

1939.
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
REPORT
ON
LOSSES DUE TO SOLDIER SETTLEMENT
BY
MR. JUSTICE PIKE.
Presented by Command ; ordered to be printed, 2 ith August, 1929.
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by H. J. Green,
Government Printer, Canberra.
No. 46. —F. 2049. — Price 2s. Bd.
[Cost of Paper : —Preparation, not given ; 940 copie* ; approximate co&t of printing and publishing, £93.]




PAGES.
Terms of Reference and General Remarks
. 5 to 6
1. Statement of losses
6
2. Principles of final adjustments
. 6 to 10 ‘'
3. Difficulties peculiar to individual States
. 10 to 14
4. Additional contribution by Commonwealth
. 14
5. Opinion of State Authorities on future prospects of Soldier Settlements
. 15
6. Further writing off believed by State Authorities to be necessary
. 15 to 16
7. Basis of valuation —whether equitable
. 16
8. Accounts
. 16
(a) Balance-Sheets and Profit and Loss Accounts with notes thereon—Index only
. 18
( b ) General Remarks—
Administrative expenses
. 16 to 17
Public works
. 17
Training of settlers
. 17
Interest charges
. 17
Losses due to negligence
. 18
Losses on land values
. 19
Losses of interest
. 19
Losses of advances
. 20
Losses due to administration expenses
. 20
Losses due to training
. 20
9. Use of Crown lands
. 21
10. Abnormal items in accounts
. 21
11. War disabilities
. 21 to 22
12. Administrative expenses—rate of
. 22
13. Principles of remission and writing off
. 22
14. Effect of (13) or losses
. 22
15. Recovery of advances from settlers
. 22
Causes of failure
. 22 to 25
Auditor-General’s Reports
. 18
Final remarks
. 25
Appendices—
Balance-Sheets —as submitted by States
Profit and Loss Accounts —as submitted by States
Balance-Sheets —as amended by Commissioner
- 26 to 58
Profit and Loss Accounts —as amended by Commissioner
Summary of losses in each State —showing loss per soldier
. 59
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
INDEX TO REPORT OF MR. JUSTICE PIKE.




REPORT ON LOSSES.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
For the purposes of my inquiry and report on losses due to Soldier Settlement, I held
sittings in the various States at different periods during the years 1928 and 1929, and took the
evidence locally where possible, and also visited several of the Soldier Settlements in each State,
paying particular attention to the irrigation areas, where the losses per settler have been greatest.
Notices of the dates of my sittings were given to the State Authorities, and also the
representatives of the Soldiers’ Leagues, and both parties were represented in the different States
except Tasmania, where the representatives of the soldier settlers stated they did not wish to
take any part in the proceedings.
I was afforded every facility in each State for the purpose of conducting my inquiry, and
a very large body of evidence was tendered, but I have not considered it desirable to encumber
this report with extracts therefrom, but have set out the conclusions arrived at by me.
A great many matters incidental to Soldier Settlement arose for consideration during the
inquiries and were dealt with at the time in a manner that appeared to be satisfactory to all
parties concerned.
In order that my report may be more easily followed, I append herewith a statement of
the different matters that I was called upon to inquire into and report upon, by the two letters
of the Prime Minister, dated the 10th November, 1927, and 6th April, 1928. These were as
follow :
1. The total losses that have been sustained by the respective States.
2. The principles upon ivhich a final adjustment in respect of losses shall be made with the
States generally.
3. Whether any State, on account of difficulties peculiar to that State, requires special
assistance, and, if so, the basis upon ivhich such assistance should be given.
4. The additional contribution, if any, which the Commonwealth should make towards the
losses of the respective States. Incidental to my report under the above headings, it was also desired
that I should:
Inquire generally into the revaluations that have been made of settlers' blocks, plant,
(&c., and advise ;
5. Whether the State Authorities concerned are satisfied that, as a result of the revaluations
that have been made, the settlers can now be reasonably expected to make good.
6. Whether, if the reply to five be in the negative, what further sum the State Authorities consider
it will be necessary to ivrite off, and whether you agree ivith their estimates.
7. Whether, in your opinion, revaluations have been made on too low a basis, and, if so, what
sum is involved.
8. Examine the position in each State in its financial aspects and submit a report thereon,
such report to include :
(a) Balance-sheet and profit and loss account, certified to by the Auditor-General of
each State, showing the financial position, after bringing to account losses arising
from revaluations referred to in five.
(b) Comments and explanations, ivhere considered necessary, in regard to items appearing
in the balance-sheet and profit and loss account, including detail information
in cases where uniformity as between States has not been observed.


As claimed by
State.
As found by me.
£
£
New South Wales ..
8,836,808
7,003,950
Victoria
9,995,666
7,721,891
Queensland
2,029,092
1,853,315
South. Australia
3,233,211
3,565,829
Western Australia ..
2,742,802
2,059,368
Tasmania ..
1,060,396
1,321,169
27,897,975
.. 23,525,522
9. A statement, showing the extent to which Crown Lands have been used in each State for
soldier land settlement, the value at which they have been charged against the soldier settlement scheme,
and the effect thereof on the balance-sheet and profit and loss account.
10. Comments on any abnormal items, or items peculiar to individual States, which in your
opinion, require the special consideration of the Commonwealth.
11. Inquire generally into the matter of those settlers who are regarded by the State authorities
as unfit for land settlement by reason of their war disabilities, advise in respect of each State the
approximate number thereof, and furnish an estimate of the financial loss that has been sustained
in respect of these settlers.
12. Inquire into the question of administration expenses on soldier land settlement, and
furnish an estimate as to the extra cost incurred in each State, as compared with ordinary land
settlement, report on the main items making up such extra cost, and advise what sum may be
reasonably attributed to costs arising from the special difficulties associated with soldier land settlement.
13. Ascertain the principles on which the remission and writing off of debts have been made in
each State, and advise whether, in your opinion, the methods followed have been reasonable.
14. Ascertain the approximate extent to which these methods have affected the losses which
have been sustained.
15. Inquire and report upon the steps taken by each State to recover advances from settlers
who have abandoned their holdings.
1. The Total Losses that have been sustained by the respective States.
I find that the total losses sustained by the respective States have been as follow :
To these figures must be added the amounts, when ascertained, of further losses due to
providing home maintenance areas and to the further writing down of indebtedness in the States
of New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland and Tasmania.
These are particularly referred to when dealing with the accounts in my answers to
Questions 8 ( a ) and (6).
2. The Principles upon which a Final Adjustment in Respect of Losses shall he
made with the States generally.
In every State the claim made by it to be recouped by the Commonwealth for its losses
incurred in carrying out soldier land settlement has been based upon the ground that the
Commonwealth Government undertook full responsibility for the repatriation of returned
soldiers.
It becomes necessary, therefore, to see whether that is the true position, although, no
doubt, if nothing had occurred between the States and the Commonwealth at the various
conferences, prima facie the Commonwealth would be responsible for the repatriation of returned
soldiers.
In order to carry out the repatriation of returned soldiers, various conferences were held
between the Commonwealth and the States, with the object of devising the best methods of
repatriation, a subject in which both the Commonwealth and the States were vitally interested,
and the first conference at which the matter was practically dealt with was in February, 1916,
when the following resolutions were passed :
“1. That the Governments of the Commonwealth and the States should
co-operate in the promotion of a scheme for the settlement of willing and suitable
returned soldiers upon the land.
“ 2. That the provision of land rests with the States, such land to be made
available to dependants of deceased soldiers as well as to returned soldiers.


“ 3. That the Federal Government provide funds by way of loans to the States
for the purpose of making advances through the agricultural banks or similar
governmental institutions against improvements, and for stock and implements, the
State institutions to advance to soldier settlers such money at cost, plus reasonable
working charges.
“ 4. That, with a view to meeting the special requirements of returned soldiers,
the State Governments be invited to liberalize the conditions applying to repayments
for land and land advances, and, if practicable, upon a uniform basis.
“ 6. That provision should be made, where necessary, for the immediate
establishment by the States of training farms, on which inexperienced men might serve
a probationary period for the purpose of determining whether or not they have an
aptitude for the work. Where the State Authority is satisfied, such training may be
arranged for on approved private farms.
“9. That loans to soldiers for land settlement purposes as provided by
Resolution 3 will be advanced at reasonable rates of interest not exceeding 3| per cent,
in the first year, increasing by \ per cent, each subsequent year to the full rate of
interest at which the money has been raised, plus working expenses ; the difference
between these rates and the cost to the Government of the money to be borne equally
by the Commonwealth Government and the State Government.”
These resolutions had been drawn up by a sub-committee appointed by the Federal
Parliamentary War Committee, and were all accepted by the representatives of the Common-
wealth with the exception of Resolution No. 9, which did not appear in the original report of
the sub-committee but was passed by conference, such representatives, however, whilst personally
agreeing with the resolution, stating that it would have to be considered by the Commonwealth
Cabinet. At the same time, Senator Pearce, who represented the Commonwealth, stated that,
whilst recommending the resolution for acceptance, there must be a distinct understanding that
the acceptance of the recommendation would not bring the Commonwealth into responsibility
for management in any way, and that the management and administration of the system must
remain with the States.
The next conference was held in May, 1916, at which no resolutions bearing on the subject
were passed, and at the next meeting of Premiers in Melbourne in December, 1916, it was resolved
that the respective States exchange ideas and also remit them to the Commonwealth Authorities
with a view to discussion at a conference of Premiers and Ministers of Lands, to be held on sth
January, 1917.
During the discussion on the repatriation of returned soldiers, there is no question that
the Prime Minister of the day then claimed that the responsibility for the settlement of the
soldiers was entirely a Commonwealth responsibility, the States on the other hand taking up the
position that it would be impossible for the Commonwealth to carry out that responsibility,
inasmuch as the States had the land.
The conference referred to was duly held in Melbourne in January, 1917, when the terms
of Resolution No. 9 were again approved of.
The most important matters with regard to the subject now under consideration that
arose at that conference were the recommendations of the Repatriation Executive for dealing
with the problem of repatriation as a whole upon a basis of Commonwealth responsibility and
control. These recommendations were presented to the conference by the Prime Minister, and
were afterwards referred to a sub-committee on land settlement. Two of the clauses originally
appearing are now set out in full;—
“ (1) That the entire question of the re-establishment of discharged soldiers,
and’ the care of the dependants of soldiers generally, be made the concern of a
Commonwealth Authority, and that it be considered whether the Board of Trustees,
composed as it is of representatives of all parties in Parliament, and of leading business
men, is not a suitable body to be constituted such authority.
“ (2) That it be the business of this central Commonwealth Authority to devise
a substantially uniform system of dealing with returned soldiers and the dependants
of soldiers on service, or of soldiers who have died as a result of service, in respect of—
(e) Assistance towards permanent re-establishment by :
(i) Settlement on the land, to include-advances for improvements, plants,
stock, seed, and sustenance during the initial period.


These clauses were, however, amended by the sub-committee in the following manner :—■
By inserting in Clause (1) in the first line immediately following “ That ” —“ with the
exception of land settlement and advances to be made against improvements and for other
purposes under the laws regulating State Institutions,” and excising all words after “ Authority
By excising in Clause 2 (e) (i) all words up to and including “ and ”, and inserting after
“ period ” —“ of settlement on the land or establishment in other avocations.”
The result was that the clauses as amended by the Sub-Committee read as follows :
“ (1) That, with the exception of land settlement and advances to be made
against improvements and for other purposes under the laws regulating State
Institutions, the entire question of the re-establishment of discharged soldiers, and
the care of the dependants of soldiers generally, be made the concern of a Commonwealth
Authority.”
“ (2) That it be the business of this central Commonwealth authority to devise
a substantially uniform system of dealing with returned soldiers and the dependants
of soldiers on service, or of soldiers who have died as a result of service, in respect of—
(e) Assistance towards permanent re-establishment by :
(i) Sustenance during the initial period of settlement on the land or
establishment in other avocations.”
The report of the sub-committee embodying these amendments afterwards came before
the conference, and was approved of by that body.
To my mind it is clear that the alteration of the original terms of the Repatriation
Executive’s proposal as submitted to conference by the Prime Minister was a clear indication that
the States would not allow the Commonwealth to control in any way the land settlement of
returned soldiers. As originally drawn, the proposals recommended that the Commonwealth
should have the responsibility and control of the entire question of the re-establishment of
discharged soldiers, including land settlement. As amended by conference, land settlement,
including therein advances to be made against improvements and for other purposes under the
laws regulating State institutions, were withheld from Commonwealth responsiblity and control.
So also with regard to the other matter dealt with under sub-section (2) (e) (i) of the original
minute as submitted to the sub-committee. (See pages VI,, YIL, XIY. and XY. of the report
of the conference.)
Nothing affecting the question arose at the 1918 conference, but during the debates at the
conference in January, 1919, the Premiers of each State claimed that the settlement of the
returned soldiers on the land was a State responsibility.
As a pure question of fact, from 1916 onwards it is quite clear that the States claimed
and exercised sole control over soldier settlement, and that the Commonwealth had no voice
in this matter beyond a limited control to the extent that, with regard to the loans to be made
to the States for this purpose, the Commonwealth protected itself from excessive drawings by
the States by insisting that before any moneys should be advanced by the Commonwealth for
soldier land settlement, a certificate should be presented by the State from its Auditor-General,
showing that the moneys claimed from the Commonwealth had been expended on soldier
settlement.
It appears to me, therefore, that the position was this—(l) that the responsibility and
control of land settlement were vested in the State authorities ; and (2) that the Commonwealth
undertook to lend moneys to the States for this purpose up to an amount not exceeding £625
(later extended to £1,000) per settler, the States having already expended the amount lent on
soldier settlement.
It has been suggested at various times during the inquiry that the States were the agents
of the Commonwealth with regard to the settlement of returned soldiers, but I am unable to
conceive of any agency which would be subject to the provisions under which this settlement
was carried out. That agency would involve this proposition, that the principal, namely the
Commonwealth, which was lending the money, was to have no control whatever over the actions
of its agent in applying that money to soldier settlement. It appears to me that the principals
in the settlement were really the States, as they had an uncontrollable right to expend the
money in whatever way they thought fit, the only limited control being that already referred to,
namely, that they were not entitled to borrow from the Commonwealth until they had satisfied
that authority that the money asked for had already been expended on soldier settlement.
From the debates at the various conferences, it is clear that losses of the magnitude
that have arisen were never contemplated, but there was in regard to one particular matter a
loss directly in view, and the steps taken to deal with that loss as between the States and the


—
(1)
Gross Losses as found
by me.
(2)
Commonwealth half share
thereof.
(3)
Amount already
contributed by
Commonwealth.
(4)
Further amount to be
written off by
Commonwealth.
£
£
£
£
New South Wales
7,003,950
3,501,975
2,612,215
889,760
Victoria ..
7,721,891
- 3,860,945
3,331,193
529,752
Queensland
1,853,315
926,657
817,272
109,385
South. Australia ..
3,565,829
/ 1,782,914
977,927
804,988
Western Australia
2,059,368
1,029,684
1,477,688
Nil
Tasmania
1,321,169
660,585
546,688
113,897
23,525,522
11,762,760
9,762,983
2,447,782
Commonwealth to my mind throw some light on the proposition as to who should ultimately
bear the loss. I refer to the Resolution No. 9, which was passed by the Premiers’ Conference in
1916, and ultimately approved by the Commonwealth in 1917. Under that resolution, moneys
were to be advanced by the States to soldier settlers at a rate below the rate at which the money
would be raised, the result being that a loss would be suffered by the States in regard to their
interest. So far as that loss is concerned, it was distinctly provided by the resolution that it
should be borne equally by the Commonwealth and the States. Although this provision was
not ultimately carried out as passed (inasmuch as by allowing the concession of 2j- per cent,
on all loans more than the half share of the loss was borne by the Commonwealth), yet it indicates
to my mind that the general feeling was that losses occurring through soldier settlement should
be shared between the Commonwealth and the States.
Some light is thrown on this matter by the debates at the January, 1919, conference, a
perusal of which establishes that every State Premier who spoke at that conference anticipated
that there would be further losses due to soldier settlement, but not one of them claimed that the
whole of these losses should be borne by the Commonwealth, and the suggestion made by these
Premiers at that conference was, to put it at its highest, that the Commonwealth should share
in the losses, or be a partner in the losses. The Minister for Repatriation, in dealing with the
view so put forward by the different Premiers, whilst not disclaiming any liability stated that,
if the Commonwealth was to be put in the position of having to share in these losses, it should
have at least some control over the spending of the moneys, not to the extent of vetoing such
expenditure, but at any rate to the extent of seeing in what manner the expenditure was being
carried out.
There is one other aspect of the case which appears to me to have very great weight in
determining whether the whole of the responsibility for these losses should be borne by the
Commonwealth, and that is this ; It is undoubted that each settler obtained by the States under
this scheme of soldier settlement represents a valuable asset to the State—in fact, some of the
statements made put down the value of such an asset as £I,OOO per settler, but whether this
be the value of a settler or not, it seems to me inconsistent with fair dealing that the States should
obtain the whole of the asset created by the expenditure, and the Commonwealth should bear
the whole of the losses in bringing about that asset.
After full consideration of the whole matter, the conclusion I have arrived at is that the
losses incurred by the different States as appearing in the accounts as moderated, and submitted
by me, together with the further losses due to the provision of home maintenance areas in the
States of New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, and Tasmania, and more fully referred to in
this report when dealing with the accounts, should be borne equally by the States in question
and the Commonwealth, and in estimating what amount of that loss should be borne by the
Commonwealth there should be taken into consideration the amounts already paid by the
Commonwealth towards the loss of interest suffered by the States, and the further contribution
of the Commonwealth of £5,000,000 towards other losses sustained by the States, each State
being of course dealt with according to the actual amount received by it.
This extra contribution should be carried into effect by the Commonwealth writing off
so much of each State’s debt as represents the amount of the contribution to that State, and I
further recommend that, having regard to, amongst other matters, the fact that the States will
have for some years to carry extra administrative charges due to soldier settlement, this writing
off should date as from the Ist July, 1927, interest on this rebate being calculated at the same
rate at which it was paid.
Applying these principles, the amount of capital debt to be written off by the Commonwealth
in respect of each State will be as set out in column 4.


To these figures must be added the amounts of further losses consequent upon providing
home maintenance areas, and the further writing down of indebtedness in connexion therewith
in the States of New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland and Tasmania.
3. Whether any State, on account of difficulties peculiar to that State, requires
special assistance, and if so, the basis upon which such assistance
should he given.
In only two of the States was any suggestion made that special assistance should be given
to that State on account of difficulties peculiar thereto.
In the State of South Australia, a claim was made to bring the losses, which have occurred
on certain irrigation areas, under this particular heading, and as this is an important matter,
the claim amounting to £2,170,236, being the amount expended since November, 1918, I have
dealt fully with it.
It appears that, prior to soldier settlement coming into effect, namely somewhere about
the year 1912, this State had embarked on a general policy of rendering lands suitable for
irrigation settlement, and as part of that policy had commenced operations in that direction
upon certain settlements, known as Cobdogla (which included Loveday, Nookamba, Weigall,
and Mclntosh), Chaffey, and Cadell, and, as part of the same policy of settlement, had started
the reclamation of areas at settlements known as Baseby and Jervois, the total expenditure for
land, works, &c., up to November, 1918, being about £288,000 ; and the amount now claimed as a
loss represents the total capital and interest expenditure since November, 1918, on the whole
of those settlements.
The manner in which the claim has been put forward is as follows, namely, the State
claims that, owing to pressure put upon it by the Commonwealth Government with regard to
soldier settlement, it immediately started to further develop the whole of the areas referred to
in order to meet the demand expected from that class of settler, and in that development had
expended the whole amount already referred to. The State claims that if this pressure had not
existed, the settlements in question would not have been developed, as sufficient areas were
already available for civilian settlement, or alternatively that they,.!! would have been only
developed over a course of years by ordinary. civi I ian settlement, and that under those circumstances
the expenditure would not have been incurred or would have stopped as soon as it was seen
that settlement on these areas would not be financially successful.
Owing to the fall in the price of products brought about chiefly, it is stated, by over-
production due to soldier settlement, and due also to the unsuitability for irrigation of parts
of the country under development, it has not been possible for the State to settle the greater
portion of these irrigation areas or recover any of the interest on the capital expenditure, and
that the most it can hope to obtain as rent or water charges from the present or any prospective
settlers is an amount equal to the cost of providing water on the irrigation areas in question ;
with respect to the reclaimed areas, it is claimed that the rents obtainable are such that there
would be nothing left to meet the interest charges on capital expenditure after allowing for
necessary out-goings. As these settlements show no return whatever of interest on the capital
expenditure, it is contended that the capital and interest should be wholly written off as a loss,
due to soldier settlement.
Dealing with the last contention first, and assuming for the moment that this is an
expenditure that has to be considered in estimating the losses due to soldier settlement, I can
find no business principle under which the whole of the capital embarked in a proposition, and
the result of which still stands in the shape of the land and the improvements thereon, and on
which there is considerable settlement, can be treated as a total loss. It appears to me that
these assets still have a value, but no attempt at all was made to deal with this position. The
attitude taken up was that the whole of the expenditure on these undertakings must be treated
as total losses.
I think also the foundation of the State’s claim fails on the facts on which it is based. The
main factor underlying the claim is that it was owing to pressure by the Commonwealth
Government that these undertakings were pushed forward, in order to provide for the influx
of soldier settlement. I have been through the several files of the State and the Commonwealth
in regard to this particular aspect of the matter, and I can find nothing in those files indicating
that any pressure at all was brought to bear by the Commonwealth Government necessitating
this expenditure. On the other hand, I find, according to the January, 1919, agreement, under
which the different numbers of soldiers to be settled, and advances to be paid to the States, were
stated, that the number of soldier settlers allocated to South Australia was 1,729. t A letter
was sent to that State by the Prime Minister, dated 14th February, 1919, following on that


conference, that the number allocated to South Australia was 1,729, and this number was
accepted as the quota for that State. By letter, dated the 10th April, 1919, the Premier of
South Australia, after dealing with certain other matters, stated that the number of settlers in
South Australia, as allocated at the Premiers’ Conference, namely 1,729, was likely to be exceeded.
In reply to that communication, on the 15th May, 1919, South Australia was informed by the
Commonwealth that their quota had already been fixed at 1,678 (which apparently should be
1,729), and at the same time the attention of that State was drawn to the fact that sufficient
steps were not being taken to settle the number of soldiers agreed upon, namely, 1,729, as the
plan of settlement submitted by the State of South Australia only contemplated that that
number would be settled by the end of 1921, and that as 329 of the settlers had been settled prior
to the 1919 conference, it meant that only 1,400 would be settled by South Australia during the
next two to three years.
In reply to this, in a communication from the Premier of South Australia, dated 26th June,
1919, he pointed out that the total number that the State was responsible for was only 1,678,
and further that the schedule of proposed settlement submitted to the Commonwealth did not
contemplate that it would take the period in question to settle their number of settlers, but
only that advances would be required over that period, or, in other words, that they would not be
drawing the whole of the moneys to which they were entitled under the agreement with the
Commonwealth until 1921, although the settlers might be settled prior to that date, and, at the
same time, the Premier of South Australia pointed out that it was probable that the quota of
1,729 allocated to that State would be exceeded.
The files disclose that the Commonwealth took up the attitude throughout that until the
State had completed its quota of settlers, viz., 1,729, as arranged at the January, 1919,
conference, no further advances would be made by the Commonwealth.
In a communication of the 2nd December, 1919, by the Premier of South Australia to
the Prime Minister, the following paragraph occurred : —•
“ When in Melbourne, Mr. Anstey explained to the Commonwealth Minister
for Repatriation that this Government had expended about £500,000 in preparing
irrigation and reclaimed lands, which are now being set aside for soldiers. When these
works were begun it was intended to offer them under the Irrigation Acts, and the
expenditure has been debited to the Irrigation Loan Account, but it has now been decided
to reserve all of these lands for soldiers, and I now ask that the Commonwealth
Government should consider the question of advancing the amount of this expenditure
with the concession of 2| per cent., as although some portion of the amount was spent
prior to 31st January, 1919, it has since been decided to utilize the lands served by
this public work for soldier settlement. Senator Millen suggested • that this request
might be made, and that it might receive favorable consideration.”
This suggestion was never approved of by the Commonwealth Government, and no
moneys were ever drawn by the State for these particular works, and so far as I can see the subject
matter would be covered by Clause (d) of the letter to the Premier of South Australia, dated
26th August, 1920, hereinafter referred to.
At the time of the July, 1920, Conference, South Australia had completed its quota. It
was arranged at that conference between the States and the Commonwealth that, for every
settler thereafter settled, the States would be entitled to draw from the Commonwealth to the
extent of £I,OOO per man, namely, the original amount of £625 as fixed for advances, and £375
per man for resumptions. The additional number allowed for South Australia at the request
of that State was 3,271. In regard to 3,171, it was to obtain an advance of £I,OOO per man, and
with regard to the extra 100, £625 per settler. This number of 3,271, added to the original
quota of 1,729, brought the full quota of South Australia up to 5,000, and of this quota of 5,000
men, it was stated in evidence that 2,500 men were to be settled on irrigation areas. As a matter
of fact, a total of 4,082 were settled, viz., 1,157 on irrigation areas, and 2,925 on dry areas.
I have quoted this correspondence so far, in order to determine whether the pressure to
•settle this large number of men on irrigation works came from the Commonwealth, or from the
State, and to my mind it evidences that, far from the pressure having been put by the
Commonwealth on the State, the settlement of this large number of men was entirely due to
State activities and that the Commonwealth from the start of proceedings insisted on the States
carrying out their quotas before rendering them any further financial assistance. It appears
to me, therefore, that so far as the claim is based on this particular factor, if fails. However,
that certainly does not complete the matter, as there are other material features to be taken
into consideration.


At the same time as it was agreed that the advance for settlers should be extended to
£l,OOO per settler, certain conditions were attached to the granting of that advance. One of
these, as appears from the letter of the 26th August, 1920, from the Commonwealth to the Premier
of South Australia (Clause (D) ), was in the following terms :
“ Advances for settlement will be made, therefore, subject to the following
condition, that the works to be undertaken will be submitted for approval, giving
the estimated cost of the work, and the approximate number of holdings for returned
soldiers it is estimated the work will provide.”
The conditions of this agreement have never been carried out by South Australia. With regard
to the works carried out on the irrigation and reclaimed areas in question, the works were never
submitted for approval to the Minister of Repatriation, nor have the other terms of the cited
agreement ever been carried out ; and, although the State as a matter of fact has made various
claims against the Commonwealth in respect of Public Works carried out by the State, it is
admitted that no claim has ever been made in respect of the subject works.
There is also another aspect of this case that in my opinion throws a great deal of light
on the question, and that is this. According to the method of financing the irrigation undertakings
in South Australia, it was the practice of the Irrigation Commission to draw on the Treasury for
all funds required by the Commission, and where those moneys were to be expended on soldier
settlement, then the amounts to be so expended were debited to a special account known as the
soldier settlement account. It appears that, as a matter of fact, with the exception of a sum of
£161,000, the purchase price of certain land at Jervois, which has been brought into the accounts
of the State, no claim has ever been submitted by the Irrigation Commission to the State Treasury
that the moneys expended on the subject settlements were to be debited to soldier settlement,
and as a matter of fact their cost has always been debited to general irrigation, as opposed to
soldier settlement irrigation. It was stated at the inquiry that it was proposed to make this
claim on the Treasury at some future date, but up to the date of my inquiry, no such claim had
ever been made. I cannot understand why, if the State from the outset had treated this as
expenditure incurred for soldier settlement, no such intimation was ever made to the Treasury,
and, further, I cannot understand why, if it was a public work for which the State was entitled
to draw the funds from the Commonwealth, no claim was ever made on the Commonwealth to
draw this amount.
It was suggested with regard to the last reason, that the State of South Australia did
not draw on the Commonwealth because the high rate of interest, namely, 1\ per cent., at which
one Commonwealth loan had been raised, was higher than the rate at which the State itself
could borrow money, and for that reason they preferred to carry out these works from general
loan money, rather than from money obtained from the Commonwealth, but I would point out
that this expenditure was not limited to the particular year in which the Commonwealth was
raising money at per cent., but extended over a period running from 1918 up to 1924, so that,
although this reason might have applied in one particular year, it certainly did not apply during
the whole period when these operations were being carried out.
There is another ground also on which I think this claim fails. Throughout the whole
of the States I have refused to consider any losses that have been due to negligence, or
maladministration, on the part of the State officials in carrying out any of the operations for
soldier settlement. As to whether there is any such evidence in this particular case, personally
I have not had the opportunity of inquiring beyond having a general inspection of the areas in
question, and certainly in regard to some of the lands the surface indications were such as to
show that the land itself was entirely unsuitable for irrigation, but, for the purpose of considering
this particular matter I rely on the findings of the State Royal Commission appointed to inquire
into these settlements, amongst others, in which that Commission found as follows, in its report
dated 22nd October, 1925 :
“ The result of the investigations of the Commission into the complaints made
by the settlers clearly points to the fact that there was an entire lack of business acumen
and foresight in regard to the opening up of the areas, inasmuch as no thought appears
to have been given to the question whether the areas, when developed and settled,
could be run on a commercial basis, that is to say, whether cost of supplying water,
including interest on capital expenditure and sinking fund on pumping plants could be
covered by a reasonable water rate. It is, in the opinion of the Commission,
extraordinary that without this basic information the Department should have
recommended the opening of areas.'^The^heavy!lossesj incurred in'”'the orchard
propositions at Wall and Neeta and the Holder Division of the Waikerie Irrigation
Area, and the annual losses in working other settled areas are, undoubtedly, the result


of the capital costs being under estimated and the failure to have a pro forma working
balance-sheet prepared for each area, as such information would, undoubtedly, have
prevented the opening up of many of these areas. It has been contended that if the
cost of labour and material had not increased to such an abnormal extent, areas
recommended for development prior to the war period could have been completed
and worked on a fair commercial Basis (although no estimates to show this are available).
Even if this were the case the argument cannot apply to areas, notably the Loveday
and Mclntosh Divisions of Cobdogla Area, where heavy expenditure was incurred from
1920 onwards, when the experience in other areas showed that the land, even if all
of it were suitable for irrigation, could not be irrigated at such high lifts and high
construction costs without the undertaking being subsidized very largely from general
revenue. " There was also no attempt to have a soil survey made in any of the areas
(except Pompoota) prior to the work of the development being commended) and in his
evidence Mr. Mclntosh, formerly Director of Irrigation, admitted that he depended
on his own general knowledge of the country and the surveyors’ reports on the surface
indications of the land, and in some cases (notably the Loveday Division of the
Dobdogla Irrigation Area) there does not appear to have been even any general
description by a surveyor prior to the work of development being commenced
in regard to the portion of the Moorook area which has been
abandoned Mr. Mclntosh stated in his evidence that this area
was set apart for soldier settlement as a lucerne proposition on his recommendation,
and that he was guided as to its suitableness by the fact that ‘ it had been cropped
for years and was covered with grass 2 feet high when he inspected it.’ This bears out
the conclusion that the fundamental principle (meaning
examination of the soil) which should guide all who seek to determine the possible
success of any horticultural proposition had been utterly ignored. Unfortunately this
failure to have a proper scientific examination of proposed irrigation areas applies in
every case with the result that considerable areas of land, which should not have been
irrigated, have been reticulated and allotted, resulting in disappointment and financial
loss to the settlers concerned, and heavy financial loss to the Government. The
evidence reveals that the area commanded by the level of the supply channel appears
to have been the dominating factor irrespective of the important questions of cost of
works and suitability of soil Another important factor in
regard to the losses incurred is' that extreme pressure was brought to bear on the
Department to quickly settle the returned soldiers who were clamouring for land, and
judgment and business acumen appear to have been absolutely forgotten in the wave
of enthusiastic patriotism.”
In conclusion, I would point out that I have eliminated from the soldier settlement accounts
in all the States all public works. If the losses on public works are to be taken into consideration
in arriving at soldier settlement losses, there would be some very extraordinary claims, as I take
it they would have to extend to losses on railways which had been extended for the purpose
of soldier settlement, losses on irrigation works, headworks and channelling—in fact losses on
all the public utilities, which were provided generally to the States, irrespective of whether the
settlers to benefit were soldiers or civilians —and this ground alone would be sufficient to dispose
of the present claim.
I might add that in no other State have the losses on any public work been brought into
the profit and loss account as evidencing the losses on soldier settlement, although in some of
the States they have been brought into the balance-sheet, but in each case they have been
eliminated for the reasons already given, as being public works.
It seems to me that the whole trouble is that in this particular State there seems to have
been a very serious over-preparation for the settlement of returned soldiers on irrigation areas,
a fact that does not appear in the other States, where larger irrigation schemes had been
undertaken, namely, in Victoria and New South Wales. This over-preparation was due, no doubt,
as was stated by one of the witnesses, to the fact that owing to the then high prices being obtained
for irrigation products, it was assumed that settlement on irrigation areas would be a most
successful undertaking from the State’s point of view.
When one looks at the net result, it means that upon the areas in question, where only
about 250 soldiers have been settled, a claim amounting in round figures to about £9,000 per
settler is made for losses on capital works only, the other losses on advances, improvements and
interest, &c., of the actual settlers placed on these settlements being already included in the
accounts under losses.


In the State of Tasmania, a claim was made at the last moment, namely, on the 27th day
of June, 1929, to have of that State increased by a sum amounting to £663,417, made
up as follows, viz. ;
£
Capitalization of between the original rents, and flat rents as
fixed by a recent regulation at 5 per cent. .. ~ 5 180,000
Writing off total value of houses and other depreciable improvements on
lands at present held by soldiers .. .. .. .. 220,726
Writing off total value of houses and other depreciable improvements on
vacant lands and soldiers’ lands at present held by civilians .. .. 262,691
These claims were supported by the evidence of Mr. Hurst and Mr. Fielding, who came
specially to Sydney to put them before me.
The basis on which this claim was made was as follows : —Namely that since my taking
evidence in Tasmania in January, 1928, a regulation has been brought into force by the
Government, under which the rents of all soldiers’ holdings were fixed on what was termed a flat
basis, such flat basis being based on the productive, so-called, value of the holding. After the
Board had carried out their investigations to arrive at this flat rental, it appeared that the
rentals payable were not sufficient to pay any interest on the houses and other depreciable
improvements, but would only show a return equal to, approximately, 5 per cent, on the bare
land. It was contended, therefore, that the result of this would be that, at the end of the term
of the lease, the whole of these depreciable improvements would have disappeared, and the State
would have lost their full value. So far as regards the loss in rentals, that was based on the
ground that as between the actual rentals payable on the flat rent basis, and the original rentals
of the holdings, there would be a difference annually of, approximately, £9,000, which was
capitalized on a 5 per cent, basis, and represented thereby £lBO,OOO.
Dealing first of all with the question of the houses, it appears to me that two very
important matters have been overlooked—firstly, the flat rentals apparently have been fixed
during a period of depression in Tasmania, so far as the prices realized for primary products
are concerned, and the assumption has been made that this period of depression will last in
perpetuity ; secondly, no consideration has been given to the fact that the Government of the
State has undertaken to provide home maintenance areas for soldier settlers, and when this is
done I am very strongly of opinion that the rents realizable should at least reach 5 per cent,
of the capital value of the holding, including all improvements ; and, in so far as any holding
may be added to adjoining holdings, thus rendering one of the houses of no value, the loss thereby
sustained will be brought into account as pointed out in my general remarks with regard to
providing home maintenance areas. From the evidence taken at the prior inquiry, it appears
that the houses on the soldiers’ farms have been written down at least 20 per cent., and that on
the land let to civilians, and vacant lands, a writing down of 28 per cent, has already been
provided for. These writings down in my opinion should be ample to provide against any real
loss that may occur in regard to this particular class of improvement.
With regard to the capitalization of the difference between the flat rents and the original
rents, I think some provision should be made to meet the loss under this heading during the
period for which it has been granted, namely, two to four years. After giving full consideration
to the evidence now adduced, I am of opinion that an allowance of £30,000 as the loss under
this heading would fairly meet any possible claims. It was suggested that this temporary
arrangement of a flat rent would probably become a permanency, owing principally to political
pressure. Of course lam not concerned with this aspect of the case, but if such a result does
happen, then I think the loss must be borne by the State of Tasmania, as it is not a fair claim
to make as against the Commonwealth.
It was further contended in regard to this State that, owing to the loss of population,
the State would suffer more losses from soldier settlement proportionately per head of the
population than the larger States. This aspect of Tasmanian disabilities is, however, being
dealt with by a special allowance from the Commonwealth, which is being made annually as
the result of a review of the general financial position of that State by the Commonwealth
Government; and the basis of the claim hardly seems to me to come within the particular matter
that I have to consider.
4. The Additional Contribution, if any, which the Commonwealth should make
towards the Losses of the Respective States.
This is dealt with by my answers to (2) and (5).


5. Whether the State Authorities Concerned are Satisfied that, as a Result of the
Revaluations that have been made, the Settlers can now he reasonably
expected to make good.
In the States of South Australia and Western Australia the State authorities are satisfied
that, as a result of the revaluations that have been made, and the other.concessions that have
been granted in the shape of writing off of indebtedness, writing down the value of improvements,
writing down advances, and extension of terms for payment, the settlers can now be reasonably
expected to make good, and this opinion of the authorities was concurred in, so far as I could
gather from their evidence, by the representatives of the soldier settlers.
In the State of New South Wales, so far as the irrigation areas are concerned, the
authorities are satisfied that, with the revaluations and concessions already granted under the
different heads, the holders should be enabled to make good, but with regard to the holders
outside irrigation areas it was admitted that there are cases still outstanding in which the holders
cannot be expected to make good unless further concessions are made by granting extra areas
to those holders who have not a home maintenance area, and by writing down their indebtedness.
The term “ Home Maintenance Area ”, as used in this report, means such an area as,
when worked by an industrious settler, will, under average seasons and circumstances, return
him sufficient to meet his commitments to the State and to maintain himself and family in
reasonable comfort.
As the result of my inquiry into this matter, and of conferences with the Minister for
Lands, the Government of New South Wales has agreed to appoint Boards to deal with the
question of home maintenance area and further writing off, and such Boards are now in process
of constitution, and when their work is completed and carried into effect, I am of opinion that
the settlers in that State should be enabled to make good.
In Victoria several Boards had investigated the question of soldier settlement for the
purpose of considering what further concessions should be granted in order to allow the soldier
settlers to make good, but apparently such Boards did not consider themselves entitled to go
into the question as to whether or not holders had in every case a home maintenance area. On
the inquiry before me it was admitted that there were cases in Victoria in which the holders
had not a home maintenance area, and as the result of various conferences between the Minister
for Lands of the day, the Premier, the representatives of the Returned Soldiers’ League and
myself, the Government of Victoria undertook to constitute Boards to deal with this question
and to allot home maintenance areas to those holders who had not them. Those Boards are',
I understand, starting operations in Victoria, and when their work is completed and carried
into effect, I am of the opinion that so far as Victoria is concerned soldier settlers should be in
a position to make good. I might add that the State authorities in Victoria admitted that,
until home maintenance areas are granted to holders who are now short of those areas, they
could not make good on their existing holdings.
With regard to Queensland, there are certain settlements on which it was admitted by
the State authorities that the holders had not a home maintenance area, and it was further
admitted that unless such an area was granted to such holders they would not be able to make
good. The Government of that State, as a result of my representations, has agreed to provide
home maintenance areas to those holders who have not them at the present time, and a tribunal
is actively engaged at the present time in investigating this position. When this principle has
been carried out I am of opinion that, so far as Queensland is concerned, the soldier settlers
should be able to make good.
In Tasmania it was very apparent to me that a large number of holders had not home
maintenance areas, due, no doubt, to the great shortage of suitable land in that State. As the
result of an interview with the Premier of that State, Mr. McPhee, he has undertaken to
investigate the position of the different holders, and where they are short of a home maintenance
area to provide sufficient land to bring the holding up to that area. If this is done, lam of opinion
that the remaining holders should be enabled to make good.
c
6. Whether, if the Reply to (k) be in the Negative, what further sum the State
Authorities consider it will he necessary to write off, and whether you
agree with their Estimates.
Owing to the stage at which the operations are now in in the different States with regard to
providing home maintenance areas, it is impossible for me to furnish any estimate of what
further amount it will be necessary to write off. The only estimate is that furnished by the
State of Queensland, and it is at the most an estimate, and I cannot put it forward as in any way
showing the actual amount that will have to be written off. In regard to this particular question,
I advise that, when these further estimates are submitted, an officer of the Commonwealth be
deputed to investigate the figures supplied.


The losses in making this provision should not be great, so far as regards providing the
additional areas, as presumably the amounts at which the acquired lands are valued will be
added to the accounts of the settlers to whom the lands are granted, less, of course, so much as
represents the value of those improvements, which are of no value to the new holder, such as
houses, &c., but these may be possibly disposed of elsewhere.
I desire to mention here that the State Authorities were concerned as to how losses in
the future due to providing home maintenance areas and a consequential writing down of debts
were to be dealt with, and were informed by me that if this, in my opinion, absolutely necessary
principle were carried out, I would recommend that any losses thereby incurred should be dealt
with in the same manner as the other losses. At the same time I pointed out that when the
States accepted the responsibility of settling soldiers on the land, the duty was cast on them of
making such settlement satisfactory and any failure in this duty would affect my recommendation
to the Commonwealth, and I wish to make it clear that the recommendations made herein for the
remission of indebtedness in the States of New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, and Tasmania,
are made subject to those States carrying out the agreements entered into by them on this question
during my inquiry.
In order to obviate any difficulties that may arise as to what losses are to be considered
under this heading, I summarize them as follows ;
(1) The difference between the cost (including compensation) of land acquired for
the purpose of addition to a settler’s holding and the amount charged such
settler for the land so added.
(2) The amount by which the debt of the settler is written down in order that he may
meet his commitmerds and have sufficient remaining for living expenses.
Compensation as herein referred to means the difference between the market value and the
debt on any soldier settler’s holding taken over to provide additional areas.
7. Whether, in your opinion, Revaluations have been made on too low a Basis,
and, if so, what sum is involved.
I went fully into this question and inspected lands that have been revalued, and I am
satisfied that in every State the authorities have been careful in their revaluations and have
taken what, in my opinion, were the proper steps in order to see that those revaluations were
not carried out on too low a basis, and I am satisfied on the whole that they have not been
carried out on too low a basis and that a fair and reasonable basis has been adopted for all
revaluations.
8. Examine the Position in each State in its Financial Aspects and Submit a
Report thereon, such Report to include : —
(а) Balance-sheet and Profit and Loss Account Certified to by the
Auditor-General of each State, showing the Financial Position after
bringing to account losses arising from Revaluations referred
to in 5.
(б) Comments and Explanations, where considered necessary, in regard
to Items appearing in the Balance-sheet and Profit and Loss
Account, including Detail Information in cases where Uniformity
as between States has not been observed.
ACCOUNTS.
Before dealing specificially with the accounts of the different States, I desire to deal with
certain principles which will apply to all the accounts, and the first matter to which I refer is the
charge made for administration expenses in the accounts of the different States.
ADMINISTRATION EXPENSES.
As the accounts were first presented, the total cost of administration of soldiers’ settlement
was included in the profit and loss account. Having regard to the fact that my inquiry is to
ascertain the losses due to Soldier settlement, in my opinion it was wrong to charge the whole
cost of administration as against the soldiers’ losses. It appears to me that if any settler at
all were put upon the land by any of the States, there would be an administration cost,
irrespective of the fact whether he were a soldier or a civilian ; and this being so, I cannot see
that the whole of the administration charges in respect of soldiers’ settlers can be charged as a
loss due to that class of settlement, but that the only loss due to the fact that they were soldiers
settlers, rather than civilian settlers, is the difference between the cost of administration of a


soldier settler, and tlie cost of administration of a civilian settler. All the States, so far as I can
gather,-have for some years past been trying to encourage settlers from overseas, and were
willing to grant generous concessions to that class of settler, and I am quite certain that, if the
settlers had appeared from overseas to an extent equal to that represented by soldier settlers,
these concessions would have been granted to them. Further, it appears to me that this method
of charging the whole cost of administration as against the soldier settlers entirely omits from
consideration the fact that each settler is an asset in the particular State in which he is settled,
and has always been regarded as such, and even if one had to charge the full cost of administration
as against the soldier settlers, there should be a set-off against that of the asset acquired by the
State.
PUBLIC WORKS.
In some of the States the amounts expended on public works were brought into the
balance-sheets and the interest on such works and maintenance charges, or a proportion thereof,
brought into the profit and loss accounts, the reason given for this action being that the works
in question had been specially carried out for the purpose of promoting soldier settlement.
In all of the States such works had been previously carried out for the purpose of civilian
settlement and no, direct charge for these works, or interest thereon, had been made as against
the civilian settlers, though indirectly the States have been recouped portion of the expenditure
by the increased value put upon the lands served by these works. I cannot therefore see why
any losses on these works should be charged up as a loss to soldier settlement, seeing that they
are always provided by the States free to settlers, and moreover the State has the asset
represented by this expenditure. I have therefore eliminated from the accounts all items
referring in any way to public works.
TRAINING OF SOLDIER SETTLERS.
The next matter to be dealt with is the training of soldiers.
Under this heading amounts appear in the various States which do not in any way set
out the true position, as they are only the amounts specifically expended at training colleges
or similar institutions for that purpose. In many of those colleges, even, no charge was made
for the maintenance and subsistence of the soldier students, but the work done by them was
taken to be an off-set against the cost incurred under this particular head. Outside, however,
of this class of expenditure, a very large expenditure was incurred in training soldiers on their
own blocks, or on blocks which might ultimately be allocated to them. This was more
particularly the case in the holdings devoted to horticulture and irrigation, where the soldiers
were employed on their own blocks, and were paid sustenance by the State during the period
of their employment, inasmuch as no returns were coming in from that particular class of
holding to keep them going. Whilst so employed, they were, generally speaking, under the
supervision of expert managers, who directed their operations in improving their blocks, and
imparted to them the general principles in connexion with the particular class of horticulture
in which they were engaged. No charge whatever has been made against the settlers for these
services, and as to the sustenance paid to them whilst they were being so employed, although
it was originally intended it should be repaid by the settler, the actual result has been that a
very large proportion had had to be written off, but in my opinion, if the amounts could be
definitely ascertained, they are amounts that really should be charged against the training of
soldier settlers. As a matter of fact, the employment of this class of labour has led to a great
deal of the losses which appear under the heading of losses on land, or losses on advances, in the
different accounts, inasmuch as the actual cost of the work performed by the settler, who, in very
many cases, was entirely a novice at that class of work, was far below the actual value of the
work, and when the ultimate writing down on the different holdings was carried out, a great deal
of it was largely due to the difference between the cost of this work and its value.
INTEREST CHARGES.
The charges under this head have been dealt with in a different manner in the respective
States.
In Western Australia and Queensland, interest has been charged to revenue. In Tasmania
and South Australia, interest was charged to loan account. In Victoria, the major part of the
interest was charged to revenue, but a small portion to loan account. In the case of New South
Wales, interest was charged to revenue, but in making up their profit and loss account and
balance-sheet, interest was compounded for the purpose of ascertaining the loss under this heading,
and when dealing with the accounts of that particular State I have set out the reason why I
have allowed the interest loss as claimed by that State.
F. 2049.—2


LOSSES DUE TO NEGLIGENCE AND MALADMINISTRATION.
Taking the losses generally, I have excluded any that, on the evidence I was able to find,
were due to negligence or maladministration on the part of the State authorities ; that is,
negligence and maladministration under the circumstances existing at the time soldier settlement
was being carried out. As is well known to everyone, those times were entirely abnormal, and
many losses which have occurred would no doubt not have occurred had the times and
circumstances been normal. On the return of the soldiers from abroad, there was a wave of
patriotism which insisted that they should receive the best of treatment, and when directed
upon the question of land settlement it meant that the whole undertaking had to be carried out
under rush conditions. Every soldier who wanted land, it was claimed, should be satisfied at
once, and so far as the States were concerned they were inadequately staffed and were not in a
position to meet this extreme demand unless and until they had in the first instance extended
the whole of their staffs. Where lands had to be purchased, it meant that proper consideration
could not be given to the circumstances surrounding the purchase, and in the later preparation
of these lands for occupation by returned soldiers, works were carried out under conditions that
could only lead to extra expenditure and further loss. The States themselves can hardly be
held responsible for the losses occurring from these circumstances, but where facts were brought
to the notice of the States that should have led them to at least minimize these losses, I think
it was the duty of the State to take action in that direction ; and where it has not been taken
I have not included any losses through the State’s neglect to take prompt action in regard to this
aspect. No doubt there are other losses due to negligence, but any investigation which would
establish this fact would probably take years to carry out.
AUDITOR-GENERALS’ CERTIFICATES.
I have received from the Auditor-General of each State, other than New South Wales,
a satisfactory certificate, covering the balance-sheet and profit and loss account as submitted
by the State.
The accounts for the State of New South Wales were not received by me until the
13th March, 1929, and as the accompanying certificate by the Auditor-General did not cover
the main items of the accounts, I, on the 29th April, 1929, wrote and asked for a further certificate.
Notwithstanding repeated attempts to obtain such further certificate, I have not yet
received it, and as any further delay in presenting my report seems unwarranted, I recommend
that that report so far as it concerns the State of New South Wales remain in abeyance until
a satisfactory certificate be furnished by the Auditor-General of that State to the Commonwealth.
Appended hereto are copies of the accounts of the different States ; Marked
Balance-sheet, New South Wales, as originally presented . . . . A.
Profit and loss account, New South Wales, as originally presented . . B.
Balance-sheet, New South Wales, as revised by me .. .. .. C.
Profit and loss account, New South Wales, as revised by me .. .. D.
Comment on items, New South Wales . . .. .. .. D. 2
Balance-sheet, Victoria, as originally presented .. .. .. E.
Profit and loss account, Victoria, as originally presented .. . . F.
Balance-sheet, Victoria, as revised by me .. .. .. .. G.
Profit and loss account, Victoria, as revised by me .. .. .. H.
Comments on items .. .. . . .. .. .. K.
Balance-sheet, Queensland, as originally presented ... .. .. L.
Profit and loss account, Queensland, as originally presented .. .. M.
Balance-sheet, Queensland, as revised by me .. .. .. O.
Profit and loss account, Queensland, as revised by me .. .. P.
Comments on items .. .. .. .. . . .. Q.
Balance-sheet, South Australia, as originally presented .. .. R.
Profit and loss account, South Australia, as originally presented .. S.
Balance-sheet, South Australia, as revised by me .. .. .. T.
Profit and loss account, South Australia, aa revised by me . . .. U.
Comments on items, South Australia . . . . .. .. V.
Balance-sheet, Western Australia, as originally presented .. .. W.
Profit and loss account, Western Australia, as originally presented .. X.
Balance-sheet, Western Australia, as revised by me .. .. . . Y.
Profit and loss account, Western Australia, as revised by me . . . . Z.
Comments on items, Western Australia .. .. .. .. A. 1
Balance-sheet, Tasmania, as originally presented .. .. .. B. 1
Profit and loss account, Tasmania, as originally presented .. .. C. 1
Balance-sheet, Tasmania, as revised by me .. .. .. .. D. 1
Profit and loss account, Tasmania, as revised by me .. .. .. E. 1
Comments on items, Tasmania .. .. .. .. .. F. 1
18


I append herewith a summary marked Xl showing the losses under the different heads,
and also showing the loss per settler in the different States.
LOSSES ON LAND VALUES.
An analysis of these figures shows that the reason generally advanced as being one of
the main causes of the failure of soldier settlement, namely, the purchase of lands at too high a
price, is shown to be largely without foundation, except as regards the State of Tasmania.
In two of the States, New South Wales and Victoria, where there were very large purchases
of private lands for the purpose of soldier settlement, I have been able to ascertain the loss due
to the revaluation of lands.
The figures show that in New South Wales the amount expended on the purchase of lands
was £8,403,621, and the writing down £632,141, the reduction in values on purchased estates
amounting, therefore, to about 7f per cent. This is, however, above the real percentage of loss,
as it includes a certain amount due to the decreased value of improvements that have been
effected on the land, and, although I was not able to obtain the exact amount of this writing
down, yet, putting it at its lowest, it reduces the depreciation of land values to about 6 per cent.
In the State of Victoria, lands were purchased at a cost of £13,911,821, and have been
written down by £253,827, or slightly under 2 per cent.
It was impossible in the other States to arrive at any figures in regard to this particular
matter. In Queensland, although certain estates were purchased, the tenure under which they
were let was leasehold, and the writings-off were of advances, interest and rents.
In South Australia, lands within the irrigation areas were let on lease, and the writings-off
were of a similar nature to those in Queensland. In the dry areas, where the lands were sold,
there were no general -writings-off, but in many cases a concession was given by extending the
term of payment over a lengthy period of years.
In Western Australia, by far the larger proportion of soldier settlers were placed on Crown
lands, and there was no writing down of these lands, and the reductions in value of other than
Crown lands were not made specificially under that heading.
In Tasmania, there has been a writing down of 17.62 per cent, on lands still in the
possession of soldier settlers, and an estimated loss on the value of those lands that have been
re-let to civilians of 36 per cent. This latter figure, however, has been revised by me, and has
been reduced to about 28 per cent., as in my opinion the estimated writing down there is too high.
These figures, however, include an amount (which I could not ascertain) for the reduced value of
certain improvements on these lands. The heavy losses in this State are largely due to the heavy
fall in prices realized for hay, potatoes, peas and oats, and to the fact that to a large extent sma.ll
cultivated farms and orchards were purchased for soldiers, and were, therefore, liable to
depreciate very rapidly if not farmed and cultivated in the best possible manner, and would,
on their abandonment, rapidly depreciate in value, owing to the growth of blackberries and
other noxious scrub.
LOSSES OF INTEREST.
It will be seen from the above figures that more than half the total losses of all the States
are losses of interest, these amounting to £12,162,291, out of the total losses of £23,525,522.
The reason for the heavy losses under this heading is not far to seek, the main cause being
the fact that the States were lending moneys to soldier settlers at a rate below that at which they
were borrowing moneys. The total loss under this head was £7,051,406, against which the
Commonwealth have allowed rebates of £4,700,000, the balance of the £12,162,291, namely,
£5,110,885, being written off.
Another chief cause of the losses under this head was the fact that when estates were
purchased for settlement, a considerable time elapsed before they were ready for disposal, this
delay arising from the necessity of carrying out surveys, road-making, improvements, &c., before
the settler could be put into occupation, and during the whole'of this period interest was running
against the original capital cost of the lands. Further, in most of the States, free periods, without
interest being charged, were allowed to settlers, and in Victoria, where the loss of interest appears
out of proportion as compared with all the other States, the principle was adopted, when writing
down debts, of writing off interest primarily, whereas in the other States the whole total of the
debt, whether for advances, rents, or interest, was taken and written off in a lump sum.


LOSSES ON ADVANCES.
It has been impossible to separate out the losses under this particular heading, having
regard to the manner in which the general writing down has been carried out, but there is no
doubt that, after interest, by far the greater losses have occurred under this head.
The major part of the advances were for the purpose of carrying out improvements, and
at the time these improvements were being effected, the prices of all materials were at their
peak, some of the main items necessary for carrying out improvements—namely, fencing wire,
posts, &c. —being over 300 per cent, above either their pre-war or their present prices. At
the same time, too, skilled labour was very short, and that also was only obtainable at a cost far
above the pre-war cost. The result was that in very many cases, improvements, although they
had been carried out in the best possible manner under the circumstances then existing, had to
be written down in some cases to less than half of their original cost, inasmuch as that represented
their true value at the time the Boards were investigating these matters.
Also with regard to the dairying propositions, the advances there were made very largely
for the purchase of stock, and in every State, owing to the rush demand for dairy stock, an entirely
fictitious price was created, which had to be paid, as it was absolutely necessary that those
settlers who had been placed on dairying propositions should be immediately supplied with the
means of at once obtaining a livelihood.
ADMINISTRATION EXPENSES.
Administration expenses amount to 12|- per cent, of the total losses, and these losses, as
shown in the accounts as presented by me, are the actual costs of administration of a soldier
settler over and above what he would have cost as a civilian settler, as pointed out by me in
another part of this report when dealing with administration costs. Although these expenses
look heavy on the face of them, a consideration of the circumstances under which they were incurred
does not lead to any conclusion that they were excessive having regard to those circumstances.
In the case of an ordinary settler, taking it as a general rule, the only administration expenses
incurred are those in connexion with the receipt of his application, the survey, the subsequent
granting of it, the annual inspection of his block, and the clerical work necessary in the Treasury
so far as regards his payments. With regard to the soldier settler, there is not only the
application for the land that had to be dealt with, but also his application for advances for the
purpose of carrying out improvements and the purchase of plant, stock, machinery, manures, &c.
Inasmuch as the advances were up to the purchase price of these different factors for carrying
on his farm, and the authorities in the different States had securities over the whole of the amount
of these advances, it was necessary, in order to look after their securities, that a staff of inspectors
should be kept, as was done in all of the States ; and, further, a very large clerical staff was also
necessary in order to deal with the accounting portion of the transaction as between the State
and the soldier settler. In addition to this, where the settlers were embarking on the more
intensive classes of farming, such as irrigation farms, horticultural farms, and poultry farms,
staffs of inspectors were kept in the different States for the purpose of advising the settlers on the
best methods of carrying out their undertakings, and of directing their operations, and this also
necessitated a further heavy administrative charge.
There appears to be no reason why the losses under this head should not be substantially
reduced in future. A decrease in the office and field staffs should be easily possible when the
affairs of the settlers are put on a business foundation, and the comparatively small loss per man
in the States of Queensland and Western Australia, where rural banks have the main control
of soldier settlement affairs, shows what can be done in regard to this question.
TRAINING OF SOLDIERS.
The claims under this heading are very small, due to the fact that in no State other than
South Australia was the agreement arrived at with regard to training farms carried out by the
particular States. In that State, however, the agreement was conformed to to a certain extent
and claims were made by South Australia for half the moneys (viz., £55,680) expended in
accordance with agreement on training farms, namely, £27,840, which claims were met and paid
by the Commonwealth.


9. Furnish a Statement showing the Extent to which Crown Lands have been
used in each State for Soldier Land Settlement, the Value at which they
have been charged against the Soldier Settlement Scheme, and the Effect
thereof on the Balance-sheet and Profit and Loss Account.
I found it impossible in certain of the States to ascertain the extent to which Crown lands
had been used for soldier land settlement, and in order to ascertain this figure a very exhaustive
inquiry would be necessary. Inasmuch as the object of this question apparently is to ascertain
to what extent the profit and loss account has been affected by bringing Crown lands into account,
I did not follow up the investigation into this matter, as in none of the States have Crown lands
been charged up against the soldier settlement scheme, nor have they in any State been brought
into the balance-sheet and profit and loss account as amended by me, so that the object of
ascertaining this particular figure having disappeared it seemed to me futile to embark on a
long investigation, the result of which would be negative so far as the information is required
by the Commonwealth. As a matter of fact, the use of Crown lands has tended to minimize
the losses in the States in which they were available.
10. Comments on any Abnormal Items, or Items peculiar to Individual States,
which, in your opinion, require the Special Consideration of the Common-
wealth.
These comments are contained in my report on Questions 8 (a) and 8 (6).
11. Inquire Generally into the Matter of those Settlers who are regarded by the
State Authorities as unfit for Land Settlement by Reason of their War
Disabilities, advise in respect of each State the Approximate Number thereof,
and furnish an Estimate of the Financial Loss that has been sustained
in respect of these Settlers.
In the State of Victoria, 57 settlers are stated to have been unable to make good owing
to war disabilities. Many of these men have been on their holdings for seven or eight years,
and at the July conference in 1927 the question of these men appears to have been discussed,
although the short note of the proceedings contains no reference to it.
The Minister for Lands was under the impression, which the Prime Minister states to be
mistaken, that these men were to be re-repatriated by the Commonwealth, and made public
statements to that effect. Acting on those statements, some of the Boards who were dealing
with the general re-adjustment of soldier settler liabilities recommended that the holdings of
these particular men should be forfeited and this was carried out. The Board members later
stated that they would not have recommended forfeiture had they not been under the impression
these men were to be re-repatriated.
At the date of my inquiry some of these settlers were still in possession of their holdings,
and it was then stated that action would be stayed in those cases pending the result of my inquiry.
I recommend that those settlers who still remain be divided into three classes, namely :
(1) Those settlers whose war disabilities were such at the time they took up land
that the Soldiers Settlers’ Qualification Committee should never have allowed
them to go on the land.
(2) Those soldier settlers whose war disabilities which make them unfitted for land
settlement have developed since they took up the land.
(3) Those settlers in Class (2) who can never be expected to make good on the land
owing to their war disabilities.
With regard to Class (1), I am of opinion that any responsibility with regard to them
must fall on and be met by the State.
With regard to Class (2), I recommend that their cases be reconsidered by the Boards
now dealing with home maintenance areas, and that they be given the same, or, if possible, a
greater, measure of relief than was given to the ordinary settlers, and that the losses incurred
thereby be shared between the Commonwealth and State in the same manner as the other losses.
As to Class (3), it seems to me that, if they are not drawing full pensions, their cases can
only be met by making applications to the Pensions Board for a reconsideration of their cases.
With regard to the other States, information was particularly asked for under this heading
and a certain amount was supplied, but this referred not to the absolute unfitness of the settler,
but to his percentage of unfitness as due to war disabilities. In all cases, however, it was clear
that this information was not very reliable, more particularly when the unfitness developed
some time after the settler went into occupation, this being especially the case where men had
been gassed.


No records have been kept that would allow of any estimate being formed of the amount
of financial loss due to unfit men being placed on the land.
12. Inquire into the Question of Administration Expenses on Soldier Land
Settlement, and furnish an Estimate as to the extra Cost incurred in each
State as compared with ordinary Land Settlement, Report on the main
Items making up such extra Cost, and advise what Sum he reasonably
attributed to Costs arising from the special difficulties associated with Soldier
Land Settlement.
The answer to this question is embodied in my answer to Questions 8 {a) and (6).
13. To ascertain the Principles on which the Remission and Writing Off of Debts
have been made in each State, and to advise whether, in your opinion, the
Methods followed have been Reasonable.
With the exception of the irrigation areas in New South Wales and South Australia, no
principles have been followed in making remissions and writing off indebtedness. The object
sought has, however, been generally to reduce the financial burden carried by the soldier settlers,
but unless that action was accompanied by a provision of a home maintenance area for the
settler, the financial burden was bound to again increase.
So far as the reduction of the financial burden was sought, the methods followed have been
reasonable, and no remissions or writings-off were granted without the cases being carefully
investigated by local authorities appointed for that purpose.
In irrigation areas in New South Wales and South Australia, the principle adopted was to
remit and write off debts to the extent that with the extra area granted where necessary, the
settler would over a period of years receive sufficient from his holding to pay his annual
commitments and maintain his family, and on those areas the settlers as a body are now satisfied
that they have been satisfactorily settled.
14. To ascertain the approximate Extent to which these Methods have affected
the Losses which have been Sustained.
I find it impossible to answer this question, and can at the most give an approximation,
which is arrived at by deducting from the total loss the losses sustained under the heads of
administration, interest not charged, training of soldiers, and re-appraisement of capital value
of lands. So arrived at, the figures would be as follow :
£
New South Wales .. .. ~ 3,501,385
Victoria .. .. .. .. 3,864,743
Queensland .. .. .. .. 1,036,715
South Australia .. .. .. 1,775,164
Western Australia .. .. .. 1,303,070 (Writing off of land value
not ascertainable.)
Tasmania .. .. .. .. 380,511
15. To Inquire and Report upon Steps Taken by each State to Recover Advances
from Settlers who have Abandoned their Holdings.
Unless the ex-settler had means no steps were taken to recover outstanding indebtedness
to the State. As nearly every settler who had abandoned his holding had practically no means,
it follows that steps were hardly ever taken to recover debts.
The financial position of ex-settlers is made the subject of inquiry by police and other
officials, and in some cases where it has improved, a proportion of the debt has been recovered,
but probably a few thousand pounds would represent the total so recovered.
In cases of fraudulent disposal of assets, &c., prosecutions are launched against the
offenders.
In certain cases in Queensland complaints were made by settlers that they had been
harshly dealt with in regard to their indebtedness, and as a result of my inquiry these cases were
satisfactorily dealt with.
CAUSES OF FAILURE.
Though not asked to inquire and report on the causes for the failure of so many soldier
settlers, it has been necessary for me, in order to deal with other matters coming within the scope
of my inquiry, to investigate these causes to the extent that they throw any light on further
estimated losses and the future success of the remaining settlers.


Dealing generally with the question of soldier settlement, and after considering fully the
evidence produced in each particular State, I am satisfied that the main causes of failure are due
principally to the following :
(1) Want of capital;
(2) Want of home maintenance area ;
(3) Unsuitability of settlers ; due to a large extent to war services and want of
training;
(4) Drop in value of primary products, chiefly on irrigation areas.
Under the scheme of soldier settlement as initiated in most of the States, the soldiers
were allotted an area of land on which to make their living, and were charged for the purchase
price thereof, and at the same time were granted advances in order to enable them to carry out
the necessary improvements and to purchase stock, implements, &c. In those cases in which
land was so purchased by the soldier settler, securities were taken by the State to cover these
liabilities, so that he was, in effect, mortgaged to the State to the full amount of the purchase
money in regard to the property, and to the full amount of his advances. Interest ranging from
per cent, to 6| per cent, was charged on the purchase price o' the land, but on the advances
a remission of interest was allowed by reducing the rate from the cost rate to the States to 3|
per cent, for the first year, and thereafter increasing by one-half per cent, annually until it reached
Si per cent., or 6 per cent., according to the particular State in which it was situated. This
remission amounted to a total of £3O of £4O spread over five years.
Assuming for the moment that the holder was a practical farmer, capable and industrious,
it appears to me that it would be impossible for him to make a living under these circumstances.
The average settler, where he has a burden of mortgage debt up to what is generally the limit
of private advances, namely, about 66 per cent, of the value of his land and improvements, finds
he can just about make a living, and is able to carry on, but when that mortgage becomes 100
per cent, and even more of the total value of his holding —because portion of these advances
was not reflected in improvements, but only in implements and manures —the position to my
mind became an impossible one, and the result has been that in very many cases, although the men
were industrious and hardworking and would under ordinary circumstances succeed as farmers,
the load of debt was so heavy that it was impossible for them to carry on ; and when one further
considers also that the greater portion of the advances was expended in effecting improvements,
which cost far above their real value, the position was made even more hopeless.
This was bad enough assuming that the soldier settler had a sufficient area to make a
living from under normal circumstances, but when one adds to the factors already referred to
the further one that in very many cases the areas granted to settlers were far below home
maintenance areas, one can see at once that the general scheme of soldier settlement based on
these terms was sure to lead to many failures.
I might at this stage introduce a comparison between a soldier settler under the terms
on which he was settled, and the position of a civilian settler taking up Crown lands, and for
the purpose of illustration I refer to a civilian settler in the State of New South Wales. In that
State, the ordinary civilian settler taking up a Crown lease would only have to pay per cent,
of the capital value of his land as his annual rental; or, if he took it up as a homestead farm,
2 2: per cent. In either case, if he converted his holding into a conditional purchase, and ultimately
into freehold, the interest charged against the balance of purchase money would only be 2-|- per
cent. When one compares these terms with those granted to the soldier settler who was taking
over purchased lands, it will be seen that the ordinary civilian settler had his land on terms far
and away superior to those granted to the average soldier settler. This probably will explain
what has been the subject of comment by many people, that civilian settlers seem to be able to
carry on their holdings, whereas the adjoining soldier settler on a similar class of land has failed.
Various remedial measures have been tried in the different States in the shape of trying
to ease the financial burden by writing down the indebtedness, granting remissions of interest,
and by writing down land values. These schemes might be successful in those cases where the
holder had a sufficient area to maintain his home —and by that I mean such an area as would,
under average seasons and circumstances, return him from his labour thereon an amount sufficient
to meet his commitments to the Crown, and also to maintain himself and his family but when
the area fell short of providing these amounts there was nothing left for the settler but to look
year after year at an accumulating load of debt.
As many of the settlers had no private capital, there was no fund from which they could
draw in order to make up the shortage occurring from the want of a full area of land, and I am
satisfied that, in very many of those cases where settlers have abandoned their holdings, it has


been due entirely to the fact that year after year they saw no prospect before them of ultimately
retrieving the position and becoming the owners of the particular holdings on which they were
working.
I have in mind one particular case in New South Wales which illustrates this position. A
farmer there had been born in the neighbourhood, and had been working on his block for some
twelve years. He admitted that he had been given very liberal concessions in the shape of
remissions of interest, inasmuch as he had been allowed to remain on his block for between
five and six years without having to pay any interest to the Crown. The departmental reports
regarding his industry and capabilities were all first-class, and yet at the end of twelve years
his position was that his property was mortgaged three times over, namely, once to the State,
once to the Rural Bank, and again to the storekeepers who had assisted him, and liens over his
future crops were held by the State and by the Rural Bank. The reason why he stood in this
position was, as far as I could ascertain, due chiefly to the fact that he had never had a sufficient
area to maintain his home. He had been granted an additional area beyond that originally
allotted to him, but on a large portion of his holding, which had originally been classed as second-
class agricultural land, his crops failed from year to year, and, as he very tersely put it, the result
of twelve years’ work was that at the end of each year his debt was bigger than at the beginning
of it. Had this particular holder been allotted a sufficient area at the outset, and had he had
some private means with which to assist him during the developmental period on his farm and
during bad seasons, I have no doubt that, instead of being in the position in which I found him,
he would have been in a sound financial position, able to look forward in tho near future to
acquiring the freehold of a holding, of which he only held the right, at the time I inspected it,
of paying its debts. As a matter of fact, a large number of these holders with shortage of areas
have been carried on to a very large extend by the local storekeeper, but owing to the State
Authorities having the first call on their securities of any asset of a realizable value, the position
had been practically reached that the storekeepers had decided that they could not carry the
load any longer, and had given notice to a very large number of settlers that in future their store
accounts would have to be closed down.
Granted that a settler has an insufficient area, it appears to me to be self-evident that a
writing down of his indebtedness cannot possibly turn him into a successful settler, as his area
not being sufficient to provide the necessary -amount to meet his annual charges, he will again
start to accumulate fresh debts and will soon return to his original state.
I desire, therefore, to most strongly emphasize the necessity of providing the remaining
settlers with a home maintenance area, if their successful settlement is desired in the future,
as I have no doubt it is.
This question has been met, and dealt with, in the manner indicated in my answer to
Question 1 (a).
When this home maintenance area allowance has been fully dealt with in the different
States, I see no reason to doubt that the soldier settler holders should be enabled to make good
on their respective holdings, and I desire to emphasize here most strongly that, unless this
provision of a home maintenance area with the concurrent writing down of indebtedness is
carried fully into effect, there is every reason to believe that there will be very many more
failures and a consequent loss to all the authorities concerned.
No doubt in very many cases this primary cause of failure was accentuated by the fact
that the holders were suffering from physical disabilities, and also in other cases by the fact that
the holders were not suited temperamentally or by training and experience for farming work.
There seems to be a general impression that any one can make a farmer, but in these days of
keen competition a farmer has to be a man of many parts, particularly having regard to the
uncertain climatic conditions of Australia. Not only must he be a good business man, but he
must keep keep himself up to date in all matters pertaining to farming operations, and so mould
his activities that the cost of producing shall be such as to enable him to compete in the world’s
markets with his produce, as we have now reached a stage in Australia where in practically every
channel of farming or horticultural pursuits we are producing more than sufficient to supply the
local markets, and the balance* now has to find a market in competition with the products of
other countries.
In the initiation of soldier settlement, there was no doubt a certain percentage of the
settlers who never intended to make good, and whose sole object in taking up holdings was to
make as much as they possibly could out of the concessions being given by the different States,
and when that source of income had been worn out they simply abandoned their holdings and
left them. That percentage, however, has now practically disappeared, and with very few


exceptions the result of my investigations has satisfied me after visiting the different settlements
in the States, inspecting the class of work done, and interviewing the settlers themselves, that,
taken as a body, the soldier settler holders of Australia, will compare more than favorably with
any other body of settlers in the different States. On the irrigaf ion areas, generally speak’ng,
their farms stand out markedly as well worked and well looked after, and in the mallee country
which requires a particularly good class of farming the resulting averages of wheat from farms
occupied by soldier settlers as compared with farms not so occupied showed that the soldier
settlers are obtaining a higher average return per acre than the ordinary class of settler.
The soldier settlers will of course be subject to the same rises and falls in the market that
all the farming community are subject to, still that is not a matter than can be dealt with by
any remissions or any special concessions, but they will have to be treated in the same way as
the other settlers in the different States who have from time to time been dealt with by their
respective Governments when occasions have arisen to merit special consideration.
FINAL.
As my inquiry was directed to the losses on soldier settlement, of necessity I was brought
mostly into contact with what I may term the seamy side of that scheme, but there is no question
that in very many cases, particularly in the grazing and mixed farming propositions where the
settlers have been given a sufficient area, the settlers are doing well and making quite a good living.
I desire to pay a tribute to the careful manner in which the Boards in the different States,
who were created as a result of the 1927 Conference to deal with the difficult question of revising
the indebtedness of soldier settlers, have carried out their work. In Western Australia there
seems to be a complete understanding between the settlers and the State representatives, and
to a lesser extent in South Australia. In other States I venture to hope that, as a result of
conferences held during my inquiries, a better understanding will prevail in the future, which
should tend to overcome the various difficulties that arise from time to time, many of which
were dealt with during my inquiry.
I desire to acknowledge the valuable assistance rendered me by Mr. E. W. T. Yandell,
of the Commonwealth Treasury, in examining and analysing the accounts and comprehensive
statements submitted by the various States, and in preparing the amended accounts submitted
by me, and also to place on record the excellent manner in wddch the taking and transciption of
the voluminous evidence has been carried out by Mr. C. L. Raymond, of the staff of this Court.


BALANCE-SHEET (AS SUBMITTED BY THAT STATE).
Liabilities.
Item No.
£
£
Assets.
Item No.
£
£
1.
Capital Account—
Loans raised by Commonwealth for
Capital Purposes
Less —
(a) Repayments of Principal to
Commonwealth
( b ) Amounts written off as from
1st October, 1925 ..
9,022,575
•
20,220
8. Personal Accounts of Settlers —
Total Indebtedness for Land, &c.,
and Advances—
(a) Land
(b) Advances
(c) Interest ..
7,807,622
5,264,991
407,466
13,480,079
1,230,409
Less —
(а) Repayments by Soldiers—
Land
Advances
Interest
(б) Instalments of Principal Out-
standing—
Land ..
Advances
2.
Indebtedness to Commonwealth for Loans..
Loans raised by State for Capital
Purposes, including Advances
pending Loan Flotation .. 8,084,936
Less Repayments .. .. 1,538,068
7,771,946
246,761
1,291,347
12,7
52,120
127,050
Indebtedness to State for Loans ..
2 (a). Funds made available by State
6,546,868
1,729,992
Fund for Advances to Curl-
waa Settlers
Less Repayments
2,146
761
1,385
Less Losses due to Revaluations —
Principal
Interest
303,044
79,876
11,750,087
3.
Funds provided by the State to meet
Deficiency
Less Contribution from State
Revenue towards Losses as per
Item 15 of Profit and Loss
Appropriation Account
382,920
20,018
20,018
9. Instalments of Principal in Arrear—
(a) Land
(b) Advances
52,120
127,050
11,367,167
179,170
756,265
4.
5.
6.
Sundry Creditors
Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts
Interest on Loans accrued to 30th
June, 1927, but not due
Other Special Items—Cash Loss
1,580,682
2,067,460
135,870
3,859,814
10. Instalments of Interest in Arrear—■
(а) Land
(б) Advances
566,165
190,100
7
Total Personal Accounts of Settlers
11. Unallotted Land ..
Land Resumed
682,597
343,359
12,302,602
1,025,956
1,930,051
10,988
12. Sundry Assets—Administrative Build-
ings, Plant, Stock, &c.
Less Losses Written off ..
1,942,988
12,937
13. Sundry Debtors
13 (a). Sundry Debtors (owing by Settlers
on Account of Crown Dues, and
Interest thereon, not in Con-
solidated Debt)
Less Repayments ..
261,370
16,014
Less Losses due to Revalua-
tions
245,356
146,934
98,422
282,561
6,313,445
14. Suspense Accounts
15. Interest accrued to 30th June, 1927,
but not due—
(a) Land
(b) Advances
251,805
30,756
16. Gross Losses to 30th June, 1927, as
per Profit and Loss Appropriation
Account
Less Losses provided for as per
Profit and Loss Appropriation
Account
8,836,808
2,523,363
21,964,025
21,964,025
A.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT (AS SUBMITTED BY THAT STATE).
Item No. Paetioulaes.
£
Item No. Paetioulaes.
£
£
1. To Interest on Loans
6,627,692
10. By Interest Earned and Accrued to
2. To General Administration
1,783,207
30th June, 1927—
3. To Training of Soldiers
5,315
(a) Interest on Advances (Loan
4. To Losses written off
773,832
and Consolidated Revenue
5. To Losses due to Revaluations and Losses on
Fund)
483,935
Account of Disposal of Lands
1,161,519
(6) Interest on Rent and Water
6. To Estimated Losses due to further Revaluations
44,830
Rates —
7. To Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts
2,022,630
Crown Dues not con-
8. To Other Special Items—
solidated (Special De-
Loss of Interest accrued on Forfeited
£
posits Account and Con-
Holdings, &o... .. .. 333,943
solidated Revenue account )
16,748
Expenses of Soldier Settlers’ Inquiry
(c) Land
2,466,604
and Classification Committee
8,211
(d) Advances
647,485
342,154
3,614,772
11. By Sundry Earnings—■
Rent, Water Charges
, ,
309,599
12. By Gross Losses carried down
• *
8,836,808
12,761,179
12,761,179
APPROPRIAT
tON ACCOUNT.
9. To Gross Losses brought down
8,836,808
13.
14.
By Contribution from Commonwealth
towards Interest charges
By Contribution by Commonwealth
towards other Losses—
(o) Loans written off as from 1st
October, 1925 ..
(6) Sustenance Allowance
Revenue
1,230,409
721
1,272,215
1,231,130
20,018
15.
By Contribution from State Revenue
Contribution from State Loan ..
20,018
16.
17.
By Total Losses provided for
By Net Losses still to be provided for
2,523,363
6,313,445
£8,836,808
8,836,808
BALANCE-SHEET (AS AMENDED BY COMMISSIONER).
Item No. Liabilities. £
£
Item No. Assets.
£
1. Capital Account—
6. Balance of Personal Accounts of Settlers, including
Loans raised by Commonwealth
charges for land, advances, and interest
10,361,711
for capital purposes .. .. 9,022,575
7. Unallotted and resumed land
1,025,956
Less —
8. Sundry Assets —Administrative Buildings, Plant,
(o) Repayments of Principal to
Stock, &c., less Losses written off
51,712
Commonwealth .. .. 20,220
9. Sundry Debtors
10,988
(6) Amounts written off as from
10. Interest acoured to 30th June, 1927, but not due
282,561
1st October, 1925 .. .. 1,340,000
11. Gross Losses to 30th June, 1927, as per
7,662,355
Profit and Loss Appropriation £
2. Loans raised by State for Capital Purposes, Less
Account .. .. .. 7,003,950
Repayments
4,668,529
Less Losses provided for by the Com-
3. Other Funds provided by the State to meet
monwealth .. .. .. 2,612,215
deficiency
3,656,209
Balance of Losses still borne by State
4,391,735
4. Sundry Creditors ..
1,700
5. Interest on Loans accrued to 30th June, 1927,
but not due
135,870
16,124,663
16,124,663
B.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
C.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT UR
TO 30th JUNE, 1927 (AS AMENDED BY COMMISSIONER).
Particulars.
Item No.
1. To Interest on Loans
2. To General Administration
3. To Training of Soldiers
4. To Losses written off
o. To Losses due to Revaluations and Losses on
Account of Disposal of Lands
6. To Estimated Losses due to Further Revalua-
tions including Provision for Bad and Doubt-
ful Debts
£
5,421,672
1,008,668
54,856
1,107,775
986,438
2,039,313
Pabticitlaks.
Item No.
8. By Interest earned and accrued to 30th June,
1927
9. By Gross Losses carried down
£
3,614,772
7,003,950
10,618,722
10,618,722
APPROPRIATION ACCOUNT.
7.
To Gross Losses brought down
7,003,950
10. By Contribution from Commonwealth Revenue
towards Interest Charges
XL By Contribution by Commonwealth towards
other Losses —
Loans written off as from 1st October, 1925
1,272,215
1,340,000
12. By Total Losses provided for by Common-
wealth
13. By Balance of Losses at Present Borne by
State ..
2,612,215
4,391,735
7,003,950
7,003,950
D.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
D. 2.
New South Wales.
Profit and Loss Account.
In this State the accounts were presented under two headings, namely the accounts of the Water
Conservation and Irrigation Commission, and the accounts of the Treasury and Lands Department,
the former being a separate trust, treated as a business undertaking by the State of New South Wales.
For the purposes of preparing the profit and loss account and balance-sheet of New South Wales, I have
amalgamated the two accounts, and propose shortly to deal with the statements under each heading.
As originally presented, item 1, interest on loans, the total amount given was £6,627,692.
This amount, however, was subsequently amended by Treasury officials owing to further calculations,
and reduced by £382,963, this reduction being entirely due to a mistake in the calculations. It appears
to me, however, that this amount must be reduced by a further amount of £10,582, due to the following
facts: —When the original loans were made for soldier settlement by the Commonwealth to the State of
New South Wales, it was agreed by the Commonwealth that a proportion of those loans should be
employed in building, or continuing the building, of certain railway lines, which were termed
“repatriation lines ”, and the building of these lines was duly carried out. When the Commonwealth
made a grant to the State of New South Wales on 1st October, 1925, of £1,340,000 towards the losses
incurred in soldier settlement, the State of New South Wales paid the sum of £109,591 to the railways in
reduction of their expenditure on these repatriation lines, and in computing the interest paid under the
loans, no interest was allowed on this amount of £109,591. In my opinion this figure must be taken into
account in computing the loans, as it was paid by the Commonwealth.for a specific purpose, namely, for
losses on soldier settlement, and although the State may have thought fit to pay the amount in
question to the Railway Department, it is clear to me that, as between the State and the Commonwealth,
it can only be dealt with as a grant towards losses on soldier settlement. The amount was arrived at
simply on a pro rata basis between the expenditure on actual land settlement, and the expenditure on
railways, and did not take into consideration in any shape or form whether there was a loss or not on
the railways.
From this item there must also be a further deduction of £812,475 which represents the interest
compounded on the amount of £1,878,339, which, for the reasons given by me under item 1 of the balance-
sheet, have been taken out of the accounts of soldier settlers. The result of these adjustments is that the
interest on loans is reduced to the figure of £5,421,672.
I might further point out that, in arriving at this amount of interest which was paid from Revenue,
it was compounded and at the same time any credits were brought into consideration in that compounding.
I am of opinion that the State was correct in adopting this method of arriving at the interest figure, as
although the amount was not paid from loans, the State was out of the use of the money when it had to
Item 1,
Interest
on Loans.


pay the interest to the Commonwealth or to its bond-holders, and did not receive the amounts from the
settlers to meet those payments, especially as the fact is in New South Wales, that during the whole of the
years from 1917 to 1927, which the accounts in question cover, the State was practically living on
borrowed money so far as soldier settlement was concerned, as, although no overdrafts were obtained
from the Banks, immediately the account started to get into debit, loans were raised on short terms from
the general public, and at the same time the account in London during that period was generally in over-
draft to an amount which roughly averaged £5,000,000. The net result is that, although the payments
were made from revenue, any deficiency in the State’s aggregate cash balances was met by temporary
loans.
The figure originally appearing under this head was £1,783,207. I have already dealt with this to
a certain ex:ent under the general reference to administration charges. The figure of £1,008,668, to
which this item has now been reduced, represents the actual cost of soldier settlement administration
over and above what the cost would have been if the soldier settlers had been civilians, together with the
sum of £8,211, portion of Item No. 8, expenses of Soldier Settlers’ Inquiry and Classification Committee,
as it appears to me it ought properly to come under the head of general administration.
These figures were arrived at as follows
£
Amended figures for Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission .. 221,114;
Amended figures for Lands Department .. .. .. .. 685,865
Portion, Item 8, profit and loss account .. .. .. .. 8,211
Miscellaneous administration (p. 15) .. . . .. .. 107,891
1,023,081
Less —Instruction to settlers —Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission
(charged to training of soldiers) .. .. .. . . 14,413
1,008,668
Training of soldiers originally appeared at £6,315. This amount has been increased by £50,262,
made up of : —£14,413 referred to in Item 2 above, and £35,849, portion of original Item 5, which I was
able to extract from the accounts as having been applied distinctly to the training of soldiers ; but, as I
have already pointed out, it does not include the very large amounts expended on training of soldiers
on their own particular holdings, which are included under other heads in the accounts. It is merely the
amount that can be definitely allocated to training. The sum of these two amounts has been reduced
by the amount of £721, which was paid in sustenance by the State to the soldiers, and which has
since been refunded by the Commonwealth to the States.
This item originally stood at £773,832, and has been increased by original item 8, £333,943,
loss of interest accrued on forfeited holdings, and now stands at £1,107,775.
This stood originally at £1,161,519. From this must be deducted the sum of £35,849, which
has been brought into item 3, and was specifically money used for the training of soldiers, and also
by the sum of £139,232, which represents a proportion of rent and water charges, namely, £309,599
(original item il in the profit and loss account). The result will be that this item will now stand
at £986,438.
Items 6 and 7 have been amalgamated. The result of the amalgamation of these items,
according to the original accounts, will be to bring the total of these accounts as presented to
£2,067,460. This has been increased by the sum of £142,220, which amount is due to an amendment
made by the Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission in their estimate of further losses. The
result of this is to bring the total of this item to £2,209,680. From this has to be deducted £170,367,
the balance of the item of £309,599 referred to under item 5, leaving the net balance under this
head of £2,039,313.
This has, as already stated, been transferred to items 2 and 4.
This figure will be unaltered, and will stand at £3,614,772.
Item 11, rent and water charges—This item represents a return of interest on public works, and as
such should come out of the accounts, as interest on such works has been excluded from item 1. It has
already been taken out of‘the other side of the accounts (see items 5 and 8). Further, the major portion ;
was originally included as losses, and, as already pointed out, practically the whole amount will be
ultimately lost.
The result of these alterations show that the gross loss, as far as New South Wales is concerned,
is £7,003,950.
Dealing now with the appropriation account, item 13 shows the contribution of the Commonwealth :
towards interest charges, £1,272,215, which amount is not altered. !
With regard to contributions by Commonwealth towards other losses, the figure originally appearing [
in the accounts was £1,231,130. This has been increased to £1,340,000, which was the total amount of the I
original contribution by the Commonwealth, and which, in my opinion, should appear in the account in ,
full for reasons already given when dealing with it under the interest charges, item 1.
Item 2,
General
Administration,
Item 3,
Training of
soldiers.
Item 4,
Losses written
off.
Item 5,
Losses due to
revaluations
and losses
on account of
disposal of
lands.
Item 6,
Estimated losses
due to further
revaluation.
Item 8.
Other special
items.
Item 10,
Interest earned
and accrued to
30th June, 1927.
Item 11,
Rent, Water
Charges.
Item 13,
Contribution
from Comwth.
revenue towards
interest charges.
Item 14,
Contribut ion
by Comwth.
towards other
losses.


Item 16,
Contribution
from State
revenue:
contribution
from State loan.
The remaining items, contribution from State revenue and State loan, have been omitted from
the accounts, as in my opinion they cannot affect the question which is really before me for determination,
as to what amount should be contributed by the Commonwealth towards State losses, and I have also
omitted from consideration in every State the amounts that the States themselves have contributed, as
in my opinion, those contributions in no way affect the amount of contribution to be made by the
Commonwealth.
The result of the appropriation account as amended is that the sum of £4,391,735 represents the
losses at present borne by the State of New South Wales.
The following schedule shows the different headings under which the losses have occured :
£ £
Losses of interest .. .. .. .. .. .. 3,129,137
(This loss has been dissected out and the following figures
appear. The loss as between the amount paid by the
State and accrued to the State is .. .. 1,806,900
while the loss written off as irrecoverable is .. .. 1,322,237
As against the £1,806,900, the Commonwealth allowed a
rebate of interest amounting to £1,272,215).
Losses under administration .. .. .. .. .. 1,008,668
Training of soldiers .. .. . .. .. .. 54,856
Losses on land .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 632,141
Losses on advances .. .. .. .. .. .. 2,179,148
Total Losses .. .. £7,003,950
Balance-Sheet.
With regard to the first item, capital account, this stood in the original accounts as £7,771,946.
This has been decreased by the sum of £109,591 which represents the payment of the proportion of
£1,340,000 paid by the State to their railway department, and which is more fully referred to in the
remarks with regard to the profit and loss account. The full debt to the Commonwealth is £9,805,984.
This is reduced to the figure of £9,002,355, by the amount of £803,629, which was expended by the State
on repatriation railways with the consent of the Commonwealth, This deduction was made by the State
in presenting its accounts, and I think at the same time, the State should have deducted from the accounts
all other moneys spent on public works, which have been included in their soldier settlement balance-
sheet, such public works consisting of the enlargement of the main canal, provision for channels, and
general irrigation works, and all works which might be fairly classified under the title of Public Works.
I have reduced Item 2, £6,546,868, by the amount £1,878,339 expended on public works, and have
therefore, when dealing with the assets side of this sheet, under sundry assets, item 12, deducted from the
amount set out, all items of expenditure which could fairly be classed under this head, as in my opinion
they cannot in any way be specifically designated as works carried out for soldier settlement, any more
than for civilian settlement.
This alteration will leave item 2 at £4,668,529. The result of altering the balance-sheet in this
particular manner will be to present a more correct view of the amount expended on soldier settlement.
Item 3 of the balance-sheet, as now presented, is a combination of items 2 (a), 3, 4 (except £1,700),
and 7. The total obtained by using the figures in the original balance-sheet is £5,440,181, while the new
figure is £3,656,209, being a reduction of £1,783,972. It should be explained that the figure shown under
this item is merely a balancing figure, and is not represented by any account in the books of the State
Treasury. It was, therefore, open to alteration, following on alterations in the profit and loss account,
&c. The alterations made are as follows :
£
Deduction owing to decrease in net losses .. .. .. .. 1,921,710
Less an addition due to an increase in the amounts provided for bad
and doubtful debts .. .. .. .. .. 28,147
Less a further increase due to alteration of, already referred to under
item 1 of the balance-sheet .. .. .. .. 109,591
1,783,972
Note. —It might be mentioned that the amount of £28,147 was arrived at by taking the difference
between the amounts originally provided for bad and doubtful debts £2,067,460, and the amount finally
adopted, £2,039,313. The alteration in this figure was due to a deduction of £170,367, which is explained
in the notes to original items 6 and 11 of the profit and loss account. This was partly set off by further
estimated losses, amounting to £142,220, which is explained under item 6 of the profit and loss account.
The balance of this item, £1,700, remains in the account.
This has been taken out of the balance-sheet altogether, and has been deducted from the personal
accounts of the settlers as appearing under item Bof the balance-sheet. It appears to me this is the
proper way of presenting this item, as the object of showing the personal accounts of the settlers is to
show the recoverable amount, and it should not include amounts which the State considers are bad and
doubtful debts.
Item 1,
Capital account.
Item 2,
Loans raised by
State for capital
purpose s.
Item 2 (a>,
Funds made
available by
State from
Consolidated
Revenue for
advances to
Curlwaa
settlers.
Item 3,
Funds provided
by State
to meet
deficiency.
Item 4,
sundry
creditors.
Item 7,
Other special
items—cash
loss.
Item 4,
Sundry
creditors.
Item 5,
Provision for
bad and
doubtful debts.


Interest on loans accrued, but not due, still remains in the accounts.
Item 7 has already been referred to.
With respect to item 8, personal accounts of settlers, the net figure appearing in the accounts is
£12,302,602. I have added to this amount item 13 (a), sundry debts owing by settlers, £98,422. I have
also deducted from this item 5, as amended, provision for bad and doubtful debts, £2,039,313, as already
mentioned, leaving £10,361,711 representing the recoverable amount of soldiers’ account.
Item 11 stands as appears in the accounts.
I have already dealt with this under item 2, and the figure will now stand at £51,712, being a
reduction of £1,878,339.
Item 13 stands as in the original account.
Item 13 (a), as has already been pointed out, has been added on to the personal accounts of
settlers, and the remaining items in the account will stand, expect that the net losses as brought into
account from the profit and loss account will be £4,391,735 instead of £6,313,445 as appearing in the
original accounts.
Item 6,
Interest on
Loans accrued
to 30th June.
1927, but not
due.
Item 7,
Other special
Items.
Item 8,
Personal
accounts of
settlers.
Item 11,
Unallotted land,
Land resumed.
1 Item 12,
Sundry Assets.
Item 13,
Sundry Debtors.
ltem 13 (a),
) Sundry debtors
(owing by
3 settlers on
account of
Crown dues,
and interest
thereon, not in
Consolidated
Debt).


BALANCE
-SHEET AT 30th JUNE,
1927 (AS SUBMITTED BY STATE).
£
Capital Account.
it
t
Personal Accounts of Settlers,
£
£
£
1. Loans Raised by Commonwealth for Capital Purposes
11.968,176
8. Total Indebtedness for Land and Advances —•
Less — (a) Repayments .. .. .. .. .. 174,101
Land
13,465,431
(b) Amount to be written off as from 1st October, 1925 .. 1,560,000
Advances
7,740,903
1,734,101
21,206,334
Less — {o) Repayments by Soldiers —
Indebtedness to Commonwealth for Loans
10,234,075
Land
921,862
2. Loans Raised by the State for Capital Purposes . . . . 10,502,459
Advances
.. 2,849,837
Advances Pending Loan Flotation .. .. . . . . 142,834
3,771,699
10,645,293
(6) Instalments of Principal Outstanding —
Land
240.565
Less Repayments
Nil
Advances
.. 1,232,923
10,645,293
1,473,488
Indebtedness to State for Loans —see Statements A and B attached
5,245,187
3. Funds Provided by the State to meet Deficiency
1,776,121
Less —Contribution from State Revenue towards Losses as per Item 15 of
15,961,147
Profit and Loss Appropriation Account
691,121
9. Instalments of Principal in Arrears
1,473,488
10. Instalments of Interest in Arrears ..
978,265
Contribution from Loan
1,085,000
4. Sundry Creditors —
Total Personal Accounts of Settlers (see Item 5, opposite)
18,412,900
Crown Lands Department for Crown Lands taken over
506,368
10a. Land Disposed of to Closer Settlement Lessees
1,474,599
Closer Settlement for Land taken over
152,478
Less Payment for Land Sold to Closer Settlement ..
309,734
Unpaid Purchase Money for Land Acquired
4,884
1,164,865
Mortgages taken over on Land Purchased ..
5,197
11. Land on Hand —
Contracts of Sale taken over on Land Purchased
657
Unallotted
137,463
Sundry Lessees for Improvements taken over
939
Reverted
352,717
Unpaid Administration Accounts, &c.
26,924
—
490,180
697,447
12. Sundry Assets —
5. Provision for Doubtful Debts (in respect of Liability of Settlers on Personal
Administrative Buildings, Residences for Inspectors
5,589
Accounts, as per Items 8, 9, and 10, opposite)
2,912,655
Public Halls ..
6,181
6. Interest on Loans Accrued to 30th June, 1927
287,596
11,770
7. Other Special Items —
Plant —
Donations of Land for Purposes of Discharged Soldiers Settlement
Implements
330
generally
15,776
Vehicle
25
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission for Losses on Water Supply for
355
Soldier Settlers
148,930
Shares Colac Dairying Co.
5
Reserve for Improvements and Public Works, being Amount Unexpended
12,130
of Loading added to Cost Price of Estates and Charged to Settlers as Part
13. Sundry Debtors —
Capital Value of Allotments
273,332
Unpaid Insurance Claims
640
—
438,038
Sundry Accounts Outstanding .. .. ..
370
Advances for Insurance Premiums
20,133
Arrears of Rent, Grazing and Agistment ..
3,331
Advances to Municipal Councils for Roads
40,028
Less Repayments
2,378
37,650
Interest on Advances to Municipal Councils
2,836
64,960
E.—STATEMENT No. 2.
SOLDIER SETTLEMENT.
S TATE OF VICTORIA.


13a. Cash at Balance —
Loan Proceeds Act 2916 —Unexpended
Discharged Soldiers’ Settlement Fund
Discharged Soldiers’ Concessions Fond
£
44,091
12,162
35,374
£
91,627
55,122
165,493
14. Suspense Accounts —
Amount Expended on behalf of Settlers, but not charged as Advances
at 30th June, 1627 ..
Settlers’ Improvements and other Assets taken over on Vacated
Allotments .. .. .. .. .. .. . •
10,926
44,196
15. Interest Accrued to 30th June, 1927, but not Due
16. Gross Losses to 30th June, 1927, as per Profit and Loss Appropriation
Account
Less Losses Provided for as per Profit and Loss Appropriation Account..
9,695,666
4,152,839
Net Losses still to be Provided for
••
6,842,827
£26,300,104
£26,300,104
F. 2049. —3


PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT TO 30th JUNE, 1927 (AS SUBMITTED BY STATE).
£
£
£
£
I
1. Interest —
Commonwealth Loans
4,703,889
10. Interest Earned and Accrued to 30th June, 1927
4,906,708
State Securities
2,860,853
11. Sundry Earnings —Grazing Rents, Architects’ Commission, Fees, &c. ..
••
110,576
7,564,742
12. Gross Losses carried down
9,995,666
2. General Administration
, ,
..
1,266,542
Being —
3. Training of Soldiers
, ,
Nil
Statutory Concessions, Interest, &c.
3,677,350
3a. Sustenance Allowances
130,525
Working Expenses and Losses ..
3,405,661
4. (a) Losses written off —
Provision for Doubtful Debts
2,912,655
Advances —Item 5, Statement No. 48 ..
101,172
9,995,666
Depreciation Sundry Assets —Item 5, Statement No. 40 ..
10,781
Interest —Item 3a, Statement No. 5
99,410
Grazing Rents and Sundries ..
747
212,110
( b ) Ascertained Losses to be written off —
Advances ..
336,627
Interest .. .. ..
463,712
800,339
(e) Recommended for writing off Advances —Irrigable Areas ..
109,979
1,122,428
8. Losses due to Revaluations
18,411
6. Estimated Losses due to Further Revaluations, as per Item 6, Statement No. 4a ..
253,827
7. Provision for Doubtful Debts in Respect of Assets as at 30th June, 1927 —
Land ..
627,178
Advances
. .
1,910,264
Arrears of Interest
375,213
2,912,655
8. Other Special Items —
Concessions Act, 3422
1,052,219
Interest written off Amount written off Cost of Buildings ..
12,361
1,064,580
Balance Concessions Act, 3422—
Interest to be written off
447,781
Amount to be written off Cost of Buildings
47,639
495,420
1,560,000
Estimated Loss on Realization of Assets Taken over from Soldier Settlers
, ,
34,890
Losses on Water Supply (State Rivers and Water Supply Commission) ..
148,930
15,012,950
15,012,950
F.—STATEMENT No. 3.
SOLDIER SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF VICTORIA.


APPROPRIATION ACCOUNT.
9. Grow Lowes brought down
• • ■ •
£
9,996,660
13. Contribution from Commonwealth Revenue towards Interest Charges —
£
1,771,193
Rebate of Interest.
14. Contribution by Commonwealth towards Other Losses —
Loans to be written off as from 1st October, 1925 ..
Sustenance Allowances —Recoup
-
1,860,000
130,525
1,690,525
16. Contribution from State Revenue Appropriations
Proceeds Sale of Crown Lands
..
658,011
33,110
3,461,718
691,121
16. Total Losses Provided for
17. Net Losses Still to be Provided for .. „
,
4,152,839
5,842,827
9,996,666
9,995,666


BALANCE-SHEET (AS AMENDED BY COMMISSIONER).
Liabilities.
Assets.
Item No. £
£
Item No.
£
1. Capital Account—Loans raised by
6. Balance of Personal Accounts of Settlers,
Commonwealth for Capital Purposes 11,968,176
including charges for Land, Advances and
Less —
Interest
16,829,130
(o) Repayments of Principal to
7. Unallotted and Resumed Land
490,180
Commonwealth .. .. 174,101
8. Sundry Assets —Administrative Buildings,
(6) Amounts written off as from 1st
Plant, Stock, &c., less Losses written off
12,130
October, 1925 .. .. 1,560,000
9. Sundry Debtors
24,474
10,234,075
9a. Sundries
55,122
2. Loans raised by State for Capital Purposes,
10. Interest accrued to 30th June, 1927, but not
less Repayments
10,553,666
due
165,493
3. Other Funds provided by the State to meet
11. Gross Losses to 30th June, 1927, as £
Deficiency
837,513
per Profit and Loss Appropriation
4. Sundry Creditors ..
38,601
Account .. .. .. 7,721,891
5. Interest on Loans accrued to 30th June, 1927,
Less Losses provided for by the
but not due
287,596
Commonwealth .. .. 3,331,193
5a. Sundries
15,776
Balance of Losses still borne by State
4,390,698
21,967,227
21,967,227
PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT UP TO 30th JUNE, 1927 (AS AMENDED BY COMMISSIONER).
Item No. Particulars.
1. To Interest on Loans ..
2. To General Administration
3. To Training of Soldiers
4. To Losses written off ..
5. To Losses due to Revaluations and Losses on account
of disposal of Lands
£
7,542,492
978,113
2,682,428
53,301
Item No. Particulars.
8. By Interest earned and accrued to 30th June, 1927
8a. By Sundry Earnings
£
8b. Balance at Credit of Loading Fund .. 273,332
Portion of Fund expended on
Public Works .. .. 81,424
£
4,906,708
110,576
354,756
7,721,891
including Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts
1,837,597
9. By Gross Losses carried down
13,093,931
13,093,931
APPROPRIATE
N ACCOUNT.
7.
To Gross Losses brought down .. ’ ..
7,721,891
10. By Contribution from Commonwealth Revenue
towards Interest Charges
11. By Contribution by Commonwealth towards other
Losses —-
Loans written off as from 1st October, 1925 ..
1,771,193
1,560,000
12. By Total Losses provided for by Commonwealth..
13. By Balance of Losses at present borne by State ..
3,331,193
4,390,698
7,721,891
7,721,891
item i,
loam. 63 * ° n
item 2,
administration
item s.
Training of
soldiers.
item 3a,
AlTowancea.
item 4,
be”
written off.
Victoria.
Profit and Loss Account.
This item has been reduced by £22,250, being the interest charges as against the sum £81,424
expended out of loading fund on public works.
This item has been reduced by £288,429, being the amount that the administration would have
cos l had the soldiers been civilians, and it now stands at £978,113.
There is no entry opposite this item.
This item has been taken out, and the same amount has been taken out of the appropriation
account.
This now includes item 8, in order to bring these accounts into line with those in the other States,
This item will now stand at £2,682,428.
H.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF VICTORIA.
G.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF VICTORIA.


Item 8a has been included with this item, and it now stands at £53,301.
These items have been amalgamated, and Item 7 reduced to £1,434,840, as set out in the special:
note dealing with that item. The total of the amalgamated items will be £1,837,597.
This item in the accounts calls for special consideration. As presented it was put under three
headings: Loss on land, £627,178; Advances, £1,910,264; Interest, £375,213.
Loss on Land Values.
This estimate is based on the assumption that there will have to be a further writing down of land
values of 5 per cent, on the total amount owing under that heading, and as a matter of fact includes a 5
per cent, writing down on the balance in hand of the reserve fund created to deal with the loading of
2| per cent, on all lands granted to the soldier settlers. I can find no support for this item in the
evidence presented before me.
Any soldier settler in Victoria had under the Act 3422 the right to apply to have the value of the
land on his holding re-appraised, and its value written down to the true value.
Prior to my inquiry, several boards were created throughout Victoria for the purpose of dealing,
amongst other matters, with such applications under this act, and their work was completed, and the
result already appeared in the accounts as a loss due to the writing down of land values. As a matter of
fact, the actual writing down of land values after these boards had completed their work, and dealt with
every application made, represented only 2 per cent, of the prior values placed on the land, whereas the
present estimate of further writing down of land value is more than double that amount, namely,
5 per cent.
In the evidence given by the Director of Land Settlement, a very strong opinion was expressed by
him that estates purchased by the Government, with one or two small exceptions, had been well bought,
and that in very many cases their values had followed the general trend of values in the State and had
increased —this, however, not applying to that portion of the estates in the Gippsland and Beechworth
districts. In the latter districts, however, the Boards already referred to had operated, and had written
down the land values to their proper market value at the date of the Board’s inquiry. I might say that
in the other districts the members of the Boards were in agreement with the opinions expressed
by Mr. Mclver that the estates had been well bought. As far as I can ascertain, this estimate of
5 per cent, was based solely on the assumption that in the future there would be a general drop in
land values owing to the fall in the values of commodities, and the estimate was made to meet that
general drop. I fail to see, however, how any such drop in land values can be called a loss due to
soldier settlement, and in the accounts in question that is the sole matter for consideration. I am,
therefore, of opinion that this item must be eliminated from the accounts.
Advances, £1,910,264.
This figure was arrived at in the following manner. A series of accounts was investigated,
and it was found that in a certain proportion of those accounts the settlers had paid over 50 per cent,
of their advances, and in the balance of the accounts investigated the settlers had paid under 50 per cent,
of their advances. It was then estimated that of the total amount owing by the settlers who had
paid over 50 per cent, on their advances, 20 per cent, of the balance owing would not be paid to the
State; and that, of the total owing by the settlers who had paid under 50 per cent, on their advances,
50 per cent, of the balance owing would not be paid to the State.
This estimate did not take into consideration the position that arose during the inquiry,
having been made before the agreement had been arrived at between the Government and the
representatives of the Returned Soldiers League, the effect of that agreement being:—
(1) That boards should be instituted to investigate the case of settlers who had not
a home maintenance area;
(2) That such Boards should provide them with a home maintenance area; and should
further decide to what extent their debts to the Crown should be written down,
and to reduce their indebtedness accordingly. The result of carrying out this proposal
should at least put these settlers on a footing from which it was estimated that they
would be able to meet their commitments in the future to the Crown. It was further
agreed at this conference, that after these Boards had carried out their work, the soldier
settlers in the future were to be placed on a business footing, and to be treated in the
same way as ordinary civilian settlers, and a written acceptance of this position was to
be given by the Soldiers League to the Government of the day.
The officials from the Treasury who presented these figures disclaimed any responsibility for the
mount set out, and said that they had been prepared by the Director of Land Settlement. The Director,
when giving evidence in regard to the matter, stated that his estimate had been prepared solely on the
assumption that in the future exactly the same concessions would be asked for and granted to the soldier
settlers as had been granted in the past. It appears to me that, having regard to the agreement already
referred to as arrived at between the representatives of the soldiers and the Government, the estimate has
been based on an entirely wrong foundation, as that agreemcnt'predicates' that in the future the conces-
sions that have been granted in the past will not be granted, and that soldier settlers will have no
other concessions than those given the ordinary civilian settlers, j
Although the estimate presented by the director was based on wrong premises, it is clear that there
must be some provision made in order to meet any losses on the advance accounts in the future. For this
purpose I have made a comparison with the claims of New South Wales under the similar heading, and
also, I asked for information as to the liabilities of the settlers under the different headings for the
Item 5,
Losses due to
revaluations.
Item 6,
Item 7,
Item Bb.
Item 7,
Provision for
bad and
doubtful debts.
£2,912,656.


purpose of seeing what class of asset was most likely to depreciate, and the payment for which was most
likely not to he made. The information supplied was that of the total liability of £4,891,006 owing as
advances by settlers, an amount of £2,895,255 was owing for improvements, an amount of £554,005 for
stock, an amount of £536,700 for implements, and an amount of £905,106 for seed, manures, &c.
With regard to the improvements, the first item referred to, I cannot see that there should be very
many losses under this particular head. The Boards had already dealt with them in the irrigation areas,
and although those Boards that were operating outside irrigation areas had no right to deal with the
question of this class of asset, yet it appears from the evidence that those Boards did deal with the matter
indirectly, inasmuch as where they found that the total debt of a settler for land and improvements
exceeded what they considered was the debt the property could carry, they wrote down the value of the
land, including improvements, inasmuch as they had power to write down land values, although as a
matter of fact the land value in itself was at the correct figure. By this method, the improvements
themselves were really written down.
With regard to the stock, apparently the major portion of this item is for dairy cattle. It was
admitted that these stock are supposed to be regularly inspected by the large stafi of inspectors employed
by the Department, and also that it was in the interests of the settler, if he desired to obtain any income
from his holding, to get the number of his stock up to the full number that could be carried on his
property. It was stated, however, that the main losses anticipated would be from those who were about
to vacate their holdings, and under that circumstance would not be careful in keeping their stock up
to the number necessary. This may be so, but it appears to me that it should be the clear duty of the
inspectors to see that stock are being kept up, and, if they are not, then to take such steps as might
be necessary in order to protect the interests of the State in this particular asset.
With regard to implements, no doubt there would be a serious depreciation in these, particularly
those of the higher class used in agricultural pursuits.
In connexion with seed and manure, nearly the whole of this item is for advances made in the
mallee country and on the irrigable areas, and no doubt the asset represented by these items has
practically disappeared ; but, apparently, the authors of the estimate entirely overlooked the fact that,
in very many cases, the holders had put their own money into their holdings, and that in the past, when
the holding has been forfeited or abandoned, the State has taken it over, and has only written down the
account of the settler by the existing value of the improvements on the block when it has been
transferred to a new holder, and has only credited the out-going holder with that value, and paid him
the surplus, if any, and written off the deficit, if any, as a loss.
A fresh estimate of the loss to be suSered under this head was submitted at a later date, and
reduced this amount of £1,910,264 to £1,250,000. This estimate took into consideration the agreement
arrived at between the State and the Returned Soldiers’ League, which, I have every reason to believe, will
be honored by both parties. As amended, the estimate appears to me to be a reasonable one, and
more in line with those made of the same item in other States which had more reliable data to act upon.
Interest, £375,213.
This item having regard to the other reductions, should be reduced pro rata, and would then be
£184,840. If this latter figure is added to the other losses under the interest heads, it would make the total
writing off of interest in Victoria 30 per cent., as compared with 24 per cent, in New South Wales, and
an average of 25 per cent, for all the States.
The total under Item 7 should be therefore £1,434,840
This item has now been included in Item 4.
This item is now included in Item 5.
This item is now included with Item 6.
This item will stand.
This item will stand.
Balance to credit of Loading Fund .. .. .. .. .. .. .. £273,332
orti on of Fund expended on Public Works .. .. .. .. .. .. 81,424
Total .. .. .. .. £354,756
This item requires explanation. It appears that in Victoria all Soldiers Settlers’ lands are charged
with a loading of 2J per cent., this loading being intended to cover the expenses of survey, etc., and
improvements, and certain Public Works carried out for the purpose of assisting settlement. At the
time of my inquiry there was an amount to the credit of this fund of the sum of £273,332. Seeing that
the State is claiming for the whole of the losses that have occurred, or are likely to occur on the
personal accounts of the settlers, which include this particular loading, in my opinion the amount at the
credit of this fund should be brought into the accounts as a profit, especially as there should not be any
further expenditure from this account on soldier holdings in future, as there are practically no new
holdings; and, in addition thereto, there should also be brought to the credit of the Profit and Loss
Account a sum of £81,424, which had been expended out of it in carrying on certain public Works in the
nature of railway sidings, roads, and bridges, for the reasons given in my general remarks dealing with
Public Works.
Owing to the amended figures, this item is now £7,721,891.
Item 8,
Other special
Items.
Item Ba,
Estimated loss
on realization
of assets taken
over from
Soldier settlers.
Item Bb.
Item 10,
Interest earned
and accrued.
Item 11,
Sundry
earnings.
Item 11 A.
Item 12,
Gross Losses
carried down.


Appropriation Account.
This figui ? is now £7,721,891.
Contribution from Commonwealth revenue towards interest charges .. £1,771,193
Contribution by Commonwealth towards other losses .. .. .. 1,560,000
Total 3,331,193
Net losses still borne by the State .. .. .. .. .. 4,390,698
The following schedule shows the different headings under which the losses have occurred :
£ £
Losses of interest .. .. .. .. .. .. 4,933,423
This loss has been dissected out, and the following figures
appear. Losses between the amount paid by the State
and accrued to the State is .. ... .. 2,635,784
while the loss written off as irrecoverable is .. .. 2,297,639
As against the first figure, £2,635,784, the Commonwealth
have allowed a rebate of interest amounting to £1,771,193.
Losses under administration .. .. .. .. .. .. 967,537
Training of soldiers .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Nil
Losses of principal .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,820,931
Sundries .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Nil
7,721,891
For the purpose of this schedule £10,576 has been taken out of sundry earnings and credited to
administration and the balance (£100,000) credited to interest. As between principal and interest, rents
and water charges have been treated as interest.
Balance-sheet.
This item will stand.
This item will be reduced by the amount of item 13a, £91,627, the reduced item being:
£10,553,666. ,
This is a balancing item, and will now stand at £837,513.
This item is reduced by £658,846, being the first two amounts, as the whole of the transactions
between the Soldiers Settlement Department and the Crown Lands Departments and the Closer!
Settlement Department have been taken out of the accounts. The item will now stand at £38,601.
This item as amended, namely £1,434,840, has been taken out of this side of the accounts, and
also deducted from the Personal Accounts of Settlers. ;
This item, interest on loans accrued to 30th June, 1927 will stand.
This item will stand at £15,776.
The amount of Item 7 (6), namely £148,930, has been taken off the Personal Accounts of Settlers,
and Item 7 (c) namely £273,332, has been placed to the credit of the Profit and Loss Account.
These items have been amalgamated, and have been reduced by the sum of £1,583,770. See ■
remarks under Item 5 and 7. The figure will now stand at £16,829,130.
This item has been taken out of the accounts.
This item will stand at £490,180.
This item will stand at £12,130.
This item has been reduced by £40,486, being the amount expended on Public Works, and interest
thereon. The item will now stand at £24,474.
This item comes out of the accounts, and Item 2 has been reduced by the same amount. ■
This item will stand at £55,122.
This item will stand at £165,493.
Gross losses, £7,721,891 —
Less losses provided for —£3,331,193.
Net losses still borne by the 5tate—£4,390,698.
Item 9,
Gross losses
brought down.
Item 13,
Contributions
from
Commonwealth
revenue towards
interest charges.
Item 14,
Contribution by
Commonwealth
towards other
losses.
Item 17.
Item 1,
Capital Account
Loans raised by
Commonwealth.
Item 2,
Loan* raised by
State for
capital
purposes.
Item 3,
Funds provided
by State to
meet deficiency.
Item 4,
Sundry
creditors.
Item 6,
Provision for
doubtful debts.
Item 6.
Item 7.
Sundries.
Item 8.
Item 9.
Item 10.
Item 10a,
Land disposed
of to G.S.
lessees, &c.
Item 11,
Land.
Item 12,
Sundry assets.
Item 13,
Sundry Debtors.
Item 13A,
Cash balance.
Item 14,
Suspense
Accounts.
Item 15,
Interest
accrued but
not due.
Item 16,
Gross losses.


BALANCE-SHEET (AS SUBMITTED BY STATE).
Liabilities.
Assets.
Item No.
£
£
Item No.
£
£
1. Capital Account—Loans raised by
8. Personal Accounts of Settlers—
Commonwealth for Capital Pur-
Total Indebtedness for Lands,
poses ..
2,717,696
&o., and Advances
2,050,058
Less —
Less —
(a) Repayments
17,113
(a) Repayments by Soldiers
401,719
(6) Amount written off as from 1st
(b) Instalments of Principal Out-
October, 1925
475,000
standing
6,228
Indebtedness to Commonwealth for Loans
2,225,583
1,642,111
2. Loans raised by the State for Capital
9. Instalments of Principal in Arrear
6,228
Purposes, including Advances pend-
10. Instalments of Interest in Arrear
ing Loan Flotation
Nil
(estimated) ..
31,068
Less Repayments (if any) ..
Indebtedness to State for Loans
Total Personal Accounts of Settlers
1,679,407
3. Funds provided by the State to meet
11. Unallotted and Allotted Land—Cost of
Deficiency
313,141
Resumptions
254,872
Less Balance not Funded ..
7,201
(Land is not charged to Settlers, butis held on
305,940
Perpetual Lease Tenure at Annual Rentals.)
Less Contribution from State Revenue towards
12. Sundry Assets (Administrative Buildings,
Losses as per Item 15 of Profit and
Loss
Plant, Stock, &o.)
22,783
Appropriation Account ..
13. Sundry Debtors
19,296
4. Sundry Creditors ..
8,782
5. Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts
1,976,358
6. Interest on Loans accrued to 30th June, 1927,
Cash Balance .. .. ..
Nil
but not due
34,990
14. Suspense Accounts (if any)
, ,
..
15. Interest accrued to 30th June, 1927,
2,575,295
but not due ..
7. Other Special Items—
16. Gross Losses to 30th June, 1927, as
Estimated Amounts, comprising—
per Profit and Loss Appropriation
Estimated Losses—
Account ..
2,029,092
Item 6, Profit and Loss Account
644,576
Less Losses provided for as per
Estimated Rebates of Rents
Profit and Loss Appropriation
(Item 8)
1,500
Account
863,079
Estimated Loss on Special
Loans
6,000
Net Losses still to be provided for
1,166,013
Estimated Interest on Account
of State Loan Money
15,000
567,076
3,142,371
3,142,371
Item 4—
£
Suspense Account
691
Agricultural Bank (Administration Ontstanding) .. 8,091
8,782
L.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF VICTORIA.


PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT UP TO 30th JUNE, 1927 (AS SUBMITTED BY STATE).
Item No. Particulars.
£
Item No. Particulars.
£
£
1,
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
To Interest on Loans
To General Administration ..
To Training of Soldiers
To Losses written off
To Losses due to Revaluations
To Estimated Losses due to further ]
To Provision for Bad and Doubtful
.. *1,099,834
272,894
4,568
202,362
90,064
it ions 544,576
9. By Interest earned and accrued to 30th
June, 1927-
Interest paid
Interest accrued (estimated)
253,017
31,068
tevalui
Debts
10. By Sundry Earnings
284,085
33,263
317,348
2,029,092
Cost of roads, surveys of new sites,
&c., on all Group Settlements
Pineapple subsidy
Estimated loss on special loans
Estimated rebates of rents
Marketing pines, deficiencies, &c.
£
116,512
7,151
6,000
1,500
979
11. By Gross Losses carried down
Item 10 —
Administration,-Sales, Rents, &c. ..
Agric. Bank penalties
Discounts
Stock account (handling charges) ..
Rents, Atherton-Tolga ..
Sundries
18,288
4,101
5,199
3,167
2,180
328
33,263
2,346,440
2,346,440
APPROPRIATION ACCOUNT.
12.
To Gross Losses brought down
2,029,092
13. By Contribution from Commonwealth
Revenue towards Interest Charges —
(o) Rebate of 2J per cent.
(b) On account of £475,000
written off as from 1st
October, 1925
335,804
52,275
388,079
475,000
14. By Contribution by Commonwealth towards other
Losses —Loans written off as from 1st October,
1925, Sustenance Allowance
15. By Contributions from State Revenue
By Contributions from State Loan ..
16. Total Losses provided for ..
17. Net Losses still to be provided for ..
863,079
1,166,013
2,029,092
2,029,092
• Include Interest, £15,000, on advance* made available from State Loan Funds, but does not include Interest on moneys advanced by State from date of
advance to date of reimbursement by Commonwealth.
Item 2—
Lands Department (gross) .
Less Administration Assets
254,122
22,783
231,339
Agricultural Bank .. .. .. 33,464
Agricultural Bank Outstanding .. .. 8,091
272,894
M.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF QUEENSLAND.


BALANCE-SHEET (AS AMENDED BY COMMISSIONER).
Liabilities.
Assets.
Item No. £ £ -
Item No.
1. Capital Account —Loans raised by Com-.
6. Balance of Personal Accounts of Settlers,
£
monwealth for Capital Purposes .. 2,717,696
including Charges for Land, Advances, and
Less —•
Interest
1,051,222
(a) Repayments of Principal to Com-
7. Unallotted and Resumed Land
254,872
mon wealth .. 17,113
8. Sundry Assets—Administrative Buildings,
(b) Amounts written oft as from 1st
Plant, Stock, &c., less Losses written off ..
19,691
October, 1925 ... .. 475,000
9. Sundry Debtors ..
25,764
2,225,583
10. Interest accrued to 30th June, 1927, but not due
2. Loans raised by State for Capital Pur-
11. Gross Losses to 30th June, 1927, as
poses, less Repayments
per Profit and Loss Appropriation £
3. Other Funds provided by the State to meet
Account .. 1,853,315
Deficiency .. .. .. .. 118,237
Less Losses provided for by the Com-
4. Sundry Creditors .. .. .. .. 8,782
monwealth .. .. .. 817,272
5. Interest on Loans accrued to 30th June, 1927, but
not due .. .. .. .. 34,990
Balance of Losses still borne by State
1,036,043
2,387,592
2,387,592
PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT UP TO 30th JUNE, 1927 (AS AMENDED BY COMMISSIONER).
Item No. Particulars.
1. To Interest on Loans
2. To General Administration
3. To Training of Soldiers
4. To Losses written off
5. To Losses due to Revaluations and Losses on
account of Disposal of Lands
6. To Estimated Losses due to Further Revaluations,
including Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts
6a. To Sundries
£
1,047,559
169,865
29,568
348,669
90,064
628,185
14,130
Item No. Particulars.
8. By Interest earned and accrued to 30th June, 1927
8a. By Sundry Earnings
9. By Gross Losses carried down
£
430,392
44,333
1,853,315
2,328,040
2,328,040
APPROPRIATION ACCOUNT.
7.
To Gross Losses brought down
1,853,315
10. By Contribution from Commonwealth Revenue
towards Interest charges
11. By Contribution towards other Losses—Loans
written off as from 1st October, 1925
342,272
475,000
12. By Total Losses provided for by Commonwealth
13. By Balance of Losses at present borne by State
817,272
1,036,043
1,853,315
1.853,315
Q.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT INQUIRY.
STATE OF QUEENSLAND.
Profit and Loss Account.
This item has been reduced by part of item 13, £52,275, which has also been taken out of the
appropriation account.
This item stood originally at £272,894. Of this amount, the sum of £25,000 has been transferred
to training of soldiers. It has also been reduced by a sum of £76,831, which represents the difference
between the administration of soldier settlers and civilian settlers, according to the figures obtained from
the Lands Department’s letter of 12th March, 1929, and by a further sum of £1,198, representing
adjustments of building not properly charged to soldier settlement. The total reduction is £103,029,
leaving this item at £169,865.
This is increased by the sum of £25,000 brought down from Item 2, and the total will now be
£29,568.
This item stood originally at £202,362. This is increased by the amount of £146,307, which figure,
according to statement No. 5, represents interest earned but subsequently written off. The total wifi
now be £348,669.
This item will stand at £90,064.
Item 1,
Interest
on loans.
Item 2,
General
Administration.
Item 8,
Training
of soldiers.
Item 4,
Losses
written off.
Item 5,
Losses due to
revaluations.
P.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF QUEENSLAND.
O.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF QUEENSLAND.


This amount, £544,576, has been increased by £83,609, due to final figures supplied by the
Revaluation Board, and now comes to £628,185. This sum of £83,609, includes the amount of £1,500
under item 8, estimated rebates.
There is no entry under this head.
The amount of £116,512 expended on public works has been taken out of the account, and the
amount of £1,500 goes into Item 6. The remaining items total £14,130, at which this item stands.
This stood originally at £284,085, and has been increased by the amount of £146,307, referred to
under item 4. The total will now be £430,392.
This item stood originally at £33,263. It has been increased by £11,070, proportion of agricultural
bank’s profits due to soldiers’ accounts, and now stands at £44,333.
The gross losses will now be £1,853,315.
Appropriation Account.
This item will be altered as above to £1,853,315.
This item will be increased by the sum of £6,468, which represents interest concession by the
Commonwealth and not drawn as at the 30th June, 1927. The item will now stand at £342,272. The
State claims that the amount not drawn at 30th June, 1927, was £2,715 only. I have adopted the amount
of £6,468 for the time being, and any adjustment can be made later,
This item will stand as in the original accounts, at £475,000.
There is no entry under this item.
This item will now be £817,272.
,
This figure will be £1,036,043.
The following Schedule shows the different headings under which the losses have occurred, but I
am unable in this State from the information supplied to distinguish between losses on land and losses on
advances, and they have therefore been included under one heading of principal losses.
£ £
Losses of interest .. .. .. .. .. .. 859,440
This loss has been dissected out, and the following
figures appear. Losses between the amount paid
by the State and accrued to the State is .. 617,167
while the loss written off as irrecoverable is .. 242,273
As against the first figure, £617,167, the
Commonwealth have allowed a rebate of interest
amounting to £342,272.
Losses under administration .. .. .. .. 169,865
Training of soldiers .. .. .. .. .. 29,568
Losses of principal .. .. .. .. .. 824,645
1,883,518
Sundries—a surplus of .. .. 30,203
1,853,315
Balance-sheet.
This item will stand at £2,225,583.
This stands at nil.
This item originally stood at £305,940, and has been amended as follows : — lt has been decreased
by the following items—Item 8, profit and loss account, £116,512, amount expended on public works ;
£76,831, decrease in administration charges ; £11,070, appearing as part of Item 10 in thepiofit and loss
account; and £4,290, hospital and bush nursing buildings, which have also been taken out of the
accounts. Total deduction, £208,703. It will be increased by the sum of £21,000, made up of the £6,000,
estimated loss on the saw-mill, under Item 8, and £15,000, estimated interest paid on account of State
loan money, appearing in Item 7, making the net reduction £187,703, and leaving the figure under this
item at £118,237.
item 8,
Se™dueto
further
revaluations.
item 7,
Provision for
bad and
doubtful debts.
items,
items. speclal
item 9,
and accraed'to
30th June, 1927.
item 10,
earnings.
item n.
Gross losses.
item 12,
Gross losses
brought down.
item 13,
j r °^ ribution
Commonwealth
fnterest charges!
item 14,
Contribution by
Commonwealth
towards other
losses
item 15,
Contributions
from State
revenue and
!° an ’
Item 16,
Total losses
provided for.
item 17,
Losses at
by state? o™* 0 ™*
Item a
Capital
account—loans
raised by
Commonwealth.
Item 2
Loans raised by
State for capital
purposes.
item 3,
by sta t eto VMed
meet deficiency,


Item 4,
Sundry
creditors.
Item 5,
Provision lor
bad and
doubtful debts.
Item 6,
Interest on
Commonwealth
Loans accrued
to 30th June,
1927, but not
due.
Item 7,.
Other special
item*.
Item 8,
Personal
accounts of
settlers.
Item 9,
Instalments of
principal in
arrear.
Item 10,
Instalments of
interest in
arrear.
Item 11,
Unallotted
land.
Item 12,
Sundry assets.
Item 13,
Sundry debtors.
Item 14,
Suspense
accounts.
Item 15,
Interest accrued
to 30th June,
1927, but not
due.
Item 16,
Gross losses.
This item will stand at £8,782.
There is no entry under this head.
This item will stand at £34,990.
This item will disappear. The sum of £544,576, amended as set out in item 6, profit and loss
account, to £628,185, has been deducted from the personal accounts on the other side, and items estimated
interest on State loan money, and estimated loss on special loans, have been added to Item 3.
The total of these items stood originally at £1,679,407. It has been reduced by the estimated
losses under Item 7, £628,185, and now stands at £1,051,222.
This item will stand at £251,872.
This item has been reduced by £3,092, adjustment on buildings, and will stand at £19,691.
This item will be increased by the amount of £6,468, which represents the undrawn interest
concession, and will now stand at £25,764. {See note, Item 13, Appropriation Account).
No entry.
This item stands at nil in the accounts.
£
The gross losses will now appear as .. .. .. 1,853,315
Less losses provided for .. .. .. .. .. 817,272
Losses at present borne by the State .. .. .. .. 1,036,043


BALANCE-SHEET (AS SUBMITTED BY STATE).
Item No. Liabilities.
£
£
Item No. Assets.
£
£
1. Capital Account —
8. Personal Accounts of Settlers—
Loans raised by Commonwealth for
Total Indebtedness for Land, &c.,
Capital Purposes
2,857,780
and Advances—
Less — £
General
5,158,745
(a) Repayments .. 24,773
Irrigation ..
1,659,177
( b) Amounts written off
—
6,817,922
as from 1st October,
Less —
1925 .. .. 567,000
(a) Repayments by Soldiers—
591,775
General
1,044,656
Irrigation
61,903
Indebtedness to Commonwealth
for Loans
2,266,005
1,106,559
2. Loans raised by State for
(6) Instalments of Principal out-
Capital Purposes .. 8,704,446
standing—
Less Repayments.. 2,750,848
General
196,289
Irrigation
29,354
Indebtedness to State for Loans
5,953,598
8,219,603
225,643
3. Funds provided by the State to
1,332,202
meet Deficiency —
General .. .. 22,262
5,485,720
Irrigation .. . - 74,003
9. Instalments of Principal in Arrear—
96,265
General
196,289
Less Contribution from State Revenue
Irrigation
29,354
towards Losses, v. Item 16, P. and
225,643
L. Appropriation Account
96,265
10. Instalments of Interest in arrear—■
General
213,704
Less Contribution from Loan
Nil.
Irrigation
39,996
4. Sundry Creditors —
253,700
General
7,010
Irrigation
5,352
Total Personal Accounts of Settlers
5,965,063
12,362
Add Land held under Lease—Irrigation
110,057
5. Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts-
—See Item
No. 7. Profit and Loss Account
6,075,120
6. Interest on Loans accrued to 30th June, 1927, but
Less further reductions due to Revaluations™
not due ..
£33,950
Irrigation
750,000
Note. —This item is ruled off short, as it
represents amount owing by State Treasury to
5,325,120
Commonwealth, and is not relevant to Depart-
11. Unallotted Land—
mental records. Item No. 1 in Statement No. 3
General
194,934
includes interest on all loan money to 30th June,
Irrigation
65,000
1927
259,934
7. Other Special Items —Capitalization of
arrears of
12. Sundry Assets—
Water Rates and Rents —-Irrigation
35,521
General—Plant, Motors, &e.
2,057
Irrigation—Administrative Build-
ings, Plant, &c.
50,205
52,262
13. Sundry Debtors—Miscellaneous
Services, Supplies, &o. —
General
2,299
Irrigation
1,721
4,020
14. Suspense Accounts—
General
14,001
Irrigation
152,864
166,865
15. Interest accrued to 30th June, 1927, but not due—
General
71,862
Irrigation
224,553
296,415
16. Gross Losses to 30th June, 1927, as per
Profit and Loss Appropriation Ac-
count—•
General
1,412,565
Irrigation
1,820,646
-
3,233,211
Less Losses provided for as
per Profit and Loss Ap-
propriation Account—
General .. .. 748,348
Irrigation .. .. 321,993
£
1,070,341
Net Losses still to be provided for—
General
664,217
Irrigation
1,498,653
2,162,870
8,267,486
8,267,486
R.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT UP TO 30
Pabtiotjlaes.
Item No. £ £
1. To Interest on Loans (Interest charged
by State Treasury)—
General .. .. .. 1,776,490
Irrigation .. .. .. 730,036
9 KOR -or
th JUNE, 1927 (AS SUBMITTED BY STATE).
Pabtioulabs.
Item No. £
10. By Interest earned and accrued to
30th June, 1927—
General .. .. .. 958,793
Irrigation .. .. .. 387,965
£
1,346,758
41,663
2.
To General Administration—
General ..
Irrigation
252,312
198,317
450,629
11. By Sundry Earnings—
General
Irrigation
35,629
5,934
3.
To Training of Soldiers—
General ..
Irrigation
65,005
104,426
169,431
12. By Gross Losses carried down—
General
Irrigation
1,412,565
1,820,646
1,388,321
4.
To Losses written off—
General ..
56,762
166,677
3,233,211
Irrigation
223,439
129,484
750,0f'0
229,216
100,414
40,131
15,197
7,065
5. To Losses due to Revaluations—
General ..
(Note. —These axe on account of
Cancelled Holdings only, which have
been re-valued and re-allotted.)
Irrigation
6. To Estimated Losses due to further
Revaluations—
General (see remarks elsewhere) ..
Irrigation
7,702
121,782
750,000
7.
To Provision for Bad and Doubtful
Debts —being actual amounts trans-
ferred from Settlers’ Accounts and
considered irrecoverable—
General
Irrigation
156,857
72,359
8. To Other Special Items —
Expenses and Discounts Account
Floating Loans—
General
Irrigation
69,597
30,817
Concessions on Soldiers’ Water Rates—
Irrigation
Loss Account Purchase and Sale of Dairy
Cattle for Settlers—General
Rent of Private Office Account Soldier Settle-
ment—Genera)
4,621,532
4,621,532
9. To Gross Losses brought down
APPROPRIATIC
3,233,211
N ACCOUNT.
13. By Contribution from Commonwealth
Revenue towards Interest Charges—
General
Irrigation
285,664
93,571
379,235
14. By Contribution from Commonwealth
Revenue towards Other Losses—
Training Soldiers —
General
Irrigation ..
r
13,322
14,519
Amounts * written off .from 1st
October, 1925—
General
Irrigation]..
27,841
427,100
139,900
694,841
96,265
[By Sustenance Allowance .. £58,500
(Note.—Sustenance was only paid to
Settlers by State on behalf of Com-
monwealth.)
15. By Contribution from State Revenue
Account—
Rent of Private Offices; Dairy
Cattle
Irrigation
22,262
74,003
Contribution from State - Loan
16. By Total Losses provided for —
General
Irrigation
Nil
748,348
321,993
1,070,341
2,162,870
*
17. By Net Losses still to be provided for —
General
Irrigation
684,217
1,498,653
3,233,211
3,233,211
S.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


BALANCE-SHEET
(AS AMENDED BY COMMISSIONER).
Item No. Liabilities.
£
£
Item No. Assets.
£
1. Capital Account—Loans raised by Com-
6. Balance of Personal Accounts of Settlers, including
mouwealth for capital purposes
2,857,780
charges for Land, Advances, and Interest
4,863,231
Less —
7. Unallotted and resumed land
369,991
(a) Repayments of Principal to Com-
8. Sundry Assets —Administrative Buildings, Plant,
monwealth ..
24,775
Stock, &c., less Losses written off
56,112
lb) Amounts written off as from 1st
9. Sundry Debtors
4,020
October, 1925
567,000
9a. Suspense Accounts
166,865
2,266,005
10. Interest accrued to 30th June. 1927, but not due
296,415
2. Loans raised by State for Capital
11. Gross Losses to 30th June, 1927, as per £
Purposes, less Repayments
5,919,648
Profit and Loss Appropriation
3. Other Funds provided by State to meet deficiency
77,050
Account ., ,, .. 3,565,829
4. Sundry Creditors
12,303
Less Losses provided for by the Com-
6. Interest on Loans accrued to 30th June
1927,
monwealth .. .. .. 977,927
but not due
33,950
5a. Other Special Items
35,520
Balance of Losses still borne by State
2,587,902
8,344,536
8,344,536
PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT UP TO 30th JUNE, 1927 (AS AMENDED BY COMMISSIONER).
Item No. Particulars.
1. To Interest on Loans
2. To General Administration
3. To Training of Soldiers
4. To Losses written off
5. To Losses due to Revaluations and Losses on account
of Disposal of Lands
6. To Estimated Losses due to Further Revaluations,
! including Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts ..
6a. To Other Special Items
£
2,506,527
438,480
169,431
263,570
862,724
597,807
115,611
Item No. Particulars.
8. By Interest earned and accrued to 30th June, 1927
8a. By Sundry Earnings
9. By Gross Losses carried down
£
1,346,758
41,563
3,565,829
4,954,150
4,954,150
APPROPRIAT
ION ACCOUNT.
7. To Gross Losses brought down
3,665,829
10. By Contribution from Commonwealth Revenue
towards Interest charges
11. By Contribution by Commonwealth towards other
Losses—Loans written off as from 1st October,
1925
383,086
594,841
12. By Total Losses provided for by Commonwealth ..
13. By Balance of Losses at present borne by State ..
977,927
2,587,902
3,565,829
3,565,829
Profit and Loss Account.
This item stands at £2,506,526.
This item has to be reduced by £19,214 (which represents the administrative cost of the Soldiers if
they had been civilians) in accordance with my general remarks. It has to be increased also by portion
of item 8, rent of private offices, soldier settlement, £7,065, which I think, should properly come within '
administration charges.
The net result will be that this item will stand at £438,480.
This item will stand at £169,431.
item i.
Interest on
mns ra on
Item s
Training of
Soldiers.
V.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
U.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
T.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


Item 4,
Losses written
off.
Item 5,
Losses due to
revaluations,
and losses on
account of
disposal of
lands.
Item 6,
Estimated
losses due to
further
revaluations,
including
provision for
bad and
doubtful debts.
Items,
Other special
items.
Item 10,
Interest to 30th
June, 1927.
Item 11,
Sundry
earnings.
Item 12,
Gross losses
carried down.
Item 13,
Contribution by
Commonwealth
to Interest
charges.
Item 14,
Contribution by
Commonwealth
towards other
losses.
Item 15,
Contributions
from State
revenue and
loan.
Item 16
Total losses
provided for by
Commonwealth.
Item 17,
Balance of
losses at present
borne by State.
Item 1,
CapiiaJ account.
Loans raised by
Commonwealth.
Item 2,
Loans raised by
State for capital
purposes.
Item 3,
Funds provided
by State to
meet deficiency.
This item stood originally at £223,439. It has been increased by portion of Item 8, £40,131,
concession on soldiers’ water rates irrigation, as in my opinion it is in effect a loss already written off, and
the item will now stand at £263,570.
This item is increased by £733,240, which is portion of the amount of £800,000, and is recommended
by the two reports of the commission to be written off. The remainder of this amount of £800,000,
namely £66,760, has been placed under Item 6, estimated losses due to further revaluations. The total of
Item 5 will now be £862,724.
Items 6 and 7 of the original accounts have been amalgmated, the amalgamated figure being made
up as follows:—Firstly, the amount of £66,760 just referred to, then the amount of £268,364, which
includes the three items of £87,000, £131,364, and £50,000 ; a further item of £22,985, which had not
previously appeared in the accounts, but is the considered estimate of losses due to re-sale of forfeited
blocks and which was previously estimated at £10,000; the amount of original item 7, £229,216, as
appearing in the accounts; and a further item of £10,483 brought up from Item 8—making the total
under this item of £597,807.
Item 8 has been amalgamated, and now consists of the two items of £100,414 and £15,197, the
balance of the items having been disposed of as before-mentioned.
( This item will stand.
This item remains unaltered.
The gross losses will now be £3,565,829.
Appropriation Account.
This item was orginally £379,236, and has been increased by £3,850, to £383,086, which represents
the outstanding liability of the Commonwealth at the 30th June, 1927. Although this further amount
had not been drawn at that date, yet as future writings down are provided for in the Profit and Loss
Account, which will no doubt cover the whole of the further payment made by the Commonwealth, I have
increased this figure in the manner indicated.
This item will stand.
This item has been taken out of the accounts, inasmuch as it has no relation to the losses of
the State, which will be contributed to by the Commonwealth.
This item will now stand at £977,927.
Net losses borne by the State £2,587,902.
The following schedule shows the different headings under which the losses have occurred, but
I am unable in this State from the information supplied to distinguish between losses on land and
losses on advances, and they have therefore been included under one heading of principal losses.
£ £
Losses of interest .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,642,203
This loss has been dissected out, and the following figures
appear—losses between the amount paid by the State
and accrued to the State is .. .. .. 1,159,769
while the loss written off as irrecoverable is .. .. 482,434
As against the first figure, £1,159,769, the Commonwealth
have allowed a rebate of interest amounting to .. 383,086
Losses under administration .. .. .. .. .. 438,480
Training of soldiers .. .. .. .. .. .. 169,431
Losses of principal .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,241,668
Sundries .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 74,047
3,565,829
Balance-sheet.
These are amalgamated in the balance-sheet as furnished, but they are brought out as follows:
r Item 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. £2,266,005
Item 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 5,953,598
1 This latter has been reduced to £5,919,648 by deducting £33,950, which amount is shown separately
under Item 6.
This Item will appear at £77,050, which is arrived at as follows:
, According to the profit and loss appropriation account, the sum of £96,264 was provided by the
State. From this has to be deducted £19,214, overcharged under administration costs. This will result
in a balance under this item of £77,050.


This item will stand.
There is nothing under this heading.
4
This item is £33,950. See remarks under item 2.
This item stands at £35,521.
The final balances of settlers originally stood at £5,325,120. This has been reduced by £22,985,
estimated further losses under new item 5, and by £10,483, part of Item 8 of the profit and loss account,
and by a further sum of £1.10,057, which appears under the personal accounts as land under lease, but which
should in my opinion appear under the asset of land. It has also been reduced by £50,000 increase of
Item 6, profit and loss account, and £2C8,364, portion of Item 7, same account. The net result of these
alterations will be that this item will stand at £4,863,231.
This item will be increased by the amount for land brought from the personal accounts, £110,057,
and will now stand at £369.991.
'
Item 12 will be increased by the sum of £3,850, representing that portion of the interest concession
by the Commonwealth, not drawn by the State. It will stand at £56,112,
These items will stand.
Cross losses to 30th June, 1927, as per profit and loss appropriation account, £3,565,829, /css losses
provided for, £977,927—Net losses £2,587,902.
item 4.
Sundry
creditors.
item 5,
Provision for
bad and
doubtful debts.
item 6,
Interest accrued
but not due.
item 7,
Other special
items.
item s,
ot
settlers,
Item tf >
Item 10 '
item u,
Unallotted and
resumed land.
item 12,
Sundry assets.
J ten ! 13 -
Sundry
Debtors.
Item 14,
Suspense
accounts.
Item 15,
Interest accrued
but not due.
item ie,
orow loss '"-
F. 2049. -- 4


BALANCE-SHEET AT 30th JUNE,
1927 (AS SUBMITTED BY STATE).
Capital Account.
Personal Accounts op Settlers.
£
s. d. £ s. d. £
s. d
£
<1. £
8.
d.
Loans raised by Commonwealth for Capital
8.
Total Indebtedness for Lands, &c., and Advances ..
6,948,472
1
t
Purposes .. .. .. .. _
... 5,463,782 3 0
Less -—
Less —
•
(a) Repayments by Soldiers
711,719
9
11
(a) Repayments
32,579 16 11
(b) Instalments of Principal Outstanding
1,272,667
14
«
(6) Amount written off as from 1st October,
1925 .. .. .. .. 796,000
0 0
4,964,084
16
9
828,579 16 11
9.
Instalments of Principal in Arrear
1,272,667
14
6
10.
Instalments of Interest in Arrear ..
363,731
2
10
Indebtedness to the Commonwealth for Loans
.. 4,635,202
6 1
2. Loans raised by the State for Capital Purposes, including Advances Pending Loan
Total Personal Accounts of Settlers
.. 6,600,483
14
1
Flotations
.. 2,208,334
0 0
11.
Unallotted Land
94,090
19
0 •
3. Additional Funds provided by the State
.. 1,441,794 6 0
12.
Sundry Assets (Administrative Buildings, Plant, Stock, &c.) . .
27,977
12
9
Less Repayments
871,113 18 11
13.
Sundry Debtors (Repayments) (as per contra)
570,680
7 1
14.
Suspense Accounts (if any)
4. Sundry Creditors (Outstanding Cash Orders)
2,526 10 2
15.
Interest accrued to 30th June, 1927. but not due
28,564
1
3
5. Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts
468,401 17 9
— 150,632
13
0
6. Interest on Loans accrued to 30th June, 1927, but not due
121,539 13 6
16.
Gross Losses to 30th June, 1927, as per Profit and Loss
7. Other Special Items
31,960 12 3
Appropriation Account .. ..
2,742,801
16
1
624,428
13 S
Less Losses provided for as per Profit and Loss Appropriation
Account .. .. ..
1,455,272
16
4
Net Losses still to be Provided for
.. 1,287,528
19
9
8,038,645
6 10
8,038,645
6
10
W.—STATEMENT No. 2.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA..


PROFIT AND LOSS
ACCOUNT UP TO 30th
JUNE, 1927 (AS SUBMITTED BY STATE;.
Item No,
£
s.
d. £ g. d.
Item No.
£
d. £
i.
1. To Interest on Loans
. . 2,443,827
12
4
10. By Interest earned and accrued to 30th June. 1927 ..
2,222,720
12
2
2. c General Administration ..
280,839
3
10
11. Sundry Earnings
71,848
8
6
3. Training of Soldiers
4,443
11
3
12. Gross Losses carried down .. ..
2,742,801
16
I
4. Losses written off
361,004
8
6
- 5,037,370
16
9
6. Losses due to Re-valuation
441,221
11
3
6. Estimates Losses due to further Re-valuations
321,667
11
11
7. Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts (if any)
146,734
5
10
8. Other Special Items (if any)
.. 1,037,632
11
10
5,037,370 16 9
5,037,370
16
9
APPROPRIATION ACCOUNT.
9. To Gross Losses brought down
.. 2,742,801
16
1
13. By Contribution from Commonwealth Revenue towards
Interest Charges
659,272
16
4
14. Contribution by Commonwealth towards Other Losses
796,000
0
0
-
— 1,455,272
16
4
Loans written off as from 1st October, 1925
15. Contributions from State Revenue
16. Contributions from State Loan
16a. Total Losses provided for
17. Net Losses still to be provided for
. . 1,287,528
19
9
2,742,801 16 1
2,742,801
16
1
X—STATEMENT No. 3.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.


BALANCE-SHEET (AS AMENDED BY COMMISSIONER).
Item No. Liabilities.
£
£
Item No. Assets.
£
1. Capital Account—
6. Balance of Personal Accounts of Settlers, including
Loans raised by Commonwealth for
charges for Land, Advances, and Interest
6,132,082
Capital purposes
5,463,782
7. Unallotted and resumed land
94,091
Less —
8. Sundry Assets —Administrative Buildings, Plant,
(o) Repayments of Principal to
Stock, &c., less Losses written off
27,978
Commonwealth
32,580
9. Sundry Debtors
22,415
( b ) Amounts written off as from
10. Interest accrued to 30th June, 1927. but not due
28,564
1st October, 1925 ..
796,000
11. Gross Losses to 30th June, 1927, as per
4,636,202
Profit and Loss Appropriation Ac-
2. Loans raised by State for Capital
Purposes,
count . . .. .. 2,059,358
less Repayments
2,095,581
Less Losses provided for by the Com-
.'i. Other Funds provided by the State to
meet defi-
monwealth .. .. .. 1,477,688
ciency
—
4. Sundry Creditors
2,526
Balance of Losses still borne bv State
581,080
5. Interest on Loans accrued to 30th June
1927, but
not due
121,540
5a. Other Special Items . .
31,961
6,886,810
6,886,810
PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT UP TO 30th JUNE, 1927 (AS AMENDED BY COMMISSIONER).
Item No. Particulars.
1. To Interest on Loans ..
2. To General Administration
3. To Training of Soldiers
4. To Losses written off ..
5. To Losses due to Revaluations and Losses on account
of Disposal of Lands
ti. To Estimated Losses due to Further Revaluations,
including Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts
(>a . To Sundry Items
£
2,434,149
280,839
4,443
361,004
441,222
468,402
104,290
Item No. Particulars.
8. By Interest earned and accrued to 30th June, 1927
8a. By Sundry Earnings
9. By Gross Losses carried down
£
1,963,132
71,849
2,059,368
4,094,349
4,094,349
7
APPROPRIATE
To Gross Losses brought down .. .. .. 2,059,368
ON ACCOUNT.
10. By Contribution from Commonwealth Revenue
towards Interest Charges
11. By Contribution by Commonwealth towards other
Losses —Loans written off as from 1st October,
1925
681,688
796,000
12. By Total Losses provided for by Commonwealth ..
13. By Balance of Losses at present borne by State . ,
1,477,688
581,680
2,059,368
2,059,368
iumi.
LoaM 810 ”
Profit and Loss Account.
This item of interest has been reduced by £9,679, made up of the two items of £5,479 and £4,200
referred to in the Auditor-General’s letter of the 6th December, 1928, in which he states, with regard to
the £5,479 that an omission was made in not adjusting interest to that amount, and in the case of th*
£4,200, that this amount can be deducted from the claim.
The item as reduced will stand at £2,434,149. f ’
A. 1.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT INQUIRY.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Z.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Y.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.


This appears at £280,839, and will stand, having regard to further information supplied by the j
State. j
Item 3 will remain unaltered. • )
i
The totals of Items 4 (losses written off), 5 (losses due to revaluations, and losses on account of i
disposal of lands). 6 (estimated losses due to further revaluations), and 7 (provision for bad and;
doubtful debts) remain unaltered, but they have been grouped under different heads, in order to bring
the accounts of the different States into line.
Item 8, other special items, £1,037,633. This was made up of the following items— i
Concessions .. .. .. .. .. .. .. £592,546 i
Interest Concessions to Soldiers .. . . .. . . .. 259,588
Flotation Expenses of State Loans . . . . .. .. 90,894
w i / 47,900
Works \ 46,705
With regard to the first item, £592,546 this covers certain concessions granted to soldier settlers,
namely, reduction of the value of Crown lands by 50 per cent.; half of registration fees and stamp
duties, rent concessions on pastoral leases, and concessions on survey fees. In my opinion, the whole of
this amount must come out of the accounts, as I cannot see that it is in any way a loss due to soldier
settlement. They were concessions granted at the very outset, and were in no way due to the fact that
the settlers would be unable to carry on without such concessions being granted. To my mind they
were simply a bonus given by the State to soldier settlors who like to settle down, irrespective of the
question of whether or not such bonuses were necessary in order to make the settlement satisfactory. It
is quite consistent with the evidence that if no concession at all had been granted to these particular
holders, there would have been no greater writing down of their laud values of their advances. The
impression I have gathered from the evidence given by the Deputy Premier and Minister for Railways
was that these concessions were granted at the time to soldier settlers in order that that class of settlement
might be attracted to Western Australia as against the other States, and was in no way given in order to
permit of a satisfactory settlement.
With regard to the next amount, £259,588, this has been taken out of both sides of the account, as
it appears from the evidence that it is included in item 10, interest earned and accrued. This concession
was, of course, quite different from the prior concession, and was one granted to settlers in order to
promote satisfactory settlement. According to the Auditor-General’s report of 22nd June, 1928, it
appears in item 10 under interest earned and accrued, athough it had never been earned and accrued,
having been granted as a concession.
Flotation expenses of State loans, £90,894 —This amount remains in.
With regard to the £47,900, this covers certain public works carried out by the bank. On an
inspection of the items therein it appears to me that practically the whole of that, except certain items
amounting to £13,396, come under the category of Public Works, as they consist of roads, bridges, bores
and drainage. The State still has an asset in those works.
With regard to the amount of £13,396 above referred to, that covers the amount expended on
assets which have since disappeared.
Regarding the £46,705, the whole of this expenditure was on works in the nature of public works,
namely bridges and roads, of which the asset remains in the State.
The result of these alterations will be that this item will now stand at £104,29(1.
This item stood orignallj 7 at £2,222,721. This has been reduced, as already pointed out, by the
amount of £259,588.
This item, £71,848, remains.
Gross losses carried down, £2,742,802. This figure now becomes £2,059,568.
Appropriation Account.
This item stood originally at £659,273, but has been increased to £681,688, or by £22,415, which
represents the outstanding liability of the Commonwealth at the 30th June, 1927. Although this further
amount had not been drawn at that date, yet as future writings down are provided for in the profit and
loss account, which will, no doubt, cover the whole of the further payment made bv the Commonwealth,
I have increased this figure in the manner indicated.
The £796,000 remains unaltered.
The total writings down of the Commonwealth will now be £1,477,688.
Net losses still to be provided for, £581,680.
Item 2,
General
Administration
Item 3,
Training of
Soldiers.
Item 4,
Item 5.
Item C.
Item 7.
Item 8.
Other special
items.
Item 10,
Interest earned
and accrued.
Item 11,
Sundry
earnings.
Item 12,
Gross losses.
Item 13-
Contribution
from
Commonwealth
Revenue
towards
interest charges.
Item 14.
Item 17.


The following schedule shows the different headings under which the losses have occurred, but I
am unable in this State from the information supplied to distinguish between losses on land and losses on
advances, and they have therefore, been included under one heading of principal losses.
£ £
Losses of interest .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,015,663
(This loss has been dissected out, and the following figures
appear. Losses between the amount paid by the State
and accrued to the State is .. .. .. , . 471,016
while the loss written off as irrecoverable is .. .. 544,647
As against the first figure (£471,016), the Commonwealth
have allowed a rebate of interest amounting to £681,688.)
Losses under administration .. . . .. .. .. ~ 280 839
Training of soldiers . . . . .. .. .. .. 4,443
Losses of principal .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 725 981
Sundries .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 32’442
£2,059,368
Balance-sheet.
This item remains unaltered.
This item will be reduced to £2,095,581 under the following circumstances. Having regard to the
reduction from the profit and loss account by eliminating the items already referred to, namely, the
£9,679, £592,546, and £81,208 —total £683,433 —it means that the whole of the “additional funds
provided by the State,” viz., £570,680, will disappear from the accounts, and, in addition, a further sum
of £112,753, making in all £683,433, has to be taken off the liabilities side, and the only remaining item
from which it can be taken is loan funds raised by the State —in other words, this means that certain of
the funds which were raised for soldier settlement wore not employed on soldier settlement to the extent
indicated.
This item will now be £2,095,581.
See note above.
This item will stand.
Provision for bad and doubtful debts, £468,402. This has been taken out of the liabilities side of
the account, and also written off the personal accounts of settlers.
This figure remains unaltered at £121,540.
This remains unaltered at £31,961.
The net total of Items 8 (personal accounts of settlers), 9 (instalments of principal in arrear),
and 10 (instalments of interest in arrear), in the accounts is £6,600,484. This has been reduced bv the
amount of £468,402, Item 5, leaving a figure of £6,132,082.
This figure stands at £94,091.
The figure of £27,978 stands.
Sundry debtors, £22,415. This is the balance of the interest which the State is entitled to draw
from the Commonwealth under the interest concession, and has been referred to under the appropriation
account.
This item remains unaltered at £28,564.
Gross losses to 30th June, 1927, as per profit and loss appropriation account, £2,059,368, less
losses provided for £1,477,688 —Net losses £581,680.
Items 1,
Loans raised by
Commonwealth.
Item 2,
Loans raised by
State for capital
purpose^.
Item 3,
Funds provided
by State to meet
deficiency.
Item 4,
Sundry
creditors.
Item 5,
Provision for
bad and
doubtful debts.
Item 6,
Interest on
loans accrued
but not due.
Item 7,
Other special
Items.
Item 8.
Item 9.
Item 10.
Item 11,
Unallotted and
resumed land.
Item 12,
Sundry assets.
Item 13,
Sundry debtors.
item 16,
Interest accrued
but not dpe.
Item 16,
Orosa losses.


BALANCE-SHEET (AS SUBMITTED BY STATE).
Item No. Liabilities.
1. Capital Account —
Loans raised by Commonwealth for
Capital Purposes
Less —
(а) Repayments
(б) Amount written off as at 1st
October, 1925
Indebtedness to Commonwealth for Loans
2. Loans raised by State for Capital Pur-
poses, including Advance pending
Loan Flotation
Less Repayments (if anv)
£
2,108,303
38,740
262,000
512,455
Nil
£
1.857,563
Assets.
Personal Accounts of Settlers, &c., Land
transferred to Closer Settlement —
Total Indebtedness for Land, Advances.
Buildings, &c*.
Less —
(a) Repayments by £
Soldiers . . 328,738
(0) Instalments of Princi-
pal outstanding . . 65,138
(<•) Written off as Bad
Debt . . . . 97,596
£
855,993
491,472
£
364,521
Instalments of Principal in arrcar
Instalments of Interest in arrear
Interest accrued, but. not yet due
Interest on overdue moneys, 30th .June,
1927 .. . .
65,138
125,822
9,539
10,729
3.
Indebtedness to State for Loans
Funds provided by State to Meet
Deficiency —
(a) From Revenue
(ft) From Loan
(c) From Trust Account
16,000
232,143
265,565
512,455
211,228
513,708
2,131
145,099
27,967
575,749
4.
Sundry Creditors—
Unpaid Purchase Money, £737 ;
other, £8
Lessees — Moneys paid before due
745
1,386
Vacant Land
Land leased to Returned Soldiers (less
P.P.M. paid)
Land leased on short-dated terms (Civi-
71,113
757,183
5.
6.
Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts
Interest on Loans from Commonwealth
but not due, 30th June, 1927
accrued
lians)
Capital Expenditure not chargeable to
Lessees (R.S.)
816,131
9,863
1,654,290
5
'795
59
7.
Depreciation Fund (Buildings sold and reverted). .
2.082
Sundry Debtors
Sundry Assets —
Furniture, &e. (less depreciation)
Stamps
765
30
Suspense Account (Implements)
Gross Loss to 30th June, 1926
Less provided by Common-
wealth Government .. 284,688
Less provided by State Govern-
ment .. .. .. 16,000
Less Commonwealth Grant . . 262,000
1,060,396
562,688
Losses not yet provided for
Hon. Treasurer of Tasmania, Cash Balance
497,708
326,399
k
3,071,005
3,071,005
B. 1.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF TASMANIA..


PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT IT
TO 30tm
■!UNK, 1027 (AS SUBMITTED BY STATE).
Particulars.
Particulars.
Horn Xo.
t
Item No.
r
1.
To Interest on Loans . .
1.084,854
10. By Interest and Bent earned and accrued to 30tb
2
To General Administration
117.936
June, 1927
746,334
To Training of Soldiers
11. By Sundry Earnings
4,072
4,
To Losses written off ..
182,(151
12. Bv Gross Losses carried down
].11(10.395
5.
To Losses due to Re-valuation . .
225,170
6.
To Estimated Losses due to further Revaluations
7,
To Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts (if any)
145,080
s.
To Other .Special Items (if any)
55,092
1,810,802
1,810,802
A I’PPOIMMAT 1 (IN AC(X) UNT.
't.
To Dross Losses to doth .June, 11*^7
1,060,396
BL Bv Contribution from Commonwealth Revenue
towards Interest Charges ..
284,687
14. By Contribution by Commonwealth towards other
Losses —
Loans written oil as from 1st October, 192-5
262,000
Sustenance Allowance—Nil.
15. By Contribution from State Revenue . .
16,001)
16. Total Losses provided for
562.687
17. Net Losses still to be provided for—
Loan .. . . .. . . 232,143
Trust ., .. . . . . 265,506
487,708
1,060,396
1,060,396
D. 1.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF TASMANIA.
C. 1.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF TASMANIA.


PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT UP TO 30th JUNE, 1927 (AS AMENDED BY COMMISSIONER).
Particulars.
Item No.
£
Particulars.
Item No.
£
1. To Interest on Loans ..
2. To General Administration
3. To Training of Soldiers
4. To Losses written off ..
5. To Losses due to Revaluations and Losses on
Account of Disposal of Lands
6. To Estimated Losses due to further Revaluations,
including Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts
6a. To Other Special Items
1,084,854
90,886
182,651
481,211
200,099
31,874
8. By Interest earned and accrued to 30th June, 1927
8a. By Sundry Earnings
9. By Gross Losses carried down
746,334
4,072
1,321,169
2,071,575
2,071,675
APPROPRIATION ACCOUNT.
7.
To Gross Losses brought down ..
1,321,169
10. By Contribution from Commonwealth Revenue
towards Interest Charges ..
11. By Contribution by Commonwealth towards other
Losses—
Loans written off as from 1st October, 1925
284,687
262,000
12. By Total Losses provided for by Commonwealth
13. By Balance of Losses at present borne by State ..
546,687
774,482
1,321,169
1,321,169
Profit and Loss Account.
Item 1 will stand.
This item has been reduced by £27,050, which represents the amounts which the administration
of soldier settlement would have cost had the settlers been civilians.
This item will now stand at £90,886.
This item will stand.
This item has been increased by £256,041, which represents the estimated losses on the disposal of
reverted and abandoned selections. The total will now be £481,211.
These items have been amalgamated, and increased by £25,000, which represents the estimated
losses due to further revaluations on lands that have been abandoned and reverted, and by £30,000, losses
due to fixing of flat rentals (See notes, page 14.) The total under this item will now be £200,099.
This represents concessions, and has been reduced by £23,218, concessions written back on
revaluations. The item will now stand at £31,874.
This item will stand.
This item will stand.
The gross losses carried down, owing to the amendments, will now stand at £1,321,169.
F.2049-5.
Item 1,
Interest on
loans.
I Item 2,
General
administration.
Item 4,
Leases written
off.
f Item 5,
Losses due to
revaluation.
I Item 6,
Estimated losses
’ due to further
revaluations.
Item 7,
Provision for
bad and
doubtful debts.
1 Item 8,
Other special
items.
Item 10,
Interest and
rent earned and
accrued to
30th June, 1927.
Item 11,
Sundry
earnings.
Item 12,
Gross losses
carried down.
F. 1.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
TASMANIA.
E. 1.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
STATE OF TASMANIA.


Appropriation Account.
This item is now £1,321,169.
This item will stand.
This item will stand.
This item has been taken out of the accounts, as it does not bear on the matter in question.
The total under this item will now stand at £546,687.
The losses still borne by the State will be £744,481.
The following schedule shows the different headings under which the losses have occurred, but I
am unable in this State from the information supplied to distinguish between losses on land and losses on
advances, and they have therefore been included under one heading of principal losses.
£ £
Losses of interest .. .. .. .. .. 582,425
This loss has been dissected out, and the following figures
appear —Losses between the amount paid by the State
and accrued to the State is . . . . . . 338,520
while the loss written off as irrecoverable is .. 243,905
As against the first figure, £338,520, the Common-
wealth have allowed a rebate of interest amounting
to £284,688.
Losses under administration . . . . .. .. .. 102,427
Training of soldiers . . . . . . .. . . . .
Losses of principal . . . . . . . . . . .. 631,834
Sundries . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 4,483
1,321,169
Balance-sheet.
This item will stand.
Items 2 and 3 have been amalgamated. The amalgamated figure is arrived at as follows:
The amounts of £512,455 and £16,000 in the original item stand, also the amount of £232,143. The
total of these items is reduced by the difference between £265,565 and £326,399, cash balance, namely,
£60,834; and is also reduced by the amount deducted from administration costs, £27,050, and by the
amount of £23,218, by which Item 8 in the profit and loss account was written back, leaving the net
amount of item 2 at £649,496.
This item will stand at £2,131.
This item, to the extent of £170,099, to which it was increased, has been taken out of this side of
the account, and out of the personal accounts of settlers.
This item will stand.
This item will stand.
The total of £364,521 has been increased by the sums of £65,138 and £125,822, which have been
amalgamated, and from that sum has been deducted the amount of £170,099, provision for bad and
doubtful debts. The item will now stand at £385,382.
The items land leased to returned soldiers and land leased on short-dated terms have been
amalgamated and amount to £1,644,427. From this has been deducted £256,041, estimated further
losses on revaluation of these lands, leaving the item net at £1,388,386.
The amount of £5 will stand.
This now embraces the items of £9,863 and £795, making a total of £10,658.
Interest accrued, namely £9,539, has been taken out of the personal accounts of settlers, also the
£10,729. This will stand at £20,268.
This item of £59 will stand.
Gross losses to 30th June, 1927, as per profit and loss account—£l,32l,l69.
Less losses provided for by Commonwealth, £546,688. The item “ Provided by State Revenue ”
has been taken out of the accounts. The balance borne by the State will appear at £774,481.
Item 9,
Gross losses.
Item 13,
Contribution
from
Commonwealth
revenue towards
interest charges.
Item 14,
Contribution by
Commonwealth
towards other
losses.
Item 15,
Contribution
from State
revenue.
Item 16,
Total lasses
provided for by
Commonwealth.
Item 17,
Balance of
losses at
present borne
by State.
Item ],
Capital Account
Loans raised by
Commonwealth.
Item 2,
Loans raised by
State for capital
purposes.
Item 3,
Liabilities —
Funds from
State to meet
deficiency.
Item 4,
Sundry
creditors.
Item 5,
Provision for
bad and
doubtful deb ts.
Item G,
Interest on
loans from
Commonwealth
accrued but not
due.
Item 7,
depreciation
Fund.
Personal
accounts of
settlers.
Vacant land.
Sundry debtors.
Sundry assets.
Interest
accrued, <6c.
Smpcnse
account.
Gross losses.


ANALYSIS OF LOSSES
-IX ALL STATES, SHOWING ALSO NUMBER OF ORIGINAL SETTLERS, AND THOSE
REMAINING, TOGETHER WITH LOSS PER SETTLER.
| Number of Settlers.
Losses.
Mate. 1
Originally.
1
1
' llemainhig.
Loss per head.
Principal.
Interest.
Administra-
tion.
Training.
Sundries.
Total.
i
i
£
£
e
£
£
£
i
New South Wales! 9.302
Victoria .. 11,140
Queensland . . i 0,031
i
South Australia j 4,082
j
i
Western Aus- d,030
tralia !
i
Tasmania .. j 1,970
r ••
H 6,649 \
I -1%J
r ••
: i 9,249 \
1 I. J
! 1
\J
! i 3,017 \
; I, 60%/
■ i
1 2,754/
I 67% J
H 3,545 \
L 70%/
f
1 777 /
L 39%/
Original Settlers . .
Settlers remaining. .
Original Settlers . .
Settlers remaining .
Original Settlers ..
Settlers remaining..
Original Settlers ..
Settlors remaining. .
Original Settlers . .
Settlers remaining
Original Settlers ..
Settlers remaining..
*2,811,289
302
423
fl,820,931
163
197
824,645
137
227
1,241,668
304
451
725,981
144
205
631,834
319
813
3,129,137
337
470
4,933,423
443
533
859,440
143
238
1.642,203
402
596
1,015,063
202
287
582,025
295
751
1,008,668
108
152
967,537
87
104
169,865
28
47
438.480
107
100
280,839
50
79
102,427
52
132
54,856
6
8
29,568
5
8
169,431
42
61
4,443
1
1
30,203
( Credit )
5
8
74,047
18
27
32,442
6
9
4,483
2
6
7,003,950
753
1,053
7,721,891
603
834
1,853,315
308
512
3,565,829
873
1,295
2,059,368
409
581
1,321,169
668
1,702
Total for all j
States .. i 37,501
r ••
ij 26,591/
; I 71%/
i
Original Settlers ..
Settlers remaining..
8,056,348
214
303
12,162.291
325
458
2,967,816
78
j 112
i
258,298
7
10
80,769
a
3
23,525,522
626
886
(*) Land, £632,141. (t) Laud, £253,627.
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Austrav ia by Jl. Green
Government Printer, Canberra.
X. I.
SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
