

Locality.
(a) From Phthisis.
3
00
1866-68
U-698T
1872-74
t—
to
S
00
s
CO
CO
1881-83
1884-86
1887-89
s
1
o
Oi
00
1893-95
1896-98
1061-6681
Metropolitan Districts
216
205
223
202
221
»
224
226
231
217
188
181
164
144
Extra-Metropolitan Districts
93
83
78
82
85
87
93
92
100
99
103
95
96
Metropolitan Districts
(6) From Other Tubercular Diseases.
84
69
58
50
65
56
56
58
65
61
44
45
42
Extra-Metropolitan Districts
43
47
30
30
32
22
19
20
19
20
20
23
22
7870.
REPORT BY DR. GRESSWELL TO THE BOARD OF PUBLIC HEALTH,
VICTORIA, ON MEASURES TO BE ADOPTED FOR THE PREVEN-
TION AND CURE OF TUBERCULOSIS.
In this report I purpose again to set out the measures that appear to me to be required for the
prevention of human tuberculosis in this State, the several previous editions of my reports, pamphlets,
leaflets, and wall-sheets on this subject that have from time to time for years past been adopted and
distributed by the Board, being now out of print.
Before engaging with these measures a few general observations on tuberculosis may not be out of
place.
This disease, known in its most prevailing form as Consumption , is so excessively prevalent and so
exceedingly fatal as to have well earned for itselt the distinctive title of The White Blague, or The White
Death. Awful as has been the havoc among the human race wrought by the disease known as The Black
Death or The Black Plague , it really has not probably been so widespread and severe as that which has
resulted from tuberculosis, which accounts in some countries for one-sixth, in others for one-fifth, and in
yet others, it is stated, for as large a proportion as one-fourth of the total mortality. In Victoria 26,321
of the 232,979 deaths that took place from all causes during the past fourteen years, 1888-1901, were due to
tuberculosis in one or other of its various forms (20,946 of them to consumption or tubercle of the lungs),
i.e., tuberculosis accounted for nearly, one-ninth of all the deaths during that period. It accounted also for
as many as 8,891 more deaths than did all the following diseases put together, viz., measles, scarlet fever,
whooping cough, mumps, diphtheria, simple continued fever, typhoid fever, and influenza, the deaths for
the same period from these several diseases having together been 17,430. A yearly average for the past
fourteen years of 1,880 deaths in Victoria from tuberculosis, a number from which it may safely be
calculated that throughout that period there have been, and that at the present time there are, as many as,
or more than, 6,000 persons suffering from that disease —a disease, too, which, as will be shown below, is
easily preventable!
Until comparatively recent years tuberculosis was regarded as hereditary, and so firmly was this
belief held that it was thought nothing short of most drastic social legislation would be of any avail in
reducing its prevalence. Numberless investigations resulted, however, in the uprooting of this belief, and
the one-time laissez faire attitude concerning the prevention of tubercle changed at once to an active, hope-
ful, nay, aggressive policy. This reaction was emphasized when Koch proclaimed his discovery of the
cause of tubercle, in the form of a microbe or germ, since known as the bacillus or germ of tubercle, and
again later when it was found that the germ was not universally present (was not übiquitous), and that it
was easily destroyed by disinfection and by sunlighting, and rendered of but little effect in dwellings by free
perflation and ventilation.
In other words, the disease has been found to be eminently preventable. This, indeed, was
practically demonstrated by the results of precautions taken in connexion with the army, the navy, and the
prisons of Great Britain, on lines suggested by Dr. Baly, who, in 1843, investigated the heavy mortality
from it in the latter institutions, and by the British Barracks Commission in 1858, the conclusions of Dr.
Baly and of the Commission being essentially the same, viz., that the main contributing cause of the heavy
incidence of the disease on the army, navy, and inmates of prisons, as compared with that on the rest, of the
population at the same ages, was inadequacy of ventilation. This work quickly brought about a remarkable
reduction of the disease in the army, in the navy, and the gaols.
There has, in fact, been a very great reduction of tuberele among most of the civilized countries
during the past 50 years. The extent of reduction that has taken place in Victoria, and separately in the
metropolis, may be seen in the chart given in the appendix to this report, the chart showing as regards the
yearly mortality from tuberculosis during the past fourteen years, a fairly steady fall from 1,800 to 1,490
per million of the population. It may at once be stated that this fall has affected almost solely the metro-
polis, as will be seen on referring to the chart or to the accompanying table; that in the metropolis the
triennial rates for the past twelve years have been lower than for any previous trienniad since 1863; and
that there the fall has been as marked in regard to consumption as to other tubercular diseases.
Average Yearly Death Rates per 100,000 of the Population in Triennial Periods between 1863 and 1901.


In tiiis connexion it may be well to note also the following facts, viz. :
1. The average yearly mortality for Victoria as a whole (luring the past fourteen years lias been 14'3S per
1,000 of the population, and dining the past three years KWH. in other words a fall lias taken place of 14)7 per
1,000, or 107 per 100,000: and this has heon made up of a fall in the metropolis from 17'10 to 14 S 2. or 2’23 per
1,000, or 223 per 100,00!), and a fall in the country from 12•. Pi to 12'.‘!d. or o'2 pur 1,000 or 20 per 100,000.
2. The average yearly mortality during the past fourteen years from all causes, from consumption and from
other forms of tuberculosis, has for many years been much lower in the country than ill the metropolitan districts,
so that there has been, it would appear, much less room for improvement in the former than in the latter. At the
same time note must he taken of the high death-rates from consumption in the city of Bendigo and its suburbs, as
also in that of Ballarat and its suburbs, the average yearly rate per 10,000 of the population during the past
thirteen years having been 24\S. in the former ease, and 10’09 in the hitter, rates the excess of which is no doubt to
be attributed in part to mining operations, and in the case of Bendigo to the selection of that city as a place of
residence for consumptives.
3. Comparison of the mortality from respiratory diseases and influenza on the one hand, with that from
consumption and all tubercular diseases on the other, will serve, I think, to suggest that the fall in the latter may
have been in part a matter of compensation. Statistics in this connexion are as follow:—“In successive quin-
quennial periods from 1804 to 1898, both years included, the average yearly death-rates in Melbourne and suburbs
per 100,000 of the population were—(l) in the case of phthisis, 206, 211, 221, 227, 227, 191, and 170; (2)
in the case of respiratory diseases and influenza, 1 (id, 13.7, 199, 22.7, 227, 227, and 198 ; and (3) in the case of all
tubercular diseases, 282, 204, 283, 282, 28S, 230, and 214.”
In other countries the fall that, lias taken place in the niorlaiify from tubercular diseases lias been
attributed to the improved sanitary conditions, improved .sanitary administration, and improved treatment ;
and doubtless the same causes have aided in bringing about the fall that has taken place here.
If all this be admitted, and there is, I think I may say, gene:al professional opinion that it must
be, then we are to conclude that tuberculosis is, as already stated, an eminent!v preventable disease.
The question accordingly arises, as put by Ilis Majesty King Edward, when Prince of Wales, concerning
preventable disease:—“lf preventable, then wiiy not prevented?” In some measure there has
undoubtedly been prevention. But. now that tiie why and the wherefore in regard to tuberculosis are so
generally understood, the work of prevention should, it must be admitted, lie carried on with more vigor
and determination than has been tlio ease in tlie past. And no doubt more rapid and successful results are
to be achieved by the process of education, by urging forward certain legislative measures, by stimulating
and encouraging sanitary executives, by establishing sanatoria, by making known the injurious effects of
indulgence in alcoholic drinks, and so on.
In advocating the adoption of such measures with such objects in view, we may bear in mind, as when
combating other communicable human maladies, that philantliropism with all its stirring sympathies can
effect but a small return towards the eradication of tuberculosis, compared with that to be secured by the
systematized methods of those who, looking on the great struggle of nation with nation, take note of the fact
that in some foreign countries State action in regard to it has already achieved magnificent results.
For the sake of convenience I will first refer to certain general principles to be observed in dealing
with this subject; secondly, I will particularize the measures that appear to bo necessary if the object in
view is to bo accomplished ; in the third place, as serving to indicate where action is specially needed,
I will review the work carried on and that in progress for reducing the prevalence of the disease in tiiis
State; and lastly, I will make a few concluding remarks.
I.—PRINCIPLES TO BE OBSERVED.
Under this heading, as just stated, some general principles will be brought forward, appearing as
they do to lie at the root of the work required for dealing eflectively with this disease. Eight such prin-
ciples may be adverted to.
(а) Tuberculosis in Man and Animals is intercommunicable. —lmportant evidence on this point is
readily forthcoming, and in so far as it is positive in its indications it shows the need of active co-operation of
the two sister-professions of medicine if tuberculosis in man is to be removed, as there is reason to believe it
may be, from the list of human maladies, or if that disease is to be greatly restricted in its prevalence. It
is to be borne in mind that man is not alone in being subject to tubercle ; that, though many animals are sus-
ceptible to it, it is specially the domesticated that are known to be affected—particularly the ox, the pig, and
the fowl ; that human tubercle is transmissible to some, possibly all, of the susceptible and domesticated
animals, and, as foremost authorities believe, from them or some of them to man ; and that the animals just
named are under daily observation by veterinary pathologists in many parts of the world. And if all this be
admitted, it will, I think, be agreed that, without co-operation on the part of the two professions, the task
of putting a stop to the prevalence of tuberculosis in man will be likely to prove a matter of needless diffi-
culty. In dealing, then, with tuberculosis in man, there must be no want of recognition of the value of the
experience of the veterinary profession, a profession which in this State, as elsewhere, has always been to
the front in the crusade against this scourge of man and beast.
(б) Tuberculosis is an acquired, not an inherited disease. —The belief is rapidly gaining ground,
and has long constituted with foremost authorities a settled conviction, that tuberculosis is, for practical
preventive purposes, to be regarded not as an inherited but as an acquired disease. And, as already
mentioned, this view of tuberculosis some years ago converted the laisse: faire attitude concerning the pre-
vention of tubercle into an active and hopeful if not aggressive policy on the part of those central governing
bodies that concern themselves with the health of the public.
(c) The constitution of particular individuals map be at birth or may become later in life specially
susceptible (or “ predisposed ”) to tuberculosis. —That this is so is almost universally hold by the medical
profession. In other words, numbers of individuals are born with a special susceptibility—so-called
predisposition—to tuberculosis ; and many, by reason of living in unwholesome surroundings, undertaking
unwholesome occupations, indulging in excesses, being subjected to privations and all sorts of weather, and
undergoing attacks of various diseases, acquire such susceptibility. Hence the need for healthy homes and
surroundings, moderate living, and wholesome occupations. Dr. Friedebcrg and others at the Tuberculosis,
Congress in Berlin in May, 1899, “ maintained that phthisis chielly and primarily attacked the poorer classes,
and urged that one of the conditions of its general extirpation consisted in the improvement of the standard
of living and social conditions among German workmen,’' so the Hon. Dr., now Sir John Cockburn, the repre-
sentative for Victoria at the Congress, reported. The applicability of this statement to communities in


general will, I think, he admitted ; and, on reflecting as to the full meaning of it, a vnst field of work will
ho opened tip to the view of all who tiro minded to deal with the prevention of tuberculosis —work directed,
for instance, to the teaching of parents as to the upbringing of their children, as to the conditions allowing
of healthy life in the home, as to (he circumstances rendering certain occupations unhealthy ; work directed
to tiic teaching of till, lor instance, as to the need of whob-somonoss of atmosphere (freedom of it from dust,
especially foul dust and soot), and as to the need of suitable building by-laws, of sufficiency of width of
streets, ol free distribution of open spaces, and of facilities for open-air recreation in populated localities ;
work dirceted also to regulation of tho hours of labour, and to general alleviation of the lot of the poor.
Tuberculosis of the lungs, commonly known as consumption, not infrequently becomes complicated
by reason of other infections of the tubercular portions of the lungs taking place as a result of inhalation
of dust, and, no doubt, death in cases of this form of.the disease is frequently duo to such complications.
In like manner the lungs become probably more readily subject to the inroads of tubercle as a result
of ncgleeted coughs and colds, and as a result of the irritating effects of inhaling dust in which the tubercle
germ dues not exist.
(d) Tuberculosis is due to a living virus, a microbe or germ—a germ, too, which may readily be
destroyed or rendered of but little effect.- —-'The germ may < f course he destroyed by many different processes.
It succumbs to the action of sunlight (even that of diffuse daylight), and it cannot resist for more than five
minutes the destructive action of a 5 per cent, aqueous solution of carbolic acid. Boiling for a few moments
suffices, if not to kill it, at any rato to greatly reduce its power to infect, and boiling for a few minutes
practically disposes of it. lienee the need for sunlighting all places used for shelter of man and animals
susceptible to the disease,for opening up to tho light of the heavens tho dark alleys, courts, and hack-yards
of cities, and for the liberal use of destroying or disinfecting agents.
(c) r l'he virus or germ of tuberculosis may readily bo localized. —It is in tho bodies and in the
discharges and excretions of man and animals affected with the disease that the germ of tuberculosis
exists ; and it is only in special circumstances, such as it is thought but rarely occur in nature, that it can
to any extent multiply, or even for any very long period maintain itself, away from the more immediate
surroundings of man and susceptible animals. It must, therefore, be to man and to those animals, to the
discharges, excretions, and surroundings of man and of those animals, that attention is to bn mainly directed.
As, moreover, save in generalized eases, it is with much probability chiefly or only in tho invaded parts
of the system, and in the discharges from those parts that infection lurks ; and as merely gaseous and
vaporous exhalations* from the patient or from tho discharges arc to ho regarded as uninfectivc, tho field
to bo considered is still further restricted—only tho invaded parts of the body of the patient and the
particulate discharges from them requiring special attention.f And among these discharges tho expectora-
tion stands facile princeps as a means of transmission of tubercle from the patient to other persons and
animals.
The question now arises : How can these parts of the body and their discharges infect ? They
may infect (whether dry or moist) if swallowed or if lodged on the surface of an open ivound, or if (having
been allowed to become dry and pulverized) they are inhaled.
If all that I have just said as to the seat or location of the infective agent in tuberculosis be correct,
then the disease will be found specially to prevail (other things being equal) in overcrowded, non-air
flushed, and unclean places,J inhabited or frequented by man or by animals liable to tho infection, and
(other things being equal) among communities and among susceptible animals that are apt to take as food
the flesh and products of animals that are tubercular. That tuberculosis (other things being equal) does
prevail, roughly speaking, in proportion to overcrowding, to want of proper pciflation and of ventilation,
and to degree of unclcaulincss, § may nowadays he regarded as practically demonstrated (I need not stay
to mention how) ; and, that the ingestion of tho flesh and products of animals infected with tubercle is a
fertile means of contracting the disease, is definitely accepted by the largo majority of tho most eminent
authorities.
As to infection by inhalation. —lt may then ho said that in proportion as overcrowding increases, as
exchange of air hv proper perflation and ventilation is impeded, and as cleanliness (particularly in regard
to expectoration) is neglected in places inhabited or frequented by man or susceptible animals, so (other
things being equal), and in tho presence of tubercular eases, will the proportion (the dose) of tho virus
in tho dust and in the air of such places increase, and so, consequently, the risk of contracting tubercular
infection. Hence, for reducing tho risk of infection, the number living in or frequenting such places
needs to be restricted or regulated, and tho amount of tubercular virus, possibly existing there, needs to be
reduced by free and regulated perflation, efficient ventilation, and scrupulous cleanliness with regard to all
waste materials (particularly, as already said, expectoration) from the body- The principle should be not
to breathe air already breathed. It has been said, and no doubt correctly, that tuberculosis may be as
prevalent in sparsely as in densely populated districts ; but, though remarkable, it is none the less true
that overcrowding in the home, and insufficiency of perflation and of ventilation, ns well as general
uncleanliness, may be, and by no means infrequently more marked among rural than urban communities.
For the prevention of tuberculosis then it will he necessary to teacli tho best means of perflating, of
ventilating, and of cleansing enclosed and covered-in places that arc inhabited or frequented by man, as well
* I have laid stress upon the uninfeclivity of the ineiely gaseous and vaporous exhalations from the tubercular
patient, an<l from the discharges. This, however, holds possibly of all communicable diseases, the difference, as regards
degree of infectivity, between one such disease and another, lying in the different distribution of the infecting agent in
the system, and in the various excretions anil discharges, while tile difference as regards power to prevent transmission of
communicable diseases lies largely in the different degree of readiness with which the various infected discharges may be
secured and rendered inert. All the same, it must be regarded as a most unwholesome habit, though not uncommon, to
converse closely face to face.
t Several observers state that milk may contain tubercle bacilli even when the udder of the cow is not diseased,
while other observers deny this. In any case, owing to the impossibility of diagnosing the early stages of tubercle of the
udder, it will be prudent to treat milk of a tubercular cow as being itself infective.
J And imperfectly lighted by the sun, as previously stated.
§ Cornet lias shown that dust taken from rooms that had been occupied by tubercular patients commonly contained
tubercle bacilli in such numbers that when injected into the peritoneal cavity of guinea pigs it induced tuberculosis, while
guinea pigs inoculated with dust of rooms that had not been so occupied did not develop the disease.
II Precautions against tuberculosis in connexion also with the meat and milk supplies are perhaps generally more
carefully observed in urban than in rural districts.


as cowsheds, pig-styes, and fowl enclosures, and of maintaining in an uninfective condition (as Mr. S. S.
Cameron, Veterinary Inspector to the Board would add) the camping-grounds of animals subject to the
infection.
As to infection by ingestion. —lt may be observed that man, the pig, and the fowl feed on the
milk, the flesh and organs of the ox, that man feeds on all parts of the pig and fowl, while the pig will
grovel in and devour, and the fowl peek at all and sundry' of the offscourings of man and animals. It
behoves us then to see that food-supplies in the respects just mentioned are free either of tubercular material
or of the living agent of tuberculosis existing in such material. jN”o matter what view he taken as to the
transmissibility of tuberculosis of birds to man or to other mammalian forms, the facts nt present ascer-
tained are sufficient to show the desirability' of excluding fowls from access to tubercular material, and
tubercular fowls from forming part, of the food-snpplv of man. It may he added that tubercular material
may be ingested by oxen (as Mr. Cameron observes), and by man in water at water-holes in which, and in
water derived from catchments on which such material is deposited.
And as to infection by inoculation —This may take place in a variety of way's. As serving to
show that it may occur more frequently than is, I think, suspected, and as serving to emphasize the need
for cleanliness, reference may be made to a report by Mr. Cameron to the Board on tuberculin-testing in
cattle in Victoria, an interesting case of inoculation being there described.
(J ) The number of centres of tubercular infection may be diminished by means of isolation and
treatment of persons and animals affected with the disease. —The isolation and the cure of persons and
animals affected with the disease will, of course, prove preventive measures. Of the factors conducive to
these ends there may bo mentioned, besides those already referred to, the establishing and maintaining of
sanatoria and dispensaries for the patients, the introducing of compulsory notification for both man and
animals, and the exercising of their powerful influence on the part of the members of the medical
profession in their daily intercourse with the sick. The education and discipline specially to be obtained
by consumptives in consumption-sanatoria aro found to prove a most important factor in reducing the
risks of transmitting the disease to other persons. In the case of animals, isolation, care in breeding, and
in rearing the young, early detection of tubercular infection as well as the destruction of alfected animals,
may be employed to good purpose in preventing transmission of the disease.
(g) Tuberculosis may be made to yield readily to the effects of widespread education. —lf regard lie paid
to what lias been said above concerning the nature and causation of the disease it will, I think, be nt once
admitted that education may be used as a powerful instrument for the attainment of the objects here under
consideration. As concerns tuberculosis, the individual may do so much for himself and for bis family, as
well as for the animals under his control, and employers, managers of institutions, and teachers
may do so much for the employed and for those in their care, that education must be looked to as an
important step to prevention. Education of the ind ividua] will not, however, of itself ho all-sullicient. Many
cannot, or will not observe the lessons to he taught, and not a few of the precautions must be taken by' the
State or by local authorities. On the other hand, legislation and administration, though all that may' be
hoped for, will not, failing education, compass the objects to bo aimed at, while widespread distribution of
information on the subject of tuberculosis may bo telied upon to bring about the particular kind of
legislation and administration required for dealing with tuberculosis in a comprehensive and efficient manner
—legislation and administration that will leave the individual freo to drink milk in a raw state, and meat
underdone or even raw, and consequently undespoiled of any' of their numerous potentialities ; legislation and
administration that will leave the physician free to order raw milk, meat and meat-juice, without perplexing
and anxious doubts as to the freedom of such food from tubercular material ; legislation and administration
that generally will provide for healthiness of dwellings, of factories, of public buildings, and of populated
places ; legislation and administration tiiat will as nearly as practicable secure the stmlighling, tbe
perflation, the ventilation, the cleanliness, anil the absence of overcrowding that are required ; legislation
and administration that will protect the worker against the inhalation of various kinds of dust ; legislation
and administration that will secure disinfection, medical treatment, and isolation, if need lie, at dispensaries
and in sanatoria.
(A) Education will itself prove to be means of obtaining the funds for prosecuting it. A quotation
from the report of Sir John Cockburn, already referred to above, will lie appropriate in this place. He
says :—“ In Germany', owing to the State old-age pensions and insurance against sickness, the Government,
from motives of economy as well as philanthropy', necessarily takes a large part itr providing the funds ; but
the same motives should induce assistance from employers, life assurance agencies, and benefit societies.”
This may, I think, be taken as a fitting text from which to plead for assistance, in a crusade against tuber-
culosis, to some of the sources from which it should bo forthcoming, and by means of which numerous
consumption sanatoria liavo been constructed in Europe.
II.—PRACTICAL MEASURES TO BE ADOPTED.
Consideration may now be given to tlie more practical aspects in which the principles above
mentioned may be presented.
Advice should be given to the municipal councils of the State, and through them to ttie com-
munity at barge (not neglecting employers of labour, managers of lay and of religious institutions,
teachers, ship-owners, stock-owners, and dairymen) on the subject of tuberculosis of man and of animals.
This might cover points such as those mentioned in the last editions of the reports and wall-sheets
prepared by me, and of the wall-sheet prepared by Mr. Cameron, and issued by the Board on the subject,
of tuberculosis, a copy of each of which is given in the appendix to this report, the advice being variously
put according to the circumstances of the person addiessed.
If mention of so many precautionary measures as are there given bo deemed likely to prejudice the
uninitiated against the inauguration of them, attention mav, I think, very appropriately' bo invited to the
great i eduction that, as stated above, has taken place of late years in many civilized parts of the world in
the mortality from tubercular diseases and to the relation which that reduction has borne to improvement
in the general sanitary circumstances, in the well-being and social conditions of communities. It may,
moreovc", be no'od that the need for many of the measures suggested has long been admitted on general
grounds of In a fh ami progress ; and that tbc application of them will prove of service, not only against
tuberculosis, Imt against, various other affections also. As an instance of this, mention maybe made of


those that are directed to the securing of wholesome milk. These have for many years been regarded as
essential for the protection of communities against typhoid fever, scarlet fever, diphtheria, certain forms of
infantile diarrhoea, and so on ; and now they are regarded as essential also if communities are to be
protected against tuberculosis.
Many of the measures set out in the appendix to this report may, for the convenience of
municipal councils, be in part summarized, as they were in a circular issued to them by the Board in
September, 1899, as follows* :
1. Councils should distribute as full information as practicable on the subject of tuberculosis, and for this
purpose should, (a) distribute to householders, to nurses, midwives, teachers, miners, cab-drivers, omnibus and tram
conductors, shipping agents, masters of ships, stock-owners, slaughtermen, butchers, persons engaged in milking
cows and in handling milk, to managers of schools (private and public), of factories, of public institutions ( e.g .,
orphanages, asylums, criches, theatres, dancing saloons, libraries, churches, convents), of lodging-houses, boarding-
houses, hotels, public-houses, restaurants, mines, of public conveyances and offices, and to others, pamphlets,
leaflets, and wall sheets, on the nature of and the means to be adopted for the prevention of the disease, giving in
them particulars somewhat if not altogether on the lines of those in the publications issued to councils by the board ;
(b) institute house-to-house inspections on the part of their officers of health or of their inspectors acting under the
directions of the former, for the purpose of giving in person any information on the subject that maybe needed, not
neglecting any place in which men live, work, or congregate ; (c) distribute a leaflet on the maintenance of air-
flushing, sunlighting, and cleanliness of dwellings, and ( d ) institute public lectures, &c., for the purpose of educating
the community' on the subject of tuberculosis.
2. Councils should do all that is practicable towards putting a stop to spitting and expectorating in schools,
factories, public buildings, public conveyances and public places, by calling the attention of the managers to the
dangers attaching to such practice, suggesting that notices be posted forbidding it or requesting persons to
desist from it, and suggesting, in the case of schools, that notices be posted such as “Spitting and expectorating
are dangerous habits, and may c'ause consumption and other fatal diseases,” and by themselves posting notices on
this subject in public buildings, streets, and other places under their own control.
3. Councils should obtain as prompt information as practicable of the existence of every case of, and of the
occurrence of every death from one and another kind of tuberculosis, seeking such information from charitable
societies, dispensaries, hospitals, schools and registrars of deaths, and, if need be, paying for such notifications.
4. Councils should as regards each case of, and death from, any kind of tuberculosis that may come to their
knowledge give full information and any needful assistance as regards the precautions to be taken, and if necessary
should carry out the disinfection processes required.
5. Councils should let it be publicly known that they are willing to give such information and assistance,
and, where necessary, to supply disinfectants and carry out disinfections without charge.
0. Councils should separately or conjointly supply (as they are empowered to do) disinfecting ovens, wash-
houses and laundries, for public use, and such hospital accommodation as may be required. It may be specially
noted that half the expense incurred by a Council in supplying hospital accommodation and in treating patients is
repaid to the Council by the State.
7. Councils should separately or conjointly maintain careful inspection and institute tuberculin-testing by
legally qualified veterinary practitioners of all dairy cows in their districts, and arrange for the services of such
practitioners to be given, if not gratuitously, then at as low a rate of remuneration as practicable, to owners of
cows kept for merely family use.
8. Councils should as regards tubercle-germs maintain a bacteriological examination of the milk provided for
sale in their districts, and in the event of such germs being detected take such further action as they are em-
powered to take for preventing the sale or use of such milk for human consumption.
9. Councils should maintain a searching inspection by thoroughly qualified inspectors of the meat offered for
sale in their districts, so as to prevent the consumption of tubercular meat.
10. Councils should urge upon the managers of all institutions in which numbers of persons are provided
with shelter, or with medical or nursing treatment, and upon managers of all hotels, boarding-houses, restaurants,
lodging houses, and such like places, the need for supplying such milk only as is guaranteed to have been derived
from animals proved by the tuberculin-test to be free of tuberculosis.
* The reports, pamphlets, leaflets, and wall-sheets issued by the Board in regard to disease are intended merely as guides concerning the
kind of information which it is thought might with advantage be given to the public, it being suggested that the Officer of Health advise as to what
information should actually be distributed. It is needless to say that the form of the advice may be variously put, and as illustrations comparison
may be made of those given in the appendix to this report with the following:—
1. Advice to dairy-farmers, dairymen, persons engaged in milking cows, stock-owners, &c.—Tuberculosis causes on an average 1,880 deaths in
man per year in Victoria. It may be transmitted from the tubercular cow, it is almost universally believed, to man, as it may certainly be trans-
mitted from such a cow to the pig equally with the calf by means of the milk, and this whether the udder of the cow yielding the milk can or
cannot be stated itself to be tubercular. It ix illegal to offer tubercular milk for xale. Tubercle in only very rare cases indeed is inherited; on the
contrary, in almost all cases it is acquired after birth, and it may then be acquired by drinking milk containing the tubercle-germ. The latter may,
of course, pass from the udder intb the milk, or it may be wafted with dust into the milk-pail or milk if consumptives engaged in the milking or in
the milking-shed be not careful to destroy or thoroughly disinfect the expectoration, or if the milk be exposed in a building in which such a careless
consumptive lives or works, or in a dwelling in which a helpless consumptive lives, or if it be exposed in a cow-shed or cow-yard in which there are
consumptive cows. Persons engaged in milking who are themselves consumptive, or who attend upon consumptives, must observe the precautions
set out on the enclosed sheet (a sheet of advice should be prepared for such persons, information as to such advice being obtainable from this
report). Consumptives must not be allowed on any account to spit or expectorate about the premises, all matter expectorated on the premises
must be thoroughly disinfected or destroyed. Milk must not be stored in any dwelling or workshop or in any place affording shelter to any animal.
A careful examination of the cows by a legally qualified veterinary practitioner should from time to time be made, all tubercular animals should
be excluded from the herd, and the premises should be disinfected from time to time with a solution of formaldehyde, or of chlorinated lime, or
with a 5 per cent, solution of carbolic acid. For further information apply to the Town Clerk, at the Town Hall, or to the Shire Secretary, at the
Shire Hall of the municipal district in which you live.
2. Advice to householders, managers of institutions in which persons work or congregate or in which they are sheltered or imprisoned.—Con-
sumption, appropriately called The White Death, caused 20,040 deaths during the past 14 years in Victoria. It is one of the forms of tuberculosis
from which there were in all 26,321 deaths in Victoria during the period just named. It is very largely due to the breathing of air in a room where
a consumptive has been spitting or expectorating, orwhere a consumptive lives orworks who is unclean in habits. Hence spitting and expectorating
should be absolutely disallowed, and notices to that effect should be posted. All consumptives in the orphanage (the asylum, criche, school, lodging-
house, boarding-house, hotel, public-house, restaurant, theatre, library, church, convent, mine, factory, <fcc.) should be required to observe the precau-
tions set out on the enclosed sheet (a sheet of advice should be supplied to be placed in the hands of each such consumptive, and, if practicable, in the
hands of each inmate, information as to such advice being obtainable from this report). Every room of the building must admit of being thoroughly
perflated, must be well ventilated, and frequently cleaned, and there must be no overcrowding. The cleaning of the rooms must be conducted not
by a dry but by a wet process, the dust raised into the air by the dry process giving rise to great danger to the person engaged in carrying it out. -No
carpets should be used, or if used they should admit of being easily raised and taken out into the open air and exposed to the sun and beaten and
disinfected, and this should frequently be carried out, using for disinfection purposes a solution of formaldehyde, or of chlorinated lime, or a 5 per
cent, solution of carbolic acid. If any of the inmates are engaged in a dusty occupation, everything practicable should be done to prevent inhalation
of the dust. Disinfection if required will be carried out by the Council. For further information apply to the Town Clerk, at the Town Hall, or to
the Shire Secretary, at the Shire Hall of the municipal district in live.
3. Advice to managers of public conveyances.—Consumption, appropriately called The White Death, caused 20,946 deaths during the past
fourteen years in Victoria. It is one of the forms of tuberculosis from which there were in all 26,321 deaths in Victoria during the same period. It is
very largely the result of the breathing of air in an enclosed place in which a consumptive has been spitting or expectorating, or in which a consumptive
has been for a time who is unclean in habits. Hence spittingand expectorating should be absolutely disallowed, and notices to that effect should be
posted. No carpet or rug or mat should be laid on the floor, and no soft upholstery should be used, or, if used, it should admit of being easily taken
out into the open air and exposed to the sun and beaten and disinfected. The interior surfaces of the conveyance should frequently be wiped over
with a cloth moistened with a solution of formaldehyde, or of chlorinated lime, or with a 5 per cent, solution of carbolic acid.
4. Advice to consumptives.—lnformation as to this may be obtained from the appendix to this report, and may be put in various ways.
5. Advice to the public in general.—This can be given in lectures, addresses, demonstrations, or by reports, pamphlets, leaflets, or wall-sheets.
Two samples of wall-sheets are given in the appendix to this report. Another short wall-sheet might be as follows Tuberculosis in its various
forms causes one-ninth of the deaths in Victoria. It is not inherited. It is not transmitted from the tubercular patient to other persons provided
the patient is clean in habits. It can be abolished. But it causes I,SSO deaths yearly in Victoria. It is due to infection of the body by a kind of
mould that lives in dark damp dirty ill-ventilated places occupied by man or by animals. It does not exist in such places unless lodged there by
a person or animal that is tubercular, the expectoration of such a person and animat containing the mould. The infection may take place by
inhalation of the dust of the room containing the dried expectoration of the consumptive, or by ingestion of milk from a consumptive, or of flesh
from a tubercular animal, or by inoculation with tubercular dust or other tubercular material. In one of the forms of tuberculosis, viz.,
Consumption, or The White Death, or The White Blague, it caused 20,946 deaths in Victoria during the past fourteen years, and yet with sunlighted
dry, clean, well-ventilated dwellings, offices, schools, workshops, and so on, and with cleanly habits among consumptives, and wholesome food, it
might be all but abolished.


Over and above the distributing of information as a means to the end under consideration in this
report, there will bo for the attention of the hoard questions as to amendment of the existing law, and
others connected with the Board’s administration, indications of which may lie gathered from one and
.another part of this report.
III.—MEASURES ALREADY TAKEN AGAINST TUBERCULOSIS IN VICTORIA.
A short review of the work already undertaken in Victoria for combating the prevalence of
tuberculosis will now bo given, in order that the directions in which action is still required may be made
the more clear.
The work has in some measure dealt, I think, with each of the factors demanding consideration. The
co-operation of the two professions of medicine has been obtained by tlio Board ; municipal councils have
been kept by the Board fully abreast of the knowledge of the day as to the nature of the disease and the
appropriate preventive measures by moans of professional addresses and demonstrations, and by reports,
pamphlets, leaflets, and wall-sheets ; that information has similarly been conveyed by the Board to the
community at large ; an Act of Parliament has been passed, at the instigation of the Board, conferring
on the municipal councils of the State ample powers for dealing with tubercular and other unwholesome
conditions of meat ; a Bill to amend the milk provisions of the Health Act has for some years been under
the consideration of the Board, and not the least important of its clauses are those drafted with the object
of aiding councils in preventing the use of milk from tubercular animals for human food ; gratuitous
tuberculin-testing of cattle in all parts of the State by a competent veterinarian has, under certain condi-
tions, been offered by the Board to stock-breeders and dairy farmers ; many herds have been so examined,
and the reacting animals have been destroyed ; many samples of milk have been examined by the Board for
tubercle germs, herds that have yielded samples revealing such germs have been subjected to the tuberculin
test, and the reacting animals have been destroyed; any sputum or other discharge suspected to bo of tuber-
cular origin, and forwarded by any legally qualified medical practitioner from any part of the State, bas
been submitted* to bacteriological examination by the Board, and a determination in each case has been
promptly posted free of charge ; three sanatoria for consumptives have been established—one at Echuca
and one at Mount Macedon, both at the instance of Dr. Duncan Turner, of Melbourne, and a third at
Heidelberg—and all three have been maintained for some years past, the two former under one committee of
management, and the latter under another ; while the Board has prevailed on tho Government to admit the
need for setting aside other Crown lands for the isolation and treatment of tubercular patients; and tho
Board has invited tho attention of councils, of public bodies, and of the Federal and State Government
Departments to the need for putting down indiscriminate spitting and expectorating.
A few particulars regarding some of these lines of action may now he mentioned.
The veterinary profession, if not adequately, has at any rale in some measure been recognised by tho
Government. Very shortly after commencing my work in the State Department of Public Health, twelve
years ago or so, I prevailed upon the Committee of tho Medical Society and upon tho Council of the Vic-
torian Branch of tho British Medical Association to aid me in representing to tho Board the need of
veterinary assistance in tho administration of that Department ; and with that aid, though only after some
years of persistent effort on the part of the Board, this object was ultimately attained six years ago. It
should also be stated that for fifteen or more years past a considerable number of tubercular cattle have
been destroyed yearly by the Agricultural Department under the Stock Act.
Councils and the community at largo have, ns far as practicable, been kept abreast of the knowledge
of tho day concerning tuberculosis in a variety of ways, among which may be mentioned the numerous
addresses and demonstrations to Councils and to the public by Mr. S. S. Cameron and myself.
Reports, pamphlets, leaflots, and wall-sheets, dealing with tuberculosis, and prepared by me, have
been distributed to councils and to the public in very many thousands since first the Board undertook tho
administration of tho Health Acts of this State. A report by Mr. Cameron on tuberculin testing of cattle
conducted by him in various parts of the State was widely distributed in March, 1899, and brought
about a great change in tho minds of stock-owners and dairy farmers as to tuberculosis and the advisability
of extirpating it from among their herds. Another report by Mr. Cameron on dairy farms was similarly
distributed in May, 1901. A third report by Mr. Cameron—one on tuberculin testing in Victoria—isabout
to bo issued. ■ Very many thousands of copies of pamphlets prepared by me, on healthy homes, healthy
occupations, and healthy living, have been distributed throughout the State, the principle being specially
emphasized never to breathe air that has already been breathed The importance of preventing overcrowd-
ing, of providing means for efficiently sunlighting, perflating, and ventilating, and for semiring cleanliness
in and about dwellings, is a matter, so to say, of every-day teaching by the Board, while perflation and
ventilation of pumic Duitdings (the only buildings directly under the Board’s control) are rapidly becoming
as satisfactory as it seems to mo they need be.
The action taken by tho Board in connexion with dairies and with tho tuberculin-testing of dairy
cows, and tho advice given to councils on these subjects, havo resulted in tho appointment of dairy
inspectors in considerable numbers, many of them legally qualified veterinary practitioners ; also in a largo
number of cattle being subjected to the tuberculin test, and a large number of tubercular cattle being
destroyed, as also in a remarkable improvement of dairies, dairy farms, and dairying operations in most
parts of tho State, while dairymen in many cases have endeavoured with tho aid of veterinarians to weed
out tubercular animals from the herds furnishing the milk that they placo on the market—beginning, seven
years ago, on my advice, with a daily herd at Kew, which, by virtue of such action, lias assumed very largo
proportions, so great have become the result ing demands for milk from that establishment. At the same time,
managers of public institutions in not a few instances, and private individuals in great, numbers, have been
induced by tho Board’s direct advice or as a result of their general teaching to require of tho milkman an
affirmative reply to tho question—“ Have you a written guarantee from a reputable veterinarian that the
cows furnishing the milk you offer for sale are sound and freo of tuberculosis?”
Much good also would, I believe, he obtained from tho careful teaching of children at school as to
this and other diseases. And in this opinion lam confirmed by the results of several prizo essay competi-
tions of six guineas that I provided for the State school children in 1899.
.* The number of samples forwarded and examined between September, 1S!)7, and 30th June, 1002, was 1,448, and of these 434 were found to
contain the tubercle eerm.


The efforts of the Australian Health Society' also have been largely devoted to the reduction of
tuberculosis, tho society having given free instruction on the subject for some y r ears past by means of
lectures, pamphlets, and wall-sheets. In 1897, on my' motion, this Society resolved to award either prizes
or certificates for properly conducted milk establishments, and the time is now, I think, fast approaching
when healthy rivalry among managers of those institutions, stimulated by prize competitions, may bo
expected to prove of material benefit to the community'.
It is also to be stated that a Victorian Association for the prevention .and cure of tuberculosis was
formed on the 2nd December last, under tho patronage of His Excellency the Governor-General, and that,
with the concurrence of tho Board, I spoke in support of tho formation of it, the active assistance of tho
public in this important work promising highlv beneficial results.
And last, though deserving of first place, there are for mention tho great sustained and increasing
influence exercised by tho members of tho medical profession in their daily ministrations among the sick,
and the power that has been so well wielded in this great crusade by a vigilant and actively progressive
press.
IV.—CONCLUSION.
It will thus be seen that, while much has been (lone, much remains to he done if the present yearly
toll of victims to Tubercle —l,BBO in number—is to be minimized. The preventive measures required are
well known, readily understood, and easy of execution, while the fall of mortality from the disease that has
already taken place may be accepted as a source of encouragement for redoubling the efforts put forth in
the past, inspiring as it must the fullest confidence for success in further reducing its prevalence, if not in
actually removing it from the list of human maladies. Municipal councils acting up to their powers will
certainly vastly reduce, if they do I'.ot succeed in eradicating, the disease —objects to fire the loftiest
ambition, and well worthy of the best possible elforts of councils and of the community at large. In any
case it will be admitted that the measures already taken have had something to do with the lessening of the
prevalence of tuberculosis in Victoria, and that there is absolutely no reason why the efforts of any party
in the State, the Board itself, the municipal councils, the managers of institutions, and private individuals,
should in any degree be slackened in the face of what still remains the most fatal plague of man and beast,
the White Death, the great scourge of civilized life, and in Victoria the cause of one death in every nine.
D. A. GIIESSWELL, J.P.. M.A., M.D. Oxon.
2dth June, 1902.


APPENDIX I.
PAMPHLET ON TUBERCULOSIS (i.e., CONSUMPTION OR PHTHISIS, SCROFULA OR
STRUMA, CONSUMPTION OF THE BOWELS, TUBERCLE OF BONES AND
JOINTS (SPINAL CARIES, HIP JOINT DISEASE), BRAIN FEVER, LUPUS, ETC.
Gth Edition (Ist in 1890).
I.—General Description.
Tuberculosis may attack any part of the body. According to the part attacked it is spoken
of as (1) tubercle of the lung or Consumption or Phthisis, (2) tubercle of the glands of the neck (as in
very many of the cases of Scrofula or Struma), (3) Consumption of the Bowels or Tabes Alesen-
terica, (4) tubercle of the back-bone or Spinal Caries, (5) tubercle of the hip joint or Hip Joint Disease,
(6) tubercle of the knee joint, (7) tubercle of the elboiv joint, (8) tubercle of the foot, (9) tubercle of the
wrist, (10) tubercle of the covering of the brain or Tubercular Meningitis or Acute Hydrocephalus or
Brain fever (some cases), (11) tubercle of the skin or Lupus.
In the ox, tuberculosis is known as Pearl Disease or Grapes, and the badly affectcd'animals are
called Wasters or Piners, or Snorters. In pigs it is generally called Wasting, Hoose, or The Pants.
Of the dairy cattle in English towns it is estimated that one in every four (of those in Victoria one in
every ten) is affected with it.
All forms of the disease are due to a special form of germ, the Tubercle germ, or Tubercle
bacillus, which is a kind of mould that thrives in dark, damp, dirty, badly ventilated places occupied by
man or susceptible animals.
It is now regarded by very high authorities as being most commonly, if not almost always, an
acquired, and not an inherited, disease. Some individuals, however, are much more liable to “take”
the disease than others ; they may be born with this exceptional liability, and the disease may bo “ taken”
very soon after birth. Liability to it may be greatly reduced by living temperately and under wholesome
conditions.
It is communicable from man to man, from man to certain animals, also, in the opinion of eminent
authorities (both on general grounds and as a result of actual experimental observation), from certain
animals to man, and from animals to certain others of the same and of different species and orders—not by
the breath nor by the perspiration, but by the “ matter ” discharged from, or the material constituting, the
part of the body that is tubercular, such matter or material swarming as it does with the tubercle-germ.
That the disease is passed on from man to the ox and the pig, and similarly from the ox and the pig to
man, is very generally believed by the medical profession. It will thus be seen that where tuberculosis
exists, the germs* will very probably be found in plenty, and especially in enclosed places that are occupied
by man or animals.
The germs are killed by sunlight. Ventilation and perflation, i.e., air-flushing of enclosed
spaces that are inhabited or frequented by persons or animals necessarily reduce the chances of the
germs of this disease being retained in such spaces, and therefore the risks of persons or animals in
such spaces “taking” the disease. Heuce the necessity for perflating, ventilating, aiid sun-lighting all
such spaces, and for living as much as possible in the open air, and when indoors then living under conditions
as closely resembling those out of doors as practicable.
The tubercular patient may recover. Infection by tubercle may be prevented. And the
disease in man and domesticated animals may in all probability be absolutely abolished.
As disinfectants formaldehyde and carbolic acid may bo specially recommended.
Tuberculosis is the greatest of all the plagues of man and of cattle. In Victoria it, in its various
forms, caused, as an average during the past 14 years, the enormous number of 1,880 deaths per
year, i.e., nearly one-ninth of all the deaths in Victoria from all causes, and (by as many as 635)
more deaths per year than all the following diseases put together, viz., measles, scarlet fever,
whooping cough, mumps, diphtheria, simple continued fever, typhoid fever, and influenza, the deaths,
during the same period, from all these diseases having been, on the average, per year, 1,245. A yearly
average for the past 14 years of 1,880 deaths in Victoria from tuberculosis — a preventable disease! Con-
sumption (as already stated one form of tuberculosis) caused as an .average during the past 14 years as
many as 1,496 deaths in Victoria per year ; and so prevalent is it in different countries that it goes now
by the name of The White Death or The White Plague. The mortality from tuberculosis iu Victoria,
and separately in the metropolis and in the extra-metropolitan districts is set out in the accompanying
chart.
* Cornet has shown that dust taken from rooms that had been occupied by tubercular patients commonly contained tubercle bacilli in such
numbers that when injected into the peritoneal cavity of guinea pigs it induced tuberculosis .while guinea pigs inoculated with dust of rooms that
had not been so occupied did not develop the disease.


TUBERCULOSIS.
Rates of Death per 10,000 Population in VICTORIA, in the METROPOLIS (Melbourne and Suburbs),
and in EXTRA-METROPOLITAN DISTRICTS.
ll.— Detailed Description.
Tuberculosis is a disease of man and animals due to Infection by a Microbe or Germ, a
minute living thing called the Tubercle Bacillus, which multiplies in and about the Lungs, or in
and about the Bowels, or in and about the Bones, or in and about the Lymphatic Glands
(i.e., glands which are popularly called “kernels”), or in Other parts of the body; and it causes the
formation of rounded bodies called Tubercles. The name “Tuberculosis” is given to the disease owing
to the occurrence of these rounded bodies.
When the lungs are affected by Tuberculosis, the disease is called Tubercular Disease of the Lungs
or Chest, or Consumption, or Phthisis, and it may be so rapidly fatal as to be called Galloping Consump-
tion ; when the bowels and their glands arc affected it is called Consumption of the Bowels or Tabes
Mesenterica ; when the hack-hone is affected it is called Spinal Caries; when the skin is affected it is
called Lupus; when the glands of the neck are affected it is called Scrofula or Struma. [lt will he seen
from the chart given above that most of the deaths attributed to tubercular disease are due to tubercle of
the lungs, i.e., phthisis or consumption.]
The tubercles after a time break up, and matter is formed. When the lungs are affected this matter
is coughed up, and is called expectoration, phlegm, sputum or lung discharge ; when the bowels are affected,
it is discharged in the stools ; when a bono or the skin is affected, it may bo discharged from running sores
on the skin. .
Wasting or Consumption of the body takes place owing to the fever that arises and to the diseased
conditions—healthy lungs being essential for proper breathing, healthy bowels for proper digestion and
assimilation, healthy bones for proper exercise and proper development of the blood. The terms “ Con-
sumption ” and “ Phthisis ” refer specially to the wasting that occurs when the lungs are affected; but in
most forms of s'evere tuberculosis there is wasting, though in some cases (frequently in cattle) fattening takes
place.
The discharge from the part that is diseased with Tubercle swarms with the Tubercle
germ, and needs to be most carefully disinfected or destroyed in order to prevent further infection
by it, in order, i.e., to prevent infection of others and fresh infection of the patient.
The disease was for years thought to be commonly inherited, but it is now held that in
all (or in all but very exceptional ) cases the germ enters the body after birth from without, viz., as
a result of “ taking ” milk from tubercular mothers, tubercular wet-nurses, or tubercular cows, or of
j 7870. B


taking” meat from tubercular animals, or of “taking” food or inhaling air contaminated with dust in
which the tubercle germ exists, or as a result of inoculation through a wound. Animals have been
made to breathe air impregnated with powdered tubercular material, the) - have been made to swallow
such material, and they liavo been inoculated with it ; and tho results, together with extensive experience
derived from tho breeding of cattle and from observations on man, show (it is generally allowed) that
Tuberculosis is an acquired, not an inherited, Disease. The germ has been found in the milk- of the
tubercular mother, and of the tubercular cow, even when tho breast of the mother and the udder of the cow
have, to all appearances, been healthy. It is said that when the udder of tho cow is infected with tubercle
“the milk possesses a virulence (a special power to infect with tubercle) which can only he described as
extraordinary,” and “ the spread of tubercle in the udder goes on with most alarming, rapidity.” Tho
germ gets into dust from tho expectoration and other discharges of tho tubercular patient, (man orauimal);
and, when such dust is wafted about in the air, the germ may, of course, be drawn into the lungs. If
consumptives spit on the interior surfaces of houses, schools, hotels, offices, libraries, theatres,
public conveyances, water-closets, or into handkerchiefs, the expectoration if allowed to become
dry will be wafted as dust in the air and be drawn into the lungs, where the countless
tubercle germs in it may multiply and cause consumption ; and it is the same with matter dis-
charged from tubercular bowels and tubercular sores. Consumptives who thus dispose of their
expectoration cause infection of other persons, and infect themselves afresh, as they also do
(thereby reducing greatly their chances of recovery) if they swallow their expectoration.
Not only would there be fewer eases of consumption and of other forms of tuberculosis, but far more
consumptives would recover if they were scrupulously careful to thoroughly disinfect, or actually destroy
their expectoration, and thoroughly clean in their habits, not forgetting the attention required to maintain
cleanliness of the hair of the head and of the face, and cleanliness of tho hands and of the clothing.
The disease is by no means so incurable as was once supposed.
* There is very good reason for believing that the number of tubercle-germs inhaled or swal-
lowed has greatly to do with the result on the system. Hence the need fur the best means of perflating
and of ventilating enclosed places that are inhabited or frequented ; and hence also the belief that tho milk
from several cows is safer than milk from one cow unless, that, is, the one cow is known to be free of
tubercle. There can be no doubt that faulty ventilation is one of the most powerful factors, if not tho
chief, in the transmission of consumption among persons who conic into close and prolonged contact with
tubercular patients.
The tubercle-germ succumbs rapidly when exposed to direct sunlight and less rapidly
When exposed to diffuse daylight, and it is very rapidly killed by a d per cent, solution of carbolic
acid (one measure of tho acid to twenty measures of water). It is not readily killed, however, even when
the material in which it exists is putrefying or frozen ; and it retains its vitality in dried expectoration for
months.
There is no danger in living or working in the same room with a person suffering
from consumption, or in nursing such a person, or in living or working with or nursing
a person affected with any other form of tuberculosis, provided certain precautions are taken.
Neither the breath nor the perspiration of the patient is infective.
On referring to the chart given above it will be seen that during the past fourteen years in
Victoria there has been a remarkaldo fall in the mortality from tuberculosis, both from consumption and
from other forms of tho disease. The fall has taken place only in the metropolis (Melbourne and suburbs),
but in this connexion it is to he borne in mind that there was apparently more room for improvement
there than in the rest of the State—the yearly rate of mortality per 10,000 of tho population during the
past fourteen years having been 17 from consumption and o from other forms of tuberculosis in tho
metropolis, as compared with 9 from consumption and 2 from other forms of tuberculosis in the rest of the
State. Many causes have operated to bring about this great fall, and chief among them may be men-
tioned the increasing care taken by municipal councils in regard to unwholesome dwellings, unwholesome
meat, and unwholesome milk, the increasing care taken by consumptives to properly dispose of their
expectoration, the increasing use of active disinfectants, the increase of knowledge in the medical and
veterinary professions as to the causation, treatment and cure of the disease, as also among the public, and
lately, perhaps, the greater dryness of the soil resulting from the introduction of the deep sewerage. The
fall in mortality from this plague that has already taken place should be a source of great encouragement
for redoubling the efforts put forth in the past, inspiring, as it well may, the fullest confidence for success
in further reducing, if not in actually abolishing it.
Ill— Prevention.
In order to avoid tubercle, and to prevent dissemination of it, the following measures should be
borne in mind :
1. Tubercular mothers and tubercular wet-nurses must not suckle infants.
2. Milk* must not bo taken from a milkman who cannot show, first, a certificate from a legally-
qualified veterinary practitioner that the cows from which the milk is taken are free of disease, and that
they are properly fed, housed, and managed ; and, secondly, a certificate from a legally-qualified medical
practitioner that the dairying operations are properly conducted. Mutatis mutandis the same holds of
milk used in tho rearing of animals susceptible to tuberculosis.
[lt may here he remarked that many epidemics of diphtheria, scarlet fever, and typhoid fever
have been traced to milk that has been taken from infected cows, or from cows whose udders have been
in a foul condition, or from milk that has become infected in some other way, e.g., (1) by the addition
of foul water or (2) by persons capable of conveying the infection {e.g., persons infected at the time with,
or attending upon or living with persons infected with, or persons that have been in contact with articles
infected with diphtheria, scarlet fever, or typhoid fever) having been engaged in the milking operations,
* The same holds of hutter, skimmed milk, and butter milk.
t Unboiled skimmed milk from cows not known to be free of tubercle should not be given to pigs. Skimmed milk used for this purpose
should in all cases be boiled.


or (3) by exposure of the milk to an infected atmosphere, as in a dwelling where persons are suffering
from such disease ; and that stale or impure milk is in large part the cause of the great mortality from
infantile diarrhoea. So that precautions taken to insure freedom of milk from the tubercle-germ
will serve to protect not only against tuberculosis hut also against other diseases.]
3. Meat must not bo taken from a butcher who cannot give satisfactory evidence that the meat
is wholesome, and that, in the slaughtering and dressing, scrupulous cleanliness was observed. Mulatis
mutandis, the same holds of susceptible animals that have access to meat, offal, and discharges of animals.
4. If evidence such as that mentioned above concerning milk and meat cannot bo obtained, tbe
meat must be well cooked, and the milk must bo boiled (for an instant) or heated to a temperature of from
158° F. to 167° F. for half-an-hour (i.e., Pasteurized).
5. Slaughter-houses, slaughtering and dressing of carcasses, dairy cattle, milking sheds, dairies,
milking processes, and the making of milk-products- must he under the supervision of legally-qualified
veterinary and medical practitioners, or trained pathologists. Every dairy-cow must be subjected to the
tuberculin-test, and if, by that or any other means, shown to bo tubercular, must at once be disused for
milkng purposes, and, if not to lie used for breeding, should bo prepared for slaughter, parts of the
carcass not allowed, owing to tubercular formations, to bo used as food being burned.
6. Houses, water-closets, schools, shops, offices, factories, common lodging-houses, boarding-
houses, hotels, public-houses, restaurants, nurseries, creches, hospitals, theatres, libraries, orphanages,
gaols, barracks, lunatic asylums, churches, and public conveyances (railway carriages, ’buses, cabs, tram-
cars, ships) —indeed all enclosed spaces that are inhabited or frequented—must be well ventilated, well
perflated, and well sun-lighted, and their interior surfaces (floors, walls, ceilings, &c.) must be dry and such
that they may bo easily washed'. All fittings and furniture should he made of such materials and
in such a manner that they may lie easily cleaned. Similarly with all enclosed spaces used for shelter
or seclusion of cattle and poultry. And inspection by local authorities of at least all places not solely used
for private purposes should be obligatory for insuring cleanliness, sunlighting, perflation, ventilation, and
absence of overcrowding.
Complete and satisfactory change of air (i.e., perflation and ventilation ) of enclosed and covered-in
spaces cannot be obtained without openings introduced in opposite toalls and extended from near th,e ceiling
or wall-plate to the floor-level. If this be impracticable, then, in addition to ordinary windows and doors,
holes through opposite walls are required not only near the ceiling but also near the floor ( through the
skirtings), such holes being provided with adjustable valves or openable loindows.
7. Spitting on interior surfaces of enclosed places that aro inhabited or frequented must absolutely
be disallowed, notices being posted in suitable positions to this effect. Spittoons, containing a littlo water,
should where required, be liberally supplied for all such places, including water-closets, and bo cleansed
daily, the contents being cast into the closet-pan or being boiled with water. The spittoons may be of
inflammable material, so that they, with their contents, may be burned. Spitting on footpaths should
similarly be disallowed.
8. Notices should bo posted in factories, offices, and such like places drawing attention to the chief
points mentioned above under the heading of “Detailed Description,” and absolutely forbidding, under
penalties, spitting on the floors or walls.
9. No overcrowding of any enclosed space that is inhabited or frequented should be allowed ; and
no room should bo occupied or be darkened so continuously as to prevent cither the complete perflation or
the thorough sun-lighting of it during a considerable part of the day. This must on no account bo
neglected in schools, not excluding private schools.
10. All houses, water-closets, schools, shops, offices, factories, common lodging-houses, boarding-
houses, hotels, public-houses, restaurants, nurseries, creches, hospitals, theatres, libraries, orphanages,
gaols, barracks, lunatic asylums, and public conveyances must be frequently cleaned ; and the cleaning
must bo conducted with the aid, not of dry but of damp processes—water, water-sprays, damp cloths,
damp brushes, wet tea-leaves, wet saw-dust, and such like articles being used—so that not only may the
dust be effectually removed, but the person engaged in the cleaning may not inhale it. The damp
material or article used in this process must be either burnt or thoroughly disinfected, as, for instance, by
being placed in boiling water for a few minutes or by being kept for use in a solution of formaldehyde or
carbolic acid. It is a good plan to spray floors and walls with some disinfectant prior to sweeping and
cleaning them.
Articles of furniture, especially carpets, should be taken out of doors from time to time for exposure
to the air and sun and for general cleaning.
Food-manufactories and food-shops must be kept scrupulously clean, and dust must bo excluded as
far as practicable from all kinds of foods.
Disinfection must be liberally resorted to, and for this purpose a solution of formaldehyde used in the
form of a spray will be found to be very beneficial.
11. Care should bo taken by the State and by local authorities in connexion with dusty occupations,
including mining, to prevent as far as practicable the inhaling of the dust. Mines must be well ventilated.
12. A house or room 9 that has been occupied by a person infected with tubercle must not be
taken for occupation unless satisfactory evidence be given that it has been thoroughly disinfected.
Disinfection of a houso or room that has been so occupied, and tho production of evidence as to such
disinfection, should, in tho case of a lodging-house, boarding-house, or hotel be rendered obligatory.
Disinfection is similarly required, in similar circumstances for byres, camping grounds of cattle, pig-styes,
and fowl-runs.
13. A dry site and a dry dwelling with plenty of open space around or about it should, wdien
practicable, bo-solected for residence.
14. All must ho taught how to preserve the general health, so as the better to lesist infection by
tubercle (and other disease-causing) germs. All should live under conditions of atmosphere as nearly as
practicable the same as those existing out of doors. Every form of intemperance (or excess), sudden
exposure to great changes of temperature, and sudden changes from warm to cool clothing, except for
certain purposes, must be avoided.
* Similarly as to ships’ cabins and sleeping railway carriage?#


If employed in dusty occupations, study must be made of the means for avoiding the inhaling of
the dust.
Breathing miist, as far as practicable, bo conducted through the nose, and not through the mouth ;
tin's is necessary in order not only to warm the air, but also to deprive it as far as possilde ot dust, and the
dangerous germs that in immense numbers and great variety are to be found in dust, before it enters the
lungs. This is of more importance in the case of' persons who are delicate or who sutler from bronchial
or lung affections, and most important in the case of consumptives.
Wind instruments belonging to a tubercular patient should not, unless first disinfected, bo used by other
persons. All who have a special susceptibility to tuberculosis should avoid sedentary and dusty occupations.
Special care should be taken not to inhale dust likely to have been infected by expectoration of
consumptives or by other tubercular material; and in passing it may be noted that care should bo taken
not to inhale the dust of monkey-enclosures, monkeys in captivity suffering greatly from tuberculosis.
15. Colds or coughs must on no account be neglected. All persons affected with coughing that
either continues for more than a few days or is apt to recur should place themselves in the hands of a
physician ; seeing that the cough may be duo to tubercle, or if not so duo, may leave a condition
of special snsccpiibility to tubercle, and that whether due to lubercle or not it is essential that the period
should not be allowed to pass when medical treatment would he most likely to effect a complete cure.
16. Tuberculosis among cattle must be closely controlled or abolished —a matter which has been
shown to be practicable. (The tuberculin-test must be applied to all dairy cows.* It serves, it may be
said, almost infallibly to reveal the tubercular condition, which any examination without it will very
frequently fail to detect.) All dairy cows should be systematically inspected by the State or by the local
authorities, and the sale of milk for human food from obviously diseased cows, and from cows with
obvious affection of the udder, should be absolutely prohibited. Disinfection of cow-sheds should bo
systematically carried out.
17. Public disinfecting-ovens must be provided for supplying means for complete disinfection of
articles of clothing and of bedding, also of carpets, rugs, and such like articles. Means must also be
provided for disinfecting upholstery. Thcro should bo no want of public wash-houses, and the local
authorities (municipal councils) should be prepared, and should inform the public of their readiness, to
carry out disinfection free of charge.
18. When a case of tuberculosis occurs the following matters require attention ;
The sanitary authority of the district (local municipal council) must be informed, so that any necessary
disinfection of the house and of its contents may be carried out —the information being addressed to the
Town Clerk at the Town Hall, or to the Shire Secretary at the Shire Ilall, of the municipal district in
which the patient lives. The latter mustlivo, as much as practicable, in the open air ; and consumptives
must not engage in any dusty occupation, seeing that the diseased parts of the lung of tho consumptive
afford excellent ground for tho settlement and growth of disease-producing organisms that may exist in the
dust. The tubercular patient must, of course, be specially careful not to take tubercular food
—milk or meat. In all cases the patients should obtain medical advice as early as possible.
The Consumptive must not spit about (for instance, on tho walls or floors of houses, water-closets,
schools, shops, offices, factories, common lodging-houses, boarding-houses, hotels, publichouses, restaurants,
nurseries, creches, hospitals, theatres, libraries, orphanages, gaols, barracks, churches, or public con-
veyances, or on footpaths), but must spit only into a wide-mouthed bottle, a cup, spittoon, or handkerchief,
or other article specially set aside for tho purpose. The cup or spittoon should contain a little water, with
or without a disinfectant, and its contents must at frequent intervals be boiled or burned, or emptied
into the closet-pan. Any handkerchief, rag, or other such article that is used for this purpose must, when
soiled with expectoration, be placed in a movable pocket,f and, as early as practicable, be put, with the
pocket, into boiling water.f [lf handkerchiefs, rags, or like articles are used, it is advisable to carry
several of them in a clean pocket; and, as each such article is used, to place it in a second pocket that is
movable—so that when soiled with expectoration the articles together with the movable pocket may be
placed in boiling water for five minutes or so, and thus be rendered safe again for further use. Pieces
of lint or even of paper§ may be used instead of handkerchiefs or rags. These precautions are as necessary
at one time of the day as at another, and must be observed, therefore, throughout the 24 hours, though
when in bed or in the house a cup or spittoon may possibly be more serviceable than a handkerchief or
rag.J A paper-fitting may be introduced] into the spittoon, and it, with the contents, be burned. The
expectoration must not bo discharged on to an open drain. The house, and particularly the rooms occupied
by the patient, must be so constructed as to admit of being well perflated, must be well ventilated and
well sun-lighted, and must be provided merely with such furniture as is really required. Chimney-flues,
unless it be in exceptional circumstances, must be kept open ; and, in so far as it is advisable to insure
dryness and ventilation, fires should be kept burning in the rooms occupied by the patient. The patient
(special attention being given to the hair of the head and face, and to the hands), the clothing, and the
bedding must be kept scrupulously clean. Articles of crockery, &c., used by a consumptive must not,
unless first thoroughly cleansed, be used by other persons. Every article soiled with expectoration must
be thoroughly disinfected before the latter has a chance to become dry. As already stated, removal of
dust must be carried out by damp processes ; and the damp article or material that has been used for this
purpose must either be burned or thoroughly disinfected, as for instance, by being placed in boiling water
for a few minutes, or by being kept for use in a solution of formaldehyde. Consumptives must UOt
undertake teaching in schools, nursing, the tending of children, the sale offoods, milking, the handling of milk,
unless they can and will rigidly observe all the precautions required for the destruction or the complete
disinfection of their expectoration. Consumptives attending school must be specially attended to.
Consumptives unable either to attend themselves to their own cleanliness, or to provide the attendance
required for this purpose, must be accommodated in suitable institutions. If that accommodation cannot
be provided, such a patient must live in a room wholly set aside for tho purpose and sleep alone, and
separate cabins must be provided for helpless consumptives on board ship.
* This is equally necessary in the case of the “ family cow.”
t The movable pocket may of course be attached to the interior of a fixed pocket.
iThe receptacle in the shape, say, of a bottle, cup, or spittoon may of course be made of inflammable material, so as to admit of being:
burned.
§ Japanese serviettes, rendered impervious by means of wax or rubber dissolved in turpentine, are much used for this purpose.


In the event of death the sanitary authority, i.e., the municipal council of the district in which the
death has occurred, or in which the patient lived (the Town Clerk at the Town Hall, or the Shire Secretary
at the Shire Hall, as the case may he, being addressed), should be at once informed, and notification
by the registrar of deaths should be made obligatory, so that any necessary disinfection may be carried
out as early as possible. The clothes worn prior to death should be burned.
The discharges from tubercular sores must be dealt with in the same way as the expectoration,
which, as already intimated, is the discharge from tubercular sores in the lungs.
Much of what has been said above as to cleansing of handkerchiefs used by consumptives is applicable
to handkerchiefs used by other persons ; and it should be a rule not to keep a handkerchief in use for more
than, at the most, 2J/. hours without being cleansed, and to have pockets, in which handkerchiefs are kept,
regularly washed and cleansed.
19. All consumptives attending dispensaries or the out-door departments of hospitals should be
supplied with printed information as to the means for preventing and curing the disease.
20. Notification to the shipping agents on the part of tubercular patients about to travel by sea
should be rendered obligatory, and such patients should, if helpless, as already said, he berthed separately.
21. All persons having the management of schools, all teachers, and lecturers, and the managers of
institutions in which people live or work, or which they frequent, as also all employers of labour, all
life assurance agencies and benefit societies, should make a special study of tuberculosis, or take expert
medical advice, as to the conditions to be observed with the view to prevent dissemination of this
disease, and see, as far as practicable, to the observance of such conditions.
22. All who attend upon or live with persons affected with tubercular disease, or who tend animals
liable to be so affected, must be made fully aware of the danger attaching to the expectoration, to the
discharges from tubercular sores, and to other tubercular material. As already stated, if the expectoration
or the discharge from any tubercular sore or the tubercular material is allowed to become dry and pulverulent
and so to be wafted about as dust, it will be inhaled and may cause consumption, or it may be deposited on
foods, and so be swallowed and give rise to tubercular infection. In addition to this it may he stated that
the expectoration or the discharge from a tubercular sore or other tubercular material may lodge on an open
wound or an abraded surface, and so infect the body.
23. The making of building by-laws, the fixing of widths of streets, and the providing and
preserving of open spaces in populated localities should be under the control of the State.
24. The establishing and maintaining of sanatoria for tubercular patients should be encouraged,
some for helpless consumptives, some for persons in the early stages of tuberculosis.
25. The Municipal Councils of the State should carry out every practicable measure for dealing
with tuberculosis with the view of prevention and cure (1) by giving the most complete information to
the public by means of public addresses, the posting of wall sheets, and the giving of advice from house to
house, not excluding the managers of schools (private and public), and of institutions in which persons
live or work, or which they frequent ; (2) by securing notification of all cases of the disease and of all
deaths from it, and by giving advice relative to each case and each death ; (3) by providing in each case
disinfection, and gratuitously if so required ; (4) by prohibiting indiscriminate spitting and expectorating
in public buildings, public places and public conveyances ; (5) by protecting the public against consuming
tubercular food ; (6) by insisting on wholesomeness of conditions in all places in which persons live,
work, or congregate; and (7) by providing for hygienic and medical treatment of consumptives in sanatoria
and by means of dispensaries.
D. A. G.


APPENDIX II.
WALL SHEET.
THE GREAT WHITE PLAGUE
OK
GOlsTSUMPTIO IEsF",
or TUBERCULOSIS oftlie LUNGS, is, like all forms of Tuberculosis, DUE TO the Tubercle
- germ, a kind of MOULD THRIVING IN DARK, DAMP, DIRTY, ILL-VENTILATED
PLACES. IT IS NOT INHERITED, IS EOT NECESSARILY CONVEYED
by the SICK to the HEALTHY, IS NOT INCURABLE, and
CA-IST J3E ABOLISHED.
BUT IT CAUSED
on an average each year during the past FOURTEEN YEARS,
1,496 DEATHS in VICTORIA—812 of them in MELBOURNE,
and, with other forms of TUBERCULOSIS (_e.g., Hip Joint Disease of Children),
1,880 DEATHS in VICTORIA—1,041 of them in MELBOURNE.
IB IE CAUSE
So many homes are damp and built on undrained land, even on filth —leaking roofs, bad walls,
bad spouting, want of impervious drains, absence of damp-proof courses, floor joists and flooring boards too
near or actually upon the ground, ground under floor wet.
So many homes aro not Well lighted by the SUn, the sun’s rays not being allowed free access to all
parts.
So many homes arc not kept free of decomposable matter by means of scrupulous cleanliness
and the carrying out of cleaning and “sweetening” operations (including the removal of the furniture,
carpets, &c., into the open air) at frequent intervals—food being littered about, spitting on the floor being
permitted, vapours condensing from the breath and skin being allowed to accumulate with dust on the
interior surfaces and on the furniture.
So many homes are constructed SO that they Cannot be sufficiently air-flushed, no care
being taken to insure complete perflation, i.e., a free draught of wholesome air through the whole extent
of each room, each passage and each recess for as long a period each day as practicable, i.e.., when unoccupied ;
and no care being taken to provide efficient ventilation, i.e., the continuous flow of wholesome air without
draught through each room, each passage and each recess at all other times by night as well as by day ;
while rooms are frequently left shut up for weeks together. And so often is this air-stagnation
marked in bedrooms, in which a third or more of life is spent. Beware of foul air as you
beware of foul food or of foul Water.
So many homes are constructed with but very little regard to the need for as open-air life
as practicable.
So many persons do not realize the need for living and working under Conditions of atmosphere
as nearly as practicable the same as those to be met with out of doors.
So many homes and public Offices aro provided with carpets instead of impervious coverings, and
such carpets are left so long uncleaned.
So many consumptives are not careful to thoroughly disinfect or destroy their expectora-
tion, whether in their homes, out of doors, or elsewhere, though such expectoration when dried
and wafted in the air as dust may bo drawn into the lungs and thus freely infect persons who breathe
such air.
So many consumptives who use handkerchiefs put them into pockets that are never cleansed.
So many consumptives employed as milkers and in milk stores and milk shops are not Scrupulously
Clean in their work and their habits and not Careful to dispose properly of their expectoration.
So many persons are in the habit of indiscriminately spitting in their homes, in public
buildings (theatres, halls, libraries, public offices), in hotels, lodging houses, boarding
houses, restaurants, in public conveyances (trams, trains, buses, cabs, ships’ cabins), and
on footpaths.
So many persons trail their garments over the ground out of doors and thus pick up infective matters
of all sorts, and so many use those same garments in cold weather as bed clothes, and brush them
in their bedrooms and living rooms instead of out of doors, and so cause, probably, many and varied
infections.


So many persons 11.se handkerchiefs anil handkerchief-pockets lor too many hours without
having them cleansed, and so infect others and infect themselves afresh with their own dried discharges.
So many persons fail t<> realize the danger attaching to matter that is spat from the month or that
is coughed up, Le., expectoration. Beware of serviettes not cleansed after being used by
other persons.
So many teachers and managers of institutions, in which persons live or work or which they frequent>
ignore the knowledge ready to their hands in regard to consumption.
So many persons engaged in food-manufactories, food-stores, and food-shops ignore this
knowledge.
So many places in which persons live or work or congregate are Overcrowded, not well perflated,
not well ventilated, and not frequently and thoroughly cleaned.
So many persons breathe unnecessarily through tho mouth instead of the nose and so draw
cold air and dust into the lungs.
So many women too rapidly change the clothing over the chest from warm to cool materials.
So many persons consume meat and milk from consumptive or tubercular animals.
So many persons allow their Cpnstitutions to iie undermined by excesses of various sorts,
not tho least, important of which is indulgence in alcoholic drinks.
So many homes and rooms in hotels, in lodging houses, and in boarding houses, that
have been occupied by consumptives are not disinfected before being occupied by
other persons.
So many persons neglect colds and coughs, and even though subject to them fail to seek medical
examination, so allowing the time to Slip by when treatment might be successful. Beware of
COUghs and colds.
So many measures are neglected by the State, Municipal Authorities, and private individuals that may
be taken for curing in early Stages of the disease, or for aiding in the isolation of persons
rendered helpless by it.
3EB TET H?
Though much remains to bo done, much has already been done, the yearly deaths
in Victoria from Tuberculosis having steadily fallen during the past fourteen years from 1,800 per million
of the population to 1,490, and there is good reason for anticipating a still further great reduction, if
not tho eradication of tho disease—if care he exercised in regard to the matters above set out.
The disinfectants specially to be recommended are FORMALDEHYDE, which Can be applied to
most articles in the form of a spray, and CARBOLIC ACID.
FOR FURTHER IHTFORMATIOKT
Apply to the Town Clerk, at the Town Ilall, or to tho Shire Secretary at the Shire Hall of the District in
which you live.
D. A. G.


APPENDIX III.
WALL SHEET.
TUBERCULOSIS-CONSUMPTION.
Eigh-tli Edition— (lst in 1593).
Tuberculosis includes Consumption (Phthisis), Scrofula (Struma), Tubercle of the Mesenteric glands, i.e.,
glands connected with the bowels (Tabes Mesenterica, sometimes called Consumption of the Bowels), Tubercle over the
lirain (Acute Hydrocephalus or Tubercular Meningitis), Tubercle of bones and joints (Spinal disease, Hip-joint disease).
In Cattle it is called Pearl disease or Grape disease (the badly-affected animals being called Wasters or Fillers and
Snorters), and in pigs “Wasting.”
It is the same disease in Man, Cattle, and Pigs, Sfc.; and it is transmissible from, one to the other.
It killed 26,821 persons in Victoria in the lj years 1888-1901, that is, nearly one-ninth of all the deaths,
which numbered 232,979 during that period, and more by 8,891 than all the deaths from Measles, Scarlet Fever,
Whooping Cough, Mumps, Diphtheria, Simple Continued Fever, Typhoid Fever, and Influenza during the same period.
BUT IT IS PREVENTIBLE, and is regarded by the foremost authorities as an ACQUIRED AND
NOT an inherited disease.
It is due in almost all cases to Breathing, or Bating, or Drinking air or food containing the Tubercle
Microbe or Qerm. which is a tiny form of mould. The microbe may be grown, but only in certain special circumstances,
on blood, on a potato, or on wall-papers and other surfaces of damp, badly aired, and badly sunlighted rooms ; and,
while it retains for a long time its vitality and actually grows in dark, damp, and dirty places, it quickly dies when
exposed to sun and air. The microbe grows freely in the lungs and other parts of the body, and more freely, so it is
generally held, in persons and animals weakened in health, whether as a result of living in rooms such as those just
mentioned or of some other cause; and it is found in great numbers in the sputum (phlegm or expectoration)
but not in the breath of the consumptive, in the matter discharged from sores of tubercular patients, in the milk of
tubercular animals, and in many parts of the carcasses of such animals. Hence, to avoid Or prevent it —
1. The conditions of life must be made as wholesome as practicable, and as sound a recovery from disease
(especially lung disease) as practicable must be aimed at. Dwellings, public buildings, and factories and like places
must be well aired, well sunlighted, dry, and clean. Unwholesomeness of the dwelling may so reduce the
health of the inmates as to favour infection of them by the germ, and it may of itself provide the very conditions
required for the preservation of the germ, and for the growth of it on the walls, fittings, and furniture. Specially
see that the bedrooms are at all times, by night as well as by day, well ventilated. Allow no dry dusting. Allow
no spitting about in the house, or in public vehicles, or public buildings, or work places, or in outhouses, or on footpaths.
Handkerchiefs and handkerchief-pockets should be frequently cleansed, at least daily. Do not allow distempering of
walls with decomposable organic matter. Allow no overcrowding. Avoid dust. Do not breathe through the mouth,
but through the nose. Do not take a room or a house that has been occupied by a tubercular patient, unless satisfied
as to the disinfection of it.
2. The sputum and the discharge from the sores of tubercular patients must be destroyed, for otherwise they may
find their way into the food, or when somewhat dried they may be wafted as fine dust in the air, and so be drawn into
the lungs. Care needs also to be exeroised in disinfecting cow yards and byres where tubercular cows are kept.
3. Milk of tubercular cows and meat that is tubercular must not be consumed, lest the tubercle germ find a
lodging in the bowel, and so infect the body.
If these points were carefullv observed, and strict regard were paid to the preserving of the
general health, there would be but little Tuberculosis, that is, but little Consumption, Scrofula, Tubercle of
mesenteric glands, Tubercle of bones and joints, Tubercle of the covering of the brain; and lives in enormous
numbers would be saved.
PARTICULAES.
1. To secure wholesomeness of dwellings—select a dry site for residence; if possible, provide an impervious
covering on the soil over which the dwelling is to be built ; see that proper damp-proof courses are introduced in the
walls; see that the walls are so constructed as to absorb but little moisture; provide freely opening windows, so as
to allow of the airing and sunlighting of every room, passage, recess, and blind end; provide a few small opening
windows in the walls close to the floor ; provide a few openings (each protected externally by a shield placed at a
distance of an inch or two from the wall) through the walls near the ceilings ; provide, even for a small dwelling, a
vertical pipe extending from the ceiling of the main passage through the roof-space and through the roof, and furnished
at its upper end with a cowl that will not admit rain into the pipe ; provide an air-flue for every room, even if it be
only the ordinary chimney flue, and keep it open, if possible, at all times; provide (for inlet of air) in an external wall
of every room a shaft extending slantingly upwards, opening into the room about 6 feet above the floor, and furnished
with means for opening and closing; thoroughly clean the walls, ceilings, and floors (not neglecting doors and windows
and their frames) and furniture from time* to time, using stale bread for the walls and ceilings and wet disinfecting
cloths for all other surfaces, and burning the crumbs and boiling the cloths afterwards, and exposing carpets in the open
air to the sun and then beating them and spraying them with formaldehyde ; thoroughly air and sunlight the different
rooms by opening the doors and windows when practicable.


2. To destroy sputum and discharges from tubercular sores use fire or some active disinfectant such as solution
of formaldehyde or of carbolic acid. A simple plan for destroying sputum or rendering it harmless is as follows :
Provide two pockets for handkerchiefs, one pocket for clean handkerchiefs and another movable pocket solely for soiled
handkerchiefs ; place each handkerchief as soon as soiled into the pocket reserved for it, and do not use it again until
cleansed; and regularly each day cleanse the movable pocket with the soiled handkerchiefs in it by placing pockct-
and-all for five or ten minutes in water kept boiling, or for half-an-hour in a solution of formaldehyde or in a 5 per cent,
solution of carbolic acid. In public buildings, in hotels, in factories and such like places, and in out-offices, spittoons
containing a little water should be placed, and the contents be discharged each day into boiling water or into a closet, and
the spittoon be washed in a 5 per cent, solution of carbolic acid. If the tubercular patient is helpless, trained nursing
is required; if the patient is not helpless, there is no need to refrain from ordinary social intercourse, provided that
scrupulous cleanliness is observed. The tubercular patient in particular needs a wholesome dwelling; the furniture
should be simple and such that it may be easily cleaned ; the patient requires as much outdoor life as practicable, and
the air of the bedroom to be as much as possible like that out of doors; the patient must be as clean in habits as
possible, not neglecting the hair on the head and face; the patient should sleep alone, and must never swallow the
sputum ; and a room or dwelling that has been left by a tubercular patient must be thoroughly disinfected. In all
cases of Tuberculosis the Council of the municipal district should be informed (letters being addressed to the Town
Clerk or Shire Secretary, as the case may be), so that any necessary help may be given. Recovery may take place
in a large proportion of cases of Tuberculosis.
3. If the milkman and the butcher cannot satisfy you that the milk and the meat offered to you are derived
from healthy animals, the milk should be boiled for an instant, and the meat should be well cooked.
For further particulars on Tuberculosis apply to the Municipal Clerk (Town Clerk at the Town Hall or Shire
Secretary at the Shire Hall, as the case may be) of the municipal district in which you reside.
D. A. G.
7870.
0


APPENDIX IV.
WALL SHEET.
CIRCULAR of ADVICE TO DAIRY-FARMERS concerning the REDUCTION and PREVENTION
of
TUBERCULOSIS IN DAIRY CATTLE
as ONE of the MEANS FOR REDUCING THE PREVALENCE OF TUBERCULOSIS IN MAN,
which causes 1,880 DEATHS per year in VICTORIA.
3nd Edition. (Ist in September, 1599).
Tlio attention of dairy fanners is earnestly directed to the fact that Tuberculosis of Cattle and pigs is
the Same as Tuberculosis of man, *■«■, Consumption, Phthisis, Scrofula, Tabes mesenterica, and other
tubercular diseases ; that the disease alike in man and in lower animals is preventable J a nd that for reducing the
prevalence of tuberculosis in man it is practically unanimously agreed as being essential that dairy produce derived
from tubercular cows shall not he used as food for man. For the purpose of protecting man against the disease, as also
for the avoidance of the great financial loss that occurs wherever the disease gains a footing among cattle or pigs (and
here it may be mentioned that in a great many instances cattle that are supposed to have died of poverty are really
victims to tuberculosis), it is strongly urged that steps be taken to reduce or to extirpate the disease among dairy cows,
many of which are affected with it; Mr. S. S. Cameron’s investigations in various parts of Victoria showing that 10
per cent, of tho dairy cows are tubercular. In English towns, the proportion of dairy cows that are tubercular is
between 25 and 30 per cent.
Tuberculosis affects any or all of the organs of the body, but principally the lungs, liver, and intestines, and
when it is general (not localized) through the system, and especially if the udder is involved, the milk becomes highly
infective, so that if used for food it may convey the disease to man, calves, pigs, and other animals. 'l'he disease is
transmitted from one animal to another by means of the discharges of the animals that are affected, and tho transmission
may take place in the milking-shed, in the paddock, in cattle trucks, at sale-yards, and at the camping grounds, water-
holes, and other places where the animals congregate. On account of the slow and insidious nature of the disease,
it is in many cases very difficult to detect, there being no characteristic sign present; and then the only means by which
the disease can be diagnosed is the use of what is called the tuberculin-test, which may be regarded as an almost
infallible guide as to the existence of the disease. All dairymen and stock-owners should have this test applied to
their cattle, not merely for their own protection, but also in the interests of tho health of their customers. It should
be applied only by a qualified veterinary surgeon thoroughly experienced in the use of it; in the hands of inexperienced
persons, mistakes in diagnosis are likely to be frequently made. It should be understood that when it is skilfully
applied, healthy animals are in no way deleteriously affected, and that the reaction in tubercular cows does not affect
the milk supply.
All cattle affected with a cough, with wheezy or snoring breathing, with chronic diarrhoea, with wasting
and unthriftiness, with depraved appetite, or with lumps about the neck and jaw, and absolutely all that react to the
tuberculin-test, should be at Once isolated and kept .apart from the rest of the herd, as also from other cattle, calves,
pigs, and fowls. Such cases should be reported to the local municipal council, and veterinary advice obtained as to the
nature of the disease. Examinations of the udders of all the COWS should be frequently made, particular caro
being exercised in tho case of cows with uneven quarters, as also in tho case of cows presenting any of the above-
mentioned signs. If the quarters of the udder (one or more of them) are found to he nodulated or lumpy, or to have
a hard, cold, and painless swelling, the animal should be at once removed from the herd; for one or more of these
conditions will bo found to develop as the udder becomes invaded with tubercle.
Animals that show the symptoms described above should not be US6d f° r milking purposes ; they should,
on the contrary, be prepared for tho butcher. As regards breeding, it is essential that the bull of the herd should be
free from tuberculosis, and in other respects sound, for while but very few animals are known to have been born with
tho disease, thero are good grounds for believing that the predisposition to it or the tendency to contract it after birth
is marked in the progeny of parents that are tubercular or of weak constitution. As regards milking, it is specially
to be borue in mind that there is no means of ascertaining precisely token the udder becomes invaded, and that the
use of milk as food and. therefore, the sale of it for that purpose from a cow affected with tuberculosis in
any degree cannot in any circumstances be approved.
In addition to the measures stated above as needing attention, with the view to reducing the prevalence of
tuberculosis, the following further points .may be mentioned :—Scrupulous cleanliness should be observed in carrying out
all the operations connected with milking. All manure, stale food, &c , should be removed from the byre immediately
after milking. A good current of air, and as much light as practicable, should be admitted into the shed. In dry
dusty weather the cow-yard and bail-floors should be sprinkled with water before commencing milking, to prevent the
entrance of dust into tho milk. The bails, walls, &c., of tho byre should be maintained at all times in. a thoroughly
clean condition, and should be frequently disinfected and lime-washed. Dry sweeping which raises dust must be
avoided. The water supply in the grazing paddock should, if possible, be a running stream. Failing this, drinking-
troughs supplied with water from a wholesome source, and admitting of being easily cleaned out, should be provided.
Water-holes should bo avoided ; but, if there is no other supply, caro must be taken to prevent fouling of thp water,
for which purposo they should be fenced off and the water he pumped by, e.g., a windmill, into drinking-troughs,
or the fence should be constructed in such a manner as, while allowing drinking at the water-holes, to prevent fouling
by tho droppings ; they should, also be thoroughly cleaned, scooped out. and disinfected with quicklime at least once a year.
The favourite camping grounds of the cattle should he ploughed or burner! off at least once a year. The burning can bo
done at tho usual burning season if there is a good growth of grass ; and it may bo aided by spreading on the surface
straw, brackens, or other inflammable material, and then setting fire to it. After the burning, quicklime should bo
sprinkled over the burnt surface.
The sale of milk from tubercular cows for human consumption cannot but be regarded as a most serious offence,
and is prohibited in most civilized countries. •
D. A. G. et S. S. C.


APPENDIX V.
CIRCULAR TO MUNICIPAL COUNCILS ON TUBERCULOSIS.
The Board of Public Health, adverting; to their circular of 7tli September,
1899, desires to again invite the attention of the Municipal Councils of Victoria to
the desirability of doing what is practicable with the view to reducing the
wide prevalence of and the great mortality from, the disease known as .tuberculosis,
more generally spoken of as consumption, phthisis, scrofula, tabes mesenterica, hip-
joint disease, and so on.
Pamphlets and sheets of information on tuberculosis have at various times
since 1890 been forwarded by the Board to the Municipal Councils, and detailed
information is again given concerning this disease in the report, pamphlet, and wall
sheets herewith or recently forwarded.
From the report just referred to it will be seen that Tuberculosis causes
nearly one-ninth of all the deaths that occur in Victoria, and considerably more
deaths than do all the following diseases put together, viz., measles, scarlet fever,
whooping cough, mumps, diphtheria, simple continued fever, typhoid fever, and
influenza.
Tuberculosis, however, is, and has for some years been recognised as, a
preventable disease, and it is confidently believed that it would be greatly reduced in
prevalence if, by means of a circular giving information such as that given in the.
report, pamphlet, and wall sheets above referred to, Municipal Councils would—
1. Distribute as full information as practicable on the subject of. tuberculosis;
(a) distribute to householders, to nurses, midwives, teachers, miners, cab-drivers,'
omnibus and tram conductors, shipping agents, masters of ships, stock-owners,
slaughtermen, butchers, persons engaged in milking cows and in handling milk, to
managers of schools (private and public), of factories, of public institutions ( e.g .,
orphanages, asylums, creches, theatres, dancing saloons, libraries, churches, convents),
of lodging-houses, boarding-houses, hotels, public-houses, restaurants, mines, of
public conveyances and offices, and to others, pamphlets, leaflets, and wall sheets, on
the nature of aud the means to be adopted for the pi'evention of the disease, giving in
them particulars somewhat if not altogether on the lines of those in the publications
issued to Councils by the Board( b ) institute house-to-house inspections on the part of
their officers of health or of their inspectors acting under the directions of the former,
for.the purpose of givingin person any information on the subject that may be needed,
not neglecting any place in which men live, work, or congregate; (c) distribute a
leaflet on the maintenance of air-flushing, sunlighting, and cleanliness of dwellings;
and ( d ) institute public lectures, &c., for the purpose of educating the community on
the subject of tuberculosis.
2. Do all that is practicable towards putting a stop to spitting and expecto-
rating in schools, factories, public buildings (including hospitals), public conveyances,
and public places, by calling the attention of the managers to the dangers attaching
to such practice, and suggesting that notices be posted forbidding it or requesting
persons to desist from it, and, in the case of schools, that notices be posted such as—
•“ Spitting and expectorating are dangerous habits, and may cause consumption and
other fatal diseases,” and by themselves posting notices on this subject in public
buildings,'streets, and other places under their own control.
3. Obtain as prompt information as practicable of the existence of every case
of, and of tlie occurrence of every death from, one and another kind of tuberculosis,
seeking such information from charitable societies, dispensaries, hospitals, schools,
and registrars of deaths, and, if need be, paying for such notifications.


4. As regards each case of, and death from, any kind of tuberculosis that may
come to their knowledge, give full information and any needful assistance as regards
the precautions to be taken, and if necessary carry out the disinfection processes
required.
5. Let it he publicly known that they are willing to give such information and
assistance, and, "where necessary, to supply disinfectants and carry out disinfections
without charge.
6. Separately or conjointly supply (as they are empowered to do) disinfecting
ovens, wash-houses, and laundries, for public use, and such hospital accommodation
as may be required. [lt may be specially noted that half the expense incurred by a
Council in supplying hospital accommodation and in treating patients is repaid to the
Council by the State.] •
7. Separately or conjointly maintain careful inspection and institute tuberculin-
testing by legally qualified veterinary practitioners of all dairy cows in their districts,
and arrange for the services of such practitioners if not gratuitously, then at as lowa
rate of remuneration as practicable, in regard to cows kept for merely family use.
8. As regards tubercle-germs, maintain a bacteriological examination of the
milk provided for sale in their districts, and, in the event of such germs being
detected, take such further action as they are empowered to take for preventing the
sale or use of such milk for human consumption.
9. Maintain searching inspection by thoroughly qualified inspectors of tlie
meat offered for sale in their districts, so as to prevent the consumption of tubercular
meat. ■ • .
10. Urge upon the managers of all institutions in which numbers of persons
are provided with shelter, or with medical or nursing treatment, and upon managers
of all hotels, boarding-houses, restaurants, lodging-houses, and such like places, the
need for supplying such milk only as is guaranteed to have been derived from animals
proved by the tuberculin-test to be free of tuberculosis.
, Copies of the enclosed report, pamphlet, and wall sheets may be obtained from
the Board on application. Those recently or now forwarded are intended merely as
guides concerning the kind of information which, in the opinion of the Board, might
with advantage be given, it being suggested that the Officer of Health advise as to
desirable alterations in them.
The Board would be glad to learn of any steps taken or proposed by the
Council on the lines here suggested for the purpose of reducing, as far as practicable,
this plague, which accounts for one death in every nine in man in Victoria.
D. A. G.
By Authority: Robt. S. Brain, Government Printer, Melbourne.
