

1954
NEW SOUTH WALES
REPORT
OF THE
ROYAL COMMISSION ON LIQUOR
LAWS IN NEW SOUTH WALES
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
A. H. PETTIFER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES
1954
[ 12s. 6 d.]
99329—1




ROYAL COMMISSION ON LIQUOR
LAWS IN NEW SOUTH WALES
REPORT
To His Excellency,
Lieutenant-General Sir John Northcott,
K.C.M.G., K.C.V.0., C. 8.,
May it please Your Excellency:
I, the undersigned Commissioner appointed by Letters Patent
dated the 23rd July, 1951, and by succeeding Letters Patent respectively
extending the period for the presentation of this my report until the
25th March, 1954, have the honour to submit to Your Excellency my
report.


The Terms of Reference were as follows:
1. The ownership, financial interests in and control of hotels generally
and in particnlar by brewery and other companies, whether or not
incorporated in New South Wales.
2. The “tied-house” system of the liquor trade.
3. The effect, operation and application of section 41 of the Liquor
Act in relation to brewery companies and generally.
4. The desirability of reintroducing into the Liquor Act the Local
Option provisions which were repealed in 1946.
5. The adequacy or otherwise of the present provisions of the Liquor
Act relating to the removal of hotel licenses.
6. The desirability of amending the Liquor Act to provide for
additional club licenses.
7. Whether the provisions of the Liquor Act relating to the obligation
upon hotel keepers to provide accommodation and meals are adequate
to ensure that the needs of the public in that regard are reasonably
satisfied.
8. Whether the distribution of liquor—
(a) as between brewers and spirit merchants on the one hand
and hotel licensees on the other,
(b) by spirit merchants,
(c) by hotel licensees,
is being carried out reasonably having regard to the quantities
available, the requirements of the various interests affected and the
needs of the public.
9. The extent to which all or any of the matters arising under the
foregoing questions operate to the detriment of the public interest.


PROCEEDINGS.
The first sitting of the Commission was held on the 30th July, 1951, when
it was announced that Mr. W. R. Dovey, K.C., had been appointed as Counsel to assist
the Commission. Later Mr. J. M. Brennan (now His Honour Judge Brennan) was
appointed as Junior Counsel to assist the Commission; on his elevation to the District
Court Bench, Mr. G. C. Whitlam was appointed in his stead. The following additional
appearances were made before me: —
Mr. G. Wallace, Q.C., for Tooth & Co. Ltd.
Mr. E. G. Reynolds and Mr. T. E. Hughes for Tooheys Ltd.
Mr. G. W. Mitchell (Solicitor) for British Breweries Pty. Ltd.
Mr. J. W. Smyth, Q.C., and Mr. Maxwell for United Licensed Victuallers Associa-
tion.
Mr. K. A. Ferguson, Q.C., for Registered Clubs.
Mr. H. Snelling, Q.C., for R.S.S. & A.I.L.A. (N.S.W. Branch).
Mr. F. C. Hutley for Clubs’ Amenities Association.
Mr. H. Maguire, Q.C., for Wine and Spirit Merchants’ Association.
Mr. T. Martin for Union of Registered Workers’ Clubs.
Mr. I. A. Duffy for J. F. Sweeney.
Mr. O. A. Piggott (Secretary) for Temperance Alliance of N.S.W.
Mr. J. W. Shand, Q.C., for W. C. S. Thompson.
Mr. S. G. Webb, Q.C., for Penfolds Wines Pty. Ltd., McWilliams Wines Pty. Ltd.,
Caldwells Wines Ltd.
Mr. S. G. Webb, Q.C., for House of Hayes.
Mr. J. E. Cassidy, Q.C., for S. C. Crothers.
Mr. J. E. Cassidy, Q.C., for H. J. Corrigan,
Mr, J. E. Cassidy, Q.C., for Australian Wine Producers’ Association of H.S.W.
Mr. E. S. Miller, Q.C., for J. W. Freeman.
Mr. A. J. Goran for Police Commissioner, Police Department.
Mr, W. E. Dovey, Q.C., Senior Counsel Assisting.
Mr. G. Whitlam, Junior Counsel Assisting.
Mr. J. M. Bruxner for the Grocers and Storekeepers Association of FT.S.W,
Dr. Frank Louat, Q.C., for the Citizens Liquor Reform League.
Mr. E. S. Miller, Q.C., and Mr. Lusher for the Federated Liquor and Allied Trades
Employees Union (H.S.W. Branch).
The Commission sat in public 140 days; 411 witnesses were examined. In
addition, 109 printed schedules were tendered as a means of saving much public time,
and as well, 147 exhibits.
Most of the witnesses were called by counsel assisting the Commission. Various
interests represented also called evidence. The witnesses included representatives of
the Licensing Court, of a government department, police and other authorities,
local government bodies, organisations representing trade, breweries, spirit merchants,
wine producers and distributors, the Temperance Alliance, holders of publicans’
licences and private individuals. In addition to the oral evidence and the schedules
and exhibits above mentioned, literature, memoranda, resolutions and correspondence
from many sources were made available to the Commission,
An important feature of this Commission is that both the decision to appoint
a Royal Commission was made and the complete terms of the Commission were
determined by resolution of the House of Assembly. Whilst the principles of legal
interpretation (as applied to statutes), in general, preclude the use of parliamentary
debates, the fact that there was —as appears by Hansard —a full debate on the terms
of reference, which were settled after various amendments were discussed, shows the
care with which the whole House set forth the several terms by which the Commis-
sioner was to be, and is, bound. This feature is rendered not less, but rather more
important, by reason of the apparent misconception of many persons, including one
representative appearing before the Commission; none of the counsel who were given
leave to appear found any real difficulty in understanding the extent or the limits
of the enquiry. Counsel assisting the Commission and those instructing them,
spared no effort to adduce complete evidence on every aspect which could be said
to be relevant to any of the terms of the Commission.
The Royal Commissions Act, 1923-1934, as amended, authorising the issue of the
Royal Commission and the commission itself required the Commissioner to “inquire
into and report upon” the matters set forth in the commission. In some cases this
would neither authorise nor require the commissioner to make recommendations.


But an examination of the Terms of Reference render it clear —and all counsel so
regarded them —that mere findings on some of the numerous questions arising would
be of little or no value; for this reason in respect of quite a number of matters
recommendations necessarily follow. The consideration given by Sir Charles Lowe,
the senior puisne judge of the Supreme Court of Victoria, to matters of procedure
and of substance in a Royal Commission where he was the commissioner appointed,
proved valuable in the present Commission, although the nature of the commission
on which he was engaged varied from the present enquiry in material respects, so
that some departure was inescapable. See 24 A.L.J. 386 and 438, at pages 617
et seq. of the transcript of the proceedings of the commission. His Honour said;
“Generally speaking, where a Royal Commission is appointed, counsel are
appointed to assist that commission. The commissioner himself has nothing to do
with the discovery of evidence, with the assembling of it or with the presenting of it.
These are matters which are committed to the counsel assisting the commission.
Ordinarily the procedure is that persons other than counsel assisting the commission
give whatever evidence they have or think may be relevant, to counsel assisting the
commission to present to the commission. In this particular case, I thought it
proper to depart a little from that general procedure . . . the responsibility of adducing
the evidence within the terms of the commission lies upon those who are assisting
the commission, but if the evidence adduced on behalf of or by those assisting the
commission is in any way an imperfect picture or in any way a false picture, then
those who have been given leave to appear may show either by cross-examination
or by evidence, that it is a false or incomplete picture, and for that purpose they have
leave to appear.”
In the present instance a striking feature of the proceedings was the consistent
and sustained attempt by witnesses not to help counsel, on the contrary to mislead the
Commission by the concealment of material facts. This not only rendered the task
of counsel, as well as the Commissioner, more than usually difficult, but necessitated
the recalling of many witnesses a second time and, in some cases, a number of times
in order to ascertain the truth. That notwithstanding this procedure, the truth was
not always revealed is not surprising.
Sir Charles Lowe also dealt with the question of whether the commissioner
was bound by the ordinary rules of evidence. He stated that he was not so bound.
This course is invariably adopted in Royal Commissions, and was followed in the
present. In addition to the oral testimony which, subject to cross-examination, is
prima facie, the safest guide, I considered myself not only entitled but bound to derive
assistance from literature, other printed material such as resolutions, and memoranda
from a large number of sources. This was the course adopted in the Royal Commis-
sion on Licensing (England and Wales) 1929-31. (See Report, p. 2.) References
to a number of matters appearing in this report are made, and afforded great assistance.
In addition to the foregoing, I informed myself by observation in this and other States
of the Commonwealth, and in overseas countries, particularly in the United Kingdom.
Primarily these observations have been used to understand the evidence presented
at the sittings of the Commission. In no instance have I regarded myself as entitled
to use these observations entirely divorced from evidence given during the sittings,
although in some instances certain matters observed and referred to in this report
covered aspects of the enquiry as to which there was little useful evidence tendered.
This was to be expected because of the lack of experience in this State on some aspects
of the liquor industry which have obtained for many years in other parts of the world.
As indicated above, some misconception as to the extent and limits of the
enquiry were revealed, not only in the course of the sittings, but in much corre-
spondence and written memoranda received by those detailed to assist counsel. In the
course of the sittings the following several matters were referred to under the clearest
misconception of the terms of the enquiry: the desirability of introducing or providing
for prohibition and of local option generally; the question of the existence of what
has been termed a Liquor Defence Fund; the question whether new publicans’ licences
should be granted; the activities of the police in spheres unrelated to the subject
of liquor. That your Commissioner had no authority to enter upon such matters of
enquiry is patent on an examination of the Terms.
In applying the procedure as to evidence adopted by Sir Charles Lowe, it has
been necessary as far as concerns conclusions from that evidence, to adhere to the
following principles: “Inference must be carefully distinguished from conjecture
or speculation. There can be no inference unless there are objective facts from which
to infer the other facts which it is sought to establish. In some cases the other facts
can be inferred with as much practical certainty as if they had been actually observed.
In other cases the inference does not go beyond reasonable probability, but if there
are no positive proved facts from which the inference can be made, the method of
inference fails and what is left is mere speculation or conjecture.” Per Lord Wright,
Caswell v. Powell, etc.. Collieries, 1939, 3 A.E.R. at 733. Where, of course, this
question of guilt or other grave issue arises, manifestly not only must it be possible
to draw an inference, but any affirmative finding should be beyond reasonable doubt.


It is my duty to acknowledge the assistance given me throughout the Commission.
Learned counsel were at all times assiduous in the presentation of evidence to the
Commission, in following up avenues of enquiry suggested in the course of evidence
in the witness box and elsewhere, and in meeting the constant effort of many witnesses
to obstruct as far as possible the ascertainment of the truth. There is no doubt that
the matter last mentioned added greatly to the labours of counsel assisting the Com-
mission, and those officers who were assigned to assist counsel. Whilst that assistance
was always forthcoming, I am obliged to mention particularly the work of Mr. G. H.
White of the Crown Solicitor’s Office, and Mr. J. L. Fitzmaurice, now the Secretary
of the Licensing Magistrates and the Licences Reduction Board. The task of tracing
and preparing evidence was primarily the responsibility of Mr. White, who had also
to deal with many written and personal communications addressed to him as the
designated officer. Mr. Fitzmaurice was made available right throughout the Commis-
sion to assist counsel, more particularly in such matters as licensing files and other
documentary evidence from the Licensing Court. The Secretary to the Commission,
Mr. J. L. Gamoty, revealed initiative and constant effort to assist in every way
possible. His assistance extended well beyond the purely secretarial side of his labours;
in particular I acknowledge my indebtedness to him for his willingness in working at
all hours to complete added tasks assigned to him.
The transcript of evidence, of schedules and exhibits, were printed regularly
by the staff of the Government Printer. The transcript of daily proceedings was
available in general the following day. The work of the Court reporters assigned to the
task of taking down the evidence was the subject of favourable comment in the light
of the freedom from mistakes. I should add that during enquiries abroad, the practical
acquaintance over many years of Mr. Fitzmaurice with licensing in this State proved
invaluable to me. I am satisfied that his experience will also enure to the benefit
of the State in the licensing jurisdiction.


Reconciliation,
Nominal shareholders . . . . . . 8,782
Estates represented . . . . . . 1,076
Total shareholders and interested estates 9,808
TERM 1.
THE OWNERSHIP, FINANCIAL INTERESTS IN AND CONTROL OF HOTELS GENERALLY AND IN
PARTICULAR BY BREWERY AND OTHER COMPANIES WHETHER OR NOT INCORPORATED IN
NEW SOUTH WALES.
1. In order the better to appreciate what follows it
will, I think, be of some assistance to examine that which
is involved in this TERM, and to consider its bearing-
on any of the remaining TERMS. The Commission is
required to “enquire and report upon”, in the first place,
the ownership of, financial interests in and control of
hotels generally. This, I apprehend, requires at the out-
set an examination to see, generally, in whom the owner-
ship of hotels is vested, applying the word “ownership”
to either freehold or leasehold interests; so far as con-
cerns “financial interests”, it is obvious that the owner of
the freehold or leasehold of a hotel has a financial interest
in it; the inference, therefore, is clear that the expres-
sion, “financial interests” is intended to and does, include
something additional to, or different from, “ownership”. At
this stage, it is necessary to draw attention to the dif-
ference between the wider expression “financial interests”
used here, and the “beneficial interest” which falls for
discussion (under TERM 3) in relation to SECTION
41 of the LIQUOR ACT. As to “control”: this, I have
interpreted as a broad term, including— inter alia —the
exercise of some influence in the conduct of the business
of a hotel, whether by the appointment of a manager, by
powers conferred by leases or other forms of tenancy and
by mortgages. It seems reasonably clear that within the
expression “control” it might he either necessary or
permissible— at any rate qua breweries —to examine the
control afforded by a “tie”. But as this is the subject of
a special TERM (No. 2), it clearly is excluded from the
present enquiry— at least, to avoid repetition. Control
generally, that is, apart from the brewery or other com-
panies requires consideration of licensees, their fitness
and qualification, and —in addition —contracts of pur-
chase and the engagement of brokers.
2. It is desirable to stress that the enquiry is first
generally ; followed by “in particular by brewery and
other companies”. This statement of the obligation to
enquire renders it clear that those owning, financially
interested in, or controlling hotels, will include indivi-
duals, family and other groups, government instru-
mentalities and statutory bodies, banks, insurance com-
panies and brewery companies, what may be called hotel
companies (i.e., formed or used to own or conduct a
hotel), and other companies, which have invested in
hotels in various ways.
If, as I think, the foregoing correctly states in broad
form the obligation imposed, it involves perhaps at the
outset a short reference to statistics.
3. The figures which follow are reasonably accurate;
any apparent conflict is explained partly by changes at
dates later than those at which the compilations were
made, and partly by the impossibility—in some instances
—of identifying one company with another where there
is in truth a link between them. But for all practical
purposes the figures are reliable. There are 2,028 hotels
in New South Wales —618 in the city, 1,410 in the
country. (The designation “city” and “country” is not
technical; it is convenient and readily understood.) Of
these, about 1,000 are owned by persons, companies or
bodies interested in one hotel only. Individuals own
976 hotels (119 city, 856 country); the Maritime Services
Board owns 22 hotels (city), the City Council, 13. Com-
panies other than breweries or subsidiaries of breweries
own 134 hotels (51 in the city, 83 in the country). Brewery
companies own 884 hotels (413 city, 471 country) :
Tooths, 625 (328 city, 297 country), Tooheys, 215 (78
city, 137 country, South Australia Brewing Company,
22; Carlton & United Breweries Ltd., 9; Richmond N.S.
Brewing Co. Pty. Ltd., 3; British Breweries Pty. Ltd.
(through subsidiary companies), 10 (7 city, 3 country). It
may be stated as a matter of some interest that the num-
ber of publican’s licences quoted above (2,028) is given
on the 1951 official figure; in 1920 there were 2,537; the
year 1920 is taken because it is the earliest year avail-
able to me (schedule 1). In relation to population, the
figures represent in 1920, one hotel to 803 persons of
population; in 1951, one hotel to 1,566. The number of
hotels remained constant at 2,028 in the years 1944 to
1951.
The shareholders in the two major breweries appear in
Schedules 24 and 51 respectively.
Schedule 24, list No. 9 gives a summary of shareholders,
trustee shareholdings in and the holders of 10,000 shares
and over, in Tooth & Co. Ltd.
Summary of Shareholders.
1-999 shares, 7,822 shareholders; 1,000-4,999 shares, 804
shareholders; 5,000-9,999 shares, 63 shareholders (repre-
senting 76 shareholders); 10*000 shares and over, 43
shareholders (representing 1,106 shareholders); total,
8,732, representing 9,808 shareholders.
Trustee Shareholdings in Tooth & Co. Limited.
Perpetual Trustee Company (Limited), 639,570 shares,
representing 776 estates. Permanent Trustee Company
of New South Wales Limited, 149,642 shares, represent-
ing 240 estates. Trustees Executors & Agency Company
Limited, 6,668 shares, representing 13 estates. The Union
Trustee Company of Australia Limited, 37,138 shares,
representing 26 estates. The Union Trustee Company of
Australia Limited No. 2 Account, 12,377 shares, repre-
senting 21 estates; total, 845,395 shares, representing
1,076 estates.
Amongst the holders of 10,000 and over are the fol-
lowing in addition to the trustee companies above: —'
The Australian Provincial Assurance
Association Ltd. . . . . . . 14,032
The City Mutual Life Assurance
Society Ltd. . . . . . . 10,151
Penfolds Wines Pty. Ltd. . . . . 12,654
Australian Glass Manufacturers Co.
Pty. Ltd., Melbourne . . . . 27,910
Penfolds Wines Pty. Ltd., Melbourne 14,980


No. of Shares.
No. of
Shareholders.
1 to 999
3,497
1,000 to 4,999
415
5,000 to 9,999
11
10,000 and over ..
14
Total nominal shareholders
3,937
Estates (Trustee Companies Only).
No. of
Trustee Company. Shares.
No. of
Estates.
Permanent Trustee Co. of N.S.W.
Ltd., O’Connell-street, Sydney
152,489
190
Perpetual Trustee Co. Ltd., Hunter-
street, Sydney
140,095
163
The Union Trustee Co. of Australia
Ltd., O’Connell-street, Sydney . .
13,701
24
377
4. Schedule 51 “K” shows the classes of shareholders,
the trustee companies’ holdings and the lists of share-
holders owning 10,000 shares and over, in Tooheys Ltd.
In the last list above appear the following:—
Shares.
Australian Mutual Provident Society,
Sydney . . . . . . • • 29,036
Trustees of the Colonial Sugar Refinery
Ltd., Staff Provident Fund . . 32,864
Trustees Tooheys Ltd., Staff Provident
Fund . . • • • • • • 18,068
5. At the risk of some repetition, the figures reveal that
of the 2,028 hotels, 975 are owned by individuals, 134 by
non-brewery companies, 884 by brewery companies (and
of this 884, 840 are owned by the two major breweries,
Tooths and Tooheys). The slight discrepancy in the
detailed figures is referred to above, and is immaterial.
With respect to ownership, little turns upon the incidence
of individual ownership, except so far as one individual
owns more than one hotel; and this aspect is dealt with
in TERM 1, in relation to “multiple ownership” gener-
ally. As to company ownership, in addition to the general
consideration of “multiple ownership,” the question of
identification or links between companies incorporated
under different names is of great importance and is dealt
with separately. Ownership by brewery companies assumes
obviously greater importance than that of any of the
foregoing, because breweries manufacture, and are other-
wise interested in other, products sold in hotels. This
circumstance alone gives rise to problems peculiar to
brewery companies, not lessened by the large number of
hotels owned by them.
6. Apart from ownership (either freehold or leasehold),
individuals, groups of individuals, companies generally
and brewery companies, are also financially interested in
hotels. Advances on appropriate security made by banks
total £2,484,671; by insurance companies, £492,202; by
Tooths Limited, £1,597,875; and by Tooheys, £195,167.
No circumstances related to these large sums make it at
all necessary, or indeed relevant, to refer to advances by
other than the two major breweries in New South Wales,
or by individuals. Importance attaches to the very large
sums advanced to “hotels” by brewery companies; the
questions which immediately arise therefrom are, however,
appropriately dealt with under TERM 2 (The “Tied-
House” System), essentially because of the inter-relation
of (inter alia) brewery advances and the “tie”).
7. The control of hotels is—as would be expected—
exercised in a variety of ways. Where the hotel itself is
owned and the business conducted by the one individual,
little question arises (under this TERM) save only where
he owns more than one hotel. So far as concerns indi-
vidual owners who do not themselves conduct the business
as licensees, or groups of individuals, companies (brewery
and non-brewery), control is exercised either by the grant
of a lease (or sub-lease) or other tenancy or by the
appointment of a manager. It is true that in a sense
the exercise of powers contained in a mortgage is involved
in control, but except in respect of “ties” I apprehend
no question really arises as to control arising solely from
the relationship of mortgagor and mortgagee.
8. Before proceeding to deal with the many problems
that arise within this TERM, it is perhaps convenient
to dispose of the subject of individual ownership and/or
control of hotels limited to one licence. Apart from the
important question of the fitness of the owner who is also
the licensee, or of the manager (and in the latter ease
the terms of the managerial agreement) on behalf of an
owner of only one hotel, there is no occasion, nor has it
been suggested by anyone to the contrary, to discuss this
situation. The fitness of the licensee falls rather into
another TERM OF REFERENCE. But there are in-
stances of individual ownership, involving more than one
hotel. It will be appreciated that so long as the interest
of the owner does not —either by the terms of a lease
granted by him or in any other way-—amount to a
“beneficial interest” in the licence within SECTION 41,
he is free to own more than one hotel. But wherever the
individual —in the ways immediately suggested—has a
beneficial interest within the meaning of SECTION 41,
as distinct from a mere financial interest, then a breach
of the law arises, and this whole subject is dealt with
under TERM 3. Subject to the qualifications mentioned,
it is not suggested that in the case of an individual,
multiple ownership raises any serious question. With
respect to what have been styled “family and other
groups,” where there is multiple ownership, but no “bene-
ficial interest” in the publican’s licence, again no serious
question arises, subject only to thia if the vehicle of
ownership is a company, limited or proprietary, then
there are matters revealed in evidence which will call
for comment. But these are properly dealt with as in-
stances of multiple ownership by non-brewery companies.
9. In that which follows I propose to deal separately
with “ownership”, “financial interest” and “control”, firstly
with respect to non-brewery companies.
Non-brewery companies own 134 hotels (51 city, 83
country)—see above. Some own or have a direct financial
interest in more than one hotel. In view of later comment
it is necessary to state a striking feature of this type of
hotel ownership. In quite a large number of non-brewery
companies—owners of or financially interested in, hotels
—other companies have substantial shareholdings. These
are illustrated by the following, taken at random and
free from any suggestion that there is anything sinister
in the fact:—
(1) The “Australia” Hotel is owned by the Australia
Hotel Coy. Pty. Ltd.; the A.M.P, Society, Hack-
shall’s Ltd., Douglas Investments Limited are
shareholders in the Hotel Company.
(2) “Clifton Gardens” Hotel, Mosman, is owned by
Harbour Land and Transport Coy. Pty. Ltd. (in
1949 the main shareholder was Sydney Ferries Ltd.)
(3) Wintersloe Investments Ltd. own the “Family”
Hotel, Rydalmere; all but three shares are held by
Birchgrove Investment Coy. Ltd. and Windemere
Investment Pty. Ltd.


(4) Eex Investments Limited, with a large financial
interest in hotels, includes amongst its shareholders
Crestwood Investments Pty. Ltd., L. J. Hooker Pty.
Ltd., Moran Securities Pty. Ltd., E.E. Holdings
Pty. Ltd., Double-Ell Pty. Ltd.
10. These illustrations, which are but a very few of
very many eases, reveal that whereas 134 hotels are owned
by non-brewery companies, many more companies, by
virtue of their shareholdings, are financially interested in
hotels. The mere statement of this features involves no
criticism; but it does, however, draw attention to unsatis-
factory features as to some companies. These are dealt
with later. Schedules 68 and 69 contain particulars of
companies owning and having interests in hotels; the
first of the two schedules deals separately with the metro-
politan licensing district and country licensing districts.
Part 3 of Schedule 68 shows certain companies holding
shares in the companies set forth in parts 1 and 2 of this
schedule. Schedule 69 contains a list of companies having
“interests” in hotels. In every instance, the particulars set
forth are the nominal capital, the number of shareholders,
distribution of shares and the names of the directors.
11. With respect to non-brewery companies, the whole
of the evidence before the Commission leads to the con-
clusion that in principle there is no objection to such
companies either owning or having a financial interest
in numbers of hotels. In this respect it is, I think, im-
possible to differentiate as a matter of principle between
the ownership of or financial interest in more than one
hotel and similar interests in a number of other types
of real property. Evils undoubtedly arise in many in-
stances in which non-brewery companies either own or
have a financial interest in more than one hotel. But
with some exceptions the evidence suggests that those
evils clearly shown to exist, arise only if the financial
interest either amounts to a beneficial interest in the
publican’s licence or if the company concerned has some
more or less active control over the business of the hotel
by reason, for instance, of the terms of a lease granted to
the holder of the publican’s licence. This involves the
proposition that the evils which have been revealed are
associated only with those cases in which the non-brewery
company is, in truth, interested not merely in the build-
ing (with the licence attached), but in the business con-
ducted in the hotel. In this respect it may be suggested
that there is a distinction between non-brewery companies
and brewery companies regarding leases; as will appear
later in some detail, there may be criticism of some
matters related to brewery companies which lease hotel
premises to a licensee and supply their products to him,
contrasted with a non-brewery company which merely
leased the premises to the publican.
12. Prima facie, multiple ownership (and this expres-
sion is used to include a financial interest in more than
one hotel) by a non-brewery company can be of advantage
to the trade without detriment to the public. A reputable
company with resources is in a position to carry out
necessary work by way of improvements or of repairs to
a building which, at least in the present state of high
building costs, is often prohibitive to the individual. In
this way a lessee-licensee, who is anxious legitimately to
carry on the business of a hotel, is frequently materially
assisted in catering for the needs of the public. It is
proper to say that throughout the course of the Commis-
sion nothing has been established that suggests any
features inimical to the public interest or adversely
affecting the hotelkeeper as a lessee merely by reason of
the ownership or financial interest of non-brewery com-
panies in a number of hotels.
13. The great evils attached to such ownership or
financial interest in one or more hotels relate to a type
of person connected with the company and directly or
indirectly with the conduct of one or more hotel. These
are serious matters dealt with in detail later in the present
TEEM. It should be made clear that they are dealt with
under TEEM 1, largely as a matter of convenience. In
some respects they relate directly to other TEEMS. But
their bearing on the public interest prompts my disposing
of them under this TEEM after dealing with the owner-
ship of or financial interest in hotels by brewery companies.
14. The extent to which brewery companies are thus
interested in hotels has already been indicated by statis-
tics; and the figures reveal the very large interests of
Tooth and Company, the large interests of Toohey’s
Limited and the comparatively smaller interests of other
named breweries.
Since —as would be expected—a brewery company
almost of necessity would be concerned with the owner-
ship or financial interest in numbers of hotels, there arises
the question very much discussed before the Commission,
whether the public interest is adversely affected by that
feature of the trade.
15. I have no doubt that so long as real and active
competition is maintained there is nothing inherently
inimical to the public interest in what may be shortly
described as multiple ownership by brewery companies.
It is the fact, though perhaps little to the point, that
there is nothing in the LIQUOE ACT which either
expressly or impliedly forbids such an interest in any
number of hotels; it is necessary to repeat that which is
stressed in discussing non-brewery companies, that refer-
ence is here made to. ownership or financial interest con-
trasted with “a beneficial interest” in a hotel licence —a
subject dealt with in TEEM 3. Manifestly, ownership or
financial interest may extend so as to amount to the
wider beneficial interest in the licence: for instance, where
the company appoints a manager who holds the licence in
reality on behalf of the company.
16. There can be no doubt that in proper circumstances
there are advantages to the hotel licensee in having the
resources of a brewery company behind him for various
purposes; and undoubted evils connected with the trade
are not at all due to the circumstances alone that the
licensee is financially assisted by a brewery. More especi-
ally in the light of greatly increased building costs the
individual owner often would find it impossible, I think,
to build or to extend or improve or even, in some cases,
to repair existing premises and impossible also to add or
bring up-to-date the plant and equipment used in the
hotel business. By contrast, a brewery company invari-
ably has large assets, liquid reserves, readily available
to carry out such work. Indeed, I think it fairly states
the position that as to the larger type of hotel only a large
organisation—whether it be bank, insurance company or
a brewery company—can find the money to do the class
of work referred to immediately above. And it is fairly
established in evidence that many individual licensees do
prefer to seek financial aid from a brewery rather than
from financial institutions.
17. Quite early in TEEM 1 reference is made to
Government instrumentalities and statutory bodies as
owners of or financially interested in hotels. Two bodies,
Maritime Services Board and the Council of the City
of Sydney, may be said to be the owners of or financially
interested in hotels; the Water Conservation and Irriga-
tion Commission stands in a somewhat different position.
Maritime Services Board: Ten hotels are vested in the
Board which as well controls others on behalf of the
Housing Commission of H.S.W. Prior to 1946 the hotels
were leased by private treaty; thereafter the practice of
the Board has been to call for tenders. Once a hotel has
been leased and the subject of a new lease arises, in deal-
ing with tenders the practice of the Board has been to
favour acceptance of the tender of an existing lessee who


has proved satisfactory, where the amount of his tender
is slightly below that of the highest tender; subject to
that in general the highest tender is accepted, unless
there is reason to doubt the fitness of the tenderer as a
lessee.
18. The City Council owns some twelve hotels which
are dealt with in various ways, falling into three classes.
As to the first class, ground rentals only are included;
they were originally building leases; as to the second
class, the rental is not fixed by any regular method but —
as far as practicable—based upon an analysis of trading
as disclosed by the annual licence fee. The third class
relates only to one hotel, the rental for which was fixed
in 1910 with provision in the lease for an option of a
twenty years’ lease from 1950 at an increased rent plus
a £5,000 bonus to the Council. The granting of leases
is to some extent at least governed by the Local Govern-
ment Act, 1919,
19. So far as concerns the Water Conservation and Irri-
gation Commission, at one stage it would not countenance
the erection of any hotels within the area controlled by it;
but owing to the activity of a Mr. M. J. Gleeson, petitions
were raised which resulted in the Court’s decision that
licences should be granted. Gleeson became interested in
practically every hotel which obtained a licence and had
associated with him Mr. T. J. Murray—who is—with
Gleeson—a substantial shareholder and a director of the
several companies conducting the hotels. So far as concerns
the tenure, with two exceptions freeholds, all the lands of
the hotel are held in perpetual lease; naturally enough,
until the hotel was built the rentals were small; thereafter
annual rentals were increased, the maximum of which is
now £250 a year. It is to be noted that Gleeson had been
a ledgerkeeper in the employ of the Commission which
he left in 1913, with an eye on the prospect of introducing
licences into the area; following his obtaining considerable
financial aid from Tooth and Company, the hotels in which
he and Murray were together interested were sold to
Tooth’s, who gave back seven year leases. This, explained
Gleeson, was due to insufficiency of capital, with diffi-
culties in making repayments of moneys borrowed and
resulted in Tooth’s being approached to buy them out,
giving a lease (or rather a sub-lease). Into these matters
the Irrigation Commission did not, nor does, enter.
20. These references to the mode of leasing or giving
a tenure are referred to shortly in the main by way of
contrast to the system generally adopted by brewery com-
panies. It seems clear that once a lease or tenancy is
granted, no control over the conduct of the business is
exercised by the statutory body concerned; this would, of
course, be the normal position as between owner and lessee,
21. On the subject of control, which gives rise to most
of the serious problems under this Term, it is proposed
to deal wiith individuals, groups (including family
groups), non-brewery companies and brewery companies
in that order; included in non-brewery companies are
many instances of individuals who have resorted to the
company device, at times legitimately, at other times to
avoid the consequences of possible infringement of
SECTION 41, and in some instances to conceal so far
as possible the identity of the person or persons exer-
cising a measure of control, which varies from what is
nominal at one end of the scale to complete control at
the other,
22. It has been pointed out that in relation to individuals
who own the freehold and who lease or give a tenancy
without more, to some person who obtains a licence, no
question of control arises. But where an individual
owner becomes the licensee, not only is it clear that
he is in control of the hotel but the LIQUOR ACT
requires him so to be. Whilst the question of qualifi-
cation and fitness to control a hotel affects matters
to be dealt with in other TERMS, it is clear that the
qualification and the fitness of the individual to obtain
and exercise a licence are relevant to TERM 1.
OWNERSHIP.
Individuals.
23. Where a financial interest in a hotel arises merely
from the relation of mortgagor and mortgagee, without
—in the case of a brewery, wine producer or spirit
merchant any form of “tie”, no question affecting the
public can arise. (Where, as usually is the case, there
is a “tie”, this is dealt with in Term 2). For this
reason, it is convenient to deal with the questions which
do arise under this Term, by considering separately
ownership” and then “control”. Ownership has been
treated as involving a freehold or a lease from the owner
of the freehold, thereafter it is necessary to consider leases
from the owner, and sub-leases from the lessee.
24. Where an individual owner or lessee is as well the
licensee whilst some of the problems are important, they
are relatively simple and uncomplicated; where there are
evils associated with hotels so conducted they are bound
up with the antecedents, the fitness and the qualifications
of the licensee. Manifestly the owner or lessee is him-
self in control of the hotel: so that the question of fit-
ness and qualifications fall to be dealt with under the
heading of Control”, But the evidence before the Com-
mission has disclosed instances of “dummying” and of the
secret introduction of a partner, after a lease has been
executed and the lessee has obtained from the Licensing
Court, a transfer to him of the hotel licence. This
illustrates a practice under which a person who never
would be able to satisfy the Licensing Court of his fit-
ness to be associated with the conduct of a hotel, is able
to enter the trade, invariably to the public detriment.
Moreover, the scheme of engaging a “dummy” to obtain
and exercise a licence for an undisclosed person, pro-
duces a similar result, and —in some instances—defeats
the operation of Section 41, which forbids any person
to ha\e a beneficial interest in a licence. For this reason,
the public interest requires that even in the case of
individual ownership or lease, the applicant for a licence
be required to support his application with an
affidavit of the facts, giving full details of any person
directly or indirectly interested in the application or in
the business or its profits: in particular, whether there
is_ a partnership (and if so the names and other details,
with the production of the partnership agreement or
statement of the terms, if not in writing); in short, the
same kind of information as to partners as would be re-
quired by the Licensing Court of the applicant himself.
The affidavit should also state whether it is intended to
introduce a partner: and the applicant should be re-
quired to give an undertaking that if there is anv
material alteration in the facts, after the licence is
granted, he will forthwith disclose it to the Court, on
penalty—if the undertaking is broken—of loss of licence.
The suggestions are made here, generally because it is
clear that major reforms in the hotel trade can be expected
by ensuring so far as possible—in some way such as
indicated that both licensee and any other person inter-
ested in the business are fit and proper; they are made
particularly _ because of the following illustrations
established in evidence.
(a) Hawkesbury River Hotel, Brooklyn; the facts
which are stated reveal a type of transaction intended
and calculated to conceal the identity of the real,
although not nominal, licensee: one Bullock acquired the
licence of the hotel on 3rd July, 1950: he swore before
the Commission that his mother had a half share in the
business, although on his application for a transfer to
him of the licence, he swore to the Licensing Court that


no one else but himself was interested: in August,
1950, H. R. Williams became Bullock’s partner, by pur-
chasing the mother’s share. A Mrs. Mellett became
cashier at the hotel after Bullock took over. She had
been interested at least as an employee of Williams at the
Felix Cafe, later known as the Ziegfeld, a notorious
resort of the underworld. Williams dissolved partnership
with Bullock on the 28th May, 1951; Mrs. Mellett
“bought” the business from Bullock by a contract signed
on the same date, and obtained the licence by transfer
from Bullock on the 13th June, 1951. Immediately
thereafter, Williams became a partner of Mrs. Mellett
in the business, to date back “until the moment she be-
came licensee”. It was the fact that Williams could not
and knew he could not, have got a licence in his own
name, because of his record. It is highly probable that
Williams was at all times the real owner; the order of
events set forth appears in the evidence of the three
persons involved. (See Transcript, pp. 647, 659, 665.)
( h ) Royal Standard Hotel, Sydney; F. C. Harvey
applied for and obtained the transfer to him of the
licence. He swore before the Commission that nobody
other than himself had any interest in the licence; he
admitted that he told the Licensing Court that no one
else was interested. The fact was that one Parker was
in truth at material times a partner. Harvey swore that
“he carefully avoided completing (his partnership) ar-
rangements with Parker” until “after the transfer in order
that he could swear that he alone had an interest in the
licence.” (Transcript, p. 154, p. 205.)
(c) A. G. Saffron employed a number of persons to
conduct various hotels on his behalf though this was
concealed from the Licensing Court. The facts shortly
are as follows: Saffron was at the material times licensee
of the Gladstone Hotel, Sydney. Before the Commission,
he first swore that no one else had an interest in the
licence (Transcript, p. 171); he later admitted that one
Kincaid had a half share in it (p. 213). Kincaid was
interested in other hotels with Saffron, but it was —as
stated-concealed from the Licensing Court. The licence
of the Mortdale Hotel was held on his behalf by Mrs.
Frack, of the Cumberland Hotel, by one Kornhauser.
Kornhauser admitted that on his application he misled
the Licensing Court. Mrs. Frack also admitted that she
concealed the facts, as she “thought it was necessary to
tell lies to the Licensing Court.” H. Taylor, licensee of
the Civic Hotel, misled the Licensing Court as to Saffron’s
interest in the hotel, because “I had given a promise I
would not mention his name.” Taylor swore falsely before
the Commission.
( d ) S. E. Wallington had dummies installed in two
hotels, whilst he held the licence of another hotel. By this
device he was enabled the more easily to practice frauds
in respect of taxation. Reference is made to him in more
detail under Term 3.
Before passing from individual ownership in leases,
where the owner or lessee is also a licensee of one or —by
subterfuge—more than one licence, it is proper to draw
attention to Saffron’s interest in the Roosevelt Restaurant,
for this purpose only: the evidence clearly establishes
that it is undesirable for the holder of a publican’s
licence to be financially interested in any restaurant or
night club, even though it is the holder of a restaurant
permit in the present form or any other form in the
future.
25. It is perhaps unnecessary to state that whilst the
illustrations above quoted reveal serious evils there are
on the other hand reputable instances of genuine owner-
ship of freeholds or leaseholds by individuals or families,
e.g., L. P. Plasto (Hyde Park, Ashfield and the Hampden
at Pennant Hills), R. W. Plasto (Ship Inn, Granville,
Liverpool), W, J. Taylor (Petersham Inn, Merton, Ex-
change and Ryde Hotels). There are as well family owners
of freeholds, some of which are leased to individuals and
some to breweries, e.g., McGirr family (Schedule 77),
reputable individual holders of more than one leasehold
from breweries are illustrated by McGrath (Mosman,
Crow’s Nest, Five Dock). In such cases, there is nothing
to suggest that the public interest in any. way suffers
from the multiple interest, either as owner or as lease-
holder (though not licensee) of such families and persons.
The evidence shows that the hotels are properly conducted
by the licensees, are well equipped and generally well
built. In all, there are some 160 hotels held in this
manner. It is claimed that most of the individuals and
families so interested have been engaged in the hotel
business for many years and have always maintained high
standards. It is claimed also that they are able to finance
not only the purchase of freeholds and leaseholds, but
also the maintenance of and improvements in the pro-
perties. So far as the claim is made that there are many
instances of persons of repute, I am satisfied that the
claim is justified. There are undoubtedly exceptions. It
is because there are exceptions that it is, in my opinion,
desirable that in every instance, any change of ownership
in the freehold or leasehold (not covered by cases where
the owner or lessee is also the licensee) should be the
subject of notice to the licensing authorities.
Non-brewery Companies.
26. The ownership (either of the freehold or of a lease-
hold) by non-brewery companies does not, upon the evi-
dence, present any real problem in relation to hotels,
subject to this: as stated earlier, the exception is where
the company is interested not merely in the buildings, but
in the business conducted in the hotel. That, of course,
merges into control, and turn,: are evils associated with
that. See under Control.
Brewery Companies.
27. It will be recalled that brewery companies own—
either as freeholds or as leaseholds —884 hotels, of which
413 are in the city, 471 in the country. The figures
applicable to individual brewery companies are set forth
earlier in this Term. In examining the incidence of
brewery ownership regard must be had to two sets of
cases (a) where there is no control in the conduct of
the business, (&) where there is control. The latter is
dealt with later; for the present, one may repeat that
control of a hotel by a brewery is exercised in general
through the appointment of a manager.
Brewery Leases.
28. In dealing with these leases, it is necessary to appre-
ciate that there are a number of small breweries in
addition to the two major breweries. Tooths and Tooheys.
Learned counsel for Tooheys stated, speaking of both
major companies, that “their business methods and their
procedures and practices are so identical.” I have no
doubt that this claim is substantially correct and applies,
inter alia , to the system of leasing by, each company. One
consequence is that there is no occasion to deal with the
leases of each company separately. Since the two breweries
together represent the majority of the leases by breweries
in N.S.W., observations and criticisms may fairly be said
to apply generally.
Tooths own 628 freeholds (332 in the metropolitan
area, 110 in Newcastle and adjoining districts, 186 in the
country), 85 leaseholds (54 metropolitan, 5 Newcastle,
26 country). Of the freeholds, 601 are leased or let on
weekly tenancies, 27 are managed; of the leaseholds, 80
are sub-leased, 5 are managed. Tooheys own 216 free"
holds (78 in Sydney, 32 in Newcastle, 34 in the country).
All, except thirteen are leased by the company, the re-
mainder being managed.


29. In general, leases from breweries are for a term of
three years. There are exceptions for special reasons; for
instance out of a total of 681 tenants of Tooths brewery,
all but 65 persons have long terms (mainly three years),
the 65 being weekly or monthly tenants of premises in re-
spect of which removals are contemplated or rebuilding is
likely. No question affecting the public arises from the
particular covenants contained in the leases. It is a
feature of the evidence that with only one exception, no
complaint has been offered by any tenant of a brewery.
As was pointed out during the sittings, the Commission
was not bound to assume that that exhausted the field of
enquiry. As between the brewery (landlord) and the
tenant, it is true that the latter cannot be heard to com-
plain, whether he has had the opportunity and remained
silent; this does not overlook the possibility that a lessee
may be reduced to silence by his anxiety for the future.
But whatever his position may be, it is necessary to
examine the incidence of brewery leases from the point
of view of the public. As to that, I have not been referred
to any particular covenant in any of the leases which can
be said to operate to the detriment of the public. There
are however several matters arising from leases particu-
larly with respect to renewals which call for comment;
they are referred to later,
30. The claims made on behalf of breweries in respect
of leases are set forth. It is urged by counsel that they
do not operate to the public detriment; indeed one counsel
claimed they worked to the benefit of the public. What-
ever form of submission is adopted, the grounds for the
claim are shortly the following:—
(1) Only a large organisation can provide the money
to erect, rebuild and maintain hotels. But this advan-
tage is just as available to banks, insurance and other
large organisations.
(2) Breweries give advice and practical assistance to
lessees, through inspectors, staff and architects. This,
in my opinion, if it relates to the liquor side of the
business, is well founded; so far as it relates to the
buildings, or to the accommodation side of the business,
it is not easy to see that a brewery only has facilities
for assisting the lessee.
(3) Breweries exercise supervision over lessees as to
the upkeep and repair of premises, during the period of
the lease and at the time —where it is the fact —of a
new tenant taking over. During the tenancy, there is no
doubt this is established. At the end of the lease, the
evidence establishes that a system of “retention moneys”
has long obtained; it operates by the brewery retaining
a sum, varying in amount with the circumstances, as a
protection to the incoming tenant, who will be bound
by the covenants to repair. The system of retention
moneys was the subject of some correspondence to
counsel and instructing officers; they included adverse
comment. I am satisfied that every effort was made to
obtain the facts relevant to such comment. It is im-
possible to make any finding critical of the system or of
its application in any individual cases.
(4) The term of three years is common to many
industries and gives security of tenure. In England
a much shorter term, generally twelve months, is the
practice. I have no doubt that the three-year term is
preferable; but it will be necessary to advert to the
usual practice on renewals.
(5) It is submitted on behalf of breweries generally
that the method of assessing the rent is equitable; it
is arrived at by discussion and negotiation between
lessor and lessee, with full opportunity to the latter to
make representations as to takings and outgoings; the
quontum is fixed primarily on the trade, which —it is
urged—is not limited to the sale of liquor, but includes
the accommodation trade and takes into account any
special efforts of the licensee (on renewals). As to the
assessment of the rent, it is a feature that with_the
exception of Barwick, who purchased a freehold to avoid
what he regarded as the burdens of a leasehold, every
brewery tenant supported the view that “proper and
reasonable margins to the lessee” are given. They are
illustrated by Brown (Eastwood: Transcript p. 614),
Perrin (Rozelle, p. 627) and Latter (Clarence, p. 918).
31. Notwithstanding this, I am not satisfied that the
parties are at arm’s length in bargaining as to the fair
rental, especially on renewals. As to renewals, the better
the trade of the licensee, the keener generally is his
desire to remain on, by getting a renewal of his lease. No
one has been able to suggest a mode of meeting this
situation, if in fact it exists. The inclusion of such leases
within the Landlord and Tenant Act, or any provision for
reference to fair rents tribunals seems impracticable,
mainly because the evidence is overwhelming that brew-
ery leases are keenly sought. That this is so, is strongly
supported by Mr. R. E. Fogarty, General Manager of
Carlton and L T nited Breweries Ltd., of Victoria; his com-
pany grants leases of one year, and two renewals of one
year each if the tenant is satisfactory. There is no right
to a renewal of original lease, so that they are really one-
year leases. They are keenly sought by licensees. The
prospective tenant is selected by the brewery. In passing
it should be stated that an examination of the evidence of
Mr. Fogarty leads to the conclusion that the practice of
the brewery selecting the tenant is not to be preferred
to that which obtains in this State, where the tenant with
a lease may sell his interest. This is subject to a very
salutary qualification which arises from section 111 of the
Victorian Licensing Act, forbidding the transfer of the
licence under a period of nine months, unless in excep-
tional circumstances: see under Trafficking in Leases.
Bonus System.
32. This system operates mainly in respect of renewals.
The name is quite inapt for the real transaction. In
essence it is this: the rent for a lease for a term is arrived
at: a substantial proportion of the hotel rental is made
payable in advance, so that the balance of the rental,
spread over the full term of the lease is reduced accord-
ingly. The sum fixed for payment in advance has for
many years been called a “bonus” or “premium”: in fact
or in law, it is neither. It is a prepayment (as a lump
sum) of part of the annual assessed rent. So far as the
brewery (landlord) is concerned, income tax is payable
on it, and the lessee is able to treat it as a deduction
under section 51 of the Income Tax Assessment Act. The
two major breweries, whilst claiming that it is immaterial
to them whether the system continues or not, showed
themselves anxious to justify it and to establish its value
in the public interest. Not least because the system was
described by a name that was completely inappropriate, an
attempt was made to discover the origin of it. Counsel for
the breweries were invited to deal with it. No witness
was able to explain it, I have no doubt that it was derived
from a practice in England under which breweries did
obtain a premium from a lessee; a sum of money on
which a tax was not payable. The Act was altered to
attract to such premiums liability for tax; it was then
discontinued. There is little doubt that it was adopted
by breweries in this State under a name which has per-
sisted, although the original plan no longer was used. (I
should add that the explanation of its origin, in England,
was supplied by a competent revenue authority.)
33. I can see no reason for retaining it. The landlord
pays no interest on it, if it is in fact paid by the tenant:
if he is unable to find it, the brewery finances him at
interest; it is not suggested that the rate of interest is
unreasonable. One of the claims made to retain it is based
upon the submission that it secures a tenant of substance,


and ensures that he has a real stake in the business. I
find it difficult to avoid the conclusion that this claim
is unreal; it rather may exclude a reliable qualified
licensee, if he is unable to find at any rate some part of
the so-called bonus or premium. It is the fact that none
of the 116 hotelkeepers who gave evidence, offered criticism
of it. It had been in use by the South Australian Brewing
Co. Ltd., but they have abandoned it, so that the rental
is spread over the period of the term; Mr. C. E. Aitken,
general manager of the company, was unable to give the
reason for its being abandoned. (Transcript, p. 200.)
Trafficking in Leases.
34. Evidence was given before the Commission of sales
of leases, quite soon after their grant. In probably every
case they were leases or renewals granted by breweries:
there is no question that such leases are regarded by
publicans as possessing security of tenure, greater than
to be found in leases from private lessors. Counsel for
Tooths, in examining the most striking cases of quick
sale of a lease, suggested that the amount of the profit was
not as great as the witness conceded (see Exhibits 15 and
18, and the evidence of M. A. Francis, assistant manager
of Tooheys Ltd., pp. 110, 114, 118). There is abundant
evidence that the purchase price was high, and that the
sale occurred early in the lease or the renewal. It is im-
possible to conclude that there is any relation between
such transactions and the bonus system. But two con-
clusions necessarily flow from the evidence:
(1) unreal prices are obtained, often unwarranted by
the trade;
(2) fictitious consideration amounts appear in the con-
tract, and cash payments are made “on the side”.
35. Inflated purchase prices lead to unlawful trading-
in the efforts to recoup the outlay: and the lower figure
appearing in the contract enables the vendor to escape as
well as evade taxation in some cases. The practices re-
ferred to (they are related) prompt the recommendation
that as to all hotel leases or licences, there should be an
amendment of the Liquor Act on the lines of section 111
of the Victorian Licensing Act, 1928, which provides “Mo
victualler’s licence which the licensee has not held for
the same premises for the nine months preceding the
application shall be transferred unless upon the considera-
tion of the exceptional circumstances of any case the
Court sees fit to transfer the same.” The period nine
months would seem to be related to the usual period of
lease (twelve months); in this State, it is suggested
that the period of prohibition of transfer should be
twelve months; in the Mew South Wales Act, the refer-
ence would be to a publican’s licence.
36. The Term as drawn includes “brewery and other
companies whether or not incorporated in Mew South
Wales.” This renders it necessary to refer to three brew-
ery companies incorporated outside this State but with
interests within the State; they are the South Australian
Brewing Co. Ltd., owning the freeholds of 22 hotels in
and around Broken Hill. Leases by this company are for
one year “with a right of renewal for one year and a
future right of renewal for one year”. These renewals
are granted ordinarily, unless the tenant indicates that
he does not desire to exercise his right (Schedule 52a) :
all the hotels are leased. The company does not conduct
any hotels under management in Mew South Wales, nor,
indeed, in South Australia. Carlton and United Breweries
Ltd. (incorporated in Victoria) owns 8 hotels, all in
the Eiverina; it does not hold the lease of any hotel in
this State. Of the 8 owned by it, it leases them all for
one year, “renewals or extensions being normally granted
to the lessee, if his conduct of the hotel is of a sufficiently
high standard”. (Schedule 64.) The Eichmond Brewery
Co. owns only 3 hotels in this State.
CONTROL
37. Any company, brewery or otherwise, may be said to
exercise control by appointing a manager. The subject
of management is dealt with generally under Term 3;
but it is necessary under this Term to refer to the subject
of managers of hotels appointed by non-brewery and
brewery companies. With regard to the former, there is
clear necessity for ensuring that the shareholders and
the directors of all companies interested in the business
of an hotel, as distinct from the building only are fully
revealed to the licensing authorities and to the Licensing-
Court. Instances have been established in evidence where
persons have used the device of forming a number of
companies to conduct or have control of hotels. Some
are manifestly reputable, but there are others in which
the shareholding is limited so that one or more indi-
viduals really own a series of companies and constitute
the board of directors. To establish the link between
such companies is not always easy. It is therefore desir-
able that such company should be required to disclose to
the Licensing Court its association with any and every
other company where such an association exists, and any
one of such companies is interested in the business of
conducting an hotel. In my opinion, this would make a
contribution towards keeping undesirables out of the
trade.
3S-. The Licensing Court requires to be satisfied that
a manager has “full and unfettered control”. As to
brewery companies, it may be repeated that of the two
major breweries, Tooth’s have thirty-three managed
hotels, Toohey’s thirteen. The evidence shows that the
latter company does not favour managers, preferring
rather to lease their hotels. Instances were given show-
ing that managers were appointed for special reasons,
e.g., some at the request of the owner of the freehold or
temporarily pending rebuilding. (Exhibit 21.) As to
either brewery, it is clear that the managers are paid a
salary and given accommodation, and also an entertain-
ment allowance. The salary advances with the capacity
and experience of the manager and the extent of the
business he has to control. On the uncontradicted evi-
dence, he is not paid any percentage on liquor sales, nor
is there anything to suggest that he is given a bonus or
subjected to pressure to foster the beer trade specially.
Various executives from the breweries were examined
thoroughly by leading counsel assisting the Commission.
I am satisfied that the evidence warrants the inference
that no public detriment flows from the managing system,
except in this respect; I am satisfied that the tenant of
an hotel is more likely to be interested in keeping up its
standard if he has, not only security of tenure, but a
real interest in the business of the hotel. There are
exceptions disclosed by the evidence, for some lessees
have been shown to indulge in profitable black marketing.
It should be pointed out that the number of managed
houses is relatively quite small.
39. Primarily for the assistance of the Licensing Court,
but also because it accords with my view of the evidence
given before the Commission, the following quotations
from the observations of the Mewington Licensing Jus-
tices (England) late last year are given;
“It must be appreciated that our primary concern
is the interest of the public. Our interest in the whole-
sale and retail side of the Trade is subordinate to this
and we are convinced that the quality of licensees is
bound to deteriorate if it becomes the policy of brewers
to transfer all the worth-while houses in the London
area to their own subsidiary companies. Licensees will
know that they have nothing to ‘go for’ and the best
men will not enter the Trade for they will know that
the rewards, which in the past they could legitimately
expect in the form of a grant of a lease or tenancy of
a really good house, will not fall to them however adept


they may prove themselves at meeting the wishes of
the public . . . We have seen something of these houses
outside London in which managers for brewery com-
panies hold the licence, and we do not think that they
compare favourably with those where the ‘Guv’nor’, as
the tenant-licensee is happily called, holds sway”.
40. In setting forth the matters arising under this
Term, reference has been made to alterations that might
be considered with respect to applications for a licence,
the disclosure of interests by persons and companies,
leases generally and control by companies, non-breweries
and breweries alike. With respect to all of these matters,
it has been obligatory to consider under Term 9 whether
any of them operate to the detriment of the public
interest. As stated earlier, some matters under Term 1
cover questions specifically arising under later Terms.
However, it is necessary to draw attention to the position
of brewery companies in relation to leases and to control.
It is clear upon the whole of the evidence that little, if
any, complaint has been made by lessors or others within
the trade. As to persons outside the trade, the operations
of breweries in this State were the subject of written
communications, some of which offered adverse criticism.
I am satisfied that every avenue has been explored by
those appointed to assist counsel in the presentation of
the evidence, and by counsel as well, so that all material
that has been available has been offered in evidence.
41. One feature is that whilst persons were ready to
offer comment (for instance Mr. G. L. Geraghty), per-
sons ready and willing to offer facts in any way relevant
have proved surprisingly few. As stated in the intro-
duction to this report, the Commission is bound to act
on satisfactory evidence and to draw inferences from
that evidence as distinct from indulging in speculation.
Suggested improvements have been made, particularly
with regard to brewery leases. Subject to such sugges-
tions, I am satisfied that with respect to breweries
generally the evidence does not warrant the conclusion
that their ownership, financial interest or control operates
to the detriment of the public interest.
BROKERS.
42. It is necessary to point out that on the sale of an
hotel business, as often as not a broker introduces the
parties and carries out the transaction. One of the
serious evils connected with this part of the trade is the
high purchase price paid in some cases, and involving
the use of contracts in which the statement of the con-
sideration money is, to the knowledge of the buyer and
the seller and the broker, completely false. This involves
added money being paid, as it is known in brokers’
circles “on the side”. A witness, Hoinville, explained his
payment of two sums, one stated in the contract, the
other omitted, by saying that the broker said that was
the usual practice. There is little doubt that whilst there
are reputable brokers engaged in hotel deals, there are
numbers who ought never to be allowed to be even
remotely connected with the trade. It is true that under
the Business Agents Act, No. 7 of 1935, these people are
required to obtain either a general licence for the whole
State, or a particular licence for a police district. It is
true that under section 7 such agents must apply in a
prescribed form and produce credentials from six respect-
able householders resident in N.S.W.; the application
has to be lodged with the clerk of petty sessions for
the district within which the agent proposes to carry
on. This is followed by a report from the police. There-
after, the application is heard by a stipendiary magis-
trate and a police magistrate. In my opinion, the extent
and ramifications in particular of the hotel business are
such that business agents, before engaging in hotel
broking, should be required to obtain some form of licence
from the Licensing Court.
ALCOHOL CONTENT.
43. This subject is referred to under this Term as being
a convenient place. Very little evidence was given with
respect to it. On being asked whether a lower alcoholic
content for beer was not desirable, the production manager
of Tooth’s (Mr. Middleton) stated in effect the real
difficulty was a lower content would seriously interfere
with the carriage of beer in warm climates. No inde-
pendent expert was called to give an opinion on this
subject. Whilst I regarded myself as free to seek the
views of, for instance, chemists, I am satisfied that
without hearing counsel for interests that may be con-
cerned, I am not entitled to do more than intimate, as
I do, that serious consideration should be given to the
question of reducing the alcohol content of beer. Whilst
this varies amongst the extensive range of beers and ales
in the United Kingdom, there is no doubt that as to
many, the alcohol content is appreciably lower than to
be found in this State; and it would appear to meet
with public approval.
BOOKS.
44. The evidence before the Commission establishes
the clear necessity for some provision for the keeping of
books by publicans, by merchants and by brokers. Black-
marketing, excessive consideration moneys, concealed
dealings, were made easier by the failure of the various
persons indicated to keep books. There is no doubt that
the obligation to keep a prescribed set of books would
render malpractices more difficult and possibly remove
them. Any person claiming to be qualified to conduct
any of the businesses indicated should, in my opinion,
be qualified to keep the types of books necessary.
CONSTITUTION OF THE LICENSING COURT.
45. Belated to most of the Terms of Beference is the
question of the constitution of the Licensing Court and,
within it, the power of delegation. These subjects are
dealt with here, partly as a matter of convenience and
partly because of their bearing on one of the most im-
portant features of the system of licensing. Although
licences of various types are involved, the comments which
follow deal more particularly with T>ublicans’ licences. It
has already been stated that at the threshold of necessary
reform is the careful insistence by the Licensing Court on
a fit and proper, and as well, a qualified licensee. The
court whose duty it is to examine the fitness and quali-
fications of applicants for the transfer of a publican’s
licence, is the Licensing Court under section 5 (i). The
members are three in number (police or stipendiary magis-
trates) one of whom is the Chairman; by section 5 (10)
the licensing magistrates may, with the approval of
the Minister, delegate in writing any of the jurisdiction,
powers, authorities, duties and functions vested in them,
excluding the enquiry upon a petition for the grant of a
licence under section 6 of the Liquor (Amendment) Act,
1919, or of the hearing of an appeal under section
170 (sb), either to one of their number or to a stipen-
diary or police magistrate. The present position as I
understand it, is that such delegation has been made to
“all stipendiary magistrates and police magistrates in
respect of all applications and matters made to or arising
before the Licensing Court for any licensing district,
excepting the metropolitan licensing district of New South
Wales all jurisdiction powers functions etc. vested in them
in relation to such applications and matters other than”
—some fifteen specified exceptions. In the result, applica-
tions for transfers in other than the metropolitan licensing
district may be, and are, dealt with by the stipendiary
magistrate or police magistrate other than the members of
the Licensing Court. The magistracy in country dis-
tricts perhaps no less than in the city, exercise important
functions, and are, it is permissible to say, a competent
body; their jurisdiction covers a great variety of matters.


But licensing magistrates acquire a special knowledge
of the many matters arising in a field which lends itself
so readily to malpractices that I am of the opinion that
applications for transfers should be dealt with only by
the licensing magistrates or —within the present power
of delegation—by one of them. It is recognised that
this may well throw much added work on the Licensing
Court; but the evidence before the Commission has
established the clear need for the fullest investigation of
applicants (by transfer) for a publican’s licence and
thereafter the importance of the Court’s being satisfied
as to the applicant to the extent already indicated.
46. This raises another question which, in my opinion,
should receive serious consideration. The liquor licens-
ing laws have for long been a field for serious mal-
practices not only by unlicensed persons, but by the
holders in particular of publicans’ licences. The evils
established served to stress the importance of the work
of the Licensing Court, an importance which, with
rapidly increasing population, must increase. In these
circumstances, it is suggested that some attention might
well be given to the raising of the status of the Licensing
Court; in the first instance by bringing into force sec-
tion 55 (2) of the Liquor (Amendment) Act, 1946, under
which the constitution of the Licensing Court is amended.
This can be done by proclamation (Act No. 34 of 1946)
(s. 55 (2)); but it is further suggested that some amend-
ment of the section might be considered to provide for
additional magistrate members —this because of the
need for confining, as far as practicable, the work in
the hands of the magistrates who have acquired, or in
the course of their work do acquire, special qualifications.
In suggesting consideration of the question of raising
the status of the Court, I do not regard myself as em-
powered under the Terms of Reference to do more than
draw attention to the suggestion in the light of the
specialised work undertaken.


TERM 2.
TIED-HOUSE SYSTEM OF THE LIQUOR TRADE.
1. In proceeding to deal with this TERM it is essential
to have a clear understanding of that which is—and that
which is not —meant by a “tied house”; it is essential
not least because of the widespread misconception of its
meaning, of its nature and of its incidence, a miscon-
ception strikingly illustrated in the evidence of Mr. J. L.
Geraghty who, it might fairly have been expected, would
have had some understanding of the expression. The
material portion of his evidence to illustrate a common
misconception is set forth later. Assistance in under-
standing the meaning (and the nature, though perhaps
not the modern incidence) of the tied house is to he
derived, in the first instance, by a consideration of its
origin.
2. No specific period of years can be fixed as the time
of origin, nor can the origin itself be ascribed to a single
cause. The inn and the tavern in older countries arose
in ancient times and were linked with the history of and
associated with the monasteries. In Great Britain in
early days, the inn was also a brewery producing its own
ale for its own customers. An individual innkeeper, the
more progressive in a business sense, no longer confining
himself to brewing his own ale for sale in his own single
house, either set up a new or acquired an existing house—
generally in his own town —and stocked each individual
house with ale brewed at his original premises. This
form of brewing may fairly be described as really ancient
in origin. A familiar variant of this was the purchase
by one man of a number of houses and then the starting
of a brewery to supply them. By contrast, the brewery
in the now universally accepted sense is a relatively
modern institution. The experience in the United King-
dom affords a safe guide to the development of such a
brewery. In the 17th century, especially in London,
there were many inns and taverns affording an outlet
for the sale of the brewery’s product. In larger towns
the brewer, with his eye to increased business, acquired
houses where his beer was being sold or into which he
sought to introduce his product.
3. Thus, it may be stated, two (or possibly three) dis-
tinct processes are to be observed. The innkeeper became
a brewer and the brewer became an innkeeper. More-
over, the processes were avowedly a commercial expedient
to ensure a wider and more profitable field for the sale
of the brewer’s product. And the brewer proper found
himself greatly helped when the practice of “home brew-
ing” died out, for he was thus presented with an ale-
house available for purchase or acquisition. (Later,
reference is made to a more modern but somewhat parallel
development in other trades, for the moment, exemplified
in these days by the chain store). The processes above
described had the advantage for the brewer and for the
inn, of centralising production on the one hand and of
building up a distributive organisation on the other.
4. In the course of time and at varying periods retailers
—innkeepers, hotelkeepers, publicans—either owning their
own houses or as lessees from individual landlords, found
*f,! >329—2
themselves faced with the need as owners or the obligation
as lessees of carrying out repairs, of increasing the size
of the house and in other ways incurring expenses in
relation to the premises. And if the retailer lacked the
means, a natural source of assistance was that brewer who
was financially in a position to help. The brewer lent
the money and as part of his return he obtained from the
retailer a covenant or agreement not to sell the beer of
any other brewer. But if the retailer’s position was
really precarious he sold the public house to the brewer
who first let the house to the tenant (subject to the
covenant) or —as later —installed a manager. In 1869 a
situation arose which gave a great fillip to the practices
here outlined (England is referred to because of the light
thrown on the development even in Australia). In
England, in 1869 beer-house licences were brought
under the control of the Justices. By the year 1900
there were many houses whose owners (or licencees)
were unable to pay their way; this was due, in
part, to there being too many houses for the avail-
able trade. The decision of the House of Lords in
Sharp v. Wakefield (1891 A.C. 173), established that
the Licensing Justices had a discretion to refuse
the renewal of a licence on the ground (inter alia) that
it was no longer needed for the requirements of the
public. The immediate relevancy of this decision is found
in the fact that no compensation was payable to him
who was refused the renewal; in 1903 six hundred and
thirty licences were refused by the Justices. The Prime
Minister at the time (A. J. Balfour) described the effect
on the licensed house in these words; “Gross injustice
had been done to a large number of individuals; ... in
a twinkling of an eye (they) were reduced from a com-
petence to a penury”. “Public houses were a bad invest-
ment during this period; and many owners of free
houses decided to make the best bargain they could with
a brewery”.
5. In consequence, the LICENSING ACT of 1904 (the
Balfour Act) amended the law “in respect to the extinc-
tion of licences and the granting of new licences”. In
particular, it established a fund for compensation on the
extinction of a licence (except for misconduct), the
compensation being raised by the trade itself. But
meanwhile, many houses had been bought up by the
breweries; although until the 1904 Act their new pur-
chases were liable to extinction without compensation, the
brewery was in the favoured position that the resulting
losses could be spread over the whole of the licences owned
by it. It is not surprising that their good fortune arising
from these happenings sharpened the interest of the
breweries in retail houses, so that they directed their
attention to new licences as owners; thereafter, either
leasing the house to a tenant or installing a manager,
as indicated earlier.
6. It will be seen that either by lending money to a
needy owner or lessee, by granting a lease of their own
premises or by appointing a manager of such premises


■ ' e breweries bad a wide and increasingly wide field
r the sale of their product. It is also not surprising
1 i;at, with competition, a particular brewery in return
f r financial accommodation or as one of the conditions
1’ granting a tenancy or when appointing a manager,
assisted on a provision that such house should deal in
r’ at brewery’s beer exclusively. These arangements
quite early came to be known as the “tie” and the
]) emises to which it attached as the “tied house”. This
t'e for beer has long be regarded as fundamental. (See
KEPORT OF A ROYAL COMMISSION ON LICENS-
-1 TO (English) in 1932); the Report criticised its
c tention to other liquors or commodities.
7. Whilst regarding it as at least desirable to show the
origin and development of the “tie” simpliciter, no useful
purpose is to be served in tracing the development of
.he extension of the “tie” other than to beer. At the
( esent time it may be taken as an almost universal
;■ actice to include liquor other than beer and much else
’ csides. In a later paragraph is set forth the extent of
lypical “ties” in England and in New South Wales;
inferences to other local ties are unnecessary because
• ny divergences are negligible.
8. What then is a “tie” ? It is an instance of that
which is knowm in law as “a covenant in restraint of
bade”. In more popular expression, it is a device or
arrangement by which a tenant (or other person affected)
<'f licensed premises undertakes to purchase from the
’■indlord (the brewer-owner) or the mortgagee (being the
Newer) and from no-one else either all his beer or all
1 s beer and other commodities, for instance, wines,
spirits, cordials, tobacco—generally at agreed prices fixed
•u or ascertainable by reference, to the document con-
taining the “tie”. It is a device not at all limited to
premises licensed for the sale of liquor. It is familiar
to many other trades and businesses, such as ice-cream
u anufacturers, manufacturing chemists, milk and butter
stributors and —as elsewhere indicated—the more re-
s' at instance of petrol distributors.
9. In passing it should, I think, be pointed out that
the suggested analogy of “ties” in relation to liquor and
t’ ose in vogiie in many other trades and businesses must
■ eet a challenge at the very threshold —this because
h e liquor “tie” more nearly touches the public by reason
< f the circumstance that the law (passed by Legislature,
aid in effect laid down by the courts) as well as sound
public opinion fortified by experts and everyday com-
mon experience—recognised the potential evil in alco-
holic liquor. Whereas in most other trades, as illustrated,
tl is is of little or no significance. In this connection I
am not unmindful of the claim that can be made, for
u, stance, with respect to foodstuffs and the like that the
c cation of a monopoly would raise questions in the public
interest beyond merely the validity in accordance with
well-established principles of the “tie” or covenant in
icstraint of trade as between the parties to the trans-
action resulting in the “tie”.
10. Reference is earlier made to a misconception in
die mind of a witness who had had some experience in
d e liquor trade and had, as part of his duties as a mem-
ler of the Legislature, given much time and attention
to the problems of liquor—Mr. J. L. Geraghty, then
i ember for North Sydney. Having been asked his
understanding of what the tied-house system meant he
gave an answer which was accurate enough; but when
asked his view of the evil of the tied system (in the
bquor industry), he answered in these words: “I believe
that it prevents the businessman in very very many in-
s ances from being owner of his own freehold hotel. I
a so realise that in every other type and class of business
anyone keeping that business has the right to purchase
it and become the owner of his own property or of the
premises for which he holds the lease”. (See Tran-
script p. 2176). If these words quoted represent the
understanding of the witness it reveals a serious mis-
conception—shared, to a lesser extent and in different
form perhaps, by many others in the community. In
fairness to the witness it may be that he expressed him-
self inaccurately; but as expressed, his views bear no
relation to the facts in either liquor or any other trade
in the absence of some special agreement.
STATISTICS.
11. There are in New South Wales 2,028 publicans’
licences. Of these 69 per cent, or approximately 1,400 are
tied to breweries. The bulk of these are tied to the two
major breweries —Tooth’s (1,003) and Tooheys (329). The
remaining breweries holding the benefit of ties are South
Australian Brewing Company Limited (25), British
Breweries Pty. Ltd. (12), Richmond N.S. Brewing Co.
Pty. (4), Carlton United Breweries Ltd. (12), Lithgow
Brewery Interests (2) (see below as to figures). The
Federal Brewery Limited (Mudgee), Terry’s Brewery
Ltd. (Lithgow), and Brookvale Brewery, have no bene-
ficial interest in ties. It is estimated that there are some
600 odd free houses in the State, or 525 (excluding those
in the Southern Riverina Area). It should be pointed
out that whilst some of these figures are accurate, others
are approximate; moreover, it is not always possible to
reconcile the figures appearing in the Transcript with
those to be found in the Schedules which were tendered
separately. But the variations in the figures assume no
real importance and for all practical purposes, the figures
quoted are reliable. They include houses in which the
tie arises in differing circumstances and not always in
the same form. Some arise from the fact that a brewery
owns the freehold and has granted a lease, or owns a
leasehold and has granted a sub-lease —in either case, with
or without a mortgage, but -with a covenant in the nature
of a tie as part of the dealing; some arise because a
brewery has lent money on security with a tie added;
in some cases a brewery has paid a lump sum to obtain
the benefit of a tie. In yet another class of case a brewery
has obtained the benefit of a tie in consideration of
carrying out work in the nature of repairs or improve-
ments to hotel premises.
12. It is a feature of the tied-house system in this
State that the majority of the tied houses are found in
other than country districts. In this connectioin, how-
ever, it may be mentioned that the South Australian
Brewing Company’s interest in tied houses is limited to
Broken Hill. As to the British Brewery Company,
reference to their holding ties in some twelve hotels is
later made because of a claim by that Company affecting
the operation of the tied-house system.
13. It is important in the light of considerations dealt
with in my conclusions that attention should be drawn
to the fact that on another set of figures tendered, the
two major breweries have the benefit of ties in approxi-
mately 1,330 houses out of a total of 2,028 throughout the
State. Expressed in another way, between 49 per cent,
and fifty per cent, of the hotel licensed premises involve
a “tie” to Tooth’s and about 16 per cent, by Toohey’s.
Before discussing the merits claimed for and the demerits
urged against the tied-house system, it is perhaps advis-
able to repeat in summary form the feature that the
tie, with exceptions not material to the real questions
involved, covers not merely the product of the brewery
(beer) but substantially all alcoholic liquor and soft
drinks alike. The important subject of the duration of
the tie is dealt with separately, mainly because of the
criticism that in cases where money owing has been paid
off the tie, nevertheless, still persists.


CLAIMS FOR AND AGAINST THE TIED-HOUSE
SYSTEM.
14. On behalf of the breweries generally, it is claimed
that the system is a well-recognised form of trade protec-
tion not confined to the- liquor industry, but found in
different types of business; that as to liquor, in common
with other products, it lessens the cost of both production
and distribution. The parties to the “tie” contract, it is
said, are at arm’s length and the covenantee is protected
by legislation and by the principles laid down by the
Courts which will refuse to enforce convenants which
are an unreasonable restraint on trade.
15. As between the parties, no complaint as to the sub-
stance, form or operation of the tie was raised by any
of the 116 hotelkeepers who gave evidence. The docu-
ments executed between the parties are proper and usual
conveyancing documents for the type of transaction in-
volved.
16. Great weight was attached on behalf of the breweries
to the atitude adopted by the U.L.Y.A. during the hear-
ing before this Commission. If it is to be accepted on
its face value, then the evidence presented by the
IJ.L.Y.A. and the arguments based upon that evidence
consititute powerful advocacy (for so I regard it) of the
tie system, proceeding— not from the party imposing the
tie —but from the official body representing, at any rate,
most of those upon whom the tie is imposed. An interest-
ing aspect of this advocacy is revealed by the terms and
the circumstances of a resolution passed by the Council
of the U.L.Y.A. in September, 1951 (See Exhibit 38).
“Royal Commission ; Mr. Pur.cell informed the
meeting that the Crown would appreciate receiving
the assistance of the U.L.Y.A. in bringing all relevant
matters before the Royal Commission in respect to
the liquor industry. Hotelkeepers who held licences
of hotels owned by companies (other than brewing
companies) and individuals, would be circularised re-
questing certain information in respect of their licence.
He was of the opinion that the Commission would also
appreciate an expression of opinion from the U.L.Y.A.
in respect to the following matters: (a) The tied-house
system; (b) hotel trading hours; (c) whether there
should be two types of licences —accommodation and
non-accommodation hotels; (d) whether the sale of
beer in smaller glasses would help towards a better
distribution of beer to the public. After a very full
discussion of the subject by members present at the
meeting, the following resolutions were adopted:—
Resolved: That this council of the United Licensed
Victuallers’ Association of Hew South Wales expresses
the view that tied-houses system, as at present existing
in Hew South Wales, operates to the advantage of the
public for the following reasons:
(1) That the security offered to the brewery allows
the expenditure by it of large sums in the re-
modelling and improvement of existing hotels,
the building of new hotels, the repair of hotels
and generally in the maintenance of a very
high standard of the hotels in Hew South Wales.
(2) That it permits the financing of men of modest
means in the hotel industry, thus resulting in
a constant influx of fresh blood into the trade.
(3) That as a result of the tradition that licensees
are granted renewals of their lease it has re-
sulted in continuity of occupancy, thus encour-
aging licensees to adopt the policy of building
up goodwill and improving their premises rather
than of making quick profits at the expense of
the public.
(4) That the two major breweries have built up a
tradition of mitigating the onerous provisions of
the tie by a benevolent administration.
(5) That by ensuring control of licensees it has cut
down to a minimum various offences such as
adulteration of liquor, uncleanliness of premises
and the like.
(6) That in the distribution of liquor there has been
no discrimination by the breweries against free
houses in favour of tied houses.
(7) That the quality of beer produced by both major
breweries is of a very high standard and that
in the maintenance of this quality the public
have always been considered.
(8) That generally this system is merely a brewers’
method of competing with a rival brewery and
that in this competition the public interest has
not been allowed to suffer.
17. Whilst I do not impugn the views as not being
genuinely held by either the council of U.L.Y.A. or some
of the principals represented by it, it must be viewed
with great caution, not least because its enthusiasm
could be, if not begotten, at any rate nurtured, by a sense
of dependence, and because the appearance of gratitude
to the brewery benefactors could evidence a lively sense
of favours to come. It will be recalled that the system
generally in vogue is approved by the U.L.Y.A., a large
organisation whose obligation is to protect the interests
of its members (hotelkeepers). U.L.Y.A. members, mostly
selected indiscriminately and called by counsel assist-
ing the Commission, approved of the system and ex-
pressed the opinion that it was beneficial to the trade.
18. Counsel for U.L.Y.A. in his printed summary of
address, contented himself with saying “as to Term 2,
we offer no criticism of Mr. Wallace’s submissions;” Mr.
Wallace, of course, was leading counsel for Tooth’s.
Reference has already been made to the official view of
the council of U.L.Y.A., but that which follows immedi-
ately is based essentially upon the submissions of counsel
on behalf of U.L.Y.A. in elaboration of his printed sum-
mary. He claimed that the tied-house system, if it does
not operate detrimentally to the public interest at its
inception, cannot so operate later because it continues
during the agreed period which, by the contract, may
extend beyond the date for the repayment of the loan
(p. 2703). Counsel’s claim that no U.L.Y.A. member and
no licensee gave evidence raising objection to the tied-
house system reflects somewhat a similar state of affairs
during the course of the English Royal Commission on
Licensing which caused the Commissioners in their re-
port to say, “we are satisfied that the evidence given
before us by representatives of the licensed victuallers
organisations erred on the side of reticence”. In the
present instance, counsel was able rightly to claim in
fact, that there was an absence of complaints against the
system from the licensees. I am not at all satisfied
that the complete picture is revealed. Whilst one is not
therefore justified in making an affirmative finding
against the system in the face of the body of evidence
from within the trade, one is both entitled and obliged
to examine the evidence given to see how far the claim
made for its are well founded, and to see also whether
alterations are called for. Below are set forth long re-
cognised claims against the system. It is proper to
state that these are obtained from earlier reports of
Royal Commissions, and they are based upon evidence
given before or provided to these CommissioKS.
19. Reference has already been made to the persistent
requests by those appointed to assist the Commission
that any member of the public who had any information
that might assist in the public interest should get in
touch with a designated officer, notwithstanding these
requests the number of witnesses who were both able
and willing to assist was relatively small. The only two
persons whom it was possible so far as I am aware, for
counsel to call to offer other facts critical of the tied-house


system were, one L. E. Spooner and L. G. Geraghty. The
former did not volunteer as a witness, but he did sign a
letter purporting to act on behalf of between 300 and
400 persons who had certain views. By reason of that
he was tendered as a witness. Leading counsel asked
him this question:
“There are some facts within your knowledge relat-
ing to the tied house system and brewery control of
hotels ?”
A. I have no facta”.
Q. “You have no facts?”
A. “I have no facts personally, no”.
He admitted that he signed the letter suggesting
something about the activities within the system of
tied houses and brewery control of hotels. Having
admitted that he personally had no facts, he was asked,
“Can you suggest any person who has, who will give
any assistance on the facts ?”
A. “Evidence from the mass meeting.”
Q. “Never mind about the mass meeting. Name one
person who can give us any facts and we will have him
here on oath”. No answer.
Q. “Name any person”.
A. “Mr. E. Walsham, who is in attendance in Court.”
Q. “Has he information?”
A. “I do not know whether it is information.”
He later admitted, after persistent attempts at evasion,
that there was no person, that he was aware of, no in-
dividual who had any facts at all relevant to the two
subjects referred to in his letters (pp. 1885, 1886).
20. A somewhat similar experience resulted from the
evidence of Mr. G. L. Geraghty. Asked,
“Is there any fact within your knowledge affecting
the public interest in relation to the tied-house system
of the liquor trade ?”,
A. “Other than that the tied-house system does not
operate in the best public interests”.
He was reminded by counsel that that was comment, and
he was then asked had he any facts to support his com-
ment, and he admitted that he had not (p. 2159). He
was later examined as to certain allegations made by him,
every one of which he completely withdrew, not in what
may be termed a Parliamentary sense, but admitting that
he had no foundation for any of them. Bo far as con-
cerns the present reference, it has been earlier stated
that the witness showed he had no understanding at all
of what a tied house was (see p. 2176).
21. The manager of British Breweries (H, T. Alse)
complained of difficulties experienced by his company; his
criticism of the tied-house system was directed mainly at
a successful competitor (Tooth’s). Nevertheless he claimed
that there were advantages in the system for the public
in particular by producing a better class of hotel (p.
5143). The witness, Barwick, a hotelkeeper, who com-
plained of some dealings with Tooth’s was examined on
the subject of tied houses. He did not offer any criticism
of the system and, in effect, was the licensee of a Tooth
house at the time of giving evidence. Because he
objected to the brewery’s demand for a bonus in respect
of a leasehold, he set about buying a freehold. However,
the freehold which he did obtain was already subject to
a tie in favour of Tooth’s.
22. It is not at all necessary to set forth the evidence
of particular hotel witnesses. But they are illustrated by
reference to Mr. M. D. Shanney, a licensee who impressed
me favourably as a witness and who gave evidence in
support of the system. He is a member of the Council of
the U.L.Y.A., and had been connected with the liquor
trade since the year 1918. He had had several leases
from Tooth and Co. and asked, “What is your view as to
the effect of the brewery control on hotels either by way
of leasing them or by way of tie”, he answered, “I have
never been of any other opinion than that it is a great
system. They help all licensees, I think” (p. 445).
23. Mr. Wallace, leading counsel for Tooth’s sub-
mitted that if the system were onerous or detrimental to
the public, at least one “creditable” member of the public
would have come forward to say so. As already stated,
a striking feature of the evidence was the absence of
complaints qua ties by publicans; but as I added in the
course of the proceedings “I feel the real problem will
ultimately be to draw a proper and careful inference from
the evidence which seems all the one way”. Counsel urged
that the leases on tied houses are keenly sought by
purchasers and that, by reason of “security of tenure,
better margins and good relations between publican and
the brewery”. Many publicans had tied themselves to the
same brewery more than once.
24. The obligations imposed by the covenants in the tie
documents tend to ensure —it is claimed—that the
licensee conducts his business in accordance with the
LIQUOR ACT even where the relationship is merely
that of mortgagor and mortgagee and not that of tenant
and landlord. As to this, it may be suggested that the
mere fact that he is granted a licence by the proper
authority, requires him to obey the law on pain of serious
penalty. But although the argument savours of special
pleading, it may be that in some eases to the fear of
conflict with the licensing authorities and the police is
added the fear lest the landlord exercise his rights under
the covenants. But I think it may fairly be said that
these later potential consequences are prima facie con-
cerned with —for instance —selling products other than
those permitted by the tie. Amongst other witnesses who
supported this favourable view of the tie system was Mr.
Selby Burt, assistant general manager of Tooth and
Company, who impressed as a witness and to whose evi-
dence I attached weight. his views must be
examined as coming from an interested and enthusiastic
source, with possibly unconscious bias.
25. It is further claimed that the public gets cheaper
and better beer and good facilities to enjoy it. Support
for this claim is found in the evidence of Mr. T. Watson,
general manager of Tooth’s. It is best appreciated, I
think, by quoting the passage in full;
Q. “In the events that have happened, I have to ask
you not as an advocate for Tooth and Co., but as a
man of experience in the trade, whether it has been in
the public interest?”
A. “I do think it is.”
(). “Would you be good enough to explain how, as
you see it?”
A. “The merger of small organisations into a bigger
organisation helps to get a spread of overheads. It helps
you to keep your unit costs down. It avoids unbridled
and nonsensical competition, spending money on things
that are not truly reproductive, and with the bigger
organisation I think you can train your staff better and
select your specialists. You train them through. You
have continuity of standards and design and organisa-
tion generally. You are in a better position to give
men wider training and equip them for modern con-
ditions and modern trends. By virtue of lower unit
costs and sounder and more stable business methods, the
big organisation is able to accumulate or set aside
money for developmental work and research work. They
plough back money, so far as the developing of assets
and expansion of assets generally are concerned”.


Q. “That answer dealt rather not with the public
interests, but with the interests of the trade?”
A. “I was not quite finished. By virtue of those
things, the public gets a better commodity, a commodity
that moves with the latest ideas and trends. They get
the commodity at a cheap price, and by reason of the
big organisation’s expenditure on assets —I am talking
about our trade —they have better facilities to enjoy
the product.”
Q. In making that answer do you have in mind the
acquisition by your company of Resch’s brewery?
A. “Yes.”
Q. “I suppose in your view the public would be still
better off if Mr. Reynolds’ client made overtures to
you ?”
A. “Who is Mr. Reynolds?”
26. Mr. Watson is a man of great ability and his ex-
perience probably unequalled in the liquor industry. But
in any expressions of opinion, I have little doubt that
his views are coloured by a loyalty to his company which,
whilst proper enough in itself, leads him at times to
express opinions which were clear over-statements. I
was struck with learned counsel’s preface to one series
of questions (see above): “I have to ask you, not as an
advocate for Tooth and Company but as a man of ex-
perience in the trade, whether it (the house tied to
Tooth’s) has been in the public interest ?” I suggest that
the preface indicated above revealed counsel’s under-
standable anxiety to dissociate the two roles in which
the witness was undoubtedly well qualified; his answer,
in my opinion, showed competent and skilful advocacy
rather than independent opinion.
27. It is said that the system is an integral part of
the mode of financing hotelkeepers who, whilst selecting
the brewery as mortgagee in preference to a bank or an
insurance company (and Mr. Burt says without pres-
sure), receive sound advice and practical help from the
brewery. I have no doubt that it is an integral part of
the mode of financing hotelkeepers. It is, I am satisfied,
a fact that advice and practical help are given.
28. The next claim in favour of the tied-house system
was made generally, but in particular on behalf of Tooth
& Co., when leading counsel submitted that “it has as-
sisted to ensure even and fair distribution by the brewery
to hotelkeepers and by hotelkeepers to the public”. It
is desirable to add as a part of this claim that counsel sub-
mitted “we have claimed again and again that we do
not differentiate in the quota system between tied and
free houses”. As to this last claim, the evidence sup-
ports counsel’s contention. As to the claim generally
with regard to fair distribution by the brewery to hotel-
keepers, this necessarily follows from that which has im-
mediately been stated. But as to the claim that the
system has assisted to ensure even and fair distribution
by hotelkeepers to the public, I can see no foundation for
it —indeed there is abundant evidence that hotels, both
tied and free, have consistently and in large measure
denied the public their legitimate demands. As to tied
houses, their responsibility for unreasonable delivery in-
volves the criticism that Tooth’s have not in all cases, in
my view, given that attention to policing proper distri-
bution by some of their tied houses that could be ex-
pected.
29. It is claimed generally on behalf of the breweries,
that the large trade which the system helps to secure
for a brewery enables it to accumulate large liquid re-
serves which it expends on the erection, rebuilding and
maintenance of high-class hotels. I think, by and large.
the claim may be well founded to this extent that money
is unquestionably available and spent in building what
may be described as attractive buildings, more especially
in relation to bars and lounges. It is also true that up
to the time of difficulties in the building trade, due to
the war, many modern buildings were erected by more
than one brewery with quite satisfactory bedroom and
meals accommodation as well.
30. Leading counsel on behalf of Tooth’s then sub-
mitted that the tied-house system permitted the financing
of men of modest means into the industry and this re-
sulted in what was described as fresh blood. This is based
partly upon one of the resolutions of the U.L.Y.A. Sub-
ject to the qualifications that expert advice and help are
offered by the brewery, this financial assistance could
come from other sources, such as banks and insurance
companies. On behalf of the breweries, much attention
was given to the claim that the creation of the tie fol-
lowed a contract recognised and enforced by law and
should not be interfered with unless grave abuse outweigh-
ing the benefits of the freedom of contract are shown
to exist. There is obviously much to be said in favour
of the sanctity of contract, but on the whole of the evi-
dence before me I am not at all satisfied that hotelkeepers
are always in a position to bargain on equal terms with
a brewery, though this relates rather to leases than to
mortgages simpliciter. It is not answer, it seems to me,
to say that as other financial institutions can provide
the money the resort to the brewery indicates a prefer-
ence by the hotelkeeper for brewery financial assistance.
The question whether the tied-house system should be
abolished or modified is dealt with later.
31. Counsel for one of the breweries raised a suggestion
of possible complaint so as to answer it in advance. He
stated that the fact that 69 per cent, of the hotels in
Hew South Wales are tied does not establish that a
reasonable choice of beer is denied the public. The argu-
ment in full with regard to suggested limitation of choice
would involve the position, at least as to draught beer
(and that is substantially the only product involved)
that a free house would be obliged to install separate
systems for each different kind of draught beer sold in the
hotel. I have no doubt that the question of expense of,
say, duplicating systems would be such as to make it
prohibitive in most cases. The evidencg touching this
subject is provided in typical form by one B. F. T.
Ritchard, licensee of the Railway Hotel, Hornsby. He
was asked: “From a personal viewpoint, which would you
prefer to run, a free house or a tied house?” His answer
was, “a free house naturally, because that means that you
have the advantage of Toth’ beers”. He was asked had
he not heard of a third one; he said, “Yes, the advan-
tage of a free house would be that it more or less brings
two hotels into one, increases your trade and a customer
can have his choice of more than one beer. That is the
advantage” (p. 354). I attach no great importance to
this, as I think, largely theoretical claim. Apart from
the question of expense, so long as the licensee served beer
supplied to him by any of the breweries distributing in
Hew South Wales, there is nothing in the evidence to
suggest that there is any complaint as to the quality of
the beer, although it is clear that some persons claiming
to have what may be described as an expert palate prefer
one draught beer to another. There is the further fact
that whilst there may be no choice of more than one
draught beer in any particular hotel, other beers are fre-
quently available, at least in the metropolitan area, in
hotels close by. Moreover, there are some owners of free
houses who find it unnecessary in the interests of their
business to supply more than one brand of draught beer
(p. 425). This subject matter in no way touches bottled
beer in view of the clear evidence that various brands of
bottled are available even in tied houses.


32. The paucity or the absence of direct evidence of
disadvantages to the public flowing from the tied-house
system has been adverted to. In that state of the evi-
dence before this Commission, it has been more than
ever necessary to seek assistance from other quarters; for
instance, from the findings of the Royal Commission in
New Zealand in 1946 and the Royal Commission in Eng-
land 1929-31. In the former, the Commissioners in a
majority report stated separately the advantages claimed
for the tie and the disadvantages claimed as against the
tie. The advantages claimed were these:
(1) That the brewer or wholesale merchant obtains
the power to ensure that only good liquor is being sup-
plied in the hotel.
(2) That only one brand of draught beer can be
satisfactorily provided in most hotels and that this is
ensured by the tie.
(3) That the tie ensures continuity of supply to the
licensee (R. 3780).
(4) That the brewer or wholesale merchant, generally
having more financial resources than the licensee, can
improve the buildings and provide better accommodation
than the licensee;
(5) That only a brewer or wholesale merchant with
large capital is able to build a large modern hotel, and
that, in that event, it is reasonable that the hotel
should stock only the liquor supplied by the brewer or
wholesale merchant;
(6) That the service in the tied house is at least
as good as in the untied house; and
(7) That the co-ordinating of the supply of liquor
with the retail demand and with the power to stimulate
the retail demand is a trend in modern business and
that the greatest efficiency, both from the point of view
of the trade and of the public, is secured by bringing
the manufacturing, wholesale, and retail trade required
for the conduct of a chain of hotels under one control.
The evidence of Mr. Stevens, the chairman of directors
of Dominion Breweries, suggests that in his view
this is the logical extension of the tie under the con-
ditions of modern business. (Para. 516 of the Report).
33. The arguments against the tied house are these; —
(1) That the brewery company or wholesale merchant
exerts a pressure on the licensee to keep up on average
of weekly or monthly purchases so that the licensee is
obliged to push the sale of liquor in order to main-
tain the profits of the hotel and the dividends of the
brewer or wholesale merchant;
(2) That rentals are fixed on the volume of trade
which often includes the after-hours trading and in-
duces breaches of the law in order that the licensee
may maintain his financial position or keep himself
solvent;
(3) That, when adjustments of rent are made by the
brewer or wholesaler, either up or down, the brewer
or wholesaler takes the maximum profit;
(4) That the tied house is so prevalent in various
parts of New Zealand, particularly in the Auckland
Province, that a licensed victualler who desires to be
“mine host” on his own account finds it impossible
to obtain a satisfactory hotel for the purpose;
(5) That the continuity of supplies to the tied house
involves a partial distribution of liquor in which the
untied houses suffer; and
(6) That the tied house supplies only the draught
beer of the brewer or wholesaler, (para. 617 of the
Report).
34. In the course of its Report the Royal Commission
on Licensing, England and Wales, examined the tied-
house system. It stated that an inquiry by a select
committee of the House of Commons in 1817 resulted
in the committee’s view that the system was a “great
grievance” and suggested that the grievance well deserved
“the consideration of the legislature in order to limit
its future progress and to relieve the public from its
mischievous consequences”. Safeguards against abuses
were recommended but the abolition of the tied-house
system was regarded as not practicable, a view which
according to the later report accorded with the opinions
of previous committees of enquiry. The English report
then proceeded to point out features favourable to the
system as carried on by the best breweries and unfavour-
able features revealed in the activities of other breweries.
In the course of examining these features, reference was
made to the extent of the tie; this is dealt with separately
later.
35. The view of the English Commission was that it
was not easy to assess the true effect of the system. Under
a good and careful brewer-owner it may operate advan-
tageously and produce excellent results. He will tie the
tenant for malt liquors only and even in the case of malt
liquors will furnish him with supplies of special brands for
which there is a public demand, although of course at
a price which will not prejudice the sales of his own
product. On the other hand with other brewers unsatis-
factory conditions obtain. The tie was all embracing and
covered articles in public demand in which the brewer
had no interest as producer. There was a risk that a
licensee’s tenancy might be brought to an end when he
would lose much of the money that he had put into the
business and his livelihood as well. In such cases, so close
might be the tie that the tenant might become little better
than an agent to dispose of the landlord’s goods. “These
are the two extremes of the system; and between these two
extremes is a great variety of interests”.
36. The Commission expressed the view, stated sum-
marily, that if there was a tie limited in extent and the
brewer in fact did advise and assist the licensee in the
conduct of his business “we should have been inclined to
leave things as they are”. But it*added that it was im-
pressed with the growth of the more unsatisfactory type
of brewer. It proceeded to state that under the system,
the public might be denied reasonable choice of refresh-
ment; that there might be a general pressure of the sale
of intoxicants and the concentration on certain brands
to the exclusion of others which were demanded by the
public. With regard to spirits, it expressed the view that
it might be the brewer-owner’s object to secure the diver-
sion of custom to a brand unknown to and unsought by the
public in which he has some interest. (Report p. 66).
EXTENT AND DURATION OF TIES.
37. It has been pointed out that two important features
capable of exercising a major influence on the operation
of the tied-house system are respectively the extent and
the duration of the tie. With regard to the extent of the
tie, it will be recalled that invariably the covenant or tie
to the breweries is not limited to the product of the
brewery, but extends to cover liquor for which the brewer
is but an agent or in respect of which he is otherwise
interested in its distribution.
38. The extent of the tie held by the major two and
other breweries in New South Wales shortly stated is as
follows: —
Tooth’s-. The tie extends to wines, spirits, ales, porters
and aereated waters as well as to beer. (Schedule 22).
A significant statement appears in that schedule in these
terms: “in practice, however, Tooth’s do not, except in
special and rare circumstances, enforce the covenant
according to its terms in relation to aereated waters or


to any liquor other than draught beer. It is very
common for houses tied to Tooth’s to buy wines as
well as bottled beers, ales and porters, cordials and
aereated waters from outside sources, in addition to
supplies obtained from Tooth’s, and this practice has
always been well known to Tooth’s. Tooth’s do not
require compliance with the tie covenant except in
relation to draught beer”. (Schedule 22).
Toohey’s ; The tie extends to “all wines, spirits,
beer, ales, porters, malt liquors, cordials, minerals and
aereated waters, whether bottled or in bulk, and all
other usual stock of an hotel”. On behalf of the com-
pany it was stated that “the invariable practice of the
company is to require a complete observance of the
tie only with respect to draught beer. The covenant
with respect to bottled beers, wines and spirits, cordials,
minerals and aereated waters and other usual stock
of an hotel is not enforced. In all cases, persons
covered by the tie are free to buy elsewhere and do,
in fact, purchase quite considerably from various sources
other than the company”. (Schedule 42).
Richmond Brewery : The tie extends to “ale, beer,
porter and stout”; there is no tie in respect of spirits,
wines or soft drinks or tobacco (Schedule 59). The
South Australian Brewing Company Ltd. (whose in-
terests in hotels is confined to Broken Hill district)
limits covenants in it's leases to cover “all ale, beer,
lager, stout or porter”. Previously it included wines,
spirits and other commodities but it was claimed that
only in relation to draught beer was the covenant
applied, (See Schedule 52a).
British Brewery ; The tie extends to “beer, ale, lager
and includes Pilsners, stout, porter, wines, spirits,
liqueurs and other liquors, cordials, minerals and aerated
waters”, but in practice the company does not supply
these lines, and the licensee is generally at liberty to
purchase such commodities both as to quantities and
brands at his discretion (Schedule 72). Terry’s
Brewery, Lithgow, and the Federal Brewery Ltd., Mud-
gee, have not the benefit of any tie; Brookvale Brewery,
which has only just commenced operation, claimed that
it did not intend to cater for the hotel trade at all
(Schedule 70).
These extended ties greatly resemble the covenants or
ties generally obtaining in the United Kingdom.
39. One of the striking claims made on behalf of practi-
cally every brewery represented was that although the
tie was so extensive it was operated, by the brewery hav-
ing the benefit of the tie, benevolently towards the hotel-
keeper. Upon the evidence it may be said at once that
I am bound to find that there has been no discrimination
between tied and free houses. In general the breweries
proceeded then to claim that although the tie was exten-
sive it was really insisted on only in relation to draught
heer; that in spite of other products being included within
the tie, the brewery in whose favour the tie existed
allowed the bottled beer of rival breweries, and the lines
of spirits and wines and other liquor supplies by other
breweries or merchants to be sold by the tied house. And
some stress was laid upon the fact that this was an atti-
tude adopted even before there was any shortage, especially
with regard to beer. If this claim on behalf of the
breweries is correct, and I think it is, I find it difficult
to appreciate any real reason for their insisting on a tie
of such an extent that it covers other liquor than draught
beer. I am of the opinion that if the practical operation
of the tie is in general limited only to draught beer, there
is no reason for insisting on the extensive covenant
appearing in all the documents executed for the purpose
of obtaining that which the brewery is entitled to obtain,
namely, effective sanctions for the carrying out of the
covenant. For this reason I am of the opinion that a
strong case is made for limiting the extent of the tie
either to draught beer or to all beer the product of the
brewery. Upon the same considerations, I see no reason
why the tie should continue to cover proprietary lines,
for instance of whisky. I refer to the fact that Tooth's
Brewery carries on business as a spirit merchant with a
spirit merchant’s licence in a very large way. To adopt
the expression used in the report of the Royal Commis-
sion on Licensing in England; the suggested limited tie
is “the simplest tie, under which a tenant contracts witli
a producer of beer to obtain from the latter all his beer,
and is fundamental” (paragraph 331). “The interests
of the public and of tenant alike demand, however, that
this tie should not be so operated in practice as to limit,
or to impose a prohibitive price upon supplies of malt
liquors of repute for which there is general demand. The
interests of the producer, on the other hand, demand that
where a rival beer is supplied to a tenant to the exclusion
of his own product, the tenant should pay something extra
so as to give to the producer a return equivalent to that
which he would obtain if it was his own beer which wa<
sold” (p. 72).
DURATION.
40. Much discussion occurred on the subject of the dura-
tion of the tie. It will be appreciated that the origin of a
particular tie generally affects the duration provided fo •
in the contract giving rise to it and in the documents
executed between the parties in order to ensure its being
observed. In particular, attention is drawn to the case
of a tie in relation to a lease where it fairly describe-
the position that the tie is expressed to last for the
term of the lease with generally some provision for holding:
over. In a case of a mortgage, the tie is made to las:
at least until the mortgage moneys are repaid in ful 1 ,
and in many instances for a much longer period.
41. The subject of what is regarded popularly as the
unreasonable duration of the tie was in 1901 dealt with
by a Select Committee of the Legislative Assembly appoin-
ted “to inquire into and report upon the matter of tied
houses and the relations in regard thereto existing between
brewers and licensees”. It will be observed that the Com-
mittee was concerned only as to the rights and obliga-
tions of the parties to the tie contract. It was not con-
cerned with the public interest. There can be little
doubt that, so far as the present Commission is concerned,
whilst any detriment to a licensee which might possibly
affect the public interest is a matter of importance," a
more vital enquiry is the relation, if any, between the
duration of a tie and public detriment. In the short
report (two pages) of the Select Committee on the
18th September, 1901, references were made to com-
plaints of licensees who had paid off to the brewers ah
moneys owing, but nevertheless were held to the tie. It
described the effect of the control as one of “perpetual
thraldom” and recommended that immediately on pay-
ment of all money and interest due to the brewers the
bonds should be extinguished. Some reference was made
(paragraph 3) to the multiplicity of documents which the
brewers required to support the tie. There is no substan-
tial difference between those documents and those at pre-
sent in force in this and other States of the Common-
wealth. and in other parts of the world. If the parties
enter into an arrangement, the one to give and the
other to take the benefit of the tie, there can be no
real ground for criticism that the party who seeks the
benefit of the tie should require the execution of sue’
assurances as will in effect produce the result intended.
42. But it is necessary to consider whether the public
interest is adversely affected by this circumstance, thaf
at the end of a lease or on repayment of moneys loaned.


the tie is not extinguished. On this it is again to be
observed that no licensee has made any complaint in this
respect. FTor would it be, as above indicated, of any
significance if he did, so long only as the public interest
was not affected. It is desirable to deal at once with
the legal aspect with regard to these ties. Before quoting
a passage which deals with most of the authorities, it
should be pointed out that the ties under consideration
very much resemble those in many other industries, for
instance ice cream, drugs, chemists’ goods generally, milk
and other dairy supplies, flour, hides, skins and tallow,
coal ( See Exhibit 11 and also Government Railways Act,
1912, as amended, section 24 (4)).
53. In Peters’ American Delicacies Lid. v. Patricia’s
Chocolate and Ganddes Pty. Ltd., the court dealt with a
covenant by which the plaintiffs had in effect the benefit
of a tie in relation to ice cream. “The business of the
plaintiffs is that of manufacturing and selling ice cream
and ices and it is the goodwill of that business which they
are entitled to take reasonable measures to protect. It is
not therefore unreasonable that they should require their
customers to take all their supplies of ice cream and ices
from them, even if they do not manufacture some forms
manufactured by their competitors, when they are bound
to supply their customers with the forms of ice cream
and ices they are manufacturing from time to time. The
contract, as pointed out in Birchmeier’s case (40 S.R.
N.S.W. at p. 230) where a number of authorities are
cited, is of the same nature as a covenant by which a
brewer agrees to supply a hotelkeeper with beer, and the
hotelkeeper agrees to buy all his beer from that brewer
exclusively. The validity of such a covenant has never
been questioned, even where as in Catt v. Tourle (4 Ch.
App. 654) it is perpetual. It has never been suggested
that such a tie is unreasonable because it would prevent
the hotelkeeper buying beer of a different quality to that
manufactured by the covenantee. In the case of contracts
in restraint of trade, such as the present contract, made
between parties at arm’s length, the Court is slow to hold
a restriction, which they themselves have agreed upon, to
be unreasonable. It considers that the parties are usually
the best judges of what is reasonable”. (See cases cited)
(per William J., 77 C.L.R. at 599) “Every Court of Justice
had had occasion to consider these brewers’ covenants,
and must be taken to be cognisant of the distinction be-
tween what are called free public houses and brewers’
public houses which are subject to this very covenant.
We should be introducing very great uncertainty and
«onfusion into a very large and important trade if
were now to suggest any doubt as to the validity of a
covenant so extremely common as this. I think there
is no ground for the distinction which has been con-
tended for, viz., that such a covenant might be good in a
lease for 21 5 50 or 100 years, but is not good if entered
into as part of a transaction where the fee simple of a
property is conveyed.” ( Catt v. Tourle, L.R. 4 Ch. App,
599). These references of course deal only with the
validity of such ties as between the parties to the con-
tracts creating them. The present enquiry concerns the
effects of ties of long duration on the public interest.
44. By section 93 of the Conveyancing Act 1919-1943 “a
mortgagor is entitled to redeem the mortgaged property
although the time appointed for redemption has not
arived, but in such case he shall pay to the mortagee, in
addition to any other moneys then owing under the mort-
gage, interest on the principal sum secured thereby for
the unexpired portion of the term of the mortgage”. An
important proviso follows: “Provided that redemption
under this subsection shall not prejudice the right of
the mortgagee to any collateral benefit or to enforce any
burden or restriction to the extent to which he would
be entitled under the mortgage or otherwise if the
mortgage were paid off at the due date”. By subsection 3,
“This section . . . shall have effect notwithstanding
any stipulation to the contrary”. One of the strongest
arguments advanced on behalf at least of one of the two
major breweries in support of what was claimed to be
a benevolent exercise of the tie, was the fact that although
the brewery insisted on the operation of the tie in some
cases for a very long period, it nevertheless accepted a
much earlier repayment in cases of loans or other moneys
secured by mortgage whilst at the same time foregoing
that right which section 93 gave them to the whole of the
interest for the remainder of the term. There can be no
doubt this claim is well founded in the sense that it
does accord with the practice. There equally can be no
doubt that it is a good practice; and the better it can
be said to be, in the interests of the public the greater
the need, in my opinion, for putting it on a sound basis
contractually, and not leaving it to the tender discretion
of some brewery or breweries which in the future could,
if so minded, use it for exerting pressure. For that
reason I suggest some consideration might be given, not-
withstanding the careful terms of section 93 of the Con-
veyancing Act, 1919-1943, to the possibility of investing
some court with power to relieve from further payment of
interest licensee mortgagors who seek to pay off moneys
at a date earlier than provided for in a mortgage, so long
only as the continuance of the tie remains intact.
45. This question of what has been called the reason-
ableness of allowing a mortgagor to be freed of a tie
once he has paid off his indebtedness was the subject of
expression of opinion by the Select Committee of the
Legislative Assembly appointed on the 22nd August, 1901.
I have no doubt that although this is what may be
described as a fashionable argument, it has little merit
and I am not prepared to recommend that the tie should
end with the debt. This is based, not upon any con-
sideration of the claims of either the brewery or the
publican. It is based largely upon the need for sanctity
of contract, unless it can be shown that one of the con-
tracting parties was so placed as not to be able to con-
tract freely. I can see no reason in the public interest,
which of course is paramount, for requiring the lifting
of the tie merely because a loan is paid off.
46. There can be no doubt that whilst the documents
executed, giving rise to and ensuring the carrying out of
obligations under the tie are carefully designed to protect
the brewer, a comparison of the kind of tie demanded
or sought by petrol companies in very recent times tends
to give support to the view that where the supplier is
unable to dictate terms but is rather in the position of
seeking the favour of the retailer, he is prepared to offer
what on the face of them are more attractive terms, al-
though effective as a tie and of short duration. This is
illustrated by the tie in the case of the Neptune Oil Com-
pany - Limited v. Harnett (1952). The deed between the
parties contained provisions by which the distributing-
company agreed to sell and deliver at the seller’s service
station at the company’s usual list price to resellers,
motor spirit, lubricants and other petroleum products
such as the reseller should from time to time require
for the purpose of his business and the reseller agreed
to purchase exclusively from the company or its suc-
cessors in business all such petroleum products and
undertook to purchase at least a specified number of
spirits and lubricants respectively in every month during
the continuance of the agreement. The deed further
contained a covenant by the reseller not to permit the
sale use or consumption on his premises of any motor
spirit, lubricants or other petroleum products other than
those supplied to him directly by the Company, with a
proviso that the reseller should be entitled to sell products
other than the company’s if the latter was unable to
supply. The only other important feature of the deed
was the duration of the term, namely five yc?-,i.s and


thereafter until the expiration of three months written
notice by either party to the deed. The duration of the
deed and the provision for terminating the tie may
fairly be described as indicative of the anxiety of the
distributor to secure the tie from the reseller..
47. In my opinion, the evidence does not warrant any
attempt to abolish the tied house system. Even if it
were so, and I am satisfied that the public interest does
not require it, I have no doubt that its abolition would
be economically impracticable, a view held in other places
for more than 100 years. It has developed to such an
extent in this State, there are so many retail houses
covered by the tie that neither its abolition at some fixed
date or progressively is called for in the public interest.
Moreover it is, in my opinion, impossible to give effect
to that view which suggests that whatever may be the
position of existing ties, there should be provision against
any future ties. One of the striking features of the
system in this State is the fact that the great majority
of existing ties are held by one brewery and that there
are difficulties in the way of other breweries securing ties
except in country areas. In my opinion, whilst the
abolition of the system is quite impracticable and whilst
also it is impossible to suggest that future ties be pro-
hibited, the public interest is best served by ensuring not
that there is that form of competition described by one
brewery witness as “unbridled and nonsensical”, but an
active and healthy competition so as to ensure against
possible evils from a monopoly. One of the valid claims
made in the United Kingdom was that the existence of a
large number of strong breweries produced that com-
petititon which required the breweries at least in their
own interests to cater for the needs of the public; in this
way my observation prompts me to express the view that
real competition will work to the benefit of the public.
In this State that competition should, in my opinion, be
ensured by some provision against amalgamation or ab-
sorption. I should add that in the course of stating
the claims made for and against the tied-house system
from time to time, comment on the claim appears where
the statement of the claim is made.
WINE TRADE.
48. Term 2 as drawn requires some consideration of the
tied-house system so far as it affects wine production and
distribution. The only interests involved in the produc-
tion of wine are, for all practical purposes, members
(either full or associate) of the Australian Wine Pro-
ducers’ Association of New South Wales; the former
comprising the wine makers or producers of not less than
250 tons of grape a year. In Australia the industry, of
course, is an important one which is rightly described
as “the fourth if not the third largest primary industry”
in Australia (p. 1943). The views of the association
members on tied houses in respect of Australian wine
were presented by counsel, and generally he sought to say
that there should be no interference with, or modification
of the system so far as it concerned any ties in relation
to wine. Nevertheless, as will be mentioned later, the
managing director of one of his member companies held
somewhat different views from those presented by counsel.
49. There are 347 Australian wine licences (Exhibit
1 Schedule 1). Of these 204 or 58.8 per cent, of the total
are owned, tied or otherwise controlled by members of the
association. Of these 204, 189 are in the hands of three
companies, Caldwell’s Wines Ltd., McWilliams Wines
Pty. Ltd., Penfold’s Wines Pty. Ltd.; the figures of 189
represent 119 in metropolitan areas and seventy in
country areas.
60. With completely negligible exceptions, it may be
stated that no other firm or company than these three,
is interested in any tied house. The whole of the docu-
ments securing the tie held by each of the three named
companies have been produced and examined and, whilst
the tie is a stringent one in the sense that the covenants
effectively ensure the protection of the goodwill of the
companies concerned in their own products, I am satisfied
upon the evidence that not only between the parties to the
tie but, and this is more important, so far as concerns the
public interest, no suggestion is called for affecting the
nature of the tie. Reference was made above to the fact
that one of the association members held views different
from those advanced by counsel on behalf of the associa-
tion members generally.
Mr. W. H. Davies, managing director of Lindeman’s
Ltd., very large wine makers, was asked whether there were
sufficient avenues of distribution for wine. He said that
was so, subject to some qualification. He stated that the
majority of the avenues of distribution were closed “to
all except three companies who owned or have tied to
them a number of Australian wine licences”. Asked
whether he favoured doing away with the tying of houses,
he said “not exactly. One suggestion of ours is that (a)
if the tied houses were allowed to sell brands other than
those of their owners a greater total volume in business
would be created; or ( b ) if these licences were transferred
back to grocers from whence some of them came, and
freed to sell all proprietary brands, an even greater total
volume of business would result than under (a)”. Later
followed in the witness’s evidence this question and
answer:
Q. “Rightly or wrongly, you take the view that the
tied-house system, in the wine trade at any rate, does
not make for the benefit of the public?”
A. “That is so”.
Mr. Davies, who impressed me as a witness, very fairly
stated that his company was not interested in any tied
house at all. I think there is some force in his view
that if there were no tied houses at all the overall sale of
Australian wines would increase, and that this would be
of benefit not only to the industry but to the public. But
so far as the public is concerned, the evidence does not
support the suggestion that they would be more easily
able to get the wines of their choice, subject only to this;
that if the grocers to whom the witness referred were
given single bottle licences in respect of wine, then mem-
bers of the public who desired a freer choice would be
more readily met. On the other hand, apart from the
facilities offered by hotels, I am satisfied that the needs
of the public can be met by spirit merchants who stock
more than one brand of Australian wine. As appears in
Term 8, and the reasons are set forth, I have reached the
conclusion that whilst, especially with regard to Aus-
tralian wine, the grocer’s single bottle licences might
faeiltate distribution, I was not preparade to recommend
it, essentially because of the difficulties of policing such
a licence. In the result I am satisfied that no modifica-
tion of the tied-house system in the wine trade, limited
as it is to the product of three companies out of some
twenty-four, is called for.


TERMS 3.
THE EFFECT, OPERATION AND APPLICATION OF SECTION 41 OF THE LIQUOR ACT IN RELA-
TION TO BREWERY COMPANIES AND GENERALLY.
1. It is to be noted that the Term of Reference re-
quires consideration of the effect, operation and applica-
tion of the section; this, on the face of it, may suggest
three separate though at times or in places, overlapping
lines of enquiry. The Term then concludes “in relation
to brewery companies and generally”. I have set out these
ingredients of the Term in order to stress the care given
by the Legislative Assembly to the form —and therefore
affecting* the substance —of the inquiry involved. As
drawn, the Term requires an analysis as to what is in-
volved. Before proceeding with that analysis as a pre-
liminary to the inquiry proper, it is at least desirable
from every aspect to refer to the history of the section
which has occasioned difficulties of interpretation and has
given rise to practices not always free from objection and
often productive of much evil.
2. The first appearance of a section with a somewhat
similar object is to be found in Victorian Legislation. See
The Victorian Act, No. 556 of 1876. Reference to the
Victorian Parliamentary Debates, 1870, reveals that in
December of that year section 21 of The Wines, Beer and
Spirits Sales Bill prohibited any person “either by him-
self, servant or agent” from having more than “one
licence (except a temporary or special temporary licence
or grocer’s licence or licence for railways refreshment
rooms), within the city of Melbourne, town of Geelong,
or of any one borough, shire or road district or from hav-
ing any beneficial interest in more than one licensed
house under a penalty of £2 for every day . . . .”.
That the excerpt from the proceedings is not a correct
citation of the section (21) is clear from the decision in
Nugent v. Kabet referred to in reports of later debates.
The record of proceedings is far from satisfactory in other
respects also. But it seems reasonably clear that section
21 above referred to, became section 22 of the Act, Num-
ber 390 of 1870. The record of the Victorian Parliamen-
tary Debates (Vol. 25), 1876, shows that the debate, so
far as is at present relevant, proceeded thus: “On clause
29, providing that no person should at any one time hold
or have any beneficial interest in more than one licence
either by himself, servant or agent; Mr. Whiteman re-
marked that if such a provision were in force in London,
firms like those of Barclay & Perkins, and Coombe
Delafield & Company, could not carry on business at
all. There were persons better qualified to conduct three
or four houses than some were to conduct half a house.
Mr. Gaunson asked whether the Clause had been drawn
to meet the decision in Wright v. Kabet. Mr. Gillies
replied in the affirmative. No further debate on section
29”.
I have reproduced the record of the debate as it ap-
pears in print. Wright v. Kabet, 2 Australian Jurist’s
Report 97 (1871), is a decision on section 22 of the Act
of 1870. At the time of that decision the section pro-
vided that “no person shall hold more than one licence
except a temporary or special licence or grocer’s licence
within the precincts of . . . either by himself, servant or
agent or have any beneficial interest in such licence under
a penalty of £5 per day”. A prosecution for a breach of
the section failed since it was held that the section was
meaningless—this turning upon the use of the word
“such”. This may well explain the attempt to re-cast
the section as appears in the deba+es forth (though
sub-nomine clause 29).
3. These references to the debate do not, nor can they,
serve any useful purpose on the question of interpretation.
Nor are they entirely satisfactory on what may be called
the historical aspects. But they serve to show that the
discussion “on clause 29” raised the suggestion that under
the designation “person”, companies (or technically, cor-
porations) might, as it was then observed, be brought
within the prohibition aimed at. The conclusion seems
reasonably clear that section 41 of our Act owes its origin
to section 22 of the Victorian Act, 1876, which was re-
enacted in the Victorian Act, No. 875 of 1885 (section
35), repeated in the Act No. 2683 of 1915, and appears
at present in the Victorian Licensing Act, No. 3717 of
1928, section 26(9).
4. Subsection 9 reads: “subject to the provisions of
this Act;
9; save as provided in section 293:
(a) no holder of any Victualler’s Licence (includ-
ing a body, corporation or firm, which holds or,
on behalf of which, any person holds a victual-
ler’s licence) shall —whether directly or indirectly
—hold or have a beneficial interest in a grocer’s
licence; and
(b) no holder as aforesaid of either of such licences
shall (whether directly or indirectly) hold or
have an interest in more than one of such
licences, provided that the holder of a victualler’s
licence may hold a temporary victualler’s licence.”
5. In Queensland 3 Geo. V. No. 29, section 22(4), pro-
vided that “no person shall hold more than one licence at
one and the same time”. No comparable provision obtains
in Tasmania, Western Australia or New Zealand, nor is
there any such prohibition, whatever its true extent, in
England. In South Australia, corporations are permitted
to “hold a licence in respect of one hotel only, a manager
being appointed”. (See section 85 of the Licensing Act,
1932-1936 (No. 2102).) It will be noted that this refers to
“corporations” not “persons”, but a reference to section
85 makes it plain that the limitation of a corporation to
one licence is for all practical purposes illusory. The
section provides that a company “being incorporated
under the laws of the State with the sole object of carrying-
on the business of a licensed victualler may hold a publi-
can’s licence in respect of one hotel only . . .”. It would
be a strange company indeed that so limited its “objects”
as to be incorporated with the sole object of carrying on
the business of a licensed victualler; the consequence is
that in every real sense, there is no prohibition in South
Australia against an incorporated company holding a
licence in respect of any number of hotels.
6. The present section in New South Wales appeared
first —substantially as now —in the Licensing Act, 1882
(45 Vic. No. 14). In the light of these circumstances
relative both to the origin of section 41 and to the position
in law in other States or other places, it is useful at once
to advert to the development of the granting of licences
in New South Wales; and whilst, as already pointed out
in another connection, parliamentary debates cannot
govern the construction of a particular section, for other
purposes with which this Commission is concerned, it is
of value to refer to some of them so far as they relate
to section 41.


7. Prior to the Licensing Act of 1882, the granting of
licences was governed by Sale of Liquors Licensing Act
of 1862 (25 Yic. No. 14) ; thereunder, all that was re-
quired prior to the grant was the giving of fourteen days’
notice to the (local) clerk of petty sessions. Objections
could be made, though no specific grounds w T ere provided.
The Act of 1882 which by section 46 first introduced the
limitations contained in (the now) section 41, made strik-
ing alterations in the law tending towards at least some
requirements as to the fitness of an applicant for a
licence, obliging him to advertise, giving power to con-
sider the “reasonable requirements of the neighbourhood”;
policing of licensed premises and what may be described
as a scheme for local option. The details of these marked
advances introducing what might have been regarded at
that time as stringent provisions before a licence could
be granted, relative to the fitness of the applicant for
a licence, are for the present purposes not important.
That which may well be of importance is the setting in
which section 46 (now section 41) found its way into the
Act of 1882. This is, perhaps, best appreciated by
reference to the parliamentary debates of the time.
8. Hansard, Yol. 6 of 1881, at pages 1591-3, reports
the debate on section 46 (now section 41) in these terms:
Sir Henry ParJces: The intention of the clause is
that no one person shall have a beneficial interest in
more than one licensed hotel. I believe that a large
amount of vice in its most hideous form arises from
persons of large capital fostering the creation of drink-
ing houses. We want to put a stop, as far as we can,
to the practice of forcing these houses into existence
for the employment of capital ... we want to reduce
the trade to what it ought to be; we want no houses
other than those legitimately called into existence to
meet the requirements of the community. We do not
want men with capital to engage in the manufacture
of liquor which they call “Jamaica Hum” and “French
Brandy”, and to open houses for the sale of these com-
pounds, the consumption of which is so destructive to
the human constitution.
Mr. Parnell said he looked on this as the most important
clause in the bill. There were 800 public houses in
Sydney and suburbs, but only 250 of these could be said
to be legitimate. The clause would tend to put down
a number of unnecessary public houses; in fact, he thought
it would have such an effect in this direction as to render
the local option system almost unnecessary.
9. Eeference was made also to “the evils resulting
from the breweries reducing the quality of liquor, in-
stead of increasing the wholesale price, in order to meet
increased excise duty; the publicans were forecd to sell
bad ‘grog’ and this was ruining the life and destroying
the intellect of the people”.
Mr. E. Barton saw no reason for the clause unless it
was intended to apply to persons improperly holding more
than one licence. There could be no objection to a brewer
having a beneficial interest in more than one house, if
each was properly conducted. It was a practice in every
trade for one person to have an interest in several busi-
nesses and it ought not to be objected to in the case of
the business of a publican.
Mr. Burdekin thought that the clause might well
be withdrawn, as it could not matter to the public whether
the licensee was working on his own capital or on the
capital of a wine and spirit merchant or brewer. The
bill would work quite as well without the clause as with it.
Mr. Jacob said the Bill provided every protection against
misconduct in the case of public houses and as persons
had to be individual licensees he did not see why a brewer
should not own a dozen public houses as long as they
were well conducted and the same might be said with
regard to spirit merchants. But this Clause would make
it liable to a heavy penalty of £5 a day for the time dur-
ing which they held an interest in more than one house.
It would be better to omit the Clause.”
10. With the aid of these short references to the his-
torical aspect, I proceed now to deal directly with the
“effect, operation and application of section 41”.
“EFFECT, OPERATION AND APPLICATION”.
11. A great deal of discussion has taken place during
the sittings of the Commission touching the nature and
scope of the enquiry required hy the words in Term 3,
“effect, operation and application”. It is unnecessary to
set forth in detail the varying suggestions made as to
what is involved in each of the three expressions. The
one confident conclusion at which I have arrived is that
the use of the particular words in question indicates the
intention of the Assembly— expressed by its resolution—
that the enquiry should be as wide as possible, firstly in
relation to brewery companies and, secondly, generally.
Upon further consideration I do not propose to treat
these words as in any sense technical, nor to examine
them in what may be called separate compartments. In-
deed, that course is not practicable seeing that each of
them as used connotes in part some element included
in the other. I propose to examine what may fairly be
described as the working of the section, to make refer-
to decisions on it, limitations placed upon it, to
consider, shortly, how it has developed in practice, and
ultimately, to make recommendations as to the future of
the section.
12. Section 41 makes it an offence for any person at one
time to hold a beneficial interest in more than one licence
for the sale of liquor; but this does not apply to holders
of booth or stand licences or to separate merchant’s
licences. I have underlined the words “person” and
“beneficial interest” because they have for years occa-
sioned great public concern. “Person” has always been
treated by the licensing authorities as being confined to
individuals in contradistinction to companies or cor-
porations. In passing, it may be said that this view has
obtained for many years, with incidents and consequences
which are far reaching and of most serious economic and
social import. The contention that the word “person”
should be regarded as including companies derives direct
support from section 21 of the Interpretation Act, 1897,
which provides that “person” includes “a body corporate”;
of course, that is prefaced with the familiar provision,
“Unless the contrary intention appears”. The enquiry at
once arises whether such “contrary intention” is to he
found in the Liquor Act. The Liquor Act, of course,
does not for any purpose define “person”. It is then
urged that the inclusion of “a body corporate” within the
designation of “person” prinia facie flowing from the
Interpretation Act ceases, in fact, by reason of numerous
indications of “a contrary intention” in the Liquor Act.
No useful purpose is served by doing more than sum-
marising what —it is said —are illustrations of a clear
“contrary intention”. The stringent requirements of
the Act as to the qualifications and as to the obligations
of licensees can be applied directly only to individuals
and not to companies (in the strictly legal sense). A
proposed licensee must produce testimonials; the court
may require evidence as to character and suitability. The
District Licensing Inspector is required to investigate and
report on testimonials and generally as to the applicant’s
character and suitability. (Section 9, subsection 12); an
applicant licensee must be not less than 21 years of age.
(Section 24, subsection 1) ; if granted a licence he must, in
effect, reside on the premises. The illustrations lead —it
is contended—to the view that “person” in section 41 does
not include “companies”. It should be observed that if


the section prohibited a “person” from “holding” more
than one licence, these contentions would afford cogent
argument; they lose some force since the section pro-
hibits a “person” from having “a beneficial interest” in
more than one licence. Moreover, it is arguable that a
“company” could be interested in one licence through
its agent or manager and still be within the designation
of “person”; and the requirements of the Act as to
suitability and the like might well apply to a company’s
manager or agent, through whom it must act. However,
it is not without some importance that the Licensing
Court has always held that section 41 applied only to in-
dividual (but, of course, so as to prohibit any individual
holding or being interested in a licence by a partner, agent
or manager). That this has been the view of the Licens-
ing Court appears from the evidence of Mr. J. M. Kelly,
at the time Secretary to the Licences Reduction Board
and the Licensing Magistrates for the State. Mr. Kelly
further states that from his searches and enquiries no
prosecution for breaches of section 41 have been launched
against any other individuals. The Licensing Police have
carried out their duties in this respect in accordance with
this view of the section entertained by the court; and
Inspector Young, in evidence, stated that he was unaware
of any prosecution except as mentioned by Mr. Kelly.
13. The most recent decision of the Licensing Court
to which I have been referred during the sittings, was
given on the 19th June, 1951, when the Chairman an-
nounced on behalf of the Court, “this Court has accepted
the view under section 41 of the Liquor Act that a “person”
is distinct from a “company” and will continue to act
on that view until some superior court indicates it is
erroneous.” In the course of a long and detailed dis-
cussion by learned counsel, representing various in-
terests, I have been referred to no decsision of a superior
court on the exact question. I am not at all sure that I
am obliged to offer a considered opinion on it myself. I
content myself with saying that I think there is, indeed,
much to be said for that view so long held and acted upon
by succeeding Licensing Magistrates on a section which
is not happily phrased in any event. In is manifest that
if “companies” are not within the prohibition then, so
far as Term 3 requires investigation of section 41 in rela-
tion to brewery companies, there is no occasion to consider
qua such companies what is involved in that part of
the section which speaks of “a beneficial interest”. But
Term 3 is not limited to brewery companies. The Term
concludes “in relation to brewery companies and gener-
ally”. This involves an enquiry as to the effect, opera-
tion and application of the section in relation to any
company or corporation that is to all, but individuals
holding a beneficial interest in more than one licence.
As with person, so with “beneficial interest”, the Liquor
Act contains no definition. I have not been referred to
any decision which attempts to define it except (as one
would expect) so far as it can be spelled out of expres-
sions in particular cases where the court has pronounced
upon particular interests on contractual or other rela-
tionships between parties in respect of some licence or
licensed premises. The lawyer readily understands that
the courts do not pronounce upon the meanings of words
or phrases in any academic sense. Decisions upon such
matters are dealt with in specific cases and (except only
as to obiter dicta, often mischievous) are confined by,
and to, the issues raised by the case. But as that which
is expressed in a report such as this is presumably read
by laymen as 'well as lawyers, it is perhaps permissible to
stress the function of a court in approaching the con-
struction of particular words or phrases appearing in a
statute. It fairly describes the cases to which I have
been referred to say that the courts have pronounced upon
“interests”, “arrangements”, or “relationships” between
parties, some of which are, some not, within the descrip-
tion “a beneficial interest” held in more than one licence.
See Blatter v. Railway Commissioners, 45 C.L.E., 68,
where it was held that the advantage obtained from the
particular provisions of a lease did not amount to “a
beneficial interest” in the licence within the meaning of
section 41; see also Tropea v. Aquina, 24 A.L.J., 1942
Metropolitan Theatres v. Harris, 35 S.R., 228; ex parte
Benny 36 S.R. 495; Hotel Sydney v. M.C. of Sydney, 37
S.R., 442. It would be at least undesirable for me to
attempt to express in general terms what is or is not in
principle connoted by the expression “a beneficial in-
terest in more than one licence”. So long and so often
as it is material to decide whether a set of circumstances
amounts to such a holding it will be —it is trite enough to
say—for the Court to which the issue is referred, to pro-
nounce upon the question. Any expression of opinion
ultra would be dicta and like so many dicta as above
stated, possibly mischievous. But it is important that
I should make it clear that the real problems raised by the
Term 3 of the Commission neither require nor really
invite me to express such an opinion.
14. A question of much greater importance and in-
volving most serious considerations affecting the public
interest, however, does call for decision. It should at once
be said that some of the matters of serious importance
arising under this Term affect directly matters dealt
with and to be dealt with under other Terms so far as
they relate to the public interest.
15. Shortly, there are certain features connected with
the public-house system directly due to the presence in
the Liquor Act of section 41; whether they are said to
flow from the “effect” or the “operation” or “the applica-
tion” of the section seems to matter little. It may be that
the best view is that some of these features at least flow
from all three. That in part rather leads me to state
it in the form that they are due to the mere presence of the
section in the Act. At once let it be said that some of
these features are notoriously bad. The long established
view of the Licensing Court and other Licensing Autho-
rities that “persons” are limited to individuals (by them-
selves, servants or agents), and does not extend to com-
panies, has led to the practice, legitimate enough in prin-
ciple, by which a person can in effect have “a beneficial
interest” in any number of publican’s licenses. The
practice assumes the character of a device —the formation
of the corporation—(either a limited company or more
popularly, a proprietary company) in which one or more
persons have controlling interests. Under the system,
family companies have been formed and, in general, with
results that so far from being objectionable, have inured
to the benefit of the public by reason of the satisfactory
manner in which the family has imposed its high stan-
dards on the manager appointed or the lessee or tenant
selected by the family company. On the other hand,
numbers of individuals have floated proprietary companies
so that they may be enabled to have an interest in more
than one licence—with consequences demonstrably detri-
mental to the public interest. In such circumstances, the
device is permitted by law, on that construction of the
section acted on by the Licensing Court for so many
years. The individuals controlling the companies are in
some instances persons who, I think, never could or never
should obtain a licence and as to whom it should be
impossible that they should be allowed directly or in-
directly to be associated with the trade.
16. That interpretation of the section which leads to the
exclusion of companies from the prohibition contained in
it has —obviously enough—enabled breweries and other
companies to own and maintain “a beneficial interest”
in more than one, indeed, in very many publican’s licences.
In the result millions of pounds have been invested in
hotel licences by limited companies; and the economic
aspect of this state of affairs assumes importance. It is
true that many of the relationships created between, for


instance, brewery and other companies and lessees, do not
fall within the expression, “a beneficial interest”, on the
part of the lessor.
17. The inter-relation between this portion of Term 3
of the reference and Term 1 manifests itself immediately
by the mere statement of what is embraeed by Term 1
(“The ownership, financial interests in and controlling of
hotels generally and, in particular, by brewery and other
companies . . . .”)• Indeed, it is clear that Term 1
assumes that fact—ownership, and financial interests
in ... . hotels —as an activity recognised in, if not
by law, which under Term 3 calls for examination in order
to decide whether or not following the decisions of the
Courts, it is lawful or unlawful, and if the former,
whether in the public interest primarily it should so
continue.
18. Earlier, reference has been made to the fact appear-
ing from the evidence that the interpretation of section
41 (by the Licensing Court for many years, as being-
limited to individuals and as excluding companies from
the prohibition contained in the section) has led to exist-
ing companies obtaining a beneficial interest in more than
one publican’s licence and, as well, to the formation of
companies, in some cases proprietary, for the specific
purpose of being able to have such an interest in more
than one licence. Reference was made, also, to this
practice involving serious economic and social con-
sequences. I propose to deal separately with these con-
sequences.
19. The evidence before the Commission establishes
that brewery and other companies are interested in various
ways in hotels. In the result, sums of money running
into millions have thus been invested. The figures which
are quoted below reveal financial interests in hotels; but
it is not always possible for me to segregate those cases
in which the interest does, from those in which it does
not, constitute “a beneficial interest” in a publicans
licence within the meaning of the section moreover, it is
not always possible to reconcile figures appearing in the
Transcript with those found in Schedules tendered sepa-
rately. In addition, it is difficult —if not impossible—to
state the figures with confidence because —in some in-
stances —of the adoption of different names for companies
which in reality represent the activities of substantially
the same shareholders. In appreciating these figures
attention is drawn to the necessity of distinguishing
between those instances in which a company’s interest
is merely as owner of the freehold or a lease of a build-
ing to which the licence is attached, or as merely in-
terested as a mortgagee who has financed the licensee on
the one hand, and those instances (on the other hand) in
which the company is, in substance, engaged in the
business of hotelkeeper through—as it must —a manager
or agent; it is with the last-named type of interest —
“a beneficial interest” —that the present observations are
concerned. In relation to Term 1, all the interests im-
mediately above set forth are relevant and are dealt with
accordingly,
20. With respect to brewery companies, the broad dis-
tinction can be made in this way: wherever the company
installs a manager it may be said to have “a beneficial
interest” in the licence held by him on its behalf. In
other cases, it may fairly be claimed that, whilst the
brewery company clearly has a financial interest (within
Term 1) it generally has not “a beneficial interest” within
the meaning of section 41.
21. The two major breweries have managers installed in,
as to Tooth’s, 35 hotels (Schedule 22), as to Toohey’s, 13
(Schedule 48). Attention is again drawn to slight varia-
tions in the figures stated, due to the situation at different
nates. British Breweries Limited, through separate com-
panies, have installed four managers. The summary to
Schedules 68-69 shows that more than 230 companies
(other than brewery companies) have an interest in hotels;
some of these 230 odd have an interest in more than one
hotel. As to these figures for other than brewery com-
panies, it is quite impracticable—and indeed, unnecessary,
if it were practicable—to arrive at a satisfactory figure
to demonstrate how many of the 230 companies (set forth
in Schedules 68-69) have “a beneficial interest” in an
hotel licence, and the task of stating in figures how many
companies have such an interest in more than one hotel
is quite impossible. Illustrations suffice for the only
relevant purpose; there are family groups such as the
Whelan (with 26 managed hotels), Plasto and McGirr
groups, which have “a beneficial interest” in more than
one hotel, and what may be called the Gleeson and Murray
group have such an interest in a fairly large number of
hotels in the Irrigation Area, carrying on business under
different company names. One estimate of the number
of hotels managed for groups of individuals, where the
group or individual is so interested in more than one
hotel, places the figure at 5 per cent.; but this is not
exhaustive.
22. These figures assume importance only because they
demonstrate the very large amount of capital invested in
hotels by companies having a beneficial interest within
section 41 in more than one hotel. It is a legitimate
activity in principle based upon the Licensing Court’s view
of the section. It may here be stated that many of the in-
stances include reputable companies, carrying on busi-
ness satisfactorily, having regard to the public interest;
in particular, some of the family companies are a credit
to the trade. But in too many cases, companies formed
for the purpose of escaping the prohibition in the section
are infamous in all respects.
23. The serious economic problem arises from the obli-
gation to consider the future of the section, to which a
great deal of evidence and much argument were directed.
Three courses have been fully discussed before me: —
(1) Repeal the section, as serving no useful purpose;
(2) amend the section so as to include companies;
(3) amend the section in order to make it clear that
companies are not covered by the section.
Obviously the economic problem arises only if the second
course is adopted. This is more appropriately dealt with
in the conclusions and recommendations set forth later.
24. The serious social problem—for thus I think it may
well be described —is one which in the public interest has
at all times during the consideration of this Term of the
Commission occasioned no little concern. Since the
section has for many years been treated as excluding
companies from its operations, the practice developed of
forming a company or companies to avoid that prohibition
which precluded individuals from having “a beneficial
interest” in more than one publican’s licence. As already
pointed out, this was a lawful device and —in many cases
—adopted with no untoward results. But as so often
happens in doing that which is within the law, the prac-
tice was taken advantage of by disreputable persons who
never would have obtained a single licence, but who by
the flotation of one or more companies were able to con-
ceal their association with the trade and to carry on
business of hotelkeeper in a manner which merits com-
plete condemnation. In order to conceal their interests
in several licences, some of the persons who were direc-
tors —and often the controlling shareholders —deliber-
ately misled the Licensing Court, committed perjury or
otherwise lied on oath before the Licensing Court and,
in some instances, pursued the course of false swearing
before this Commission. It is, perhaps, easy enough
to suggest that these disclosures obtained with the aid
of the wide powers of a Royal Commission, might hav«


been obtained from time to time by closer scrutiny of
applications for a licence or a renewal made to the
licensing authorities. This, I think, at least so far as
relates to the licensing magistrates, amount to being
wise after the event. It is proper to add that they arose
not only in the case of companies floated for the purpose
outlined above, but as well in the case of individuals
who flouted the law in clear breach of the section by in-
stalling “dummies” as licensees and —to carry out their
unlawful designs—swore falsely before the Licensing
Court and, until discovery, persisted in the false swear-
ing before this Commission. Illustrations of the nefari-
ous device of defeating the section by installing “dum-
mies” follow immediately. The two illustrations follow-
ing represent the worst instances of “dummying”. There
were others, not so flagrant, but nevertheless deliberate.
Moreover, there is little doubt that other cases have
remained undiscovered.
25. S. E. Wallington in clear breach of section 41,
has “a beneficial interest” in a number of hotels; there
is no doubt, on his own admissions, that he is the bene-
ficial owner of the business conducted in the Wallington
Hotel and the White Horse. Equally, I am satisfied —-
notwithstanding his denial —that he has the same interest
in the Hotel Epping and in McQuillan’s Hotel. It is
unnecessary to stress the fact that these multiple in-
terests were concealed from the Licensing Court. This
witness admitted that the books of, at any rate, two of
his hotels were faked “to deceive the Taxation Depart-
ment”, which in the result was defrauded in one case
alone at the rate of £l3O per week. (I am satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that he swore falsely before this Com-
mission).
26. A. G. Saffron ultimately admitted his beneficial
interest in a number of hotels using different persons as
“dummies”. These hotels included West End Hotel,
Westdale Hotel, Cumberland, Gladstone, Albert Hotel.
These interests were successfully concealed from the
Licensing Court; and before this Commission —with a
clear appreciation of his obligation to abide by his oath
and of his liability if he failed —he engaged in systematic
false swearing.
27. These are but illustrations of the way in which
breaches of the section were committed. In these, and
similar cases, other persons were necessarily involved in
deceiving the Licensing Court on the application for
the licence. They are referred to in another connection.
28. An attempt has been made to trace the origin of
section 41 and to examine its effect, operation and appli-
cation. In the light of the many matters disclosed in
the discussion by counsel of the working of the section,
it has been submitted that the Commission is empowered
and obliged to make recommendations as to the future,
with this I agree.
29. In my opinion it has been clearly demonstrated
that in principle there can be no objection to an indivi-
dual or a company being beneficially interested in more
than one hotel. The Parliamentary Dehates on the
original introduction of the (proposed) section contain
expressions of views which experience has shown to be
well founded. “There were persons better qualified to
conduct three or four houses than some were to conduct
half a house” (Whiteman) : “There could be no objections
to a brewer having a beneficial interest in more than one
public house if each was properly conducted” (Barton) ;
“The bill provided every protection against misconduct
in the case of public houses and as persons had to be in-
dividual licensees he did not see why a brewer should
not own a dozen public houses as long as they were well
conducted” (Jacob).
30. The frequent references to breweries having “a
beneficial interest” in a number of hotels is explained by
the clear object of the clause to prevent the manufacturer
of liquor from forcing retail houses on the public, in order
to provide an outlet for the sale of the product.
31. Whilst I am of opinion that there is no reason in
principle for limiting either an individual or a company
to the running of only one hotel, it is equally clear that
some safeguards are desirable beyond that of care in ap-
proving of the applicant—either in his own right or as
manager or agent for a principal (including companies).
Amongst the safeguards it seems to me that anything
like a monopoly might be attended with evil. Competi-
tion would seem to be a corrective, lending support to
competent policing of hotels. The prospect of a monopoly,
or indeed, of a few large controlling interests, with little
to fear by way of competition, is found to arise from
amalgamations and absorptions. In recent years large
sums have been spent—in the main by breweries —in buy-
ing up or amalgamating with other breweries in the
United Kingdom; in this way not only is the manufac-
turing trade affected but large numbers of hotels are
brought under the control of one company. I have no
evidence that these- —in the United Kingdom—have
affected the public interest adversely. Indeed, the large
number of successful breweries in the United Kingdom
considerably reduces the risk of such a consequence. But
in New South Wales there is, in my opinion, much less
competition amongst established breweries; and newer or
smaller concerns have little prospect of forcing their way
into the retail trade, so as to provide that competition
which —in my view—is a healthy factor in the trade.
32. Much reliance was, in the past, placed upon the
value of section 41 in improving the manufactured pro-
duct, whether beer or rum or other liquor. In present
times, I find it impossible to see any connection between
the clear need to guard against bad liquor and the pre-
sence of section 41 in the Act. There is, to be sure, this
difference in the times; when the suggestion was made
that such a section was necessary to provide against liquor
of bad quality, there was no advanced legislation such as
now is found in this State, directed to ensuring purity and
quality and, as well, controlling the price of—at any rate
• —some of the liquor sold. I agree with the claim ad-
vanced before me that whatever justification may have
existed for the fears experienced when the section first
was introduced, it no longer exists.
33. The experience of some other countries throws light
on the pqroblem. In that which follows, I do not include
any reference to that body of opinion which advocates
the nationalisation of the liquor industry, either whole-
sale or retail. There are forms of it in some countries;
the matters referred to by me are quoted on the assump-
tion that, at least for economic reasons, the trade would
continue in private, as distinct from national ownership.
34. In the United Kingdom, I am satisfied from close
enquiry, there is no suggested magic in a prohibition
against what may shortly be called multiple beneficial
interests in hotels or publicans’ licences. The subject
has in a sense been considered by two Royal Commissions
in this way. The managed hotel is invariably one of a
number in which some person or company (in New South
Wales it can only be the latter) has a beneficial interest
in more than one hotel. In the course of dealing with
the subject of managed hotels the Royal Commission on
Licensing, England and Wales, adverted to the nature of
the contract for management. The manager generally
receives by way of remuneration a salary only or a salary
and the whole or an agreed share of the profits on the sale
of non-intoxicants, but not in any case commission or a
share of the profits on the sale of intoxicants. This is
popularly known as “disinterested management”. “The
fact that a manager’s remuneration is not based upon
his sales of intoxicants is not of vital significance if,
because of his owner’s interest, he has to maintain sales


of intoxicants in order to keep his job. The attitude of
the owner is then the really vital matter; and the value
of ‘disinterestedness’ must, we think, in the end depend
on the extent to which the owner’s policy is reflected in
the practical conduct of the business”. {See Report paras.
363-364.) The New Zealand Royal Commission in its re-
port dealt with managed houses in Chapter 23. It sum-
marised the evidence for and against managed hotels.
The arguments in favour of them were these: —
(1) That an hotel company can supervise the adminis-
tration of the hotel and can exercise proper house
discipline.
(2) That the hotel company, having adequate financial
resources, can and will make improvements to the
premises more readily and effectively than a private
licensee (R. 2850). Indeed, the hotel company
might find it difficult to obtain a lessee with suffi-
cient financial resources to carry on personally a
modern hotel.
(3) That an hotel company, having adequate financial
resources, is the only type of company which can
undertake the building of an expensive modern
hotel, and that, having built it, it is in the interests
of the company to take the best care of its invest-
ments by giving the best service to the public by
direct management.
The arguments against managed hotels are these: —
(1) That management is mainly an instrument for
securing a profitable outlet for the company’s
beer or liquors.
(2) That inducements are given to managers to en-
sure that they do their best to secure large sales of
liquor.
(3) That the company can put pressure on its ser-
vant, the manager, to keep up the volume of its
sales, and that this is most likely where an exces-
sive amount has been paid for the goodwill of
licensed premises.
(4) That managers, who are often promoted barmen
(R. 3997 and 4166), often give less personal service
than a tenant for years with his own money in-
vested in the business (R. 3050).
35. The report continues that in considering the stated
advantages and disadvantages a very important question
is whether the system of management subjects the mana-
ger to pressure or to a sense that he is under pressure
to sell alcoholic liquor.
36. These considerations have a direct bearing on any
view as to the future of section 41 because, as indicated
above, of the necessity of employing managers by com-
panies retaining a beneficial interest in more than one
hotel. (It is obvious, of course, that as to a limited
company it can hold a licence only through a manager.)
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.
37. It is advisable to stress that the Term of Reference
concludes with the words “in relation to brewery com-
panies and generally”. It has been pointed out that the
prohibition contained in the section has for very many
years been limited, by the Court’s interpretation, to per-
sons ; with the important consequence that brewery com-
panies have acquired a beneficial interest and have
appointed managers in some fifty hotels, whilst other com-
panies, including family groups, have acquired a like
interest through their appointed managers in some eighty-
five hotels. In my opinion, a consideration of the origin of
the section shows that it was directed essentially towards
ensuring liquor of quality (see Parliamentary Debates).
The precautions regarded as necessary in 1881 are more
than achieved at the present time by such statutory pro-
visions as the Pure Food Act, Prices Regulation Act,
Weights and Measures Act, licences reduction provisions
under the 1919 Liquor Act, and section 40a of the present
Liquor Act. In these circumstances, argument has been
addressed to the Commission on the proper course to be
taken. It is unnecessary further to discuss the three
courses. I am satisfied that in the interests of the public
the section may be omitted from the Liquor Act; the
long-standing limitation of the section means that it
serves no useful purpose and, so far as persons are con-
cerned, its prohibition is avoided by devices in the for-
mation of companies not always of repute. But if it is
to be omitted there should be substituted, in my opinion,
a statutory provision that no person shall hold more than
one publican’s licence. This will achieve a result which
is necessary because of the personal obligations which
the Act at present imposes upon a licensee. They are
such that no licensee can effectually or should be allowed
to attempt to conduct personally more than one hotel.
As a consequence any person or company who was minded
to conduct more than one hotel would of necessity be
compelled to employ a manager. Subject to the fitness
of the owner (either the individual or the company), to
the fitness of the manager and to an approved managerial
contract or arrangement, there is, in my view, no detri-
ment to be apprehended from the point of view of the
public.
38. In the public interest I recommend that if the sec-
tion is removed from the Act, detailed statutory provision
should be made for the fullest disclosure as to the consti-
tution of the owner company, the persons in control of
it and any alterations in its constitution or control. In
the case of individual owners, provision should be made
for the Court’s being satisfied as to the fitness of the
owner in the first place to appoint a manager. There-
after consideration should, in my opinion, be given to the
prescribing of some form of managerial contract to
ensure, not only as the Licensing Court now requires,
that the manager has “full and unfettered control” but
that he is fit and qualified to manage the particular hotel
and, inter alia , that his remuneration should in no way
be dependant upon the sale in liquor and that he should
be freed, as far as the Licensing Court can ensure, from
pressure to sell alcoholic liquor. It is impossible to
recommend in detail the modes of ensuring what, in my
opinion, are necessary safeguards if the system which in
fact obtains at present is to be continued. The need for
safeguards is stressed, not only with regard to the future,
but especially in the light of evidence referred to earlier
in the discussion of the incidence of the section. A
general safeguard would be to require the application
for a licence by a proposed manager to be verified by
both the manager and the owner; the subject of appli-
cations being verified by affidavit at the time of lodging
or filing is dealt with elsewhere.


RESULTS OF VOTING.
Year
vote
taken.
Number of
electorates
which carried
“ Reduction.”
Number
of
hotels
closed.
Number of
electorates
which carried
“ Continuance.”
Number of
electorates
which carried
“No License.”
1907
65
203
25
Nil
1910
14
28
76
Nil
1913
15
23
75
Nil
Total closed-
-344 hotels.
TERM 4.
THE DESIRABILITY OF REINTRODUCING INTO THE LIQUOR ACT THE LOCAL OPTION PROVISIONS
WHICH WERE REPEALED IN 1946.
1. In order to appreciate what is involved in this Term
it is desirable to state shortly the nature of the local
option provisions which were repealed, but not to state
the machinery for voting. These provisions appear in
short form in Schedule 109, which is reproduced hereunder
in full. The qrovisions referred to appear in the paragraph
of the Schedule noted as the year 1905. As appears later
in Exhibit 109, these local option provisions were suspended
by the Act No. 42 of 1919. (It will be seen that the
document set forth below includes a reference to a
referendum on closing hours; in passing it may be pointed
out that referendum provision continued until the passing
of the Act No. 51 of 1923, by section 6a (i) of which the
closing hour was fixed at 6 p.m.; thereafter by the Act
of 1946 provision for a referendum on closing hours
(6 p.m., 9 p.m. or 10 p.m. with special provisions in the
event of 9 p.m. or 10 p.m. being carried) was reintroduced.
{See Part II of Act No. 34 of 1946.)
2. The statement Exhibit 109 contains also a useful
short history of the development of local option legislation
since the Licensing Acts 1882-83, and as well of the results
of voting on licences reduction in the years 1907, 1910
and 1913.
LOCAL OPTION (See Schedule 109).
3. 1882-1883 —The Licensing Acts, 1882-83, provided
that at the annual election of aldermen in 1882, and
subsequently at intervals of three years, a vote of rate-
payers was to be taken in the City of Sydney and all
municipalities. Where a municipality was divided into
wards the vote was to be taken in each ward. If not so
divided the vote was to be for the whole municipality.
4. Under the 1882 Act the question submitted to rate-
payers was —“ Shall any new publicans’ licences or
removals of publicans’ licences be granted within the
ward (or municipality) during the next three years ? ”
5. Under the 1882-83 Act the question was submitted
in two parts: —
(1) Shall any new publicans’ licences be granted in
respect of premises situated within the Ward/
Municipality for the period of three years from
this date %
(2) Shall any removals of publicans’ licences be granted
in respect of premises situated within the Ward/
Municipality for the period of three years from
this date ?
6. If eleven-twentieths (55 per cent.) of the electors
voted “ NO ” in answer to either question, no new licences
(or removals) could be granted in the municipality during
the following three years; otherwise the voting would
have no effect on the grant of licences or removals.
7. 1898 —The above provisions were re-enacted in the
Liquor Act, 1898 —sections 28 and 29.
8. 1905 —The Liquor (Amendment) Act No. 40 of 1905
fixed the number of publicans and wine licences and clubs
at the existing number and provided for local option vote
at general election in all electorates. {See sections 64—68.)
9. Resolutions, etc., and Votes Required .—Resolution
“ A ” —Continuance-Bare majority of votes. Resolution
“ B ” —Reduction—Bare majority of votes. Resolution
“ C ” —No licence— Three-fifths of votes— 3o per cent, of
electors on roll must have voted for resolution.
10. If Resolution “ C ” (No licence) is not carried the
votes in favour of “ C ” shall be added to the votes in
favour of “ B ” (Reduction).
11. Where “C ” (No licence) has been previously
carried and is in force, the resolution submitted shall be
—“ D ” —Licences to be restored—Three-fifths of votes —-
30 per cent, of electors on roll must have voted for
resolution.
12. While local option was in force no electorate carried
“ No Licence.”
13. The number of hotels in existence at the commence-
ment of the Act was, it is believed, 3,023.
14. Where “ Reduction ” was carried, licences were to
be reduced by not more than one-fourth and not less than
the number prescribed by section 72, on a sliding scale
according to the number of hotels in existence.
15. Fifty-eight wine licences were also taken away as
a result of the three polls. There was no reduction of
certificates of registration of club.
16. The Act provided for reduction to be determined by
special courts following each poll. Hotels closed in
scheduled order, partly according to the number of
convictions and partly according to the currency of the
leases.
17. No compensation was provided.
18. 1912 — The local option provisions were re-enacted
in the consolidated Liquor Act No. 42 of 1912 ( Part IV).
19. 1913 —The Liquor (Local Option) (Amendment)
Act No. 5 of 1913 substituted a new section 80 in Part IV
of the 1912 Act (Local Option) which fixed the maximum
number of publicans’ licences, wine licences, and clubs
in electorates as the number then in existence, less the
number, if any, a special court had determined should
cease to be in force.
20. 1916 —The Liquor (Amendment) Act No. 88 of 1916
provided for the suspension of the local option vote at the
next general election (1916).
21. 1919 —The Liquor (Amendment) Act No. 42 of
1919 —Part ll—provided for reduction of hotel licences
by Licences Reduction Board during the period Ist
January, 1920, to 31st December, 1922 (three years).


PUBLICANS’ LICENCES.
Number of Publicans’ Licences to cease under
Year
in which
respective votes.
Licences
to cease.
1907 Vote.
1910 Vote.
1913 Vote.
Total.
1907
Nil
Nil
1908
17
17
1909
63
63
1910
Nil
Nil
Nil
1911
151
Nil
151
1912
5
1
6
1913
57
3
60
1914
Nil
24
Nil
24
1915
Nil
Nil
1
1
1916
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
1917
Nil
Nil
22
22
Total ...
293
28
23
344
COLONIAL WINE LICENCES.
Number of Colonial Wine Licences to
cease under
Year
in which
respective votes.
Licences
to cease.
1907 Vote.
1910 Vote.
1913 Vote.
Total.
1907
Nil
Nil
Nil
190&
1
1
1909
4
4
1910
Nil
Nil
Nil
1911
38
1
39
1912
Nil
Nil
Nil
1913
3
1
4
1914
Nil
3
Nil
3
1915
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
1916
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
1917
Nil
Nil
7
7
Total ...
46
5
7
58
During that period the operation of Part IV of the 1912
Act (Local Option), except certain sections relating to
clubs, was suspended (sections 3 and 4).
22. Part 111 provided for a referendum on the questions
of (1) prohibition with compensation and (2) closing hour.
The vote was to be taken on a day to be proclaimed by the
Governor (section 37). Absolute majority. (The day was
never proclaimed but by the 1923 Act the date for the
referendum on prohibition was definitely fixed for Ist
September, 1928. The provision for taking a referendum
on the closing hour was omitted, and the closing hour was
fixed at 6 p.m. — See Act 51 of 1923.)
23. 1922 —The Liquor (Amendment) Act No. 42 of
1922 provided that reduction of licences by Licences
Reduction Board should continue for a further three years
(until 31st December, 1925).
24. 1923—The Liquor (Amendment) Act No. 51 of 1923
provided a substituted section 37 of Part II of the Liquor
(Amendment) Act, 1919. This new section 37 provided
for the vote (referendum) on question of prohibition with
compensation to be taken on the first Saturday in
September, 1928 (Ist September). Voting compulsory —•
bare majority—Reduction to continue until referendum
taken (the referendum was taken on Ist September, 1928,
and resulted in a majority against prohibition. The
voting was as follows ;
Against ... ... ... 896,752
For 357,684
25. The referendum having been taken, Part HI of the
Liquor (Amendment) Act, 1919, became inoperative.
26. 1928 —The Liquor Amendment (Continuance) Act
No. 27 of 1928.
27. This Act deemed to have come into force on 31st
August, 1928.
28. Reduction to continue until a date to be proclaimed
in the Gazette and Part IV of the 1912 Act (Local Option)
suspended whilst reduction in force. {See sections 3 and 4
of the 1919 Act.)
29. 1946 — The Liquor (. Amendment) Act, 1946.
30. Part IV of the 1912 Act relating to local option was
repealed.
31. Statement showing the number of licences which
ceased to exist in accordance with the determination of
special courts under the Local Option Votes of 10th
September, 1907, 14th October, 1910, and 6th December,
1913.
*69329—3
32. Note.- — Under the 1907 Vote “ Reduction ” was
carried in sixty-five electorates but was not given effect to
in Allowrie, Broken Hill or Sturt. Allowrie Electorate—
See Ex parte Stephen Major 25 W.N. 24. Broken Hill and
Sturt Electorates — See Ex parte S.A. Brewing Co. 25
W.N. 95.
33. Under the 1913 Vote “ Reduction ” was carried in
fifteen electorates.
34. In a number of cases the licences expired or were
cancelled before the date ordered by the court to cease.
35. Notifications of determinations of special courts
were published in Government Gazettes between 1907
and 1914.
36. Those unfamiliar with the liquor legislation may
well find some difficulty in appreciating readily the exact
local option provisions repealed by the Act of 1946; the
difficulty arises from the series of amendments made since
1905 affecting in various ways the local option provisions.
For this reason attention is again drawn to that which
appears in the reference to the year 1905 (above), for there
is set out the substance of the provisions repealed in 1946.
For further convenient reference in detail see Redshaw,
Liquor Law in New South Wales (second edition).
37. I proceed now to deal with what is involved in
Term 4. In my opinion the enquiry on the subject is
demonstrably clear, notwithstanding that quite a deal of
argument took place suggesting that the scope of the
enquiry was wider and the powers of the Commission more
extensive than in fact they were. This argument was
really limited to the submissions of one representative.
38. In order to demonstrate the nature of the argument
last referred to, it becomes necessary to analyse the Term.
The trained legal mind has no difficulty in understanding
it nor any occasion to have it analysed, in the way
proposed; but experience during the sittings of the
Commission suggests that, at any rate, for the lay mind
a short examination of the Term in the nature of an
analysis may be helpful.
39. That analysis, as one has chosen to call it, may
well take this form. The Commission is required to
enquire into the desirability of re-introducing into the
LIQUOR ACT the local option provisions that were
repealed. An appropriate question the better to see
what—in my opinion—should be obvious, is what local
option provisions are referred to in the Term. That
question is immediately answered by the concluding
words of the Term (4); these words are (the local option
provisions) “ that were repealed in 1946.” One would
have thought that any mind with some experience and a


working acquaintance with the English language would
conclude that in order to see what “ local option
provisions ” were “ repealed in 1946,” reference would
at once be made to any Act or Acts (no question of
Regulations under power can be involved), which
produced the repeal. Everyone who has addressed
himself to the subject of the Term agrees —as he must —
that the repeal was made by the Act No. 34, 1946
section 49 (1) (a) and by no other Act. As would
ordinarily be expected, the Act above quoted is entitled
THE LIQUOR (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1946; Part 111
of that Act repealed sections 79-94 of the LIQUOR
ACT, 1912 (as amended prior to 1946) except as to clubs.
An examination of the 1912 Act as at the material time,
shows that sections 79-94 included provisions for a
particular scheme of local option. (The 1946 repealing
section expressly excepted from its operation the
restrictions on the registration of clubs. These later
provisions are repealed as from April, 1947, when the
provisions of Part IV of the LIQUOR (AMENDMENT)
ACT, 1946, were to, and did come into force. These
include a new provision for clubs as discussed under
Term 6. It is true they deal with them in a special
category. See section 54 (2) and the Government
Gazette No. 102 of 13th September, 1946.
40. Every person who exercised the right to address
indicated on behalf of those he represented that they,
without exception opposed the re-introduction of the
repealed provisions; but the reasons for opposing the
re-introduction may fairly be said to differ violently. I
think it fairly summarises the two sets of reasons to say
that one set proceeded upon the view that the repealed
provisions were unsatisfactory, were too narrow and were
not democratic because too narrow. The other was based
upon the claim that the repealed provisions were wholly
undemocratic and not at all calculated to obtain an
expression of the true views of the community. I feel that
I am both empowered and required to see whether, apart
from the addresses on behalf of persons represented there
is any evidence from any body or person favouring the
re-introduction of the repealed provisions. It is proper
to say at once that no witness directly expressed himself
as being in favour of re-introducing them.
41. Mr. Piggott, on behalf of the New South Wales
Temperance Alliance, in the course of his address made
it clear that his clients were not in favour of the
re-introduction of the repealed provisions. It is proper
to point out that in the course of that address, he invited
me to say that upon a proper interpretation of Term 4
it was open to the Commission to say that there was at
least a body of opinion favouring the re-introduction of the
repealed provisions in part. This has a direct bearing on
the reasons advanced on behalf of the Temperance Alliance
for their opposition to the re-introduction of the repealed
provisions. In my view every statement of their
opposition reveals the fallacy in Mr. Piggott’s argument
that the interpretation of the term allowed the Commission
to make a recommendation as to part of the repealed
provisions. I am of the opinion that if the Assembly,
which drafted the terms of Reference 4, had intended
to include an enquiry as to whether there should be a
re-introduction “ in whole or in part,” it would have been
the most obvious thing to say so. lam at pains to avoid
anything which even appears to be a strict interpretation.
On the contrary, I am satisfied that the argument of all
counsel who addressed on the subject is correct in saying
that the only enquiry is whether these provisions, which
were dropped from the Act in 1946, should be put back
again. Faced with that interpretation of the term,
Mr. Piggott, on behalf of his clients, intimated that they
were opposed to their re-introduction. His attention was
drawn to the desirability, if not the necessity of addressing
upon the evidence from whatever Source before th rt
Commission: in fairness to him it should be said that when
reminded, he did thus confine himself and with ability.
Moreover, the evidence in support of his address on this
subject included his own testimony as a witness of great
experience. It is proper to state the reasons advanced
on behalf of an organisation which clearly and at least
from their point of view, understandably advocates what
is popularly described as local option for opposing the
re-introduction into the Liquor Act of that which has been
called “ only a measure of local option.” That can be
stated shortly in these terms; they do oppose it because
it is not liberal enough; it restricts the advocates of local
option and essentially because of requirements where they
appear for a three-fifths majority. The view seeking a
decision by a simple majority and objecting to the present
statutory provision for a three-fifths majority is one
which, at least since 1916, the Temperance Alliance have
consistently adhered to. The evidence of Mr. Piggott,
who has been associated with the Alliance for 52 years
and has had—as he described—-a lifetime experience of the
subject in all States of the Commonwealth and in New
Zealand, appears in detail at pps. 1975 et seq. of the
transcript. The details of his submissions based upon the
evidence, appear at p. 2746.
42. Having referred to the reasons offered by Mr.
Piggott which are stated shortly, not least because of the
clarity with which he expressed them, I am bound to
point out that other interests which found themselves in
agreement with Mr. Piggott against the re-introduction,
nevertheless founded their opposition on reasons which
were beyond any question opposed to the long held views
and principles expressed by Mr. Piggott. These views
of those who oppose the re-introduction for reasons quite
different from those of Mr. Piggott may be summarised
thus. It is argued that the question is not one suitable
for the determination by popular vote; there is—they
say —no justification for giving 50-1 per cent, of the people
power to over-rule on this question the views of 49*9 per
cent. Further, it is argued that the question is not one
suitable for determination by electorates. Apart from
the general argument against the “ infallibility of the
odd head ” it is clear, say counsel, -that on an electorate
vote many electors would not apply their minds to the
real question. They would vote not having regard to the
reasonable requirements of the electorate but, for example,
because they were in favour of State-wide prohibition, or
because they were prepared to deny facilities in their own
electorates so long only as they could obtain their own
drink in the city or at places away from their place of
residence. Attention was drawn to the fact that hotels
and clubs did not serve only voters of the electorate in
which they are situated. In some cases they cater for
tourist trade; whilst city hotels and clubs cater for patrons
and members respectively, the majority of whom live out
of the city.
43. It is argued that the reduction of licences in one
electorate would adversely affect drinking conditions in
the remaining hotels of that or neighbouring electorates.
In this respect, reference was made to the fact that whilst
the population of New South Wales has increased by over
one million during the period 1920-1950, the number of
hotels has decreased by 511. The average number of
persons per hotel has increased from 803 to 1,566 in the
same period {See Schedule 2). It is claimed that the
result of previous local option polls has been that reduction
was carried in certain electorates having comparatively
few hotels and continued in an electorate where there were
many. One of the arguments, particularly on behalf of
the breweries, was that the recommendation of the local
option provisions would militate against the improvement
of hotels. Not only would owners and lessees, it is said,


hesitate to spend money on improvements in those
circumstances, but, it is argued, the Licensing Court would
hesitate to make orders under section 40a for additions
or improvements to hotel buildings. {See Transcript
paragraphs 84637/84640.)
44. It is advisable to repeat that all persons or interests
who addressed the Commission following the evidence
opposed the re-introduction of the repealed provisions.
In stating that earlier, I had expressed the obligation to
see whether, apart from addresses, there was any evidence
favouring the re-introduction of the repealed provisions.
The only two witnesses as to whom it may be said that the
evidence suggests the possible view in favour of such
re-introduction are Mr. N. L. Griffiths, Town Clerk,
who expressed views on behalf of the Municipality of
Ku-ring-gai and Mr. J. L. Geraghty, who, at the time of
giving evidence was the Member for North Sydney. I
refer first to the evidence of Mr. Geraghty because it is
short and, I think, does not really express a view contrary
to those expressed in the addresses. His evidence was
related to the subject of local option generally. He said,
“ I think that is democratic at least; to give the people
the right to say whether they want hotels to continue in
existence or otherwise.” But I have not been referred
to any passage of his evidence in which he, either directly
or indirectly, expresses himself as in favour of the
re-introduction of the local option provisions as they were
at the time of repeal.
45. Mr. Griffiths, on behalf of the Ku-ring-gai
Municipal Council, tendered a statement including the
Council’s expressed views, as well as several resolutions
carried by the Council. After this material was presented
he was asked certain questions relative to the Council’s
attitude. In fairness to him lam not sure that he was not
placed in an invidious position, because some of the
matters raised in examination were possibly not the
subject of discussion between him and his Council. In
those circumstances I think it would be unfair to expect
him to express the Council’s view and it might equally be
unfair to conclude that his expressions should be adopted
as the views of the Council.
46. The first material presented by him on behalf of
the Council was so far as is relevant in these terms. “ The
Council for some time past has given considerable attention
to matters arising under the LIQUOR ACT with particular
regard to the provisions for the removal and granting of
hotel licences and wine licences. The members of the
Council have expressed definite views as to the effect
which they consider should be given to the Council’s own
wishes as an elected and representative body in the
community and also as to the wishes of its ratepayers and
residents on these questions which it has instructed me to
place before the Royal Commission. The Council’s policy
is that the wishes of the local residents should be given
the greatest possible weight when considering whether a
hotel should be located in any particular district and it
has recently been actively concerned in the case of an
application to establish a hotel in Lindfield in the following
circumstances. (Then follow the circumstances referred
to which are in no possible sense directly or indirectly
related to the subject under enquiry since the Lindfield
application was a removal application and did not involve
the repealed local option provisions.) It will be observed
that this statement would seem to indicate a confusion
of thought. In one part of the paragraph it would seem
to urge that the views of the residents should be obtained
by ascertaining the opinion of the Council as the elected
representatives of the residents. Later in the paragraph
I think it can fairly be said that statement on behalf of
the Council adopts a different criterion, when it expresses
the view that “ the wishes of the local residents should be
given the greatest possible weight.” That passage might
be regarded as a view in favour of local option in the sense
discussed within Term 4, subject to the later passages
included in Mr. Griffith’s evidence; obviously, regard
must be had to the whole, even to estimate the part.
47. However, an examination of a resolution carried by
the Council on 12th July, 1949, for submission to the
Annual Local Government Conference was in these
terms :
“ (a) That the present Act governing transfers of hotel
licences be amended to provide that such transfers
of licences may not be approved by the Licensing
Court unless the Council of the Municipality or
Shire in whose area it is proposed the licence be
transferred, consents.”
(It is clear that the draftsman meant “ removals ”
within section 39a of the LIQUOR ACT.)
“ (6) That the local option provisions be restored to the
Liquor Act.”
“ (c) That provision be made for an appeal from the
decision of the Licensing Court and arrange for
representations on these lines to be made to the
Minister of Justice.”
48. The statement continued: These resolutions were
considered by the 1949 Annual Conference of the Local
Government Association and adopted with the substitution
of provision for a ballot of electors instead of the consent
of Council. At this stage it seems to me, the inference is
that the witness was fairly and accurately stating the view
of his Council (assuming the adoption by the Council of
the amendments by the Local Government Association
Conference), in favour of local option as it stood before the
1946 repeal. But the matter proceeds a little farther by
reason of a resolution of the Council on the 27th May, 1952.
49. On that date the Council resolved—
(a) that Council re-affirms its support of the principle
of local option in relation to applications for hotel
and wine licences within this Municipality and is
stfongly of opinion that this principle could be
put into operation as soon as possible;
[b) that the terms of this resolution be brought to the
notice of the Royal Commission in conjunction with
the matters previously dealt with.”
50. Mr. Griffiths added that he had been a resident of
the district for about forty years and that he was
“ reasonably conversant with its general requirements and
with the view of residents and ratepayers on the matters
dealt with.” He added that the general character of the
municipality is residential.
51. In the course of examination Mr. Griffiths properly
explained what he regarded as the Council’s view by
summarising it in this way; his Council was in favour of
local option except for clubs. I do not think it fair to
hold either Mr. Griffiths or his Council to the somewhat
unconvincing reasons given for excluding clubs. Indeed,
I felt at the time and have no reason to alter the view, that
Mr. Griffith was placed in a rather embarrassing position
in endeavouring to reconcile the view expressed in different
forms on behalf of the Council. It may well be that the
Council’s view that “ clubs ” should be excepted from
local option provisions is well-founded, for reasons other
than those offered in evidence.
52. Although I am still left with some little doubt as to what
is the Council’s view with regard to the enquiry under
Term 4, I think that if their attention had been drawn to
the precise terms, they might possibly still have been
prepared to adhere to the passage which appears in (£b of


the resolutions of the 12th July, 1949, namely, “ the local
option provisions be restored to the LIQUOR ACT.” But
as their attention has not been drawn to the precise
provisions contained in the Act at the time of the repeal in
1946, I think that an inference that the Council wished
those particular provisions restored may not be justified.
On the balance of probability I rather think that it states
their views accurately to say that they favour the insertion
in the LIQUOR ACT of such provisions for local option
as will enable the residents of a defined area to give
expression to their views.
53. It is clear that the only conclusion based upon the
evidence tendered in relation to this Term must be that
it is not desirable to re-introduce into the LIQUOR ACT
the local option provisions which were repealed in 1946.
In stating this conclusion I draw attention to the widely
differing reasons offered by a number of interests—lor
agreement in a view against re-introducing the repealed
provisions. There is, I think, some assistance on the
subject of local option generally to be obtained from the
Reports of the Royal Commissions in England and in New
Zealand, passages from each of which are quoted in dealing
with the subject of Removals (Term 5).


TERM 5.
THE ADEQUACY OR OTHERWISE OF THE PROVISIONS OF THE LIQUOR ACT RELATING TO THE
REMOVAL OF HOTEL LICENCES.
1. This Term as drawn requires an examination of the
removal provisions of the Liquor Act to ascertain whether
they are adequate or not; since the question of the
public interest is by Term 9 involved in Term 5 as it is
with all other terms of reference, it is clear that the sub-
ject of adequacy or otherwise relates to both public and
private interests. The subject Term is dealt with as in-
volving also the obligation to indicate not only those
respects, if any, in which the present provisions are in-
adequate but, if they are, as well to suggest possible
remedies.
2. It is necessary therefore first to state clearly the
provisions of the LIQUOR ACT governing the removal
of hotel licences; they are to be found in Sections 39
and 39a, Section 39 is the main section in the sense that
it provides the circumstances in which, and the areas from
or to which, an application for removal may be made;
it sets out the objections which may be made (and by
whom) ; and as well, defines the power and the duty of
the court in dealing with such an application. The
essential difference between Section 39 and Section 39a
is that the former deals with removals to premises which
may —for the purposes of the application—be said to be
suitable as licensed premises; whilst the latter deals
with removals to “premises which are proposed to be
erected” or to “premises already erected but requiring
additions or alterations to make them suitable to be
licensed”: a consequential distinction between the two
sections is that under Section 39a, as would be expected,
any order for removal is conditional in the first instance
and is liable to cancellation if reasonable steps have not
been taken to carry out the erection, additions, alterations,
or completion of the premises to be licensed under the
(conditional) order. Subject to this difference between
Sections 39 and 39a it accurately states the position that
Section 39 governs removals, though it has to be read
in conjunction with other sections, for instance, with
respect to objections. It is not surprising that the
majority of applications for removals are made under
Section 39a, since it would be infrequently the case that
premises to which the removal is sought are ready or
suitable for licensing.
3. The holder of a publican’s licence who wishes to
remove his licence to other premises must give the same
notice in principle as required in an application for a
new licence (Section 39 (1)); and the same objections
may, so far as applicable, be made to the removal as to
the grant of a licence (Section 39 (3)). The owner
of the freehold of the premises to which the licence is
attached, lessees from the owner, or sub-lessees and mort-
gagees, must be served with notice of the application
(Subsections 2 and 2a). The Licensing Court shall not
make an order for removal, unless satisfied that no valid
objection—defined as one considered by the court as
reasonable —to such removal is made by the owner, lessees
or sub-lessees entitled to notice, as above.
4. An important distinction between “Metropolitan” or
“Newcastle” licences, on the one hand, and what may be
called “country” licences, on the other, is made by Sub-
section 4a; a hotel licence within the Metropolitan
Licensing District or within the Newcastle Licensing
District may be removed in a proper case, to any other
place within the State; licences without these two districts
may not be removed to within them.
6. The Licensing Court shall not make a removal order
unless satisfied both that the interests of the public in the
neighbourhood of the new site are served, and that the
interests of the public in the neighbourhood of the exist-
ing premises will not be adversely affected (Subsection '
4b). In respect of applications to remove a licence from
one site to another, both being within the Metropolitan
Licensing District, or both being within the Newcastle
Licensing District, the court shall refuse to make an order
to the proposed new site if—having regard to the suffi-
ciency or insufficiency of licensed premises in the various
areas of the licensing district—it is satisfied that the
public interest would be served to a substantially greater
extent by removal to a site in another area of the licens-
ing district (Subsection 4c) : this does not apply where
the existing site is in the same neighbourhood as the
proposed site (46(d)). (The meaning of the word “site”
as here used is the subject of a pending appeal to the
High Court.)
6. The objections which may be made in respect of
removal applications so far as the court considers them
applicable are —apart from the fitness of the applicant or
the sufficiency of the premises—that the reasonable re-
quirements of the neighbourhood do not justify an order,
that the proposed premises are or in the immediate
vicinity of a place of public worship, hospital, or public
school, that the quiet and good order of the neighbour-
hood will be disturbed. Moreover, there is a proviso that
“any objection whatsoever (not being a frivolous or vexa-
tious objection) may be taken, which appears to the
Licensing Court to be sufficient” (Section 29).
7. The persons who may object are (a) any three or
more residents of the licensing district in which the
premises are situated or the owner of such premises (see
as to owner, lessees, sub-lessees and mortgagees Section
39 (2 and 2a)); ( b ) Police in the new district; (c) any
person thereunto authorised by a city or municipal coun-
cil, within the boundaries of which the new premises will
be situated.
There is no appeal to Quarter Sessions in relation
to applications under Section 39 or Section 39a (Re Place
ex parte Thompson 78 O.L.R. 464), though an appeal
by way of prohibition or special case may be made to
the Supreme Court.
8. The foregoing provisions indicate, in effect, the
charter for removals to be found in the LIQUOR ACT;
as so often happens when legislation is enacted by way of
reference “so far as practicable”, questions have arisen
as to the extent of the application of the several parts
of sections dealing with the grant of a licence, incor-
porated by reference, in the removal provisions of the
Act. Some expressions used in relation to the “grant”
of a new licence can be applied to removal applications
only by the exercise of some ingenuity, and particularly
to applications for a conditional order for removal.
9. Before proceeding to deal with the “adequacy or
otherwise” of the provisions outlined above, it is desirable
to stress that the matters to be considered are limited to
hotel licences; there may well be other and different con-
siderations touching removal of licences not covered by
this Term of Reference. It is clear that under the pro-
visions for removal, as they now stand, the overriding
consideration is the public interest. “It is evident that


the primary considerations are the public interest. If the
licensee applies for the removal of the licence to other
premises, the primary question for the Licensing Tribunal
is whether or not it would be in the public interest that
the removal should take place”; per Jordan, C.J., in
Ex parte Berry v. Kessell, 36 S.R. (N.S.W.) 485
at 490. But although this correctly states the position
as at present, serious questions have been discussed during
the sittings of the Commission as to whether these pro-
visions—deigned to have regard primarily to the public
interest —sufficiently aqhieve that purpose; and the use
of the expression “the primary considerations are the
public interest” attracts attention to the fact, clear
enough from an examination of the scheme of legislation
for removals, that subsidiary to the public interest, there
are persons or interests capable of being affected by the
making* or refusing of an order, who —if likely to be
affected in a particular application —are entitled at least
to have some part in the procedure to be followed, or to
be heard as to the conditions which ought to be attached
to the grant of removal applications. The nature of these
questions is reflected by views advanced on behalf of
various and conflicting interests in the course of evidence
and in addresses.
10. The first subject which suggests itself for con-
sideration is the provision for removal in what may be
called the “city” by contrast with the “country” areas.
It will be recalled that the scheme at present allows for
removal of a Metropolitan or Newcastle licence anywhere,
whereas a “country” licence may not be removed to the
Metropolitan or Newcastle districts; this summary state-
ment of the position is accurate for all practical pur-
poses. During the sittings of the Commission the effect
of this provision was not discussed by any interest; it was
accepted as a fact and no suggestions were made that it
was in any way either inadequate or capable of improve-
ment. In principle, it would seem to be desirable not
to allow hotel licences to be taken away from the country
where generally—there are exceptions—it may be said
there is no overcrowding, and added to Metropolitan
areas, where it may perhaps be claimed the total number
of hotel licences is not insufficient at any rate contrasted
with the country. But, there is a feature of the disposi-
tion of licences which, it seems to me, may well warrant
the attention of the Legislature. I refrain from stating
it in other terms solely because it was not discussed during
the sittings of the Commission: it is mentioned because
of the valuable discussion of a like problem in the United
Kingdom. It is true the problem is not at all the same;
for the precise conditions do not apply. It suffices, I
think, to direct attention to the passages in the “REPORT
OF THE COMMITTEE ON WAR DAMAGE
LICENSED PREMISES AND RECONSTRUCTION”
(published in 1944) particularly in paragraphs 61-65.
Whilst these passages relate primarily to the distribu-
tion of public houses, including both new licences and
replacement of premises destroyed by war damage, they
may, in ray opinion, be of value in relation to removals,
not at all in the immediate but more probably in the
distant future —this because of the changes in centres
of population, due to the growth of industries in particu-
lar areas, and to the increased flow of immigrants
generally. The above Report is included in the material
preserved as part of the records of the Commission.
11. At present, a limited control over the selection of
a proposed site is vested in the Licensing Court by section
39 (4c) (see above) ; if, having regard to the sufficiency or
insufficiency of licensed premises in the various areas or
parts of the licensing district, it is satisfied that the
public interest generally would be served to a substan-
tially greater extent by removal to another site in the
district, the court is bound to refuse the application in
respect of the proposed site. The court has acted on
these provisions (see Balgowlah application).
12. Although the effect of the subsection (4o) was
discussed by counsel, I am of opinion that the subsection
is satisfactory in form (though see below). The court
has not required an applicant to survey the whole licens-
ing district. In effect it has ruled that the onus is on
an objector who seeks to establish that the public interest
would be better served by another site; where the objec-
tion is raised the court has required the applicant to pro-
duce evidence that he knows of no other site better
serving the public interest. I see nothing to prevent the
court of its own volition raising the question so long as
the applicant has an opportunity of meeting the position.
I am satisfied that the section serves a good purpose and
is adequate for that purpose. As already stated, the
provision has no application where the existing site and
the proposed site are in the same neighbourhood (sub-
section 4c (d)). Since writing this, an appeal has been
lodged in the High Court as to what is connoted by the
word “site”.
13. Criticisms have been offered suggesting the inade-
quacy of the present provisions as to removals. In ad-
vancing some of the criticisms, it seemed inescapable that
some subjects outside the Term of Refernce should be
argued: they are referred to only to the extent that they
may have some bearing on the “adequacy or otherwise”
of the present provisions. The first criticism dealt with
is that made by the advocate for the New South Wales
Temperance Alliance. Stated as shortly as possible con-
sistent with doing justice to the claim made, it was urged
strongly that the primary consideration —the interest of
the public—could not be provided for adequately without
a scheme of local option giving the people affected the
right to say whether they were willing to have a hotel
licence removed to within their area. In particular the
claim was supported by evidence not only of Mr. Piggott
and other witnesses called by him, hut as well by a reso-
lution of the Anglican Synod of the Diocese of Sydney
published in 1948 in the terms following:—
“This Synod requests the Government of New South
Wales (h) to amend the Liquor Act providing that
before an application for the removal of a liquor licence
~,.to other premises or to a it is proposed to
erect premises may come before the Licensing Court
for consideration, a vote be taken of the adult residents
living within a mile radius of the proposed premises
or site on the question of licence or no licence, the
decision to be by a majority.
(a) To restore the democratic principle of local option
to the people by the passing forthwith of an Act of
Parliament providing for a vote to be taken at each
State general election on the question of continuance
or of no licence within each State electorate, the de-
cision to be by a majority.”
I have cited paragraph (6) of the resolution ahead of
paragraph (o), because it is strictly the only one of the
two paragraphs relevant to the present subject matter;
however, as the two are related, it is desirable that both
should be reproduced for convenience. (See Exhibit 123,
Transcript 1995).
14. The submissions of Mr. Piggott were advanced
strictly on behalf of the Temperance Alliance; but obser-
vations made by him during his address indicate that
he was entitled to speak on behalf of affiliated churches
(Transcript 2750). He claimed that “the people in a
particular area should be the deciding factor in deciding
whether a new licence should come in or not”; that “the
local people are in a better position to judge their re-
quirements than any other body”. In one sense this is
to some extent recognised at present by giving local resi-
dents a right to object, but Mr. Piggott’s claim is that the
only democratic way of obtaining their views is by their
vote. (In the course of his address he adverted also to
a real—and in my view often a substantial—difficulty


affecting local objectors in presenting a case to the court
on removal applications; it relates to the subject of
expense and is dealt with later).
15. Further support for the claim by the Alliance is
found in the views expressed by the Ku-ring-gai Muni-
cipal Council, which announced its policy to be that “the
wishes of the local residents should be given the greatest
possible weight when considering whether a hotel should
be located in any particular district.” The more detailed
views of the council are found in TERM 4; it ig unneces-
sary to repeat them here, beyond recording that a sub-
mission made by the council to the Annual Local Govern-
ment Conference in 1949, was amended and, in effect,
adopted in the form that a ballot of electors be taken,
rather than the consent of the council be obtained, be-
fore the Licensing Court could approve of a removal
application; as pointed out in dealing with TERM 4, the
word “transfer” is used in a context which shows clearly
that “removal” was the subject of the submission.
16. I am satisfied that there are substantial practical
difficulties in the way of applying to removal applications
the principle of local option. Not least in view of the
sincerity of purpose in those advocating local option as
applied to removals, I have devoted some care and atten-
tion to its advocacy as “a democratic principle”. I find
myself unable to share the faith of its supporters that in
this way the public interest is best served, either gener-
ally or confined to the district likely to be affected. With
respect, I find myself in accord with the members of the
Royal Commission on Licensing (England and Wales)
1929-1931, who were unable to accept the contention that
“questions relating to the sale of intoxicants are specially
suited for local decision by popular vote”. I would add
to the reasons expressed in the Report of that Commis-
sion (see below), the opinion that on few subjects would
it be easier to raise false issues, to influence votes by
vested interests able to devote unlimited resources to
achieve a favourable vote, and to make an appeal to self-
interest which not infrequently is in conflict with public
interest. I am satisfied that the decision of a competent
and reliable tribunal based upon evidence —especially of
“local residents” —tested in open court and arrived at by
a judicial approach is more calculated to serve the public
interests. In expressing this view I am not unmindful
of the need for close scrutiny of removal applications
based ostensibly on the needs of the public but, in fact,
invariably prompted by commercial considerations and as
often opposed by vested interests.
17. Assistance is afforded those who may be obliged
to examine these reasons by references to the reports of
other Royal Commissions. In that of the Royal Commis-
sion on Licensing (England and Wales) 1929-1931, appear
the following observations:
“Many of the proposals laid before us for licensing
reform contain some measure, greater or less, of local
option, that is the concession to the electorate in a
locality of the right to determine by vote whether or,
subject to what limitations, the sale of liquor should
be conducted in the locality.
Many of the arguments are not peculiar to the liquor
question, but find root in a general faith in the merits
of decision by local referendum. Into these arguments
we do not think it necessary to enter. It is, however,
contended that questions relating to the sale of in-
toxicants are specially suited for local decision by
popular vote. We do not accept this contention.
It is, we think, generally accepted by sponsors of the
policy that only public facilities for obtaining intoxi-
cants (including possibly clubs and wholesale estab-
lishments) could be brought within its orbit. This
would leave untouched private cellars and private stores
of a less pretentious character. It may be of doubtful
advantage to drive drinking from the public houses into
the private home; and there is, we think, a grain of
truth in the suggestion made to us, although the state-
ment goes too far, that the travelling public stand to
be the only sufferers.
For this reason, too, it seems to us clear that ad-
vantage would be most likely to be taken of the policy
in comfortable residential neighbourhoods, where it
would be a matter almost of indifference to the electors
whether public facilities for obtaining intoxicants were
available or not; and least likely to be taken advantage
of in those areas which are the cause of most anxiety.
The boundary question, moreover, impresses us as
of great importance. The adoption by any particular
area of the extinction of licences might, it seems to us,
be as likely to inconvenience surrounding areas as
to benefit the area itself —particularly if, as some ad-
vocates of the policy appear to contemplate, small areas,
such as parishes, were taken as the voting units.
The adoption of the policy by Parliament would
also, we think, undoubtedly at once impose a check
upon the willingness of the trade to embark on large
scale improvement schemes, to which we attach much
importance.
Views were expressed before us by many witnesses
as to the experience in Scotland of the working of the
policy there under the Temperance (Scotland) Act of
1913. We prefer not to attempt any independent con-
clusion based on these views; but to rely upon the
opinion expressed in the Majority Report of the Royal
Commission on Licensing (*Scotland), who took a con-
siderable amount of evidence especially directed to this
question. We think it useful to quote their conclusions
in full:—
‘We venture to express our conclusions on this im-
portant matter thus: while we could not hold that,
looked at as a social experiment in local option, the
Act of 1913, operating from 1920 to 1930, has suffi-
ciently justified this experiment, yet the adverse con-
ditions of its introduction already averted to, and
other considerations, lead us to conclude that it is
expedient to afford it a further experimental period.
It is, however, an express condition of this recom-
mendation that the system introduced should be puri-
fied of certain objectionable features and in general
made less expensive and burdensome to the com-
munity.’
The Commission accordingly recommended the con-
tinuance of the Act subject to certain specified amend-
ments.
We do not therefore favour the policy for general
application in England. We have elsewhere, in discus-
sing facilities in new housing areas, indicated a sphere
for its partial adoption; and, in reviewing problems
peculiar to Wales, have expressed the view that the
policy might be given its chance in the principality.”
p. 92 et seq, G 14 “Local option”.
IS'. Notwithstanding the views set forth above on the
principle of local option generally, the majority report
specially deals with development areas in these terms: —
“We are, however, impressed by the special case
development areas. We believe that there are many
such areas where a large number of inhabitants, not
necessarily themselves abstainers, are anxious to
avoid the establishment of licensed premises near their
residence” (Paragraph 174).
The succeeding paragraphs recommend that before
granting a new licence within (or the removal of a licence
to) a “special area” the Justices should cause a popular
vote to be taken. “The popular vote would not be con-
clusive but informative, the decision being left to


discretion of the Justices who would not, however,
normally fail to give practical effect to a strong expression
of popular opinion”.
Whilst it appears later in the printed report that two
members of the Commission in separate minority reports
do not adopt this view (see pages 224-5, 239 and 245-6),
the above extracts from the majority report show that so
far as development areas are concerned, the recommenda-
tion is a marked qualification of the earlier conclusions
on local option generally.
19. The views expressed in the report of the Royal
Commission on Licensing in New Zealand (1946) follow.
From that report it is clear that the method of control of
the liquor trade in New Zealand includes the creation,
pursuant to the vote of the electors, of a district in
which no licences are issued for the sale of alcoholic
liquors although any individual may import alcoholic
liquors from a district where the sale is licensed. The
provision of this method of control by local option is
examined by the members of the New Zealand Royal
Commission in their several reports; the following passage
is taken from the majority report; (there were three
minority reports in none of which is there any dissent
from the passage to be quoted).
“We may note here that the explanation of the
strength of the section of city no-license electors who
are against national prohibition is probably that many
desire themselves a drink in the city area, but have no
desire to have liquor sold in their residential area. This
is the explanation given by Mr. Andrew Morrison, who
gave evidence on behalf of a cross-section of the voters
of Wellington East, a no-license electorate. He said
(Report 1701) :
‘I would say to the Commission that of the 8,554
people who voted in favour of local no-license in
Wellington East, exactly half that number, plus 4,
voted national prohibition, indicating thereby that,
while the electors of Wellington East desired local
no-license, they were still in favour of going to the
town zone or area for their alcoholic beverage. They
do not want it in their residential district, and that
is what we feel and have submitted for our people’.
“We infer that many of the voters in city no-license
areas would have no objection to licensed premises in
the commercial areas of their city. In view of these
voters, the general welfare of the community in the
commercial area where they work and where are the
shops, the hotels, and the travellers, is not the same
as the general welfare of the community in the resi-
dential area in which these voters live at home. They
would therefore permit hotels in the commercial area,
but not in the residential area near their home. If
both the commercial and the residential area are in-
cluded in the one electorate, these voters have to
decide whether their view of the best interests of the
commercial community or their view of the best
interests of the residential community is paramount,
and then record their vote accordingly; either for
license, which might bring an hotel near their place
of residence, or for no-license which would keep an
hotel out of the commercial area, where they desire it.
From these considerations it follows that, while a
district may be suitable, in its area and in its com-
munity of interest, for the expression of one view by
each voter upon the representation of the district in
Parliament, the same district may be too extensive
for the expression of one view by each voter on the
question whether liquor shall or shall not be sold in any
part of that district. He might think it should be sold
in one part, but not in another.” Report of New
Zealand Royal Commission, page 211, paragraphs
1111-1113.
20. The reference to removal applications being
prompted by commercial considerations was the subject
of much evidence, illustrated by the arrangements made
between Tooth and Company and one L. J. Hooker with
respect to licences, which appeared to be of value —if a
successful application could be made to remove a par-
ticular licence from one area —where the hotel trade had
seriously decreased in value —to an area where the com-
mercial prospects were markedly better. Details of these
arrangements are set forth below. It is not at all sug-
gested tha»t they represent the only instances of the prac-
tice involved; there can be no doubt that there have
been many other instances where a removal applica-
tion owed its origin, not to a clear public demand in one
area for a hotel which, in the present state of the Act,
could not be obtained by an application for a new licence,
and which could be obtained only by the removal of an
existing licence, but to the recognition by some person
or interest of the commercial value of a hotel in an area
lacking such a licence. Whilst the evidence does not
warrant the comment that it is to be deprecated entirely,
there are features associated with it which undoubtedly
call for close scrutiny and which suggest the need for
certain safeguards.
21. It may be observed that the device of sponsoring
a removal application, whilst new licences could not be
obtained, is not novel. It reflects a very old device used
in England in 1871; “the main purpose of the Act of
1871, was to suspend for a year the grant of new licences,
and the ordinary removal was a device designed to bridge
over the gap” (Report of Royal Commission on Licensing,
England and Wales, page 43 note).
22. It will be recalled that the 1946 amendments of the
LIQUOR ACT included a provision, which eliminated
the one-mile radius restriction on removals. Following
this provision, L. J. Hooker, who is in business as a real
estate agent, approached Tooth’s with a proposal that
they should make licences available to him, with the sole
purpose of their being available to him for removal to
sites selected and acquired by him; the procedure adopted
was that Hooker, through the medium of ostensibly
independent proprietary companies, conditionally pur-
chased from Tooth’s a number of licences; if, and when,
a removal order was finally granted by the Licensing
Court, the licence was to be absolutely transferred by
Tooth’s to the representative (of the particular proprietary
company) who would hold the licence. The agreement
provided that the new premises were to be tied to Tooth’s
for fifty years. With one exception, the agreement did
not provide for Tooth’s advancing money, though Hooker,
in evidence, stated “No doubt they could in future, if
approached at the right time.” The exception is the
instance of the removal to Kings Cross (the “Oriana”
Hotel) where Tooth’s agreed “to pay up to £IOO,OOO pound
for pound towards that hotel” (See L. J. Hooker, Tran-
script page 2018). There were a number of dealings pur-
suant to the agreement, running into very substantial
sums of money. The Licensing Court was informed of
the brewery’s interest in all applications made to the
court (Transcript, paragraph 86502).
23. It was frankly conceded, if not indeed claimed, that
both parties to the several agreements anticipated finan-
cial benefit from the transaction; Hooker, through what
are in every real sense his companies, from the retail
trade in the new premises, Tooth’s from the increased
trade in the new profitable area by contrast with the
poor trade in the area from which the licence was to be
removed. Learned counsel for Tooth’s submitted that
such arrangements are in the public interest; the 1943
amendment, he argued, contemplates removals from areas
well or over supplied with licences to areas where the
reasonable requirements of the neighbourhood are not
being met. There can be no doubt that the present provi-
sions for removals are based upon the considerations


advanced by counsel. Wherever the court grants removal
applications, it must be assumed that it is upon evidence
that the public interest is served. And where there is a full
disclosure of such arrangements as outlined above, counsel
is—in my opinion—entitled to claim that they are proper.
However, applications which owe their origin to such
arrangements are at least in some cases attended with
features not wholly to be approved; the comment is not
unreasonable that they savour of trafficking in removal
applications.
24. Invariably applications arising in this way involve
long and often spirited opposition from an existing hotel
in the proposed area and often enough from a brewery
interested in the existing hotel and, therefore, prepared
to protect its trade against the competition flowing from
new licensed premises. In the result, rival breweries
spend large sums of money in making a case for removal
on the one hand and a case against removal on the
other. With unlimited resources at the disposal of con-
tending breweries, there is a potential danger that other
interests, sometimes commercial, sometimes private and
frequently public, may be handicapped in what is qua
them an unequal financial contest.
This was in Mr. Piggott’s mind when he drew atten-
tion to the question of expense in relation to local ob-
jectors in the presentation of their case (against removals
into an area) before the Licensing Court. I add that in
the past it notoriously had applied to applications for a
new licence equally with applications for removal. He
illustrated the difficulty by reference to two applications
known shortly as the Rydalmere application which lasted
some thirteen weeks, and the Fairfield application which
also lasted a long time; the exact length of time is im-
material, but they were both long applications. Mr.
Piggott pointed out that whilst the Licensing Court was
at all times ready to meet the convenience of witnesses,
they were often left in the position of not knowing
when they were required to give evidence. This involved
inconvenience and expense which could not be met by
those whom he represented. By contrast, commercial
interests represented in general had unlimited resources
and in the result he, as he claimed, was seriously handi-
capped. Mr. Piggott was not prepared to suggest any
remedy for this other than the provision for local option.
This suggestion, it seems to me, involves a confusion of
thought. I find no difficulty in appreciating his claim
that he is at a disadvantage in a contest with com-
mercial interests in facing long—and in my view often
unnecessarily—protracted hearings before the Licensing
Court; I do find some difficulty in understanding his
suggested remedy, for it is only another way or arguing
that local option is to be preferred to a hearing before
a Licensing Court irrespective of the length of time taken
up by such applications.
25. At this stage it is desirable to advert to the posi-
tion of community hotels as affected by the more liberal
provision for removals. Part II Ib of the LIQUOR ACT
provides for municipal councils undertaking the conduct
of community hotels. The method for a council’s estab-
lishing a community hotel is laid down by Section 78x.
Since the procedure is relevant only to the extent that
it has been suggested that a council’s decision to estab-
lish a community hotel may in some cases be defeated by
a removal application, it is not necessary to set forth
fully the ways in which the LIQUOR ACT empowers
municipal councils to acquire or establish a (community)
hotel.
26. The suggestion made is shortly this: since the
council proceedings are public, a decision by the council
to petition for a licence—that being permissible qua coun-
cils only—becomes known immediately. That knowledge
may- well encourage a person interested in hotel licences
in the belief that the council’s view reflects the prospect
of success in a removal application into the area selec-
ted by the council. The length of time necessarily in-
volved in giving effect to the council’s decision contrasted
with the relatively short period required to apply for and
obtain a hearing of a removal application, may unduly
favour the latter to the detriment of the council’s decision,
made directly in the public interest.
27. Mr. B, C. Fuller, Q.C., who has appeared as
leading counsel in applications for community hotels,
illustrated the possibilities by reference to the experience
of the Randwick Municipal Council following its de-
cision to establish a community hotel at Maroubra. Whilst
the petition was being prepared in accordance with the
procedure laid down by the LIQUOR ACT, two applica-
tions for removal of hotel licences were made to the court
in respect of sites close to the site selected by the coun-
cil. When the council’s application for the grant of the
petition came before the court the two removal applica-
tions had already been heard and granted. Mr. Fuller
drew attention to the consequent difficulty which lay in
the path of the council’s establishing that the reasonable
requirements of the neighbourhood demand a third, in-
stead of, at the beginning, a first licence.
Mr. Fuller, who was senior counsel for the Randwick
Municipal Council, stated that—appreciating the possi-
bility of detriment already quoted from his evidence be-
fore the Commission —he had asked the Licensing Court to
adjourn the removal applications, but the court held
that it had no jurisdiction to adopt that course, and both
removal applications were heard ahead of the council’s
petition.
28. Mr. Fuller made various suggestions to overcome
the difficulties to which his evidence was directed. Inter
alia, he suggested that once a council’s decision was made
and so long as reasonable diligence was shown in seeking
to give effect to the decision, the Licensing Court should
refuse to hear any application for removal to the locality
selected by the council until the council’s application
for a licence has been heard and determined. Learned
counsel also advanced the suggestion for fixing a time
limit within which the court should 'either not be em-
powered to or —at least —should not, in fact, entertain a
removal application. He appreciated the practical difficul-
ties in the way of the suggested time limitations.
29. Reference was made to the decision in Ex parte
Walsh, 49 S.R. 326; the passage to which attention was
directed appears at 328: “The Licensing Court is not
devoid of all discretion in the matter even in relation
to the preliminary enquiry under the reference of the
petition .... The court would have inherent power
to grant such reasonable adjournment as would admit
of its having all the facts relevant to clause (b) before
it” (clause (b) is section 6 (b) of the Act of 1919, which
provides for the enquiry whether there are “insufficient
licensed premises to meet public requirements within the
area”). In Walsh’s case, the Full Court held that in
determining 'the question within section 6 (b), the
Licensing Court is entitled in its discretion to leave out
of account the fact that conditional applications for the
removal of existing licenses to the area in question have
been granted. The Licensing Court did in that instance
recommend to the Governor that the Randwick Council’s
petition for a community hotel should be granted; and
in so recommending arrived at the determination that
there were insufficient licensed premises within the area,
by leaving out of account the circumstance that two con-
ditional orders for removal to the area had already been
granted. The suggestion raised by Mr. Fuller envisaged
the prospect that a council’s application could be preju-
diced and possibly defeated, if the court in its discretion
held that the existence of conditional orders for removal
into the same area rendered it impossible for the court


to find that there were insufficient licensed premises to
meet the public requirements within the area. I am of
opinion that there is a real danger in the situation can-
vassed by Mr. Fuller.
30. Subject to what appears later in this paragraph,
the question of guarding more effectively against the
defeat of a council’s decision to establish a community
hotel might well receive consideration. Mr. Wallace,
leading counsel for Tooth’s Ltd., addressed himself to
the possible injustice flowing from suggested limitations
as to time or as to area. He submitted that application
for removal attended with success are, ex hypothesi, in
the public interest and that a proposal for a community
hotel is not necessarily more in the public interest. The
argument thus expressed is, I think, attractive but not
convincing. However, I do agree that limitations as to
time or area are not practicable, It should be pointed
out that whilst agreeing with Mr. Fuller’s suggestions
as to possibilities unfavourable to a council’s decision,
it is a surprising feature that only five applications by
councils to establish community hotels have been made
between 1947 and 1952, notwithstanding the encourage-
ment offered by the 1946 amendments to the Liquor Act.
Of these five, one petition was granted but no application
for a conditional licence was lodged by the Council;
two conditional licences have been granted but in neither
instance have premises been completed. One application
for a conditional licence is pending; in the last of the
five applications the hearing of the original petition is
pending.
31. With regard to the subject of removals generally,
a great deal of discussion centred upon the question of
objectors.
The persons entitled to object in removal applications
are the same as in applications for the grant of a new
licence (section 29). They are: —
(1) Any three or more residents of the licensing dis-
trict within which the premises are situated or by
the owner of such premises.
(2) Any district inspector or members of the police
force in charge of the district or place in which
the premises are situated or any person authorised
by any such inspector.
(3) Any person thereunto authorised by the council
of a city municipality or shire within the boun-
daries of which the premises are situated.
32. The objections to a removal application may be any
of the grounds of objection to a new licence which the
Licensing Court may consider applicable. An additional
ground qua removals relates to accommodation, renova-
tions, etc. Moreover upon any application for removal
(as with other applications) any objection not being a
frivolous or vexatious objection may be taken which ap-
pears to the Licensing Court to be sufficient. As already
observed in another connection, the provision for objec-
tors and objections on removal applications is made by
the unsatisfactory method of “reference”.
33. In relation to residents as objectors, a serious prob-
lem is revealed by the evidence before the Commission.
So long as what may be described as the three or more
residents of the district are genuine objectors either in
the public interest or upon their own private considera-
tions, no difficulties arise. But there is a notorious
practice by which a person or company with a pecuniary
interest in stifling a removal application has enlisted the
aid of three or more local residents, ostensibly for the
purpose of protecting the public interest, but in fact for
the sole purpose of protecting a vested or existing pecu-
niary interest in the district or place to which it is sought
to remove a licence. The practice was largely availed of
by competing breweries, although it is not suggested that
they are the only persons who have taken advantage of
this position.
34. One of the results of such a practice has been that
a tremendous amount of the Licensing Court’s time has
been taken up in lengthy hearings in which an applicant
has sought to establish the need for a removal to a par-
ticular district or a place within that district and “three
local residents” have been used by financial interests to
answer the lengthy case of the applicant. In the past,
in numbers of removal applications, a brewery has been
involved and interested in an application to remove and
a brewery has been involved in opposition to such appli-
cation ; but neither brewery has come out in the open
either as an applicant or as an objector. Apart from
any other features which may be the subject of con-
sideration, this touches the question of costs. It has
been refered to earlier on submissions made by Mr.
Piggott who appeared before the Commission on behalf
of the New South Wales’ Temperance Alliance. The
question of costs in removal applications is covered by
section 33 which is in these terms: —
“On the hearing of any application made in accor-
dance with this Act to the granting of which objection
has been made, the court may order payment to the
successful party of such sum as it deems proper to
meet his reasonable costs and expenses in the matter.
Provided that costs shall not be awarded against an
unsuccessful opponent of an application if the court
is satisfied that his objection is based exclusively on
considerations of public interest, that it is not malicious
or frivolous and that he has no direct or indirect pecu-
niary interest in the refusal of the application and no
expectation of such interest.”
35. It would seem clear that under section 33 an un-
successful applicant may at least in principle be obliged
to pay the costs of successful objectors who are in fact
dummies for persons financially interested; whilst the
real objectors may evade the consequences of an unsuc-
cessful objection unless perhaps it can be shown that the
resident objectors are their agents. Dbjectors who exer-
cise their right as three residents and fail may avoid
any obligation for costs if the court is satisfied that their
objection is based exclusively on considerations of public
interest and that they have no direct or indirect pecuniary
interest in the refusal of the application and no expecta-
tion of such interest. Subject to the question of enlarg-
ing provision for objectors dealt with below, it seems to
me desirable that consideration should be given to the
question of giving the Licensing Court discretion to
award costs against such objectors in the sense not that
they shall be liable personally for the costs but that the
persons really sheltering behind them should be respon-
sible in the order for costs.
36. In my opinion a marked advantage might be secured
in this direction by requiring all objectors under 29 (1)
—that is “any three or more residents”—to state their
position in relation to those matters covered by the proviso
to section 33, namely that the opposition is or is not based
exclusively on considerations of public interest and/or
that they have no direct or indirect pecuniary interest
in the refusal of the application and no expectation of
such interest, and as well that no person or body is
directly or indirectly interested in lodging the objection
which on the face of it is made by residents.
37. On behalf of one of the two major breweries (coun-
sel for Toohey’s really did not address himself to Term
Five at all) the problem of the identity of objectors was
discussed by learned counsel. Shortly stated counsel’s
argument conceded that the practice of breweries or others
financially interested in opposing a removal application


of using three residents within the licensing district as
dummies had obtained. His suggestion to remedy the
defect which permitted a practice accompanied with ob-
jectionable features was to allow persons or bodies financi-
ally interested to protect that interest by giving them
the right to object and to allow them to rely on any of
the statutory grounds open to objectors as now provided.
38. In effect he argues that such objectors should be
allowed to appear and object at their own risk. Counsel
for the U.L.Y.A adopted these submissions, but added
that the only real solution of most difficulties associated
with removal applications was the grant of new licences.
As to that it was indicated during addresses that in my
opinion, the subject of new licences is not within the
Terms of Reference,
39. Mr. Mitchell, on behalf of British Breweries Pty.
Ltd., submitted that an amendment of the Liquor Act
was desirable “to abolish an evil which permits a fiananci-
ally powerful and long-established brewery to take up a
stand in the Licensing Court for no other purpose than
to stifle competition”. These are Mr. Mitchell’s words
and he went on to give two illustrations in which his
company were, as he claimed, adversely affected. He sub-
mitted that “it never was the intention of the Legislature,
as is clear from the sections dealing with the particular
matter, that anybody other than the public or the cus-
todian of the public interest should be allowed to come
forward with an objection except in one case and that is
the owner of the freehold concerned. In all other circum-
stances it clearly indicates only persons who are the
public or would normally be deemed to have the public
interest at heart, such as police, the municipal councils,
or residents, should lodge the objection”. The argument
that the classes of objection at present set forth are really
those concerned with the public interest is attractive on
a cursory examination of the section; but there is ample
authority for the view that residents are entitled to
object in their own private interests and that the inten-
tion of the section is not limited in the manner suggested
by him.
40. Mr. Mitchell’s concern about a practice which I
have no doubt has some objectionable features was not
even momentarily advanced as a matter of public interest.
It is dear that his views on behalf of his client are
coloured, though understandably, by the fact that his
company is late in the field and finds it difficult to obtain
a greater footing in that field which his clients have
already found profitable. He does not really adopt the
suggestion that a brewery or other body financially in-
terested should be given the right to object. His sugges-
tion ultimately is that the three residents of the licensing
district who are given the right to object may be per-
mitted to object really on behalf of a brewery but that
they should be required to disclose the fact, when it
arises.
41. Whilst attention is drawn to the position that Mr.
Mitchell’s criticism of the abuses of the right to object is
based upon the protection of his client’s interests, there is,
nevertheless, much force in his claim that if new breweries
are to be prevented from expanding then there is a risk
of the creation of either a monopoly or a very limited
number of large breweries.
I am satisfied that there is a great deal to be said for
his suggestion that residents who lodge objections should
either be required to go into the witness box, or at any
rate make it clear that they either are or are not really
acting on behalf of an undisclosed interest. This is dealt
with later. (He suggests that provision for costs would
go a long way towards wiping out the objectionable
features.)
42. The provision for objection qua removals has been
incorporated as indicated above by reference and the
provisions more or less applied to renewal applications;
but it should be pointed out that since the seven years
have elapsed since the coming into force of Part 111 of
the Liquor (Amendment) Act, 1916, section 30 (2 ceases
to have effect (see subsection 3) and an objection to a
renewal application will now include ground (e) in
section 29 “that the reasonable requirements of the
neighbourhood do not justify the renewal of such licence.”
RECOMMENDATIONS.
43. Attention has been drawn to those respects in
which the provisions of the Liquor Act relating to the re-
moval of hotel licences are inadequate. Following upon
the conclusions indicated above, I make the following
recommendations: —
1. Every applicant for a removal should be required
to support his application with an affidavit of the facts,
which would involve a full disclosure of the persons
directly or indirectly interested in the application and
other matters affecting the identity of the persons
really concerned. This relates to the evils associated
with possible trafficking in removals which are in some
cases merely a device to circumvent the prohibition
against new licences.
2. The classes of objectors under section 29 should
be widened and, as in the case of applicants, it is sug-
gested that the grounds of objection and the interest
of the objector or objectors should be verified by
affidavit. The simple but important reason for this
is the clearly established practice of using dummies as
objectors. The prevention of dummying would be
made easier by providing for the Licensing Court en-
tertaining objections from any person establishing to
the court’s satisfaction that he had a real interest in
the application, financial or otherwise. If the list of
objectors is not widened, then consideration should
be given to the question of the court’s power to make
an order for costs under section 33, If the practice of
dummying is effectively destroyed, then section 33 as
at present can be applied with practical results; the
reference is to the fact that an order against a person
of straw who is a mere dummy—and this applies to
applications as well as objectors—is worthless.
3. Attention has been drawn to the practice of ex-
tremely long and expensive hearings. The attention of
the Licensing Court is drawn to the wide powers even
now under section 33, the exercise of which could con-
trol any unreasonable protraction of proceedings.
4. Following an order for conditional removal, a final
order cannot be made by the court unless the district
inspector certifies that the premises have been com-
pleted substantially in accordance with the plan ap-
proved of by the court (section 39a (1)). Experience
has suggested the need for making it clear that the
court should have power to alter plans previously ap-
proved for proper cause; this would include require-
ments by local authorities, building permits and possible
alteration of circumstances between the date of appli-
cation for the conditional order and the progress of
the work of erecting the premises. It should be added
that the court already has control over the application,
by cancelling a conditional order if satisfied “that
reasonable steps have not been taken to carry out the
erection, additions, alterations or completion of the
premises to which the order relates” (39a (1a)),


TERM 6.
THE DESIRABILITY OF AMENDING THE LIQUOR ACT TO PROVIDE FOR
ADDITIONAL CLUB LICENCES.
1. The answer to this Term of the enquiry is, in
my opinion, a simple one in this sense; the evidence is
overwhelming that the LIQUOR ACT should be amended
so as to provide additional club licences. However, the
mode of providing for such additional licences, the safe-
guards to be provided in that event and the protection
against destruction or serious interference with those
public needs which are met by hotels rather than clubs
—all these considerations give rise to problems which
render what has been described as the simple answer not
easy to give effect to by appropriate legislative action.
2. Before dealing with these problems it will, I think,
be of value to appreciate the position of clubs in New
South Wales as the law stands at present. This, in turn,
may be helped by setting forth briefly the growth of the
club system in this State. Later, reference is made to
the marked contrast with the position in which clubs
stand in the United Kingdom where the system is of long
standing, embracing many thousands of clubs. In the
LIQUOR ACT of 1898, the only provision for clubs was
that contained in Section 13 (5) which exempted the sale
of liquors in any club house if such liquors were sold
only to members of the club or offered only to such
members or their guests and on premises of which the
members were ban a fide owners or lessees.
3. The LIQUOR (AMENDMENT) ACT, No. 40 of
1905, by Sections 42-62, introduced the system of regis-
tration of clubs under certain conditions. “In effect, the
Legislature undertook to deal with clubs in which liquor
is sold and to bring them under the same general laws
as hotels or licensed premises. The provisions, of course,
are not the same in words, but the Legislature under-
took to regulate the whole subject of clubs and the scheme
was, in short, that every club should be registered.” Per
Griffith, C.J., in Sweeney v. Fitzhardinge, 4. C.L.R., 716
at 724. Section 64 of the LIQUOR (AMENDMENT)
ACT (above), provided that the number of clubs
in an electorate should not at any time exceed the
number of clubs formed before the Ist November,
1905, and bona fide used on that date as clubs and
registered under the Act on or before the Ist March,
1906. This provision continued —see Section 80 (3), of
the LIQUOR ACT, 1912—until the amending Act of
1946. The effect of this section 80 (3) was to make it
impossible to obtain a neiv licence for a club; in a few
eases many years ago, licences were transferred from one
club to another in circumstances where the former either
was going out of existence or was unable or unwilling
to continue the holding of its licence.
4. In 1946 the LIQUOR ACT was amended so as to
provide for fresh club licences. The Parliamentary De-
hates, when the Bill was before the House, reveal that
the Assembly was mindful, not only that no new club
licences had been (for they could not be) granted for the
past forty years, but as well of the difficulties in arriv-
ing at a satisfactory formula by which new club licences
should be provided for. In the result a purely artificial
formula was adopted. An attempt was made to afford
ex-servicemen’s clubs the opportunity of obtaining licences
(a form of preference readily acceptable), and as well to
protect the interest of those who did not or could not
enjoy the benefits of a club licence and who, if desirous
of drinking facilities, were obliged to resort to hotels.
Whilst other questions arose, of course, these two main
circumstances explained the form which the enactment
took to achieve the desired purpose. Experience of the
new legislation, which is shortly summarised below, has
revealed anomalies quite contrary, it would seem, to the
intentions of the Legislature as expressed in Section
133 a.
5. By Section 133 a of the LIQUOR ACT, 1912 (as
amended by the Act of 1946), the number of club licences
is limited substantially as follows: —
(a) In the Metropolitan Licensing District, includ-
ing Liverpool, Parramatta and Eyde, the num-
ber of publicans’ licences divided by four, less
twenty, and in addition twenty returned soldiers’
clubs, allocated as to eleven to R.S.L.; six to the
Australian Legion of Ex-Servicemen, and three to
other returned servicemen’s clubs.
( b ) In Licensing Districts, other than the Metropolitan
District, and Wollongong; publicans’ licences divi-
ded by six, with a proviso that one club may be
registered if there are less than six publicans’
licences, and where the number of existing regis-
tered clubs exceeds the number according to the
formula, this number replaces that ascertained by
the formula.
( c ) Wollongong Licensing District; number of present
registered clubs plus three.
(d) In addition, one returned servicemen’s club in each
Electoral District outside partly outside the
Metropolitan Licensing District.
6. For the purpose of registration “club” is, in effect,
defined by Section 134 (b) as “a body, association or com-
pany associated together for social, literary, political,
sporting, athletic or other lawful purpose”. In this respect
it is noteworthy that there is no such definition within
the LICENSING ACT in the United Kingdom, though
in a popular sense the expression “club” is understood
substantially as defined in New South Wales. But pro-
vision for registration in the United Kingdom is markedly
different; moreover “proprietary” clubs as well as “mem-
bers’ ” clubs may both quite readily obtain registration.
7. In view of the submission made by learned counsel
representing varied and, to some extent, conflicting inter-
ests, it should be stated that by the Act and Regulations in
New South Wales wide powers of control over clubs exist
as to the conditions of registration, enquiry and report on
applications (both in the first instance and on renewal),
grounds of objection, persons entitled to object, registers
of members, cancellation of registration and the obliga-
tions to comply with certain provisions of the LIQUOR
ACT. As to the obligation to comply with the Liquor
Act, it has been held that under Section 57 (applied to
clubs by Section 133) clubs are, in effect, not bound by
hotel hours in respect of liquor for members so long as
it is not sold, supplied or consumed at the bar —this as a
result of the decision in Ex parte Coulson and Anor. re
Jones 48 S.R. 178. As to most of the foregoing, argument
has been presented that conditions appldaable to clubs
should be varied substantially.


8. The present method of providing for club licences
is, as pointed out above, mainfestly artificial. In prac-
tice, the application of the formula has proved unsatis-
factory largely because the formula adopted is controlled
by the fact that no new publicans’ licences can be ob-
tained. The position as to the granting of club licences
is clearly to be described as static, subject only to the
possible effect of removals of hotel licences from one
district to another as now permitted within the State.
The evidence disclosed curious weaknesses in the present
formula —weaknesses which probably could not reasonably
have been anticipated at the time of the passing of the
1946 Amendments.
9. To appreciate the instances of these weaknesses set
forth below, it should be stated that prior to the 1946
Amendments, there were eighty-five club licenses, fifty-
three in the Metropolitan Licensing District and thirty-
two elsewhere. By the Amendments, the permissible
number of club licences —it is calculated —was increased
to 414 (of which, in fact, eleven were allowed to lapse).
The strange feature appears in the circumstance that,
although not every available club licence was taken up,
for practical purposes no more are at present available
within the State —this due to the limitations as to dis-
tricts, arising from the formula.
10. Counsel for the Club Amenities Association properly
described the position when he said that a the number of
club licences is tied to the number of hotels”. Moreover,
it is tied, not by having regard to the State as a hotel
district, but by having regard to named or ascertainable
licensing districts. (The special position of returned
servicemen’s clubs is discussed separately.) The better
to appreciate the strange anomalies that have been seen
to flow from the existing formula, I have thought it
desirable to cite, in some detail, instances revealed in the
evidence by Mr. J. M. Kelly (then secretary, now a
member of the Licensing Court). They are as follows: —
11. In the Barraba Licensing District two towns,
Manilla and Barraba, have four and three hotels respec-
tively. Under the formula, only one club licence was
permissible. It went to the Manilla Bowling Club.
Barraba, 30 miles from Manilla and with a population
of only 400 less than Manilla, could not have a club
licence.
12. In the Bellingen Licensing District, only one club
licence could be obtained. That went to Goff’s Harbour
(R.S.L.) whilst the townships of Bellingen and Dorrigo—
with substantial although smaller populations—could not
obtain a club licence. I should add that in Coff’s Harbour
there are, as well, two other clubs with suitable premises
which could not obtain a licence. By contrast it may
be observed that the Grafton Licensing District, where
the licence fees were double those of Bellingen District,
was able to obtain five club licences because there were
so many more hotels than in the Belligen District.
13. In the Cowra Licensing District (eight hotels),
three club licences were permissible. The town of Cowra
obtained all three new club licences. The town of Cano-
windra (four hotels) with a substantial population has
and can have no club licence.
14. In the Kiama Licensing District the one permis-
sible club licence went to Kiama. Shellharbour could not
get one, although it has a much larger population; the
population figure on which this comment is based for
Shellharbour may include outlying places, but this does
not impair the illustration offered in evidence.
15. In the Murwillumbah Licensing District four club
licences are permissible. Murwillumbah got two, Mullum-
bimby one, Tweed Heads one; Byron Bay, which has a
larger population than either Tweed Heads or Mullum-
bimby, is unable to obtain a club licence. This accords
with Mr. Kelly’s evidence; although a reference to
Schedule 104 suggests that the population of Byron Bay
exceeds that of Mullumbimby but not of Tweed Heads.
16. In the Penrith Licensing District four club licences
are permissible. Within that licensing district, Leura re-
ceived one, Katoomba two, Blackheath one. Penrith and
St. Mary’s, which are rapidly growing centres and which
each exceed in population that of Blackheath and (on Mr.
Kelly’s evidence) also that of Leura, cannot get a club
licence.
IT. The Quirindi Licensing District is entitled to two
club licences. Quirindi town has both; Werris Creek
with a comparable population cannot obtain one.
18. Shoalhaven Licensing District is entitled to two
club licences. The town of Nowra has both; Berry and
Ulladulla, within the licensing district, cannot obtain
one.
19. Windsor Licensing District is entitled to two club
licences, shared between Windsor and Richmond; River-
stone, within the licensing district, with a large popula-
tion, cannot obtain one.
20. Under the special provision for the Wollongong
Licensing District, a large centre such as Bulli, within
the Wollongong Licensing District, is not able to get
a club licence.
21. The examples (there are others in Schedule 103)
listed above are all in country or non-metropolitan areas.
In my opinion, they illustrate the extent to which the
hands of the Licensing Court are tied by the formula
adopted as the most equitable, though recognised at the
time as artificial. In many districts, metropolitan and
country alike, applications were made which could not
succeed; moreover, many enquiries were made of the
Licensing Court’s office to ascertain if a licence were
available. Mr. Kelly expressed the view, which I accept
unreservedly, that many districts refrained from making
an enquiry which would have proved of no avail.
22. The conclusion is, in my opinion, inescapable that
there is in both metropolitan and country areas a legiti-
mate demand for additional club* licences. -With in-
creasing population accelerated by immigration, it is
clear that the (legitimate) demand will, in the near
future, be greater. Thus it is that one is able and com-
pelled to say that the answer to the question, whether
the Act should be amended to provide for additional club
licences, is a simple one. I have no doubt upon com-
pelling evidence that it should be so amended. But I am
obliged to consider how such amendment should be made,
and this problem involves the question properly raised
by counsel, with what safeguards. Moreover, the posi-
tion of ex-servicemen’s clubs gives rise to a further prob-
lem and for this reason; the 1946 (amending) Act has
regard to the claims to preference by such clubs. The
evidence, in my view, clearly justified provision for the
preference already made. Whether, and if so, to what
extent further preference should be granted in relation
to additional licences if the Legislature so decides, has
exercised my mind considerably, especially during ad-
dresses. Further consideration has not left me with any
confidence that a solution of the difficulties involved
has been found.
23. A great deal of evidence was tendered and many
interests represented before this Commission addressed
themselves at some length to the desirability of or, as
they would describe it, the need for additional club
licences. On this they were in substantial agreement;
the exception to this was the case advanced against any
additional club licences by Mr. Piggott representing
the New South Wales Temperance Alliance. But once
that agreement is acknowledged there were marked diver-
gences of opinion and many conflicting claims. The ap-
propriate authority examining these differences of opinion


reflecting- different interests or points of view, would be
faced with a colossal task if obliged to examine the
transcript of evidence and the detailed argument. For
this reason I have felt it desirable, if not an obligation
as Commissioner, to reproduce the respective contentions
as shortly as possible—consistent with the further obliga-
tion to do justice to the conflicting claims and to ensure
clarity in stating them.
24. Firstly, attention is drawn to the position taken up
by Mr. Piggott on behalf of the Mew South Wales Tem-
perance Alliance. His attitude was one of compromising-
opposition to any increase in the number of club licences
because, he said, they would merely give facilities for
drinking. He stressed the possibility of an increase in
the danger to young people. Whilst conceding that reput-
able citizens could belong to a club where the licence and
the bar were not the sole considerations, he, or rather
the organisation on behalf of which he spoke, felt that
there would be such an increase of drinking that disas-
trous effects would follow, partly because of the difficulty
of policing clubs. In that respect he preferred the hotels
to clubs. He stressed an aspect which emerged from the
evidence that unlike hotels in general, drinking facilities
were available in clubs on Sundays. Moreover, he drew
attention to the provision that a person under 18 could
not enter the bar of a hotel and suggested that he could
in relation to a club.
25. The attitude of the U.L.V.A., on behalf of its
members as presented by Mr. Smyth, Q.C., may be shortly
stated. It concedes, as I rather think it must, that in the
public interest it is desirable that the LIQUOR ACT
should be amended to provide for additional club licences,
but with appropriate limitations and safeguards. The
qualification with which the submission concludes is, of
course, accepted by all authorities or interests. In other
words, if additional club licences are to be provided for by
legislation, proper limitations and safeguards must also
be provided. But the U.L.Y.A., through its counsel, has
addressed itself especially to these limitations and safe-
guards which—it is said —are necessary to afford reason-
able protection to existing hotel licences. In my opinion,
some regard must be had to the part played by hotels
in serving the public. Wherever a hotel licence is exer-
cised by a publican, his trade is carried on with the
approval of the properly constituted authority. It must
be assumed—in the absence of evidence to the contrary —
that it serves public requirements, for that is an essential
fact, bringing the licence into being in the first instance.
It is trite to add that the changed conditions in a par-
ticular area may often cause doubt on the continuance
of public requirements within that area. The case made
by the U.L.Y.A. cannot be dismissed merely by saying
that it is a vested commercial interest that must yield to
the public interest which may justify the licensing of a
(new) club or of an existing club though—in the latter
case —the difficulties to be faced are, I imagine, smaller
and fewer.
26. Few counsel have been bold enough to suggest
that club licences should be granted indiscriminately; at
one stage a claim was advanced that any hona fide club
with sufficient members and suitable premises should be
able to obtain a licence. This, in my opinion, cannot be
justified. Quite apart altogether from the circumstance
that it would properly offend the views of a section of
the public with commendable and, in some instances,
strong views against the liquor traffic and with no
vested interests to serve, such a claim is as well imprac-
ticable and would, in my opinion, not be in the public
interest.
27. One suggested safeguard proceeded, as already in-
dicated, from counsel for the members of the U.L.Y.A. I
think it does no injustice to his argument or to his
clients to say that, primarily, it was based upon the self-
interest of the members. That, of course, does not involve
its being summarily dismissed. On the contrary, it is
proper to say that at least some off the matters advanced
in argument, do affect public as distinct from private con-
siderations. Already, a reference has been made to the
fact that the U.L.Y.A. concedes, to quote counsel’s words,
“that in the public interest, although contrary to its
own interests, it is desirable that the LIQUOR ACT
be amended to provide for additional club licences but
with proper limitations and safeguards.” With this as
a general proposition it is easy to agree. Acceptance of
the suggested limitations and safeguards and of all the
arguments advanced, is not at all so easy.
28. I am obliged to refer in some detail to these matters
advanced, not least because of the large numbers of hotels
within the State, the many persons interested in the
publicans’ licences and because there is, I am confident,
substance in the claim that prima facie the hotel is the
centre which meets the (retail) needs of the consumer
public or rather of that section which the law recog-
nises as entitled to reasonable facilities for obtaining
liquor. The argument proceeds thus: there are very many
people who resort to hotels for their needs who either
could not or would not, wish to join a club capable of
obtaining a licence; that it is quite possible that a large
increase in club licences might easily—it is argued—so
seriously affect hotels in particular districts as to make
it practically impossible to carry on, with the consequence
that non-club members of the public served by hotels
would be denied reasonable facilities; and with the
further consequence that hotelkeepers and others financi-
ally interested in hotels might be seriously affected. This
latter consequence envisaged in the argument is not to be
disregarded as the complaint of a vested interest, since the
law by the LIQUOR ACT has long recognised the pub-
lican’s licence as a mode of earning a livelihood and a
method of investment. Indeed, I expressed the view
that provision for club licences, which is likely to ex-
tinguish or seriously affect large numbers of hotels is
not desirable, mainly and directly in the public interest
and based upon economic consideration directly affecting
those legitimately engaged in the hotel trade. I do not
subscribe to the view that adequate provision for addi-
tional club licences, whilst continuing adequate hotel
licences, is a problem of irreconcilables, but it is fraught
with difficulty.
29. Counsel for the U.L.Y.A. has argued that the onus
should rest upon the applicant for a club licence to
satisfy a licensing court not only that there is a need for
such a licence but that the granting of it will not result
in “undue competition or economic waste.” I can appre-
ciate this proposition as a possible ground for objection,
but I am of the opinion that it is not acceptable in the
form that the onus should rest on the applicant as sug-
gested. The criterion, “undue competition or economic
waste”, is borrowed from the THEATRES AMD PUBLIC
HALLS ACT, 1908-1946, Section 13 D(5)(6)(iv). By
that section provision is made on application for a
“prescribed endorsement enabling the showing of films
in a licensed public hall,” the THEATRES AMD PUB-
LIC HALLS COMMISSION, to which the application
must be made, may entertain as a ground of objection
that “the granting of the application woud result in
undue competition or economic waste”. (In passing,
it may be said that another ground of objection under
that Act is that “it is not in the public interest that the
application should be granted”. Such endorsement may
be renewed annually.)
30. Whilst the suggested analogy is of assistance, it is
not, I think, a perfect one. Apart from any other con-
sideration, there is, I think, clear necessity to have regard
to the feature of a liquor licence, that it is clearly to be


described as in a class by itself. Many types of licences
may resemble it in some respects and a licence to exhibit
films is not, in my opinion, really comparable. Never-
theless, on present advice I incline to the view that
consideration should be given to the question, whether
the granting of a club licence will result in undue com-
petition or economic waste, having regard to the existing
hotels in the area, or to the persons served or to be
served by the club. Whether this should be a ground
tenable without regard to the tenure held by the hotel
licences or to the financial interest held by a person in
the hotel, is a serious question. I have in mind that
the licensee may really have a temporary interest in
avoiding undue competition or economic waste. On the
other hand, the owner of the freehold or head lessee may
possibly be seriously affected by the practical extinction
of or diminution in, the value of the property with the
licence attached. This latter interest in the licensed
premises vested in the owner is recognised on applications
for removal in certain cases of agreement between the
owner and the licensee. See Section 39 LIQUOR ACT
and METROPOLITAN THEATRES LIMITED v.
HARRIS, 35 S.R. at 236; Ex parte Liverpool Corporation
1934, 2 K. 8., 277. See also Transcript p. 2710 paras,
11471-82; and p. 2711 paras. 111483-111510.
31. As part of this argument, learned counsel for the
U.L.Y.A. has urged in addition that the court should
have power to cancel a new club licence if it should sub-
sequently appear that existence of the club licence has,
in effect, resulted in undue competition or economic waste;
and that on such cancellation some provision should be
made for compensation. This, says counsel, would guard
against “a faulty prediction” on the part of the court.
In short, I am not at all impressed with this argument;
if there is any substance in the earlier claim as to
undue competition or economic waste, I can see no reason
for the court’s not being capable, if it has the power, of
dealing with the matter effectively when the application
for a club licence comes before it.
32. The U.L.Y.A. further suggests that section 141 of
the Act should be amended by allowing an objection to
be taken by a licensee likely to be affected by the grant-
ing or renewal of a club licence. This, of course, is not
unrelated to the argument based upon competition and
economic waste, having regard to existing hotels in the
area; if effect is given to that in substance, then it
follows that any licensee in the area likely to be affected
should be included in the category of those entitled to
object. Moreover, even if the specific claim as to com-
petition or waste as set forth above, should not be
accepted, as a desirable amendment, serious consideration
should be given to the right of a licensee as above to
appear as an objector, although quaere whether grounds
in his case should be limited.
33. Further limitations urged on behalf of the U.L.Y.A.
are that a maximum number of club members should be
prescribed, that clubs should be subject to the same condi-
tions as hotels, particularly as to trading hours and
gambling devices, and that clubs other than sporting clubs,
should be required—as a condition of registration—to
provide accommodation. I can see no reason for prescrib-
ing a maximum number of members. I can only conclude
that this suggestion is simply based upon a fear of com-
petition. The same comment, I think, applies to the
argument that social clubs, that is, all but sporting clubs,
should be required to provide accommodation. Many
genuine clubs do so, providing an obvious convenience
to members. If, however, the argument claims to rest
upon a fear that a club may become a “mere drinking
shop” in the well-understood sense of that expression, it
seems to me that section 40 of the Act already meets the
case. As to clubs being required to observe the same
hours as hotels, I am of the opinion that the clear dis-
tinction between the position of a hotel and that of a
club suggests that the position in law should continue
as laid down in Ex parte Goulson and Anor. {supra).
Once the granting of a club licehce is justified, it
seems to me that hotelkeepers within the neighbourhood
to which the Liquor Act has regard, must be obliged
to appreciate that the one (the hotel) is ostensibly a
profit-making concern whilst the other (the club) clearly
is not. With respect to the question of hours generally,
attention is here drawn to the subject of possible altera-
tion of hours for hotel trading, which was a fully de-
bated matter —it is one of substance and is dealt with
later.
34. The fear of undue competition from additional
club licences, and the possible economic consequences ex-
pressed on behalf of the U.L.Y.A. in New South Wales,
finds an echo in the complaint of publicans in certain
parts of the United Kingdom. Briefly, the attitude of,
at any rate, some publicans is that clubs should “come
under the same laws” as hotels; if clubs come under Rolice
supervision, club members will not be able to get a
drink at hours later than in hotels. The fear is ex-
pressed that “if nothing is done there will soon be no
room for the pub in this country.” It is impossible to
estimate the strength of these claims; at one stage re-
cently, some branches of the Licensed Victuallers’ Asso-
ciation threatened to “march on Westminster” to stage
an “anti-club campaign”. These matters are stated
shortly as indicative of the attitude of the retail trader
in liquor in England. It would not, I think, be proper
for me to express any opinion as to the validity of the
complaints made; on the other hand, it is my duty to
draw attention to circumstances which clearly distinguish
the position of hotels in relation to clubs in New South
Wales from the position in England, at any rate.
35. In England, it is abundantly clear, that it is
markedly easier to obtain registration of a club in order
to sell liquor than it is in this State; moreover, the recog-
nition of the proprietary club as distinct from the true
member club is something quite foreign to this State;
and the trading hours of hotels, whilst not identical
with those of registered clubs, are much longer than in
New South Wales. (This is the subject of further
reference elsewhere.) In the result, I am of the opinion
that any argument that might be advanced in this State,
based upon complaints of competition in the United
Kingdom, would have little weight.
36. The special statutory provision made for ex-service-
men’s clubs requires that their representations before this
Commission should be dealt with in some detail. Their
concern is two-fold—
(a) as between what may be called the headquarters
of organisations such as the Returned Sailors,
Soldiers and Airmen’s Imperial League of Aus-
tralia —New South Wales Branch —(referred to
hereafter as R.S.L.) and the Australian Legion of
Ex-servicemen and Women (referred to hereafter
as the Legion) on one hand and branches and
sub-branches on the other;
(b) in relation to sharing in the allocation of additional
club licences, if the Act should be amended so to
provide.
37. It is desirable shortly to re-state the position of
ex-servicemen’s clubs under the Act as it stands at pres-
ent. In the Metropolitan Licensing District: in addition
to the number of club licences permissible under the
formula, eleven are allocated to returned servicemen’s
clubs approved and authorised by R.S.L., six to returned
servicemen’s clubs approved and authorised by the Legion;
three to returned servicemen’s clubs not requiring the


approval and authorisation of either the R.S.L. or the
Legion. In districts, other than the Metropolitan Licens-
ing District, a club licence is to be available to one
returned servicemen’s club in each electoral district. (It
is not necessary to set forth the details and the later
machinery prescribed.) This is re-stated mainly to direct
attention to the difficulties in making adequate provision
for genuine ex-servicemen’s clubs on the one hand and
on the other, the meeting of the reasonable demand of
other clubs in any scheme for additional licences. So far
as concerns branches or sub-branches of the R.S.L. and
the Legion, much argument took place before me, afford-
ing valuable assistance in clarifying the problem without
—I apprehend-—ensuring an easy solution of it. One is
mindful of the fact that in making any recommendations
on this subject one cannot readily avoid entering the
field of legislative policy.
38. The submission made by learned counsel for the
R.S.L. shortly is as follows: —
The Act should be amended not by providing for
an additional specified number of club licences to be
allocated to returned servicemen’s clubs, but by pro-
viding that whenever a sub-branch of the League can
satisfy the Licensing Court that it has the necessary
premises and facilities available and is otherwise in a
position to comply with the provisions of the Act, such
sub-branch should be able to procure a licence without
limitation as to the number of licences. This, it is said,
is no departure from the principle of the LIQUOR ACT
that the reasonable requirements of a neighbourhood
should be catered for.
39. In support it is pointed out that the R.S.L. was
incorporated in 1935 by virtue of the Act, No. 39 of
1935, which made provision for a constitution and recog-
nised its organisation into sub-branches. The R.S.L.
has approximately 600 sub-branches in New South Wales.
Many sub-branches were, in 1946, desirous of obtaining
licences, but this was not possible owing to the restricted
number of licences permitted under the 1946 ACT. One
hundred and forty sub-branches desired to obtain licences
(see annexure Exhibit 103). Many licensed clubs have
made great progress. The provision for only one
ex-servicemen’s club in each electoral district outside the
Metropolitan Licensing District has lead to anomalies.
This last argument refers to the evidence of Mr, Kelly,
already dealt with, which touches not merely ex-service-
men’s clubs but clubs generally.
40. In addition, evidence was desired on behalf of the
R.S.L., establishing the special value of R.S.L. clubs to
men in the country, on the land —the desire, and indeed
the need, to retain control by the R.S.L. of clubs (sub-
branch) with licences . . . the contributions made by
some of them to worthy public activities, such as the
Northcott Neurological Centre, rest homes as at Mt.
Keira (supported by the Wollongong sub-branch)
. . . added facilities provided for members by licensed
branch clubs and the striking progress made by the
Hamilton R.S.L. with the aid of its licence. Attention
was properly drawn by the R.S.L.’s special concern for
and interest in sub-branches (and, therefore, in potential
sub-branch clubs) relative to property, aims, objects, and
activities, civilian membership and control and the check-
ing of what is called a possible “drifting away” by such
clubs from true R.S.L. relationship.
41. As a corollary to some of the claims made above,
R.S.L. asks that provision should be made for notice
to it, of any application for the granting or renewal of
registration of clubs connected with, or purporting to be
connected with the R.S.L. or its sub-branches; and that'
it may, if desired, have the right to object; and, as well,
that if any R.S.L. club amends its rules, a copy of the
amendment should be sent to R.S.L. as well as to the
Licensing Court and the Licensing Inspector, as required
by section 135 a of the Act. Although these immedi-
ate submissions are referred to in my ultimate conclusions,
it may be stated at once that whatever scheme may be
adopted, this claim is, in my opinion, a proper one. Neither
the Australian Legion of ex-Servicemen and Women
nor the Air Force Association, N.S.W. Division, was
represented by counsel. Their views were expressed by
two witnesses Mr. B. J. McDonald, a former State
President of the Legion, said that of the six club licences
available to clubs approved and authorised by the Legion
(see Liquor Act section 133 a) all were taken up in the
sense that conditional orders for registration were ob-
tained; two only of these were made absolute because
as to the remaining four suitable premises were not
available. The Legion’s concern as to servicemen’s clubs
promoted by the Headquarters Association or any branch
is to see that its character as an ex-servicemen’s club does
not alter, and that it does not dispose of its funds or
assets in liquidation. Headquarters would not require
to approve and authorise the registration of a club spon-
sored by a sub-branch, nor would it want to supervise the
conduct of such club. It would seek to prevent an altera-
tion of rules without approval (but see ss. 135 and 135 a).
Later, however, this witness added that the Association
should, in fact, have the power to approve of the inclusion
in club rules of a rule giving the Association the right
to control organisations. In fairness to the witness, I feel
that the question put to him by Counsel did not result
in a clearly expressed answer. However, the general
attitude of the Legion is made reasonably clear.
42. The views of the Air Force Association were given
in evidence by Mr. R. M. Levenger, the Honorary Secre-
tary of the Air Force Association, New South Wales
Division. He stated that his Association had 38 branches
in New South Wales, and that clubs had been formed
by the members of two of those branches, one in New-
castle and the other in Sydney, and that each was fully
licensed. In passing, he stated in answer to a question
whether former members of the Women’s Auxiliary of
the Australian Air Force belong to these clubs, he said,
“Yes, they have the use of the third floor on Friday night.”
His evidence continued that there were five other branches
of-the Association in this State which had the means to
build premises and equip them with all club facilities,
and conduct them in accordance with the Act, if they
were assured that they could get a licence when the
premises were ready. Among the facilities offered by the
existing clubs were a pension scheme for those in need,
recreation, golf outings, outings on the harbour, billiards,
and, of course, meals. The attitude of the Association,
he said, was that the New South Wales division head-
quarters did not think it necessary to obtain control of
such clubs as were formed, nor would they regard it as
necessary that the headquarters should authorise the
applications.
43. Counsel for the R.S.L., in answer to three matters
raised by Counsel for the U.L.Y.A., made what I think
were pertinent observations. So far as concerns the sug-
gestion that clubs should be required to provide accom-
modation, he submitted that Section 134 (b) embraces so
many different kinds of club that the suggestion for
compulsory accommodation was really impracticable. So
far as concerns the suggestion by Mr. Smyth that clubs
should not be permitted to increase their membership
without reference to the Licensing Court, here again
Counsel for the R.S.L. claimed that the provisions of
134 (g) were sufficient for the purpose and drew atten-
tion to the provisions of Section 151, requiring a register
of club members to be kept and to be open for inspection
by the officers authorised by the Licensing Court, In
addition, he relied upon the provision for objections con-
tained in Section 140 (1), paragraph (ii), which make
it a ground of objection that the accommodation or


sanitary conveniences are insufficient or otherwise inap-
propriate. The last matter dealt with by Mr, Snelling
in answer to Mr. Smyth (for TJ.L.Y.A.) w r as the sug-
gested competition between clubs and hotels. He sub-
mitted that whilst much could be said for the claim that
a hotel performs some public service, the over-riding con-
sideration is that clubs not only perform a great public
service but, unlike hotels, are established not for an
individual’s profit. In the result, he suggested that there
should not be recognised in hotels a vested right or
preference; but that the test should be that each applica-
tion for a club should be considered on its merits in the
light of existing requirements and existing facilities.
44. Those clubs which at present have a licence and are
members of the Registered Clubs Association dealt
shortly with some of the contentions raised on behalf of
the TT.L.Y.A. It is true that learned counsel for the
registered clubs covered some of the ground dealt with
bv Mr. Spelling but it is desirable shortly to state his
views. Mr. Ferguson rightly drew attention to the posi-
tion in law that members of clubs are in no sense retailers
as hotels are; but, on the contrary, are consumers. A
conclusion he sought to draw from that is that the
members of a club are no more in competition with a
hotel than is the individual who has a cellar of his own”.
He stressed the fact that club members buy their liquor
for their own consumption on their own club premises
and that for the privilege of being able to do they pay
quite a considerable entrance fee as a rule and quite a
considerable subscription. In my opinion, the earlier con-
tention of this paragraph is based upon a legalistic view;
in a real sense, I think there must in many cases be
appreciable competition between clubs and hotels and the
reference to a “considerable entrance fee and quite a con-
siderable subscription” throws into relief the possible in-
convenience to those of the public who seek facilities for
consuming liquor on premises, but who cannot afford or
do not wish to belong to a club, if the existence of addi-
tional club licences should result in jeopardising the only
resort for their purpose, namely, an hotel. There is, how-
ever, in my opinion more substance in his reply to the
U.L.Y.A. contention, with respect to trading hours. He
stressed —as already mentioned —that under the present
state of law members of clubs enjoy the advantage of being
able to obtain a drink at their club when they like, assum-
ing, of course, they can get service under the particular
club’s conditions. That advantage the members of his
Association appreciate and desire to retain; and he opposes
any suggestion that there should be uniformity of hours
in both hotels and clubs. He concluded by submitting that
it fairly can be said that it would not be in the public
interest that members of a club should be deprived of the
right to drink their own liquor on their own premises
whenever they wish, merely because people who retail
liquor cannot sell it after 6 o’clock as the law stands.
45. Much assistance on the present subject was
offered by the Clubs Amenities Association, represented
by Learned Counsel. This association has a membership
of 135 clubs which are either bowling or golf clubs (the
latter all in the country), which cater for some 19,000
members and which have not a licence, but seek one. In
the course of his address, Mr. Hutley, on behalf of this
Association, canvassed the position in which unregis-
tered clubs stand in the present state of law. The con-
tentions raised on behalf of this Association are set
forth as shortly as possible, for easier reference by the
appropriate authority.
46. Mr. Hutlky adverted to an observation made dur-
ing evidence which is abundantly established. “The
position in regard to these clubs is perfectly clear and I
think it is complete. You have decent people carrying on
a decent club, determined to provide their members with
liquors. In the process they break the law. There are
*69329—4
difficulties associated with doing that apart from break-
ing the law”. This observation was made following
cogent evidence with regard to liquor practices in
unregistered clubs. Learned Counsel rightly pointed out
that the evidence before the Commission did not allow*
of an accurate estimate being made of the number of
clubs so involved in illegality or of the extent of their
membership, but that the practice is widespread and that
the membership is considerable are undoubted. He
fairly pointed out that membership of the Association
did not necessarily indicate that the club is or has been
engaged in breaking the law. Attention was drawn by
him to the circumstances that clubs breaking the law
frankly in the interests of their members, included in
their membership businessmen, clergy, lawyers and
members of the Police Force (Transcript page 1574);
whilst members of the Magistracy visited and accepted
hospitality from clubs where the law is inevitably broken
(page 1567).
47. Counsel’s argument based upon the evidence pro-
ceeds as follows: —
There is a strong demand for licences. Amongst
bowlers a drink is a necessary social amenity. It must
be provided to maintain the inter-club visits which are
essential to maintain and raise the standards of the
game. The same, he suggests, applies to visits between
golf clubs. He adds that as a social drink has become
an accepted necessity,, every bowling club has to take
steps to provide liquor and a system whereby the num-
ber of club licences is limited must appear quite unfair
to those denied the opportunity of doing so within the
law. The number of bowling clubs is rapidly increas-
ing both in the Metropolitan Area and in the country
and no limit can be placed upon the increase. These
clubs cater for all classes of the community. They
become a form of community centre where all members
of the community get together. It can be a benefit, not
only to the men, but also to their waves and children.
The bowling club is not only a sporting club, but a
social club as well. He continued that a licence assists
the finances of a club and permits it to give more sub-
stantial service to the community. This is particularly
important to clubs in the country towns as appears
from the comparison between the relative progress of
the Wauchope and Kempsey Golf Clubs (pages 1570-
1573). He submitted also that the evidence proceed-
ing from both his Association and from the R.S.L.
establishes that clubs are a real acquisition to a com-
munity and that the development of club life is stimu-
lated by the granting of a liquor licence. That being
so the demand for the increase of club licences is
likely to be a permanent one.
48. I am constrained to set forth a further argument
raised by Mr. Hutlky because it tends to cover ground
not precisely covered by other Counsel. The argument
proceeds: not only is the population of the State increas-
ing but the reduction in the hours of work has made
acute the problem of leisure. This leisure is being spent
in part in drinking and drinking is ancillary to health,
and exercise is more in the public interest than drinking
in hotels. It is not sufficient for provision to be made for
club licences to increase merely with the population. A
proportionately more rapid increase is needed to meet the
social need. Clubs, he claims, are now recognised as a
need by all classes of the community and not merely by
the well-to-do, and people do expect to be able to drink
in clubs. There is, he says, no necessary connection be-
tween the number of hotels and the number of clubs which
a district can support and the tying of club licences to
the number of hotels in Licensing Districts is insupport-
able. The hotel performs a completely different function
from a club, wdiich is a private institution wdiere people
with common interests get together to enjoy each other’s
companionship; it is not dissimilar to a man’s home. A


public house exists to serve anybody and everybody. De-
spite the talk of its being a working man’s club, he argues,
a hotel has none of the features of a true club which has
some purpose, to which drinking is purely ancillary. A
district with a large itinerant population can be expected
to need few clubs and many hotels. A district with a
settled population of similar size would need fewer hotels
and more social and sporting clubs. The areas in which
hotels were most numerous were just the areas in which
most club licences become available. This means that
whereas the expansion of club licences might have helped
to bring civilised drinking habits to those parts of the
State in which there was a deficiency of hotels, it was
just those places which were not entitled to receive a large
quota of the available club licences. This was the strange
explanation for the fact that the town of Wauchope with
a population of more than 2,000 is not able to abtain a
club licence. He further points out in relation to the 1940
formula, that though the number of club licences is tied
to the number of hotels, there appears to be no provision
for the removal of a club licence from one Licensing Dis-
trict to another. He refers to the evidence of Mr. Kelly
that this has never been done. This, he says, makes the
position of towns which have no licenced club, more
desperate than those which have no hotels, which can look
forward to removals in appropriate cases. (Whilst Mr.
Kelly’s evidence probably relates to the present position
attention is drawn to the fact that many years ago when
new club licences were not obtainable there was, in effect,
at least one removal from a club in one area to a club
in another.)
49. The argument on behalf of the Association con-
tinued that the need of an expanding population can be
met in part by a constant number of hotel licences in
that existing hotels can be expanded and replaced by
larger and more commodious ones. Similar expansion
is not feasible for sporting clubs especially, by way of
illustration, bowling clubs, which have, he says, about
80 members per green. He submits that whatever justifi-
cation there may be for the limitations of the number of
hotel licences, no similar justification applies to club
licences. In relation to the 1946 formula he argues that
it does not command public acceptance. As there is no
principle behind it, the members of clubs which cannot
obtain licences accorded to other clubs in precisely similar
situations will feel morally justified in disregarding or
evading the law if they can. He claims that “the heart
of the authorities responsible for the enforcement of the
liquor laws is not in their task.” This situation, he says,
in which decent citizens are involved in law breaking,
brings the law into contempt and embarrasses those re-
sponsible for the enforcement of it. Such a situation is
not healthy and it is submitted that the Commission
should recommend that it should be obviated by the
provision of sufficient club licences to meet the evident
need.
50. He frankly says that the very object of the Clubs’
Amenities Association is to obtain legislative authority
for an increase in the number of club licences. He refers
to the evidence of the President that the Association
sought the elimination of any restriction on the number
of clubs and that its object was to have Section 133 a of
the LIQUOR ACT repealed so that the secretary of any
club which satisfied the conditions laid down in Sections
134, 135 and 140 of the ACT would be entitled to obtain
and retain a licence for the club.
51. There was one aspect of Mr. Hutley’s argument
which dealt with the preference for ex-servicemen’s clubs.
He frankly indicated that the Clubs’ Amenities Associa-
tion is opposed to any reservation of licences which may
become available for any particular interest, such as re-
turned servicemen or workers. On behalf of the Asso-
ciation, he submitted that the case presented by the
R.S.L. was not based upon facts. He claimed that the
evidence of Mr. Comaiereord (on behalf of the Union of
Registered Workers’ Clubs) that they were at a disad-
vantage compared with other clubs (page 1604) and,
therefore, needed the help of the legislature, would lose
all its effect if the number of licences for clubs was not
limited.
52. With complete frankness he argued that if contrary
to an earlier submission, some limit was to be placed
upon the number of additional club licences, there should
be a recommendation that priority be given to the mem-
bers of the Clubs’ Amenities Association. He further
drew attention to what I think may fairly be described
as the invidious position in which some clubs which were
members of his Association would stand if additional club
licences were provided and if, at the same time, Section
140, Subsection (1) (e) of the LIQUOR ACT should stand
in its present form as an objection. This is a matter of
substance because Section 140 (1) (e) provides that upon
any application for the granting of a Certificate of Regis-
tration of a club, objection may be taken by any corpora-
tion or person hereinafter in this Act mentioned upon
the ground “that illegal sales of liquor have taken place
in the club premises.” Although I deal with this matter
later, I should say at once that I find no difficulty in
acceding to this suggestion.
53. Mr. Hutley adverted to the argument that the
abolition of limits upon the number of clubs might lead
to “the proliferation of petty clubs, really created for the
purpose of drinking.” This danger, he said, is not real,
provided the Licensing Police and Licensing Authorities
are insistent on the provisions of the Act being carried
out. In support of this he cites Section 140 (e) (supra)
which is ample to deal with an offending club on an
application for renewal. His Association opposes the
claim made on behalf of the U.L.Y.A. that club licences
should be restricted by having regard to undue competi-
tion with hotels. He says that the hotelkeeper is subject
to restrictions because he has been given a quasi monopoly
of supplying liquor to the public and the time and place
of that supply must be limited. Club licences are not
supplying to the public and are private institutions with
selective membership. A good club can render signal
service to the community, but it has not obtained any
special advantage upon the basis that it renders service to
the community, which the community is entitled to control
minutely. The nature of a club as a private institution
requires that the proper conduct of the club be left largely
to the self-limitation and self-control of its members. He
suggests not that the Licensing Police or other Authorities
should not exercise control, but that the control which
they at present exercise over the premises and general
affairs of a club, is adequate.
54. He draws particular attention to the state of the
evidence in relation to competition between the U.L.V.A.
members and clubs. He claims, and in this I think he is
right, that there is no evidence to show that in the past
the former have suffered from the latter or that they
have been hindered in carrying out their duties to the
public by impoverishment following the rise of registered
clubs. He concludes by pointing out that with the excep-
tion of the Temperance Alliance, no interest appearing
before the Commission has disputed the need for an
increase in club licences and no evidence has been called
reflecting adversely on existing clubs licensed or un-
licensed. In these circumstances it is submitted that the
apparently bold request for a recommendation that there
be no legislative limit on the permissible number of club
licences is no danger to the community. I refer to this
aspect later.
55. The Union of Eegistered Workers’ Clubs of Hew
South Wales was represented by Mr, Martin of Counsel.


In view of the detailed argument of Counsel, who pre-
ceded him in address, Mr. Martin showed commendable
brevity in the submissions he made. In short, he said
that there should be a recommendation in favour of
additional club licences, that his clients did not oppose
the suggestion of Mr. Hutley, that the number of club
licences should be unrestricted, and that Section 133 a
of the Act should be repealed. If, on the other hand, un-
registered numbers was not practicable then the numbers
should at least, be related to population and to needs and
not to hotel licences. He further suggested that if un-
restricted numbers were not practicable then, in addition
to all other licences, there should be power in the Goversior-
in-Council to declare that a particular area needs a workers’
club licence. Whilst provision for a Court’s decision was
acceptable it was urged that such a declaration as indi-
cated above would be cheaper and simpler. It was finally
submitted that the claim on behalf of the U.L.V.A. that
there was likely to be undue competition from clubs was
unfounded. Like Mr. Hutley, he drew attention to the
fact that any apparent competition was either unreal or,
at the most, merely incidental. If, on the other hand, the
question of undue competition should be regarded as
relevant, then it should be a ground for objection, the
onus resting upon the objector who in such cases should,
in any event, bear his own costs of objection. He argued
that licence fees for clubs should in no case be the same
as hotels. He argued that they were properly described
as co-operatives and not merely suppliers of liquor. If
that is a valid claim, he claimed that there was pre-
cedent for relieving co-operatives with regard to taxation.
Their profits cannot be distributed nor can the club land-
lords or mortgagees buy the licence. (Prior to 1946 the
fee for a club was 2 per cent.)
56. The two larger breweries, Tooth’s and Toohey’s,
respectively, made very short submissions with regard to
the subject of additional club licences. By way of illus-
tration, Mr. Reynolds on behalf of Toohey’s, contented
himself with a submission in these terms, “subject to the
establishment of a requirement and to control by the
Licensing Court (he) did not desire to make any sub-
mission opposing additional club licences”. On behalf
of Tooth’s, Mr. Wallace, Q.C., claimed to make no sub-
mission on the subject ; but he added a suggestion that it
would seem desirable to regularise the position of well-
conducted returned soldiers and sporting clubs (at that
stage he seemed to show no interest in social clubs); but
he drew attention to the clear necessity, as he said, for
control by the Licensing Court over the number and type
of premises to be licensed and in this connection also drew
attention to the evidence critical of some English work-
ing men’s clubs (page 2137, para. 90512). The subject
of Englishmen’s working clubs is dealt with later; but
it should be pointed out at once, that Counsel’s observa-
tion here referred to was made under a misapprehension
of the evidence.
57. The Commissioner of Police, represented by
Mr. Goran, offered short submissions on the subject of
additional club licences. Learned counsel was careful
to point out that his observations were made on behalf
of the Police Department. In substance, he said that he
really made no submission at all as to whether additional
club licences should be recommended or as to any possible
alteration in the constitution of clubs or in the condi-
tions to be laid down affecting them. He stressed the
fact on behalf of the Department, that no great difficulties
are found in policing registered clubs but by contrast
there were marked difficulties in respect of unregistered
clubs. He did not subscribe to the suggestion that the
number of clubs should be unrestricted. He very properly
stressed the need, the obvious need, not to facilitate the
“legislation of sly-grog sellers” who might seek to pursue
their nefarious trade under the umbrella of registration.
This last matter is dealt with by me in relation to what
are called member clubs as distinct from proprietary
clubs.
58. Assistance on the subject of club licences may, I
think, be found by a short statement of the position of
clubs in the United Kingdom. They are an institution
of very many years standing and provision for them
presents a striking contrast to the statutory provisions in
New South Wales. In the United Kingdom there are
recognised two forms of clubs, fairly described as “pro-
prietary clubs” and “members clubs”. There is no statut-
ory definition of the word “club”; but it is clear that it
denotes “a society of persons associated together for
the promotion of some common object or objects (other
than the acquisition of gain), such as social intercourse,
art, science, literature, athletics or sport.” Where liquor
is sold in either a proprietary club or a members club,
the club must be registered; and registration is strikingly
much easier to obtain in the United Kingdom than, for
instance, in New South Wales. So far as concerns pro-
prietary clubs, the clubhouse and furniture and stores
of food and drink in the oldest form belonged to the pro-
prietor or group or proprietors to whom members paid a
subscription in return for which they had, by contract,
a licence to use the club. The actual management was
generally entrusted to a committe, partly nominated by the
proprietor and partly elected by the members. Although
the precise original form of constitution has altered over
the years, there are still in existence many clubs which
fall within the description of a proprietary club. By
contrast, there are money members’ clubs the property
of which belong to all the members jointly—being usually,
for convenience, vested in trustees; their subscriptions are
paid to a common fund and an elected committee manage
the club. The members’ right to use the club is founded
on their joint ownership. As above indicated, speaking
generally all the clubs in which intoxicating liquor can
be obtained must be registered and a club may be struck
off the register, if the supply of intoxicating liquor is nqt
under the control of the members or a committee
appointed by them. Since proprietary clubs, as well as
members’ clubs, must be registered i 4 is usual in the
modern proprietary club to have a purely elective wine
committee to satisfy the registration provisions. It
should be added that there are many working men’s
clubs (so-called) some of which have the character of
both members’ clubs and of proprietary clubs, which are
registered also as friendly societies, a step which confers
some advantages on the club.
59. By what are called The Defence ( General ) Regula-
tions 39 (55C) (f), restrictions are (or ivere) placed on
the registration of new clubs. An examination of the
objections which can be taken to the registration of a
clubs show that such registration is somewhat easy to
obtain. The mode of registration may be shortly described
as follow.
60. The secretary of every club which occupies premises
habitually used for the purpose of a club in which any
intoxicating liquor is supplied to members or their guests
must cause the club to be registered in the manner pro-
vided —( Licensing ) Consolidation Act , 1910, section 91
(1). The name and objects of the club, the name and
address of the secretary, the number of members, the
rules of the club as to election of members, and as to the
admission of temporary and honorary members and guests,
the terms of subscription and entrance fee, if any, the
cessation of membership, the hours of opening and closing,
and the mode of altering the rules, comprise substantially,
the material that must be forwarded to the Clerk of the
Justices of the appropriate Petty Sessional Division, who
is, in turn, required to keep a register of all clubs subject
to registration and the particulars supplied. As well, on
an application for the registration of a new club, there


must be included amongst the particulars—in some cases
—the names and addresses of the promoters of the club,
the proprietor (if any) the person (if any) who will be
manager, the persons who take part or will take part in
the management of the club, the persons who have become
or who have agreed to become members of the club, the
persons wdio are financially interested in the success of
the application and the extent of such interest or interests.
Grounds of objection to registration are: —
(a) Having regard to existing facilities for social
amenities, recreation and refreshment or for cultural
or political activities and to the objects of the
club, the club is not required to meet a genuine and
substantial need (but see later as to a recent import-
ant alteration in the law).
(b) That the particulars supplied for registration are
inaccurate or incomplete.
(c) That the character or antecedents of any of the
promoters, of the proprietor, of the secretary or of
any of the persons who take or will take part in
the management or who are financially interested
in the success of the application for registration,
are such that the club ought not to be registered.
61. It will be seen from the foregoing provisions that
registration is readily obtained so long as the club,
whether a proprietary or members club, is one of some
repute, and so long as it can be said that having regard to
the existing facilities for clubs, there is a genuine and
substantial need for the proposed club (but see below).
The latter provision as it stood was very wide in terms
but, in my opinion, did not derogate from what I think
was and is the comparative ease with which a club may
obtain registration. Nevertheless, it is fair to add that my
enquiries did not establish that there is any serious com-
plaint about the conduct of member’s clubs. It is true
that there are instances where clubs have been either, in
the first instance, or found later to be, places merely for
the purpose of obtaining intoxicating liquor and in which
drunkeness with varying degrees of frequency does occur
on the premises. They were in the main proprietary clubs.
But in respect of such matters and others, there is pro-
vision for the striking of offending clubs from the
register. It should be added that there is provision in the
LICENSING ACT, 1921, for permitted hours in relation
to registered clubs. The number of permitted hours for
clubs generally is based on that prescribed by the Licens-
ing Justices. Shortly, the number of hours during which
intoxicating liquors may be supplied for consumption
either on or off the club premises is as follows:
(a) in the Metropolis (the administrative County of
London) 9 hours on week-days, 5 hours
on Sundays, Christmas Day and Good Friday;
(b) elsewhere 8 hours on week-days and 5 hours on
Sundays, Christmas Day and Good Friday.
It is a feature of the fixation of hours that the members
of the club may (within the total allowable), in accordance
with the rules of the club, themselves fix the hours which
in the Act are called the permitted hours during which
intoxicating liquor may be supplied to them or their
guests. This privilege of fixing the hours is subject to
certain limitations as to the earliest and latest hours,
respectively, and as to the provision of a break in the
fixed hours. No purpose is served by stating these in any
further detail.
62. The objections to registration in England set forth
above include a ground that “having regard to existing
facilities for social amenities recreation and refreshment
and to the objects of the club, the club is not required to
meet a genuine and substantial need”. Recent ministerial
action has affected it. This ground of objection was
introduced by a Defence Regulation (55c) which was
brought into effect by an Order in Council dated 6th
August, 1942. Representations were made to the Home
Secretary on behalf of the Workingmen’s Club and
Institute Union, the Association of Conservative Clubs
and of the National Golf Clubs Protection Association,
seeking the revocation of the regulation. As the claims
made in support bear some resemblance to the argument
advanced before this Commission for unlimited club
registration, it is desirable to reproduce them in substance
and as well to record the decision favourable to the repre-
sentations.
63. It was urged that the regulation affected “the per-
sonal theory of the individual to associate together with his
fellowmen for common or communal purposes. It was en-
tirely wrong to hamper or prevent the formation of bona
fide members clubs merely to prevent the formation of one
man or bogus clubs”. The deputation stressed the fact
that is was not reasonable that the Police should have the
right to say a club “is not required to meet a genuine and
substantial need” if the people who propose to establish it
and become members thought it was desired; (the refer-
ence to the Police is due to the provision that a Chief
Police Officer might object to the registration). The Home
Secretary having decided to revoke the regulation as from
10th December, 1952, the matter came before Parliament
on the 27th November.
64. The Home Secretary explained why it was proposed
not to continue the regulation, saying that the deputation
regarded it as an unwarranted interference with the rights
of the citizens; the deputation had assured him that the
bogus clubs were in a small minority and could be struck
off. He informed the House that he had decided to revoke
the regulation adding later in the debate that "where
there is no prospect of reasonably proximate legislation
then he thought the balance came round in favour of
maintaining freedom”.
65. As indicated later, on the evidence before me and
in the light of the large number of clubs that would at
once be entitled to seek and probably obtain registration
if the only test were their genuineness as clubs in the sense
understood in England, I am not prepared to recommend
the automatic registration of such* clubs as conform to the
requirements of the Act as at present. In this connection
attention is again drawn to the existence in England of
the proprietary club which has never been acceptable in
this State. (see s. 134 ( h ).)
66. With respect to working men’s clubs in New South
Wales, evidence was adduced before the Commission on
the subject of such clubs specifically. They are dealt with
in this report separately, in the main because they are
a striking feature of club activity in England. In this
State, there are a number of “registered workers’ clubs” —
seven in all with some 7,000 members; they are member
clubs affiliated with the Union of Registered Workers’
clubs of New South Wales. The evidence of the constitu-
tion and the activities of both the Union of Clubs and of
the clubs themselves was provided by Mr. James Comer-
ford, President of the Union. A complete statement of
the scope of the Union’s activities is to be found in
Exhibit 107; among the objects of the Union is “2(a) the
furthering of the educational sporting social literary
cultural and atheletic interests and organisation of all
workers’ clubs.” Membership of the Union is confined
primarily to registered workers’ clubs in New South Wales
but the Union may admit to association membership with
limited rights any club with approved aims and objects
(2 (b)). The Union may discipline member clubs (Rule
9) although it does not interfere with the internal manage-
ment of the Clubs. In addition to the seven registered
clubs there are twelve workers’ clubs that cannot be
affiliated with the Union because they are not registered
clubs. All such clubs seek registration under the Liquor
Act. Reference is made first to the Union of Registered
Clubs because of the successful activity of the comparable


body in England, “The Working Men’s Club and Institute
Union” a federation of over 3,300 clubs and institutes
representing more than two million members; the Union
itself is neutral on questions of religion and politics and is
open for membership by any bona fide (workingmen’s)
members’ clubs. See annexure to Annual Report 1952
published in April, 1953.
'67. In Uew South Wales the rules of most workers'
clubs require that applicants must be members of a regis-
tered Trade Union, but that is not insisted on by the
Union of Registered Clubs. The witness Comerford
illustrated this by reference to his own club. “There are
business people who naturally could not be members of
trade unions, but we provide for people who work for
themselves. If they have more than ten employees we
require that employees shall be members of the Union
covering the particular calling, and that permits the
employer to join. I do not known the Union rules of
policemen, but the local policeman is a member”.
(Transcript 1604). A feature of this type of club in
New South Wales and also in England is the small mem-
bership fee; whilst in England the benefits of membership
for clubs affiliated with the Union are comprehensive,
embracing educational work, convalescent homes, organi-
sation of games, free legal and administrative advice.
68. These clubs seek licences under the Liquor Act and
—the witness claims —they are hampered by lack of
licences. The question of liquor licences for these clubs
is naturally part only of the general question whether
there should be unrestricted licences for genuine and
reputable clubs or whether there should be some limit and,
if so, upon what principle should limits be imposed. It
will be recalled that in England prior to December, 1952,
and as a temporary measure during the previous ten
years, registration (so that liquor might be sold) could
be objected to on the ground —inter alia —that “having
regard to existing facilities for social amenities, recreation
and refreshment and to the objects of the club, the club
was not required to meet a genuine and substantial need”;
this on one view at any rate was directed to prevent the
formation of one man and bogus clubs. This is a problem
which, under the definition of clubs in this State could
not ordinarily arise. In the ultimate conclusions and
recommendations, reference is made to the safeguards
generally desirable. For the present it suffices to add
that so far as concerns workers’ clubs in New South
Wales, consideration may well be given to the possible
need of persons seeking the benefits of the small subscrip-
tion and extensive activities of workers’ clubs, whose
rules may prevent their becoming members unless they
are also members of trade unions. This is a problem
with which there is much to be said on both sides. I am
of the opinion that it may not be really within the subject
of safeguards related to registration; rather is it a ques-
tion of club rules directed to interrupt organisation on
which the Commission is not obliged to make any con-
crete recommendation.
69. In view of what appears in the transcript at page
2650, it is necessary to refer to a criticism by learned
counsel for Tooth’s Brewery, which is completely un-
founded. I add in fairness to learned counsel of standing
that it is based upon a misconception of the evidence
tendered. But since the criticism appears in print it is
necessary to draw attention to it. Learned counsel, in
dealing with this subject said “ ... we simply beg to
point out that on the one hand it seems desirable to
regularise the position of well-conducted returned soldiers’
and sporting clubs; on the other hand control by the
Licensing Act on the number and type of licences would
appear to be necessary, particularly in view of the sug-
gestion in the evidence that not all English workmen’s
clubs are of a high standard. There are sixteen or eighteen
thousand workmen’s clubs. They can get one by paying
five shillings. If they are disbarred or struck off the
roll, they can move next door and get another one for
five shillings”.
70. This comment is based upon the evidence of Mr.
T. Watson, General Manager of Tooth’s, who quoted a
page from “English Life and Leisure” by Eountree and
Lavers, Chapter 3, “Drink” at page 166, The transcript
of evidence shows that the passage is correctly quoted.
It is in these terms —“Registered clubs, the second of the
three sets of places where people drink, present consider-
able difficulties in describing the drink problem because
the law that regulates them is itself unsatisfactory. As
stated above, in 1948 (the latest year for which figures
are available) there were 18,370 registered clubs in Eng-
land and Wales. They varied from eminently respectable
social and political clubs, including the most famous clubs
in the country, to places existing solely as drinking
establishments, sometimes in sordid surroundings”. The
evidence of the witness continues —“The authorities go
on to say that for five shillings one cam obtain a licence
in that country and when the premises are declared they
move over into the next house with the same staff, get
another five shilling licence and carry on”. (Transcript
para. 90512.) From this it is clear that the authors
were referring not to working men’s clubs as counsel
inadvertently suggested, but to the position of clubs
generally.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.
71. The legitimate demand for additional club licences
is clearly established. On the other hand I do not think
that the suggestion made by at least one counsel, that
any genuine club which satisfies the provisions of the Act
should be entitled to registration, is practicable. It is
manifest that there are very many clubs throughout the
State which not only fall within the definition, but which
also would presumably be well conducted; this is illus-
trated —and it is only one illustration —by the large
number of bowling clubs which seek, and so far as their
constitution and membership are concerned —would merit
registration. I do not think it practicable to register
every club without having regard to the reasonable
requirements of the neighbourhood served by the duo;
this is used in the sense already recognised by the Act.
In my opinion consideration should be given to dealing
with the clubs in two classes —sporting and non-sporting.
It is obvious that some sporting clubs would be also
social clubs; on the other hand many social clubs (or
other clubs within the definition in the Act) would not
be sporting clubs. Thereafter, a mode of controlling
registration might be afforded by empowering and re-
quiring the Licensing Court to be satisfied—assuming all
other things in favour of the application—that ‘Laving
regard to the existing facilities for social amenities,
recreation and refreshment or for cultural or political
activities and to the objects of the club, the club is
required to meet a genuine and substantial need.”
72. This criterion is taken with necessary amendment
from the grounds of objection which obtained in England
until 1952, as part of a defence measure. It was revoked
at that date as “an unwarranted interference with rights
of the citizen” but, as appears above, one matter taken
into account was that there was “no prospect of reason-
ably proximate legislation”. Although much time was
devoted in counsels’ addresses to the need for additional
club licences, no suggestion was forthcoming as to any
scheme for regulating the grant of application, if they
were not to be allowed indiscriminately.


73. In my opinion, provision should be made for an
objection open to the licensee or the owner of hotel
premises (or other person directly interested in the
premises to which a licence attaches) that the grant of a
particular registration would result in “undue competi-
tion and economic waste”; as to this, the onus should
be on the objector. The reason which prompts this recom-
mendation appears above: it reflects also the view accepted
to a limited extent by the New Zealand Royal Commis-
sion as appears at p. 344 para. 1938 of the report.
Similarly the report of the Hotel Investigation Com-
mittee 1942-43, Union of South Africa, attached some
importance to what is called “excessive and unfair com-
petition”. As appears at pp. 10 and 11, the Committee
stated that “there is no question that hotels proper are
in normal times faced with severe competition on the
part of unlicensed hotels, clubs, boarding-houses, flats
and similar establishments. The paragraph referred to
quoted the views of an earlier investigation by Professor
Norval, where reference is made to competition qua
accommodation. Whilst it is true that provision for such
a ground of objection would operate to protect the private
interest of a person or company interested in an hotel,
it would tend to serve also the public interest to the
extent that, and so long as, the hotel meets the require-
ments of persons who could not, or did not wish to join
a club.
74. Some scheme of priorities is desirable: if provision
should be made for additional club licences under any
scheme, it would seem desirable to give preference to
clubs in existence at a named date, subject to exceptions
in special circumstances. It is suggested that special
priorities in respect of ex-servicemen’s clubs should re-
ceive consideration, although the form it should take
would depend so much on the general provisions, if any,
for additional club licences. The suggestion made by
counsel for the R.S.L. is in these terms, “the Act should be
amended not by providing for an additional specified
number of club licences to be allocated to returned ser-
vicemen’s clubs but by providing that whenever a sub-
branch of the league can satisfy the Licensing Court
that it has the necessary premises and facilities available
and is otherwise in a position to comply with the pro-
visions of the Act, such sub-branch should be able to
procure a licence without limitation as to the number
of licences.” This, it is claimed, is no departure from
the principle of the Liquor Act that the reasonable re-
quirements of a neighbourhood should be catered for. If
this suggestion by counsel is regarded as reasonable, it
would naturally apply to all genuine sub-branch clubs,
not only of the R.S.L. but also of the Australian Legion
and the Air Force Association. In any case, I recom-
mend that the headquarters or head branch of any of the
organisations abovementioned should have the right to
notice of application by any club purporting to be con-
nected with the association or its sub-branch with a
further right to object (see above). In the alternative,
consideration should be given to continuing the present
requirement of the Act, namely, that such a cub should
be approved and authorised by the headquarters or the
head branch.
75. On the evidence, I am of the opinion that there
should be some provision for what have been called work-
men’s clubs. I am not prepared to recommend a sugges-
tion of learned counsel for the Union of Registered
Workers’ Clubs of New South Wales, that such provision
should be made by proclamation. On the other hand,
such clubs provide special benefits not shared by many
other clubs, and have a feature of small subscriptions.
Consideration should be given to making provision for
a limited number of such club licences. The qualification
for membership was the subject of some discussion before
the Commission. I see no good reason for limitation in
the rules so as to exclude non-members of union. The
successful operation of this type of club in the United
Kingdom seems not at all to depend upon any such
limitation.
76. Generally it is desirable to stress that which has
been referred to above, that if additional club licences
are provided for, learned counsel for the Police Depart-
ment submitted that no great difficulties are found in
policing registered clubs; there were, however, marked
difficulties in respect of unregistered clubs. Whilst it is
plain that it is necessary to guard against the rise of
the mere drinking shop, it is clear that there is no room
in this State for the proprietary club which flourishes
in other places. In recommending that club licences be
not granted indiscriminately, I am mindful that if the
criterion above suggested be adopted, there may well be
a number of genuine and reputable clubs unable to
obtain a licence. Whilst matters of detail as discussed
by counsel are earlier set forth, they are to a large extent
related to machinery provisions as distinct from matters
of principle, and for that reason are not dealt with as
recommendations.
77. One further matter of substance should be made
clear. It was frankly conceded on behalf of the Club
Amenities Association, and doubtless applies to other un-
registered clubs, that many member clubs lacking regis-
tration thoroughly reputable and conducted in a most
satisfactory manner, had been breaking the law, having
regard to the particular way in which members and guests
were supplied with liquor. In some instances the supply
did amount to “illegal sales of liquor” in the club premises.
That is a good ground for objection upon an application
for the grant of a certificate of registration. See section
140 (1) (e). Whilst it is impossible to suggest in general
terms that such an objection should not apply, I regard
as quite reasonable counsel’s suggestion that it should not
be an inflexible barrier to an otherwise qualified club. For
further references, see the following passages of reports
relevant to clubs: —Royal Commission on Licensing
(Scotland), 1931, paragraphs 114, 121-154; Royal Com-
mission on Licensing (England and Wales), 1929-31 C.
XVI, page 103; Royal Commission on Licensing (New
Zealand), 1946, Part XI, C. 62 and paragraphs 1847-1853;
Report of Hotel Investigation Committee (South Africa),
1942-43, page 10.


TERM 7.
WHETHER THE PROVISIONS OF THE LIQUOR ACT RELATING TO THE OBLIGATION UPON HOTEL
KEEPERS TO PROVIDE ACCOMMODATION AND MEALS ARE ADEQUATE TO ENSURE THAT
THE NEEDS OF THE PUBLIC IN THAT REGARD ARE REASONABLY SATISFIED.
(See also Term 9.)
1. An examination of this Term renders it clear that
it is essentially an inquiry into the adequacy of the
liquor legislation touching the obligation upon hotel-
keepers to provide accommodation and meals; the legisla-
tion to be considered includes both sections of the Act
and regulations made thereunder. The remaining words
of Term 7 direct this inquiry thus: are the provisions
adequate “to ensure that the needs of the public are rea-
sonably satisfied.” This concise analysis of the Term is
stated not least because of the fact that a number of
witnesses were called, giving experience of major short-
comings as to both accommodation and meals. A number
of hotelkeepers also admitted that they failed to carry
out their obligations and, as well, counsel and those assist-
ing him received much correspondence containing com-
plaints and illustrations of the clear failure of many
hotelkeepers to comply with their obligations. As appears
at p. 1611 of the transcript, the attention of counsel
interested in this Term was drawn to the precise nature
of the inquiry; “I do not know that much evidence will
he wanted to establish the fact that both as to accommo-
dation and meals, conditions are, to say the least of it,
highly unsatisfactory. The reasons in particular cases
will vary, but I must keep very much in mind the nature
of the reference which, in effect, asks whether the pro-
visions of the Act with regard to the obligations for
accommodation and meals are adequate to ensure that the
public needs are reasonably satisfied. I shall concern
myself with the question of whether there should be
further sanctions than those provided in the Act to
ensure that the standards fall as little short of the
standards required as possible. It might tend to shorten
the evidence if we keep that in mind. Obviously I do
not intend to shut out anything, but the fact that there
is a lamentable falling short seems to be something of
which one could almost take judicial notice” (p. 1611).
It was accepted by most, if not all persons and interests
represented before the Commission that conditions in
both metropolitan and country areas were in general
unsatisfactory as to both accommodation and meals.
There were striking exceptions which tended to show
what could be done by licensees who were both qualified
and interested. Evidence was given of difficulties in
meeting sudden demands for special occasions, of obtain-
ing labour generally, of prohibitive costs and other factors
mitigating in some instances against an hotelkeeper dis-
charging his obligations. On the other hand, there was
clear evidence that many licensees were interested only
in selling liquor and disregarded the house side of the
trading as an unprofitable nuisance. In order to reach
a conclusion whether the provisions of the Act (and
regulations) are adequate as a sanction to enforce the
obligations imposed, it is first necessary shortly to state
what those obligations are; accommodation and meals
have to he considered separately.
THE REVELANT PROVISIONS OF THE ACT AND
REGULATIONS.
2. Section 25 provides that a licensed house shall
contain, in addition to accommodation for the publican’s
family, at least two moderate-sized sitting rooms and four
sleeping rooms constantly ready and fit for public accom-
modation, such rooms to be of a specified minimum size
and there must be two decent places of convenience for
customers. By section 26 the above minimum standard
may be lowered or lessened in respect of an hotel
“situated ten miles or more from the nearest licensed
public house”; nothing turns upon this qualification. By
section 40 (2) any material alteration or addition to the
premises by the owner or licensee without the authority
of the Court may involve a cancellation or suspension of
the licence. With respect to additional accommodation
section 40a gives power to the Court to order such
additional accommodation. Non-compliance with the
order may entail suspension or cancellation of licence.
As is mentioned in another connection, additional accom-
modation embraces such things as “facilities for the
consumption of liquor at tables, in lounges, gardens or
in the open air” (subsection 7).
3. Section 40b empowers the Licensing Court to order
a licensee to provide within a reasonable time additional
bedding, furniture, etc., where public convenience re-
quires it. The penalty may involve suspension of the
licence. By section 65 the licensee is bound to provide
proper and sufficient sanitary appliances— to maintain
them in good condition, keep the premises free from
offensive matter, take reasonable steps to keep the pre-
mises free from flies, vermin, etc. —penalty £5O. Section
66 is an important section dealing with the obligation
of licensees in the actual conduct of the hotel. By sub-
section 1 it is provided that “no licensee shall, without
reasonable cause, proof whereof shall lie upon him, refuse
to receive any person as a guest or to provide him with
meals or accommodation at the charges prescribed or,
if none are prescribed, at reasonable charges”. But the
section shall not be construed to require a licensee to
provide meals at hours other than “the usual meal hours
ordinarily observed in the licensed premises”. Penalty
not exceeding £3O. By subsection 1a (a) the Licensing
Court may either generally or in respect of particular
premises by order prescribe the hours during which
meals shall be obtainable. By subsection (b) (i), regu-
lations may prescribe the minimum standard of quality
and variety for meals and the minimum standard of
sleeping accommodation which must be available on the
premises to persons requiring the same, and may pre-
scribe the charges. With respect to meals, the Licensing
Court has fixed in the metropolitan area, breakfast 8-
9 a.m., dinner or lunch 1-2 p.m., tea or dinner 6-7 p.m.


In the country it has provided for country magistrates
fixing the same hours, with power to vary on special
application. By Regulation 27 of March, 1949, the mini-
mum standard of meals was provided. With respect to
charges, no provision has been made for them by the
Licensing Court; they have been dealt with by the
Prices Commission. By subsection (2) of section 66, the
Court may prescribe a higher standard of accommoda-
tion and meals with respect to any particular premises
and the charges therefor. The penalty for failure to main-
tain standards and observe the charges prescribed is £oO,
In this connection section 126 is important, for by it it
is provided that a conviction under section 66 does not
count as an offense against the Act in proceedings for
cancellation of a publican’s licence under section 124,
or for the disqualification of the licensee under section
125. The effect of sections 124 and 125 so far as is
material, is that an aggregate of four convictions within
three years recorded against a licensee may result in
cancellation. (It is convenient to add that the excep-
tions to section 126 include as well the obligations to
keep a register under section 68a). By section 68a “every
licensed publican shall keep a register in which shall be
entered legibly and in ink,
(a) the name of every lodger, boarder or guest who
takes up his residence in the licensed premises, and
(h) the date and the hour of the day or night or hour
at which such residence is taken up”.
The entries required by this subsection shall be made
immediately upon the reception by the licensed publican
into his house of every such boarder or guest: by sub-
section (1a), a licensed publican shall on demand by a
member of the police force designated in section 63 (1)
produce such register and permit such member of the
police force to inspect it and take copies or notes of any
entries —penalty £lO. By section 70 if the licensee fails
to maintain the premises and the accommodation at the
standard required by the Act (subsection 3), or allows
the premises to become ruinious and delapidated other
than by fire, floods, etc. (subsection 4) his license shall
be liable to cancellation.
4. Section 153 of the Act, which appears in Part XI,
contains the regulation-making power. In connection
with the present Term, the following regulations are
material:
3. (a) The District Inspector in every licensing dis-
trict shall annually furnish to the Licensing Court a
report on every licensed house in his district. The
report shall describe the condition of the premises, fit-
tings, furniture and furnishings, the manner in which
the premises have been conducted during the twelve
months ended the previous 31st December, and shall
state the “number of bedrooms available for the use
of the public and the number of other similar premises
in the locality”. He shall furnish supplementary re-
ports quarterly in April, July and October. The re-
ports and supplementary reports must be placed before
the next sitting of the Licensing Court for the dis-
trict. The inspector must inspect, or cause to be in-
spected every such licensed house in his district at
least once every three months; he must furnish a
report upon all applications made to the Court as soon
as practicable. He must report in the case of the
transfer of a licence whether the applicant or the pro-
posed transferee has previously been an applicant or
proposed transferee for any such licence, with the
result of any previous application. By Regulation 3
(1), on any application for the (grant or) transfer of
any licence, the Court may call and receive evidence
as to the character and suitability for the particular
premises of the applicant as licensee or proposed trans-
feree, and it is the duty of the District Inspector to
make a searching investigation as to the applicant’s or
proposed transferee’s character and suitability, and to
report in writing thereon to the Court. The Court is
bound in dealing with the matter to take into con-
sideration such report and evidence.
5. Before dealing with the precise answer to the ques-
tion involved in this Term, it will be of use to state
shortly two reliable pieces of evidence dealing partly
with genuine difficulties of hotelkeepers, and partly with
suggestions for improvement. Mr. H. Z. Devery, licensee
of the Royal Hotel, Camden, has been associated with
the hotel trade since 1935. In 1942 he was with the
Department of the Interior as supervisor of food sup-
plied for camps and other establishments throughout Aus-
tralia, and became the licensee of his present hotel in
1945. He was a witness whose evidence in all respects is
completely reliable and a valuable contribution to the
problems which arise under accommodation and meals.
He stated that he sought at Camden to build up a big
trade on the house side, but had consistently shown a loss.
His hotel has five or six rooms available to the public,
depending on staff transits. They are occupied all the
time. He provides three meals a day. He stated that a
smaller country hotel with less than ten or twelve rooms
would be unable to conduct it at a profit. The lack of
staff, particularly trained hotel staff, and the high cost of
foodstuffs were contributing factors. He charged for only
the service that was rendered. He expressed the opinion
that a major improvement would be the education of the
licensee and the provision for a la carte menus only, by
which a person is charged for the particular dish ordered.
He added, “I think the table d’hote three course meals
should be a relic of the past.” He gave reasons why, in
his opinion, the a la carte menu would be a major improve-
ment (see p. 1738). He further stated that either a fixed
bed and breakfast tariff should be provided or a room
charge only for travellers who would pay for such meals
as they had, and an inclusive tariff for persons staying
for a week or more if they wished it. In his opinion, such
provision would hold out a better prospect of service to the
public and avoid a loss on the house side.
6. Mr. H. E. Best, secretary* of the Department of
Tourist Activities and Immigration, stated that from his
experience of travelling about the country in the course
of his duties, there were undoubted difficulties in obtain-
ing properly trained staff, but he added that the whole
atmosphere of the house is influenced by the attitude of
the host and the staff under his control. He thought that
throughout the State under prevailing conditions about
50 per cent, of the licensees were anxious to provide
accommodation. He said on the subject of meals, he had
a great deal of sympathy with men trying to run a good
hotel. He made particular reference to the need for
trained hotel managers and staff. He referred to the
courses provided at the East Sydney Technical College
in hotel management and in cookery. He said he knew
of a number of hotelkeepers and staff taking advantage
of the course. His experience enabled him to say that the
losses on the accommodation side in many cases in the
more thickly populated areas were offset by the profits from
bars and lounges; the problem was to provide a reason-
able standard of meals and service at a tariff within the
capacity of the majority of travellers. He later stated that,
being interested in the tourist trade, it was necessary to
improve that standard of hotel accommodation to attract
people from overseas. That the needs of the publie are
commonly not met in relation to both accommodation
and meals is not a feature to be found only in this State.
There is abundant evidence that, for instance in the pro-
vinces in England, in particular districts would be found
only one out of quite a number of hotels ready and willing
to meet the reasonable requirements of the public as to
either accommodation or meals. As to the latter, it was


most marked where there was a request for meals at any-
thing other than what might be called early dinner
hours. See publications by “Bon Viveur” of the Daily
Telegraph (London).
7. Notwithstanding marked difficulties in the way of
hotelkeepers, there is a clear need for making statutory
provision either in the Act or by the Regulations for ensur-
ing that the reasonable requirements as to accommodation
or meals are met. The suggestions which follow are of
two kinds :
(a) Those designed to ensure that the obligations
are carried out in present circumstances where they
can clearly be carried out; and (b) to make alterations
in the statutory provisions to remove as far as possible
some of the difficulties confronting hotelkeepers.
8. (a) In principle, the general scheme of the Act
defining the obligation to provide accommodation and
meals is sound. I have no doubt that one of the initial
difficulties in the way of hotelkeepers is the fixing of
prices by an authority other than the Licensing Court;
this applies particularly to meals. Counsel in the course
of argument, suggested that price control be removed
in the public interest, as it tended to destroy the hotel-
keeper’s incentive and to reduce standards. It was
claimed that the public would be protected by the expres-
sion “reasonable charges” where it appears in section 66,
subsection 1. In my opinion, the more satisfactory course
would be that the control of the price of meals be placed
in the hands of the Licensing Court. I think that some
provision by regulation of the a la carte meal, as
suggested by Mr. Devery would go a substantial way to-
wards improving the position in the public interest.
THE LODGER’S REGISTER.
9. The opporunity for refusing to provide accommoda-
tion, which is clearly availabel and genuinely sought in
many cases, is seized by many hotelkeepers whose
interest is in the sale of liquor only. One of the sugges-
tions under discussion during the course of the sittings
was a method of checking this undoubted evil. I am of the
opinion that an alteration in the obligations as to keeping
of a register of lodgers, etc, (section 68a) is clearly
necessary. It can be made one of the most useful checks
upon the licensee who choose to refuse accommodation
when it is really available. The present form of register
requires that an entry should be made legibly and in ink,
of the name of every guest, etc., who takes up residence,
and (b) the date and hour at which residence is taken up.
As the section now stands, the guest, etc., is not identified
with any room, there is no requirement to state the date
and time of departure, and partly as a consequence there
is no adequate method of checking whether permanent
lodgers are still in residence or whether they have de-
parted quite a long time before inspection. The excuse
for not having available accommodation, frequently takes
the form that a large number of permanent lodgers are
in residence as shown by the register, which may be com-
pletely out of date. For this reason it is suggested that
the section should be amended by prescribing that the
register shall be in a form to include the following:—
(1) that on the first page will be stated the number
of bedrooms in the hotel, the number occupied by the
licensee and his family (and staff), the number avail-
able for the public. No difficulty arises from the pos-
sibility that these figures may alter genuinely from
time to time;
(2) when the name of the lodger or guest is en-
tered, the number of the bedroom to be stated also;
(3) the date and time of departure of each guest
to be entered;
(4) that there be an obligation on the licensee each
month to bring the register completely up to date;
(5) that provision be made in the register for enter-
ing instances where application is made for accom-
modation and refusal follows. Section 68 (1a) provides
for the publican on demand producing his register for
inspection. This does not impose an obligation on
the designated police to inspect the register. In my
opinion, the problem of accommodation as effecting the
public is so pronounced that, although it involves added
duties, there should be not only the power, but an
obligation on the District Licensing Inspector under
Regulation 3a to inspect hotel registers at regular speci-
fied intervals and make a report accordingly. The
period which suggests itself, in view of the other pro-
visions of Regulation 3 (a) is a quarterly inspection.
I am satisfied that the sanctions in respect of offences
in the keeping of a register are not sufficient. In the
first place, there is something to be said for the claim
that the section does not adequately cover the wilfully
false entry. Further the register at present would seem
to comply with the section if it is what might be called
a loose-leaf register. Kirwin v. Long, 1936 (V.L.R. 283)
Such a form of register lends itself so easily to manipu-
lation that it should be forbidden. In my opinion, the
penalty of £lO provided by section 68a is quite inade-
quate in the importance of the keeping of a register.
Moreover, its importance requires, in my view, that
section 126 should be amended by deleting from sub-
section (a) the references to section 66 (1a) and section
68a. This would mean that whereas at present the
offences provided for in the sections just cited are not
considered as convictions under sections 124 and 125,
involving possible cancellation for four offences against
the Act within three years, if the suggested amendment
is made they would be available as offences under those
sections. No hardship can be said to follow from this,
because the Court has clear power in an appropriate
case to direct that having regard to the character of
the offence and the circumstances in which it was com-
mitted, the conviction for the offence shall not be
recorded against the licensee or the premises (section
78b).
10. Regulation 3 (I) as it stands at present provides for
the reception of evidence and reports as to the character
and suitability for the particular premises of a proprietor,
licensee or transferee. (See above.) In my opinion, this
should be extended to apply equally to applications for
renewal. Experience sometimes shows in relation to
particular premises or a particular class of trade, a person
who is able to satisfy the Court with evidence as to his
suitability at the time of his application, may reveal in
his conduct of the house after the granting of his appli-
cation, that he is completely unsuitable. Provision should
be made for this being dealt with on a renewal application.
11. ( b ) Although the statutory provisions in general
are sound in principle, there is, in my opinion, room for
improvement to meet the requirements of the public as
to both accommodation and meals. Set forth above are
the requirements provided by the Act and the Regulations.
But the evidence of the two witnesses, H. E. Best and
N. Z. Devery, summarised above, not only afforded valuable
guidance as to the conditions prevailing, but suggested
lines of enquiry as to the ways of encouraging licensees
to meet the public requirements, and not merely fulfil
their obligations under the law. The general recommenda-
tions which follow are based upon the sworn testimony
before the present Commission, observation in Australia,
in the United Kingdom and abroad, and upon the findings
of earlier Royal Commissions.
12. There is no doubt that the hotel in this State is in
very many, if not most cases, a resort where the sale and
supply of liquor are the primary considerations. They
offer the substantial trade profit, are easier to provide
than either accommodation or meals, and are freer of
difficulties as to staff. The house side of the trade is


undoubtedly subservient to the liquor side of it; the ex-
ceptions which can readily be quoted prove the rule. In
this State, under the law there is no distinction, as for
many years in other countries, between the inn and the
public house; as a consequence, all hotels are obliged to
provide accommodation and meals.
13. A serious question arises whether in the Act and
Regulations in force, sufficient distinction is made between
metropolitan and country areas, and whether as to each
area sufficient regard is paid to the substantially different
requirements in different parts of the areas. This prompts
the suggestion that the Licensing Court be given wide
powers to vary the obligations as to both accommodation
and meals. By way of illustration only, it is difficult to
appreciate why the light meal or “snack” often provided
elsewhere, cannot be encouraged, or indeed required, in
some parts of this State, it would be part of the desirable
provision of food with liquor, rather than liquor alone.
{See Memorandum by H. E. Best, 7 November, 1952.)
It seems readily acceptable by some that the person who
uses the hotel uses it primarily for drink; whilst during
certain hours this is clearly so, there are undoubtedly
times when he would partake of food on his visit to the
hotel rather than go off to some other place in the neigh-
bourhood.
14. A feature of the average hotel is the layout which
discourages the taking of food with liquor. The large
modern bar is attractive for the consumption of liquor
alone, in conditions at periods of over-crowding; and in
some smaller places the layout includes small bars and
rooms, with little else beside a bar counter and a foot
rail. This is related to the practice of what has become
known as “perpendicular drinking.” . There can be little
doubt that this discourages the provision even of light
meals and, on the other hand, encourages drinking to
excess. In connection with the subject of bars, reference
is made to the evidence of one witness who did not approve
of the provision of seats and tables.
15. A consideration of conditions here and abroad
clearly indicates that the failure to meet public require-
ments as to both accommodation and meals is affected
also by the type of licensee. The obligation on the part
of companies in choosing a manager, of brewery companies
in leasing a house owned by or tied to them, in selecting
a lessee, and of the Licensing Court in granting a licence
to an applicant, to be satisfied as to qualifications as well
as the character of the prospective licensee seems clear;
the requirements must vary with the area and with the
hotel. But experience suggests that at any rate as to
some of those concerned, the principal qualification is
the ability to supervise the sale and supply of liquor. This
does not at all overlook the lack of training. The need
for training, both hotelkeeper and members of the staff,
is increasing. There is a course at the East Sydney Tech-
nical College which is making a contribution to this
problem. In England, some breweries undertake the
training of managers and staff. In my opinion, added
attention to the training of staff as well as management
is desirable. In respect of meals, the training of waiters
is not generally undertaken. Courses should be provided;
thereafter practical experience in the hotel will produce
better service to the public.
16. On the accommodation side, some evidence was
given of the difficulties of casuals securing rooms at hotels
which cater for the tourist coach; this class of trade is,
of course, legitimate and is growing, more particularly in
country districts. It presents a problem to the licensee
who may be, and often is, anxious to provide for the
independent traveller. No one during addresses was pre-
pared to offer a practical solution to this problem; it
calls for consideration by the licensing authorities. In
the course of the hearing the question of encouraging
licensees in meeting the needs of the public by some
reduction in the licence fee where accommodation and
meals were regularly supplied, was the subject of discus-
sion. Whilst there is no doubt that difficulties in the way
of some hotels suggest the need for some form of en-
couragement related to the licence fee, no concrete proposal
was offered that could be adopted as a recommendation;
it is, in my view, a subject that merits consideration.
17. A subject which is relevant to this Term, but affects
the public generally, is the question of sanitary provision.
So far as concerns the residential quarters, the provisions
of the Act and Regulations appear to be adequate. But
this is a convenient place to stress the necessity for
stricter inspection of the maintenance of such provision
as is made for both guests and other members of the
public to ensure cleanliness at all reasonable times. It
is understandable that neither licensees or staff can be
expected to see that at every moment the arrangements
continue to be perfect; on the other hand, there are many
instances of failure to comply reasonably with the statu-
tory requirements.
18. subject that produced a. marked conflict of
opinion, was a suggestion that women police should act
as inspectors of hotel accommodation. In my opinion,
there would be a distinct advantage if hotels particularly
were inspected by trained women, on both the accommo-
dation and the meal side. Whether they should be attached
to the Police Department, or to the bureau associated
with the Licensing Reduction Board, would seem imma-
terial. There can be little doubt that such inspectors
would be more likely to produce improvements than would
male members of the Police Force.


TERM 8.
WHETHER THE DISTRIBUTION OF LIQUOR—
(a) AS BETWEEN THE BREWERS AND ALSO MERCHANTS ON THE ONE HAND,
AND HOTEL LICENSEES;
(b) BY SPIRIT MERCHANTS:
(c) BY HOTEL LICENSEES;
IS BEING CARRIED OUT REASONABLY HAVING REGARD TO QUANTITIES AVAIL-
ABLE, REQUIREMENTS OF THE VARIOUS INTERESTS AFFECTED AND NEEDS
OF THE PUBLIC.
1. Term 9, “The extent to which all or any of the
matters arising under the foregoing questions operate to
the detriment of the public,” assumes added importance
in relation to the subject of distribution as framed, be-
cause of the ramifications of those illegal practices abun-
dantly established. It is desirable to analyse the term,
the better to approach the problem involved which, upon
the evidence, is vast, complicated and serious. The essence
of the enquiry is to be found in the first instance in the
words “whether the distribution of liquor is being carried
out reasonably”; but the words immediately following
channel the enquiry by “having regard to the quantities
available, requirements of the various interests affected
and the needs of the public.” The reference to “quantities
available” would seem to predicate a shortage of liquor;
the words following, so far as they relate to the “needs
of the public” are clear and unmistakable. They relate
to the consumer in the widest sense. “Requirements of
the various interests affected,” in my view, embrace a
consideration of the position of merchants, retailers, in-
cluding hotelkeepers, restaurants, clubs and like persons
or organisations who cater for those who are supplied
either for resale or for consumption. In embarking on
the enquiry there is the initial obligation to give effect
to (a), (b) and (c) of the term so as to examine the
facts of distribution —
(b) by brewers and by merchants to publicans;
(b) by spirit merchants supplying hotels, other places
for resale or persons, etc., for consumption as
distinct from resale;
(c) by publicans who, at least ostensibly, supply the
public direct either as individuals or —by way of
illustration —as organisations for special occasions.
2. Obviously, care must be taken to avoid anything
like a stereotyped interpretation of words and expressions
which indicate a purpose to cover a wide field. Indeed,
in attempting what one has chosen to call an analysis,
the intention is to ensure, so far as possible, an orderly
approach to an extremely complicated subject.
3. It is convenient to deal first with “quantities avail-
able.” The inclusion of this expression suggests—and
all parties addressing themselves to the subject in the
course of the hearing have so understood it —that there
was, or is, a shortage of liquor—mainly beer, and more
particularly bottled beer.
4. It is trite to add that if the supply exceeded or
equalled the demand no problem of distribution could, in
the ordinary course, arise, subject always to the question
of hours of trading. The evidence establishes clearly that
from 1942 there has been an increasing margin between
the demand and the supply. Various explanations have
been offered for the shortage which, it is explained, is
temporary; this is examined later. But the fact of a
shortage does not dispose of the matter, so far as con-
cerns breweries, for even an established shortage can be
accentuated by the method of distribution to hotels. This
will involve an examination —among other things—of the
quota system. Meanwhile, it is necessary to make clear
that a variety of persons, firms and companies have seized
on the circumstance that liquor was in short supply, at
least to some extent, to turn it to financial advantage, with
the added consequence that the legitimate demands were
left the worse off, whilst illegal traffic at black market
rates, sly grog and other flagrant breaches of the law
were indulged in. In their train followed an outbreak
of wanton false swearing before the Commission in the
repeated attempts by many witnesses to conceal the facts
or explain away strange happenings. It is probable that
more evils were uncovered in connection with distribution
than in connection with any other Term of the inquiry;
and it is equally probably, indeed in my opinion it is
certain, that the established instances are but a fraction
of the real number of breaches of the law.
5. Before proceeding with the details, I deal with the
suggested reasons for the shortage and, as well, with
the claim that it is temporary. It is proper to point out
that the statements are based upon evidence given during
the years 1951 and 1952, although schedules upon which
some of these facts are based do not go beyond the year
1951. Beer distributed in this State comes from two
sources in this sense; most of it is manufactured within
the State, a proportion only is imported from other States
of the Commonwealth or from abroad. Comparatively
little turns upon beer imported into this State. So far
as concerns beer produced locally, it is clear —as indicated
above —that the supply does not equal the demand. There
are a number of breweries engaged in producing beer,
both draught and bottled; of these, Tooths and Tooheys
may be described as the major producers, although there
are a few other breweries in production and as at the
date of the evidence, two others about to produce. Tooths
Brewery produced 80 per cent, of the beer —including
interstate —sold in New South Wales in the year 1950
(Schedules SO and 83). Of this beer, draught has always
been considerably greater than bottled beer. By way of
illustration, in the year 1939, 23,124,024 gallons of draught
beer were produced (and sold) and 5,723,600 gallons of
bottled beer, by Tooths; in the year 1951, the draught
beer produced (and sold) totalled 43,473,096 gallons,
bottled beer 6,203,290 gallons. In passing it may be men-
tioned that Carlton and United Breweries, producing in
Victoria, have a higher proportion of bottled than draught
than Tooths, this being largely explained by the circum-
stance that the brewery exports large quantities of bottled


beer to various parts of Queensland. Although the estab-
lished shortage of beer affects bottled beer more than
draught beer, I am satisfied, upon the evidence, that no
significance on the subject of distribution attaches to the
marked preponderance in the production of draught beer
over that of bottled beer. Upon the evidence of Mr. S. J.
Burt, Assistant General Manager of Tooth & Co., which
I accept, I am satisfied that at the time of his giving
evidence, the Company was producing to its maximum
capacity, and that no substantial further increases could
be obtained until alterations and additions were completed
and until there was an uninterrupted supply of labour,
ingredients and material (see page 1010). In the Schedule
83, prepared and verified on behalf of the Company,
appears the statement, “As regards bottled beer production,
there have been appreciable but comparatively much
smaller increases since 1946” (Table 15b). Mr. Burt ex-
plained that more bottled beer could be produced, but
only at the expense of draught beer. He added that there
were some difficulties with respect to crown seals, many of
which had to be imported, but no serious difficulty with
regard to bottles. He agreed that in Victoria, South Aus-
tralia and in Tasmania there was relatively much more
bottled beer produced than in Mew South Wales. I accept
his evidence that the question of profit on the one beer
as against the other does not seriously affect the matter.
He explained: “Speaking in round figures, bottled beer
was more profitable to the brewery up to 1949, and is
at the moment, but in the interval between 1949 and
1951, the balance was in favour of draught beer”.
6. Learned Counsel for Tooths drew attention to the
fact that the evidence established that shortage in beer
did not exist prior to 1942. He claimed also that the
shortage was only temporary, in spite of the increasing
population and the increased earning power of those
whom he described as “the beer drinking section of the
community”; he submitted that the shortage would dis-
appear entirely and permanently as soon as Tooths can
carry out major alterations and additions to their main
brewery.
7. On the 25th June, 1952, Mr. T. Watson, General
Manager of Tooth and Company, gave this evidence:—
Q. “At the present time I understand your brewery
is able to supply as much bulk beer as the hotelkeepers
want ?”
A. “We have nearly caught up to the bulk demand
at the present time.”
Q. “Assuming the economic conditions remain as
they are, what would be the position next summer?
Will there be a shortage^”
A. “I think there will be, subject to economic condi-
tions.”
Q. “The demand is always greater in the summer-
time.”
A. “Yes. I might qualify that. We are nearly meet-
ing the demand, but we are also accumulating stocks
for the summer period.”
Q. “What about bottled beer?”
A. “We are right out to capacity at the present
time.”
Q. “Proportionately, how much more bottled beer are
you manufacturing today than you were last Sep-
temper ?”
A. “I would not say manufacturing, but at present
we would be delivering fifteen to sixteen per cent, more
than this time last year.”
8. He added that, “owing to present labour and material
conditions, the Company could not get down to a master
plan. It would be waste of time to put before the Board
any big scheme which might be a complete solution to
the demand and supply position, so all we can do, and
we have been doing over the last five or six years, is to
carry out some small alterations, or attempt to carry out
some alterations, which we can get done during the winter
in readiness for the next summer period. By doing that
we are able to squeeze out a little bit more each year
than we got last year.” (p. 2133). Based partly upon
this evidence and partly from the fact that new breweries
have been established which are either increasing or
commencing output, learned Counsel for Tooth and Co.
suggested that the inference was that probably produc-
tion would equal the demand in the near future.
9. The production of Toohey’s Brewery has increased
since 1939 as to draught beer by 120 per cent., as to
bottled beer by 54 per cent. —(Schedule 84, Table 2). The
Assistant General Manager stated in evidence that some
ten years ago the company had a policy of pushing the
sale of bottled beer; he added that within the last three
years the company had imported new plant for bottling,
but they were not producing to capacity as “our main
trouble has been raw materials, malt in particular”. He
expected that production would improve at any time
because raw materials were becoming easier; their plant
was capable of producing eight to ten per cent, more than
at present (p. 1027). However, the General Manager,
giving evidence some months later, stated that the com-
pany was brewing to capacity in both bulk and bottled
beer. (p. 2150).
10. The Brookvale Brewing Co. Pty. Limited com-
menced production on 12th January, 1952, the average
gallonage per week at that time being 5,274, of which
forty per cent, was bottled beer, the balance bulk. The
whole of the output was distributed to two registered
workers’ clubs. This was the evidence of the witness
called on behalf of the Company, but in the letter 22nd
October, 1951, it was stated on behalf of the Company,
that it did not intend to cater for the hotel trade at all;
and in addition to the arrangement with the Union of
Kegistered Workers’ Clubs, there was an arrangement to
supply licensed golf and social clubs and direct to con-
sumers in the Brookvale area. The feature of this Com-
pany’s production is that in the first instance its beer
is made in concentrated form.
11. The South Australian Brewing Company Limited
does not produce in Mew South Wales, but sells both
draught and bottled beer in this State entirely through
its Broken Hill depot, and to hotels in Broken Hill or
within thirty miles of it; there are some twenty-two hotels
in all in the district owned by the Company. Sales to
these hotels through the depot were as follows:
1939, draught 416,260 gallons, bottled 41,880 gallons
1951, draught 883,253 gallons, bottled 185,142 gal-
lons.
These figures show that the sales have increased in the
following proportions:—
1951 were 2.34 times greater than 1939; of this draught
2.13 times greater than in 1939, bottled 4.42 times
greater than in 1939.
Mr. O. R. Aitken, General Manager of the Company
stated that there were two other brewing companies in
South Australia, one of which produced bottled beer only.
He stated, as at September, 1951, that his Company was
able to supply almost the whole amount of draught beer
sought in their hotels in Broken Hill, but that he did not
think it possible to meet the demand for bottled beer. He
added that his Company did not make any alterations in
bottled beer quotas, because they were bottling to capacity,
distributing to capacity and “there just is not any more”,
(p. 199). Later a document from the Company made it
clear that owing to “sanctions imposed by the brewery”
sales of bottled beer outside South Australia had de-
creased by something between seventy-five and eighty per
cent, (p. 792).


12. The Richmond N.S. Brewing Coy. Pty. Ltd. (in-
corporated in Victoria) supplies beer in New South Wales
to two hotels in the Riverina, the freehold of which is
owned by the Company, and also to certain free hotels.
The supply of beer to hotels in New South Wales was: —
In 1939, draught 390,600, in 1951, 206,865, bottled beer,
1939, 101,372 and 1951, 100,748 gallons (Shedule 86.)
13. Terry’s Brewery, which is one of the smaller local
(Lithgow) breweries, provided limited information due
to difficulties connected with transfer of ownership and
the death of an active official of the Company. There
is no reason to doubt the claim that there are difficulties
in the Company supplying the full information wanted
but, as appears in Schedule 95, the following figures
appear to be reliable:—ln 1945 the draught beer produced
was 50,208 gallons, bottled beer 82,344 gallons. In 1951,
draught beer 381,744 gallons, bottled beer 265,076 gallons.
Of this (1951 product) draught beer supplied to publicans
totalled 74,816 gallons, bottled beer to publicans 37,448
gallons.
14. The Federal Brewery has been in production only
since 1946. It has distributed both draught and bottled
beer direct, but the policy of the brewery has been to
supply bottled beer almost entirely through Mudgee Wine
and Spirit Coy. Pty. Ltd., the Blue Mountains Wine and
Spirit Coy. Pty Ltd. and V. E. Rowe, wine an spirit
merchant, of Tamworth, The figures supplied with regard
to production and distribution are not of themselves im-
portant but, as appears in Schedule 96, for the year 1951
production of draught beer was 231,084 and bottled beer
341,553 gallons. Draught beer supplied to publicans in
that year was 185,382, bottled beer 1,854 gallons. In order
to reconcile these figures, it is proper to draw attention to
the fact, which is illustrative only, that the Mudgee Wine
and Spirit Coy. Ltd. supplied hotels really as an allied
company of the Brewery.
15. The witness, Mr. W. J. Sinclair, a director of
Federal Brewery Ltd. and of the Mudgee Wine and Spirit
Coy., stated that in order to link up “the production with
the distribution, you have to look to the Wine and Spirit
Coy. to see the actual person who does the distribution.
I am satisfied there is no significance in the distribution
arrangements, apart altogether from the fact that the
quantities are relatively small; but, if there are irregulari-
ties by the latter company, the brewery company cannot
escape responsibility. The witness stated that their pro-
duction of draught beer was to full capacity, and that his
company was not able to seet the demand and could not
meet the demand of publicans for bottled beer, (p. 1219)
(see also Exhibit 95).
16. British Breweries Pty. Ltd. produced in New South
Wales in the year 1947, draught beer 361,221 gallons,
bottled beer 278,862 gallons. In that year draught beer to
publicans totalled 331,248 and bottled beer 65,440 gallons.
In the year 1951 draught beer produced amounted to
902,653 gallons, bottled 457,224. In the same year supplies
to publicans totalled 690,359 gallons draught and 30,268
bottled. (Schedule 100.) Mr. H. T. Alse, Manager of the
Company, stated in evidence that “so far as your produc-
tion for the purpose of serving in the hotels is concerned,
you are brewing to capacity at the present time?”
A. “Yes.”
Q. “Capacity of plant, or do you have in mind that
your output is restricted in some way to shortage of
anything ?”
A. “No. We have not suffered from any shortages of
raw materials.”
Q. “Nor of bottles?”
A. “Nor of bottles.” No, that is generally speaking.
Of course there are times when industrial disturbances
may restrict us. (p. 543.)
Later in evidence he stated that it was originally
intended that the Company’s products would be distri-
buted through Home Delivery Service, but later the
practice was adopted of producing and distributing
draught beer through hotels. He had previously stated
that the amount of bottled beer supplied to hotels was
comparatively small, it being the policy to sell the bottled
beer direct to consumers. He agreed with what is obvious
from the schedule produced, that the production of
draught beer had more than doubled since 1947, and that
the production of bottled beer had increased by about
fifty-five per cent. He stated that under the home delivery
system his company supplied about 1,400 individuals.
17. Carlton and United Breweries, producing in
Victoria, provided information by letter as to distribution
of draught and bottled beer between the years 1939 and
1951, but in their records there was nothing to distinguish
between supplies, at any rate so far as concerns New
South Wales, between publicans and clubs. In 1939
550,260 gallons of draught beer were supplied to publicans
and registered clubs, whilst in 1951 the figure was
1,346,058. The figures for bottled beer were in 1939,
141,872 gallons and in 1951, 184,868 gallons to publicans
and registered clubs.
18. Mr. R. G. Fogarty, General Manager of this
Brewery, in the course of evidence stated that in 1951
draught beer was about twenty-five per cent, of the Com-
pany’s total production. Immediately afterwards he was
asked;
Q. “I understand that before the war the percentage
was different?”
A. “Yes, the bottled beer was greater. In 1938-39 our
bottled beer productions was forty-six to forty-eight per
cent, of our total production.”
He continued that the Company’s bottled beer was distri-
buted widely throughout Australia. It interested itself for
many years in Queensland, particularly in the North
Queensland trade. He added that to North Queensland
and Darwin his Company shipped 40,000 dozen a month,
contrasted with about 700 to Sydney "(p.382).
19. Mr. Fogarty further explained that for a period in
1949 and 1950 his Company was able to meet the demand
in full for draught beer. So too for a period of some
months in 1951. But he added that his Company had not
been able to meet the demand with bottled beer “because
they had never been able to meet the demand”. They were
only making half bottled beer now. In October 1951, his
Company inserted an advertisement in the Melbourne
newspapers in these terms: —
“The Facts about the Supply of Beer,
1. Each year our production has increased and our out-
put this year will be well over forty-two million
gallons as against twenty-five million gallons in
1939—an increase of sixty-six and two-thirds per
cent.
Despite this substantial increase, supplies this
summer will be again short of demand, which from
year to year continues to outstrip all our efforts to
extend our production capacity.
2. We are brewing as much beer as is possible with our
present plant and the raw materials available. All
the beer, as soon as it is matured, is distributed with
the least possible delay.
3. Beer is short solely because we cannot more speedily
increase the output. Our three Melbourne breweries
need more buildings, still more plant and still more
raw materials.
4. Everything possible is being done to overcome these
difficulties and fulfil peak period requirements.”


He added that the reason for publishing the advertisement
was that they were coming into the summer months and
knew that they would not be able to supply the full require-
ments that they had been supplying so far as bulk beer
was concerned. Consequently it was felt that the public
should be taken into their confidence and told what their
difficulties were. (p. 385.)
20. It is true that as to the major breweries, bulk beer
has throughout the whole period for which the figures were
available always shown a marked excess in the production,
and therefore the sale of draught beer has clearly exceeded
that of bottled beer. If the mischiefs and evils associated
with distribution be due solely to the shortage of bottled
beer, this disparity between draught and bottled beer would
assume importance. Apart altogether from the circum-
stance that there is no legal obligation to produce more
bottled beer, I do not think that the evidence warrants an
inference that the production of bottled beer is deliberately
kept down because of considerations of profit.
21. It is clear, of course, that once the supply equals
and continues at least to equal, the demand, the mis-
chiefs and evils surrounding distribution would at any
rate be lessened. Efforts were undoubtedly made to lay at
the door of the shortage problems most, if not all, of the
evils surrounding distribution. As will appear in detailed
references to the evidence, the shortage in supply does
not wholly explain the failure in countless instances to
meet legitimate demands. At the moment, it may be
stated very briefly that the evils which it is true could
not have existed but for a shortage, are due to mal-
practices of various kinds. It is necessary to point out
that so far in dealing with shortages, reference has been
made to beer only. It is notorious that there is a shortage
in, for instance, Scotch whisky; but shortages in either
spirits or wines are negligible compared with shortages
in bottled beer.
22. An examination of the evidence from the major
breweries in Hew South Wales, smaller breweries in
Hew South Wales and those from Victoria and South
Australia importing into Hew South Wales indicates, in
my opinion, on the face of it that there is a shortage of
beer, in some cases draught beer, more often in bottled
beer. The suggestion that there was a shortage in 1942
is supported by the circumstance that the quota system
was devised; and there is no doubt that it still obtains.
I have not overlooked the necessity to be satisfied that
the institution of the quota system was genuine, in the
sense that it was forced, upon the breweries by shortages.
Moreover it is necessary to examine the quota system
to arrive at a conclusion whether it is, or is not, affected
either wholly or in part by any improper diversion on
the part of breweries from legitimate sources to unlawful
sources. It will be observed that the examination of this
position proceeds first of all on the basis of supply to
hotels, and secondly to (wine and) spirit merchants.
The fact of a shortage does not dispose of the matter so
far as concerns breweries; for even an established short-
age can be accentuated by the method of distribution
to hotels. This will involve examination—among other
things—of the origin and development of the quota
system.
23. The existence of the quota system, in relation to
distribution, is of course a subject of great importance.
In what follows, attention is drawn to the method adopted
by the two main breweries (and the several smaller
breweries) producing in Hew South Wales, and in addi-
tion —for the purpose of testing the evidence of the
Hew South Wales breweries —the practice adopted by
Carlton and United Breweries producing in Victoria, but
distributing in parts of Hew South Wales. I have no
doubt that the origin of the quota system is accurately
stated in the schedules and the evidence tendered bv
Tooths and Tooheys and supported by the schedule and
the evidence volunteered by Carlton and United
Breweries.
24. The history of the quota system is as follows: Dur-
ing the war, in March, 1942, rationing was introduced by
the Commonwealth Government both in respect of
brewery production and of distribution. This official
rationing continued until March, 1946. During this
period, the Commonwealth Customs Department con-
trolled both brewery production quotas and the distribu-
tion quotas to licensees generally. The actual quotas,
either as to production or as to distribution, did not
remain constant, there being adjustments, especially in
quotas to licensee, as a result partly of representations by
individuals to the Department and partly of Government
policy. For instance, the original quotas were increased
by grants to hotels in localities where defence force
camps were situated, and as well in what were classified
by the Department as industrial areas. The official quota
covered beer without regard to its being draught or bot-
tled. The proportions of draught and bottled allotted
to licensees were generally the decision of the licensee.
Increases in production, and therefor in distribution,
were allowed by the Department from time to time, not
only for the reasons already indicated, but because —and
this applies particularly to the two main breweries Tooths
and Tooheys—the breweries were called upon to supply
both draught and bottled beer to troopships, canteens
and military establishments both at home and abroad.
This short statement of the rise of the quota system de-
pends upon the schedules and evidence tendered by both
Tooths and Tooheys, and there is no room for doubt that
it is a correct statement of the position. In the process
of examining the accuracy of the statement by these two
breweries, reference has been made by the Commission
to the evidence of Carlton and United Breweries which,
in all material respects, accords with the foregoing (See
Schedule 101 and Transcript p. 1557).
26. As already indicated, the official departmental
rationing ceased in March, 1946, and all brewery com-
panies affected took over control both of production and
of distribution to licensees. So fatf“ as concerns Tooths
Brewery the evidence, which I accept, establishes the
position as follows: It should be stated that in view of its
importance, it is not desirable to state in summary form
the system of fixing the quotas without some reference
to necessary details. As to Tooths, production of draught
beer was immediately increased due partly to building
improvements, additions and improvements to plant, and
availability of materials, ingredients and labour. It is
stated, and examination of the evidence bears this out,
that production as at 1951 was approaching its maximum.
So far as concerns bottled beer production, there have
been appreciable but comparatively smaller increases
since 1946. This is governed partly by quantities of
bottles and crown seals available, partly by a deliberate
policy to prefer production of draught as against bottled
because —it is claimed —by so doing the overall require-
ments of the public are more fully and equitably met;
and it is affected by the fact that the manufacture and
distribution of bottled beer involves the use of more
labour and required more storage space than for draught
beer.
26. In fixing quotas for distribution, the quotas in
force at the termination of departmental rationing were
used as the basis of what may be called rationing by the
breweries. Generally speaking, as to both draught and
bottled beer quotas have been increase. Adjustment of
individual quotas have from time to time taken place
and have been reviewed about every two months. Factors
which affect adjustments are, increase in population in
particular areas, development of tourist areas, the com-
mencement of local works, for instance Snowv River


Scheme, the improvements in particular hotel buildings,
special local functions, e.g., Jacaranda Week in Grafton,
Cherry Blossom Festival Week in Orange. In addition,
representations for increased quotas have been received
from various public bodies and public men interested in
particular areas, or individuals, requests from individual
licensees, reports from travellers. The Company claims
that their claims often conflicted, and that as there was a
on their merits and dealt with in accordance with the
production position and the general demand on distribu-
tion. It was claimed, on behalf of the Company, that
draught beer was supplied to more than 1,800 licensees,
that their claims often conflict, and that as there was a
shortage it was impossible to avoid some anomalies. In
most cases winter quotas were less than summer quotas.
With respect to bottled beer, here again the basis
of the quota by the Company was that which existed
under governmental rationing up to March, 1946, aug-
mented by the supplies which became available to civilians
as demobilisation progressed. The evidence discloses that
the whole of the bottled beer was distributed to hotel
licensees, clubs and spirit merchants in New South Wales,
subject to a small proportion exported overseas (mainly
to New Guinea, some to Queensland), some direct to the
services and to shipping. The basic scheme for initial
quotas was a minimum of a dozen bottles for every
thirty-six gallons of draught beer; but this was flexible
and adjustments were made in individual cases on the
lines already stated with respect to draught beer. Details
of other adjustments do not affect the position under re-
view, but are to be found in Schedule 83, Table 15. The
quotas were markedly affected from 1947 onwards by the
coming into force of the Liquor (Amendment) Act of
1946. (This particularly affected new clubs, and as well,
there were additional quotas of bottled beer to new mer-
chants, to which reference is made later.)
27. Toohey’s, from March, 1946 (when Governmental
control ceased) carried on under the quotas then existing;
but as their production increased, a number of draught
beer quotas were increased whilst, with regard to bottled
beer, these also were increased in relation to the com-
pany’s “tied” houses as well as free houses; the quota was
made upon a percentage of “total quota allotted to bottled
beer and the balance to draught beer”; e.g., country hotels
10 per cent, to bottled beer, 90 per cent, to draught beer;
metropolitan hotels 6J per cent, to bottled beer, 93J per
cent, to draught beer. The adjustments of individual
quotas from time to time were made upon conditions
which accord substantially with those applicable to Tooths.
In October, 1949, all hotel quotas of draught beer were
reviewed and, in many cases, increased; and sales in
1950 as a result substantially exceeded all previous years.
In 1951 there was a review of quotas. The company
claimed, and I am satisfied that its claim was correct,
that there is a continuous review of quotas in order to
eliminate, as far as possible, anomalies in distribution
so long as supply falls short of demand. Except for 3,000
gallons a year of draught beer, which goes to Suva, the
whole of the production is distributed in New South
Wales. Except for interstate trade and shipping, the
whole of bottled beer produced is distributed in New
South Wales.
28. Carlton and United Breweries Ltd., after the lifting
of the liquor control, still continued the existing basis of
quota distribution, with necessary modifications due to
movements of population and anomalies discovered from
time to time. As at 1961, there was no question of a
quota in respect of draught beer as the supply met all
normal demands; but bottled beer quotas were continued
as indicated above. The remaining breweries in New
South Wales afford no real assistance on the subject of
quotas, either by reason of the small output, or because
of restricted opportunities of supply to hotels particu-
larly, or because of special methods of trading in some
cases adopted, but in other cases forced, upon the indi-
vidual breweries; they certainly do not affect the state-
ments as to the fixing of quotas extracted from the evi-
dence of the two major breweries.
29. In my opinion, the statement of the position prior
to 1946, and since 1946, as set forth above, correctly re-
ports the quota system as applied to hotels. In the nature
of thing's, some of the above material applies to supplies
to merchants, but reference is made to these later.
QUOTA SYSTEM AS APPLIED TO MERCHANTS.
30. It is necessary now to examine the brewery quota
system as applied to spirit merchants. Such traders under
“spirit merchants’ licences” are authorised to sell and
dispose of “two descriptions of liquor, namely (a) malted
liquor; (b) liquor other than malted liquor,” but only
in quantities of not less than two gallons of the same
description of liquor (Liquor Act, section 15a). The
immediate enquiry is as to the supply of beer by breweries
to such merchants.
31. The following breweries supply beer (and in some
instances other liquor) to spirit merchants: Tooth’s,
Toohey’s, Richmond, Federal, Terry’s, British, Brook-
vale; see also Carlton, United and South Australian Brew-
ing Coy., each of which produces outside this State, but
delivers within.
32. With respect to sales to merchants, malpractices
by some merchants were established, which related to
bottled beer. For this reason the figures as to draught
beer for the years between 1939 and 1951 appearing in the
schedules, under the heads of the respective breweries
are not analysed. In some few cases the periods covered
are not identical because, as to them they were not produc-
ing as far back as 1939. Over the whole period (1939-51),
as would be expected, the supply to merchants is mainly
if not entirely bottled beer. The information as to these
supplies appears in verified schedules supplemented by
additional evidence of witnesses. Tooth’s supplies to
spirit_merchants totalled in 1939, 39i7,958 gallons; 1951,
1,153,476 gallons; this represented 7 per cent, of the total
sales. Supplies to hotelkeepers represented 86.5 per cent;
to clubs, 1.5 per cent.; to others (Defence Force canteens,
etc.), 5 per cent (Schedule 83, Tables 7 and 8). Supply
of draught beer to merchants ceased in 1942, portion of
this supply was converted into bottled beer supply, under
a Control of Liquor Order; this went to W. Park Pty.
Ltd. but ceased in 1950 (Table 12),
33. The Assistant General Manager (S. J. Burt) for
Tooth’s was examined on the figures as to distribution
both to publicans and to spirit merchants. His attention
was drawn to the fact —clearly established —that although
the overall production of bottled beer was a half a million
gallons greater in 1951 than in 1939, the supply to hotel-
keepers was a decrease of substantially the same quantity;
and that during the same period the increase to spirit
merchants was about three-quarters of a million gallons.
His explanation was that during the period, spirit mer-
chants’ licences increased from 232 in 1939 to 506 in
1951, and that in particular, the new merchants licensed
in 1946 (following the amending Act) received quotas
for the first time. (The use made of merchants’ quotas
generally is dealt with later.)
34. Toohey’s provided verified figures between the years
1943 to 1951 (Schedule 84, Table 3). Supplies to spirit
merchants for the year 1943 were 40,575 gallons; for
1961, 275,164 gallons—a total increase over the period of
28.2 per cent. Over the same periods supplies to hotels
increased by 53.4 per cent., whilst to defence services,
shipping, railway refreshment rooms, export, etc., showed
a decrease from 651,756 gallons in 1943 to 85,162 gallons


in 1951. A check on these figures is to be found in Table
6, in which it is shown that supplies to merchants in
1951 were 21 per cent, of the total supplies of bottled
beer. In Table 6 appear the supplies from 1939 to 1951
to fourteen named merchants. The licensing of new clubs
following the 1946 amending Act affected quotas gener-
ally. (For convenient reference, it is here noted that
3,000 gallons a year of draught beer goes to Suva). Inter-
state bottled beer in 1951 required 1,600 dozen to Queens-
land merchants, interstate shipping 5,240 dozen, the bal-
ance of the bottled beer produced being distributed in
New South Wales (Schedule 84, page 7).
35. A striking feature of the supply by Toohey’s to
merchants was the position in relation to the Sydney
Liquor Service, the licence for which was held by one
Collins. His supplies from the brewery began in 1946
with 2,450 gallons and rose in 1951 to 62,752 gallons;
although there were eleven merchants (most of them of
the highest repute) with quotas in 1939, none of these
merchants reached the figure of 25,000 gallons in 1951.
Moreover, the current quota of Sydney Liquor Service
was sworn to be 1,020 gallons a week, the nearest to that
being 592 gallons (Schedule 84, Table 6). I entertain
no doubt that this was so striking as to call for
explanation, and in view of what was already revealed of
the clandestine business arrangements between Nolan and
Mallet in Tooth’s beer, I deemed it necessary to examine
critically the evidence from the sales manager (W. M.
Rain) who was said to be the only one in a position to
explain. The explanation shortly was that the brewery,
having decided on a new system of supply to what may be
called consumer customers, allotted increased quotas to
an existing merchant. Meanwhile, Collins, who had bought
a spirit merchant’s licence situated near to the brewery,
sought a quota from Rain’s predecessor —one Lyons,
deceased—but was at that time refused. The arrangement
with the spirit merchant prior to Collins was that it (a
company) should supply to consumer customers nominated
by the brewery; this, in the course of time, proved unsatis-
factory so that Lyons transferred the quota from this
company to Collins, again limiting him to nominated
customers.
36. Learned counsel for Toohey’s conceded that the
arrangement with the Sydney Liquor Service, at any rate,
appeared to be a departure from what might be described
as usual practice, and therefore demanded investigation.
The possibility that some employee in Toohey’s was impli-
cated in a scheme similar to that evolved between Nolan
and Mallet with respect to Tooth’s beer added grounds for
suspicion; but in the light of the evidence of Collins
(p. 2255) and Rain (p. 2393), I am satisfied that Mr.
Dovey (as he then was) is correct in suggesting, as was
claimed by Mr. Reynolds, counsel for Toohey’s, that there
is no ground for a comment that it was other than a
proper business arrangement. Nothing emerged in the
evidence to indicate that any employee of Toohey’s was
involved. However, as will appear later, in spite of what
I find to be a proper arrangement as between the brewery
and the Sydney Liquor Service, the latter did supply in
breach of that arrangement (p. 1024, para. 44393).
37. BROORYALE BREWERY which, as appears
earlier, commenced production in 1952, supplied between
12th January, 1952, and the sth March, 1952, bottled beer
to merchants totalling 5,770 gallons (Exhibit 96 and
Transcript p. 1220). In addition it supplied to unlicensed
R.S.L. and golf clubs 10.5 per cent, of its total bottled
beer produced.
38. TERRY’S BREWERY LTD., which produces in
the Lithgow district, supplies two merchants in the metro-
politan district with 158 dozen and 25 dozen a week,
respectively. Outside the metropolitan district it supplies
R. Chick Pty. Ltd., Leura, and the Westr/n Wine and
Spirit Trading Coy., Lithgow; in 1951 the brewery ob-
tained “the whole financial control and interest” in the
latter company. This, in effect, means that through the
Western Wine and Spirit Company Terry’s Brewery really
supplies direct (p. 1501).
39. BEITISH BREWERY PTY. LTD. was unable to
supply figures prior to 1949. In a letter to the Crown
Solicitor, the company stated that it was unaware of any
sales to merchants prior to 1948; in that year supplies
were very small (para. 94). During the years 1949-1951
(figures for these years being the only complete ones
available) the company supplied bottled beer in com-
paratively small quantities to fourteen named merchants:
1949 — 19,210 gallons.
1950 — 19,098 gallons.
1951 — 16,518 gallons (Schedule 100).
This company has developed what is called a home delivery
service. In evidence the manager of the company (H. T.
Alse) stated that 80 per cent, of the company’s production
was distributed at retail prices to “liquor supply services”
which, he claimed, was legitimate trading for a brewery.
The brewery company formed “a number of private com-
panies with different names, which are wholly owned
subsidiaries” (p. 2284).
40. CARLTON AND UNITED BREWERY LTD. (in-
corporated and producing in Victoria) sold to spirit mer-
chants in New South Wales in 1939 53,026 gallons; in
1951, 102,736 gallons.
41. THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN BREWING COY.
LTD. confines its activities by way of distribution in
New South Wales to Broken Hill. The evidence indicates
that there are no supplies of beer, or indeed any other
liquor, to merchants. It would appear that the sales of
bottled beer outside South Australia over the last twelve
months have decreased by between 75 and 80 per cent,
(para, 33466).
42. RICHMOND N.S. BREWING COY. PTY. LTD.
produces in Victoria and supplies beer to spirit merchants
in New South Wales; draught beer is delivered in negli-
gible quantities (1950, 7,704 gallons; 1951, 25,056 gallons).
Bottled beer supplied to spirit merchants totalled in 1929
201,502 gallons; in 1951, 256,002 gallons. Of the twenty-
one merchants in this State supplied with beer by this
company, all but two carry on business in Eiverina or the
southern parts of the State; two Sydney merchants re-
ceived respectively in 1949 21,296 gallons; and 1951, 5,800
gallons (R. S. Buttle Ltd.); 1949, 280,646 gallons; 1951,
23,656 gallons (Richmond Brewing Co. (N.S.W.) Pty.
Ltd.). The latter company would appear to be a direct
distributing medium for the brewery and supplies other
spirit merchants, licensed clubs and restaurants, hotels,
private firms, beer for special functions and as well to
unlicensed places for resale (Exhibit 93). The New South
Wales company supplied unlicensed places for resale, but
claimed through its management in this State to be
unaware that a breach of the Liquor Act was involved in
such resale (1518).
43. THE FEDERAL BREWERY LTD. supplies beer
in substantial quantities to ten spirit merchants; the
present company has been operating since 1946. It
supplies bottled beer almost entirely through the Mudgee
Wine and Spirit Coy. Ltd., the Blue Mountains W. & S.
Coy. Pty. Ltd., and V. E. Row. Of the three named, between
the years 1946-51, the first received 694,590 gallons, the
second 148,666 gallons, and the third 33,100 gallons. The
Mudgee company received in 1951, 231,258 gallons. The
importance of this large supply is that the shares in the
Mudgee company are owned by fifty shareholders, all of
whom have shares in the Federal Brewery and two-thirds
of the bottled beer production went to the Mudgee com-
pany, which sold it at the retail price Op. 1219)


44. The significance of the link between the brewery
and the Mudgee company is that the latter for a limited
period supplied bottled beer to Carl Thomas, although the
witness giving this evidence claims that it was thought
to be licensed. This claim would seem to be supported
by the fact that the company made a return to the
Licensing Court on which the amount of licensing fee —
by Carl Thomas —would be payable (para. 52621). But
it also supplied the Grosvenor Club, a so-called taxi-
drivers’ club with some 800 members, who are afforded
drink at a bar as well as by the use of the locker system
though the club, so called, is unlicensed (p. 960). The
importance of what may be called the direct supply is
this: that whatever may be said by way of excuses for
the failure of breweries to police the ultimate destination
of its products to resellers engaged in unlawful business,
where a brewery is financially interested in the distribut-
ing house, it may fairly be said to be directly responsible.
This criticism would apply—if, in fact, such sales are
made to unlicensed places—to three breweries, two
(Federal Brewery and Terry’s Brewery) producing as
well as supplying in this State, the third (Richmond
N.S. Brewery) producing in Victoria and distributing in
New South Wales. So far as breweries are concerned with
distribution, naturally most of the evidence related to
beer, both in bulk and bottled. It has been pointed out
that Tooth’s supply 82 per cent, of beer distributed in
New South Wales. But reference is necessary to the fact
that Tooth’s brewery carry on the business of wine and
spirit merchant in a very large way. Distribution by
them is set forth fully in Schedule 83, Table 14, which
has been verified. The figures reveal that in 1939 Tooth’s
sales of wines were 18.7 per cent, of the total wine sales
in New South Wales; in 1950, 11 per cent. Their trade
in spirits, in 1939 was 43.5 per cent, and in 1950 30.4
per cent, of the total spirit sales for the State. These
sales comprise direct deliveries to licensees and deliveries
to licencees by spirit merchants and charged to Tooth’s
by the merchant and by Tooth’s to the licensee. (The
latter are about 2.3 per cent, of the total spirit sales
and 59.9 per cent, of the total wine sales.) There are
no actual figures for Tooth’s sales delivered by merchants
to hotelkeepers and charged to the latter by Tooth’s, and
it is for this reason that these figures are estimates on
the actual values of these sales, and the estimated price
per gallon based on sales from the wine and spirit depart-
ment of the company.
45. Toohey’s also carry on business as wine and spirit
merchants. There are no records for this company from
1939 to the 2nd October, 1944, so the only complete years
are 1946 to 1951. In 1946 the sales of wines were,
publicans 63,160 gallons, others 4,658 gallons; in 1951,
65,246 gallons and 1,893 gallons respectively; for spirits,
1948, to publicans 98,032 gallons, to others 27,910 gallons;
in 1951, to publicans 131,286 gallons, to others 167,229
gallons (see Schedule 84, Table 7). As to both of these
companies there is nothing in the evidence to suggest they
w’ere directly or indirectly involved in sales to unlicensed
persons for resale. The question how far they could be
expected to discover breaches by either hotels or merchants
supplied by them is dealt with later.
46. With respect to distribution by breweries generally,
the evidence was supplied by printed schedules showing
sales (essentially based upon production figures which
normally agree) and by oral evidence. As to figures
in the schedule, there is a check upon these by excise
authorities and by returns of purchases from breweries
required by the Licensing Court. There is no suggestion
that the figures are unreliable. As to the oral evidence,
I have not been referred to, nor am I aware of any evi-
dence, indicating that breweries were directly involved in
improper distribution. With respect to supplies to tied and
*09329—5
free houses respectively, the evidence does not warrant any
inference that there has been unfair discrimination. There
is undoubted evidence that hotels leased by, or managed
on behalf of breweries, did engage in unlawful sales at
hlackmarket rates and did otherwise supply liquor for
resale to persons having no license or no permit to sell.
In the case of Tooth’s quite a number of licensees were
shown to be engaged in this type of trading. In the
case of Toohey’s also some of their hotels were involved,
and in the case of British Breweries one hotel business
really conducted as a subsidiary of British Breweries
Limited, did supply the Ziegfeld; but on discovery, the
Hcencee was forthwith dismissed. Many merchants sup-
plied by Tooth’s engaged in unlawful distribution on a
larve scale. Two instances of merchants supplied by
Toohey’s were also established The action taken by the
two major breweries following the discovery during the
Commission of malpractices is shown by the exhibits ten-
dered; in particular see Exhibit 142.
47. But a serious question arises as to whether there was
any duty on breweries to police hotels and merchants
supplied by them and, if so, whether a proper performance
of that duty would not have discovered the unlawful
practices established during the sittings of the Commis-
sion. As to hotels managed on behalf of the brewery,
there is a clear duty on such brewery to police the distri-
bution of its product. Leading Counsel for Tooth’s agreed
that the company “as owner of some 600 hotels owes a
measure of duty to the public to police the conduct of its
licensees.” On behalf of Toohey’s learned Counsel sub-
mitted that “a proper and fair approach is that the
breweries should not be called upon to investigate what a
duly licensed person does with the product unless they
have some notice of irregularity.” The General Manager
of Tooth’s (Watson at p. 2077), and of Toohey’s (Calla-
way at p. 2544), each agreed that as the brewery is licensed
by the .State it has some obligation to police dealings with
its products. It was claimed that as to merchants “the
duty was not so clear.” On the evidence it is not possible
to find that any brewery was in fact aware beforehand
of the malpractices proved before the Commission. Much
of Counsel’s addresses was devoted to the difficulties in
the way of discovering some of them,’particularly black
marketing and supplies to retailers having no licence.
Notwithstanding the difficulties I find it impossible to
accept the claim that reasonable diligence or an effective
exercise of that obligation which is admitted, would not
have revealed at any rate some of the offences regularly
being committed by both publicans and merchants.
MERCHANTS TO HOTEL LICENSEE-
PART OF TERM S (a).
48. It is observed that so far as concerns distribution
of beer as between merchants and hotel licensees, this
question was scarcely dealt with in addresses by parties
interested, for the reason that it would appear not to be a
regular part of merchants’ trading. The breweries supply
both hotel licensees and merchants with bottled beer; the
practice of a merchant supplying any of that beer to hotel
licensees is regarded unfavourably as being in competition
with the brewery. This is clearly demonstrated by the
action taken by Tooth’s Limited to reduce quotas of mer-
chants found to be supplying bottled beer to hotels, even
at proper prices. During the course of the Commission’s
sittings and prior to the 21st March, 1952, it was estab-
lished that a number of spirit merchants to whom Tooth’s
supplied bottled beer under a regular quota had been
supplying unlicensed restaurants. The evidence revealed
that this was a common practice in which reputable and
disreputable merchants alike were engaged. Following
this, Tooth’s addressed to a number of merchants a letter


dated 21st March, 1952, advising them of a reduction in
the weekly quota of bottled beer; the letter contained also
the following two paragraphs:—
We also desire your written assurance that as regards
such reduced quota you will not sell any portion there-
of to any unlicensed restaurant, or to any hotelkeeper ,
or to any person or company, including licensed res-
taurants where resales to the general public involving
a breach of the law occur.
We also desire an assurance that existing supplies to
individual members of the public will not be curtailed
as a result of the reduction. (See Exhibit 92.)
49. The terms of the letter make it clear that lawful
sales to hotels are frowned upon and visited with a
penalty, as were sales which enabled the purchasers from
merchants to engage in flagrant breaches of the law. In
the course of his evidence the Assistant General Manager
(S. J. Burt) admitted that under the Commonwealth
quota system, the merchants were obliged to supply hotels,
but the brewery “decided that (they) would disapprove
from now on of sales by these companies to hotels”
(para. 52834). Earlier the witness had stated that he
was unaware that for many years past the merchants
had in fact been supplying hotels. That a considerable
quantity of beer was sold by merchants to hotelkeepers
was clearly established, and to some extent was conceded
by Mr. Lindsay, Secretary of the Wine and Spirit Mer-
chants Association; he was asked —“You have heard it
said here, and you see by your Schedules that many of
your members sell dozens of gallons of bottled beer week
after week to hotelkeepers at the retail price?” A. “Les,
I know. Some of (our) members sell a great deal” (p.
1146). But the witness could offer no assistance as to
whether the hotelkeepers so supplied sold at correct prices.
It is clear that although no breach of the law was involved
in supplies at correct prices by merchants to hotel licen-
sees, the brewery clearly sought to restrain merchants
from such distribution. This they were entitled to do;
but it is nevertheless clear that since it involved tres-
passing on what was regarded by the brewery as its field
of supply, it was sought to prohibit it entirely for the
future.
50. In the light of these facts, two consequences fol-
low; (1) any brewery was entitled to ensure that hotel
licensees were not supplied with bottled beer by merchants,
and (2) any question of whether distribution of beer by
spirit merchants to hotel licensees was being carried out
unlawfully having regard to the needs of the public does
not, and it cannot, call for comment. (The question of
supply by merchants to unlicensed restaurants and to
restaurants with permits, which is quite a different prob-
lem, is dealt with later under (b) of this Term of
Reference.)
TERM 8 (b).
DISTRIBUTION BY SPIRIT MERCHANTS.
51. As already set forth, the failure of merchants to
supply hotel licensees does not substantially arise under
8 (a) for the reasons stated; but under (b) of Term 8,
it is necessary to examine the question whether distribu-
tion of liquor by spirit merchants otherwise is being
carried out reasonably. Most of the evidence centred
upon the distribution of beer, but it will be necessary to
deal with the distribution as well of wines and spirits.
On the clearest possible evidence, a large number of
merchants have beyond doubt carried out distribution
unlawfully, and in some instances at least in aid of large
scale breaches of the law, and as well in a manner that
is aptly described as being at black market rates and in
general demonstrably at the expense of legitimate public
needs. The merchants involved fall into 2 classes;
(a) Reputable merchants who may or may not have
appreciated that they were in fact aiding serious
breaches of the law, but who sold at correct fixed or
reasonable prices.
( h ) Disreputable merchants who openly facilitated
serious breaches of the law and, in addition, secured
for themselves extortionate prices for the product
supplied. That which is of greater importance is that
in respect of the second class of merchants, unequivocal
and deliberate false swearing was indulged in in the
effort to hide the truth from the Commission. That
in some instances the truth was not uncovered is
indisputable. The result is that the clear inference
follows beyond the field of speculation, that some
merchants in fact did engage in serious malpractices
but escaped detection.
52. Although beer assumed a prominent place in dis-
tribution by spirit merchants, whisky—and more especi-
ally Scotch whisky—was a subject of sales by merchants
and others in circumstances involving both breaches of
the law and excessive and—in some cases —extortionate
prices. Initially the cause of malpractices was shortage
due to the outbreak of war in 1939, resulting in a 40
per cent, cut to local distributors and also the prohibition
by the Commonwealth Government of importation of
Scotch whisky for more than two years, so that distributors
were obliged to sell from accumulated stocks. From 1943
onwards importation for a period amounted to 40 per
cent, of the total imported in 1938-39. Under Common-
wealth control the price of beer and of whisky was fixed;
after that control ceased the price of beer was, but of
whisky was not, fixed (p. 1034). The price of whisky
was then left to arrangement amongst dealers in it. As
between the Wine and Spirit Merchants Association and
the Wine Producers Association an arrangement exists
for a discount to Tooth’s and Toohey’s in respect of liquor
supplied to an hotel owned by or tied to the brewery “if
the goods are ordered by a licensee to be charged to the
brewery” (para 44752). The Secretary (Mr. Lindsay)
stated that there was no document evidencing the arrange-
ment for such discounts or the arrangements with the
Wine Producers’ Association, or with U.L.V.A. (p. 1036) ;
no such arrangement existed in respect of merchants or
distributors who were not members of the associations
mentioned.
53. The witness’s attention was drawn to the practice
of supplying unlicensed resellers and of charging exces-
sive prices. He believed that some of his members did
supply for resale to unlicensed places. He did disapprove
of the practice as illustrated, but on the question being
put to him that some of these unlicensed resellers charge
£3 16s. Bd. for a bottle of whisky, he stated that whilst
his association did have inspectors they did not attempt
to police unlicensed restaurants where as to prices ‘the
sky is the limit”. Asked whether he did not think his
association could make some contribution “if you have
to sell to these places, by policing them just as well, he
stated that they were of opinion that they had no power
to do it”, (p. 1034). A little later when asked what
his association thought of the practice, having’ regard
to the public interest, he stated that they would be con-
sidering the position at a special meeting of the com-
mittee the next day (p. 1039). (Following this evidence
by the Secretary, a witness Cavill, whose company was a
member of the association, when asked whether the fair
thing was being done by the community in supplying


people who resold at exorbitant rates, answered “Until
our association directs otherwise I feel I am privileged
to sell 2 gallons and over to any unlicensed* person”.)
(Para. 47792).
54. On being recalled, Mr. Lindsay stated that follow-
ing a meeting of his committee, certain resolutions were
passed. The terms were: —
1. That it is the opinion of the Association that the
right of members to sell liquor in accordance with the
terms of the spirit merchant’s licence issued to them
under the provisions of the Liquor Act, 1946, is highly
desirable and should be maintained.
2. That the Association expects members to conduct
their business in accordance with the recognised stan-
dards of business ethics which have the approval of the
community generally.
3. That whilst each member must make his own
decision as to the extent and nature of his trade, the
Association considers that all liquors which may be
in short supply at any time should be equitably dis-
tributed to all sections of the public in the same relative
proportions as sold when ample supplies are available.
4. That the committee of the Association thinks it
undesirable to take any action in respect of particular
interests until all evidence on that aspect of the enquiry
has been given and all sides have had an opportunity
of expressing their viewpoint (pp. 1141-1143).
55. In relation to the above resolutions embodied in a
circular to members, the Secretary stated that as to Mo. 1,
“we felt that as an association we had no power to
interfere or direct the individual conduct of a merchant’s
business, but having regard to ordinary standards of
commercial and business conduct, we expect members
to maintain those, as we have power under our rules to
discipline any member who carries on in a business way
derogatory to the trade” (para. 49449).
56. When his attention was drawn to paragraph 4 of
the resolutions, he explained that “at the time that the
meeting was held we knew a further meeting would have
to be held. We anticipated that all members of this
Association who would be called in respect of distribu-
tion of bottled beer would have been heard in the course
of a few days or a day or two after the Commission
resumed”. He explained later that he did not expect that
all 68 of his members were going to the called and
added that he imagined that on receipt of the resolutions
conveyed to members by the circular “if any member
felt that he was selling to any particular places where
there was some doubt in his mind whether they were right
or wrong, if he so felt they were wrong he would dis-
continue” (p. 1143).
57. As already stated, it is clear that distribution by
many spirit merchants is not being carried out reason-
ably in this sense; that much of the liquor available to
them has been diverted from the persons legitimately en-
titled to expect it, to persons and organisations not
at all entitled to it, and—in some instances particularised
later —using that which they have secured, to engage in a
trade which extends from the merely irregular to the
seriously criminal. Schedules were tendered in evidence,
showing the dealings by members of the Wine and Spirit
Merchants’ Association (Schedule 91) and also of the
Wine Producers’ Association (Schedule 93), some of
whose members hold spirit merchants’ licences. The find-
ings which follow are based partly on the information
contained in these schedules, together with Schedules
87-90 but in greater detail from the oral testimony of
a number of witnesses; it is essentially upon this latter
testimony that the findings of serious malpractices are
based.
58. Schedule 79 lists 26 full members and 37 associate
members of the Wine and Spirit Merchants’ Association.
The more detailed Schedule 91 is in two parts: Part A
shows in table form the total annual sales of liquor by
full members and then the quantities of beer, whisky (and
other spirits) and wine supplied to publicans, other
merchants (including breweries), restaurants with per-
mits, restaurants without permits (night clubs, etc.)
service canteens and messes, etc., other unlicensed per-
sons, etc. Part B provides similar information from
associate members. In addition, figures in schedule
form were tendered by four other merchants independ-
ently. Other figures as to distribution of liquor of various
kinds (including beer) were supplied by the spirit sec-
tion of the Grocers and Storekeepers’ Association of
M.S.W. (Schedule 94).
59. Mo purpose is served by doing more than sum-
marising the nature of the information contained in
these schedules. During the sittings of the Commission,
the details appearing in these schedules, however, afforded
valuable material for tracing the ultimate destination
of liquor distributed. For the rest, reference is here
made to the nature of the schedules in order to facili-
tate the work of such authorities as may be obliged to
acquaint themselves with the activities of individual
merchants. The summary reveals that there are many
merchants who distributed various liquors at all times,
not only in accordance with the licence held, but in
strict compliance with the Liquor Act in relation to the
persons or places supplied; and at fixed or reasonable
prices. Other merchants are shown to have supplied
liquor irregularly and in quite negligible quantities to
persons or places thus enabled to resell in breach of the
law; most of the merchants falling within this cate-
gory failed to appreciate that, for instance, a restaurant
without a permit which supplied patrons out of stock
infringed provisions of the Liquor Act. Yet another
class of merchants supplied appreciable quantities to
resellers who engaged in unlawful trading. In some
instances such suppliers claimed to be unaware that they
were aiding breaches of the law; others frankly admitted
that they realised it, but attached little importance to
it. In.a few cases the schedules disclosed constant and
large supplies of all kinds of liquor amounting to most
serious malpractices. This last class of merchant dis-
covered not only from the schedules, but independently,
is the only class calling for detailed examination. In
view of the large number of licensed spirit merchants, it
will be understood that only a proportion could be called
as witnesses; some of these were called because Counsel
assisting the Commission were put on enquiry by the
facts revealed in the schedules; others on information
received from reliable sources. The remainder were
called without design and in the effort to have before the
Commission a representative cross-section of the trade.
I am satisfied that by the use of this procedure a safe
guide was provided in order to ascertain whether dis-
tribution by merchants —within Term 8 (b) —was being
reasonably carried out.
60. As above indicated, the evidence disclosed unreason-
able distribution by many spirit merchants; it is so
characterised mainly because it was made to persons
and places not entitled to receive it, and to the detriment
of the public thus denied legitimate supplies. The total
number of merchants involved in irregular or improper
supply for resale, involving a breach of the Liquor Act
by the person or firm supplied, is 47 (Schedules 87-
91: 93 and consolidated schedule with transcript marked).
Many of these merchants supplied unregistered clubs and
restaurants without permits in negligible quantities and
never at excess prices; these all appear in the volume
marked “Schedules” and called for no special comment.
61. The following merchants I find beyond reasonable
doubt —in some cases the fact was admitted —supplied
liquor at what may properly be called “black market


rates”; —A. T. Baldwin, Campsie Home Deliveries (Fer-
guson), Catlan Bros., Walter Cavill Pty. Ltd., House of
Hayes, McLaughlin & Coy. Ltd., R. G. Page, Robyns
Pty. Ltd., Y. P. Taffer, G. G. Yeitch
(1) A. T. Baldwin holds a wine and spirit license at
Collaroy. He admitted that he had often sold both
beer and spirits at black market prices, and that his
books do not correctly record his dealings in liquor.
(2) Campsie Home Deliveries. One A. Ferguson, is
the manager of this firm, which is a grocery business
with a spirit licence held by Ferguson. It supplied
the Grosvenor Club with 10 dozen bottled beer a
month, but Ferguson claimed that that had now ceased.
On his own admission he supplied this so-called club at
black market rates; his employer was unaware of the
fact, and he (Ferguson) kept the excess price, which
“did not go through the till.”
(3) Catlan Brothers, Earlwood. F. Catlan, who con-
trols the business, that of a spirit merchant, claims
that it is owned by his wife. This illustrates the exist-
ence of a (suburban) licence to meet the require-
ments of the neighbourhood; nevertheless he supplied
the Riverview Restaurant at black market rates and
kept no proper stock books. He claims on oath to have
bought from one Yalentine at a correct price 1,600 to
1,800 dozen bottled beer which Yalentine bought from
Cavills Pty. Ltd. at black market rates. On Catlan’s
story, Yalentine was making him, Catlan, a gift of
from £BOO to £9OO. There are no records of these large
dealings with Yalentine. There is no doubt that he
engaged in an irregular transaction with Yalentine
(and one Lynch), and that he was guilty of false
swearing.
(4) Walter Cavill Pty. Ltd. One Cavil! is the
managing director. He actively indulged in most
extensive black market trading, supplying amongst
others, the notorious nightclub known as Sammy Lee’s
Restaurant. He gave evidence on several occasions;
when recalled he admitted that earlier he designedly
gave false testimony, that he conspired with his em-
ployee Bingham that he, Bingham, and others should
give false evidence before the Commission. He admitted
that he had defrauded the taxation authorities of many
thousands of pounds, that he kept false books and al-
though the sales were made by the company, he appro-
priated the whole of the excess price.
(5) House of Hayes. This business is really and for
all practical purposes the business of one David Blank.
First he carefully, on his oath, concealed any interest
in the business, but later admitted it not completly; and
the fact of his ownership was established by other evid-
ence beyond doubt. This business is possibly the worst
offender in the disposal of liquor and at black market
rates. In partciular, it shares with other spirit mer-
chants a large measure of responsibility for the shortage
of bottled beer to meet legitimate demands. By way of
illustration only, of the type of supplies made, Roosevelt
got 20 dozen a week, Riverview Restaurant 50 dozen a
week, Sammy Lee’s “large quantities”, R. J. Yalentine
large quantities. All these were at black market rates
and almost without exception paid for in cash. As an
illustration of the type of business carried on, it may be
stated that this business obtained in a period of 8
months as shown in another connection, £790 above
legitimate prices from the Riverview Cafe alone, and as
appears elsewhere, Blank endeavoured to get his one-
time licensee T. G. Strover, falsely to swear before the
Commission as to the lists of people supplied with beer
from the House of Hayes. Strover, during his period of
employment with this business, was aware of the exten-
sive black marketing indulged in, and ultimately
resigned his position because of the malpractices en-
gaged in.
(6) McLaughlin & Coy. Ltd., spirit merchants,
supplied bottled beer to the Roosevelt to the extent of
between 25 and 35 dozen a week. The witness Saffron,
who ultimately admitted his interest in the Roosevelt,
stated on oath that he got his liquor supplies from this
company through an employee, and he “chose not to
ask him how much he paid for it”. The fact is that
though large quantities of liquor were bought by the
Roosevelt, it was invariably paid for in cash. These spirit
merchants also supplied the Caronia Club (so-called)
with 40 dozen bottled beer a month. There is little
doubt that the supplies illustrated were at black
market rates.
(7) R. G. Page, wine and spirit merchant, whose
licensed premises are situated at Bondi. This licence is,
of course, intended to meet the reasonable requirements
of the neighbourhood (Bondi). Nevertheless the licensee
supplied unlicensed night clubs in the city. He indulged
in black marketing in an extensive way, gave false
testimony, kept no books showing his dealings in large
quotas of beer. Although carrying on business at Bondi,
he supplied 60 dozen bottled beer a month to a restaurant
at French’s Forest. He admitted that although he car-
ries on a most extensive trade “there is no way in which
anyone can check how much” he makes from liquor.
(8) Robyns Pty. Ltd. Under this name the business
of spirit merchant is carried on by one Doyle Mallet
and T. P. Nolan (who was an employee of Tooth’s dur-
ing the period of his association in the business of
Robyns Pty. Ltd). They have carried on business since
1945 in premises at Mosman licensed “to meet reason-
able requirements of the neighbourhood”. Within a
comparatively short period of Mallet’s acquiring the
business at auction, his quota from Tooth’s was enor-
mously increased upon representations that he was to
supply R.S.L. clubs on the northern side of the Harbour
(whilst Nolan was still an employee of Tooth’s). For
a time at least some of such clubs were so supplied, but
at black market rates. Very quickly large quantities
supplied by the brewery, and intended for the numerous
RrS.L. clubs went to Gearin’s Hotel in which Mallet
(and I find as a fact, Nolan also) acquired an interest
and also to Woy Woy Household Supply—another busi-
ness owned by Mallet and Nolan, with increased prices
to Robyns Pty. Ltd., and involving denial of liquor to
the intended clubs and as well, to local residents. By
way of illustration only, it may be stated that for a sub-
stantial period 200 dozen bottles of beer were diverted
from their legitimate purposes to supply the Woy Woy
company. As mentioned elsewhere, Mallet indulged in
flagrant false swearing by first denying that Nolan had
any interest in any of his businesses, although in fact
he not only had such interest, but was instrumental in
the pair of them acquiring the business of Robyns Pty.
Ltd. carried on at Mosman.
(9) V. P. Taffer, wine and spirit merchant, Haberfield.
He supplied beer at 10s. above the fixed price to River-
view Cafe. This is another instance of a (suburban)
licence granted to meet the reasonable requirements of
the neighbourhood (Haberfield) and yet the licensee
supplied the business at Tom Ugly’s at black market
rates and did not bank the excess. He claims that he
ceased this improper supply only “because of the Royal
Commission”.
(10) Yeitch, G. G. He is the holder of a spirit mer-
chant’s licence for premises situated in Oxford Street.
He supplied one Tony Muscat, who in turn —to Yeitch’s
knowledge—supplied Sammy Lee’s restaurant regularly.
He also supplied the Caronia with a small quantity, 8
dozen a week. There is no doubt that whilst he has
reputable customers, he is also engaged in black market-
ing.


62. In listing these merchants I am far from satisfied
that they represent all the merchants who engaged in
black market trading. Later, references are made to other
malpractices or offences established in relation to some
of the foregoing and to other merchants. Other merchants
carrying on either as merchants alone or as grocers with
a spirit merchant’s licence, have made casual irregular
supplies of liquor, mainly bottled beer and including
Scotch whisky. No useful purpose is served in setting
these out categorically—this because the important ques-
tion to be dealt with is merely illustrated by particular
cases, the worst of which so far, as has been revealed by
sworn testimony, are set forth above. I add what appears
in another place, that I am satisfied on the evidence that
not all of the holders of spirit merchants’ licences who
have indulged in malpractices have been discovered.
63. Mr. Cassidy, Q.C., on behalf of the Wine Producers’
Association, submitted that the only irregularities on the
part of members of the Association disclosed, was the
supply of limited quantities of wine (which was not in
short supply) to the proprietors of certain unlicensed
restaurants for resale by them. He further claimed that,
following a comment during the sittings of the Com-
mission, that such supply facilitated a serious breach of
the law, the practice of his members so to supply was dis-
continued, and an undertaking was given by all members
as to future strict observance of the provisions of the Act.
In support of this, reliance is placed upon the evidence of
Mr. A. Critchley, the Secretary of the Wine Producers’
Association of New South Wales, who stated that the
majority of either members or associate members do their
own selling, distribution sales and production. Asked
whether his Association expressed any view to members
on the question of sales to unlicensed persons for resale,
he stated “all those members who by the schedule are sell-
ing to unregistered clubs or night clubs have undertaken
not to sell any more stock to them directly or indirectly”.
I have no reason to doubt the evidence or that the under-
taking is being observed.
TERM 8 (c).
DISTRIBUTION OF LIQUOR BY HOTEL LICENSEES.
64. As appears with details in connection with an earlier
Term, the number of publicans’ licences in existence in
the State has remained constant at 2,028 since the year
1944 (Schedule 1). In dealing with the subject of distri-
bution by hotel licensees, understandably enough, most of
the evidence tendered by learned counsel assisting the
Commission centred around the Metropolitan Licensing
District; and in particular much evidence was called
in respect of hotels in and around Sydney. It is, perhaps,
desirable to point out that since it was impossible to
call more than a limited number of licensees, some method
had to be adopted to ensure, as far as possible, that they
represented what may be described as a fair cross-section
of publicans. It was conceded by all representatives that
that method succeeded in obtaining a reliable cross-section.
65. Quite early, leading counsel assisting the Commis-
sion made this public statement in Court. “I make this
appeal to the public. In the not far distant future we
hope to get on to the question of distribution. We have
touched on it lightly with a number of hotelkeepers, all
of whom spoke about the various systems of trading with
tickets. All of them tell us that by means of these tickets
very many dozens of bottled beer are distributed regu-
larly from hotels. So far the gentlemen instructing me
have not received any information from any member of
the public to support that story. I am not saying that
it is not true. As yet we have no evidence that any
particular individual, for instance, is able to get this beer.
It is all very well to talk about having these card systems
and the like, but I should like to be in a position of
producing some evidence one way or another to your
Honor at the proper time from members of the public.”
66. Much correspondence has been received on this as
on other subject matters connected with the Commission.
Some of it was worthless, some of value, and I have no
doubt that as to the latter, every effort has been made
by those instructing counsel to test reliable information
and to ensure that, wherever possible, it has been ten-
dered. Notwithstanding these circumstances, it is a
matter for some surprise that whilst there has been a
good deal of talk of the difficulties associated particularly
with respect to the distribution of bottled beer, that
assistance which might have been expected from the
public was not fully forthcoming. The only relevancy
of this is that learned counsel have been obliged to search
and probe time and time again a process involving the
necessity of recalling many witnesses in the effort to
reconcile later with earlier evidence; with the result that
all too frequently much of the earlier evidence given was
shown to be mainly false.
67. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
distribution of liquor by many hotel licensees has not been
carried out reasonably, that this has operated to the
detriment of the public by denying those legitimately
entitled to get it from hotels, immense quantities of
liquor—in the main bottled beer —because is was being
diverted to unlicensed clubs, to restaurants supplying
liquor with and without permits, to notorious and infam-
ous night clubs and, as well, to persons or places carrying
out a “sly grog” trade in the well understood sense. I
deal hereunder with a comparatively limited number of
licensees on this principle: wherever sworn testimony has
been given affecting a licensee, and this is denied by him
and I am prepared to accept the denial, or I am left
with some doubt as to the truth of the allegation against
him, I have preferred not to make a finding. In some
instances the evidence of unlawful receipt of beer from
a particular licensee has been given; where such a licensee
has for any reason not been available to give evidence
in denial, again I have refrained from dealing with the
instance, so far as it may affect him personally. In the
result, those which are dealt with below are cases where
I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the licensee
in question—in some instances a member of his staff as
well —has been guilty of wrongful distribution, often at
black market prices, and frequently to so-called night
clubs which to the knowledge of the licensee have been
notorious law breakers.
68. In respect of the hotels hereunder—with one excep-
tion included for reasons appearing below —there is clearly
established unlawful dealings in the supply of liquor by
the hotel; in most instances the licensee is directly in-
volved, in others the evidence does not enable one to reach
that conclusion.
(1) Edinburgh Castle Hotel, during the time that
D. E. Barwick was the licensee, on one occasion supplied
35 to 40 dozen bottled beer to one Babicci, conducting
Sam’s Restaurant, which possessed a permit under the
Liquor Act but which notoriously carried on in flag-
rant breach of the law. The licensee claimed that it
was an isolated transaction in the nature of a loan. He
was, I am satisfied, away from the hotel when the
delivery in fact took place. At the time the hotel’s
quota was 70-odd dozen a week. His manager, Morris,
admitted delivery of the beer to Babicci on the licensee’s
instructions —“that if ever Mr. Babicci ever wanted any
stock and I had it on hand he could have it.” The
licensee claimed to have been present when the “loaned”
beer was returned; Morris also claimed that it was a
loan, but did not see it returned as he was absent, he


said, from the hotel on that day. Babieci admitted re-
ceiving the beer from Morris and claimed that it was
returned by him to Morris, adding, “I saw Morris and
one of the men take it down to the cellar.” It is
admitted by all three that the beer was delivered to
Babicci; but I am satisfied that it was not returned
and was at least an irregular sale involving a denial to
the public of a substantial quantity of bottled beer that
should have been available to them at the Edinburgh
Castle Hotel.
(2) Maitland and Morpeth Hotel, Sussex-street,
whilst A. B. Azar was licensee, frequently supplied the
Riverview Restaurant with 30 dozen bottled beer at
black market prices, when his quota was about 110
dozen a fortnight. No records of the transactions were
kept, and at the time of the deliveries his own customers
were being rationed under a ticket system. Samuelson
(manager of the Riverview) swore to the amount re-
ceived from Azar as “approximately 80 dozen a month.”
He always paid cash for it and no records were kept
at all.
(3) Bank Hotel: The licensee, J. L. Norris, admitted
supplying about 80 dozen a month to the Riverview at
black market prices. He kept no records and “pocketed”
the difference between the fixed and the black market
price. The amount supplied represented a substantial
proportion of his bottled beer quota, and he also denied
his customer’s legitimate supplies by resorting to the
ticket system of rationing.
(4) Duke of Edinburgh Hotel: The licensee, R. R.
McKinnon, on his own statement, supplied quantities
of bottled beer to the Riverview varying from 20 to 30
dozen a fortnight; his quota was 44 dozen a fortnight
from Tooth’s, 16 dozen from Toohey’s. He supplied the
Riverview at black market prices, kept no records and
resorted to the ticket system, by which he severely
rationed his regular customers.
(5) Clarence Hotel, Petersham: The licensee, O. E.
Latter, on his own admission, supplied to Sammy Lee’s
night club 190 dozen bottled beer over the short period
October, 1951, to January, 1952, at £2 2s. a dozen, which
was at black market rates. It is proper to point out
that there is no doubt that he was strongly pressed by
both Lee and Day to supply bottled beer and for a time
resisted the pressure; but ultimately yielded to strong
added pressure from Day, to whom he was under a
financial obligation. Day, whose sworn testimony is in
general completely unacceptable, admitted that he put
pressure on Latter. I am not at all satisfied that 190
dozen represents the total supplies. In addition, the
licensee supplied Lee (or Day) two or three dozen bottles
of whisky a month at irregular intervals. In consequence
of these supplies his own customers were denied both
bottled beer and Scotch whisky.
(6) Excelsior Hotel, Foveaux-street; the licensee of
which at the material time was Mrs. W'allington. This
hotel supplied one lot of 20 dozen bottled beer to the
Caronia, Double Bay, one of the more notorious night-
clubs. There is no doubt that the beer went there. The
suggestion that it was for a special occasion, and was
left at the Caronia only as a matter of convenience, to
be picked up for a pre-wedding party. The circum-
stances revealed by the evidence are such that I have no
doubt that it was a straight-out sale to the Caronia,
although it is impossible even to speculate as to the
price paid. On the evidence, it must be described as
an isolated case of supply; but in view of the unsavourv
nature of the place supplied, it assumes importance.
There is nothing to indicate the licensee’s knowledge
of the deal, and an examination of the evidence leaves
me unable to say whether the manager or the barman
was the person implicated.
(7) Cumberland Hotel, Bankstown: Whilst E. Korn-
hauser was the licensee, this hotel supplied the Roose-
velt Restaurant with 70 dozen bottled beer a week at
£2 a dozen, said to be the “top price.” Apart from
the quantities and price involved, the seriousness of this
supply is aggravated, if possible, by the fact that the
Roosevelt is possibly the most notorious and disreput-
able nightclub in the city.
(8) Mortdale Hotel, the licensee of which is Mrs.
Brack (a dummy for her brother), supplied 40 dozen
bottled beer a week to the Roosevelt at blackmarket
rates.
(9) Civic Hotel, City, the licensee of which was H.
Taylour, supplied 15 to 16 dozen bottled beer weekly
to the Roosevelt at blackmarket rates.
(10) Merryfield Hotel, Woolloomooloo. The free-
hold of this hotel is leased by British Breweries Limited
to Merryfield Pty. Ltd. The licensee (who has since
been dismissed) supplied liquor, apparently bottled
beer —although of this there is some slight doubt upon
an examination of the transcript, as to its being bottled
—to the Ziegfeld Cafe, as appears from the evidence
of the occupier of the cafe and the owner of the business,
one Farrell. The importance of this dealing, although
all efforts to establish the extent of it failed, is that it
was a supply to a notorious resort of reputed criminals
and a place which has been declared a disorderly house
on several occasions. One of these declarations was
made in 1941, and continued in force until part of 1942.
The occupier at the material time since the declaration
was E. Farrell. On his own testimony he, in 1947,
made an application to rescind the declaration which
had been made on the ground that liquor was sold there
irregularly. He admitted that his affivadit included
this passage, “No alcoholic liquor has been sold on or
from the premises”, presumably since the making of the
1941 declaration. This was obviously put forward for
the purpose of influencing the learned judge to rescind
the declaration. Yet he is doing the very thing which
brought about the declaration. His precise answer to
a question in these terms was, “I do it more discreetly”
(para. 37470). This was the place in which an under-
world brawl, involving shooting, took place while Farrell
was in change. It is not without signifiance that this
evidence was given in February, 1952, and that on the
19th June, 1952, upon the application of the police, a
further declaration was made on the grounds that —
(a) Drunkenness has taken place, and is likely to
take place again on the premises.
(b) Reputed criminals are likely to resort to the
premises.
It is impossible to set out in detail the lurid history
of this place, but for many years past there is no room
for doubt that the Ziegfeld has been a regular resort
for notorious criminals, and received beer for resale
from some source in addition to the Merryfield Hotel.
69. New Brighton Hotel, Manly: It is desirable to point
out at once that this instance is included in special cir-
cumstances. The licensee at the time was C. G. Maloney.
Samuelson, manager of the Riverview Restaurant, swore
that he obtained three deliveries at blackmarket prices,
totalling 500 dozen bottled beer in September-October,
1951, from this hotel whilst Maloney was licensee. A
number of witnesses gave a circumstantial story support-
ing Samuelson. Maloney admitted that Samuelson did
on one occasion ask for beer, but on his evidence he
refused saying, “We have not enough to go round our
regular customers.” Earlier in evidence Samuelson, in
fact, did not involve Maloney in the supply of beer, and
explained his failure to mention his name as an effort to
shield him. There is no doubt that Samuelson got the
ouantity of bottled beer sworn to by him, and I am satis-
fied from some hotel. A re-examination of the whole of


the transcript covering the several occasions on which the
various witnesses deposed to the transactions leaves the
position in this way. In the light of Maloney’s denials,
I am not prepared to find beyond reasonable doubt that
he was a party to the dealings sworn to by Samuelson
(and others supporting him in material particulars). As
it is not possible to make a finding affecting Maloney, this
dealing is recorded for these reasons: Samuelson beyond
doubt received the large quantity of beer stated; the cir-
cumstances are consistent with his having obtained it
either from the Mew Brighton unknown to Maloney, or
from other sources that Samuelson was determined, in
breach of his oath, to shelter.
70. It will be recalled that earlier, Kornhauser (Cum-
berland Hotel), Mrs. Brack (Mortdale Hotel), Taylour
(Civic Hotel), all supplied one of the most infamous
nightclubs, the Koosevelt, with regular large quantities
of bottled beer, always at blackmarket prices. As appears
above, the clearly established figures show that this night-
club, so called, received from six separate sources, four
of them being hotel licensees, 250 dozen bottles a week.
This particular place has been declared a “disorderly
house” under section 3 of the Act Mo. 6 of 1943,
on a number of occasions. There is no other conclusion
than that the amount of liquor received by the various
proprietors, for they changed hands (at least ostensibly)
following declarations, could not possibly be disposed of
by them by merely supplying those who resorted to the
premises.
71. In view of the statement by various persons able
to speak on behalf of the Roosevelt, it is clear, to use the
expression most commonly stated to be the fact, that the
prices paid by the Roosevelt to publicans and spirits mer-
chants alike were “top prices.” It is equally clear that
beer sold on the premises must have been sold always at
extortionate prices. I am satisfied that this place illus-
trates a practice by which so-called night clubs, unable
to dispose of the huge quantities of bottled beer received,
has in turn been the medium for supplyinug outside sly-
grog places. I should add that the figure of 250 dozen
per week is that admitted by various witnesses from the
Roosevelt. In view of the unsavoury reputation of such
witnesses, of the place itself, and in view also of the
demeanour of such witnesses in the box, I have little
doubt that they admitted to minimum amounts only, and
that the fair inference is that they got even more than
250 dozen a week. Mo books were kept offering the slight-
est assistance to check either the prices paid or the
amounts received.
72. Sammie Lee’s Restaurant is (or was) a notorious
night club conducted by Lee, Day and Galea. Lee ad-
mitted that their liquor purchases reached the figure of
between £750 and £BSO per week. He claimed that his
largest purchase in one week was between £1,400 and
£1,500 during a Christmas season. From Cavill alone he
got 165 dozen bottled beer a week (15 dozen at correct
price, 150 dozen on the black market). In addition, he
got extra supplies of English beer from Cavill’s and from
Latter, a hotelkeeper, 40 or 50 dozen a week; and he
bought liquor from men who called in trucks from day
to day. Whilst he is a person who cannot be believed on
his oath without clear corroboration, I accept these figures
taken from his evidence to this extent, that I have no
doubt that they represent the minimum quantities re-
ceived by him. The bulk of these purchases were bottled
beer, but he either admitted or claimed to have bought as
well champagne, brandy, gin, Scotch whisky, liqueurs and
table wines (Transcript 874-875).
73. From the nature of his business, I entertain no
doubt whatever that it was impossible for him to dispose
of the liquor purchased by him by selling it at the tables
in his night club. This leads to the reasonable conclusion
that he, in turn, was supplying sly grog sales outside the
night club and, of course, both inside and outside the
club at extortionate prices. Reference is made in another
place to the association in this night club of three persons,
Lee, Galea and Day. Day, on behalf of Sammy Lee’s
Restaurant, bought a large quantity of wine—including
champagne—the property of Penfold’s Wines Pty. Ltd.,
knowing it was stolen. In this instance, Day procured
the liquor (valued at £SB) for the sum of £32,
74. The Riverview Restaurant which is, or was, pos-
sessed of a restaurant permit, claimed to serve about 2,000
meals a week. On the assumption, in spite of false testi-
mony in other respects, that the statements of the owner
and of the manager with regard to the source of liquor
supplies can be taken on the basis that they are the
minimum supplies, and no other assumption is possible,
it is clear that this restaurant cannot dispose of the whole
of the liquor received, most of it at black market prices,
by serving at tables either in the restaurant or the premises
generally. By way of illustration, witnesses associated
with this restaurant stated that some patrons brought
their own liquor, that the restaurant supplied wines as
well as beer, that 50 dozen bottled beer a week were re-
ceived from the LTouse of Hayes and 50' dozen a week from
Cavills Pty. Ltd., that large supplies were received from
four named hotels and, in addition, from five individual
suppliers whose identity no amount of searching examina-
tion could establish. In the light of these facts it is clear
beyond doubt that, assuming the claim made on behalf
of the restaurant that it served 2,000 meals a week is
correct as the maximum, it would be quite impossible for
the restaurant to dispose of the whole of its bottled beer,
at any rate, on the premises. An examination of the
whole of the evidence in respect of this place leads me
to the strong suspicion that it also is a source of supply
for other sly grog.
75. A striking feature of this restaurant’s nefarious
activity is the proved amount of excess payments made
for liquor over the period August, 1951, to March, 1952;
to Hayes, £798; Walter Cavill, £1,350 ; “Bert” and “Mac”
(the identity has never been established), £1,367 and £154
respectively. These figures can, beyond question, be taken
as the minimum. Many payments were made by cash, so
that it is quite impossible to accept the information con-
tained in the so-called books as beiitg a genuine record
relating to the above figures.
76. These night clubs or restaurants are cited as illus-
trations only. In respect of them, and of other places
as well, it is often impossible to reconcile the figures given
on conflicting versions from time to time. Moreover, it
should be made clear that they are but illustrations on
which it is possible to make the finding as to sly grog
already mentioned. There are other notorious places as
to which learned counsel assisting the Commission met
with less success on this aspect of the unlawful supply
and distribution of liquor. However, as was pointed out
more than once during the sitting, no particular import-
ance attaches to conclusions with regard to individual
cases, except to illustrate a practice or establish a principle.
SINGLE BOTTLE LICENCES.
77. A question closely related to distribution which
was the subject of much discussion and marked conflict
among interested parties, was that of single bottle licences.
The main advocates for the institution of single bottle
licences were grocers who had, in connection with their
business, a spirit merchant’s licence which, of course,
entitled them to sell in quantities of not less than 2
gallons. The view of the grocers was advanced primarily
by the President of the “Spirits Section, Grocers and
Storekeepers’ Association of Mew South Wales.” He
stated that in the spirit section there were 100 members,
although the information in Schedule 94 came from only
62 members. The majority of the members were country


members. He stressed the fact that there were in exist-
ence single bottle licences in Victoria and Canberra,
and in modified form in South Australia where single
bottles of wine and spirits may be sold together with
six bottles of ale. He claimed that there were repeated
requests by people for single bottles or quantities of less
than 2 gallons, that many people did not like going to
hotels for their purchases, and there were many centres
where there was no hotel but there were licensed grocers
(p. 1210). He agreed that it would be undesirable that
it should be possible for children to make such purchases.
The Secretary of the Grocers’ Association, Victoria, who
had been a member of the association for twenty years,
said that the single bottle licence in Victoria was of great
value, especially in relation to home deliveries. He added
that there was no difficulty as to competition with hotels.
Mr. W. J. Madgwick, the Deputy Chief Food Inspector
for New South Wales Department of Health, was asked
certain questions about this type of licence and, in the
interests of the public health, expressed the view that
grocers should not in any case be allowed to do their
own bottling, and that single bottle licences would, from
his point of view, require strict policing. Individual
merchants and grocers, publicans, wine distributors and
wine growers were examined on the subject, and there was
a surprising lack of uniformity in their views. The
representations made on behalf of the various interests
are set forth in summary form from the addresses of
respective counsel, and from the views of several witnesses.
78. The view of the Temperance Alliance was strongly
against single bottle licences, which should be limited to
an hotel or a wine shop. Their objection was based essen-
tially upon such considerations as difficulties in policing,
the likelihood that such licences would lead to an increase
in drinking and to the number of victims of drink, that
it would provide an opportunity for young people to buy
liquor without going to an hotel. Neither Tooth’s nor
Toohey’s counsel made any submission on the subject.
79. On behalf of the U.L.V.A. learned counsel opposed
a suggestion for such licences. In the course of his
address, he commented upon those matters which were
urged in favour of the introduction of such a licence,
and made the following submissions against them. He
claimed that the convenience to the public would be
so slight as not to warrant the introduction of such
licences as indicated, that the claim as to a home de-
livery service was without value because hotels would 1 e
able to resume such service when supplies met demands;
when that situation was reached the main benefit claimed
for single bottle licences would cease to have any real
importance. He added that as hotels had bottle depart-
ments and as home delivery by hotels would be resumed,
all reasonable objections based on reluctance of some
people to purchase liquor from an hotel would disappear.
He added that there would be a greater possibility of
persons under age obtaining access to liquor, there would
be increased difficulties of police supervision, a probable
increase in the cost of liquor to the public, and undue and
unnecessary competition with hotels and wine and spirit
merchants. He claimed that any real value to the public
was limited to time of shortage and submitted that no
member of the public had come forward to advocate
the single bottle licence. Whilst I deal with the various
representations in summary form at the end, it is
proper to point out that there is no doubt that the
objections of the hotelkeepers through U.L.V.A I . can
fairly be described as based upon self-interest.
80. On behalf of the Wine and Spirits Merchants’
Association, leading counsel submitted that the Act
should be amended to allow bona fide grocers to be
allowed to sell within permitted trading hours spirituous
and fermented liquors in original sealed containers of all
sizes. He submitted that in relation to single bottle
licences, the following safeguards would prevent undesir-
able practices arising. Permits should be given only to
bona fide grocers, no holder of such a permit should be
allowed to purchase liquor in bulk and bottle for resale,
this submission being based partly upon Victorian experi-
ence where certain evils have been found to result. He
urged that no grocer should be permitted to sell an
excessive quantity of liquor to any one individual, unless
satisfied that such individual bona fide required the liquor
for a proper purpose. He strongly argued that the
holders of such a permit should be permitted to sell or
supply from licensed premises and should not be per-
mitted to sell from licensed premises and supply from
n on-licensed premises, as is the present practice with
many chain stores in possession of spirit merchant’s
licence. He claimed that the evidence revealed a strong
demand from the public for such a licence, that the
grocers’ home delivery service could be utilised as a
means for distributing liquor, that if the present short-
age of bottled beer continued, and he claimed that it
was not improbable, such a licence would provide a more
equitable distribution to the public. He relied upon the
evidence that certain sections of the community, particu-
larly women, dislike dealing with hotels, that in many
hotels there is no bottle department, that hotels are
unevenly distributed and that it would make liquor avail-
able to the public where no other facility now exists. He
claimed that where such a licence has been tried it has
proved a success. He illustrated this by the provision
in Canberra. After dealing with certain of the objec-
tions to the provision for single bottle licences, he dealt
specifically with a suggestion from the Australian Wine
Producers’ Association that if such licences were intro-
duced they should be confined to liquors of Australian
origin. He claimed that this suggestion was parochial
and was admittedly motivated by self-interest”; such
a suggestion, he argued, ignored the wide demand for
certain imported liquors, for instance Scotch whisky, and
submitted that it was in the public interest that such
liquors should be equitably distributed during the
present shortage.
81. Learned counsel represented on this aspect of dis-
tribution three named companies,yPenfold’s Wines Pty.
Ltd., McWilliam’s Wines Pty. Ltd. and Caldwell’s Wines
Ltd. He fairly conceded or claimed that the three com-
panies own or control the majority of those businesses
which have Australian wine licences, and that the capital
invested in such businesses is considerable. He further
conceded that, for these reasons, these companies had an
advantage in distribution over other wine producers. He
submitted, however, that the evidence to which he did
refer established that any proposal to extend the sale of
single bottles is in the interests neither of the public
nor of the wine producing industry. It should be pointed
out at once that he properly confined his attention to the
sale of wine by the single bottle. He boldly argued that
there should be no recommendation for an alteration of
the law which adversely affected vested interests and
accrued rights unless the evidence called to support such
alteration clearly established that it would be in the pub-
lic interest. His argument proceeded on these lines: —
3. A particular type of licence, namely the Australian
wine licence, was created by the legislature to provide
a means to extend the sales of Australian wines in
New South Wales and thus to encourage and improve
the wine industry generally. It has achieved, and
still continues to achieve, its object, and if this method
of distribution is extended its value to the wine industry
will be lost (p. 1496).
2. If spirits are allowed to be sold by the single bottle,,
sales of spirits will increase to the detriment of the
sales of wine, and wine-producing is a great and
growing industry in Australia.


3. Many holders of Australian wine licences are ex-
pert in their trade and give advice to customers. He
feared that if the extension were made it could result
in a loss of this service of advice to-the community.
4. The holder of an Australian wine licence could
not hope, especially in the country, to compete with
grocers’ shops, many of which are controlled by large
financial institutions, because such shops have other
merchandise to support their wine departments and
this, he claimed, could result in the disappearance of
the Australian wine licence as known.
5. The suggested alteration would cause a rise in
distribution costs and wine producers would have ‘less
bargaining power when fixing the retail margin of
profit in consultation with the United Licensed Victual-
lers’ Association”.
6. The suggested alteration could lead to abuses by
holders of Australian wine licences who, in order to
regain or retain the money invested in the business,
may resort to improper practices such as adulteration
of wine.
7. That in any event, if the suggested provision for
single bottle licences were made, then restrictions
should be imposed and the holders of wine licences
should have a right to sell by the single bottle. The
suggested restrictions appear in the submissions on
behalf of the Wine Producers’ Association, and are
dealt with there to avoid repetition. His final sub-
mission was that the present avenue and methods of
distribution are both satisfactory and sufficient.
82. Leading counsel, on behalf of the Wine Producers’
Association, first approached the question of single bottle
licences by stating that the Association which he repre-
sented offers no view. His attitude was that the evidence
called, and the submissions made, were limited to the
regulation of such a type of licence should it be introduced
into the Act. The recommendations of such regulation
appear in Exhibit 120:
(1) Sales of wine and brandy should be limited to
wine and brandy of Australian origin.
(2) Any authority to sell by single bottle should be
controlled by non-transferable retailers’ permit,
(3) Sales should be made only in sealed packages not
exceeding 26 oz, and not less than 13 oz, net con-
tents.
(4) Permit holders should be prohibited from storing
bulk wines or brandy on premises owned or con-
trolled by them.
(5) Permit holders should not be permitted to bottle
Australian wine or brandy from bulk and/or sell
under their own label either directly or indirectly.
(6) Permit holders should not be permitted to sell,
supply or deliver in more than two gallon quanti-
ties at any one time.
(7) Delivery should be effected on demand within a
radius of five miles in quantities down to a single
bottle.
(8) Hours of trading should be restricted to those
applying to hotels and Australian wine licences.
(9) Permits should be placed only in those areas where
the population warrants same, and only where the
district is not adequately served by existing licences.
83. He pointed out that the main dissentient from the
suggestion that the sales of wine and brandy should be
limited to the Australian product was the secretary of
the Wine and Spirit Merchants’ Association (page 2270).
84. An Australian wine licence authorises the licensee
to sell and dispose of, on tht premises, specified in the
licence, between the hours of 10 a.m. and 6 p.m. (but
subject to the provisions of the Act) wine, cider or perry,
the produce of fruit grown within any Australasian colony
in quantities not exceeding 2 gallons. The Licensing
Court may impose a condition of the grant or the renewal,
that the liquor shall be not be consumed on the premises
(Liquor Act, section 18). Consumption on the premises
is later dealt with briefly, in view of certain suggestions
made by counsel for the Wine Producers’ Association at
the conclusion of his address on single bottle licences.
85. The views of Lindeman’s Ltd., wine makers, were
shortly stated in evidence by the managing director of
the company, Mr. W. H. Davies. He stated that his com-
pany felt that, speaking generally, there were sufficient
avenues of distribution available at present without the
suggested single bottle licence, but he qualified the state-
ment in this way; he was asked whether it was not his
trade view that the solution of any difficulties in wine dis-
tribution was to do away with the tied house. He said,
“Not exactly.” He advanced one suggestion that (a) if the
tied houses were allowed to sell brands other than those
of their owners, a greater volume of business would be
created, or (b) if these licences were transferred back to
grocers, from whence some of them came, and freed to
sell all proprietary brands, an even greater total volume
of business would result than under (a). He agreed that
there were no houses tied to his company. It fairly sums
up one of his clear views to say that if provision were
made for single bottles among the existing wine and
spirit merchants who are not tied that would assist equit-
able distribution (page 1948).
86. The views of the Australian Wine Board are entitled
to special consideration for this reason; the Board carries
on under the provisions of the “Wine Overseas Marketing
Act of the Commonwealth of Australia, No. 94 of 1936.”
No witness was called, but a letter from the Board was
tendered, dated the 12th May, 1952, which contained the
resolution of the board in these terms: “That this Board
favours the granting throughout Australia of unlimited
grocers’ licences for the sale of Australian wine and
brandy by the bottle in original packages, all such licences
to be obtainable for a nominal fee and to be terminable
on the proof of abuses and, in addition, such licences to
permit the sale of Australian wine and brandy in quanti-
ties of Pne or more bottles.” {See Exhibit 119.)
87. The provision for single bottle licences in the Aus-
tralian Capital Territory is made by several ordinances
tendered before the Commission (Exhibit No. 128). Evi-
dence as to the operation of the appropriate ordinances
was given by Mr. S. H. Carmen, an officer of the Depart-
ment of the Interior, situated at Canberra. He stated
there were at the time of giving evidence ten grocers’
licences under which Ordinance No. 30 of 1950 permitted
grocers to sell by the single bottle. In the course of his
evidence he stated that the police were satisfied with the
way in which the single bottle licence was operating in
Canberra and he added, “Visitors to Canberra, particu-
larly from New South Wales, express their pleasant sur-
prise at being able to purchase a single bottle” (page
2268), It is of some importance that the provision for
grocers’ single bottle licences came into force largely as
a result of the view favourable to them of the Advisory
Council of the Territory.
88. The question arises whether any, and if so, what
recommendation, should be made with regard to the single
bottle licence is any form. A striking feature of the
evidence on the subject is in the words of the submission
made by leading counsel assisting the Commission, that
even those persons or companies with identical interests
“did not speak with one voice.” Upon a further examina-
tion of the evidence which does on the face of it present
strange conflicts, and of the addresses, I am not prepared
to recommend the suggested type of licence, with or
without the qualifications offered by various counsel.
Whilst there is much to be said in favour of a single


bottle licence as advocated, I am satisfied that there is a
real foundation for the apprehension of those who are of
the opinion that young people who, experience shows, may
frequently go to a shop for legitimate purposes and
grocers’ shops are the principal medium for the suggested
licence —may too easily be supplied with bottles or other
small quantities of liquor. Moreover, the policing of the
exercise of such a licence would, in my opinion, present
substantial difficulties. I am mindful of the evidence,
particularly as to Victoria and Canberra, and of the
force of the suggestions of the Australian Wine Board.
If the suggested licence should not be introduced, hotels
should be required to meet the public convenience by
properly established, equipped and stocked bottle depart-
ments, and by giving a genuine home delivery service.
Provision for such service is not difficult. If, on the other
hand, the single bottle licence as advocated by several
interests should be granted, attention is drawn to the
view which I have no doubt is a sound view, that the
licensees of such places should not be allowed to do their
own bottling, and that both the sale and supply of liquor
should be made only on or from the licensed premises,
and not from unlicensed branches.
WINE SALOONS.
89. Counsel for the Wine Producers’ Association, after
dealing with the question of single bottle licences,
addressed himself to the existing regulations covering
premises on which wine is consumed. Power to make
such regulations is—as stated in another connection —
conferred by section 153 (1a) of the Act; by that sub-
section power is given to make regulations prescribing
the accommodation and conveniences, the number and
dimensions of rooms or premises in respect of which an
Australian wine licence is held, which may be used for
the sale or consumption of authorised liquor, and the
internal fittings and arrangements of such rooms. . . . The
regulating power is by the section made “subject to the
provisions of section 40a of the Act,” which by subsection
(8) is made to extend and apply to “premises in respect
of which an Australian wine licence is held in like
manner as those provisions apply to premises in respect of
which a publican’s licence is held.” The existing regula-
tions made pursuant to this power appear at p. 386 of the
3rd edition of Redshaw.
90. Counsel adverted to subsection 7 of section 40a for
the purpose of stressing that additional accommodation
which the Licensing Court may order upon proof that
public convenience requires it. Such accommodation in-
cludes “facilities for the consumption of liquor at tables
in lounges, gardens, under awnings or in the open air.”
The submissions shortly are that regulation 2 imposes
restrictions on the type of premises which are stringent
and unsatisfactory and that they are not in consonance
with the provisions of the section. I do not agree that
the regulations are not in consonance with the section if
this means that it does not comply with the spirit of the
section. On the other hand, I think there is much force
in the claim that the regulations are at least to some
extent outmoded. Mr. Davies, the managing director of
Caldwell’s, was invited by leading Counsel assisting the
Commission to deal with the subject, and he said that
many people are not attracted to wine saloons because
of the size and condition of the rooms prescribed by the
regulation (para. 31292). A licensee of a wine saloon
in Park-street stated that from the point of controlling
customers generally, it would make for better drinking
conditions if there were places for men and women to
drink separately (paras. 31804-5). These are matters
which, in my opinion, should have the serious attention of
the authorities. There can be no doubt that there are
some wine saloons which are a disgrace and others which
could be greatly improved. I think it properly states the
position that the facilities for police supervision would in
no way be affected, if serious consideration were given to
improving the conditions in which authorised liquor is
consumable in wine saloons.
91. There does seem to be a complete lack of imagina-
tion with respect to such provisions. I am satisfied, upon
the evidence generally before the Commission, that it is
a safe working rule that the greater the secrecy in which
liquor is consumed, especially in wine saloons, the greater
the prospect of increasing the evils associated with them.
That there are evils there can be no question.
HOURS.
92. The question of hours of closing is relevant to the
subject of distribution —this because it was recognised at
any rate to some extent by all interests represented that
some of the evils —and there are undoubtedly evils —
connected with the liquor trade were not unrelated to the
hours of trading during which liquor might be sold, sup-
plied or delivered, or permitted to be consumed. In order
to appreciate what follows, it should be made clear that
the satutory provisions for trading hours vary in accord-
ance with the licence or permit, not only as to particular
times but as to conditions. It is partly for this reason
and partly because of the marked differences in public
requirements, that it is necessary to approach the question
of hours by considering separately hotels, restaurants and
nightclubs, registered clubs and wine saloons.
(1) By the Liquor Act, under Australian wine
licences, the hours of trading are from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.,
and a condition of the licence may be imposed that
the wine shall not be consumed upon the premises.
(Section 18.) Premises, accommodation, conveniences
and similar matters are provided for by regulations
made under section 153 (1a).
(2) Hotel premises. So far as it is at all material to
set forth the provisions of the Act, what may be called
the trading hours for hotels are from 10 in the morning
to 6 at night. (Section 57 (1) (d).) Reference is made
to the proviso that nothing in the section shall relate
to the sale, supply, delivery or consumption of liquor to
orJay any bona fide traveller, lodggr, servant or inmate,
if the liquor is not sold, supplied, delivered or consumed
at the bar of the licensee’s premises. There is no
occasion to set forth other particulars of the section,
which substantially relate to special occasions when the
licensed premises must be closed.
(3) Registered clubs. So far as concerns registered
clubs and hours of closing, it is necessary only to state
that amongst the sections of the Liquor Act governing
hotels certain specified sections are made applicable to
clubs (see section 133). One of the specified sections
is section 57 abovementioned. The extent to which
section 57 applies to clubs has been the subject of
judicial decision. It is desirable to state shortly the
circumstances of the decision. Under section 57, a
licensee is prohibited from keeping his licensed premises
open for the sale of liquor or from selling, supplying or
delivering any liquor or permitting the same to be con-
sumed on the premises on Sundays or on several other
specified days, or upon week-days, except between the
hours of 10 in the morning and 6 at night. It is provided,
however, that nothing in the section shall relate to the
sale, supply, delivery or consumption of liquor to or by
any bona fide . . . inmate if the liquor is not supplied,
delivered or consumed at the bar of the licensed pre-
mises. In Ex parte Coulson re Jones & An or., 64 W.M.
215, it was held that members of a club were inmates
within the meaning of section 57 of the Act and that
no offence was committed by the secretary and the
holder of the certificate of registration of the club under
the Liquor Act in allowing liquor to be consumed in
the lounge of the club premises on a Sunday by non


resident members of the club. This has some bearing
also on the provision for the taking of a referendum,
to which reference is made later.
(4) Meals permits for hotels are provided for by sec-
tion 57a. Shortly the operation of the section is this;
that in respect of hotels where bona fide meals are
regularly supplied to the public, the Licensing Court
may grant a permit to the licensee in effect to supply
liquor for consumption upon the premises with bona
fide meals between 6 and 9 p.m. (Clubs are similarly
provided for in this section but the application of the
section to clubs loses much of its relevancy in view of
Ex parte Coulson above.) By subsection 4 of section 57a
“meal” is defined as “a meal of at least two courses at
which the persons partaking thereof are seated at a
table, and the meal shall include fish or meats other than
in sandwich form and cooked vegetables.”
(5) Restaurant permits. Under Part lIIa provision
is made for the court’s granting a permit authorising
the holder to sell and supply light wines and malted
liquors in a restaurant. (Section 78n). “Adequate staff,
fittings, furniture and accommodation and 50 separate
seats for customers must be provided.” (Section 57j
(3).) Light wine is defined as “Australian wines not
including fortified wines, cider or perry”; “restaurant”
is defined by section 78c as “premises in which meals are
regularly supplied on sale to the public for consump-
tion on the premises; meal is defined by section 78k,
subsection 2, and the conditions under which liquor—
light wines and malted —may be sold and supplied with-
in the permit for bona fide consumption by persons par-
taking of a meal are set forth in subsection 3. Sub-
section 4 allows such liquor to be sold and supplied
only between the hours of 12 noon and 2.30 in the after-
noon and between 6 p.m. and 8.30 in the evening. All
bottles in which light wine or the malted liquor is sup-
plied in the restaurant and all drinking vessels used iu
the consumption thereof must be removed from every
dining room of the restaurant, in the afternoon by 3
o’clock, in the evening by 9 o’clock (section 78n).
93. It will be necessary to consider the vexed question
of closing hours by keeping in mind the purposes which
are served by each of these licences or permits separately.
One of the clear facts emerging from the evidence and
th addresses on the subject of hours is that markedly
different considerations apply—
(a) between metropolitan and country areas, and
(b) amongst hotels, restaurants, and clubs.
94. Evidence was offered on behalf of varied interests.
Some evidence was tendered, mainly on behalf of the
Temperance Alliance and of churches, which plainly
assumed that the powers of the Commission under the
terms of reference enabled me to deal with the subject of
prohibition. From time to time during the sittings, it was
necessary to point out that whilst the Commission was not
only entitled but obliged to go into the question of evils
associated with various aspects of the liquor trade, it was
nevertheless obliged to proceed on the basis that facilities
for liquor in its various forms is something which is
accepted by and part of, the law of the land. An examina-
tion of the terms of reference make it obvious that I am
obliged to approach the problems with this important
situation in mind. However, notwithstanding that it was
pointed out that the Commission is governed by the Terms
of Reference, certain arguments have been addressed sug-
gesting that the only really practical reform of the in-
dustry is to wipe it out altogether. Because of this, some
of the material which is included in the introduction and
as well in this section dealing with the subject of hours
will unavoidably include a reference to the arguments
based either upon a failure to read the Terms of Reference
or a misconception of their scope.
95. It is desirable to set forth in some detail the views
of certain churches contained in resolutions tendered
before the Commission. On behalf of the Presbyterian
Church, resolutions were tendered in the course of the
evidence of the Rev. S. A. Eastman, who was the convenor
of the Public Questions Committee of the New South
Wales Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of Australia.
Those resolutions are as follows: —
References to Six O’clock Closing.
ASSEMBLY, 1929.—The Assembly of 1929 asked the
Government “for a better enforcement of the Six o’clock
Closing Act, and to this end that the provision of serving
liquor with meals up to 9 p.m. to be repealed.” Also the
Assembly urged “the closing of Liquor Bars on Saturdays
at 1 p.m.”
ASSEMBLY, 1938.—The Assembly expressed “the
emphatic opinion that no extension of hours for the sale
and consumption of liquor should be given.”
ASSEMBLY, 1939. —The Assembly vigorously protested
against any extension of hours or facilities for its greater
use. The Assembly also resolved “to urge the prevention
of hotels where residential areas were being planned.”
ASSEMBLY, 1940.—Similar Resolution to 1939, viz.,
the Assembly “protest against any legislative action in the
direction of extending the hours.”
ASSEMBLY, 1945. —“In view of the fact that the out-
going Government, which proposed to extend facilities for
the drinking of wine in restaurants after the hours of
closing, was defeated and that the Government has no
mandate from the people to extend the hours of trading—
and that there is no evidence of a public demand for the
extension of such hours apart from those who have vested
interest in the liquor trade —and that the present hours of
trading were fixed as the result of a Referendum, this
Assembly emphatically declares that no extension of the
hours of trading should be made without first submitting
the proposals to a Referendum.”
ASSEMBLY, 1948. —“Request the Government in view
of the fact that the people of this State have, by an over-
whelming majority, declared that the closing hour of all
liquor bars, including clubs, should be 6 p.m. to clarify and
amend the law to bring clubs under this Early Closing
decision, and also to forbid the sale of drink in clubs on
Sundays.”
ASSEMBLY, 1949. —“Warn our people against the
present insidious propaganda of the Liquor Trade aimed
at extending the habit of liquor drinking amongst the
young people of the State.”
ASSEMBLY, 1941. —The Assembly “strongly demand
that there be no interference in the present closing hour
of liquor bars, viz., 6 p.m. with a view to extending the
hour and that licensed clubs be brought under the same
hour of closing”. (Transcript p. 1553.)
96. The view of the Methodist Church, so far as it is
contained in a resolution, was produced by the Rev. W. C.
Francis, then the Secretary and now the President, of the
Methodist Conference of New South Wales. Mr. Francis
added that as a church total abstinence was advocated, but
that the church did not set up to be any man’s conscience.
The resolution, which was carried unanimously, is in these
terms; —
“As the clear mandate of the people fixes the hours
of hotel closing at 6 p.m., we affirm our clear conviction
that no alterations of the hours should be attemped
without a mandate from the electors.”


97, On the 4th of March, 1952, the Provincial Synod of
the Church of England passed certain resolutions, which
are as follows:
That this Synod belives that the present use of
alcoholic beverages is not in the best interests of the
Australian people.
Therefore it urges —
(1) That the laws at present governing the sale of liquor
should be policed more effectively and more res-
ponsibility laid on licences to this end.
(2) That the alcoholic strength of our liquors be
reduced.
(3) That Church people should ask for a careful study
on the part of the Government as to whether the
placing of the whole trade, brewing and selling,
under a commission be not to the advantage of the
State and people.
(4) That Church people should consider whether in the
interests of the young people of to-day, strong drink
should be refused by them at weddings, cocktail
parties, and other public occasions at least.
98. During the course of the hearing attention was
drawn to the difference between the Provincial Synod and
what is called the Church of England Social Questions
Committee within the Church of England in Australia.
This body passed certain resolutions which were not pre-
sented in the original, but were contained in a newspaper
cutting which had been treated by all parties adverting
to the subject as being completely accurate.
“The use of alcoholic drink is a time-honoured and
deeply-rooted social custom and, as such, must be viewed
with understanding and respect, the Church of England
in Australia declared yesterday.
“This view is contained in a statement of policy on
alcoholic drinks released by the Church of England
Social Questions Committee.
“Neither prohibition nor a plea that all should become
total abstainers is the best way to tackle the problem,
says the statement.
“An eight point policy is advocated. The points are: —
“Creation of a demand for light beers.
“Responsible guidance of young people by their
seniors, removal of any ‘need’ for clandestine drinking;
acceptance of the sound rule that boys and girls under
18 years of age should not be offered alcoholic drinks.
“Rigid enforcement of the laws which require keepers
of hotels, etc. to police their own premises, especially in
regard to supplying intoxicated persons or persons under
age.
“Abolish Bars.—Focusing of the demand for abolition
of the ‘bar’ and provision of comfortable open accommo-
dation for drinking at hotels.
“Where relevant, discussion of the abolition of
brewery-ownership, or participation in ownership of
hotels by breweries.
“Discussion of the advantages of confining breweries
to a Public Commission and diverting profits to pro-
jects of public welfare.
“That all thoughtful people strive to create an over-
whelming public opinion that all drinking should be
controlled by an ideal of the true social fellowship—
a sacred thing and a Christian objective.
“That all recognize and safeguard the freedom of
those who prefer or feel their duty to be total abstainers,
or who do not.”—ls Nov., 1951, p. 17, col. 4.
99. Mr. Piggott (advocate for the New South Wales
Temperance Alliance) does not agree with these views.
Q. “Then you do not agree with the views of the
Australian Church of England Social Questions Com-
mittee which feels that one must recognize that liquor
is a necessity in the community?”
A. “No. I do not agree with that.”
Q. “That is a very important body, is it not?”
A. “Not to my mind. It is a sectional body. It is
not really representative, as I understand it.”
Q. “I suppose the New South Wales Social Questions
Committee of the Anglican Church is representative
because it agrees with your view?”
A. “No. I would say the New South Wales Synod,
which is the Parliament for the Diocese of Sydney.
That resolution still has to go to that body.”
Q. “Am I to accept as a considered reasoned judgment
that notwithstanding, for instance, the views of the
Australian Church of England Social Questions Com-
mittee you would wipe out all licences in one electorate
if 50 per cent, of the voters said so ?”
A. “Yes” (p. 1977.)
100. These views of the Social Questions Committee of
the Church of England bear some resemblance to views
expressed in London by the Rev. Dr. T. G. Dunning,
General Secretary of the Temperance Council of the
Christian Churches. They were broadcast in the United
Kingdom on the 4th February, 1953, on the 8.8. C. Home
Service; a transcript of the talk was made available to
me and the following extracts are taken from it. Follow-
ing a reference to a meeting of the Secretaries of the
Young People’s Departments of the churches, which con-
cerned itself, among other things, with the evils associated
with drink, Dr. Dunning continued in these terms: —
“The third point made clear that these secretaries
were not dictating to the Christian Youth of the
country. It said quite definitely that the young
Christian must decide his own personal relationship
tew these social issues. His own ‘personal relationship,’
you see, because any social issue, as all these people
believed the drink problem to be, any social issue is not
just an object for academic study, a morally optional
extra subject. Each Christian ifiust determine his own
personal attitude towards the cure of our social ills.
Now while these secretaries refrained from trying to
dictate to others, they had no wish to conceal their own
mind, so in the excellent words of a committee of the
Church of England they stated as their fourth point;
‘Whilst all are not agreed upon the duty of total
abstinence from intoxicating liquor as a beverage, there
is no room for doubt that such abstinence, for the sake
of others and as a contribution to the stability of our
industrial and social life, is a splendid privilege of
Christian service.’ But young Christians will not allow
these different viewpoints to divide their ranks. If one
feels that as a Christian he can take strong drink in
strict moderation, he won’t consider as a crank, a nitwit
or a killjoy a Christian brother who believes he must
abstain entirely from alcoholic drink. He will recognize
that moderation is only a relative term and what is one
man’s moderation may be another man’s excess.
On the other hand, the Christian abstainer will
appreciate that his abstinence gives him no right to
be censorious or to feel morally superior to others. There
are so many virtues and neither a man’s character nor
his destiny is determined exclusively by the alcoholic
content of his bloodstream.”
101. Mr. Piggott, the Secretary of and the Advocate for
the Temperance Alliance, was asked by counsel:
Q. “Are there any facts within your knowledge of facts
you believe to be within the knowledge of any person


that you can nominate which can throw any further
light on the matters that have been referred to His
Honour ?”
A. “Excepting the desire for local option.”
The Commissioner: “Mr. Dovey is not now dealing
with local option.”
Counsel ; “I am referring to any of the other terms of
reference to His Honour.”
A. “I cannot think of any,”
Q. “You do not know of any fact from your know-
ledge nor of any fact that you believe to be within
the knowledge of any person that you can nominate,
which can add anything to the material that you have
placed before his Honour.”
A. “Excepting the witnesses that I may have yet to
call.”
Q. “On what subjects ?”
A. “On this subject, local option.”
Q. “I am excluding local option.”
A. “Are you referring to early closing?”
Q. “This Commission has been engaged for a number
of months in investigating the terms of reference to
his Honour.”
A. “Yes.”
Q. “At present his Honour is engaged on two matters,
local option and removals.”
A. “Yes.”
Q. “Forget those for the time being and apply your
mind to all those other matters that have gone before
—control of hotels, section 41, the tied-house system,
distribution of liquor, and so on. Are there any facts
in your knowledge that you can put before his Honour
relevant to those subjects?”
A. “Ho.”
Q. “Are there any facts within the knowledge of any
person that you can nominate that you believe to be
relevant to those matters?”
A. “Ho” (p. 1981).
102. As already indicated, amongst the problems of
hours of closing are whether there are substantial evils
associated with 6 o’clock closing, for instance, what has
been described as the “peak hour swill,” the flagrant
breaking of the law by persons seeking and obtaining
liquor after lawful hours in licensed places and by the
process of what has come to be known as “sly grog.”
103. With regard to the so-called 6 o’clock swill, it is
manifest that it is necessary to arrive at some conclusion
whether such an evil exists and, if it exists at all, whether
it is of such dimensions or of such a nature as to call for
possible reform.
104. Mr. Piggott, on behalf of the Temperance Alliance,
has plainly said that he does not concede that there is
this six o’clock rush, at any rate to the extent claimed
by others, and that whatever its extent may be, the ex-
tension of the closing hour would not remedy it (para.
112379). It must be stressed that at all times he has
made it clear that if for any reason it is suggested that
the hour of closing should be extended beyond 6 p.m., it
should be done only if that is the wish of the people
expressed by submitting the question to them as electors.
105. I proceed first of all to discuss the question whe-
ther there are really conditions of drinking in hotels at
6 o’clock or during what is called the peak hour, which
may be said to amount to an evil. For this purpose I
have examined in detail the evidence of various witnesses
and for convenience, as shortly as is consistent with doing
justice to the views expressed, I reproduce the evidence
of the main persons examined on the subject. It is.
perhaps, unnecessary to draw attention to the circum-
stance that in reproducing the evidence it is impossible
to set it forth in full, and as well impossible to sum-
marise the evidence of every witness who dealt with the
subject. Of this there is no doubt, that the short pas-
sages relevant to the subject fairly express the views
of the witnesses; the references in brackets to the page
and/or the paragraph of the evidence are inserted for
easy checking by those either obliged or minded to
examine the evidence in full.
106. Witnesses who gave evidence by being called either
by Mr. Piggott, or at his instance, are dealt with first in
the order in which they were called.
107. The Eev. C. H. Tomlinson, the Rector of the
Church of England, Horthbridge, expressed the opinion
that what was described as “the disgusting procedure
that has been called pig swilling and various other names
is, I think, an exaggeration in the main.” On being asked
to assume for the moment that an extension of hours
would eliminate or tend to eliminate the four to six pig
swilling at hotels, he added that he would not be in
favour of an extension of hours:
“You think that no reasonable objection could be
taken to conditions in Hew South Wales hotels, particu-
larly in the city, between four and six o’clock in the
afternoon ?”
A. “There is not much wrong with it” (p. 1521).
He fairly agreed that practical experience is a much
more reliable guide than an opinion, however firmly
or honestly held.” (p, 1523.)
108. Later there appeared this passage in his evidence:
Q. “Will you agree that for the average Australian,
leaving out the other section, an extension of hours
would be a desirable thing?”
A. “Yes.”
Q. “How far do you think we can go for the aver-
age Australian —to ten o’clock or eleven o’clock?”
A. “The further you go the worse the moral problem
becomes.”
Q. “Would you be prepared to agree that ten o’clock
would be a reasonable hour for the average Australian ?”
A. “Ho.” (p. 1525.)
109. The next witness was Mr. Y. E, Stanton, then
the Field Secretary and Director of Youth Work for the
Hew South Wales Temperance Alliance. When first
asked about the subject of conditions under six o’clock
closing, he said:
Q. “In Hew South Wales, have you noticed similar
conditions to those in Adelaide, allowing for the dif-
ference in pouplation?”
A. “Ho. Occasionally one has the company of a
drunk in the train, but it is not a regular experience
by any means in the evening.”
Q. “Would you say that an extension of closing to
ten o’clock would eliminate the rush with which we
are familiar in Sydney?”
A. “Based on my experience in Adelaide, I would
say no, and from my general study of the question I
do not think that an extension of hours would materi-
ally alter the present rush conditions.” (p. 1532.)
110. The witness then indicated that there were rush
conditions in Hew South Wales due to various causes,
more particularly since the last war. Jit is quite clear
that the witness referred to the 1939-45 war. His atten-
tion was drawn to conditions in this way:—
“You may take it that it is the subject of judicial
record that long before the war and long before there
was a shortage of beer, we had this disgusting six


o’clock rush, and the shortage of beer had nothing to
do with it then and the recent war had nothing to do
with it?”
A. ‘‘Your Honour, I agree with that.”
To Mr. Piggott:
Q. “You are not denying that there is a rush?”
A. “No, there is definitely.” (p. 1533.)
111. The witness had earlier referred to his experi-
ence in Adelaide, when he stated that “before six o’clock
closing came in we had a very definite peak hour rush in
most hotels in and around Adelaide and right through
South Australia”.
112. He was followed by Mr. Francis Wilson who,
prior to his retirement, was Research Secretary of the
Temperance Alliance. He was examined by Mr. Piggott:
Q. “Do you remember the manual workers’ hours?”
A. “They knocked off at five o’clock as a rule.”
Q. “You have observed the conditions under six
o’clock closing?”
A. “Yes.”
Q. “You will admit that there is a rush now?”
A. “Yes, definitely.”
Q. “What was the position then?”
A. “There was a rush then too.”
(This referred to eleven o’clock closing —see p. 1546.)
113. Later he gave evidence of his investigations at
the end of April, 1952, in these terms: —
“This week, because of the enquiry, I made sure of
my grounds again, and on my way home I called and
looked in at the hotels. The first hotel in which I
looked was the one at the south-west corner of King
and Pitt streets. There was ample room for at least
six or seven men to have immediate access to the bar.
One reason that I paid attention to that was the state-
ment that men could not get near the bar, and that
some had to climb over the shoulders of others.”
114. The witness’s v,isit was at five o’clock (para.
67373). Immediately afterwards he was asked: —
Q. “You have read in the press that somebody said
that people had to climb over one another’s shoulders ?”
A. “The press has made that statement.”
Mr. Piggott : “Would you like to qualify that state-
ment. Do you mean reaching over?”
A. “The suggestion was that they were driven to
excess and had to reach over and that it almost came
to climbing over. I went to Belfield’s Hotel and had a
look in there. The inner bar was more full than the
other bar, but still people had access to the bar with-
out disturbing anybody else. I went to the Tatler on
Monday and Tuesday nights. At the Tatler the inner
bar on both occasions was well crowded. The outer
bar had room for people to have access to the bar itself.
“Next I went to Adams; the bar in George-street is
a very large one. That was very well filled. The Town
Hall Hotel had a great number in it also, but in no
case did I find that access to the bar was not possible.”
115. Then followed a reference to a number of other
hotels in which, in effect, the witness stated that the con-
ditions were as to some a small number at the bar, there
was access to the bar; as to some there was plenty of room
for people to have access to the bar, some were very
well filled, one other very crowded. The witness pointed
out that a great many of these hotels listed by him are
more popular than others and the number of people fre-
quenting them varies from time to time over the course
of years (page 1547). The witness detailed quite a num-
ber of visits and ultimately referred to the hotel “just
below Salvation Army Headquarters. I stood there at
twenty minutes to six and watched the people coming
from Mark Foy’s. I saw no evidence of any rush at all.
Perhaps half a dozen men went in there. I am making
this statement there because of alleged lack of conveni-
ences.”
Mr. Piggott: Q. “Would you say that if people had
an opportunity of sitting at tables and drinking it
would improve the position ?”
A. “That is sheer nonsense.”
Mr. Piggott: Q. “On what do you base that opinion?”
A. “I stayed at the Civic Hotel in Canberra in
December, 1945. I was having lunch in the lunch room,
which is divided from the lounge by a big plate-glass
window, and one of my fellow diners drew my attention
to the position obtaining there. Two women who were
as respectably dressed as any member of a church ladies’
guild were sitting there and they had ten glasses of
beer before them at once.”
Q. They were served with ten glasses—five each, right
away ?”
A. “All at the one time. This place was most modern,
with tub chairs and nice round tables, all the things
that we have been told would help to prevent people
from drinking to excess,”
Q. “Is this the incident on which you base your ex-
pression ’sheer nonsense’?
A. “That is one only. While I was watching they had
another serve of ten at once. I wondered how they
could accommodate them. One woman came in, ostens-
ibly a guest of the house because she had no hat and
she sat down to write a letter. She ordered four at
once. When she started to write one of these semi-
drunken women brought over one of the glasses to
make sure she had enough.”
Q. “You heard her say, ’I want to make sure that you
have enough’ ?”
A. “No. I deduced that from what I saw. Then a
man and a woman came in six glasses brought
in once, not one after the other.”
Q. “What was the time of day?”
A. “At 2.20.” (Page 1548.)
116. The later passage in the evidence of the witness
as to the lack of honesty in those who held opinions dif-
fering from his appears at page 1551, paragraphs 67533-
67549. This portion of his evidence plainly must affect
the value of any opinions expressed by him.
117. He was followed by the Reverend S. A. Eastman,
who was the convenor of the Public Questions Committee
of the Presbyterian Church of Australia, New South
Wales Assembly.
Q. “I suppose you are of the opinion that there
are evils connected with six o’clock closing, don’t you
think?”
A. “No, I would not say there are evils connected
with six o’clock closing.”
Q. “No evils at all?”
A. “No, except I would like to shorten them.”
Q. “You would prefer four o’clock, I take it?”
A. “Yes, I prefer four o’clock. As a matter of fact,
I prefer none at all—no licence.” (Page 1553.)
118. As already indicated, the Yery Reverend William
Charles Francis, of the Methodist Church, produced the
unanimous resolution of the conference with respect to
six o’clock closing.


119. In the course of his address, Mr. Piggott indicated
his reliance upon the fact that “the question was put
to the people and by a very large majority—62 per cent. —
over a million people voting—voted for six o’clock closing
and we feel that no alterations should be made unless a
vote is taken. We are quite willing to leave it to the
people.”
120. As appears at page 2752, Mr. Piggott submitted
that ten o’clock closing does not get past that rush. “The
rush at six o’clock is like the rush on the railways and
tramways, and when people knock off at the same time
there is a peak period. I have here an extract on the
evidence of Sir Edgar Sanders, Director of the Brewers’
Society, given before the Royal Commission in England:
“The earlier closing hour has been a reform of
the first magnitude for the country. The last hour in
the evening is always the worst, whatever the period of
opening is, and to get the streets cleared at least an
hour earlier than used to be the case has been an
enormous benefit.”
121. Mr. Piggott continued:
“Then I have a cutting from the Sydney Morning
Herald. (2nd January, 1906.) ‘Those who in other
circumstances would most likely have consumed their
liquor deliberately and at reasonable intervals extend-
ing into prohibited hours manifest a desire to consume
as much as they could before the tolling of the much
dreaded modern curfew —eleven o’clock.’ ”
122. Mr. Piggott added:
“It proves that there was a rush then until eleven
o’clock and that they were using the same argument
about the rush and the bad conditions.” He was asked
whether he could refer the Commission to anything as
bad as what I describe as “the pig swill conditions.”
He replied that he had heard the term and continued:
“I have contested right through that there is a rush but,
with respect, I would say that that rush would still
continue at that peak hour” (page 2752). He supported
his argument by a cutting produced during the evidence
of Mr. Watson (page 2136) where the following passage
appears (90512) :
Commissioner: Q. “What is the date of that clip-
ping?” (Newspaper.)
A, “It is a bit tattered, and I cannot tell you, your
Honor.”
It continues:
“Hitherto closing time in London has varied between
10 and 11 p.m. Mr. Nally (Labour, Bilston) supporting
the Bill said ‘Different closing hours cause wholesale
migration of drinkers from one district to another.
During the beer shortage it was remarkable that some
thirsty Londoners were not trampled to death in the
rush.’
“The Home Secretary (Mr. Chuter Ede) said his con-
ductors had complained of buses being overcrowded by
people rushing over Hammersmith Bridge for a last
quick one in Barnes after Hammersmith pubs closed
at 10 p.m.
“The teetotal members clashed on a clause allowing
night clubs to serve drinks until 2.30 a.m.”
123. Mr. Piggott added: “That just supports my view
in regard to the closing hour.”
124. His final submission was that if there is any altera-
tion it should be “in the same way—that is, by the vote
of the people.”
125. I have endeavoured to trace the passage quoted by
Mr. Piggott from the evidence of Sir Edgar Sanders,
given before the Royal Commission on Licensing, 1929-
1931. The transcript is not available, but it is clear that
he gave evidence before the Commission on the 30th
April, 1930, as appears at page 256 in the appendix list
of witnesses. The exact passage appears in a handbook
“The Control of a Dangerous Trade” (1947 at page 53).
There is, of course, no reason to doubt the accuracy of the
passage as quoted. No reference is made to it in the
recommendations on permitted hours in the report of
the Royal Commission. However, the subject of opening
and closing hours was dealt with in some detail in the
report and reference is made to it later,
126. In view of a suggestion at one stage in Mr. Stan-
ton’s evidence that such evils as were associated with the
peak hour under six o’clock closing were intensified since
the 1939-45 war and by the beer shortage (p. 1532) several
transcripts of evidence before the Licensing Court of
hearings between the years 1925 and 1936 were produced
before the Commission (p. 1597). These reveal conditions
existing before the war and when no question of beer
shortage was involved —comparable with those existing
in 1951 and 1952. These were obtained by Mr. Fitz-
maurice, now the Secretary of the Licensing Court, who
informed Counsel that he believed that similar evidence
could be found in almost every application for a new
licence before the restriction on licences and in applica-
tions for removal after that date.
127. There is ample sworn testimony that the drinking
conditions in many hotels during the peak hour, con-
cluding at least nominally with six p.m. amount to an
evil. This is especially so in many parts of the Metro-
politan Licensing District and some cases close to the
city proper, and in other cases farther removed. More-
over, impartial observation of such conditions can lead
to no other reasonable conclusion than that they range
from the undesirable to the disgusting. As is indicated
in the summary later, the finding is inescapable that there
are in many districts and in many hotels what has been
inelegantly described as “pig swilling”,
128. An evil of quite a different kind has been revealed
in the evidence. There is no doubt that there are serious
breaches of the law by licensed hotels trading after hours,
and algo by sly grog sales when hotels observing the law
are closed for trade. It is quite unnecessary to set forth
particular pages of evidence in this connection. Police
statistics reveal that after hour and sly grog trading are
indulged in, particularly in the extensive Metropolitan
Licensing District; of course, it is not confined to the
city areas, indeed after hour trading is in many country
areas unavoidable. There is no doubt that some of this
trade by licensed hotels is carried on at profitable rates.
The problem which arises is whether the evils which are
found to exist can be either controlled or completely
eliminated.
129. The official view of the U.L.Y.A. is found in a
resolution tendered before the Commission (Exhibit 68)
which is in these terms: —
“Further resolved: That the Council of the U.L.Y.A.
is of the opinion that alteration of trading hours would
be beneficial to the public in regard to a- more equitable
distribution of liquor’.
130. It is manifest that this resolution is carefully
framed, and whilst it obviously contains the expression of
the view that an alteration of trading hours would be
beneficial to the public, it adds that the benefit would
be “in regard to a more equitable distribution of liquor”.
131. In view of the careful terminology of the resolu-
tion which, on the face of it, does not at all advert to
what I regard as the more important pronounced evil,
namely the peak hour rush, attention was drawn to the
circumstances in which the series of resolutions appear-
ing in the above exhibit were drawn up. It is clear from
the evidence of Mr, M. D. Shanney, a member of the
Council of the U.L.Y.A. that the different items in the


series of resolutions were discussed and then “put into
proper legal form by our solicitor, Mr. Purcell, and then
read to the satisfaction of the person who moved the
resolution”.
132. Thereafter a number of witnesses were called on
the subject of “extending” the hotel hours. Some of
these witnesses spoke generally as to hours and others
with special reference to country or non-metropolitan
areas.
133. Mr. Shanney is the licensee of the Hurstville
Hotel, Hurstville, and as well the owner of the premises
of the Hotel Hunter’s Hill at Hunter’s Hill. He has been
connected with the liquor trade since the year 1918 and
impressed me as a qualified and reliable witness. He
was asked with respect to the resolution of the U.L.Y.A.
Council, whether “a reference to the alteration of hours
represents an alteration in the point of view or whether
that is a long held view.” The ’witness stated that “We
do know that there are licensees who favour six o’clock
closing. It seems to suit them. I think that most of
the hotelkeepers who are really interested in the trade
realise that we should have longer opening hours”. He
continued that the resolution was in accord with the
Association’s official attitude at the period of the referen-
dum, but that a very considerable number of members
were quite satisfied, or more than satisfied, with the
existing hours. Further examined, he said that the posi-
tion for some years has been in the metropolitan area
that the publican can sell the product from which he
gets the greatest profit, that is draught beer, in half the
number of hours that he is entitled to trade at present,
and that therefore many of these people do not want to
see any extension of hours. In his opinion, the Council
“are a hundred per cent, behind the later hours.”
134. Mr. V. J. McCarthy, the licensee of the Grand
Hotel, Hunter Street, was asked his views on the stagger-
ing of hours and whether the closing hour of an hotel
might vary with its locality and type of trade. He agreed
with that, adding that it would be an advantage. He
continued, “I do know, at six o’clock in our area they
are usually on their way home. We do not get much
worry. Some places, of course, would be different, but
most of the offices finish about a quarter to five and by a
quarter to six they are on their way out”.
135. The witness, Mr. Walter Magrath, a director of
Lennon’s Hotel, Brisbane, and associated with the hotel
trade for very many years and a shareholder in a number
of companies in the metropolitan area which have hotel
interests (p. 518) gave evidence as follows: —“My own
opinion is that the public would be better served if trading
were something similar to England, where the hours are
broken. In Sydney, or in Few South Wales, if the hours
were say, eleven to two with a break until five, and then
until about nine around the suburbs. Around the markets
and other places I think there are special conditions pre-
vailing, and I think the hours should be altered accord-
ingly as they are throughout London, England, and other
parts. I think there may be some case put for the
country, of which I have not had much experience.
136. Mr. L. P. Plasto, who is the governing director
of L. P. Plasto Pty Limited, which conducts two large
hotels in the city and who is one of the trustees of the
trust controlling an hotel at Ashfield and is part owner
of the freehold of an hotel in Wellington, has had experi-
ence of hotels both in the suburbs and in the country
between 1922 and 1947; he is the senior vice-president
of the U.L.Y.A. New South Wales Branch. He was asked;
Q. “What in your opinion would be a reasonable time
to extend the hours for the opening of the bars?”
A. “Opening and closing. Well, the retail section of
the trade, the U.L.Y.A., have carried resolutions and
they are in favour of ten to ten, and I endorse that.”
Q. “Is it your opinion that if the hours were ex-
tended from ten a.m. to ten p.m. that that, for the
reasons you have already given, would tend to eliminate
this four to six rush?”
A. “I have not any doubt about that.”
Q. “Have you given any consideration to having
other facilities available to the public?”
A. “Yes. I think that if the law was changed to
make these trading hours ten to ten, most of the hotels
would provide facilities whereby people could drink
leisurely in lounges. I think that is the most desirable
place to drink after their working day is finished, but I
do think also that hour, the night life as we know
it that the hotels of the non-residential quarter or the
centre of the city, that the law should have some elas-
ticity and permit those hotels to trade until midnight
if necessary in lounges, to provide a necessity or an
amenity for those people who go to a picture show or
theatre or who had social intercourse.” (p. 1242.)
Ql. “Would Ithat include refreshment, other than
liquor in some form?”
A. “Well, that would be conditional on the public
who wanted to frequent those places. If they cared
to have a sandwich or some light supper, that would be
provided.”
137. Later Mr. Plasto was asked whether “ten to ten as
the desirable hours” represented “the real view of most
of your association members.” He answered, “well, we
are representing our members and I would not like to
take a plebiscite of it, but if we are their representatives
we are having the say and that is by resolution the hours
we have suggested to be adopted are ten to ten.”
Q. “To be frank you feel that if a plebiscite was
taken self-interest might bring about a different result ?”
A. “Yes.”
Q. “In other words that the interests of the public
might be subordinate to the interests of the individual ?”
A. “Yes.” (p. 1245-6.)
These answers, it might fairly b 3 stated, throw some
light on the value of the resolution passed by the Council
of the U.L.V.A. and, in my opinion, suggest a more can-
did expression of opinion of the trade generally than is to
be found in the carefully drafted terms of the Council’s
resolution, particularly in view of its concluding words.
138. He later gave evidence touching the subject of the
difficulties of the employer of labour. He stated they
could be overcome “because there are other industries
in which they have to work late in the evening, for in-
stance to give transport service and so on. We have two
States, Queensland and Tasmania, with ten o’clock closing
. . . When they enter the hotel industry they know
mostly that that is what they have to expect and most
of them go in with their eyes open and expect it”; this
had reference to the unavoidable working of long hours
in transport and other national services (p. 1246).
139. The position in the country was further dealt with
by licensees and other persons with experience. It is
impossible to quote all of these, although one should add
that all persons represented before the Commission appear
to have agreed that the licensees who were called to give
evidence, by whomever they were called, were fairly repre-
sentative of the retail trade.
140. Mr. S. M. Harrison, licensee of the Locomotive
Hotel, Junee, stated that he had been around the country
districts of New South Wales. He agreed that in quite
a lot of country towns, small country centres, there would
not be much trade at all if it were confined to the hours
allowed by the A«t.


Q. “So that in order to meet, shall we say, the con-
venience of those people who work on the land who could
not get in before six o’clock, you do sometimes forget
what time it is—that is so is it not?”
A. “Correct.”
Q. “Would you agree that that state of affairs often
is found to exist in small centres ?”
A. “Yes.”
Q. “Where there is a public house to serve a small
community ?”
A. “Yes.”
Q. “Many of whom are engaged during the day on
their own work.”
A. “That is so.”
Q. “Would you agree with this; that after six o’clock
there comes what you might call the normal trading
hours ?”
A. “In some centres.”
Q. “In small country centres ?”
A. “Yes, small country centres.”
141. Mr. L. J. Sheppherd, licensee of the Albion Hotel
ax Grabben Gullen, has been the owner-licensee of that
hotel for some twenty-six years; it is about 27 miles from
Goulburn and 50 miles from Boorowa. He stated:
“The people for many miles around are working
throughout the hours of daylight. The country man
works while it is light and fine and he is free at nights
and week-ends.”
Q. “Therefore ?”
A. “After six.”
Q. “You get trade at night-time do you not?”
A. “That is correct.”
Q. “Quite frankly, do you get much trade during
the daytime?”
A. “Actually I would think it would be more busy
after six than before.”
Q. “You think?”
A. “I am sure.”
Q. “Of course when shearing is in progress you do
get the shearers there from far and wide?”
A. “Yes, many of these men are ten and fifteen miles
away on the various properties.” (p. 45.)
142. Dr. J. J. G. McGirr, who is the executor of the
estate of the late J. J. G. McGirr, and takes the most
active part in the management and control of the estate,
regularly visits some 24 hotels in various part of New
South Wales. He was asked;
“What would you say as to the position of the
country licensee in the small country town or village in
relation to hours of sale?”
A. “Well, the position to-day, of course, it is just
according to the policeman, the policeman who is in the
area. If you get a decent man he allows them to do
reasonable after-hours, but if you get a chap who is a
bit harsh, well he makes them shut up right on the
knock.”
Q. “We have evidence that it would be impossible to
meet the needs of the public in some country places
unless you did the bulk of your trade after six o’clock.
What do you say to that?”
A. “No, I would not agree with that. Ido not agree
with that.”
Q. “What about a country town in which you have
people working on the on the road, and they
cannot get into the town to the only hotel in time to
get their liquor by six o’clock.”
*69329—6
A. “I do not say it would meet the convenience of
all the public. I said the bulk of the business of the
hotel would be done in the correct trading hours, but
from the convenience of the public point of view natur-
ally you would need longer hours. These men could not
possibly get in by six o’clock nor by eight o’clock.”
(p. 636.)
143. The witness, Mr. M. J. Gleeson who, with Mr. T. G.
Murray, is a director of a number of companies owning
hotel businesses in the Irrigation Area, was asked a series
of questions on the subject of hours. After referring to
the fact that many people in the Irrigation Area work on
farms, he was asked his experience of what happened to-
wards the close of day before the hours of five and six, to
which his answer was in these terms:
“The same thing happens there that more or less
happens at any of the wheat centres. The men are out
harvesting all day. In the Irrigation Area they are out
picking fruit and they rush in about ten to six and
have one eye on the clock and one eye to see if the beer
is still on. I have seen two men buy as many as six
schooners and put them into the corner. My firm con-
clusion is that hotels in the country should close at
half past six and then a man will know that he will
have reasonable time to have a drink. The next thing
to help would be if there were plenty of beer. I would
suggest that country hotels should open again about
eight to ten and encourage a better class of lounge drink-
ing where a man can get a cup of tea or coffee in the
lounge. The great trouble in most country towns, and
particularly in small towns, is that you might take £2O
in the day, take £1 until half past five and take £lB
between six and ten o’clock at night with the farmers
and working chaps coming in at night time. That
appears in dozens of small country towns.”
Q. “What about beer gardens ?”
A. “My experience of Australians is that it is very
problematical whether they would use the beer gardens.
If men knock off from foundries or have been picking
fruit all day they are in dirty clothes and like to make
for the bars. It would run into millions of pounds to
put up beer gardens. It would be better to put up more
rooms. Many of the hotels are not suited for beer gar-
dens. There is no place to put them.”
144. Later in his evidence he said: “You hear so much
criticism about this beer swilling that I have given it a
lot of consideration. I do not know any possible way of
getting over it. The beer swill was there twenty-five or
thirty years ago when there was plenty of beer, and I
think it will be there in twenty-five or thirty years time
.... I have been in the hotel trade since 1913, and I
have always seen it exactly the same as it is to-day.”
(pp. 676-7.)
BROKEN HILL.
145. The position with respect to Broken Hill was the
subject of evidence by several witnesses. Mr. C. E. Aitken,
General Manager of the South Australian Brewing Coy.
Ltd., stated that his company owned (140 hotel freeholds
in South Australia and) more than 20 in New South
Wales, the latter all “in Broken Hill or within 30 miles of
Broken Hill”. Examined by Counsel he stated:
Q. “As the owner of the premises in which the publi-
cans licences are held I suppose your company is inter-
ested to see that the businesses are conducted in accord-
ance with the requirements of the licensing
authorities?”
A. “As directed by the local licensing police.”


Q. “You do not come to Sydney; when I say in
accordance with the direction of the licensing authori-
ties on the spot —the officer or officers who are licensing
inspectors ?”
A. “We can say under the peculiar circumstances
which apply in Broken Hill.”
Q. “We’ll say then subject to local rules.”
A. “Yes.”
Q. “I understand in Broken Hill the hotels are run on
shift work more or less.”
A. “Perhaps almost is nearer the mark.”
Q. “Much in the same way as the mines are run ?”
A. “I have only spent a week in Broken Hill, but I
would say that.” (p. 199.)
146. Then later to Mr, Piggott:
Q. “I think you have agreed that the liquor law is
not very well observed in Broken Hill?”
A. “I have agreed to that, yes.”
Q. “With the powers of your company having ties
over these hotels, has your compnay ever considered
trying to police, as far as you are able, to see a higher
standard is maintained?”
A. “What do you mean by a higher standard?”
Q. “To see that the law is observed.”
A. “In what particular respect ?”
Q. “In regard to what has been suggested in regard
to closing for instance.”
A. “If you refer only to trading hours I say it is the
job of the licensing police.”
Q. “You do not think it is a job having the power in
your equity in the hotels ?”
A. “I would say that anyone who suggests that has
not been in Broken Hill.”
Q. “I have been in Broken Hill if you are suggesting
I have not. You are agreed the law is not observed, to
put it bluntly?”
A. “I do think that the law, whether written or other-
wise, in Broken Hill is observed.” (p. 203.)
147. Some time later Mr. T. W. Stone, licensee of the
Palace Hotel, George Street, Sydney, who had held the
licence of the Royal Hotel, Broken Hill, from December,
1939 to August, 1948, was examined by leading Counsel
assisting the Commission:
Q, “What were the unofficial hours at Broken Hill
when you were there ?”
A. “That was a matter usually determined by the
local U.L.Y.A. and the police authorities in conjunction
with the unions.”
Q. “And the Barrier Industrial Council?”
A. “Yes, the unions. That was made to suit the local
conditions.”
Q. “What was the happy arrangement that was
arrived at?”
A. “We had our normal trading hours during the
day, and of course shift workers were also catered for
when they came off shift and, provided you were com-
petent and sober, if you happened to be out of an
evening you could also take advantage of those con-
ditions.”
Q. “If you went to a cinema that came out at eleven,
you could be sure of being supplied?”
A. “Yes. Close handy there would be someone who
would cater for your requirements.”
Q. “We know the mines work shift work. You are
obliged to have in hotels shift work ?”
A. “Usually it falls to the lot of the lucky licensee to
trade the late hours.”
Q. “There are 47 hotels in Broken Hill?”
148. I should add that in the course of evidence I drew
the attention of Counsel assisting the Commission that I
was familiar with the conditions in Broken Hill. As has
been pointed out earlier, sitting as a commission I was
entitled to inform myself without adhering to the strict
rules of evidence, although naturally sworn testimony sub-
ject to cross-examination is, if reliable and free from
self-interest or prejudice, the most valuable. If suffices
to say that there can be no doubt that in Broken Hill
the hotels generally do not observe what may be called
six o’clock closing, and I have no reason to doubt, and
every reason to accept, the evidence of Mr. Stone that
that circumstances is by arrangement as he suggests. I
think it proper to add that no one has suggested that the
conditions in Broken Hill so far as concerns sobriety, are
in any way worse than in any other part of the State. So
far as statistics based upon police records are of value,
they support the view that conditions in Broken Hill are
favourable. (See statistics reproduced later.)
149. In addition to this sworn testimony, there was a
statement of Mr. S. H. Bannear, part owner of the lease of,
and licensee in, the Union Club Hotel at Broken Hill. He
has been interested in the hotel since the Bth May, 1950,
and it is owned by the South Australian Brewing Com-
pany. He stated that, especially in the summertime, there
was not sufficient draught beer to enable the hotel to keep
open from 10 to 6; and after referring to shift work in
some of the mines at Broken Hill he was asked whether he
kept open at night. He stated that it was found that if
they opened at night it did not pay for the light. Beer
was the principal drink, in his opinion 99 per cent, of the
liquor drunk was beer. Having added that his hotel would
be open from 12 to 2 and then again from 4 to 6.30, he
claimed that this was the “day’s trading”. Asked whether
he found the hours of trade in Broken Hill were dictated
in any way by pressure from the industrial groups he
said he did not know, but he though the licensed victuallers
had agreed on certain hours, “I think there are hours
agreed, like more or less an unwritten law, and I think if
you exceed those hours you would be pick up”. As to the
night hours he said, “I think the hours are Monday to
Thursday open to 10.30 p.m. You can reopen at 11.15
p.m. and close at 1 a.m., but they are very strict on the
1 a.m. At 1 a.m. you have to have everybody off the
premises. The idea of opening at a quarter past 11 is
to give the afternoon shift men a drink and no one is
allowed —an ordinary person would not or should not
gain admittance at a quarter past 11. It is simply for
the miners.” He further stated that on Fridays the hotels
traded till 1 a.m., and on Saturdays the hour of closing
was 11 p.m.; Friday and Saturday hours were not re-
stricted to miners. With regard to Sunday, the transcript
shows that he stated: “Sundays, 10 a.m. to 1.30 p.m.”
Q. “And then they have to go home for their meal?”
A. “Yes.”
Q. “Are they strict about 1.30 p.m.”
A. “Yes. I think if you traded later they would just
close your hotel to the right hours. And 4 p.m. in the
afternoon to 6.30, and from 7.45 p.m. to 10 p.m.
Q. “And that is open to everybody?”
A. “Yes.”
150. On being asked whether there was any mad rush
to have a drink, speaking generally,
A. “I do not think so. I think they line up and take
their turn to be served.” (See last schedule.)
151. As stated above, one matter which arises in relation
to the clear position with regard to Broken Hill, that


6 o’clock closing is disregarded, is the question as to the
effect on what may be called sobriety. There is nothing
to suggest that conditions as to drunkenness or excess in
drinking are affected by the undoubted long and late hours
of trading. There are official figures on the subject of
crime in various centres. In another connection, attention
is drawn to the fact that very great care must be exercised
in drawing any conclusion from statistics with regard to
crime, in relation to hours or conditions of trading in
liquor. So many circumstances have to be taken into
account and so many factors may affect the reliability
of statistics that at best they are, in my opinion, not a
very reliable guide. But for whatever value they may
possess, and I myself attach no great importance to them,
the following comparative tables from the Police Records
dated 24th December, 1952, relate to four major cities in
country areas:
Broken Hill (population 29,000).
E. 576—Crimes reported per 100 of the population, 1.99.
C. 344—Crimes cleared up per 100 of the population, 1.19.
A. 274—Number of offenders per 100 of the population,
.94.
Wagga Wagga (population 15,351).
R. 768—Crimes reported per 100 of the population, 4.95.
Q- HI —Crimes cleared up per 100 of the population, 4.63.
A. 442—Number of offenders per 100 of the population,
2.85.
Goulhurn (population 16,029).
E. 693—Crimes reported per 100 of the population, 4.33.
C. 492 —Crimes cleared up per 100 of the population, 3.08.
A. 391—Number of offenders per 100 of the population,
2.44.
Lismore (population 16,062).
E. 921—Crimes reported per 100 of the population, 5.76.
C. 723—Crimes cleared up per 100 of the population, 4.52.
A. 615 —Number of offenders per 100 of the population,
3.22.
R. Crimes reported.
C. Crimes cleared up.
A. Persons arrested.
_ 152. Mr. Smyth, Q.C., on behalf of the U.L.Y.A., ad-
dressed himself to other aspects of trading hours. He
submitted that a licensee should be bound to remain open
during “either the basic hours or during hours fixed by
the Court.” He suggested that “the infinitely variable
needs of the public according to locality are met, which
is obviously not the case with arbitrary opening and clos-
ing hours.”
153. On the subject of restaurant and night clubs, he
made the following submissions:
(a) The Licensing Court should have power to grant
permits to restaurants to sell all liquors during
such hours as the Court thinks fit, having regard to
the type of restaurant and the needs of the public.
(h) In the granting of permits the Court should have
regard to whether such a grant will result in undue
competition or economic waste.
(c) The supply of liquor should be ancillary to the
meal,
(d) The applicant for the appropriate permit should be
subjected to the same strict investigation as is
suggested with respect to all future hotel licensees.
(e) The holder of a permit should be subject to the
same sanctions and the same degree of supervision
in all respects as are suggested with respect to hotel
licensees.
(/) The U.L.Y.A. agrees with Tooth’s suggestion that
it be made unlawful for liquor to be on the premises
of an unlicensed restaurant regardless of the owner-
ship of liquor.
154. Mr. Cassidy, Q.C., on behalf of the Australian
Wine Producers’ Association, submitted that some amend-
ment should be made in Part lIIa of the Liquor Act “to
provide for extension of the hours during which all liquor
may be sold and supplied by holders of restaurant permits
was sold.” He claimed that “there is a universal desire,
even from prohibitionists, that drinking conditions should
be improved and sophisticated.” Briefly, he stated that
his association “adopted the suggestions of counsel for
the U.L.Y.A. that the Licensing Court should have power
to grant permits to restaurants to sell all liquor during
such hours as the Court thinks fit” and specifically adopted
the suggestions immediately following upon that which
has just been stated. He elaborated the submission that
the restriction on the type of liquor which might be sold
or supplied in restaurant and night clubs should be re-
moved. He stated that it was “partly against our own
interests because while it would permit the sale of forti-
fied wines and brandy it would also permit the sale of
spirits and imported wines in competition with our wines.
It is felt, however, that the larger interests of the public
demands there should be no restriction on the choice of
liquor consumed before, during or after a meal.”
155. Mr. Maguire (as he then was) on behalf of the
Wine and Spirit Merchants’ Association of Hew South
Wales, stated that he adopted the submission of Mr. Smyth
with regard to the alteration of hours, and as appears by
his written submissions, indicated that he did not desire
to elaborate beyond indicating:—
1. It is an established fact that the trading hours in
Broken Hill rightly or wrongly have been adjusted to
meet the needs of that community and that no attempt
is made to enforce 6 o’clock closing.
2. It is also established that in many small rural
towns in New South Wales for many years past there
has been a substantial and persistent “after hours”
trade.
Spenser Harrison, 417/17320.
Leslie Sheppard, 425/17659 and 17667.
John Beavis, /18874.
The reason for this trade is the inability of the rural
worker to reach the hotel before the hour of 6 o’clock.
It is incontestable that this is a serious inconvenience
to such individuals. Even the advocates of temperance
agree that such a worker would suffer inconvenience in
consequence of the present closing hours.
Eev. Tomlinson, 1527/66607.
3. The foregoing are only instances of special require-
ments arising in particular localities, and the list could
be expanded.
4. The submission is made that such requirements are
legitimate and should be met, and accordingly that
legislation should be enacted to enable the lawful fulfil-
ment of same.”
156. Mr. Wallace, Q.C., on behalf of Tooth’s, suggested
that the question of hours affected the breweries only
indirectly, if at all. However, he submitted that “longer
or staggered hours would be in the public interest; the
so-called pig swill hour would tend to disappear if hours
were increased or at least staggered”. (I add in passing
that the problem presents itself to me in the form not
whether the total hours should be increased but rather
whether the closing hour should or should not be altered,
and if the former, whether there should be provision for
staggering.) Conditions in Tasmania and Queensland,
he claimed, confirmed the view advanced by him. Country
conditions in New South Wales and the position of the
rural worker and the position at Broken Hill, he sub-
mitted, led to the view that an inflexible closing time of
6 p.m, is irrational and not in the public interest.


157. Mr. Reynolds, on behalf of Tooheys, supported
a recommendation extending the legal hours of trading
for hotels although he added that the hotelkeeper was
more directly concerned with this question.
158. Mr. Goran, on behalf of the Police Commissioner
and of the Police Department, stated that he was not
instructed to make any submissions on the subject of
hours, this being a matter of Government policy. He
thereafter limited his argument in this way; “that it was
not considered that a recommendation for the extension
of hotel drinking hours would provide any immediate
difficult problems in policing hotels even though more
police may have to be allotted to this duty; the more
immediate problem would be whether there would be any
increase in general crime arising out of the extension of
facilities for pubhc drinking.”
169. Mr. Dovey (as he then was) learned senior coun-
sel assisting the Commission, submitted that with the
, exception of Mr. Piggott’s witnesses, every witness who
was asked about the question of trading hours gave
evidence in support of the proposition that a variation of
the existing hours was desirable in the public interest
in that, amongst other things it would, if not abolished,
tend to minimise what has been called the six o’clock
swill, or the disgusting conditions round about the time
that hotels close (p. 2774).
160. The subject of hours, either in hotel bars or as
to liquor with meals in hotels, restaurants or night clubs,
raises a question affecting employees in the liquor trade.
Attention is drawn to expressly as learned
counsel were given leave to appear for the Hew South
Wales branch of the Federated Liquor and Allied Trades
Employees’ Union of Australia. Counsel stated on that
occasion that “we have been informed by the Crown
Solicitor that the representatives of the U.L.V.A. have
indicated their intention to call or tender evidence that
in the opinion of the witnesses, an extension of present
hours of trading will make for the improvement of con-
ditions and redound to the public benefit. It is in
respect of that matter and limited to that matter that
we seek leave to appear on behalf of the Union”. After
leave was granted he suggested that counsel for the
U.L.V.A. might furnish the Union representative with
particulars of the matters to be raised; thereupon counsel
for the U.L.V.A. stated that he proposed to deal with it
in evidence “some time to-day”. Counsel for the branch
union suggested that he be given the opportunity of
reserving questions of cross-examination and reply until
he had had an opportunity of considering the matter (p.
1227). Thereafter, however, he did not cross-examine, nor
did he tender any evidence in reply, nor address. I have,
therefore, not had the benefit of the views of the em-
ployees’ union on the subject to which counsel had pro-
posed to address himself. But, it is clear that an altera-
tion of hours in any of the ways canvassed by various
interests would directly affect the conditions of employ-
ment and wages of employees. This work is comparable
to the position in other industries such as transport and
similar national services, as well as for instance, as in
the catering industry. For this reason this seems to me
to be a matter which, if it arose, would be dealt with by
the appropriate arbitration tribunal.
161. Mr. H. E. Best, Secretary of the Department of
Tourist Activities and Immigration, afforded valuable
assistance in evidence, mainly with respect to the sug-
gested requirement of overseas tourists. In addition he
tendered in documentary form, suggestions following a
conference of Australian Government tourist representa-
tives. (See Transcript p. 1937 and Exhibit 118.) Although
he was concerned essentially with provisions for tourists
from overseas, he stated in his “observations on hotels
and the liquor trade as affecting the tourist industry” that
“my experience overseas showed very definitely that,
generally speaking, drinking conditions in other countries
are very much better than here; there was no congestion
or suggestion of what has been referred to as the pig
swill conditions which prevail here.”
162. In the course of his evidence dealing with diffi-
culties experienced by travellers in Hew South Wales, he
said:
“When I was abroad 1 travelled through Germany,
Llolland, Belgium, and other European countries. I
travelled by car very often and at other times by plane
and arrived at all hours. My business would probably
keep me going until 8, 8.30, 9 or probably 10 o’clock at
night, and then I would think about a meal. I could
get into almost any cafe or restaurant and order with
ray meal a bottle of lager. The way it was served and
the fact that it was available was very much appreci-
ated. This is a commonly accepted arrangement in
continental countries. I feel myself that you are in
a country of grown-ups—that is my reaction —where
the people are responsible to themselves for their
actions, and if you want to drink at 10 o’clock at night
in a cafe under good conditions you may do so. I felt
that it was a very good thing from everybody’s point
of view that that should be so.”
163. Asked whether he would place any restrictions at
all on the sale of liquor he said: “Yes, I would see that
liquor was served in reasonable and nice conditions as
it is overseas” (para. 82978-9).
164. In order to appreciate what follows it is desirable
to state in short form the ordinary trading hours of hotels
in the various States: —
Hew South Wales, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Victoria, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Tasmania, 10 a.m. to 10 p.m.
South Australia, 5 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Queensland, 10 a.m. to 10 p.m.
West Australia, 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
(Goldfield district, 9 a.m. to 11 p.m.)
165. This short statement of trading hours makes no
reference to conditions associated with the provision of
meals or any special condition relevant to travellers or
other qualifications. These are dealt with separately.
166. It will be seen from the immediately preceding
paragraph that the hours of trading in Hew South Wales
are 8 in all. Bar sales are not permitted on Sundays,
Good Friday, Christmas Day, the morning of Anzac Day
or on general election days: It will be seen further that
no other State of the Commonwealth has fewer trading
hours; for instance Victoria 9 hours in all, Tasmania 12,
South Australia 13, Queensland 12, West Australia 12.
167. The very serious question arises whether for any
substantial reason the hours of trading in relation to
hotels should be amended by provision for alteration in
the opening and closing hours within the present total of
eight hours. In the recommendations which follow, it is
made clear that the real question is the closing hour but
so that no increase in the total number of trading hours
should be provided.
168. In the report of the Royal Commission on Licens-
ing (England and Wales), 1929, at page 31, appears under
the head “Permitted Hours —Conclusions and Recommen-
dations, the statement: “We have set down in the intro-
duction to our report our conviction that restriction in
hours has been of great value in promoting sobriety”
(paragraph 455).
169. In order to understand this paragraph it is desir-
able to set forth the paragraphs referred to:
“Paragraph 43. Restriction of hours. Prior to the
emergency legislation introduced during the war (1914-
18) public houses could remain open on week-days for


periods ranging from 16 to 19J hours (according to
the nature of the district), and for 6 or 7 hours on
Sundays. Under the Licensing Act, 1921 —which as
has been recorded earlier, adopted the principles of
certain emergency provisions applying during the war
—the number of hours during which liquor may be
sold is fixed, generally speaking, on week days at 9
per diem for the metropolis, and 8 per diem in other
districts and on Sundays, Christmas Day and Good
Friday at 5 per diem both in the metropolis and in
other districts in England. Paragraph 44. Although
opinion amongst our witnesses was not unanimous, we
feel satisfied that the shorter and broken hours as fixed
by the Act of 1921 have, by restricting the almost
indefinite continuity of opportunity for drinking which
formerly existed, proved themselves to be an indispens-
able element in the reduction of insobriety.
Paragraph 45. We have had strong evidence of the
beneficial results which have followed from the cutting
off of early morning drinking, particularly among in-
dustrial workers, the value of the afternoon break —
particularly in checking the continuity of afternoon
‘soaking’—and the changed conditions which have been
brought about by the abolition of the former late night
hours.”
170. (In paragraph 385 of the report a reference is
made to the experiment in the “Carlisle undertaking”:
“the policy of the management, too, for instance, in
abolishing snuggeries and discouraging what is called
perpendicular drinking, that is standing by the bar and
drinking, may have run somewhat in advance of conserva-
tive opinion amongst the consumers; an effort to lead
public taste can hardly escape such a fate. These early
prejudices are steadily disappearing and we see no reason
to doubt that the large majority of consumers in Carlisle
are well satisfied with the service given to them.”)
171. The report of the Royal Commission on Licensing
(Scotland), 1931, drew attention to the fact that more
evidence on the subject of hours than on any other single
topic was addressed to the Commission. The Commission
reached the conclusion that, notwithstanding suggestions
of variations in relation to districts, simplicity was prefer-
able. “Keeping in view, therefore, the relative desira-
bility of the midday break and the desirability of uni-
formity so far as that may be obtained, we are now
proposing that permitted hours throughout the country
should be from 11.30 a.m. to 10 p.m. with a compulsory
break extending for 2J hours, neither more nor less,
being the hours from 2.30 until 5 p.m.”
172. It will be observed that the views expressed in
the English and in the Scottish reports were published in
1931 and 1932, In 1946 the Royal Commission on Licens-
ing, New Zealand, dealt with the question of extending
the hours of retail sale. The majority report recommended
that the hours should be extended for the following prin-
cipal reasons: —
1. In the cities decent conditions of drinking do not
appear to be practicable when the sale of liquor closes
for the day at 6 p.m.
2. Workers coming in from their work in the country
to the town at the end of the day must, if they desire
a drink, rush to hotels before 6 p.m. and then engage
in rapid drinking.
3. Many workers in the country cannot leave their
work, such as milking, in order to have a drink before
6 p.m.
4. We think that after-hours trading would be
diminished if opening hours in the evening were per-
mitted.
5. The object of treating alcoholic liquor as an inci-
dental aid to the social enjoyment of those members
of a civilised community who desire it would be assisted
by providing evening hours.
6. The improvement in temperance and manners in
relation to alcoholic liquor over the past twenty-five
years and more affords good ground for assuming that
evening hours would not be abused.
7. In Tasmania, where the closing-hour was extended
to 10 p.m. in 1937, there has been a progressive drop
in the convictions for drunkenness and for drunken-
ness and related offences. (We note this fact, though
we have not seen any critical analysis of the position.)
8. Some of the alterations in the law which we pro-
pose would assist to safeguard the “on” sale of liquor
in the evening—e.g., the additional check on the charac-
ter of a licensee, the registration of barmen, the con-
duct of the breweries by a public corporation, and
inspection by a Liquor Trade Inspection and Advisory
Board.
173. We recommend accordingly the following hours for
sale to the public;—
Under an hotel or a bar licence (which we recom-
mend in replacement of the publican’s and accommo-
dation licence) and a New Zealand wine licence, on
the days of the week, other than Saturday or Sunday
the hours for sale for both “on” and “off” consump-
tion be from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m., from 4 p.m. to 6 p.m.,
and for “on” consumption only from 8 p.m. to 10 p.m.
We think the breaks in the hours we have sug-
gested will be useful for clearing the bars on week-
days so that some customers will not remain in a
bar all day.
On Saturdays we recommend that the hours of sale
be from noon to 6 p.m. only. We think that this
period would prevent the misuse of a free Saturday
morning and tend to ensure that the first drink would
be taken after food. Keeping open during the whole
of the afternoon would tend to relieve the situation
at sports matches. At present many bottles are taken
to foQtball grounds to provide drinks. If hotels handy
to sports grounds remained open during the afternoon
fewer bottles might be taken to the grounds.
On Sundays we recommend there should be no
hours of sale to the public.
Hotels would retain the same right as they have
at present to sell liquor at meals on any day of the
week between 6 p.m. and 8 p.m. Hotels should also
have the same right to sell liquor to bona fide guests
at any time as they have at present.
We recommend also that any person, as well as a
lodger in an hotel, having a meal in the dining-room
of an hotel between noon and 2 p.m. on a Sunday
should have the right to be supplied with liquor as
part of his meal, even though the meal is then eaten
when licensed premises are required to be closed.
With respect to a house licence, we recommend
hours from 10 a.m. to 11 p.m. on every day of the
week, including Saturdays and Sundays. Under this
license the service would be to guests only and their
guests.” (New Zealand Royal Commission Report,
page 309.)
174. There were three minority reports, one of which
expressed no views on the above suggestions; one of which
agreed with them (see pages 401 and 411); the remaining
one dealt with the subject in these terms: —
“That the pre-war hours be restored and that the law
be amended to allow liquor to be served to the ordinary
public in hotel lounges between the hours of 7 p.m. and
11 p.m., excepting Sundays, Christmas Day and Anzac


Day, subject to a special license issued by the Licensing
Committee, and subject to the withdrawal of this special
license at the Committee’s discretion.
I see little merit in the majority’s recommendation
that the hotel bars be closed from 2 p.m. to 4 p.m. each
day, as this would inflict a hardship on country folk
who visit the local centres on business and have to
return for the evening’s milking. This section of the
community suffer too many restrictions already, be-
cause the hotels at present are open during their work-
ing hours and shut during their leisure hours. I do
not favour the Committee’s recommendation to open
the bars between 8 p.m. and 10 p.m. Monday to Friday
for several reasons, one of which is that the public’s
need for liquor is as great or greater on Saturday night
than on any other night of the week, and, as patrons
are required to be in their seats by 8 p.m. sharp in
houses of entertainment, much inconvenience would be
caused by those who elected to have a quick “one” in
the hotel before the performance. Under my suggestion
both sexes would be permitted to partake of liquid
refreshment prior to attending the evening shows, and
to do this at an hour that would enable them to be in
the theatre on time. I think it would be a most unedify-
ing spectacle to see a wife waiting on the footpath for
her husband to come out of an hotel bar some time after
8 p.m., and then both necessarily going in late to a
picture-show.
The objection may be raised that insufficient lounge
space is available to cater for this proposed evening
trade, but 1 suggest that additional space would soon
be made available if this plan were adopted. It is my
view that the evening, or leisure-hours, is the proper
time to indulge in sit-down, leisured drinking, of
which we have heard so much.
A drastic change in the hours during which liquor is
legally on sale, materially changing, as it must, the
social habits of the people, would be a very serious
responsibility for parliament to assume; in fact, I
would go so far as to say that I do not think any
government would be entitled to make such a change
without first having clear proof that the proposal con-
formed to the wishes of a majority of the people. For
that reason, I suggest the desirability of this issue
being submitted to the electors for their decision.” (p.
420.)
175. As pointed out above, a great deal of discussion
took place with regard to the subject of a referendum
as to closing hours. It should be made clear that in
many instances the subject was loosely and inaccurately
described as an extension of hours. It is clear that the
real question is whether or not it is desirable to alter
the closing hour for hotels or the latest hour within which
hotels and restaurants may supply liquor with meals.
There is a body of opinion quoted above which, to state
it shortly, urges that there should be no alteration either
in the trading hours or in the 6 o’clock closing hour
except by a referendum. Although this is dealt with in
greater detail in setting forth the views of those who
favour a referendum, it may shortly be repeated here that
the claim is that since the people voted for 6 o’clock
closing" in the referendum taken under the 1946 amending
Act, no alteration should be made without the taking of
a further referendum. It is a striking circumstance that
many of those who share this view appeared to direct their
attention almost entirely to hotels and to give little con-
sidered opinion to the hours during which liquor might
be supplied with meals; it is, of course, clear that some of
the resolutions tendered before the Commission did
advert to this latter question. It is necessary for me to
reach a conclusion as to the desirability or otherwise of
some alteration in trading hours in respect of liquor as
supplied under the various types of licence or permit.
I am of the opinion that the question whether there should
be a referendum before any alteration is made as to the
“closing hour” of hotels (and clubs so far as they are
involved) is a matter for the legislature as to which I
regard myself as not entitled to make a recommendation.
I propose, therefore, to state my conclusions and recom-
mendations —based upon the evidence—as to what is desir-
able on the subject of hours, and since the subject has
been debated, to refer to the statutory provisions under
which the referendum was taken; this is inescapable,
partly because of the clear difference in circumstances
applicable to country districts and those applicable to
metropolitan districts.
176. The provision in the Liquor Act brought about by
the Liquor (Amendment) Act No. 34 of 1946 for the
taking of a referendum embraced hotel premises and
registered clubs; it did not affect hotel or restaurant per-
mits for the supply of liquor with meals. It may be noted
as part of the history of what may be called 6 o’clock clos-
ing, that by Part 111 of the Liquor (Amendment) Act
No. 42 of 1919 provision was made for a referendum on
(1) prohibition with compensation, (2) closing hour. By
the 1919 Act the vote was to be taken on a day to be
proclaimed, but by the Act No. 51 of 1923 the date for
the referendum on prohibition was definitely fixed for the
Ist September, 1928, while the provision for taking a
referendum on the closing hour was omitted and that
hour was fixed by Parliament itself at 6 p.m. In the Act
of 1946, Part 4 of the Principal Act, providing for local
option generally, was repealed but provision was made
in Part II —as already explained—for the taking of a
poll to establish on the vote of the electors whether the
closing hour should be 6, 9 or 10 p.m. It is a feature
of the provision for the taking of the referendum that for
the purpose of ascertaining the opinion of the electors, the
entire State was regarded as a single unit, and the Act
makes a slight contribution to what may be called the
“staggering” of hours by providing that if 9 o’clock or
10 o’clock should be decided upon by the popular vote,
then the licensed premises must be closed between 6.30
and 7.30 p.m., except in respect of the liquor with meals
permit under section 57a.
177. The referendum was taken on 15th February, 1947,
with the result that there was an overwhelming majority
for 6 o’clock closing. In accordance with the Act,
the Electoral Commissioner made a return to Parliament
showing the figures for the 90 electoral districts. He
stated “the aggregation of these returns shows the follow-
ing to be the result of the vote for the entire State: —
6 o’clock p.m., 1,050,260.
9 o’clock p.m., 26,954.
10 o’clock p.m., 604,833.
Informal, 15,183.”
{See Exhibit 147.) In the same exhibit, pages 78 and
79, are set forth the number of votes recorded in each of
the 90 electorates, the number of electors enrolled and
the percentage of votes recorded to number of electors
enrolled. An examination of these last stated statistics
shows that in 75 of the electorates 90 per cent, or more
of the electors enrolled voted, in 13, 80 per cent, or more
voted, and in 2, 75 per cent, or more voted. Although
these figures were not analysed in the course of the hear-
ing they would, on the face of them clearly suggest that
the voting represented the views of a substantial number
of electors.
178. Junior Counsel assisting the Commission offered an
analysis of the voting by distinguishing between what he
described as electorates east of a given line drawn from
north to south of the State, and electorates west of that
line. This analysis by Counsel appears at p. 2774 of the
transcript and is in these terms:
“It would appear that if one draws a line from
Mungindi on the Queensland border to Howlong on the


Yictorian border through the towns of Collarenebri,
Walgett, Warren, Euabalong West, Lake Oargelligo,
Rankin’s Springs, Griffith and Urana, people placed on
that line or to the west of it returned a vote with a
majority in favour of 10 o’clock or 9 o’clock as against
6 o’clock closing. The other polling places to the east
of that line returned a majority in favour of 6 o’clock
closing, with a few scattered and insignificant excep-
tions. In the city electorates Double Bay, Edgecliff,
Darlinghurst, Darling Harbour, Ultimo, Pyrmont, Surry
Hills, returned a vote for 10 o’clock.”
179. I have not checked the accuracy of these claims
as traced upon the map, but I have no reason to doubt or
comment. In any event I attach no particular importance
to the matters adverted to except so far as they tend
to establish that metropolitan areas favoured 6 o’clock,
and country centres a later hour.
180. So far as concerns the question of a referendum
on closing hours, Mr. Smyth, on behalf of the U.L.Y.A.
Council, submitted that the result of the referendum
ought to be disregarded because, he claimed, a very large
section of the community did not apply its mind to the
real problem, the voters were given a choice of particular
hours as being applicable to the whole State without any
regard to the needs of a particular locality, there is
abundant evidence that the result was materially con-
tributed to by deliberate misrepresentation by the Temper-
ance Alliance, it must be conceded that the needs of the
community are best determined by an independent tri-
bunal after a judicial hearing.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.
181. My conclusions and recommendations as to hours
of trading follow. It is necessary to consider separately
the hours of hotels (and wine saloons) registered clubs,
restaurants and nightclubs. As to hotels, it is necessary
to distinguish between bar and lounge trading on the one
hand, and liquor with meals on the other; as to restau-
rants and nightclubs, consideration must be given as well
to the question whether they should be allowed to supply
with meals other than Australian light wines and malted
liquor. In view of the position of clubs clarified by the
decision in Ex parte Coulson and Anor. (above) no con-
clusions or recommendations are necessary. Generally it
is essential to keep in mind conditions in country areas
by contrast with those in metropolitan areas. Special
reference is made to Broken Hill in relation to hotel
hours.
HOTELS.
182. I am satisfied that the evidence requires the find-
ing that there are evils associated with 6 o’clock closing
which ought not to be tolerated in a civilised community.
So far as concerns the testimony before the Commission,
there are conflicting views as to the wishes of interested
parties, and indeed, as to the public. Stated in summary
form, the council of the U.L.Y.A. would appear to favour
later closing with a break late in the afternoon: I say
“appear to favour” because of the careful terms of the
resolution although—on the other hand —several reputable
witnesses, members of the council, satisfied me that they
genuinely favoured a later closing hour mainly to abolish
the “6 o’clock swill” and in the public interest. I have
little doubt that licensees (either tenant or manager) will
in many —and possibly the majority of —instances, favour
the retention of 6 p.m. closing because the return from
the sale of liquor is obtained more quickly than with the
burden of supervision and added labour involved in later
hours. This point of view is based solely upon self
interest The opinion of some clerical witnesses and of
the Temperance Alliance is firmly against an extension
of hours with the added insistence of a referendum to
decide the question. It is demonstrable that the opinion
of a particular witness that shorter hours are desirable,
however honest that opinion is, loses much force if, in
fact, the witness would if possible close hotels altogether.
In the same way the views of licensees or other liquor
interests must be discounted where they are based upon
self-interest. There can be do doubt upon the evidence
that in the metropolitan area conditions associated with
6 o’clock closing are deplorable; apart from any other
consideration, a refusal to attempt some reform involves,
in my opinion, the conscious perpetuation of a clearly
established evil: in addition the present closing hour en-
courages sly grog and after-hour trading at “black
market” rates.
183. The reliable evidence in favour of a later closing
hour with a closing period in the afternoon is supported
by observation in other States, in the United Kingdom
and on the Continent. A warning is necessary on the
subject of observation as to conditions under a later hour
of closing where there has been long experience of it.
Whilst the fact, if it is the fact, that less drunkenness
is to be seen under, for instance English and Continental
hours and conditions may have some weight, it can be
misleading. This is perhaps demonstrated by the oft
repeated claim that in France, where hours are for all
practical purposes uncontrolled, no drunkenness is to be
seen. That this claim is not in itself a reliable guide
is illustrated by the pronouncement in 1952 of the Bishops
of the Roman Catholic Church in France, that drunken-
ness is one of the three major evils of that country. (See
printed publication.) Trained observation does suggest
that in the open air or in well designed places in France,
there is a comparative absence of drunkenness; but that
it exists in some parts is undoubted. In England, where
the total hours are fixed and where they include later
closing, with a compulsory break in the afternoon, the
statutory provisions do conduce to saner and cleaner
drinking, in better surroundings and in a more leisurely
civilised manner. It is difficult to accept the view that
those who patronise hotels in this State prefer to drink
in the conditions that obtain, and that they would never
appreciate the conditions obtaining, for instance, in Eng-
land. There is little doubt that an improvement in
conditions would not follow quickly in the adoption of
English trading hours, and that it would require time for
improvement to be achieved if, as I think it is, achievable.
Closely related to this problem is the nature and con-
struction of the bars in many hotels, particularly in the
Metropolitan Licensing District; if the present typical
bar continues, it must mitigate against marked improve-
ment. There is clear need for provision for drinking at
tables or seated —as against what is described as “perpen-
dicular” drinking, for better facilities than very large
bars, less secrecy and more openness attendant upon the
present layout of many bars and, in addition, greater
provision for either gardens or open air bars. A study
of conditions abroad shows clearly that climatic conditions
are not in New South Wales unfavourable to the sug-
gested provisions for different —and better —bars. It
should be pointed out that the Legislature has already
considered this question. By 40a (7) the Licensing Court
is empowered, in ordering “additional accommodation”,
to provide for “facilities for the consumption of liquor
at tables, in lounges, gardens, under awnings or in the
open air”. I have little doubt that the claim that climatic
conditions are unsuitable comes in part from the self-
interest of those who would be required to make provision
for them. One of the complaints made in evidence was
the objectionable practice of hotel drinking spreading out


over pavements adjoining some bars. Whilst in some
cases this may be forced upon the patrons by small and
badly laid out bars, it does as well indicate a desire to
escape the atmosphere inside and a preference for the
open air. It is a feature of some hotels in England—
especially in the country—that the orderly and leisurely
drinking is interrupted by the sudden arrival of coaches
with large numbers of passengers seeking a drink in
that limited space of time fixed by the need for the coach
to proceed on its journey. That the conditions so pro-
duced are objectionable is evidenced by notices outside
some country hotels, “NO COACHES.” The conditions
during the short stay of the coach leave no doubt of the
effect of the sudden desire for the consumption of liquor
in a limited time, and the attempt to meet the demand
results in temporarily objectionable conditions.
184. The foregoing relates primarily to the metropolitan
area. As to country areas, 6 o’clock closing is shown
clearly by the evidence to deny many persons engaged in
rural industries and working outside the town or village,
the opportunity that the Legislature by statute lays down
they are entitled to, if they seek it. In the result there
is in many country areas constant after-hour trading in
defiance of the law.
185. It is convenient at this stage to refer to the situa-
tion at Broken Hill (for evidence, see above) which —
although in many respects possessing metropolitan fea-
tures —fairly may be classed as either a country or non-
metropolitan area. Stated shortly, there is no doubt that
whilst 6 o’clock closing is the law of the land, the uncon-
tradicted evidence shows that it is not observed and that
the later hours of hotel trading have been countenanced
at least by the non-interference of the police for many
years past, with a practice that arose by design. Personal
observation accords with the evidence that established
hours of trading are really recognised by the police. It
cannot be suggested that the local community suffers by
it, if it is assumed, as it must be, that the Legislature
regards the residents and visitors as entitled to reasonable
amenities for drinking at hotels or in hotel bars. Never-
theless, the practice which obtains is in obvious breach,
if not in studied defiance, of the law. It is trite to say
that such a state of affairs is undesirable. Whilst, on the
other hand, it may be suggested that the obvious remedy
is to insist on 6 o’clock closing being observed, there can
be no doubt that, unlawful though it is, and for that
reason to be condemned, it does appear to meet both the
needs and wishes of the people of the community, not
merely because of the incidents of shift working, but in
general. The conclusions above stated suggest that con-
sideration should be given to the question of staggered
and later hours of closing in metropolitan areas, without
increasing the total hours of trading; in country areas
the need is markedly greater and a later closing hour, in
my opinion, may there be warranted even if this involves
adding to the total number of hours.
186. As appears earlier, closely allied to this question,
is the further question, namely, if it is desirable to provide
for a later closing hour, should this be done directly by
the Legislature or by first seeking the views of the people
as was done following the 1946 amendment of the Liquor
Act. I have indicated that some provision should at least
be considered, if not actually carried out. Whether the
proper course is first to seek the views of the electors by
a referendum is a matter for Parliament and not for this
Commission. Elsewhere I have set forth in detail the
views of other Royal Commissions on the subject of sub-
mitting such questions to popular decision. ( Bee under
Term 6.)
187. If the question is left to decision by referendum,
serious consideration should be given to the, as I think,
strange feature that under the present law the State is
regarded as one unit, the whole of which will be controlled
by a simple majority. By that, I mean that although condi-
tions in the country are markedly different from those in
the metropolitan area, and although the needs of the
former may well be different from those in the latter,
a metropolitan vote derived from a relatively closely settled
population is allowed to decide the wishes of country
centres with a strikingly less potent voting power. This
comment is based partly upon the fact that the last poll
shows broadly that the metropolitan area voted clearly in
favour of 6 o’clock closing, whereas at least many country
centres favoured a later hour. It is one illustration of
the boundary difficulties referred to in the Report of the
Royal Commission on Licensing (England and Wales).
LIQUOR WITH MEALS IN HOTELS, RESTAURANTS
AND NIGHT CLUBS.
188. As set forth above, section 57a empowers the
Licensing Court to grant to the licensee of an hotel where
meals are regularly supplied to the public a permit to
supply liquor for consumption upon the premises with
bona fide meals between 6 and 9 p.m.; of course, there is
no need for the permit in respect of hotels for lunch time
meals. Restaurant permits cover liquor (defined) with
meals between the hours of 12 noon and 2.30 and between
6 p.m. and 8.30 p.m.- —with a half hour allowance for
the removal from the dining room of all bottles and drink-
ing vessels used in the consumption of the liquor supplied
with the meal. {Bee section 78k.) It will be appreciated
that the necessity for provision as to the lunch hour meal
arises since restaurants are not otherwise “licensed.” The
question arises whether any alteration of the hours within
which such permits operate is reasonably necessary in the
public interest; in addition, a serious question has been
raised as to the desirability of adding to the kind of
liquor that may he supplied under a restaurant permit
(reference is made to night clubs not as places necessarily
distinct from restaurants for some of the latter carry
on as night clubs).
189. I am satisfied that there is a strong demand from
reputable sections of the public for later hours of dining
with provision of liquor as ancillary to the meal. At
present there are some restaurants trading under a permit
which endeavour to adhere to the present limited hour
of 9 p.m.; some have a permit and openly supply patrons
up to hours long beyond the permissible hours. Others
again supply liquor with meals, although not possessed
of a permit at all; as to some of these, they have frankly
stated that the present permit is of no value because of
the hours. In some instances, a ritual has for a long time
been invoked by which orders —so it is claimed —are taken
before 6 p.m. and executed after 6 p.m., out of stock
carried on the premises. This procedure is in clear breach
of the law and is extensively practised. Many of the
restaurants concerned are well conducted and patronised
by reputable citizens who desire not only to have liquor
with their meals, but at an hour which is not at present
permitted by law. On the other hand, the limits imposed
by the statute -are disregarded by most disreputable places
frequented by undesirables, although reputable persons
may at times be found there. Suggestions were made
during addresses that there is a clear demand by the
public for both later meal hours and, as well, for supper.
This claim, of course, includes provision for hotel meal
permits. I am of opinion that the legitimate requirements
of the public warrant a recommendation that such hours
be substantially lengthened. In the case of the trading
hours of hotel bars or lounges divorced from the provision
of meals, it may be claimed that the position is not so
clear, the more so if further club registrations—including
workmen’s clubs —are provided for; in such event there
is something to be said for the view that the hotel may
no longer be regarded as the club, although it is not at


all certain that large sections of those who would resort
to the hotel would be minded to join or use a club. But
with respect to liquor with meals in hotels and restaurants,
it is difficult to appreciate any sound reason against meet-
ing the clear demand, if it is assumed —as the Liquor Act
does assume —that the requirement for some provision of
meals and liquor is reasonable, that the hours for the
operation of the permit should be extended.
190. The problem may be approached in two ways;
with the safeguards to be suggested immediately, such an
extension would help clearly to extinguish the disreputable
resort and would result in greater respect for law and
order. Safeguards which suggest themselves at once are
that the applicant for a permit should be required strictly
to satisfy the Licensing Court that he, or she, is in all
respects a fit and proper person; that once a permit is
granted the restaurant should be policed as strictly as the
hotel is policed if those charged with the duty carried it
out as it should be carried out; and that as a corollary to
the provision for what may be called the extended permit
there should as well be statutory provision to the effect
that any liquor found on premises to which the public are
admitted for which admission is by pretended club mem-
bership, should be liable to confiscation, if no permit is
held in respect of the premises; (and as well that the
proprietor should be liable to prosecution). These sug-
gested provisions were supported by numbers of counsel
in the course of addresses, although no attention was given
to the particular form of the legislative provision. With
such safeguards undoubted difficulties in the way of the
police would be removed, and the undesirable proprietor
would be eliminated with consequent advantage to the
public. But the other and I think better approach, is this.
The time limit of the present permit expires at an hour
when many citizens, quite reasonably would be commenc-
ing or in the middle of, a meal. It is a subject for sur-
prised comment in other countries in circles with a full
appreciation of the possible evils • associated with liquor
and with no self-interest to serve, that what may be called
“wine with food” hours are so limited as they are in this
and some other States of the Commonwealth. Personal
observation accords with the views expressed in the course
of his evidence by Mr. H. E. Best, Secretary of the Depart-
ment of Tourist Activities and Immigration.
191. This evidence (Mr. Best’s) is shortly reproduced
immediately prior to the present “conclusions and recom-
mendations”. In addition to that oral evidence, he pro-
duced extracts from the “Minutes of the Second Joint
Australian Government Tourist Conference” held April
1951 (Exhibit 118). This exhibit includes material of
value on subjects other than the present, but that which
follows is limited to liquor with meals. The extract is as
follows; —
Hotel Trading Hours —Consideration of Information
Prepared as a Result of the Previous Conference.
Decision.
That each representative forward a letter to the
appropriate State Minister in the following terms:
At the meeting of the Second Joint Australian
Government Tourist Conference held at Mt. Buffalo
Hational Park, Victoria, from April 7 to April 11,
1951, the question of the liquor laws was discussed
in so far as they affect dining room service and the
serving of liquor with meals. As a result, a compre-
hensive statement has been prepared, a copy of which
is attached, and this information is submitted to the
Hon. the Minister with a suggestion that the data
may be found useful in any discussions which may be
contemplated on a government level in regard to this
very important aspect of hotel service, particularly
as it affects tourist traffic.
In this connection, the oustanding points sum-
marised are;
(a) The extension of hours for dining room service
at which liquor may be served.
(b) The question of extending the licensing privi-
leges to apply to bona fide guests or lodgers so
that they would be allowed the same privilege
regarding the service of liquor as is enjoyed
by bona fide lodgers themselves, particularly in
relation to such service in dining 1 rooms,
restaurants and lounges.
192. Towards the end of the present section reference
is made to overseas observation.
193. In the course of address leading counsel for
U.L.V.A. supported the suggestions made that restaurant
permits should be granted allowing the supply with meals
of all liquors, during such hours as the Court thinks
proper, having regard to the type of restaurant and needs
of the public. He submitted that it should be left to the
Court to say what is the proper period. But he advanced
the claim that “in the granting of permits the Court
should have regard to whether they would result in undue
competition or economic waste. If there were a wholesale
granting of permits, particularly if there were extended
hours for hotels, then it might well become a matter of
concern from the hotel licensee’s point of view. If it were
left in the hands of the Court, having regard to these
considerations, no real harm should result”. I am satisfied
that there is no warrant for limiting the granting of per-
mits in any way based upon such considerations. It is
clear that the submission proceeds from self-interest on
the part of the licensees. There is abundant evidence that
the public require provision for permits authorising liquor
with meals, and I see no reason at all for denying that
requirement, by having regard to the question whether
in granting such permits to restaurants similar permits
for hotels might be interfered with. In the first place
there is nothing to suggest they would be interfered with;
moreover the public interest is the main consideration, and
if restaurants were more to the public taste and were there-
fore patronised in preference to hotels? there would seem
to be no reason to protect the holder of a publican’s
licence from such competition.
194. It has been submitted that the restaurant permit
should be extended so as to cover other than “light wines
and malted liquors in accordance with the provision of”
s. 78k. This is important because, as appears from a read-
ing of the section, a present restaurant permit does not
allow of the supply, for instance, of fortified wines or
spirits. On this subject, those who favoured the granting
of restaurant permits for extended hours were not in
agreement as to whether the type of liquor that might be
supplied under a restaurant permit should be limited as at
present. Whilst consideration should be given to the ques-
tion of allowing other than light wines and malted liquors
to be covered by such permits, because in fact although in
breach of the law restaurants do supply such other liquor,
I am not satisfied that the evidence warrants the suggested
additions. Many of the restaurants (and night clubs)
would be patronised by a proportion of young people—
experience shows that they are not always accompanied
by older persons —and it may well be that for this reason
the present limitation as the type of liquor should be
retained. (This receives some support from the evidence
of Mr. Lay (N.S.W. manager of Penfolds) who agreed
that persons under 18 should not be served with fortified
wines (p. 1203). If the present limitation continues it
may encourage the drinking of light wines in preference
even to malted liquors and certainly with advantage by
excluding fortified wines and spirits.
195. Attention should be drawn to the fact that, as
applied to liquor with meals under hotel permits (s. 57a)


and under restaurant permits (s. 78k), a meal is denied
as follows: —
“A meal shall mean a meal of at least two courses at
which the persons partaking thereof are seated at a table
and one course of such meal shall consist of fish or meats
other than in sandwich form and cooked vegetables''’.
It is difficult to understand the necessity for the
inclusion in the definition of a meal of the words
‘‘cooked vegetables”. Doubtless it is part of the neces-
sary attempt to ensure that the meal is genuinely a
meal and not something that would savour of, for
instance “counter lunch” as known in the past, and to
prevent a surreptitious supply of liquor with a pre-
tended meal. Why vegetable salads with appropriate
dressings, especially with such dishes as fish or even
with meats, should render a meal in all other respects
a genuine meal, not acceptable for the purposes of such
permits is difficult to follow. As the present provision
appears in the Act, it is a necessary part of the permit
and the Licensing Court has no power to dispense with
it. In my opinion, consideration should be given to
the question of omitting the reference to cooked vege-
tables or, at any rate, adding to it to allow of other
than cooked vegetables.
196. Reference is made above to the position with re-
gard to wine saloons. They operate under what are
called “Australian Wine Licences” granted pursuant to
section 18. As appears elsewhere, they allow the
licensee to sell and dispose of on the premises in the
licence specified, wine and other produce of fruit grown
within any Australasian colony in quantities not exceed-
ing 2 gallons. Under the section the Court may in either
granting or renewing such licences, impose a condition
that liquor shall not be consumed upon the premises. This
place is perhaps the most convenient to draw attention to
what I regard as a serious evil associated with the supply
of Australian wines. There are, especially in the metro-
politan area, numbers of wine saloons which are a dis-
grace to the community, and which perhaps more than
any other premises, merit the attention of the police.
In my opinion, serious consideration should be given
to doing away with these saloons which do not, with few
exceptions, serve tie public interest. I understand that
the practice of the Licensing Court tends towards requir-
ing that the prescribed liquor shall not be consumed
upon the premises. This has much to recommend it, more
especially while the present type of premises continues
and whilst the undesirable type of trade flourishes. It
should be pointed out that the wiping out of the wine
saloon, as it is known, should not materially restrict the
public in obtaining the single bottles, at any rate of
Australian wines; this aspect is referred to because of
those considerations which are dealt with under that
part of the enquiry affecting “single bottle licences”.
197. As indicated above, there are cogent reasons why
hotel and restaurant permits should not be limited as
to hours as at present. An aspect of the matter dealt
with by Mr. Best was the encouragement of the tourist
trade to this, as well as the other States of the Common-
wealth of Australia. The influx of immigrants from
other parts of the world and the attraction for tourists,
both afford added reasons for making the provisions sug-
gested. Observation in the United Kingdom and con-
tinental countries clearly shows that the public appre-
ciate the opportunity of taking liquor with meals at
convenient times and, as described by Mr. Best, “in
reasonable and nice conditions as it is overseas” (p. 1940).
These times and conditions in such countries include
provision not only for meals at later hours than can be
enjoyed in this State at present, but also for after
theatre and cinema dinners and suppers. The present
trade, unlawful though it is, by night clubs, and in
this respect reference is made only to reputable night
clubs, indicates that public need would be met by making
provision for supper and what has been described as
“after theatre and cinema dinners”.
POLICING OF LICENSED AND UNLICENSED
PREMISES.
198. One of the features of the distribution of liquor
is its wrongful diversion to restaurants (with or without
permits), to disreputable night clubs and to sly grog
dealers; in addition much liquor has found its way to
unregistered clubs for direct supply to members in breach
of the law. The various types of place indicated resell
the liquor, in some cases in breach of a permit, in others
wholly in breach of the law. The abuses flowing from
this kind of trading are extensive; as already pointed out
they involve reputable as well as disreputable restaurants
and include places known to engage in nothing but sly
grog trade. Some of the trading is done with elaborate
precautions to ensure secrecy and to make detection
difficult; some of it is done openly and in particular
cases with a pretended ritual designed to keep the trade
within the law, although in fact it is plainly illegal. The
extent of this dealing in liquor is so great as to raise the
serious question whether those police authorities respon-
sible for dealing with the offences involved are liable to
criticism and, if so, of what nature and to what extent.
199. The evidence as to police duties and as to the
fields of activity in relation to liquor was not wholly
satisfactory, due to the anxiety of some police witnesses
to avoid admitting responsibility for a state of affairs
which involved persistent disregard for the law governing
the sale and supply of liquor. Close examination of the
transcript renders it clear that the licensing police autho-
rities are charged with duties limited to licensed places.
Here it should be made clear that these “licensing autho-
rities” are obliged to control the issue and exercise of
18 different hinds of licence, of which liquor is but one.
The Metropolitan Licensing Inspector has control over
the police licensing authorities so far as concerns liquor
matters. (Para. 33693—the evidence of Inspector
Young.)
200. A great deal of the work of Inspector Young, the
present holder of the office, and those under him, is
taken up with the applications for liquor licences, for
transfers and similar matters; but as well they are
responsible for the policing of licensed places for the
purpose of detecting and suppressing breaches of the
liquor law by licensed persons or places. Inspector Young,
whose evidence it should be stated is acceptable, stated
that all complaints concerning liquor, where the person
concerned is the holder of a licence under the Liquor
Act or the premises are licensed under the Act, are re-
ferred to the Metropolitan Licensing Inspector from any
part of the State. He added that thereupon it was that
officer’s duty to prepare a minute for the appropriate
superintendent—in the metropolitan area that would be
the Metropolitan Superintendent. He further stated that
so far as prosecutions were concerned, country prosecu-
tions had nothing to do with the Metropolitan Licensing
Inspector. He produced figures showing prosecutions be-
tween Ist January, 1948, and 31st December, 1961. Sum-
marised they show that up to 1950, the number of
prosecutions was fairly constant. Over the four years
there were 1,196 prosecutions under the Liquor Act with
1,127 convictions against licensed owners under the
Liquor Act (p. 1881). It may be stated here that in
addition, evidence was given of particular types of
offences by licensees of refusing meals or accommodation,
mainly as the result of the work of 21 Division in the
metropolitan area, sometimes following requests from
the Metropolitan Licensing Inspector. He further stated
in evidence that if sales of liquor by unlicensed places


were “brought under our notice we passed the informa-
tion on to the Vice Squad for necessary attention”
(p. 716).
201. The Vice Squad is essentially that section of the
Police Force concerned with —among other duties —the
detection and suppression of sales and supplies of liquor
by persons or places not licensed under the Act, or in
the case of restaurants, not the holder of the appropriate
permit. In addition, what is known as Division 21, which
is split up into different component parts, to some extent
deals with the selling of liquor without a licence. In
1946 this Division had quite substantial duties in con-
nection Avith night clubs, restaurants and the like. Some
of the members of the Division, it would appear, confined
their duties to offences against the Liquor Act, including
those occurring in licensed premises—as to the latter,
more particularly with respect to meals and accommoda-
tion (page 1869).
202. Inspector Morris, who is the officer in charge of
“No. 21 Mobile Division,” stated that “the activities of
the members of this division are supplemental to the
activities of the police in other areas.” It is clear that
the division is occupied with all sorts of crime; and it
would appear from Inspector Morris’s evidence that work
connected with the Liquor Act is only a fraction of the
work carried out by Division 21 (paragraph 80116). Ref-
erence is made later to Exhibit 115, which sets forth the
activities of 21 Division in relation to liquor offences;
and Schedule 92, which sets forth the activities of the
Vice Squad. In the nature of things, it is to be expected
that the figures for the Vice Squad are substantially
greater and more comprehensive than those for Division
21.
203. Manifestly, the problems due to sales and supply
without a licence or permit, in a sense concern both the
licensing police and the Vice Squad in this respect; liquor
sold by unlicensed places is invariably obtained from
licensed merchants and publicans. There is no doubt that
there exists a practice by which sly grog places in the
popular sense obtain liquor from unlicensed persons, who
have receiA r ed from merchants and publicans much greater
quantities of liquor than can be consumed on the premises
—for instance —of an unlicensed restaurant or night club.
Moreover, the irregular—if not unlawful —diversion of
liquor by a licensed merchant to places and purposes not
intended by the licence held by such a merchant, is an
activity falling within the province of the licensing police
as distinct from the Vice Squad. (This type of trade
is illustrated by the malpractices of Robyns Pty. Ltd.;
see above). Whilst there is reason to feel that some
offending licensed merchants and licensed retailers have
been successful in evading detection, the evils, so far as
they concern the police authorities, are not so pronounced
as they are with respect to offences and practices com-
mitted by and indulged in by persons, firms and places
wholly unlicensed or possessed, as in the case of restaur-
ants, of a limited permit which are supplied by merchants
and publicans. This involves an examination of the
activities particularly of the Vice Squad.
204. There is no room for doubt that many of the
irregular practices established in evidence before the Com-
mission were difficult of detection. The care taken by
offenders has made the task of the police one calling for
ingenuity and strict devotion to duty. But, with a full
appreciation of the difficulties associated with the work
of detection, I have reached the conclusion that some of
those responsible for this work have fallen short of the
duty imposed upon them. I propose later to examine in
what respects this has happened, and to deal with specific
instances. But before doing this I think it proper to
stress that care must be taken to avoid inferences not
sustained by the evidence; whilst criticism of those police
involved generally is inescapable, the number of indi-
viduals against whom positive findings can be made
beyond reasonable doubt is limited.
206. Mr. Goran, of counsel, appeared on behalf of the
Commissioner and the Police Department, and in his sub-
missions as to what conclusions ought properly to be
draAvn with regard to police activities generally and to
named officers particularly, he suggested that the subject
of illicit sales should be conveniently dealt with under
two main heads, (a) illicit sales by indiAfiduals or bodies
other than unlicensed restaurants, (b) illicit sales by
restaurants or night clubs.
(a) Classified in the way suggested by learned coun-
sel (a) would naturally include what are known as sly
grog traders in the popular sense. This is a type of
trade which undoubtedly flourishes. Schedule 92 shows
that for the period Ist January, 1949, to 31st December,
1951, there were 383 arrests and 383 or 382 convictions.
The return shows that beer was infinitely the greatest
type of liquor seized, although wine, whisky and brandy
were included. Mr. Goran submitted that there was no
evidence to show that there had been a failure by the
department, or by individual officers, to recognise their
duty in policing such sales. Upon a reconsideration of
the whole of the evidence, including the Schedule 92
and Exhibit 115, it would not be possible to draw any
inference adverse to the police in relation to such grog
sellers. There are difficulties associated with detecting
these offenders, and there is nothing in the figures or the
details that would warrant my rejecting Mr. Goran’s
submission. This is clear, that the evidence does not
touch any particular member of the force, and I am
satisfied that learned counsel is correct in his sugges-
tion that there is a definite relation between the extent
of sly grog selling in the strict sense and the closing
hour of hotels. Inspector Crothers stated that there
were more sly grog shops prior to the last war because
beer was more plentiful and in areas such as Redfern,
Waterloo, Mascot and Botany, there were “cottage
groggers,” many of whom were convicted but found it
profitable to continue. Counsel is correct, I think, in
submitting that sales by sly grog shops “probably can
never be fully eliminated under present conditions”
(page 818). Under (a) would fall offences by unregis-
tered clubs. By that is meant the genuine social or
sporting club, and not the so-called night club. In
relation to such genuine clubs, although there is evi-
dence before the Commission that they frequently have
supplied members in breach of the law, no suspicion of
impropriety attaches to the Police Force in relation to
this activity.
(b) As to illicit sales by restaurants or night clubs,
the inescapable conclusion is that the police have been
at least unsuccessful in the suppression of illegal sales
of liquor. The proprietors of such establishments have
persistently broken the law either by selling when they
possessed no restaurant permit, or other licence to sell,
or by selling at hours much later than allowed and
liquor not covered by the restaurant permit. Many of
these restaurants have engaged in this unlawful trade
openly. A scheme in many cases has been used in a
pretence to regularise the supply of liquor by suggesting
that the restaurant merely acted as the agent of the
purchaser. Even most reputable places (without a
restaurant permit) have supplied patrons out of stock :
some of them genuinely believed that so long as the
liquor had been ordered before 6 p.m. there was no
breach of the law in supplying from the stock. Others
were well aware that in supplying from stock they were
committing a breach of the law. As appears in another
place, the first matter of very serious concern is that
so many of these restaurants and night clubs obtained
such large quantities of liquor of all sorts and that the


legitimate demands of the public were denied, and the
persons who frequented these places were almost with-
out exception charged exorbitant prices for the liquor
they obtained. But the question which arises at present
is as to the responsibility of the police.
206. Learned counsel for the Police Department sub-
mitted that there was “no one single explanation for the
failure” of the police to enforce the law in connection
with these places.
207. The first matter to be considered is whether there
was in fact a policy of toleration by the department. It
was submitted by Mr. Goran that there never has been
such a policy officially. The first suggestion of such a
policy appeared in the evidence of Superintendent Thomp-
son, at the time the Metropolitan Superintendent, who
stated that it arose during the period when a Commis-
sioner of Police, now deceased, held office. I agree that
the claim of the existence of such a policy could not
safely be concluded on the evidence of Superintendent
Thompson. He proved an unreliable witness and as
against it was the evidence of ex-Superintendent James,
Superintendent Boswell, Inspector Morris and Inspector
Crothers (pages 2011, 2073, 1851, 1877),
208. Reference was made in the course of evidence and
of addresses to the fact that there was no minute sanc-
tioning the suggested official toleration spoken of by
Superintendent Thompson. But before leaving this ques-
tion I think it is desirable to quote the passage relied
upon by learned counsel from the evidence of Superin-
tendent Boswell. Asked whether he agreed that there had
been any policy of toleration of night clubs in the Police
Force, he replied, “I have never heard of it” (paragraph
88167). But earlier he not only admitted but claimed that
he was thoroughly aware that restaurants and night clubs
were operating, and in particular stated “all the night
clubs that were operating had been operating for some
considerable time, and in my opinion it had become com-
mon knowledge to anybody who was prepared to be as
observant as the ordinary man or the ordinary policeman”
(p. 2049).
209. In relation to the proper inference to be drawn
as far as concerns this type of trade, I attach importance
to the evidence given by Superintendent Boswell, an
officer of great ability and experience, and I quote the
passage in full: —
Q. “You would expect the Metropolitan Superintend-
ent would make it his business to know what was going
on in restaurants and nightclubs?”
A. “I would.”
Q. “You would agree that a good deal of his infor-
mation might be expected to come from officers subor-
dinate to him?”
A. “Yes.”
Q. “Over the period when there were two of these
places in two of your divisions at least, you would have
been described as such an officer?”
A. “Yes.”
Q. “As it was his business to know —as you say —did
you ever draw his attention to what had been learned
about these places in either or any of these divisions ?”
A. “No.”
Q. “Why? Does that mean that you had not dis-
covered it?”
A. “No. But perhaps there was some degree of —I
can’t explain the word —because the nightclubs that
were then operating had been operating for some con-
siderable time.”
Q. “I really would like to know the missing word.
There was some degree of what —laxity, tolerance—
shutting one’s eyes ?”
210. It was at that stage that the witness made the
reference already quoted to what was common knowledge.
I have no doubt that the proper inference to be drawn
is that at any rate so far as concerns reputable restaurants,
or even reputable nightclubs there was that which Mr.
Goran accurately described as “a habit of toleration” as
distinct from “an official policy of tolerance.”
211. If this is the correct view, it must be examined to
see what criticism fairly can be levelled against such
police officers as had duties in connection with these
places. The expression has been used as to some restaur-
ants and nightclubs that they are reputable. In the pre-
sent connection, they are places which were carried on by
reputable persons who kept proper books, did not buy,
liquor for cash for the purpose of concealment and were
patronised by reputable citizens who could claim to be
law abiding.
212. It should be appreciated that members of the Vice
Squad were engaged in detecting crime generally, and
had duties fairly to be described as much more serious
than attempting to establish breaches of the Liquor Act
by restaurants and nightclubs which were unlicensed.
Mr. Goran approached this problem by claiming that
although any police officer who was efficient and who
viewed his duties seriously must have known positively
that the law was being broken every night in sales of
liquor in unlicensed restaurants, the difficulties of estab-
lishing breaches were increased by the fact that members
of the public as customers co-operated with the proprietor
in breach of the law. Moreover, he rightly claims that in
some instances nightclubs were warned of impending
police raids either by members of the public or by un-
scrupulous police officers. This is illustrated by the experi-
ence at the place known as the Caronia. Diaries of some
of the Vice Squad officers were produced and revealed
beyond question that a night’s work for such officers
involved often lengthy and arduous attention to a variety
of different matters of which sly-grog selling was only
one. For this reason, claimed Mr. Goran, the fair infer-
ence was that breaches of the Liquor Act did not receive
as much attention as it should from the Vice Squad.
A further explanation for lack of success was advanced
by Mr. Goran in these terms: “Unless there is deliberate
and positive direction from above, the methods and habits
of the rank and file amongst police tend to become stan-
dardised, and if the failure of those efforts are accepted
from above, members of the rank and file become satisfied
that they are doing all that is expected of them. There-
fore, it is suggested, a peculiar habit of tolerance for
nightclubs has grown up amongst individual members
of the Vice Squad, which can be distinguished from a
deliberate policy of the Police Department.”
213. I agree with the claim made by Mr. Goran that
there was “no one single explanation for the failure” of
police to enforce the law in connection with these places.
One explanation which I find established by the evidence is
that that there were some difficulties in securing evidence
with a reasonable prospect of proving an offence; this
was not lessened in some instances by the attitude of
patrons who resented interference with what they re-
garded as their right to have liquor with food if ordered
before 6 p.m. The fact that the execution of such orders
out of stock was in breach of law clearly occasions sur-
prise to most of them and as the evidence shows, to some
members of the Police Force. Even where evidence
was obtainable the waiter who in fact directly supplied
the liquor was the only person to be prosecuted; for un-
like the licensed publican, who in many instances under
the Liquor Act is affected with vicarious liability, the
proprietor of the unlicensed place is not thus liable.
Partly due to these difficulties, and partly due to the fact
that many places were conducted in all other respect free
from many objectionable features, there is no doubt that
here would develop what counsel has described as a habit


of tolerance in those members of the Force whose duty
it was to police such places, either by themselves or by
subordinate officers. With so many other serious duties,
apart from breaches of the Liquor Act, it is not surprising
that some offences by even reputable restaurants and
nightclubs were practised without regular and persistent
attention from the police. There were, of course, some
so-called raids and there were intermittent prosecutions
with varying success.
214. In general the proved tolerance must involve some
criticism of the police concerned. With this, as with any
other branch of the law, it is in principle not for the
police to decide which laws should be observed and which
may be broken with impunity. Nevertheless it is my
duty to state —and I state it unhesitatingly—that there
is a marked difference indeed between the nature and
degree of criticism .flowing from the practice which I find
to have been followed, and that which would attach to
dereliction of duty flowing from any form of corruption.
It properly states the position from the public point of
view that many sections of the community have regarded
themselves as entitled to a kind of service which the law
at present denies them. As appears elsewhere in the pre-
sent Term (8), the remedy would seem clearly to be that
the law should be altered in the public interest.
215. The next question dealt with in relation to police
and unlawful sales of liquor arises from the evidence that
wherever there is a prosecution for the type of offence
discussed above, it is extremely rare for the proprietors
of the place in respect of which the offence arose to be
charged with the particular offence. One suggestion has
been made that police officers were paid to refrain from
charging the proprietor and deliberately confined their
attention to the waiter who sold liquor when that offence
was detected. I agree with counsel’s suggestion that so
far as the evidence enables one to draw the reasonable
inference, the more probable one is that in this particular
respect the police hands are tied when a waiter denies
that he has instructions from the proprietor to sell and
the proprietor denies both knowledge of the sale and of
the stock of liquor from which the sale is effected. Whilst
I am prepared to accept counsel’s suggestion in this
respect, I cannot agree that the difficulties are insurmount-
able by officers properly instructed in their duties and
possessed of that initiative and ingenuity that might be
expected after some experience. It is true as already
stated that for such offences, the Liquor Act does not
provide for vicarious liability of a sly-grog sale for the
act of a servant. This is referred to later in suggestions
for amendment.
216. Learned counsel for the Department then addressed
himself in detail to the enquiry whether the obvious lack
of success in policing restaurants and night clubs is due
to bribery of police officers. He approached this inquiry
by suggesting that it may take one or both of two forms.
(1) The paying of protection money to police officers
so that night club proprietors would be forewarned of
impending visits of police to their premises.
(2) Police officers could have been paid to give less
attention to certain night clubs or to fail to take action
when breaches of the Liquor Act were discovered.
With respect to the second, I agree that there is little
positive evidence that some form of corruption has taken
place. Schedule 92 does reveal that a certain amount of
attention has been paid to night clubs and, although there
are anomalies in the schedule, I agree with his submission
that it is impossible to conclude from that fact that there
is widespread corruption amongst members of the Vice
Squad. This question was tested at the instance of learned
counsel by pointing out that there were anomalies in
Schedule 92 related to the division where Sergeant Walden
has operated, and counsel’s argument proceeds in this way;
that since anomalies appear in relation to the work of
Sergeant Walden, as to whom no suggestion of corruption
is or can be made, no importance is to be attached to
the existence of other anomalies. I agree to this extent,
that the mere existence of anomalies does not establish
the proposition. With one exception, I am satisfied that
no inference can be drawn from the existence of anomalies
in Schedule 92, examined in the light of other evidence.
That exception is with respect to what is called the Black
Tulip Eestaurant. That place was raided and prosecuted
so many times that it can be described only as extra-
ordinary compared with others. One inference could be
that the proprietor was extremely careless or indifferent as
to the possibility of his being caught. That is not the
inference that I drew. The inference I draw is that he
was subjected to visits which could as often have been
made on other places without discrimination. The evi-
dence does not allow me to say whether either Sergeant
Corrigan or Sergeant Davis was involved corruptly. This
is clear, that the relations between Sergeant Davis and
the proprietor (Bos) were improper and give rise to a
grave suspicion of the possibility that attempts were made
to get Bos to fall into line and thus escape that attention
which was given to him, and which I am satisfied could
as well have been given to other restaurants.
217. With regard to the first suggestion in (i) set forth
above, it is conceded by learned counsel for the Department
that the evidence does warrant an inference that night
clubs were on occasions forewarned of police visits. To
use his expression “the lack of success shows that either
both of the following propositions are true:
(a) The system of detecting police officers by night-
clubs was very efficient” (by that is meant recog-
nizing them as police); “or
( h ) the night dubs must have had some knowledge of
impending police visits.”
It is true that as to the latter, the foreknowledge could
have been provided not only by police officers but by
persons employed specially by the proprietors to keep a
careful watch. So far as concerns ole place, the Caronia,
I have no doubt that this nefarious place was warned of
impending visits by the police. The Caronia is referred
to specially, because it provided one of the exceptional
instances where learned counsel assisting the Commission
were able to obtain evidence from within the night club.
This was provided by a woman who had for a limited
period (i.e., December, 1951, to January, 1952) —not quite
two months—been a cashier at the Caronia. A strong,
indeed a violent, attack was made upon this woman as a
witness. Whilst great care must be exercised before accept-
ing her evidence for reasons appearing in the transcript,
I have no doubt about her honesty. This is illustrated by
her reference to visits by Superintendent Boswell to the
Caronia; she spoke of them without knowing whether they
would be admitted or denied by Boswell. Later he agreed
with the facts to the extent that he did visit the place,
he did describe himself substantially as deposed to by
the woman, and he did refer on the occasion spoken of
by the witness to his being on leave. Her evidence also
dealt with an occasion when she was asked to ring up the
Paddington Police and ask for a Sergeant “Friedman”
(this is referred to more particularly in special reference
to named police officers).
218. Sergeant Corrigan is the subject of reference later.
For the present, mention of him is relevant to the question
of whether the Caronia was in fact forewarned. During
the period within which the woman witness was employed
as a cashier at the Caronia, it is proper to point out that
on the evidence there was in fact a raid by Corrigan when
there did appear to have been no warning at all. Pro-
ceeding from this illustration and in the light of the


whole of the evidence, I agree with the way in which
learned counsel states the position, namely, “although
there may be a fair inference on the probabilities that
certain officers were being paid to assist night club pro-
jmetors ... no positive finding should be made
against any individual officer unless it is based upon a
satisfaction as to the guilt of that officer beyond reason-
able doubt. This would not prevent a finding on the whole
of the evidence as to whether there was corruption amongst
police officers, but would only go to pinpoint the guilt in
a particular officer.”
219. The possibility of the police being involved in any
respect requires that special reference should be made to
an activity open to the police, which is based upon section
161 of the Liquor Act which, so far as it is material to
set it forth in exact terms, is as follows: —
“(1) Upon complaint on oath before a licensing magis-
trate or any justice that the complainant suspects
and believes any liquor to have been sold at or in
some premises or place specified in such complaint
and upon reasonable grounds being therein shown
for such suspicion and belief, such magistrate or
justice may grant a warrant to any member of the
police force to enter and search such premises or
place.
This section shall not apply to or in respect of
a licensee or his agent or servant selling liquor under
and in accordance with the authority conferred by
the licence held by such licensee.”
This section covers the subject of seizure and forfeiture
of liquors in any unlicensed house “suspected to be for
sale.” It was amended to its present form by Act No. 34,
1946, section 51 (e) (i). Prior to the amendment the
section above quoted was in these terms: —
“Upon complaint on oath before a licensing magis-
trate or any justice that the complainant suspects and
believes any liquor to have been sold by any person not
holding a license under this Act authorising the sale
thereof and at or in some premises or place not au-
thorised by his licence and to be specified in such com-
plaint, and upon reasonable grounds being therein
shown for such suspicion and belief, such magistrate
or justice may grant a warrant to any constable to
enter and search such specified premises or place.”
The form in which the section appears at present is
obviously of greater value to the police that in its form
prior to the amendment. There can be no doubt it was
made to render its operation easier for the police. It is
true a great deal of evidence has been offered with regard
to it, suggesting that difficulties still exist. But the
striking contradiction in the evidence of various police
officers as to the failure to use this effective section are
not convincing.
220. The evidence before the Commission shows that’
while section 161 of the Liquor Act was used frequently
with respect to stocks of liquor on premises of private
sly grog sellers, yet it was seldom if ever used with respect
to stocks of liquor found on nightclub premises. Superin-
tendent Thompson stated that it was not used because
“of a deliberate policy of toleration towards nightclubs
laid down by the late Commissioner Mackay”. Inspector
Crothers stated in evidence that “unless one or other of
the police in the Squad were in possession of actual
evidence of sale, we could not hope to get a magistrate
to sign the information or warrant to act under that
particular section 161 to enter premises and seize liquor
where it is kept for sale (p. 1874). In this view, he
was mistaken. By contrast, Sergeant Walden stated that
the real difficulty is not the securing of a warrant but
the hesitation in taking such action arising from the
fear (based upon experience in actual cases) of failure
in the proceedings against the proprietor to show cause
why the liqfuor should not be forfeited (p. 2498), I
have already indicated that Sergeant Walden is an officer
whose evidence is satisfactory, and in respect of whom
no suggestions are made. Nevertheless I hesitate to
accept, at any rate with approval, the suggestion that the
proper officers of police in fact refrained from using
section 161 to obtain a warrant to enter and seize in the
first instance, merely because of the difficulties of, or
lack of success in, the subsequent proceedings when the
proprietor or owner of the liquor was called upon to show
cause whether it should be forfeited. However, in view
of this evidence, a suggestion is later made for an amend-
ment of the section.
221. Learned Counsel for the Department has asked
me to accept Sergeant Walden’s statement of the reason
for disregarding the section as the real one “whether he
is justified or not”. I am satisfied that that is Sergeant
Walden’s honest view; but in general I think the more
likely inference is that at any rate most of the officers
concerned in the possible using of section 161 have been
brought up in habits and the known procedure of their
predecessors prior to the 1946 amendment and because,
in Counsel’s words “of no contrary direction, lead or
example placed before them”. I am not unmindful of the
difficulties in the way of the police in the past in obtain-
ing a forfeiture following the issue of a warrant. But
the evidence repeatedly given before the Commission, by
proprietors that they sold out of stock (to supply even
orders given before 6 o’clock) and, therefore, in breach
of the law, shows that in the vast majority of cases
where stock was carried, the liquor was unquestionably
liable to forfeiture. This, it should be added, is not a
criticism of proceedings before the magistrates at the
instance of the police, because the evidence before the
Commission as to selling out of stock was obtained from
proprietors who were compelled to make these admissions
or claims, whereas in proceedings to show cause under
section 161 manifestly this evidence would not be, if
available at all, so readily available. The terms of the
amendment to the section designed to assist the police
is set forth hereunder.
222. As is indicated above, the Commission was invited
to deal with particular police officers. I proceed to deal
with them accordingly: Sergeant Corrigan —This officer
was a member of the Vice Squad and charged with a duty
of supervising, amongst other things, nightclubs situated
mainly in the city areas. The evidence establishes that he
and other officers of the Vice Squad had comparatively
little success in controlling unlawful sales of liquor in
nightclubs. There is in particular, clear evidence that
he paid much more attention to one restaurant in par-
ticular (the Black Tulip) than to other restaurants in
his area. Whilst I agree that this, in itself, is insuffi-
cient to prove corruption on his part, it does, in its
setting, give rise to suspicion affecting Corrigan. But
there is another specific matter touching Sergeant Corri-
gan to which attention must be drawn, with this pre-
liminary statement: I agree with learned Counsel who
appeared for Superintendent Thompson, and learned
Counsel appearing for the Police Department, that where
it is established that a particular officer’s assets are
increased to an extent and in a manner inconsistent with
lawful dealings, nevertheless this Commission is not em-
powered to make a specific finding unless it is further
shown by evidence that this is the result of activities
connected with liquor. In other words, before making
a specific finding I would be bound to hold beyond
reasonable doubt that an accretion of assets was not only
due to unlawful dealings, but that they proceeded from
the field of liquor. Sergeant Corrigan gave details and
called evidence in support of his financial affairs, after
his books and records had been examined by the officer
from the Attorney-General’s Department detailed for the


purpose generally. Corrigan, on oath, gave an explana-
tion of the sources of his income and assets. I am forced
to the conclusion that his explanations in material res-
pects are completely unacceptable; but as the evidence
does not enable me to say from what source the accretion
of his assets took place, I have no jurisdiction to make
any specific finding.
223. Sergeant Freeman. This officer was a member of
the Vice Squad stationed at Paddington, and in his area
there were numbers of nightclubs which were notorious
for their sly grog trading. They had a strikingly success-
ful run of freedom from prosecution. In particular the
evidence of the woman employed at the Caronia club
related to an occasion when she was told by Boom to
ring up as she says “Sergeant Friedman” at Paddington
Vice Squad, She swore that she rang the Paddington
Police Station, after looking up the number, asked for,
as she believes, Sergeant Friedman, and the person who
answered the telephone then spoke to Boom who asked,
“Did you call me?” I accept her evidence, which how-
ever is limited as quoted, and leaves the matter one for
speculation and not inference (p. 1957). Ho Sergeant
Friedman is stationed at Paddington; Sergeant Freeman
is. On his own story, he was familiar with the Caronia,
had visited it officially, was aware that it had a bar and
at least knew some of the persons in charge at the Caronia.
I have no doubt that his answers with respect to his
acquaintance with persons engaged at the Caronia were
false and intended to conceal a knowledge of the place
and those persons that was too intimate to be explained
satisfactorily. Learned Counsel for Freeman made a
trenchant attack upon the woman witness. On the
application of Counsel assisting the Commission that her
name and address should not be revealed, I directed
accordingly. At the time I held a view that the interests
of justice demanded it—-a view strengthened by un-
doubted evidence that she was later subjected to a threat.
It is proper to state at once that there is nothing to
suggest that Sergeant Freeman was either directly or
indirectly associated with such a threat. A good deal
of the cross-examination of this witness by Counsel for
Freeman turned upon the question of what could be seen
from mirrors just inside the entrance to the “club”. A
re-examination of the transcript shows that nothing turns
upon the ability of persons to see outside with the aid
of these mirrors because the witness, although referring
to the position of mirrors, stated that she had never
actually looked in them herself “but they used to see
people”; this is clearly an inference of the witness and,
as it is her inference and not her own experience, it
would be impossible to attach importance to it.
224. Sergeant Freeman’s visit to Glen Ascham also
gives rise to serious comment. He was directed by his
superior officer to visit Glen Ascham in these circum-
stances, that a large and flamboyant advertisement ap-
peared in the daily press making extravagant claims as
to the cocktail bar at Glen Ascham at the time of its
commencing business. Freeman admits that he had the
advertisement, and was aware of the special reason for
his being required to visit the place; nevertheless he con-
tented himself with being shown where the proprietor
chose to show him, and was at least sufficiently lacking
in interest to enquire whether there was any liquor on the
premises.
225. There is another particular incident affecting
the Caronia which casts some light on Freeman’s con-
ception of his duty. (p. 1919). He received a complaint
either from or concerning the Caronia somewhere about
II o’clock at night, and left the station at Paddington for
the purpose of attending to it. But he found it con-
venient to call at Sammy Lee’s to make another enquiry,
as he claims, for the purpose of serving a warrant uncon-
nected with the subject of liquor. I am satisfied that his
explanation for failing- to go directly to the Caronia in
answer to some complaint requiring immediate attention
is untrue. In fairness to Sergeant Freeman, it should be
pointed out that his financial affairs were examined by
the officer of the Auditor-General’s Department in con-
trol of these matters and the result was completely nega-
tive. It would be impossible to find specifically that
he was corrupt in his performance of his duties as a
member of the Vice Squad, but I am satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that he was grossly negligent in the
performance of his duty and quite unfit to be a member
of the Vice Squad.
226. Inspector Brothers. This officer has had con-
siderable exx)erience in the Vice Squad and until recently
was for a time in charge of it. There is no doubt that
whilst he was in charge, the efforts of the Vice Squad
to police the liquor laws in nightclubs were unsuccessful.
Inspector Crothers offered reasons for this lack of suc-
cess, which he attributed mainly to the difficulty facing
police officers in securing evidence of sales in night-
clubs, partly to his mistaken impression as to his in-
ability to use section 161 in aid of the seizure of liquor
in nightclubs, and I add, to the extent of other duties
besides liquor matters with which the Vice Squad was
concerned. He was aware, he said, of all raids that were
to take place on nightclubs by members of the Vice Squad.
But it is proper to say that there is no evidence at all
to support any inference of corruption against him. More-
over, his affairs were examined by an officer of the Audi-
tor-General’s Department, and he was closely cross-
examined upon them, and I am satisfied that his explana-
tions of them may fairly be accepted as truthful. How-
ever, I adopt the submission of Counsel for the Police
Department, that Inspector Crothers failed to display
that leadership and lacked that ingenuity in countering
the devices adopted by nightclub proprietors, which reason-
ably could have been expected from an officer in his posi-
tion and with his experience.
227. Superintendent Sweeney. He was Metropolitan
Superintendent for a period of some 2 years and 5
months (March, 1948-August, 1950). As such he was
charged with the supervision of investigation of crime
and all manner of offences in the metropolitan area; yet
he claimed before the Commission not to be aware of
the extent of the acivities of nightclubs (p. 1963). As
appears in paragraph 83722, he stated that he did not even
suspect that the law was being broken in nightclubs night
after night. He admitted that he would have had notice
from weekly returns of offences committed in these places,
but he says that this might be a rare occasion (para.
83725). He places the responsibility for policing these
offences on subordinate officers and, in particular, upon
the inspector in charge of the Vice Squad. He claimed
that he was not responsible for initiating matters which
affected the licensing laws. I agree with learned Counsel
that he seemed to regard his position as being an adminis-
trative officer who merely deals with reports and approves
or disapproves of actions recommended in those reports.
He stated that not only did he himself never initiate pro-
ceedings against hotels or nightclubs, but also it was
not part of his duty to initiate them. He added that he
invariably agreed with minutes placed before him. He
further swore that whilst a crime return came to him
every morning, he left this to his assistants to check over,
and repeated that he had nothing to do with the adminis-
tration of the liquor laws, and would take action only
when something was brought to his notice (para. 103433).
His attention was drawn to a report of the 31st March,
1950, based upon a file of newspaper clippings concern-
ing the sale of liquor at certain nightclubs, and stated
that he merely prepared his report on the basis of the


reports of other police. His report contained two pages
which should be quoted:
“The two premises mentioned (Roosevelt and Reg’s)
as well as other nightclubs received constant atten-
tion and any offence discovered is dealth with ....
There is difficulty in securing evidence of sly grog
selling or other offence under the Liquor Act at night-
clubs or any other premises for that matter, but it is
not considered that any amendment of existing law is
necessary; the difficulty is naturally in securing
evidence rather than in any legal obstacle and this
could hardly be cured by any legislative action.” The
first sentence in the Report, at least relative to “other
nightclubs” is not supported by the evidence. Asked
whether he gave consideration to the question whether
amendments of the existing law were necessary, he
replied that he merely relied on a trained sergeant and
a trained superintendent who made the minute and
made no attempt to examine them in relation to it (p.
2440). He was examined in detail as to his knowledge
of these places and at all times maintained a consistent
attitude that he had no knowledge that they were
flourishing during the time that he filled the office of
Metropolitan Superintendent.
228. It is manifest that if he had acquainted himself
with the details of the report signed by him, he must
have been fully aware of what was going on in night-
clubs. It leads at least to the suspicion that his insistence
on a lack of knowledge is due to his inability to explain
that share of inactivity with respect to nightclubs for
which he was responsible. I entertain no doubt that it was
part of his duty as Metropolitan Superintendent to ex-
amine reports and see that his officers were carrying
out their tasks diligently. In making this comment, I
am careful to appreciate the multifarious duties carried
out by him. But Superintendent Boswell, a man of vast
experience, stated in his evidence, “If I were in Mr.
Sweeney’s position I would make it my business to find
out about them”. That obligation was admitted also by
Superintendent Thompson, who succeeded Mr. Sweeney
as Metropolitan Superintendent.
229. I have been invited to make a specific finding
with regard to Superintendent Sweeney. Learned Coun-
sel for him made, amongst others, the following submis-
sion : “That in relation to the distribution of liquor
within the meaning of the terms of reference of the Royal
Commission, the policy of ‘laissez faire’ adopted by a
succession of commissioners contributed to the general
laxity of supervision by the appropriate officers of the
Police Force of licensed and unlicensed premises, includ-
ing nightclubs, during the time the office of Metropolitan
Superintendent was held by Superintendent Sweeney.”
There may be some force in this submission made on his
behalf.
230. I should add that Superintendent Sweeney made
his affairs available for examination by an officer of the
Auditor-General’s Department, and he gave evidence on
oath in explanation concerning his assets. He admitted
that he had not been frank with the Commission in this
respect. But I am not satsified beyond reasonable doubt
that any inference suggesting corruption can be drawn
upon the whole of the evidence. On the other hand, I do
agree with the submission made by learned Counsel for
the Department that “it is owing to the lack of initiative,
ingenuity, leadership and drive on the part of Sweeney
that many of the difficulties of the police rank and file
in dealing with nightclub proprietors can be explained”.
231. Superintendent Thompson. . Superintendent
Thompson was Metropolitan Superintendent from Aug-
ust, 1950, and still held that office at the time of giving
evidence before the Commission. During the whole of
that period, the policing of sly grog offences in nightclubs
was ineffective. He did not claim to be unaware of this
as a fact. On the contrary, he stated that sly grogging
in nightclubs was notorious (p. 1796). In fairness to him
it should be stated that his admission was qualified by
his saying that he did not know that the breaches were
going on to the extent revealed before the Commission.
He offered two explanations for police failure with respect
to nightclubs—
(a) The extreme difficulty of securing evidence.
(h) Later, that there had been a deliberate policy of
toleration towards these night clubs initiated by
a deceased Commissioner.
His affairs were examined by the officer from the Auditor-
General’s Department quite voluntarily, and he was cross-
examined on his affairs at some length. It should be
made clear that in his office, and this applies to -Superin-
tendent Sweeney, it is not easy to see what he could have
done at any rate directly, to protect night clubs. There
is no evidence that he gave any direct instruction to
ensure immunity, nor is there evidence that he stifled
prosecution of night club proprietors. So far as concerns
his financial affairs, here again it is necessary to repeat
that which was stated above, that if any conclusion was
open that an accretion of his assets was due to any unlaw-
ful activity, there is no jurisdiction in this Commission
to make any specific finding unless it also follows that
this was due to his part in the administration or failure
in the administration of the Liquor Act.
232. There is no evidence that his assets were increased
unlawfully in his association with liquor administration.
I am wholly dissatisfied with his explanations as to his
financial affairs. He himself admitted that he was not
frank with the Commission and I agree with counsel’s
submission that “with his duty as a police officer before
a tribunal in mind, he deliberately attempted to mislead
the Commission.” I am satisfied that he sought to hide
the real source of a substantial portion of his income. I
find that whilst Superintendent Thompson possessed great
ability and was fully aware of the extent of his duty in
relation to the policing of sly grog, he failed “in leader-
ship and example to direct or assist police under his
control towards any or better methods and greater energy
which his ability shows might have been expected of him
in the policing of night clubs.”
233. Reference has been made above to Superintendent
Boswell and his visiting the Caronia. He explained the
only two occasions on which he visited this place by stat-
ing that he sought one Hayes employed there over a family
matter affecting Hayes. I have examined his evidence
again in detail. Mr. Goran did not ask for any specific
finding with regard to Superintendent Boswell. So far
as he is concerned, the evidence turns upon his own
testimony and that of the woman who gave detailed evi-
dence of happenings during her short period of engage-
ment when she was relieving the regular cashier at the
Caronia. She spoke of seeing Boswell in the foyer, stated
that he had a meal and drinks there and gave evidence
of a conversation which she stated he had had with Boom
to the effect that Boom said: “Where have you been
lately?” Boswell replied, “I am a Superintendent of
Police at Dubbo and I am having some leave.” She fur-
ther stated that Boom said to him: “A couple of your
boys are on the way down to-night,” and that Boswell
replied, “Gee, Reg., I hope you don’t think I’m to blame
for it.” In answer to Mr. Goran, the witness stated that
it was possible she may have attached more significance
to some of the things that occurred at the Caronia than
they deserved. She further stated that on the subject
of Boom’s being informed that the Caronia would be
visited she replied upon “what else I had been told,”
adding that she was told what to expect “by the girl I was
relieving.” At another stage of her evidence she stated
there was only one occasion when she saw someone who
appeared to be a police officer arrive, as far as she could
remember only once. This would appear to have been the


occasion when two members of the force, a man and a
woman, made an official visit “disguised.” This was a
proper visit and as to them the witness added “other
people said they were police.” Mr. Miller, appearing for
Sergeant Freeman, cross-examined the witness closely for
the purpose of casting doubt upon the whole of her evi-
dence. In the course of his cross-examination he asked the
witness whether, and she admitted that, she had been a
patient in a hospital for what may be called mental dis-
turbance. The conclusion at which I have arrived is that
so far as Superintendent Boswell is concerned, it would
be impossible to draw any adverse inference as to his
visits to the Caronia. I make it clear at once that, apart
from Mr. Miller, on behalf of Freeman, no one has
attacked the woman’s honesty. But in the light of the
matters set .forth, including the fact that some of her
evidence is the result of what she was told by others and
is also in part inferences from what she saw and heard,
it is proper that I should say that at least there is a
doubt in my mind affecting Superintendent Boswell. As
indicated in another connection, the findings with regard
to particular persons ought to be made where guilt or
grave issues are involved, only upon evidence which satis-
fies beyond reasonable doubt. I am not prepared to make
such a finding with regard to Superintendent Boswell; in
some respects his evidence corroborates the woman’s
story. The conclusion I have reached is that it cannot
safely be said that Superintendent Boswell’s admitted
two visits to the Caronia involved any dereliction of duty.
There is no doubt that the period of his visits to the
Caronia were during his leave and at a time when he
was stationed continuously at Dubbo.
COUNSEL’S SUBMISSIONS ON CORRUPTION
GENERALLY.
234. Counsel for the Police Department in his printed
address stated, “It is quite obvious on the evidence that
bribes are frequently offered to police officers to persuade
them to refrain from doing their duty. The Vice Squad
is a body of men who are continually faced with tempta-
tions of this kind. It is essential, if they do their duty
efficiently, that they must be of the highest integrity and
completely above temptation. It is not claimed that mem-
bers of the Yice Squad have never fallen below this high
standard required of them, and it is quite obvious that
even amongst men in whom great trust is placed there
will be some who betray that trust, and it is quite possible,
indeed it may well be probable, that certain members of
the Vice Squad have succumbed to the bribes offered them
and have granted favours in exchange to night club pro-
prietors. However, it is submitted that there is nothing
in the evidence, apart from failure of police efforts in
regard to night clubs, which shows that there is wide-
spread corruption among members of the Yice Squad.
Invitations to members of the public to come forward
with complaints, widespread publicity of the proceedings
before the Commission, and particularly those portions
where the police were under fire, have produced no evi-
dence other than that already dealt with against any
members of the Yice Squad. It is submitted, therefore,
that on the evidence, unless the failure of the police to
control night clubs’ sly grog traffic is taken as showing
corruption on the part of those charged with this duty, it
would be unfair to those police officers in general to make
a finding against them that they failed in their duty
because they were corrupt.
235. “As to the evidence of failure in night clubs, it is
submitted that this failure was caused by the factors
already discussed as well as the factor which forms the
subject of the next heading, and although a certain amount
of corruption may have existed, this was not the prime
cause of the failure, but only a contributing factor and
the evidence does not warrant a finding as to the degree
of the effect it had upon that failure.”
*69329—7
236. Learned counsel for the Department, as appears
immediately above, referred to “invitations to members
of the public to come forward with'complaints”; there can
be no doubt that the legal officers detailed to assist counsel
explored every avenue and examined the relatively few
complaints that were received. I should add that in the
course of Superintendent Thompson’s evidence it became
necessary to draw his attention to the fact that one
“could not understand how these things could have hap-
pened to such a great extent . . . although you can have
all the legislation in the world, if the police whose duty
it is to enforce it are not above suspicion themselves, that
legislation is not worth anything” (p. 1798), The refer-
ence, of course, was to the wholesale unchecked breaches
of the liquor law. The observation arose from the sus-
picion then held that police connivance in part explained
the many malpractices. This suspicion has not been
removed; but I agree with counsel for the Department
that it is not possible on the evidence to make an affirma-
tive finding that there is, to use his words, “widespread
corruption amongst members of the Vice Squad.”
COUNSEL’S SUBMISSIONS ON LACK OF LEADERSHIP
AND INGENUITY.
237. The Royal Commissioner has remarked from time
to time, when evidence was given by police before the
Commission of the difficulties of controlling sly grog
traffic in night clubs, that while he appreciated the diffi-
culties, he expected that some officer with ingenuity would
formulate plans and directions for overcoming these
difficulties.
238. It is submitted that the Police Department has
the right to expect that senior commissioned officers, who
have the duty of seeing that the policy of the Depart-
ment is put into effect by the men under their charge,
have an obligation to police the work of the men beneath
them, and by leadership and by direction to change
methods which have failed and to show ingenuity in
dealing with law breakers. In this regard, it is submitted
that the man who has the ultimate charge of doing these
things is the Metropolitan Superintendent for the time
being. He is the third officer in rank in the Police Force
and he is also the officer charged with carrying out the
policy of the Department as formulated by the Commis-
sioner of Police and/or his deputy. That he is an officer
in whom the Commissioner, as the administrative head
of the Police Department, has the right to repose complete
faith and trust goes beyond question.
239. When one attempts to check the work of Sweeney
and Thompson in their respective offices by these stan-
dards, it becomes patent that they have betrayed their
trust and failed in the duties of their office as required
of them. It is submitted that it is not too much to expect
of the Metropolitan Superintendent that he should have
taken a direct and vigorous interest in the policing of
night clubs; that he should have taken it upon himself
to call conferences, discuss the action being taken by
police charged with controlling sly grog sales; have ex-
pressed his dissatisfaction with the current position and
have demanded and suggested new methods of dealing
with the difficulties that arose. Neither Sweeney nor
Thompson, on the evidence, did either of these things,
and it is submitted that much of the trouble in night
clubs that was permitted to continue can be blamed upon
both these men. Their inaction, it is suggested, lulled
the men beneath them into a feeling that they were doing
as much as the Department required of them. There
was no drive or initiative which might have assisted these
men, particularly the rank and file, to change their
methods and to use devices which would overcome the
tricks of the night club proprietors. If there was a change
required in the law it was up to the Metropolitan Superin-
tendent to investigate the position, and not merely to


accept the reports of junior officers as Sweeney did, but
to question these reports and to seek to secure alterations
in the law which would be consistent with justice and yet
would make the task of the police easier. None of these
things was done by either of these two men, and Sweeney
in particular says that he did not even question the
reports that were submitted to him.
240. The Commissioner and the Department submit
that, “in attempting to assess the reasons for the failure
of the police to control effectively sly grog trading in
night clubs, the incompetence and general failure of both
Sweeney and Thompson in the office of Metropolitan
Superintendent must be regarded as a major factor.”
(Counsel’s printed address.)
241. Whilst prepared to accept counsel’s submissions
with respect to the senior commissioned officers, it would,
in my opinion, be impossible to confine the criticism of
“leadership and ingenuity” to them. I am satisfied that
it must extend to some of those officers with perhaps lesser
responsibility than the Metropolitan Superintendent, but
nevertheless charged with the important duties of organis-
ing and carrying out the policing of serious breaches of
the liquor laws.
POLICE TESTIMONIALS.
242. During the course of the hearing, numbers of police
officers were called on the subject of distribution of liquor.
Amongst them were two retired officers, Superintendent
Sweeney and Inspector Noonan. In the course of their
examination serious questions arose as to their possible
implication in their dealings with persons engaged in
the liquor trade, and it transpired that each of them on
retirement was given a testimonial in cash. As was
pointed out to counsel during the course of the hearing,
it is clear the question of police testimonials generally
is outside the terms of reference, subject only to this
qualification: if either in particular cases or as a result
of some proved practice, an officer was, or officers were,
improperly involved in the administration of the liquor
laws and this was linked with the receipt by such officer
or officers of a testimonial, then it would be relevant to
that extent. The fact is that two retired officers did
receive testimonials in circumstances which, as submitted
by learned counsel for the Police Department, “lend
themselves quite readily to suspicion and criticism.” The
two instances are summarised; thereafter the submission
made by learned counsel for the Police Commissioner and
the Police Department as to departmental policy on testi-
monials are stated without comment, for the reason above
set forth.
243. Superintendent Sweeney retired from the service
in August, 1950. From March, 1948, to the date of retire-
ment he had been Metropolitan Superintendent; prior to
that he had been an area superintendent (country) at
Dubbo. He swore that he had no knowledge of night
clubs and later stated that he had been to only one and
that after his retirement on the occasion of a send-off to
him. This function was held at Sammy Lee’s night club,
one of the most notorious offenders against the liquor
laws (p. 1963); if Superintendent Sweeney is correct, he
would have had no prior knowledge of the reputation of
this place. It is a matter of surprise that an officer in
his position should have been unaware of it. At the
send-off there were between 200 and 300 people present,
and he was presented with a cheque for about £6OO. The
secretary arranging for the testimonial was the licensee-
manager of the Plaza Hotel (J. B. Limerick) who had
met Superintendent Sweeney about 1948. A circular was
sent to “hotelkeepers, business people or private citizens,
or anybody like that,” and bookmakers —this on Sweeney’s
own testimony. He added that subscribers included per-
sons connected with night clubs, hotels, bookmaking.
Liquor was consumed on the premises and there is little
doubt that it was supplied in breach of the law. On
Superintendent Sweeney’s own story, he knew that some
of the subscribers were connected with hotelkeeping. His
learned counsel claimed —and he was entitled to claim —
that successive retiring occupants of the same office were
given similar farewells and presentations either of money
or some other substantial gift. Counsel added that his
instructions were in effect that his client greatly regretted
attending the farewell.
244. Inspector Noonan was for four and a half years
Metropolitan Licensing Inspector. He retired in July,
1950, and is now a hotel broker and a business agent in
partnership with one L. A. Bowler (one of the testimonial
treasurers, page 1783). On his retirement he was given
a dinner at the Hotel Australia and presented with a
cheque for £I,OOO. The subscribers included, he said, “the
legal fraternity, shipping people and men in all walks of
life, including the racing game.” Asked specifically from
whom were subscriptions solicited, he said from spirit
merchants and hotelkeepers, he believed, but he had noth-
ing to do with it. On his own evidence, he was clearly
aware that publicans had subscribed, I have no doubt
that in each instance, in view of the association
liquor trade with both of these testimonials and in the
light also of the knowledge of each of the recipients, they
give rise “to suspicion and criticism.”
245. It seems to me nothing to the point to say that
the events happened after these two officers had retired
from the force. The receipt of testimonials in such cir-
cumstances throws some light on the propriety of them
generally, but I have no doubt that I am not entitled
within the terms of reference to deal with the depart-
mental policy which allows of the accepting of testimonials
subject to clearly defined circumstances.
246. Counsel for the Police Commissioner and the
Police Department made the following observations;—
“It has been suggested in evidence that certain police
connected with licensing have in return for such favour-
able treatment received testimonies in gratitude. The
Commissioner and the Police Department make the
following submissions as to the practice of retiring
police accepting testimonials.”
247. The effect of Police Rules Section YIII is to re-
strict the receipt of testimonials as follows:
(1) (a) No member of the force may solicit any pres-
ent for himself, a member of his family, or other
member of the service;
(b) collect or solicit money, liquor or goods from
any person or body connected with the sale of
liquor;
(c) retain without authority any money received as
a gratuity from any person or accept any address,
presentation or testimonial without permission of
the Commissioner.
(2) A member of the force must decline to accept any
offered reward or gratuity and must request the
offerer to communicate with the Police Commis-
sioner,
(3) Permission will not be granted for a presentation to
be made to or accepted by a member of the Police
Force when he is being transferred from one station
to another in the same district.
(4) Superintendents, when practicable, must institute
inquiries to see that no solicitations have been made
and must make a report if they are not so satisfied
or if there are any other circumstances which make
it improper for police to receive such money or
presentation.


248. There are other incidental matters in these Police
Rules which govern the conditions upon which police
officers may receive gifts from either the public or fellow
police officers.
249. It is submitted, therefore, that Police Rules recog-
nise the receipt of testimonials by police officers, but
restrict the conditions under which they may be received.
It is further submitted that the practice of making testi-
monials to retiring police officers has become almost recog-
nised custom, not only among members of the Police
Force, but to other public servants as well as certain
businessmen. However, a police officer who has been in
a position to harass or favour citizens in his district is
always liable to criticism if he accepts a testimonial, even
if he has not solicited it or shown any indication that he
would welcome it. It is submitted that little criticism
can be offered if the monies contributed come on the
whole from reputable citizens who do not represent one
single vested interest. It is, however, indiscreet, to say
the least, for a licensing inspector to accept a testimonial
which comes substantially from the liquor interests in
his district, or from the gambling interests in his district
since the policing of the latter also comes under his
general duty. However, if the subscribers are sufficiently
widespread over the general civic, trade or professional
interests in the community the mere fact that some vested
interests have subscribed should not arouse criticism of
the police officer receiving such testimonial.
250. It is further submitted that although abuses of
the practice may well have occurred, it should not be
abolished on that account alone. The practice has much to
recommend it since it gives reputable citizens an oppor-
tunity of showing their appreciation of a public officer
who has done his duty faithfully and well. The practice
could well serve as an encouragement to a police officer
to do his job well. The refusal of such a testimonial may
embarrass the police officer as well as those reputable
citizens who offer it. It is submitted, however, that any
police officer who is offered such a testimonial, should be
very careful to scrutinise its sources before accepting it,
although it is clear that in many cases the police officer
may find it difficult to subject his donors to such scrutiny.
(Counsel’s printed address at pages 4 and 5.)
AMENDMENTS SUGGESTED BY COUNSEL FOR
THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.
251. Evidence before the Commission has established
that there are unquestionably difficulties in the way of
policing the distribution and supply of liquor, more par-
ticularly in respect of restaurants (without permits under
Part 111 (A) of the Liquor Act) night clubs, bogus social
clubs and sly grog traders. Suggestions for amendments
to facilitate the work of the police follow immediately;
it is necessary that they should be examined subject always
to the later recommendations with respect to trading
hours generally. The amendments recommended are as
follows:
(a) Section 161 should be amended by the addition at
the end of the first sentence of subsection (1) the
words following: “or such other premises or place
where it is suspected upon reasonable grounds that
liquor is being stored or held for the purpose of
selling the same at or in the premises or place
specified in such complaint”. At present section
161, which deals with the subject of liquor in un-
licensed places “suspected to be for sale” is not
wide enough to enable a member of the Police
Force who obtained a warrant under the section
to search other than the premises or place at which
it is suspected and believed liquor has been sold. A
device which defeats the section in its present form
is to store liquor away from the premises or place
at which it is being illegally sold.
(b) A further addition to subsection (1) of section 161
by adding after the last sentence therein (before
the proviso) the words “and all books of account,
documents et cetera which may reasonably be sus-
pected to pertain to the supply or sale of such
liquor.” This addition would fortify the hands of
the police in ensuring that seized liquor is forfeited
in cases where the facts upon which a warrant
has been obtained clearly exist; the power to seize
such books of account, documents et cetera would
contribute much to forestalling the device resorted
to of pretending that liquor on the premises was
really ordered and obtained from licensed premises
to meet a specific order, when in truth stock is
carried from which such order is supplied.
(c) Subsection 2 of 161: Omit from the second sen-
tence of this subsection the words “and if they
are satisfied by reasonable proof that any liquor
was in such premises or place for the purpose of
being illegally sold,” add the following words,
“. . . and if after being so summoned he fails to
appear or if upon his so appearing he fails to satisfy
the Court by reasonable proof that any liquor that
was in such premises or place was not there for
the purpose of being illegally sold, they shall
adjudge the same and every such vessel shall be
forfeited”.
(d) Amend subsection 2 of section 161 of the last sen-
tence to read “. . . and if the Court is satisfied that
such proof is reasonable, such liquors and the
vessels containing the same shall be forthwith
restored to the owner or occupier as the case mav
be.”
(e) Section 175. Omit from the section the words “so
as to support a conviction.” Section 175 provides
that the delivery or supply of any liquor shall be
evidence of sale within the meaning of this Act so
as to support a conviction unless satisfactory proof
to the contrary is produced to the Court or any
justices hearing the case. In this present form
there is, I think, grave doubt as the applicability
of the section to proceedings under section 161, and
in addition, the amendment suggested would be
necessary if the amendments to section 161 (above)
are made.
(f) Section 43. Add a new subsection 1 (a) as
follows: —“Every person being the occupier, man-
ager, or person apparently in control of any place
of premises from which liquor is sold in contra-
vention of subsection 1 of this section shall be
deemed to have suffered such liquor to be sold
unless he makes it appear that—
(a) he has no knowledge of such sale, and
(b) he has systematically and diligently taken
steps to prevent the sale of liquor from such
premises or place.”
This is recommended in the effort to throw a vicarious
liability for the act of his servant upon the proprietor of
public premises where liquor is sold without a licence. It
is a strange anomaly that some vicarious liability exists
for certain offences where a licence is held, but not where
there is no licence. This suggested amendment in terms
advanced by Mr. Goran on behalf of the Police Depart-
ment, is taken by him in part from provisions of the
Commonwealth Prices Act.
252. It is convenient here to record the attitude of the
Police Commissioner and the Police Department to a
suggestion which has been widely canvassed before the
Commission, and which prompts a drastic amendment to
the Liquor Act. Counsel for various interests have
addressed themselves to the desirability of increasing
restaurant permits and, as well, varying the terms of
such permits affecting the nature of liquor that may be


sold or supplied, and extending the hours for such sale
or supply. Learned counsel for the Commissioner and
the Department had no instructions to make any submis-
sions on this subject. However, he stated that he was
empowered to submit that if permits were increased or
hours extended, or if the nature of liquor permitted for
supply for sale were less restricted, no immediate prob-
lems of policing would flow. He added that it probably
would involve an increase in the number of police be
assigned to such duties. He further stated that, on
behalf of his clients, he could place no evidence before the
Commission on the question whether the alterations
referred to above would lead to an increase or decrease
in crime directly or indirectly, particularly from the
social consumption of liquor at late hours of the even-
ing, He added that he was not suggesting that “the
figures for this type of crime will increase.”
253, The subject of restaurant permits generally is
dealt with in the present Term (8). If the submissions
made as outlined above are given effect to, Mr. Goran on
behalf of the Commissioner, submitted that the task of
policing unlicensed restaurant and nightclubs would be
rendered much easier by legislation, in effect imposing a
complete ban on liquor in any premises to which the
public are admitted and in respect of which a permit is
not held. It is convenient to add for the present that
serious consideration would have to be given in legis-
lating in this direction to include within the ban not only
premises to which the public are admitted, but also bogus
clubs; otherwise the obvious device would be resorted to
of setting up that which already has been done in this
State, a pretended club to which members, so-called, only
are admitted.
INCREASE AND DISPOSITION OF LICENSING
POLICE.
254. As appears on the evidence of Inspector Young
(Metropolitan Licensing Inspector) the licensing police
have multifarious duties apart from the investigation of
liquor licences, and they include clerical duties as well
as what has been described as field work. Learned
counsel for the Police Department conceded that the
present system is defective in some respects. In this
connection he suggests a distinction should be drawn be-
tween the licensing police stationed in areas where there
are few hotels to supervise and those in areas, particularly
in the metropolitan district and in large country towns,
where there are far more hotels calling for attention.
Inspector Young as I understand his evidence, suggested
that a reorganisation of the licensing police force by
delegating the clerical work to clerks or similar officials
would be an improvement. As to the course to be taken,
I agree with the submission by counsel for the Depart-
ment, that the present system would be rendered more
effective by what he calls “tightening up of investigations
and some form of reorganisation of the licensing
branch.” It is quite impossible for this Commission to
make any precise suggestion for the actual method or
the details of any reorganisation. These, I agree, are
more properly left to the Government and under it of
the Police Department. Another suggestion on this sub-
ject matter is that the licensing branch should be
reorganised to constitute a separate career branch of the
police in some way independent of the remainder of the
force and “without interchange of personnel with other
members of the force.” Learned counsel for the Depart-
ment submitted this was undesirable because—
(a) police work more efficiently if they are offered
the hope of a general career of police work with
the wider scope for promotion,
(b) the creation of a separate department would
involve very difficult questions of promotion,
(c) it is undesirable to leave men in the peculiar posi-
tion of licensing officers for any great length of
time, since even the most trusted officers in such
a position become open to temptation.
A. V. MAXWELL.


APPENDIX OF WITNESSES: PAGES (OF TRANSCRIPT).
Transcript
Witness. Pages.
Abbott, Miss J. (Policewoman) 2104, 2267
Adshead, R. C. —Golden Sheaf Hotel, Double Bay... 134 to 136
Agnew, A.—Accountant (R. Boom) 1076 to 1078
Aitken, C. R.—South Australian Brewery 197 to 204
Alee, H. T.—British Breweries Pty. Ltd 541 to 546,
1215 to 1218,
2282 to 2285,
Andronicus, E. —Spirit Merchant 1779
Archer, T. T,—Coogee Bay Hotel 700 to 701
Armstrong, P.K.—Palisade Hotel, Millers’ Pt 485 to 486
Astbury, Miss G. J. E.—G. Gramp & Sons Ltd 1207
Ault, R. H.-—Cosmopolitan Hotel, Sydney 329 to 331
Azar, A. B.—Maitland & Morpeth Hotel, Sussex 1326 to 1328
Street.
Babicci, S. F.—Sam’s Restaurant, Tom Ugly’s Point 925 to 928,
1293 to 1295
Bacon, F. W.—Kings Cross Hotel 131 to 133
Bailey, E. A.—Palm Beach Country Club 1220 to 1221,
1223
Baird, J. A.—Bathurst Hotel, Sydney 142 to 144
Baldwin, A. T.—242 Pittwater Road, Collaroy 1263 to 1266
Barlow, H. R.—Annandale Hotel 401 to 406
Barwick, D. F. Captain Cook Hotel, Moore Park... 599 to 607,
611 to 613,
2330 to 2337,
2341 to 2344,
2405 to 2409,
2411 to 2414,
2417 to 2428,
2484 to 2488,
Bath, W. H.—Ansett Hotels Pty. Ltd 1659 to 1663
Bathgate, W. H.—Accountant—(T. P. Nelan) 2193 to 2194
Bayly, D. M.— {re Robin Hood Inn, Blacktown) ... 1505 to 1508,
1509 to 1510
Beaumont, E. A.—Aussie Tours, N.S.W. Pty. Ltd. 1666
Beavis, D. S.—Bald Rock Hotel, Balmain 454 to 455
Beckhouse, A. G.—Auditor-General’s Department... 1106 to 1108,
1120 to 1121,
1166 to 1171
Bell, S. B.—(Brother-in-law —W. Patterson—Park 645 to 647
View Hotel, Alexandria).
Bendrodt, J. C. —Prince’s Restaurant 933 to 936,
987 to 989
Bentley, A. M.—Tooth & Co. Limited 65 to 72,
75 to 86,
796,
1019 to 1023,
2285 to 2287,
2551
Bernard, B.—Royal Hotel, Bathurst 1821 to 1829,
1836 to 1838,
1839 to 1848,
1866 to 1869
Bertram, D. B. (Boulton Lane Rex & Co.) 657 to 659
Best, H. E.—Secretary—Dept, of Tourist Activities 1937 to 1941
& Immigration.
Bianchi, P. M.—Colony Club Restaurant 1081 to 1086,
1289 to 1293,
1315
2559 to 2562,
2568 to 2570
Bingham, C. E. A.—Walter Cavill Pty. Ltd 1131 to 1132,
1137 to 1140,
1147 to 1153,
1236 to 1239,
1267 to 1269
Bittar, Mrs. A.—Gleneagles Restaurant 829 to 833
Black, W. Z.—Terry’s Brewery Ltd 350 to 353,
1501
Blanch, A.—Employee of C. A. Hall, Hotelbroker ... 531 to 534,
541
Blank, D.—(House of Hayes)—(Royal Hotel, 287 to 292,
Orange, etc.). 321 to 326,
327 to 328,
1427 to 1431
Blank, W.—(House of Hayes)—(Royal Hotel, 292 to 299
Orange, etc.).
Book, H. J,—Grocers Association of Victoria 1434 to 1438
Boom, R. F.—Club Caronia 897 to 904,
1366 to 1367,
1925 to 1927
Bos, D.—Black Tulip Restaurant, George Street ... 2222 to 2231,
2275 to 2278
*69329—8
Transcript
Witness. Pages.
Boswell, H.—Superintendent of Police, Dubbo 2047 to 2056,
2057 to 2070,
2071 to 2075,
2501 to 2508
Bowler, L. A. —Frank Nunan & Co 1781 to 1787
Bradstreet, J. M.—Police Constable—Manly 1452 to 1453
Bray, D. W.—(Pres. Clubs Amenities Association) — 1565 to 1570
(Earlwood Bowling Club).
Brown, A. W.—Tatler Hotel 1686 to 1689
Brown, G. W. —Ireland’s Accountant 1313 to 1315,
1317
1328
Brown, L. O. H.—Eastwood Hotel 613 to 615
Brunen, M.—Roosevelt Restaurant, etc 227 to 229
Brunen, Mrs. B. (wife of above) 284 to 287
Bryant, E. T.—Bull & Bush Hotel, Baulkbam Hills... 453 to 454
Buckingham, R.—Mortdale Hotel 756 to 762
Bullock, F. A. (Hotelbroker) —(Hawkesbury River 510 to 511,
Hotel, Brooklyn). 659 to 665
Buring, R. G. —Leo Buring Pty. Ltd 1202 to 1205
Burnstein, R. S.—lnverell Hotel, Inverell 458 to 461
Burt, S. J. W.—Tooth & Co. Limited 22 to 32,
33 to 54,
55 to 59,
87 to 92,
991 to 1001,
1003 to 1008,
1009 to 1019,
1187 to 1189,
1223 to 1225
Burton, R. —Customer —New Brighton Hotel, Manly 1439
Cain, L. A. —172 William Street, Sydney 773 to 774
Callaway, E. L.—General Manager—Toohey’s Ltd.... 2143 to 2151,
2297 to 2303,
2541 to 2547
Campbell, R. D.—Robin Hood Inn, Blacktown 1510 to 1512
Carman, S. H.—Department of the Interior 2267 to 2270
Carroll, J. B.—-Caledonian Hotel, Tam worth 426 to 429
Carruthers, J. E.—Solicitor 1109 to 1112,
1113 to 1114,
1172 to 1176
1179
Carter, A.—Employee —R. G. Page 1186 to 1187
F.—Wallington Hotel , 1692 to 1698
Cartwright—Pyrmont Arms Hotel, Pyrmont 1729 to 1731
Castor, F. T. —Bussell Vindale Castor Ltd. (ex-Mc- 1513 to 1515,
Laughlin & Co. Ltd.). 1529 to 1531
Catlan, F.—Catlan Bros., Earlwood 977 to 980,
985,
1405 to 1408
Cavanagh, W. J.—187 Rowe Street, Earlwood 1272 to 1274
Cavill, W.—Walter Cavill Pty. Ltd 1097 to 1105,
1127 to 1131,
1227 to 1236,
1266 to 1267
Chisholm, E. J.—lnspector—Bathurst 1816 to 1820
Christie, W. C.—Cooper Nathan & Co 1046 to 1047
Clarke, T. N.—510 Cleveland Street, Sydney 1382 to 1383
Clarke, W.—Burwood Hotel 592 to 593
Clarkton, C. D.—Household Supplies Ltd., Double 1269 to 1272
Bay.
Clegg, W. —Hurstville R.S.L. Club 1589 to 1590
Clerici, A. M.—Colony Club 1315
Clerici, V. H.—Auditor-General’s Dept 1120
Collins, —.■ —Sydney Liquor Service—Elizabeth St. 2255 to 2261
Collins, R. J. —Thomas Hardy & Sons Ltd 1207 to 1208
Comerford, J. —(Union of Regd. Workers Clubs, 1602 to 1609
Western Workers Club).
Condon, Mrs. H. G.—lllawarra Hotel, Wollongong... 432 to 435
Conlon, Mrs. E. M.—Palace Hotel, Darlinghurst ... 1350 to 1354,
1358 to 1360,
1361 to 1362
Corrigan, Sgt. H. J.—Sergeant—Vice Squad 1898 to 1901,
2024 to 2026,
2307 to 2326,
2382 to 2385,
2463 to 2466,
2488 to 2489
Corrigan, Miss M. C 2385 to 2386
Coward, J. R.-—Builder, Cronulla 2467 to 2473
Critchley, A.—Secretary—Australian Wine Pro- 1197 to 1200,
ducers’ Association. 1943 to 1944


Transcript
Witness. Pages.
Crothers, S. C.—lnspector—Vice Squad 815 to 820,
1165,
1872 to 1880,
2386 to 2387,
2389 to 2393
Curtis, Sgt. W. C.—Sergeant—Vice Squad 1893 to 1897,
2107 to 2115
Davey, A.—Arthur & Matthews Pty. Ltd. (Hotel 813 to 815
Broker).
Davie, L. —Gollin & Co 1046
Davies, F. G. S.—Caldwells Wines Ltd 736 to 740
Davies, W. H.—Lindeman Ltd 1209 to 1210,
1948 to 1950
Davies, E. C.—Sergeant of Police 2231 to 2239
2241 to 2244
Day, R. 0. —Sammie Lee’s Restaurant 904 to 909,
913 to 917,
972 to 975,
1281 to 1287
Delaney, C.J.—Deputy Commissioner of Police 1119
Davery, N. Z.—Royal Hotel, Camden 1737 to 1740
Doyle, D. H.—McLaughlin & Co. Ltd 1153 to 1159
Duggan, Mrs. M. E.—586 Anzac Parade, Kingsford 1341,
1343 to 1344,
1367 to 1368
Durkin, A. J.—Royal Sheaf Hotel, Burwood 628 to 630
Eastman, S. A.—Presbyterian Church 1552 to 1555,
1995 to 1998
Edds, A. W.—Bells Hotel, Wooloomooloo 511 to 518,
534
Edwards, H. (re loan to Saffron) 299 to 301
Edye, L. V.—Newport Hotel 1715 to 1716
Eggleston, F. J.—Royal Narrabeen Hotel 702 to 703
Eldred, R. J.—(re Palace Hotel, Darlinghurst) 1355 to 1357,
1362
Elliott, M. A.—Colonnade Restaurant 833 to 836
Ellis, K.—Solicitor 597 to 599
Ellsmore, D. H.—(Hotelbroker) 564 to 566
Evans, L. D.—Northern Suburbs Supply Stores, 1275 to 1277
900-904 Military Road, Mosman.
Fairweather, C. W.—Duke of Edinburgh Hotel 1335 to 1339
Farrell, E.—Ziegfeld’s Cafe 876 to 878
Ferguson, A. Campsie Home Deliveries 1379 to 1380
Fesq, W. L.—Fesq. Casson & Co 1159
Finney, C.H.—269 Marrickville Road, Marrickville 771 to 772
Fisher, B. —142 Mount Street, North Sydney 753
Fletcher, J. R.—Thirroul Soldiers Memorial Club... 2291 to 2292
Flockton, W. B.—People’s Palace 1678 to 1679
Fogarty, R. F. G.—Carlton & United Breweries Ltd. 376 to 387
Forrest, E. J.—Bank of Australasia 184 to 185
Fountain, A. F.—Royal Oak Hotel, Double Bay 331 to 335
Fox-Ashwin, L.—Tottenham Bowling Club 1591 to 1592
Foyle, J. —Pioneer Tourist Coaches Pty. Ltd 1663 to 1666
Frank, Mrs. B.—Mortdale Hotel, Mortdale 248 to 252
762 to 766
Francis, C. W. R. (re Page) 1132 to 1133
Francis, M. A.—Toohey’s Ltd 92 to 96,
97 to 119,
121 to 125,
1023 to 1028
Francis, Rev. W. C.—President—Methodist Con- 1555 to 1556
ference.
Freeman, D. W.—lnspector—Goulburn Licensing 1493 to 1494
Inspector.
Freeman, Sgt. J. W. —Sergeant—Vice Squad 1095 to 1909,
1917 to 1924,
1925
1934,
2091 to 2103
Fuller, B. C.—Queen’s Counsel 2493 to 2496
Galea, P. J.—Sammie Lee’s Restaurant 921 to 922,
923 to 925
Gallagher, W. —Wangi Wangi Workers Club 1609 to 1610
Gavey, F. P.—Goldsbrough Mort 1045
Geddes, A. —Waratah Hotel, Kings Cross 494 to 496
Geraghty, J. L.—M.L.A 2153 to 2169,
2172 to 2178
Gibson, Mrs. E. G.—Great Northern Hotel, Newcastle 419 to 424
Gilligan, Miss E.—Kinneil Restaurnat 825 to 829
Glass, J. M.—Wauchope Golf Club 1470 to 157
Gleeson, M. J.—lrrigation Area Hotels 672 to 678
Good, E. A.—399-401 King Street, Newtown 766 to 767
Gortley, W. T.—Accountant for Thompson 2489 to 2491
Gottaas, E. F.—217 Oxford Street, Sydney 177
Goulder, B. J.—Catlan Bros 981 to 984
Transcript
Witness. Pages.
Griffiths, N. L.—Town Clerk—Kuringai Municipal 2279 to 2282
Council.
Guest, A. B.—Caldwells Wines Ltd 740 to 749
767 to 768
Guinsberg W. J.—(Carl Thomas—Band) 970
Gustafson, 0. W.—Tucker & Co 1043 to 1045
Hadfiold, R. D.—Secretary, U.L.V.A 387 to 394
954 to 655,
Hall, C. A. J.—Hotelbroker 502 to 510,
coo
540 to 541,
547 to 551,
795 to 796
Hall, J. H. —Sales Manager—Tooth & Co. Ltd 2272 to 2274
Hammond, N. H.—St. George Hotel, Belmore ... 412 to 415
Handley, E. C. —Barman—Excelsior Hotel, Eoveaux 1479 to 1481
Street.
Hannan, Miss E. M. —McQuillans Hotel, Bankstown 1731 to 1733
Hare, N. H. —Accountant —Sammie Lee’s Restaurant 889 to 891
Harris, W. G.—(President —Wine & Spirit 1039 to 1042
Merchants’ Association) (Dalgety & Co.).
Harrison, S. M. —Locomotive Hotel, Junee 415 to 417
Harvey, F. C.—Royal Standard Hotel, Sydney ... 144 to 146,
149 to 156,
204 to 208
Harvey, J. N. —Estate Agent, Cronulla 2473 to 2478
Hayes, F. F.—Club Caronia 1328 to 1330
Heath, A. T.—O’Malley & Morris 1047 to 1048
Henderson, A. J.—John Dewar & Sons Ltd 1042 to 1043
Hickey, T.—Commonwealth Bank, Goulburn Street 964
Hicks, J. G.—Civic Hotel, Lismore 1742 to 1743
Hoinville, F. D. —Welcome Inn, Sussex Street 496 to 498,
499 to 501,
450,
541
Hollingdale, B. A.—Chairman—Toohey’s Ltd 2521 to 2529
Holmes, G. —Det.-Sergeant 1165
Hooker, L. J.—Estate Agent, etc 678 to 682,
683 to 694,
2015 to 2022,
2027 to 2031
Hooper, G. P. G. —Hotel Inspector—Tooth & C 0.... 2547 to 2551
Horning, F. P.—2oa Pitt Street, Sydney 755 to 756
Hoyle, H.—Earlwood Bowling Club 1572 to 1574
Hunt, A. L. —L. de V. Hunt & Co., Goulburn 1944 to 1945
Hunter, E. M. —Electrical Trades Club 1610
Hunter, L. G. B. —McWilliams Wines Pty. Ltd 768 to 770,
1205 to 1207
Hurt, E. G. —City Council 468 to 471
Hyland, C. T.—Cellarman—New Brighton Hotel, 1385 to 1387,
Manly. 1396
Ireland, A. D. —Kitchennlan—Riverview Restaurant 1472
Ireland, E. A.—Riverview Restaurant 928 to 930,
1295 to 1299,
1312,
1316 to 1317
Jack, W. H. W.—Canberra Hotel, Brisbane 1666 to 1677
Jackson, H.—Church Point Stores 1383 to 1384
James, A. B.—lvanhoe Hotel, Manly 311 to 314
James, N. D.—ex-Supt.—C.l.B 2009 to 2015
Jenkins, W. J.—Allen’s Tourist Coaches 1666
Johnson, B. D.—Manly War Memorial Club 2292
Johnson, E. A.—Estate Agent, Cronulla 2481 to 2483
Jones, Miss B. R.—Stenographer—Auditor-General's 1123 to 1126,
Dept. 1172,
1176 to 1177
Jones, R. W.—Pardoe, Woinarski & Co. (Page’s 1186
Accountant).
Juergens, H. W.—Clifton Gardens Hotel 1689 to 1691
Kain, W. M.—Sales Manager—Tooheys Ltd 2393 to 2405
Kavanagh, E. M. —Warwick Castle Hotel, Balmain 319 to 321
Kay, Mrs. G. M. —Stork Club, Sylvania 865 to 866
Kaye, F. W.—Railway Hotel, Parramatta 569 to 570
Keating, A. F. —Queensland Hotel, Sydney 342 to 345
Kelleher, E. M.—Leichhardt-Lilyfield R.S.L. Club 1357 to 1358,
1362 to 1363
Kelly, J. M.—Secretary to Licensing Magistrates ... 12 to 21
990 to 991,
1557 to 1560,
1661 to 1563


Transcript
Witness. Pages.
Kelly, Miss P. J.—Policewoman 2266 to 2267
Kemp, J. D.—re Sutherland hotels 1494 to 1495
Kenny, J. P.—Epping Hotel, Epping 281 to 284
1734 to 1737
Keogh, A. J.—Ex-Sergeant of Police 1746 to 1752,
1830 to 1835
Kincaid, H. G.—Roosevelt Restaurant 219 to 221
Kinnear, C. T.—(Waiter) —Riverview Restaurant... 1456 to 1457
Kirkpatrick, R. S. —254 Coogee Bay Road, Coogee... 774 to 775
Kiss, G. R.-—Lion Hotel, Sydney 345 to 348
Kornhauser, E.—Cumberland Hotel, Bankstown ... 221 to 224,
Kortum, H. P.—Shakespeare Hotel, Sydney 371 to 372,
373 to 376,
406 to 408
Kriticos, A.—Carrier—Valentine’s 1491 to 1493
Lambourne, W. —Hardys Bay War Memorial Club... 1600 to 1601
Land, P. T. —Clerk to J. E. Carruthers, Solicitor ... 1177 to 1179
Lane, P.—46 Caledonia Street, Paddington 975 to 976
Latham, R. T.—Town Clerk, Randwick 2496
Latter, C. E.—Clarence Hotel, Petersham 917 to 920
951 to 953
Lay, R. E.—Australian Wine Producers’ Associa- 719 to 734,
tion—Penfolds Wines Pty. Ltd. 1200 to 1203,
1946 to 1948
Lee, S.—SammyLee’s Restaurant 820 to 823,
870 to 876,
879 to 888,
909 to 913,
1332 to 1335
Levenger, R. M. —Air Force Association 1599
Lewis, C. I.—Crown Solicitor’s Office 260 to 261
Lewis, J. R.—Secretary—R.S.S.A.I.L.A 1582 to 1583,
1585 to 1589,
2293 to 2294
Lewitz, J. F.—Rawson Hotel, George Street, Sydney 439 to 442,
2303 to 2305
Lilja, H. W. —Ex.-U.S. Army Liaison Officer 1885
Limerick, J.—Boyle’s Sutherland Hotel 1602 to 1503
Limerick, J. B. —Plaza Hotel, Sydney 1247 to 1249,
1251
1966 to 1970
Lindsay, J.—Secretary—Wine & Spirit Merchants’ 1030 to 1039,
Association. 1141 to 1146,
2270 to 2272
Lockwood, H. G.—(Waiter) —Riverview Restaurant 1471 to 1472
Long, G. R. —Chequers’ Restaurant 936 to 938
Lucas, D. W. —Randwick Hotel, Randwick 466 to 467
Lussick, F. J.—Harbord Beach Hotel, Harbord ... 1726 to 1729
Lynch, J. J.—Commodore Club 1387 to 1396,
1409 to 1410,
1482 to 1483,
1485 to 1491
Mabey, G. V.—Bognor Hotel, Sydney 335 to 338
Macky, S. P.—Commercial Traveller 1641 to 164
Madgwick, W. J.—Food Inspector—Board of Health 1942 to 1943
Maher, H. J. —Elizabeth Hotel, Sydney 316 to 319
Mallett, D. —Robyns Pty. Ltd., 417 Military Road, 1051 to 1058,
Mosman; Gearin’s Hotel, Katoomba; Woy 1060 to 1068,
Woy Household Supply. 1069 to 1076,
2214 to 2215
Maloney, C. G. —New Brighton Hotel, Manly 277 to 280,
1384 to 1385,
1453 to 1456,
1457
Mason, J. L.—Olympic Hotel, Moore Park 1512 to 1513
Mattick, Miss E. W. —Research Officer —Teacher’s 1653
Federation. 1655 to 1659,
1745 to 1746
Medcalf, J. F.—Morris Hotel 1692
Mellett, Mrs. I. K. L. M. —Hawkesbury River, Hotel, 647 to 654
Brooklyn.
Middleton, R. I>. —Tooth & Co. Limited 72 to 75
Mizelle, Elliott —Celebrity Club, York Street 878 to 879,
891 to 892,
893 to 895,
1417 to 1421
Moloney, H. B. —Clare Hotel, Sydney 314 to 316
Monti, W. —Club Caronia 1927 to 1928,
1932 to 1934
Moraan, 0. R. S.—Windsor Hotel, Sydney 408 to 412,
8 1731
Morris, A. R. —Pfahlerts Hotel, Sydney 705 to 708
Morris, J. C. —Inspector—21 Division 1839,
1850 to 1851.
1869 to 1872
Muller, E. F. —(Accountant to D. Blank, etc.) 461 to 466,
472 to 474,
1432 to 143
Transcript
Witness. Pages.
Munro, A. D.—Five Dock Hotel 136 to 137
Muro, C.—Roosevelt Restaurant 225 to 227,
1376 to 1379
Murphy, F. J.—Maroubra Junction Hotel 1712 to 1715
Murphy, J. L. B.—The Lakes Hotel, Botany 610 to 611
Muscat, T.—Maltese Club 1330 to 133
Munga, A. F.—Hotel Sydney 1911 to 1915,
1924 to 1925
Myerson, J. —Orient Hotel, George Street North ...1767 to 1778,
1789 to 1790
McAllister, R. H. A.—Markets Hotel, Quay Street ... 539 to 540
McAlpine, A. S.—Commonwealth Bank, Hurlstone 621 to 622
Park.
McAvoy, J. E.—(Blind persons) 1443
McCarthy, V. J.-—Grand Hotel, Hunter Street 395 to 401
McCosker, E. J. G.—Park View Hotel, Alexandria... 553 to 556,
564,
967 to 970
McCrea, A. G.—James Buchanan & Co. Ltd 1045 to 1046
McDonald, B. J.—Solicitor to Whelan family 631,
694 to 697
McDonald, B. J.—Legion of Ex-servicemen 1599 to 1600
McDonough, J.—Kay-Bee Hotel, Sydney 574 to 580
McEncroe, J, J.—4l Liverpool Road, Summer Hill 1277 to 1278
McGeorge, Dr. J. (re Supt. Thompson) 2433 to 2435
McTill, B. K.—Reporter, Sydney Morning Herald ... 2169 to 2170,
2171 to 2172
McGirr, J. J. T.—McGirr family interests 633 to 640
McGrath, W. P.—Mosman Hotel, etc 518 to 523
McGrath, W. T.—Smithfield 1853 to 1862
McHugh, E. V.—Sir Walter Raleigh Hotel 568 to 569
McKinnon, H. R.—Angel Hotel, Sydney 699 to 700
McKinnon, R. R.—Duke of Edinburgh Hotel, 1323 to 1326
Enmore.
McLachlan, E. W.—Brookvale Brewing Co. Pty. Ltd. 1220
McLaughlan, A. T.—Brighton Hotel 146 to 147
McLeod, J. M.—Royal Hotel, Orange 708 to 709
McManus, J.—Water Conservation & Irrigation 571 to 574
Commission.
Nash, M. R.—Hornsby R.S.L. Club 1592 to 1593
Neasmith, C. S. —Bondi Hotel 127 to 131
Nelson, J. B. —Murray Valley Coaches Ltd 1677 to 1678
Newsome, K. H.—Galway Castle Hotel 140 to 142
Newton, H. R.—56 Caledonia Street, Paddington ... 846 to 850,
854 to 855
Nicholson, G. L. E.—Penfolds Wines Pty. Ltd 783 to 786
Nolan, J. P.—(ex-Tooth & Co. Limited, re D. Mallett) 2194 to 2204,
2205 to 2214,
2215
Norris, J. L.—Bank Hotel, Newtown 1339 to 1341
Nunan, F. T;—ex-MetrOpolitan Licensing Inspector 1753 to 1766,
1787 to 1789,
1790 to 1792
O’Brien, F. J. —Canterbury Hotel 321
O’Keefe, P.—Reginald & Great North Roads, 1210 to 1215
Abbotsford ,• President —Spirit Section, Grocers
& Storekeepers Association.
O’Neill, M. J.—Solicitor—Murphy & Maloney 2218
Oram, B. T.—Storeman 1363 to 1364
O’Rourke, L. W.—Sgt. of Police, Manly 1466 to 1469
1472
Packham, C. L.—Union Club Hotel, Wagga 366 to 371
Page, R. G.—Simpson & Curlewis Streets, Bondi ... 1086 to 1091,
1093 to 1096,
1133 to 1136,
1186
Pallier, R. P. —Princes Highway, Blakehurst 1380 to 1382
Parfitt, A. G. —Auditor-General’s Department 1121
Parker, C. L. —Hero of Waterloo Hotel, Lower Fort 486 to 488
Street, Sydney.
Parker, F. A.—Royal Standard Hotel, Sydney 156 to 165,
208 to 211
Patterson, Mrs. H. M.—Piccadilly Hotel, Kings 1515 to 1516
Patterson, S. S.—Royal Hotel, Redfern 566 to 568,
1472 to 1473
Patterson, W.—Solicitor 556 to 564,
786 to 791,
792 to 795,
801 to 805
Payne, A. T.—Accountant—Richardson Payne & 2218 to 2219
Co. (Mallett’s & Nolan’s Accountant).
Penny, C. R.—39 Manning Road, Double Bay 930 to 933
Percy, Dr. C. E.— (re Supt. Thompson) 2435
Perrin, W. 1.-—Rozelle Hotel, Rozelle 627 to 628
Petherick, A. P.—Carrier 950 to 951


Transcript
Witness. Pages.
Piggott, O. A.—Secretary—N.S.W. Temperance 1975 to 1976,
Alliance. to 1992,
2141 to 2143
Plasto, Mrs. I. M. I.—Station Hotel, North Sydney 1718 to 1720
Plasto L. P.—Hyde Park Hotel, etc 640 to 643,
’ 1240 to 1247
Plasto, R. W.—Ship Inn Hotel, Circular Quay 622 to 627
Powell D. F. —Assembly Hotel 301 to 305,
307 to 311
Prendergast, F. B. —Commercial Traveller 1915 to 1917
Quinn, Dr. T. R., Marrickville —re Supt. W. C. S. 2327 to 2330
Thompson.
Ramacciotti, L. A.—Colony Club Restaurant, 859 to 864,
Sylvania. 368 to 8/0,
3 1058 to 1060,
1287 to 1289
Rawson, Miss C. B. —Colony Club Restaurant, 1078 to 1081
Sylvania.
Rea, E. V. —Rockdale Hotel 703 to 704
Rees, A. D.—Hamilton R.S.L. Club 1589
Rentoul, A. L.—Australia Hotel 593 to 595
1260 to 1263
Ridgewell, Mrs. G. M. —McMahons Point Hotel 709 to 711
Ritchard B. F. T.—Railway Hotel, Hornsby 353 to 358,
1259 to 1260
Robertson, J. —N.R.M.A 1644 to 1653
Romano, A. 0. —Ramano’s Restaurant 942 to 946,
1345 to 1348,
1360 to 1361
Ross, M. B.—Hotelbroker 590 to 592
Rowley, G. S. —Bega Hotel, Bega 435 to 438
Rutter, C. J.—200 Victoria Road, Bellevue Hill ... 1278 to 1279
Saffron, A. G.—Gladstone Hotel, Roosevelt 168 to 183,
Restaurant. 135 to 195,
213 to 219,
231 to 239,
2564 to 2568
Saffron, P.—Phillip Hotel, Sydney 252 to 254,
255 to 260,
276 to 277
Samuelson L. E.—Riverview Restaurant 1319 to 1323,
1348 to 1350,
1439 to 1441,
1444 to 1452
Sandon, F. W.—Auditor-General’s Dept 1122
Scanlon, B. A. —Accountant for W. Patterson 805 to 809
Sciberras, A. G.—Attilios 2562 to 2564
Schumack, Sgt. S. H.—Sergeant—Vice Squad 1904
Schytrumpf, A. A. L.—Sergeant of Police—Police 1809 to 1814
Boys Club.
Sellman, Mrs. E. J. S.—Richmond Brewing Co. 1516 to 1518,
(N.S.W.) Pty. Ltd. - 1528
Sellman, G. H. M.—Richmond Brewing Co. (N.S.W.) 1191 to 1197
Pty. Ltd.
Shanny, M. D.—HurstviUe Hotel, HurstviUe 444 to 453
Shaw, H. L.—Allawah Hotel 615 to 619
1251 to 1259
Shepherd, L. J. —Albion Hotel, Gratten Gullen 425 to 426
Shepherd, Sgt. R. A.—Sergeant—Vice Squad 1901 to 1903
Short, W. —Grosvenor Club —Darlinghurst 960 to 962
964 to 966
Simpson, C. R.—Bells Hotel, Wooloomooloo; 525 to 529
Welcome Inn Hotel, Sussex Street.
Simpson, A. L.—Bells Hotel, Wooloomooloo 529 to 531
Sinclair, W. J.—Federal Brewery, Mudgee 467 to 468
1218 to 1220
Snowdon, W. J.—Penfolds Carrier 970 to 972
Sommers, F. J.—Royal Hotel, Carlton 580 to 590
Southwell, F. H.—loB Cathedral Street, Sydney ... 778 to 783
Spearman, Dr. H. L. —re Supt. Thompson 2415 to 2417
Spensley, A. R.—46 Park Street, Sydney 749 to 753
Spooner, J. H.—Hayden, Pitt Street, Sydney 856 to 859
1411 to 1416,
1420 to 1421
SSooner, L. R.—Eveleigh Workshops 1885 to 1886
Spratt, S. M.—Cawsey Menck T. & S. Ltd 1473 to 1474,
1556
Strod, H. V.—Brooklyn Hotel, George Street 534 to 536
Stanton, T. W. —White Horse Hotel, HurstviUe ... 1704 to 1709
Stanton, V. E.—Field Secretary, N.S.W. Temperance 1531 to 1533,
Alliance. 1535 to 1546
Staunton, M. P.—New Tattersalls Hotel, Lismore... 429 to 432
Steele R. A.—Hotelbroker 61 to 64
Transcript.
Witness. Pages.
Stephen, R. M.—Palm Beach Country Club, Pickwick 1221 to 1223
Club.
Stewart, Mrs. F. M.—Royal Hotel, Sutherland 1503 to 1505
Stone, T. W. —Palace Hotel, George Street 488 to
Strover, T. G. —House of Hayes 1421 to 142-,
1432
Stutchbury, E. S.—Commercial Travellers Associa- 1614 to 1631,
tion. 1633 to 1641
Sutton, C. P.—Friend-in-Hand Hotel, Glebe 137 to 140
Swan, L. G.—Century Hotel, Sydney 125 to 127
Sweeney, J. F.—Retired Metrop. Supt. of Police ... 1962 to 1966,
1970 to 1974,
2338 to 2341,
2344 to 2347,
2375 to 2382,
2429 to 2431,
2436 to 2441
Taffa, V. P.—67 Waratah Street, Haberfield 1364 to 1366
Taggart, W. H.—Park View Hotel, Alexandria ... 551 to 553,
564,
643 to 644
Tahmindjis, P.—New Hunter River Hotel, Sussex 491 to 494,
Street. 1779 to 1781
Taylor, W. J. A.—Petersham Inn 358 to 366
Taylor, W.—Goulburn District Trades & Labour 1457 to 1466
Council.
Taylour, H.—Civic Hotel, Sydney 239 to 248,
261 to 276
Tengstrom, C. E.—Gollan Hotel, Lismore 1740 to 1742
Thirkettle, Sgt. L. S.—Sgt.—Vice Squad 1904 to 1905
Thomas, E. —27 Caledonia Street, Paddington 836 to 846,
851 to 854,
855 to 856,
867,
938 to 942
Thomas, H. C. —Carl Thomas’ Restaurant 895 to 987,
1421
Thompson, W.—Watsons Bay Hotel 1723 to 1726
Thompson, W. C. S.—Metropolitan Superintendent 1793 to 1809,
of Police. 2349 to 2367,
2369 to 2370,
2441 to 2453,
2455 to 2463,
2478 to 2481,
2483 to 2484
Tomlinson, Rev. C. H.—President N.S.W. Temper- 1995
ance Alliance.
Trembath, W.—Balmain Ferry Hotel, Erskine 536 to 537
Street.
Tuxner, W. H.—467 King Street, Newtown 772 to 773
Valentine, C. J.—Valentine’s Restaurant; Commo- 1397 to 1399,
dore Club. 1401 to 1405
Valentine, F.—Valentine’s Restaurant 953 to 954
Valentine, R. J.—Commodore Club 954 to 959,
962 to 964,
985 to 987,
1299 to 1302,
1303
1310 to 1312
Veitch, G. G.—120 Oxford Street, Sydney 1049 to 1050,
1112 to 1113,
1114 to 1115,
1117 to 1119
Vesperman, A. C. R.—Carter—Roosevelt Restaurant 1341 to 1343,
1374 to 1376
Vicars R. J.—Chairman—Tooth & Co. Ltd 1886 to 1893,
2555 to 2559’
Villenave, A.—Chequers Restaurant 960
Wade, E. J.—House of Hayes 1162 to 1164,
1182 to 1186,’
1303 to 1309,
1317 to 1318
Wade, O. G.—Hayes & Norton 1160 to 1161
Walden, Sgt. R. J.—Vice Squad 1929 to 1932,
2496 to 2500
Walker, A. R.—Constable 2104 to 2105
Wallington, Mrs. C. C.—Excelsior Hotel, Foveaux 1474 to 1476
Street.
Wallington, L. J.—Manager—Excelsior Hotel, 1476 to 1479
Foveaux Street.
Wallington, S. E.—Wallington Hotel, William 1699 to 1704
Street; White Horse Hotel, HurstviUe.
Wallington, M. J.—Epping Hotel 1709 to 1711
Waring, Miss B. L.—Hotel Accommodaton Board... 1682 to 1686


Transcript
Witness. Pages.
Waenecke, G. A.—Speedy Messengers 947 to 950,
959 to 960,
1279 to 1281
Watford, Mrs. A. L. J. M.—York Hotel, King Street 1717 to 1718
Watson, T.—General Manager—Tooth & Co. Ltd. ... 2031 to 2045,
2075 to 2078,
2080 to 2090,
2115 to 2128,
2129 to 2140,
2215 to 2217,
2509 to 2519,
2529 to 2540
Weber, L. C.—Storeman—Roosevelt Restaurant ... 1368 to 1370,
1372 to 1374
Wells, J.—Welcome Inn, Sussex Street 501 to 502
Wetherill W. H.—Maritime Services Board 478 to 485
Whelan, J. A.—Whelan family interest 697 to 699
Whelan, M. J.—Liverpool Arms Hotel 701 to 702
Williams, H. R.—Hawkesbury River Hotel, 665 to 671
Brooklyn.
Williams, L. 0. H.—Mountbatten Hotel 328 to 329
Williams, W. C.—Accountant for J. J. Lynch 1495 to 1501
Willis, R. S. —(re Place Hotel, Darlinghurst) 1354 to 1355
Wilmott, Mrs. R. C 2289 to 2291
Transcript
Witness. Pages.
Wilson, F.—Ex-Research Secretary, Temperance 1546 to 1552
Alliance.
Winders, T. C.—Bookmaker’s Clerk to K. Ranger 2370 to 2375
(re Supt. Thompson).
Wilson, J.—Crecy Hotel, Oxford Street 537 to 539
Woman, A. —Ex-Cashier, Caronia Club 1953 to 1961,
1992 to 1994,
2056 to 2057,
2244 to 2254,
2261 to 2266
Woman, A. Second—Ex-Powder Room Attendant, 1998 to 2003,
Caronia Club. 2005 to 2008
Woodward, J. V.—John Woods & Co. Ltd 1159 to 1160
Wooldridge, L. A.—Aarons Exchange Hotel 608 to 609
Wray, C. D. W.—Solicitor—Crown Solicitor’s Office... 1482
Yeo, W.—President, R.S.S.A.I.L.A 1563 to 1565,
1574 to 1582
Young, J,—Metropolitan Licensing Inspector 712 to 716,
796 to 800,
809 to 813,
1880 to 1883
