

ABORIGINES’ PROTECTION SOCIETY.
REPOET
OF THE
SUB-COMMITTEE ON AUSTRALIA.
With Notes.


ABORIGINES’ PROTECTION SOCIETY.
REPORT OF SUB-COMMITTEE ON AUSTRALIA,
WITH NOTES.
The Sub-committee to which was referred the
question of presenting a memorial to her Majesty
relative to the Aborigines of the Australias,
having considered that a comprehensive examina-
tion of the condition of these Aborigines was
indispensable before it could be determined what
address ought to be presented to Her Majesty, or
elsewhere, has attempted to open such an exami-
nation ;
The result is a clear opinion on the part of the
Sub-committee,
1. That in various parts of the Australias, viz.,
in New South Wales, 1 in Van Dieman’s Land, 2
in Western Australia, 3 in Northern Australia, 4
and even in South Australia , s British Settlements
have been formed, and are now forming without
sufficient guarantees legislative 6 or otherwise/ for
protecting and improving the Aborigines.
2. That Great Britain has long oppressed and
is still oppressing these Aborigines,—
(а) By taking their lands without treaties or
consent founded on sufficient compensation. B
(б) By permitting new diseases to be intro-
duced among them by tbe white people without
check, or attempting cure or prevention ; and
generally finding them remarkably healthy, our
diseases weaken or destroy great numbers of
them. 9
(c) By not causing the law to be administered
equally in their behalf ; 10 by applying to them
our law of oaths ; 11 by punishing them with the
severest of our legal penalties when they commit
a 2


crimes against us, 12 but when serious offences are
committed against them, by not duly punishing
the white offenders ; 13 by not taking judicial
notice of their laws, 14 and by not collecting their
laws in writing. 13
(d) By not having properly paid competent
interpreters, and generally not having any such
interpreters, even for proceedings in Courts of
Justice. 16
(e) By not establishing suitable means of pro-
tecting and improving the natives. ll
(/) By a system of Military executions and
massacres, that equal in cruelty the Commandoes
of South Africa—a system that is in a great
measure the source of such events as we have
stated in our former report on Swan River or
Western Australia. lß
( g ) By establishing remote convict settlements,
in addition to the ordinary assignments of
convicts to free settlers; and by leaving the
timber cutting, sealing and stock establishments,
without due superintendance. l6 And,
(A) By permitting explorers to kill the natives
for want of precaution, and with impunity. 20
3. That in addition to the injuries inflicted on
the Aborigines by free colonists, they have
suffered peculiar evils at our hands, in conse-
quence of penal colonies being founded; 21 and
that in Van Dieman’s Land, the still further
evil of removal, has been inflicted on them, which
further evil is at this moment prevailing with
fatal effects. 22
4. That although the more depraved convicts
are particularly mischievous to the Aborigines;
and although the inequality of the sexes, neces-
sarily incident to convict transportation, leads to
frightful injuries to them, nevertheless no system,
nor any unusual good principles in force in the
Australias, restrain free colonists from also
inflicting the natives the wrongs commonly
attendant on all colonization as at present con-
ducted. 23
5. That an exceedingly grievous evil arising
out of the wrongs done to the Aborigines is the
desire of revenge excited in their breasts, of which
innocent white men are often the victims. 24
6. That v the history of our past intercourse
with them is pregnant with details of a succession
of injuries on them by us without redress ; of


frenzied vengeance taken by them ; and ulti-
mately their most miserable extirpation. 2s
7. That the opinion as to the unavoidable exter-
mination of the Aborigines of the Australias (an
opinion wisely condemned by the society in the
Ist report, in regard to all new countries) is at
this moment particularly mischievous in Western
Australia, being the source of acts and neglects
on our part, fatal to the Aborigines. That this
opinion springs from want of knowledge and
consideration of the Aborigines, and of the cir-
cumstances in which they are placed by us ; and
that it leads in the first place to neglect of means
to protect and improve them; and often to in-
difference to their safety, and to their actual
murder. 26
8. That our experience in the Australias has
proved that the Aborigines possess a good capacity
for civilization, and that they are affectionately
attached to the white people when well treated ;
they are industrious when paid j 27 they wish to
amalgamate with us j 2B they have property, and
laws for its protection, although we are generally
ignorant of the one, and do not pay proper respect
to the other ; 2 9 they are fond of our dress ; 30 they
are excellent guides to our travellers, to our police
and to our settlers, when searching after fertile
lands ; 31 they are capable of learning letters ; 32 and
they have that curiosity to know our usages, and
see our country, which has been held to indicate
a capacity for civilization, 33 but our injustice
thwarts their good tendencies and aggravates their
natural vices.
9. That efforts made by Governor Macquarie
before 1820, to civilize them in New South
Wales were attended with as good results as the
circumstances of the case admitted, and it is
deeply to be lamented that the proposals to the
Home Government to extend these efforts, were
not sanctioned. 34
10. That the promises of the founders of
South Australia in favour of the Aborigines, have
not yet been sufficiently fulfilled; and without
the fulfilment and improvement thereof under
Acts of Parliament, the natives of South Austra-
lia cannot escape the fate of their fellow country-
men. 35
11. That in the present year (1838) Acts of Par-
liament have been passed for all the Australian


colonies, east, west, and south, and a new settle-
ment has been founded in the north, without
sufficient guarantees in favour of the Aborigines,
although the government has either had the
charge of the measures, or consented to them. 36
12. That the amount of funds now appro-
priated by the government to protecting and im-
proving the Aborigines, is far from being suffi-
cient. 3 *
13. That the funds supplied by private socie-
ties in no degree make up the deficiency at
present, nor are they likely to do so: this is
remarkably the case as to missionaries, although
their success has been as great as the particular
circumstances of the case admit. 38
14. That the neglect of means of protecting
and improving the Aborigines is contrary to the
tenor of ancient and recent instructions issued by
successive sovereigns. 3^
15. .That the British Public must be roused,
and appeals be made to the Crown and to Parlia-
ment, in order to obtain justice for the Aborigines
of the AustraUas, against the enormously in-
creasing interest of the free colonists there ; 40
and against the widely spread and increasing
mischief of convict settlements. 11
16 That the value of the land settled, 12 and
to be settled, 13 and of other property 11 in the
Australias; the amount of customs received
annually there, 45 and from imports from thence, 46
and the profits upon goods exported thither, 4 * are
sufficient to meet the expense of protecting and
improving the Aborigines; and they ought to be
charged forthwith proportionably with the burden
of carrying a proper system for their protection and
improvement into effect. 4B
17. That hitherto the government has never
formed such a proper system, although if the
same efforts were made in behalf of the Abori-
gines, that are begun to be directed to promote
judicious emigration, 50 it would not be difficult
to devise a more satisfactory system than that
■ which is formed by our present proceed-
ings.sl
18. That a new system of law 52 and of ad-
ministration, 53 and an amount of missionary and
other establishments for the benefit of the natives,
proportioned to their numbers and their need, are
indispensable, and such a new system and estab


lishment will probably save hundreds of thou-
sands of Aborigines still surviving. sl
19. That such new system and establishments
ought to be framed with a distinct view to meet
as much as is possible, at once, 65 and fully, 56 all
the difficulties and all the requisites of the case,
so as to cause the new state of things in the
Australias created by our settlements, to be per-
manently acceptable to the Aborigines, 5 ? and con-
ducive to their interests, and so as to prevent one
good thing from being nugatory by the con-
tinuance of evil in other respects.
20. That in order to pave the way to such
new system, and to the success of such establish-
ments, the transportation of convicts ought to be
absolutely and immediately abolished. 58
21. That the following are some of the specific
parts of such a system:—
(a) A sufficient number of interpreters, s9 pro-
tectors, 60 political agents, 61 medical men, 62 mis-
sionaries,63 schoolmasters, 6 * teachers of farming
and of the arts and common trades, 65 appointed
for these Aborigines with proper hospitals 66 and
other buildings and stores for presents and other
uses, (whatever the cost may be,) at the expence
of the Home Government, in the first instance to
be met as soon as may be, rate ably 6? out of Colo-
nial and Home resources.
(b) The affairs of the Aborigines to be ad-
ministered in London by the board of control, 68
provided with an additional Commissioner or
Secretary,—[all the functionaries in article ( a ) to
be appointed and removed by that new depart-
ment, but to be liable to suspension by the
Governor of the respective colonies,] or through
some other expedient which farther inquiry may
suggest.
(c) The functionaries in article (a) (except the
missionaries and the political agents) to make
quarterly reports to the Protectors, and the
missionaries to make quarterly reports to their
respective religious superiors ; and the protectors,
political agents and religious superiors to make
quarterly reports direct to the Commissioner in
London, depositing copies in the Secretary’s
office in each colony.
( d ) Sufficient quantities of land to be granted
in trust for a time for such Aborigines as wish to
become settlers 69 severalty ; and other larger


quantities of land to be appropriated in trust, as
hunting grounds, common fields and enclosures
for game, for other natives and for tribes ;?° and
if in particular spots all the colonial lands have
become private property, repurchases to be made
by the government if the proprietors are willing
to sell for the foregoing purposes.? 1
(e) The law which requires an oath to he
taken by heathen witnesses to be repealed ; and
such witnesses to be admitted without oath, subject
to punishment in case of bearing false testimony as
if they had committed perjury.
(/) Spirituous liquors to be prohibited being
paid in wages or given in barter on any occasion
to Aborigines.? 2
(g) Shooting natives illegally, and illegal
military executions or massacres to be punished.
(It) Non-feasance of duty, as well as acts of
positive illegality in cases concerning Aborigines
on the part of any public officer whatever, to be
duly punished.
( i ) Official reports? 3 of all violences and wrongs
that are subjects of legal or official complaint,
and in which natives are concerned either as
aggressors or sufferers, with reports of the expen-
diture of the funds and the execution of measures
for protecting and improving the Aborigines, to
be published monthly, or oftener as may be
needed, in the Colonial Gazettes, and in all the
independent colonial newspapers, at the public
expense ; and such reports, with copies of all
colonial laws and orders concerning Aborigines,
to be transmitted home quarterly, in print, and
to be laid annually before Parliament.? 4
(J) The transportation of convicts to be aban-
doned forthwith, and no convicts to be sent from
the colonies to places inhabited by coloured people;
the inequality of the sexes in the convict colonies,
to be reduced by facilitating the voluntary return
of all convicts to Great Britain and Ireland, and
by other good means.
(£) Natives to be employed as much as
possible in the public service,? 5 and some of them
to be aided from time to time to come to England,
?® under the care of the Commissioner of the
new department for the Aborigines. Those who
come voluntarily to be also under his care. The
natives also to be regularly included in the
colonial census, and described according to their


various ages, sexes and ranks, as much as is
practicable. 77
(/) Proper penitentiaries to be established in
place of capital and other corporal punishments,
where natives are concerned.
(m) The Judges in all the Australias, to be
enjoined by Parliament and the local legislature,
to take notice of the native laws in particular
cases before them, involving such laws.
(n) The Governors of the several Australian
Colonies to cause collections of such laws to be
made forthwith.
(o) A hearing to be allowed of right 7B at the
Privy Council, in regard to all administrative acts
complained of, by, for, or against, natives in the
Australias.
With these views strongly impressed on the
Sub-committee, it recommends, that not only an
address to the Queen be founded on the foregoing
statements, and on the proofs of their correctness,
but also that communication be forthwith had
with the Secretary of State for the Colonies, and
the first Lord of the Treasury, on the different
parts thereof respectively, which seem more
especially to concern those ministers, and with
the Secretary of State for the Home Departm,
on the subject of convict transportation.
The Sub-committee also recommend that
petitions to both Houses of Parliament be pre-
pared on the statements and proofs, and that
signatures to such petitions be sought by the
Society’s agency throughout England, Ireland,
Scotland and Wales.
NOTES.
(1.) New South Wales founded - - 1787. N «
(2.1 Van Diemen’s Land - - - 1804. J s
(3.) Western Australia, or Swan River 1829. \s-s-.
(4.) North Australia - - - - 1826,
And resumed in - - 1838. I i
(5.) South Australia - - - - 1836. "3
Voluminous accounts of all these settlements, ex-
cept North Australia, have been published by private
individuals, or by parliament. On North Australia
there seems to be nothing in print, except Dr. Wilson’s
excellent volume, and Mr. Windsor Earl’s work.
(6.) See Art. 12 below, and Note 37.
A*


' (7.) Sec Art. 13 below, and Note 38.
(8.) This applies to all these Australian settlements.
According to the account of the Secretary of the
South Australian colony, Mr. Gouger, (p. 66) “no
effective arrangements have yet been made, in the pro-
vince for attempting the civilization of the natives: ”
and not a single treaty or agreement for the purchase
of land from the natives is believed to have been made
from 1788, downwards.
(9.) Diseases. So early as in 1789, the small-pox
ravaged Port Jackson, (Collins’s New South Wales, p.
67, and 383, and Mann, do., p. 14) and in 1831—
1835, the same disease prevailed among the natives,
(Mitchell’s Eastern Australia, vol. i. p. 20, 216, 285,
and 304,) and it is understood that small-pox is a
disease that must have come from Europe to New
Holland. But no efforts seem to have been made to
inoculate, or vaccinate the natives, although those
preventives have been used for the whites. Yet such
efforts have checked small-pox considerably among
slaves. (Collins’s Practical Rules, p. 46.) In North
America, the ravages of the same disease have also
been checked by those means. (New York Paper,
1838.) As to other diseases, see Ist Aborigines Re-
port, p. 485; and 2nd Do., p. 129, Dr. Collies’s Pro-
posal of Checks, and the South Australian Instructions
of 1836; and Commons’ Papers, 1831, No. 64, p. 16.
(10.) Transportation Report of 1812, p. 7.
m.) As to Oaths. —Ist Aborig. Report, p. 505.
2nd Do., p. 140; and Papers on Aboriginal Tribes,
1834, No. 617, p. 174. A letter from Adelaide, dated
Sept. 16, 1838, states, that in a case of murder of a
white man, justice could not be done, because none
but natives witnessed the fact, and the Advocate-
General and Commissioners were of opinion, that their
evidence was not admissible in the court.
(12.) Punishment of Natives by us. Transportation
Report, 1838, p. 269; and Perth Gazettes, 1838.
Mitchell’s Eastern Australia, i. 360.
(13.) Impunity of White Culprits. Ist. The Wind-
sor murderers of 1800. Collins’s New South Wale?,
p. 623. 2nd. The Myall murderers of 1826. Human
Policy, p. 246 ; and 3rd. The Hunter River murder-
ers of 1826. Bannister’s New South Wales in 1824,
6, and 6. 4th. Mitchell, ii. 196. It is fit to add,
that the recent papers from Sydney state that ten
white people are under trial for murdering natives,
and some such trials have occurred before.
514.) Universal Practice.
16,i House of Commons’ papers, 1838. No. 687,
p. 7, Governor Stirling’s Report; and Mann’s New
“South Wales.
(16.) Universal practice, except since 1826, when
a feeble attempt was made to remedy this evil in New
South Wales. At the Swan River also something ie
•begun on it.


(17.) See Art. 13 below. See House of Commons’
papers,.lß3l, No. 261; and Mr. Gouger’s book, p. 56.
(18.) The Sub-committee appointed under
Minute 195, to report, (inter alia) on the facts
brought before this Committee, by Dr. Giustiniani,
respecting alleged aggressions on the aborigines by
the colonists and military at the Swan River
settlement, has to report that Dr. Giustiniani has
brought under their notice the following specific
cases of outrage;—
Ist. A night attack upon the natives by a
small party of colonists, headed by Mr. ,
Acting Government Resident, and Lieutenant
half old, were killed; the others escaped.
2nd. Natives while stealing from a barn, shot
at by a person placed there for the purpose of in.
flicting this summary punishment. One person
seriously wounded, and afterwards deliberately
murdered, to put a speedy end to his sufferings.
3rd. A native apprehended on suspicion of
murder, wantonly shot on the pretence that he
attempted to escape from prison.
4th. A native woman imprisoned and treated
with a neglect that nearly proved fatal.
sth. A volunteer native witness accompanying
a party of soldiers, shot on endeavouring to leave
his conductors.
6th. Martial law proclaimed in the summer of
last year, in consequence of the murder of two
white men, and an indiscriminate massacre of
many of the natives without form of trial.
7th. The killing of a woman, and attempt to
kill a man by a young person of the name of ,
and the subsequent mutilation of the corpse of
the woman. In this case there seems to have
been no trial, and no exhibition even of displea.
sure on the part of the local authorities.
Bth. The unprovoked murder of a native by'
9th. The murder of two natives; one suspected
of murder was shot while attempting to escape;
and the other in a tree, it being doubtful whether
he was there as a spy, or hunting the oppossum.
Most of these cases are supported by extracts
(which your Committee have not in all instances
had the means of verifying) from the papers pub-
lished on the spot, and in several instances by the
assertions of the Perth Gazette, .which is the


government journal; but, in no instances does it
appear that the offending party and the witnesses
are at present in England.
Besides these statements of specific facts. Dr.
Giustiniani has laid before your Committee abun-
dant evidence of a general carelessness on the part
of the colonists, of the rights and lives of the sa-
vages, and a lamentable want of endeavours to
improve and conciliate them.
Your Committee cannot undertake to form any
other opinion on these grave cases than that they
demand the most careful inquiry on the spot.
They are inclined to believe that this frightful
state of things has in a great degree grown up
from the very difficult situation as to their lives
and property, in which the colonists have been
placed by the government, which has sent them
out without adopting sufficient measures to pre-
vent collision between them and the natives. They
recommend that a copy of the foregoing represen-
tations and conclusions belaid before Lord Glenelg.
They are not prepared to suggest at present the
adoption of any other step applicable to the indi-
vidual cases already specified. Dr. Giustiniani’s
statement has, however, supplied them with very
important materials which will be made use of in
the more general report on the Australian Abori-
gines, upon which your Committee has been and
still is engaged. (Lord Glenelg referred this
report to the new Governor of Western Australia,
Mr. Hutt, with instructions to make the proper
quiries into the case.)
Military Massacres of the Natives. —ln one colony.
New South Wales, in June, 1838, the Governor pub-
lished a proclamation, declaring that such indiscrimi-
nate killing should not be allowed in future, whatever
might have been the practice in this, or other colonies.
This proclamation he founded on recent instructions
from the Secretary of State. But the following refer-
ences prove how inveterate this practice is.
Collins’s New South Wales, 1795, p. 288. 2,
Governor Darling’s case of 1826. (Bannister’s New
South Wales in 1824, 6, and 6.) 3. Wilson’s Voyage
p. 124—148. 4. 2nd Aborigines Report, p. 130—
139, on a case at the Swan River in 1834; p. 138,
Lord Glenelg’s rebuke to the Governor of the Swan
River; and Perth Gazette, July, 1837, an order of the
Governor substantially like the case rebuked. This
order was read in the House of Commons lately by
Mr. Bindley; and the necessity of further efforts to


stop this abominable system, Is proved by the Swan
River Government newspaper of October, 1838, still
containing accounts of such massacres, by the troops
still going on.
(19.) e. g. Moreton Bay, and Wellington Valley.
Ist Aborigines Report. The Myall river Timber set-
tlement. {Humane Policy Appendix.) Ist Report of
the South Australian Commissioners; House of Com-
mons’ paper, 1837. Government orders in Wilson’s
voyage, p. 227, and 235.
(20.) Major Mitchell’s case in the Journal of the
Geographical Society, v. 7, p. 271 ; and see trial at
Sydney on his return, and his new books, vol. i. 204,
269 ; vol. ii. 101,19 C. Captain Beechey’s case stated
in his own Voyage, p. 132. Ist Transportation Re-
port, p. 257. The method by which some explorers
succeed without killing natives might be universally
adopted ; for which see Sturt’s and Hume’s books.
(21.) Ist Aborigines Report, p. 487, as to stealing
young girls: ib. as to the venereal disease. And 2nd
Transportation Report, p. 24, 26, as to bestiality.
(22.) As to removal, see House of Commons pa-
pers, 1834, No. 617, p. 163 and 165. 2nd Report of
Aborigines, p. 121, 124; and especially Lord Glen-
elg’s despatch, ib., p. 125, and its result, in the Aus-
tral Asiatic Review, of 10th April, 1838. Hobart
Town Almanac, 1837, p. 158 ; and Gouger, p. 49.
By the last papers from Sydney, it appears that the
natives removed from Van Dieman’s Land to Flinder’s
Island are to be removed again to an institution on
the Mainland of Australia.
(23.) As to alleged superior humanity of free co-
lonists over convicts. See Ist Aborigines Report, p.
683. But this is an erroneous allegation. There are
no convicts at the Swan River ; and a free judge has
been heard, in a solemn council in New South Wales,
propose to destroy all the natives of a particular dis-
trict. (Bannisters New South Wales in 1824, 6, and
6.) “I have prosecuted a free man for murdering
natives; and in my time, the Governor influenced by
a free party, issued illegal orders, authorizing military
executions, and successive free secretaries of state sup-
ported this Governor, (Bannister’s New South Wales
in 1824, 6, and 6.”)
(24.) See particulars of the excellent Captain
Barker’s case in Wilson’s Voyage.
(25.) The Van Diemen’s Land case. Wilson’s
Voyage for the origin. The Gazette’s and note 22 for
the completion.—The New South Wales case. Col-
lins, 275, 283, and 622. The narratives in the Colo-
nial Gazettes of the wars on the Hawkesbury, 1799,
&c., on the Nepean, 1816, at Bathurst, 1824; on the
Hunter, 1826 ; (Bannister’s papers) and at Pott
Macquarie, 1837. (New South Wales papers.)
The North Australian case; Dr. Wilson’s Voyage.
The Swan River, or Western Australia case; 2nd
Aborigines Report, p. 141. The transactions of the


Colonial Church Society. The Advocate-General
Moore’s Journal. The Perth Gazette. The Guardian
newspaper, and Irving’s Australia.
(2C.) 2nd Aborigines Report, p. 141. The Gover-
nor of Western Australia in 1835.
Mirror of Parliament, 31st July, 1834. The Secre-
tary of State for the Colonies on Mr. Button’s Ist
motion. Contra, the despatch of Lord Glenelg, 20th
December, 1836 ; House of Commons papers, 1836,
No. 279, p. 29.
(27.) Industry and Capacity. —Sec Mann’s New
South Wales, 1811, p. 47. Ist Aborigines Report, p. 15.
4th Report of the Australian Land Company, p. C.
2nd Aborigines Report, p. 141. Gougcr’s South Aus-
tralia, 1838, p. 40—101. Mitchell’s Eastern Australia,
1838, vol. i. p. 201. Vol. ii. p. 193, 338. Lecture on
South Australia, 1838, p. 18.
Perhaps the most remarkable testimony to the in-
dustry and capacity of natives to be met with of late
years, is in the Records of the Council of Swan River,
where the Colonial Secretary is represented as
“ strongly urging that the employment of the natives
should be strictly confined to such occupations as are
actually necessary for their subsistence, and that they
should on no account be permitted to perform such
services as would interfere with the daily avocations
of the industrious fisherman and labourer.”
Commons’ papers, 1837, No. 425, p. 141. Ist Abori-
gines Report. This equals the anti-industry acts of
Assembly in Jamaica a century ago.
The industrious disposition of the natives, and their
usefulness to us, will not be disputed by those who
consider well the force of the following statements,
of recent date:
(а) The last arrivals from Swan River mention that
the post is regularly carried by natives to one station
forty miles from Perth ; and that a party of them was
just arrived from King George’s Sound in fourteen
days. It was contemplated to establish a post to this
place regularly by their means.
(б) The South Australia Gazette, of Sept. 8, 1838,
contains a notice from the government against “cut-
ting down the trees in the park of Adelaide, and
employing the aborigines to lop their branches.
(c) All accounts from South Australia agree in
details of the readiness with which the natives have
laboured for the settlers, and for small pay.
(d) In an able report from Dr. Collie, at King
George’s Sound, published in the House of Commons’
papers, 1837, No. 425, p. 130, it is justly stated, that
“in the general intercourse between the natives and
“ new comers, the former will be ready to perform
“ certain services for a slight remuneration in victuals,
“ tools, clothing, &c., and the latter will be, too, glad
“ to avail liimself of the smallest assistance at so cheap
‘ ‘ a rate.”
(28.) Amalgamation. They have no institutions


opposed to ours. Their women beat us children, and
their children come to our schools.
(29.) Property, JjC. Captain Cook found them
with boats on the coast, and now they have none
there. In 1788, Governor Phillip found 130 boats in
Port Jackson alone ; Phillip’s voyage, 4t0., 1789.
Major Mitchell saw them using boats in the interior.
Vol. 5. p. 253. Vol. ii. pp. 141, 280, 331. The Report
of the Governor of Western Australia. House of
Commons’ papers, 1838, No. 387, p. 7, Gougcr, 65.
(30.) Dress. South Australian Commissioners’
Instructions. 2nd Report. Commons’ papers, 1838,
No. 04, p. 10. Gouger, 47—50. It has often been
said that they are insuperably averse toclotliing. This
was said of the Hottentots a century ago. But the
Abbe de la Caille disposed of the assertion, then,
by showing that the colonists were unwilling to
pay them for their labour, and so they could not get
clothes. So it has been with the Australian Abori-
gines. The same point was made out by Nayti,
the New Zealander, in giving testimony before the
House of Lords last session. His people will wear
clothes, if they can get them.
(31.) Guides. Mitchell’s Eastern Australia. Vol. i.
p. 29, 34, 147; and vol. ii. p. 331. 4th Report of the
Australian Land Company, p. 0.
(32.) Learning. Ist Aborigines Report, p. 677.
Governor Arthur’s Report House of Commons pa-
pers, 1331, No. 201. Mitchell’s Eastern Australia,
rol. ii. p. 331—334.
(33.) Curiosity. Bennilong’s case. Collins, 258.
Boongaree’s case. King’s and Flinders’ Voyage.
Other cases in Mann’s New South Wales, and
Mitchell’s Eastern Australia, ii. p. 334. Foster’s Ob-
servations, p. 302, and see Dr. Collie’s Remarks.
House of Commons’ papers, 1837, No. 425, p. 131.
(34.) Governor Macquierie's plans. House of
Commons’ papers, 1831, No. 26, p. 3. 1828, No.
477, p. 12.
South Australia.
(35.) Promises and Instructions. Colonial Land
Committee’s Report. Commons’ papers. 1836, No.
512, p. 180. Ist Report of the South Australian Com-
missioners ; Commons’ papers, 1837, No. 491, p. 8.
2nd do. No. 64, p. 16.
Non-Fulfilment of Promises and Instructions. —
Speech of the late Secretary of South Australia.
South Australian Record, 12th Sept., 1838. Gouger’s
South Australia, p. 68, and Steven’s History of South
Australia.
The spearing of whites has begun. MS. Letter.
(36.) New South Wales Act, and Van Diemen’s
Land Act. 1 and 2 Viet. c. 60.
Western Australia Act. land 2nd Viet. c. 44.
South Australia Act. ■ c. 60.


(37.) Public Funds Expended.
c / New South Wales—lnstitutions, 1839-9,1 £.
g and Removal of Natives, Mis-> 4900
ip sionaries. Protectors, Interpreters)
rt ~ Van Dieman’s Land. The-re-) Rnn
§ moved Natives . . . ( uu
* ~ Western Australia or Swan
,, River. Protector ) ,
% ~ Interpreter 5 ’ ‘ ‘
c ~ South Australia
~ North Australia
2 Voyage Expenses of Missionaries.—Tran-
sportation Report, 838, p.
S I 159. Presents to natives in
P -1 clothing Food, &c. . . .
(38), Private Funds and Societies.
In 1792, the Society of Friends contemplated
a setlement, to benefit New South Wales; but
the negociation with government was abandoned.
—Parliamentary Papers, 1792.
In 1826, the London Missionary Society founded
a mission for the natives, and abandoned if. Their
missionary, Mr. Threlkeld, has been ever since most
usefully employed by the government in similarefforls.
In 1832, the Church Missionary Society, com-
menced a mission at the expense of government; and
it now requires more funds from the government to
extend its efforts.—House of Commons rapers, 1837,
No. cxii. p. 30.
The Wesleyans abandoned their first mission to
the natives, and they recently commenced a new one,
with the aid of the government.—(Wesleyan Report,
for 1837.)
In 1836, the Colonial Church Society was begun,
by a mission to the natives of Swan River. That
society has now a large income, and whilst it extends
its operation to all white colonies, it contemplates
abandoning the mission to the natives.
The Scottish and German Missions are in their in-
fancy, and depend much on the government.—Com-
mons’ Papers, 1837, No. cxii. p. 85—43, and Tran-
sportation Report, 1838, Appendix, p. 169.
On the success of missionary efforts, see a remark-
able testimony in Mitchel’s Eastern Australia, vol. ii.
p. 346.
The efforts of the Australian Land Company have
not been without effect. See their Annual Reports.
(39.) Instructions
Edward VI. 1563 Hakluyt.
Elizabeth 1682
Charles 11. 1670 Harleian Coll. British Mus.
George 111. 1776 Cooke’s Voyages.
William IV. Mirror of Parliament.
(40.) Free Colonists.
The general increase is from 6000 a-ycar, t 070,000 a


year.—Emigration Commissioners Report, Commons’
Paper. 1838.
As to tlie Australias, in particular, the Emigration
Commissioner estimates the pauper emigrants of last
year, at7ooo,toNew South Wales alone. Transporta-
tion Report p. 18 . More than 5000 people, includ-
ing Germans, are gone to South Australia, since 183 C.
(41.) Convicts. —ln 88 years before 182 G,
the transported convicts 33,080
In 12 ditto since 44,420
—Transport. Report, p. 322.
The system in force since 1830-7, seems to
bo more unfavourable to the natives of New South
Wales than even the old system—being the with-
drawal of convicts from the settled districts, and the
bringing of them more into contact with the tribes.
—Transportation Report of 1838.
(42.) Value of lands settled—e. g. in New South
Wales four-and-half millions of acres, worth three
millions sterling.
(43 —47.) It is not easy to estimate exactly the
clear gain to England on all these heads; but it may
be set low at half a million a year.
(48.) Second Aborigines’ Report, sixth suggestion,
that the expense of protecting and improving the
aborigines, be a charge on the colonial lands.
(49.) Absence of system. —First Aborigines Report,
1830, p. 1.
(60.) A special commission has recently been
formed, to improve the mode of sending out emi-
grants ; and it has done much good; see its First
and Second Reports, Commons’ Papers, 1837 and
1838.
(61.) These are almost the words of First Abori-
gines Report of 1830, p. 1.
(62.) Law. It has been shown above, that on
specific heads of law, the natives are oppressed.
(63.) Administration. The present administration
is necessarily inefficient; inasmuch as it is the protector
of the colonial administrations and people who are the
actual oppressors of the natives. The natives thereof
ought to have a new department to resort to, —a
department not influenced by colonial interest.
(64.) Missionaries.— The Honourable and Rev.
Baptist Noel has shown the enormous deficiency of
missionary agency compared with the need. Per-
haps £400,000 a year is expended in this way,—at
least 5,000,000 are wanted. See sermon at an
anniversary of the Church Missionary Society, 1838.
The successful missionary efforts, will furnish ex-
amples and aids for their extension.
(65.) The population. —There arc two ways of
computing the population of the Australias; first,
by taking the most exact element of computation
known and applying it to the whole of New Holland;
secondly, by applying the same element to the belt all
round of about 200 miles from the ocean. The


former includes the centre, of which we know
except by conjecture. The second extends only to a
portion, of which we know much very exactly. The
population of this belt is that with which the white
people have_ long been, and will long continue to be
exclusively in contact.
The best known element is in the evidence of Sir
E. Parry.—Transportation Report, House of Com-
mons’ Papers, No. xvi. p. 66 ; viz., that about 2000
native are to be found on 1,000,000 acres.
The population of the whole of New Holland, ac-
cording to it, is above 1,500,000 souls.
The population of the belt of 200 miles from the
ocean, according to the same element, will be about
1,000,000 souls.
A report of Governor Stirling of the Swan River,
has made a census of the natives near Perth, giving
a computation of almost one-half of the number for
the whole country and for the belt.—House of Com-
mons Papers for 1838, No. CB7. p. 7.
Previously to the publication of these documents
no means of ascertaining the truth even approximately,
existed except Governor Phillip’s census and compu-
tation in 1788, which gave 6 to the square mile_from
Botany Bay to Port Jackson and Broken Bay. " Ac-
cordingly, in Macculloch’s statistical account of the
British Empire, (vol. i. p. 603) the remark annexed
to the title New South Wales, Van Dieman’s Land,
and Western Australia, is Aborigines not ascertained.
And the diversity of the conjectures of other writers,
and, even of the same writers at different times be-
fore the recent parliamentary documents were pub-
lished, is extraordinary.
Balbi, in 1834, estimated the population Souls.
of the whole continent at 100,000
Hassel in 1828 200,000
Hassel, &c 2,688,000
Balbi in 1828 1,4000,000
Cannabich in 1818, and Carpini in 1827 . 1,600,000
Richard in 1822 . . . . 1,500,000 to 2,000,000
Stein in 1811, and Galeth in 1822 . . .2,000,000
C. J. Bargius in 1828 2,600,000
Hassel in 1826 2,628,000
Denaux in 1828 2,678,000
Schnabel in 1830 2,700,000
Balbi in 1810 2,800,000
Stein in 1826 3,712,000
Yolney 1804 6,000,000
—Balbi Abrege de Geographe, p. 1287.
(55, 66.) If we ate content with partial efforts, wc
shall incur the hazards of the same dangers as were
fatal in former days, where partial success only put off
the general ruin of the natives for a few years ; as in the
case of Elliot in New England; and of Penn and the
Quakers, in Pennsylvania. White colonization in-
vades these people in many ways, and every diffe


rent step must be accompanied by a corrective of the
evil it may work.
(57.) Permanently. —The natives always like the
whites for a time, —till they find us out.
(68.) Abolishing transportation.
Various schemes are now on foot for continuing
transportation in new forms.
1. The West India Scheme.
2. The scheme prepared by the Commons committee.
3. Dr. Lang’s scheme.
4. Chief Justice Forbe’s scheme.
' All are fatal to the people of colour in some part
of the world.
(69.) Interpreters.— It is probable, that at this
moment, not three white men possess a competent
knowledge of the native language in all the Austra-
lias. It was not until 1825, that any attempt was
made by the government to encourage the learning of
the language.
(60 —65.) In principle all these officers are esta-
blished already. It is only wanted to have enough of
them under a proper system.
Protectors; and Vote of Money for Natives.—Pro-
vision was made in the legislative Council of Sydney,
in August last, for five protectors of natives; and the
money voted for the natives for 1838-9, amounted to
£4,900. This included the expense of removing the
natives again from Flinders’ Island.
(66.) Hospitality. &c.—lt is not intended topropose
the separation of the natives, in all cases, from whites.
They are known to go on often well together.
(67.) The apportionment of the expenses is diffi-
cult ; but it is far from being impossible to be accom-
plished. Approaches to such apportionment have
been made in the convict colonics, as to the funds for
support of the convict establishments.
(68.) The want of a new department uninfluenced
by the department which patronizes the white colonial
administrations, seems to bo indisputable.
(69.) Settlers in severalty.
The secretary for South Australia, asserts that,
even at present, there is something approaching to
/ami/!/possessions (Gouger,p.6s,)apointstrongly con-
firmed by the recent important report of the governor
of the Swan River on the point.—Commons Papers,
1838. No. 687. p. 7.
The general progress of the natives would soon
produce candidates for farms.
(70.) There is a passage in the last new book on
New South Wales, that touchingly describes the want
of this provision.—Mitchell’s Eastern Australia, ii. 355.
“ The kangaroo disappears from the cattle runs,
and is also killed by stockmen merely for the skins;
but no mercy is shown to the natives who may help
themselves to a bullock or a sheep. Such a state of
things must infallibly lead to the extirpation of the
aboriginal natives, as in Van Dieman’s Land, unless


timely measures are taken for their civilization and
protection. I have heard some affecting allusions
made by the natives to the white men’s killing the
kangaroos. At present almost every stockman has
several strong kangaroo dogs; and it would only be an
act of justice towards the aborigines to prohibit white
men by law from killing these creatures, which are as
essential to the natives as cattle are to the Europeans.
The prohibition would be at least a proof of the dis-
position of the strangers, to act as humanely towards
the natives as they possibly could."
(71.) The unjust improvidence with which land
has been given away from the natives ma)*, in some
cases, have raised a difficulty in this respect. But if this
land be dear, that will be a consequence of the wealth
of the colonists; in which case the funds will be
plentiful for making the repurchases; or if the
colonies do not prosper, the cost of such repurchases
will be low. Under any circumstances, the posses-
sion of a competent quantity of land, is as indis-
pensable as the free enjoyment of air and water to a
savage.
(72.) The cases are frequent, in which half-civil-
ized native governments have prohibited spirits; in
Sydney last year a penalty of £5 was enacted against
all who make natives drunk.
(73.) In South Africa, this system has been par-
tially begun.
(74.) By the 4 Geo. IV. c. 97, reports of colonial
sentences are ordered to be transmitted home; that
they have been useless, inasmuch as they halt in the
Secretary of States’ office.
(75.) Captain M'Konochio has drawn an ingenious
plan for enrolling natives into a police corps.
(76.) The desire of many to come to England is
unquestionable. Without care they will return vitiated,
(77.) Census of population.—The increase or de-
crease of their numbers would be an excellent test of
the justice, qr,in : ustico of the administrations from
time to time,’' ,
(78.) It is not intended to propose gaols for the
black people exclusively. Nothing is more needed in
New South Wales forexample, than goqdpenitentiaries
for the white criminals also; and both’ may properly
be in the same penitentiary.
(79.) For example, the Prime Minister is the
proper person to address on the great point of estab-
lishing a new adminstration, for the aborigines, inde-
pendent of the Colonial Office; but the Secretary of
State for the Colonies would be properly applied to,
for instance, on the change of, law in the colonial
legislation.
Printed by J. Haddon, Castle Street, Finsbury.
