

REPORT OP DEBATES at meeting of the Advisory Council appointed
by the Commonwealth Government to consider and initiate scien-
tific research in connexion with primary and secondary indus-
tries, held in Cabinet Room, Prime Minister’s Department on 14th
and 15th April, 1916.
The Acting Prime Minister (Senator The Hon.G.F.
Pearce) presided at the opening of the proceedings and
subsequently the chair was occupied by the Vice-President
of the Federal Executive Council (Senator The Hon. A*
Gardiner.)
There were also present -
The Hon. F*W. Hagelthorn, M.L.C., Minister of
Agriculture for Victoria.
The Hon. W. Lennon, M.L.A., Secretary for
Agriculture and Stock, Queensland.
The Hon. C. Goode, M.H.A., Commissioner of
Crown Lands and Minister of Agriculture,
South Australia.
Mr. G. Vrlder, Under Secretary and Director
for Agriculture, Hew South Wales (repre-
senting the Minister for Agriculture,
Hew South Wales.)
Mr. A.B. Piddington, K.C,
Hon. G. Swinburne,
Mr. W.P. Wilkinson,
Mr. W. T. Appl et on,
Professors C.E. Fawsitt,
A. Gibson,
T.H. Laby,
D. Orme Masson,
B. Watt,
Dr. T.R. Lyle,
Messrs W.H. Butters,
D. Clark,
G.D. Delprat,
J.F. Elliot,
W«R. Grimwade,
P.B. Guthrie,
J.M. Higgins',
F. Leverrier, K.C.
E. Mann.
SENATOR PEARCE. Gentlemen. On behalf of the Common-
wealth Government I thank you for your acceptance
of the positions on the Advisory Council. As you
are aware, the Council is a temporary body, but
the Federal Government believe that it will lead
to the establishment of a permanent body which
will render incalculable services to Australia.
The view taken is that you will proceed immediately
to take steps to initiate research work in the
most pressing directions, and I think those who
were at the previous conference will know what
are the most important matters to be included in it.
it/


It has been laid down also that you will seek to utilise
the existing available resources. Each of the States has
pursued to some extent research and inquiries into various
questions, and the data, they have collected will be avail-
able for us, and of the things towards which you will
naturally first turn 3 r attention one of the most import-
ant is to ascertain what data is available, so that there
shall be no overlapping. We do not wish you to waste your
time upon inquiries that have already been carried to a
certain stage of development. Then again there are certain
bodies in the Commonwealth that have facilities for invest-
igation and scientific research, and we assume that you
will take full advantage of the resources of those bodies,
and utilise them as much as you possibly can in pursuance
or your investigations• There is in the Commonwealth in
various places a mass of statistics that you will need to
deal with, and it will require some time and effort to co-
ordinate that information and make it available first of
al! for your purposes and subsequently for the industries
of the Commonwealth. To ascertain the resources, sectional
committees will be required, and one of your early duties
will be to decide upon these, and to select the best men
to be given a requisite task.
j. question that you will be asked to consider
is that.oi the selection of. an. Executive and with vour
permission F should t iust like to make a few" remarks about
that Executive* The Government believe the Executive will
form a very important part of the Council, and, whilst your
Committees will be pursuing their work of investigation
and research, it will be the executive that will have to
co-ordinate their labors and link up the activities of the
various committees. Now because of the vast spaces in Aust-
ralia, this Council must necessarily be very largely grouped
in Melbourne and Sydney so far as its personnel is con -
cerned. The Government feel -we believe toe that you
share this view* - that the more distant States have just
|?s great an interest in your labors as have the States of
victoria and New South Wales, and in some respects the
Commonwealth has more to look forward to in the distant
nearer and more populated States. Next I would
submit to you that in selecting this Executive you should
pay some regard to State representation. I know it is not
always easy to reconcile State representation with a work-
ing body - a body that can be readily brought together and
perform the most important work that this Executive must
do- but giving that full weight and consideration, I would
ask you as far os possible in the formation of your Exec-
utive to consider this aspect so that the various States
will feel that in the heart of this body they have some
persons who will see that the various questions that come
up from time to time, which particularly affect them, will
receive every consideration.
One of the subjects in view in the formation of
the Bureau is the dissemination amongst those engaged in
the industry or industries of the scientific information
collected. During this war in the Department over which
X have the honor to preside - the Department of Defence -
we have been forced to make inquiries on subjects which
were widely foieign to the ordinary work of the Defence
Department, We ha.ve had the good fortune to have the
services/


services of scientific gentlemen who have been of incalculable
value in assisting us to do things which we otherwise could
et possibly have done with the ordinary departmental staff.
It has brought home to my mind the fact that there is a lot
oi^ latent talent in Australia which could develop our indus-
tries and remove from the path many obstacles. If that has
Deen demonstrated in the haphazard and accidental way in which
l/ 0 0 \ghce Department has had to grapple with those Questions
q _ much more must it be when a body like this proceeds to
iCcxi with a problem in a scientific way,
, . . ow » one of the practical Questions which will come
you l n J^ e initial stage will be that of staff and accom-
iiOaation. I think this meeting this afternoon has proved con-
Sio 1V ? ly that y° u . c annot pursue your deliberations with such
camped accommodation, The Government recognise that you must
*7** a G ? m P G^e nt staff and a competent secretary, and we will
? 0U t 0 ma * e , recommendations as to staff. The view taken by
.y er ? ln respect to the appointment of the staff is
unat it should be done in the ordinary way as in Government
Departments and the same thing applies in regard to the ordin-
ary expenses of the Council.
. Money will be required from time to time to enable
_ 0 T? ri 2 us sectional committees to pursue their Investigations
c~nd the Government, fcave agreed to make £5,000 available for that
purpose which will supplemented from time to time as the Council
finds further funds are required,
.Senator Gardiner, the Vice President of the Exec-
u ive Council, has been nominated by the Government to preside
?y e v h f or(i^ n - r y meetings of your Council. As you know I have
the burden of two busy Departments to bear, therefore I cannot
remain to hear your further discussions. I welcome you to this
meeting; I congratulate you on your appointments; and I thank
you on behalf of the Commonwealth. I wash you every success
y? yo ? r deliberations, and feel confident that the Commonwealth
1 . back to this day as the Inauguration of a period of
scientific order in grappling with the question of production
inat will lead to big results for the future. It is. I believe
tne organisation of Industry and its linking up with science
nere, for the first time on such big lines, that will help us
o learn one of the lessons that our enemies have taught us in
r al !, wa r ~ the benefit of organisation of Industry and linking
up the brains of a nation with the brawm of a nation. I wish
you success,
P - T Pd lV^ -.• Mth regard to the first business of this Congress.
1 suppose it will be necessary to appoint your Executive, I do
not know whether you are ready to undertake the election of the
-executive, but certain officers will be required, and I think
f!7t?\ be - aS well right at the outset, as you are responsible
ior the business, ohat as business men gathered together in a
meeting fully aware that the Government does not desire either
o lead or direct, but to leave you to your own methods of pro-
cedure it will be as well for you to undertake such business
you deem necessary. Then there will come such business
f 2£ eycm a ® the staff. Senator Pearce spoke briefly
on o at point. Of course the Government is responsible to the
people, but as far as personnel is concerned that is a matter
lor you gentlemen to recommend to the Government. Clearly
understand that the Government will use its own discretion but
I t.ank your recommendations will be treated harshly.
All appointments will have to be confirmed by the Government
the C pi S pnt- anS - Of^ h V oO £ lE,s rooney - Ido not know Whether
a nn^infipfni 3 first thing to be done. If someone will put
a mooion before the meeting w:e could get an idea, *
Professor Masson/


PROFESSOR ORME MSSON. With regard to the question of Exec-
utive'. It seems to me it is a little complicated. Senator
Pearce directed our attention to what we must all recognise
as a most important question, the representation of other
States and especially of the more distant parts of Australia.
It is not only desirable but absolutely necessary to enlist
the sympathy and active co-operation of men in all parts of
Australia, particularly these engaged in industrial science
and scientific men in general. On the other hand Senator
Pearce said there might be a little difficulty in providing
an Executive that could meet frequently and give a large
amount of time to the work. As I would like to put in an
Executive that can meet ofte. and without any long notice
being given. The question is this - how are we to combine
these two necessities? If the executive contains represen-
tatives of Brisbane, Perth, and Sydney, the may
only meet at rare intervals and we shall make very little
progress with our work in the course of the next several
months. Now there is another difficulty. I think I am right
in saying that, as appointed, this Council does not contain
a single representative of South Australia except the Min-
ister of Agriculture whom we must not look to give a great
deal of time or attendance. I understand Mr. Porwood, who
was nominated to hold office, is now in America. His name
was put down on the list sent to each of us avowedly as the
representative of a Federal body and not as a South Austral-
ian. It is also unfortunate that the list does not contain
a University representative from that State* Under the head-
ing of Representatives of Universities we have the University
of Sydney with two, the University of Melbourne with two,
and the University of Brisbane with one, and there are three
other Universities without any representative. I think my-
self that even at this late hour the Government might considei
the names of this Council with the view to adding one or two
more. I should like to seeone or Wo more representing the
more distant States including South Australia. There are men
in Perth who would be most valuable on this Council, and I
am sure the Government would have no difficulty in finding
others willing to assist. If we had their services I think
it would reconcile the necessities we have spoken about.
Thy should there not be a Committee formed in each of the
States? In Brisbane we have Professor Gibson; why should he
not form a fully representative body there? The same could be
done in Sydney. They could all be in direct touch with the
Central Executive here. The best way would be to make the
Chairman of each of the State Committees a member of the Exec-
utive on the understanding that he should attend when he could
but in the event erf his inability to be present, there should
be a sufficient number here to carry on the work. Each Chair-
man ex officio would be a member of the Executive Committee
when he chose to come. It seems to me that some arrangement
of kind would give you the machinery that would link up
the Central Executive with the States, and at the same time"
I cause us t 0 wait until notice had been sent to
Perth that there was going to be a meeting. Something of
no.s kind is necessary if we are to get into touch with the
manufacturers, industrialists and scientists throughout Aust-
S tn f,. obher haad if we are goinf to carry on here,
rn A « cannot meet without the representatives
a vorf usTTboT 1 d ° not think we shall be a


HON. EE XENNON. I am somewhat loth to speak at such a disting-
ulshed gathering as we have here, but as a representative
of Queensland I think I should say something in regard to
the remarks that have fallen from Senator Pearce and Prof-
essor Orme Masson, Senator Pearce suggested the necessity
for what I would call State representation on the Committee.
I think that is very desirable for many reasons, but I
strongly believe that what is required is capacity and
efficiency. At the same time Ido not depreciate th'- value
of State representation, because here as a representative
of Queensland I might say that many things of great import-
ance in our State are not regarded as of much consequence
in Victoria. The last occasion on which I was here I
referred to the item Cane Grub Pest, which results in a loss
of £50,000 a year in our State. I do not see this referred
to on the Agenda paper. The method suggested by Professor
Crme Masson seems to meet the case to some extent, but while
the Chairman of the local committee would bring under notice
matters of State concern. I fear he would rarely attend
meetings of the Executive. I desire an opportunity of dis-
cussing this question with my own Government, While I admit
that State representation is a very desirable thing still I
think we should not make that a condition, to the exclusion
of capacity and efficiency.
HON. C. GOODE. I endorse what Professor Masson has said in
regard to State representation in regard to special matters
of scientific investigation that particularly affect the
Industries of any particular State. I -am of opinion that
a Sub-Committee should be formed in each State that will
devote special attention to particular questions In that
State. With a representative of the State Committee on the
Central Executive you will get the co-ordination of opinion
that is necessary. Of course there are many questions of
national concern that affect the States eoually and these I
take it would come directly under the control of the Central
Executive. Scientific investigation In connexion with sub-
jects which affect the interests of the different States
should be carried out by the State Committees to enable them
to pursue the right line. Already different States have
specialised in various directions. I do not want to boost
South Australia unnecessarily, but I think in agriculture
South Australia has been in advance of the other States, I
believe that that the methods of farmers who have settled in
South Australia are very carefully watched. I may say that
we have special facilities in South Australia for pursuing
agricultural investigations and carrying out experimental
work. Through the generosity of one of our leading citizens
in South Australia, who I suppose is well known to many of
you, a large estate has been set aside near the Adelaide
Post Office for the establishment of an Agricultural High
School. With the establishment of that High School we will
conduct experiments in regard to the development of agric-
ulture. That is how one State can experiment in a particular
line. It would save time if the Executive could set aside
a different class of work for each State which otherwise
might overlap. If separate States were pursuing the same
lines and making similar experiments> it would be only adding
expense and giving nothing more practical than what could be
carried out in a single experiment in one State. I there-
fore largely support the view which Professor Masson express*
when he suggests that each State should have its own local
committee, with the Chairman of that Committee on the Exec-
utive Committee. I agree with Mr. lennon that we want the
best men to be on the Executive, and I think that each State
should select a man who is a specialist who could act as
Chairman of the State Committee and also attend meetings of
the Executive. I might sat that in South Australia Mr* W,A.
Hargreaves, the Government Analyst has conducted numerous
experiments and shown in many directions how we can assist
industrlesjto get greater profits than they are able to do at
present/


present by pursuing their usual methods. As one "brief illus-
tration he has demonstrated to the Railway Department that
out of Pintsch Gas he could make £l,OOO worth of Petrol saved
out of the by-products alone. He Is pursuing other valuable
investigations which no doubt will result in the same prac -
tical manner. I support the idea that we sho'uld have
Committees with the Chairman as representative dn the Executive
MR. E. A. MAUN. I am sorry that the Minister for Agriculture
Western Australia has been unable to attend, and, therefore I
have to appear as the sole representative of that State. That
makes it necessary for me to say what he would probably other-
wise have said on his own account with regard to State repres-
entation -on this Executive, I fully appreciate the difficul-
ties which Processor Orme Masson has mentioned and agree with
him that there are many men available In the States whose
services would be Valuable. I regret personally very much in-
deed that there are other eminent men in Western Australia who
are not here today. That we have no representative of our
University is I think a great loss to the State, Professor
Orme Masson's suggestion is in my opinion a good one. The
duties and the powers of the Committee have not been laid down
in the report but I take It the sectional committees would
partake of a local nature and would represent the industries
of the individual States. I entirely agree with what Professor
Orme Masson says in regard to the formation of committees in
different States. I believe they should be linked in some way
with the Central Executive but I think that that linking up
should be a closer one than he indicated. I am of opinion that
it Is necessary even to extend the size of the Committee in
order to obtain on the Committee the best men available. I thin
if possible some direct representation should be given to the
different States. If Professor Orme Masson's suggestion, which
I heartily endorse, is adopted, that some additions should be
made as far as the representation of the different States is
concerned, I think some of the objections will be removed, I
stand here as the sole representative of Western Australia. I
consider there are abler scientists than I in Western Austral!■
and if it is thought that one of them should be elected, some
means should be found far them to attend. I think we should
have direct representation on the Central Executive. I will
make a statement that Mr. Johnston would have made had he been
here- that the Government of Western Australia is so impressed
with the importance of this work and recognise so strongly the
necessity for State representation in the State interests that
they have specially instructed me, as far as possible to try
and get such representation, and that to overcome the diffic-
ulty which has already been mentioned with regard to the rep-
resentative of the State not being available at all times, I
believe the Government of Western Australia is willing, if a
representative is selected, to make it possible for him to
attend in Melbourne practically all his time. That would re-
move the difficulty that has been mentioned.
MR. A.B. PIDDIHGTOE, I think it would be better to deal with the
matters seriatim. We must consider the functions which will
be discharged by the Executive Committe and Advisory Council
respectively. The Advisory Council, requires statistical in-
formation as to equipment and staff for the solution of prob-
lems. Information as to existing means and the stage they
have reached must be preliminary to research. I think it
would be a good thing if Professor Orme Masson's suggestion as
to Increasing the number of members of this adding
others for the States that at present are not represented or
imperfectly represented, were adopted. The Sub-Committee -


of this Council could then he arranged not entirely but at
any rate in part upon State lines. These Sub-Committees -
these sectional committees, whatever you like to call th em -
would in their respective States do the work of the Institute
which is the gathering together of the information - the
census taking* Then will become I t kc It each State repre-
sentation on the Executive Committee a minor matter because
the information as to what State wants, can do and is doing,
can all be got by the local Sub-Commit tees. There is no chance
of the interests of the States being overlooked as far as the
Executive Committee Is concerned. So ftr from increasing the
number of the Executive I am inclined to think that three is
quite enough. These are to be men who can spare most of their
time for the work, and they should receive fees. I am of
opinion that an Executive Committal' of three at present is
quite sufficient to carry on the work from here for some con-
siderable time to come, while this Domesday Book of the indus-
trial science resources of Australia is being compiled. That
is the suggestion I should make - an Advisory Council to have
sub-commit tees in each of the States.
l.'-MFES SOR GIBSOH. To some extent I am in the same position as -Mr. Mann,
although luckily I have the Queensland Minister for Agriculture
here to support me. The difficulties raised In connexion with
the selection of the Executive can I think best be looked at
from the point of view of the way in which we must get to work - .
We know that each of the States has problems which primarily
concern the Individual State. They also have problems that
concern two or three States collectively. Some of them have
problems which are Bed oral in their scope. Consequently it
seems to me that in setting up machinery for the work of this
institution we have to provide first of all for the States
gathering in their difficulties, then such States as have
similar difficulties could be grouped and finally matters
brought to a definite body which could sift them and which has
the power of saying whether they are of sufficient importance
to justify the Federal authorities spending the money. The
States then I think have a duty to this Institute in maintain-
' ing such research work as they have in hand at present. They
ought not to imagine because we have a Federal Institute of
Science and Industry that that is enough. It seems to me all
the more important that the State research work should receive
consideration by the State, They want to know naturally how
their State is standing. They want to see that their partic-
ular problems are getting, to put it plainly, a fair deal. We
are faced with the question that the mei on this Council have
great responsibilities and cannot afford to leave their work,
not only on account of financial but for other reasons, for
any length of time. Conseouently If we want a working Exec-
utive we must obtain men who are free and car* devote a large
amount rf their time to this Institute. Such men may be found
in one /locality, say in Melbourne or in Sydney, but it is
hardly likely that we can find men drawn directly from all
the States who can combine capacity with this amount of free-
dom and who would be able to afford to live say in Melbourne
while this preliminary work is going on. The States might
make provision for that. Personally I should not support
State representation If it meant the sacrifice of the capacity
of the individual appointed. If we refer to Professor Masson’s
suggestion, we can see that the States would be brought very
definitely into touch with the work of the Institute. Perhaps
we can imagine that a man could get away fear a time- say every
six weeks - from his State and by this means keep definitely
in touch with the work that is going on. A State member of
the Executive could be definitely charged with a certain amount
of responsibility with regard to the work In his State. It
could be laid upon him to see that a committee is formed and
that the information required Is obtained. That will not in
all cases be easy to do in the States because most of the men
whom one would select are already very much engaged, but it
should be possible to get a body together who could gather
the/


the Information remit red "by the Executive. I do not feel that
the Individual State Committees, or sectional Committees,
suggested hy Mr. Piddington, would altogether meet the case
“because of the close touch that is reouired between /■ St ate
and the Executive. I suite agree with him it might/ fye possible
to cut the- numbers of the Executive down - that is it might
consist of from three to six, but considering the'amount of time
that most of the people will be able to give work, it
would I think bn better to have a committee of six. I will move
as a distinct motion -
"That an Executive of six be elected from the Advisory
Council and that in addition to that Executive, a member
be appointed in each State charged with the duty of the
formation of a State Committee to carry out such work as
the Executive may desire, and that such member in the State
shall be considered to be a member of the Executive ex
of ficioV
That will bring the matter to a finality.
’:>■ OF ES SQ R MAS SOP. I second the motion. As seconder of the motion I
should like to suggest that a member of the State Committee be
considered a member of the Council. There is this little diff-
iculty that we have not a man to represent South Australia* I
think that difficulty may be overcome and rectified. I would
like to suggest to Professor Gibson that the Chairman of each
State Committee should be selected from this Council and that
he then should be an ex officio member of the Executive.
PROFESSOR GIBSOM. Professor Masson*s motion would make it consist of
twelve members. Mr, Piddington suggested it should be three,
I understahd we are a preliminary body, We have only to do
preliminary work until Parliament meets - the taking of the
censusof personal and apparatus and the collection of data to
facilitate this work is one function. Another thing is to take
a census of the problems which it is desirable to investigate,
and a further function is to establish a bureau of Industrial
scientific information.
7■ ;oFESSOR LA3Y. I think the proposals as to the Executive Committee
'have to be decided on the ground of how they will facilitate
the ? 7 ork we have to do. It is very undesirable to bring in the
question of State representation. It is purely scientific and
Industrial work we have to do, and our object should be to
obtain the men with the greatest capacity for that work. It is
the question of capacity that we have to consider. The main
object is to have trained representatives who are capable of
accomplishing the work that has been given to us to do. It seems
to me that the Executive should be a small body that can act
quickly. If the number is confined to six or seven as proposed
by the Government it would not be possible for the members of
the Executive to be chosen for their capacity and State repre-
sentation to be taken into account at the same time. The questicn
of State representation can be tested by seeing what it can
help us to do. The people most capable of doing the work are
chosen from this Council and put on the Executive. The facilit-
ies for research can be ascertained^!thout State representation.
Then as regards the industrial side we have the means of getting
the information we require, i think it is a pity to have too
large a body, or bring State rights into this question,
IMR. J.H. BUTTERS. I am in much the same position as Professor Gibson
and Mr. Mann, in regard to Tasmania. I heartily endorse what
has been said, I think it Is the best proposition rais Qd to meet
the situation. When Mr. Hughes’ proposal was first made, some
of us in Tasmania discussed the matter, In order to get some-
thing done I called a small meeting over there at which members
of the University and Chamber of Commerce met in my office. As
the outcome of that we had a meeting for the carrying of the
?/ork /


work of this Institution, T ’ T e were not well informed ns to what
was happening. I certainly formed the opinion that something
was about to even lair te and that the State Interests would he
guaranteed and that the Chairman of the local committee would
he placed on the Central Committee when established. I think
the Executive of this Institution should have a sufficient
number of representatives in Melbourne or within easy reach of
Melbourne to be able to carry on the business. That is met by
the original six, he must not lose sight of State represent-
ation by which State troubles alone can be made known. State
troubles should be brought forcibly before the Executive and
the proposals should be well put before the Central Institution.
I think that can only be done by a representative from the State
concerned. Presumably he would be the best representative from
the local State, otherwise he would not have been nominated,
and he should be able to put the views of the local Committee
before the Central Institution, Therfo-re I have great pleasure
in supporting Professor Crme Masson*s motion,
SEF ATOP CAR PI FER . The motion is - "That an Executive of six be elected
from' the Advisory Council and that in addition to that Exec-
utive a member be appointed from each State”, (I take it this
is the Chairman of the Committee you intend to appoint in each
State. )
MH» BETTERS, I understand that this committee would actually
appoint.
IROFESSOH ORME MASSOF. I think the suggestion is that this Council
should appoint a committee of its own in each State and that
the Chairman of that Committee should be a member of this
Council and become ex officio a member of the Executive,
MR. PIDRIFGTOF, The members of the local committee will need to be
made members of this Council.
MRo W.T. AP~TETOF, I do not follow Mr. Piddington when he says that
tliey should be members of this Council. The State Committee
may be entirely distinct from members of this Council. Undoubt-
edly the Chairman of that Committee should be a member of our
Council. I agree with Professor Gibson that the Chairman
should be a member ex officio of the Executive. I quite
sure how far the Government have adopted the views which we
put forward in our report, but it may be found that later on
when we get to work and the work of the Institute requires
high class officers, that our original suer ; estions wall be
agreed to by the Government. In the meantime all we have got
to do is to have a temporary working body. I agree that this
Council should form an Executive. I go still further and say
that we should form in the States sub-committees with one of
our own representatives as Chairman or we should ask them to
form these committees. If these committees find a man rep-
resenting those States here who cannot act as Chairman someone
else could be appointed and we could ask the Government to put
that man on our Council. I think what we want to do is to make
a move to get into working order. One other suggestion I had
in mind was this. In connection with State Munition Forks and
State Far Council work, the Governments of the States have
afforded those bodies accommodation and clerical assistance.
Consequently I believe that the State Governments^ would afford
our Government clerical assistance and accommodation for these
sub-comma ttees. I have much pleasure in supporting Professor
Masson*s motion.
EOF, W, lEFFOF. It is necessary that the Chairman of the local
Committee be ex officio on the Executive, I think the Govern-
ments should h e agreed in the matter of the personnel of these
respective committees. If Professor Gibson could not be a
member of the Central Executive he might accept a position on
the Queensland Committee. In other States which are not rep-
resented, this committee may be at a disadvantage In selecting
a Committee. For instance Queensland has not been represented
to/


ext ? nt b y Professor Gibson. There may be many
thp G^rrin^ C men in Q^© 0 nsland• I do not think we should leave
tne appointment of these Committees, in cases where thev have
no representative here on the Advisory Connell, to the resnect-
fnntGfh Br >^i? tS ° f *s® States themselves. They will have to
loot the bill very ofeen in regard to travelling expenses.
. That is my view. We appoint our six and also appoint
o^^ ln but the Executive and that representative
should consult with the Federal Government, and
Federal Government with the State Governments, if desired as
v , e personnel of the State Committee. The Executive should
count° Son icatlons only - State representation not to
jjkJgjß*. Six is too many. Three would be enough, at any rate
for the preliminary work.
MLi,.?« DELPRAT. I support the proposal to have an Executive of three.
ML*-SLLIDT. have three members of the Executive those
ave their time, I fyou want three
of the best men in Australia your £5,000 will not go very far
to pay their salaries. On the other hand if you have six men
they will be able to give up portion of their time. If you * i
have a Chairman from each State on the Suh-Gomraittee here they
will come into touch. We cannot come into touch with the rep-
resentatives working in the States unless those members can
come over here. The whole twelve would not attend meetings. I
think you might have six or seven and surely they could get
through the work,
liR. FIDBINGTON. I suggest -
(a) ’’That an Executive Committee of three be
appointed.
(b ) That the Government be a,sked to appoint
additional members of this Council, so as to
permit of Sub-Committees of this Council being
formed in each State.”
The Government have suggested to us the position In
which it has put the sub-committees, I think that what lam
now suggesting will fairly carry out the Government’s intention
in that respect. It will add a feature that is generally desir-
able, that there should be a body in each State to assist.the
Council in gathering local information and so forth and advis-
ing as to local production.
With regard to the other suggestion that there should
he a big committee of six with another six to be added, the
weak point of the argument advanced is in saying that the other
six will not be there; that is, apart from the meetings of the
main Council these Chairmen of Sub-Committees in the different
States would never be in Melbourne sufficiently often to be
carrying on the day to day work. The Committee have to work
almost day by day. The Government ask that such men shall be
able to give roost or almost all their time, I think that three
men should be appointed and then all the problems of local
representation could be solved by having enough members on this
Council for us select at this Council members who would have
a right, and to attend.
MR. BUTTERS.
I would laike to be clear on one point, I should like
to know would that committee have to deal with and then send
on the information coming from the sub-committee or would it
be supplied to the Council and handed over to the Executive to
he officialy dealt with?
SENATOR GARDINER. I think the Executive will be responsible for the
whole business. If sub-committees send in their requests, as
far as the Executive Committee is concerned, I think it is the
same as the Executive of the Government. The responsibility
of the work will fall upon it. The motion is -
-V-
-”That/


"That a Central Executive Gommi ttee of not more than
six be appointed by this Council".
I realise the advantages of small executives, and I also
realise that particularly with men as busy as yourselves,wher«
you have your "Executive small you will have no Executive meet-
ings. I think if you keep close to the six all the work can
be done. Personally, as your Chairman, I have no objection.
You should be careful in deciding on the number. A casualty
will.probably throw you out of working. We have Western Aust-
ralia whose Government offers to place a member at our disposal
Tasmania is not so rich. Then there are South Australia and
Queensland to consider. In coming to a decision I would like
you to deal with the different matters separately. First there
is a proposal of not more than six. Then we have Mr, Piddlng-
ton v s proposal of not more than three.
HR . PISPI 11 GTOF. lam willing with your consent to alter my amendment
~to read.
"That an Executive Committee of six be appointed of
whom three shall form a quorum".
POP. F.W, HAG EL THORP. Mr, President:- May I take it the Council con-
sists of quite a number of people. We here represent the
Council from day to day. nT e may meet from time to time. We
propose to hand over the Executive working of this Bureau to
a certain number of gentlemen. Mow these gentlemen are going
to do the actual work. They do the Executive work on behalf
of the whole Council. They must meet continuously and they
must be paid well to get the right class of man. What class
of men are you going to get 9 Are you going to get a scien-
tific or a business man 9 If you are going to get a scientific
man - take our friend the Professor for Few South Wales.
Personally, I do not think we need three to do the work -
probably one If he is the right class of man, Instead of three.
I take It we 7/ant something like the Inter-State Commission
with ability to organise. The scientist cannot be allowed to
use his time to do the whole thing. He must be doing his work
in his actual sphere; he is a chemist doing research work all
along the line. If we are goingto appoint three men to do the
Executive work unless the remuneration is fixed and they are
going to give their whole time, it would be unsatisfactory
to do the whole thing. I would take some time to think of
appointing them. If., these men are going to come down here
and do the work from time to time then I think we are going
to have the work done badly. These men must meet from day to
day, putting up their problems from each part of the State,
Unless we do that I think we might be pretty slow in getting
any result,
ajF. 0. GOODE. It is my Idea that the Central Committee would
actually direct what work should be carried out in different
directions by men who had special qualifications for doing It,
It has been said we want to get the best men available on the
Central Executive. That may be granted, but in what direction
is it to be chosen? There are so many good men in different
branches of investigation. If you are going to take the best
of each particular line what Is required Is a small Central
Council. It seems to me that it may be achieved If we have a
Federal Executive to direct work of a Federal or national
concern. Where matters are of special State interest they
would direct State Committees for a particular State. If a
State had particular facilities for carrying out work of a
national concern, they would cause all those special facilities
to be delegate! to a particular scientist to carry out invest-
igations along the line in which he specialises. If the works
w T ere so carried out in Western Australia, Queensland or any
other State, the results could be forwarded in a report to the
Central Executive, and there made available for general inform-
ation, What are required are three or four men who can give
up practically all their time to organisation, and you want
men capable of organising. There you have the whole thing.
They/


They must he chosen from that point of view, and we are
limited by the choice of men who can give up their time to
it. I agree with you that you must get the best men in
particular professions, but you want three men who can under-
take to specialise the different sides of the work they have
to carry out. The Federal Council should co-ordinate the
work carried out vtether In Federal laboratories or in the
State institutions, already existing.
Ma. PIDDIjIGTOF . When I speak of the Committee doing the work,
I do not mean that it will displace this Council, which
should, I suppose, meet every six weeks or so. I mean that
it should work under this Council and the determination of
the researches would he surely arrived at hy this Council on
information and report from the Executive.
PPCFESSOR FAWSITT The plan of separating the proposals into three
sections would be a good one. We are all agreed on the point
that there should be local Committees Whether all the members
should be on the Council or not is another matter. I do not
think they should. Firstly ©r-net-is-ane they-mat tea? then
there should be local committees. In the second place, there
must be some increased representation on the Council from the
other States, The third suggestion is that the Executive
Committee is really doing war work and it is important that
members of the Executive should give up all their time to it.
This is an emergency measure and it is extremely Important
that members should give up all their time to it, I would
support the proposal that not more then six he appointed to
the Executive and that if possible each State be permitted
to have the opportunity of nominating one member. There may
he jealousy if all the States are not represented,
The first section of Mr, Piddington's amendment
was carried.
a 'EM ATO H CAR PI F BR . It does not need any words of mine to show that
the Government want to work with 7/ou in everything. Mr.
Piddington proposed that the Government he asked to appoint
additional members of the Council so as to permit of sub-
committees of this Council being formed in each State. I do
not know whether he desires it to go on immediately or
whether it may be left until a further meeting. What I would
like to he done now i s to have the machinery going hy which
your business will come before you as a Government. We pre-
fer to set the example of putting the business before you
and letting you marshal it out. Regarding the question of
suggesting further appointments to this Council it will be
well to consider whether the State Committees may not be
Committees that will work with the Council without being
members of it. We could surely have called together a huge
Council, hut what we have summoned is sufficient for the
beginning. I would like you to see that the suggestions you
do make are well thought out
L'ROFESSOH GIBSOE. I would like to make quite clear what Is the
real position with regard to the duties of these sub-comm-
ittees, It seems we are a little hazy as to what the work
of the Central Executive will be. In my mind the Executive
will undertake the correlation of the work submitted to it
through the State Committees, and they will decide who are
fit and proper persons to carry out any particular invest-
igations and he responsible for carrying out the wishes of
the Government in regard to the collection of information
as to the resources of the community, and the like. The
State Committees will he charged with the duty of finding
out the resources of the State for submission to the Central
Executive, and also they will ascertain the problems pressing
In each State, by actually approaching manufacturers, pastor-
all sts, agriculturists etc, sc that we get fully into touch
with the people handling problems day by day. I do not think
the Executive can frame these problems. In the framing of
the problems it seems to me we need some means of getting
down/


down to the actual manufactures and actual producer engaged
in these industries, and the function of the State Committees
is to gather the information, find out the problems, and bring
them before the Executive, who will, if necessary, will select
a man to carry out the investigations.
PaPI'ESSOn ORME MAS SOI. I submit that if we are really to get
through our work in an orderly way we must next take the
question as to whether we are to ask the Government to add
additional members to this Council, We must get some other
persons or this Council before we can form a Committee In
South Australia. There is not a single member of this Council,
to represent South Australia, Therefore I think it is imper-
ative if we ..re to consider the idea of forming committees in
the different States that we should first consider whether the
Government should appoint a limited number of additional membeis
to this Council so as to enable us to have machinery at work
in each State. I think if this Council approves of the proposal
then we might ask in the meantime that the Government 7/111
carry out our desire and we may go on to determine ho 7/ we will
establish that machinery in the States. We must first of all
agree to ask the Government to give us the machinery by appoint-
ing one or two additional members. Until we have decided that,
I do not see that we can discuss the question of forming local
Committees,
HQU. C. GOGPU. May I ask that communications have passed between
~THe Governments with regard to representation on-this Council.
It seems to me that you have get to have men who must meet to-
gether frequently and it may be necessary that they will more
or less have to live in one State, or if they have to come
from other States they will have to visit Melbourne 7/here the
Council meets. I think the Executive Committee should be
chosen regardless of State representation, and only because of
the fitness of the men or the ability they possess. That the
State Committee should be based on the general principle and
that they would he able to meet from time to time.
MR v PI I) lIUGTOM. The terms of the second branch of my amendment are-
That the Government be asked to appoint additional
members of this Council so as to permit of sub -
committees of this Council being formed In each State’/
I do not think we are deciding upon that branch of my
amendment here nor/,
SEMAT 0 R GAH DIMER * To get something definite I will put before you -
”That the Chairman of the local committees be ex
officio members of the Executive”.
PR OF ESP OR ORME MS SOU. I know for a fact that if this is done it will
remove a good deal of the discontent that may exist in the
distant parts of Australia. It is for that reason I wish to
support Professor Gibson’s proposal very strongly. If we make
him an ex officio member it will do no harm and it will remove
any feeling which might prevail. I think it will facilitate
things considerably.
EE. IYI E. Take the case of a representative from Western Aust-
ralia. T le might live here, and he would not then be in touch
with what was going on in Western Australia.
PROFESSOR ORME MAS SOU. If a man were an ex officio member he would have
" the feeling all the time that if he had any misgivings on any
point he could come here to the Executive meetings and ascer-
tain for himself. The reason I mentioned this was that Mr. Mann
stated that the Western Australian Government were prepared to
keep the! r reprrs e n t a five ir M 0 ] bourne.
PROFESSOR GIBSOU. He would be one of the six,.
MR. BUTTERS. Might I say that from what I understand the first
six would be selected quite irrespective of their locality, and
the other six Chairmen of the local Committees who could cor-
relate State interests with the interests of the Commonwealth.
Spn ;■ f:r. r anTrln *n or /


-O' l2 gentlemen have decided that the Executive
shall not be more than six. As far as State Committees are
concerned it has been suggested that the Chairm .n of the State
Committees be ex officio members of the Executive.
_ It would not be satisfactory to Western Aust-
ralia to have an ex officio representative.
. With reagrd to State jealousy, personally I do
not think that the States will be jealous providing they have
proper representation on the Advisory Council. What earthly
use is there to put a State Chairman on the Executive Committee
In the case of Western Australia he will rarely come over. He
will endeavour to determine the problems that require solution
in his and the ways .and ,means available for their solu-
tion thergy/" He is £ member of 4he Committee and the
Executivewill be glad, to receive him and consider his propos-
itions.
PROFaSSOW CIB3QH. Perhaps we are all forgetting that the business
is of a temporary nature. What we are putting down is not the
laws of the Medes and Persians at all. When the final organ-
isation of the Institution comes about what we have done we
hope will he for its good. The Director when appointed will
travel all over the Commonwealth, We cannot expect our Exec-
utive to he travelling about the country collecting information
The State Committees can perform a definite useful function no T :
Phether they can be members of the Council or members of the
Executive I do not think matters very much. The fact of having
one representative with the right to a seat on the Executive
Council is to my mind, at any rate, important from the point
of sebtiment. He may not be always there but the fact he can
be there is a feeling of satisfaction to the State. If I may
come down to personal matters; supposing I were to be appointed
Chairman or representative of Queensland. I could make it con-
venient to get away occasionally for two or three weeks. The
State certainly would not be prepared to pay my personal expen-
ses for me to remain down here to sit as one of the twelve
that might be acting on this Executive. It will only be an
Executive of twelve when all the State Chairmen are able to be
present. Surely it will be a great thing if they get those.
These ex officio members cannot be administrative people. They
will be too far away. The administrative work must be done by
those who are living in Melbourne.
SENATOR IAHDIIIER. I will put the motion now that the Chairman of
each State Committee shall be ex officio a member of the Exec-
utive Committee.
(Motion carried).
The second part of Mr. Piddington’s amendment
was carried.
I have here in the Prime Minister’s memorandum
before me a clause relating to the staff of the Council. It
would not be out of place at this stage to deal with the staff
you think you will require. You might also consider what else
is necessary. Shall I put it before you now, or is there any
other matter that you can suggest.
a.-: BUT TEH 3 . I suggest that the State Governments should be
asked to appoint representatives from those Universities which
are not represented on the Council. That the Commonwealth
Government should ask the Universities not on the Council to
nominate representatives. I consider it would be to the benefit
of the scientific interest if they are able to appear on the
Council and make their suggestions there.
Professor Crm-e Masson/


PROFESSOR ORME MA SSOU, Ae you know the Government appointed each of us
on TTs own responsibility and I do not think the Government
should he asked to share that responsibility with the Univers-
ity at all. I think that the Government should be asked in
appointing these additional members of the Council to give due
consideration to the Universities which are not at present
represented here. That would leave It in the hands of the
Government to say whether they chose to appoint ce man from the
South Austral lan University and if so what man* We could
simply call attention to the fact that there are three Univers-
ities which have no representatives. That in making appoint-
ments the Government should be asked to take into consideration
these three Universities.
SENATOR G ARBITER. As far as the increase in your members is con-
cerned, no matter how you increase them there will be quite a
number of very able men left out. What I ask as a member of
the Government is that you get this into working order with
the object of getting the preliminary work going as soon as
possible. I shall represent you and your views before the
Government. Perhaps if we elect the Executive now many matters
which are matters of detail could be sent on later. I shall
be glad to receive nominations from the Executive.
Preferential voting was resorted to, and the
following were elected members of the Executive:-
Professors Masson and Watt, Ur. Lyle, and Messrs
Piddington, E.A. Mann, and G.U. Belprat,
(The meeting was adjourned until 10 o'clock on
the 15th April, 1916.)
SATURDAY, 15th APRIL, 1916.
STATOR GAR PI IT EH ♦ As this is an adjourned meeting, we have not an>
minutes ready for you but you have before you the record of the
business transacted yesterday. I have here on the business
sheet'that the matter of the staff and salaries be ref erred to
the Executive”. If that is taken as the first business, I trust
you will consider it carefully.
PROFESSOR FAWSITT. I would suggest that representations be made to
the Commonwealth Government for the increase of representatives
of certain States on the Advisory Council to consist of two
additional members from South and Western Australia, and one
additional member from the States of Queensland and Tasmania.
MR. GRXMWAUE* I think we should leave the matter of staff for
the consideration of the Executive Committee.
SENATOR G ARBITER. I have a notice of motion by Professor Laby -
That an Education Sub-Committee be appointed to
(a) report on what supply of men posssssing a
scientific training will be available to carry
out the original investigation and form the junioi
staff of the Commonwealth Institute of Science
and Industry, and if the supply is found to be in-
' adequate to the probable needs of the Institute
to report on what steps should be taken to ensure
that it will be adequate; (b) to report on what
supply of scientifically trained craftsmen is
available to on such industries as the act-
ivities of the Institute bring into existence,
and (c) to frame the details of a system of Indus-
trial Research Fellowships to be held at the Uni-
versities and Technical Colleges r . T


Also one by Professor Pawsitt which reads -
11 That the local sub-committee in each State
consist of the State representatives on the
Advisory Council, together with any co-opted
members whose assistance is desired. The co-
opted members of the local State Committees
shall not be members of the Advisory Council”.
DR. LYLE. I move -
"That all questions relating to the staff be
referred to the Executive Committee".
PROFESSOR GIBSQF. I will second that.
SWA TOR CAR PI PER. The question now arises, will the Executive recommend
direct to the Government or the Council. I suggest that it be
direct to the Government. (This was agreed to).
PROFESSOR GIFSOP. looking at the resolution as put down on the business
sheet I do not think it is quite in the form in which it was
put before the meeting. The resolution I originally moved yes-
terday was -
"That the Chairman of the State Committee should
be charged with the duty", so as to definitely
fix the responsibility on him or on to some
person.
PROFESSOR PRICE MAS SPIT, This is not a correct record of the motion as
carried. Professor Gibson* s motion was to the effect that the
Chairman of each State Committee should be appointed and given
the duty of forming a local committee. It is rather important
that that should be put on record because there is a distinct
duty cast on the Chairman, which Is not recorded by the meeting.
MR. PI DPI FG T OF. If I remember rightly Professor Gibson moved in those
terms, 'but that motion was not put to the meeting. The resol-
ution agreed to was that which has been circulated amongst the
members.
3EFA T 0 R CARD 1F ER. You have the resolution before you.
PROFESSOR QRME MSSON. 1 think, Mr . Chairman, Mr. Riddington 1 s
memory w r as in fault.
* lON F. W, HAG EL THORP . They said yesterday he was infallible in
memory and everything else.
PR OF ESSOR QRME MASSOP. Professor Gibson is correctly reported in to-
day's paper. I think we will all agree that the Chairman of
each sub-committee has power to call a meeting.
PROF S 3 SOR FAT SI TT. The members of the State Committee should be
called together by the Chairman of the State Committee.
HQ F« F. W , HA GEL THORP . It seems to me that we are likely to have a
weakness in regard to State local committees unless we recognise
the State Governments more than we are at present doing. I do
not wish to throw any parochial view tn the question, but we
cannot overlook the fact that State Governments control education
from the Primary to the University, I am afraid we have got to
give the State Governments more direct and controlling interest
in It.
DR. LYLE. We have really a Stpte Committee here.
Hon. F, Hag el thorn/


P±A..,* HAGSLTHORF, This is the difficulty I see - suppose the
Premier of the State took an interest in the matter. The
Premier of the State would he in an inferior position in every
respect compared with our sub-committee. Is that advisable,
PROFESSOR PA.SITT. There is no suggestion of inferiority simply
because the co-opted members have no seat on the Advisory
Council.
f* W * HAG EL THORN. I do not suppose it would have that effect,
It has that appearance apparently. It seems to me there may be
some difficulty.
P-pGPESSOH OHME MASSON. But is not each State represented by the
Minister of Agriculture? Can it be said that we are excluding
the State Premiers?
HOF. .1 . LEFFOF, So far as I understand Professor Pawsitf's
question I think this will meet the case. In selecting the
State Committees in each of the States I think it will be very
unwise to leave It in the hands of the Advisory Council or the
Executive.
MPI . PI BP I FIT ON. Should there not be a specified number as to
the local committees - the number to be appointed by the Govern-
ment and the number to be q 'nominated by the State? Both
Governments would then have the advantage of having the number
of appointments laid down. There are admirable people avail-
able who would like to serve. I think a specified number would
be desirable.
MP., BIT 1 TEHS. I rather take the opposite view, I think it
would be undesirable to limit the membership of the State sub-
committees because each State is given a different set of
interests or troubles. I think it is most desirable that add-
itional members should be able to be co-opted from time to time
as development goes on.
POF. C. S7IFBUPFE, I think the Executive should have some say
as to the appointments in the States and the most suitable men
to carry out the work, We do not want to have any political
appointments.
nOF« ?, W. HAG EL THORN. The Commonwealth Government have control.
They hold the purse.
HOF. G. SWIFBFREE. What is to be the moving force - the Exec-
utive of the Committees? If the Executive, the Executive should
have a say in the appointment of the State Committees. I do not
think the State Governments should worry about .appointments on
the Committee. I think the Executive should have some control
over the appointments. Each member here has stated that he has
so much to do that he cannot take any part in it. We want to
keep in view what Professor Baby said yesterday - the means and
objects we have for getting together all the best and most
talented men to obtain the desired results. The Council will
in addition to the State Committees, have the power, I presume
of initiating inquiries into certain subjects. I know on one
occasion a Chemist was required for a Poods Board, The finest
Chemist in Australia was proposed by the Minister but a pharma-
ceutical chemist who opposed him was appointed.
PROFESSOR ORME MASS OF. perhaps it would meet Mr. Swinburne T s views
if the co-opted members names should be submitted for confirm-
ation to this Council, It seems to me that that would be a
function of this Council rather than of the Executive Committee
- to approve of the nomination of outside members to the State
Committees. It would perhaps be a little more dignified on the
appointment of outside members if they felt that they received
their appointment on local nomination approved of by this Coun-
cil as a whole. I think it should be properly speaking a
function/


function of this Council rather than of the Executive in making
these appointments. With regard to the suggestion that we limit
the numbers, I think it would be better to increase them, and I
agree with Mr. Butters. The primary object of the existence of
this Council is to bring together all the available men and
material we have in Australia in order to attain the end we
have in view - the correlation of science with industry. Our
aim should be rather to widen the body than to limit it. Some-
one may say Mr* So and So is eminently interested in science
and industry, but we cannot admit him. I think we want all the
men we can get. I consider we should widen the Bureau rather
than narrow it.
MR * RIBBIRGTOM, After hearing what Mr. Butters has said I go
’Sack on the suggestion with regard to absolute limitation, but
I think if I move "That the number of the Government nominees
be limited" that would be to the convenience of the Governments
themselves. The number of associate members might still remain
large. As to the suggestion that the Advisory Council should
'exercise some sort of supervision and have a veto over suggest-
ions that are made by the Governments in regard to appointments
I do not think that would work. I do not think it would be a
Pleasant function for them. The Advisory Council would have to
be called together to confirm these appointments before the >
State sub-committee could get together. We want to start things
from this meeting so that this Advisory Council not be
called together unless there Is something substantial to deal
wi th,
DR. LYLE. There is one point here which is apparently
being overlooked. The State Committees are not to actually
conduct the research. The committees are to control the work -
not themselves do the work - and the question will arise whether
a small body in a Stats is not better than a large one. I do
not think we should put every scientist in Australia on invest-
igation work, or allow different States to carry out the same
i nves t i gatio ns.
ii Oh, G. SWI ME UR ME. That would clog the work.
DR. LYLE. What we want on the State Committees are people
of experience who can direct the work in their own States, and
whv * would he aVie'to put their, fingers on the right men to cariy
out the work located in that State. It would involve a small
committee of experienced men.
-10 IT. C. GOODE. I am in accord with the views of the last speaks:
I think it would be preferable to have a small committee carry-
ing out the work in each State and we would have a man to do th.
special work. If In the wisdom of the Executive Commitnee they
decide that this particular man shall carry out special invest-
igations or undertake some particular scientific work, it will
be then for the Central Executive to endorse the recommendation
sent on,' and see that he is provided with the neces°ary appar-
atus or funds to carry out the necessary work. I do think
that it would be desirable to bring together a number of
scientific men in each State. I see a difficulty, which is
that when you get each Committee you. cannot suit the conven-
iences of the different members in calling a meeting. My idea
is that the State Committees should he limited to a committee
of five. Might I be permitted to suggest that I do see some
little difficulty in making the Chairman of each State Committee
a member ex officio of the Executive. I am pointing out that
so that we may be able to retrace our steps in that direction.
It may be that he may be appointed, and may find it inconven-
ient to attend. If it is possible for a member to appoint a
delegate it may be all right. If it were permitted that each
State Committee could from time to time nominate a delegate to
attend the Central Executive I think it would be a more satis-
factory arrangement. I throw this out as a suggestion. I con-
slderit would be desirable for the State to be able to do this.


1 ■&?/ be permitted at this stage to say that it is somewhat
unfortunate that South Australia is not represented on the
Committee here, on the Advisory Council, it is only by
accident that Mr* Norwood, who is now away from South Australia
became a member of this Council at all. It was simply because
he was Chairman of the Chamber of Manufactures that he was
appointed. It is very undesirable simply to take from some
body the existing Chairman, who may or may not be the best man
available. Now as he has gone away we are practically without
a representative at all. I understood from the Government of
South Australia that Professor Rennie had been nominated as a
member of this Council. I know it is also felt in South
Australia that Processor Perkins and Mr. Hargreaves should in
some way be affiliated with this work. If we have State
Committees I think it should be left to the State to make the
appointments. I consider Professor Perkins, Professor Rennie,
and Mr. Hargreaves should receive consideration.
MR. HIGGINS. In ordinary business matters I think it is best
"to have a few men only to control affairs. I think the previous
speakers have overlooked the fact that the work of the Committee
is rather administrative. We cannot start investigation work
at once. We must first collect the data. The work will be
carried out by specialists. If there are none in Australia
we must get them from Europe or America.
HON. C. GOODE. You want an organising Committee.
MR. HIGGINS. Yes, that is what we are here today for ~
really to start the work. If there are individuals in the
State the State Committee can appoint a sub-committee to em-
brace these individuals.
HON. F.W. HAGEI THORN. We cannot engage them without a fee.
MR. HIGGINS. I think we will find that many men will be only
too willing and happy to co-operate with us. I would propose
that on the State Committee the number be limited to five -
2 Government nominees and three (3) appointed by the Exsoutive
of this Institute. Those five would'be quite enough for a
wording body.
...I'ABY. I would like to second professor Pawsitt 1 s
motion. I might point out that the two motions before the
meeting are inconsistent,
MR. DEIPRAT« I would like to second Mr. Higgins 1 motion.
The work done is in inverse ratio to the number of members I
think three would be quite sufficient, but as Mr. Higgins has
moved that a Committee of five be formed I will second that.
P ROFE 3 SOR GIBS ON. I think we are rather inclined to forget the
kind of work we have to do - the initiatory work. In this con-
nection I might refer to the report of the Committee under the
heading of immediate arrangements” which sajrs -
"The Committee realises that not all the above
subjects can be examined to the point of final
results during the interval before the Institute
gets to work. The Committee, however, suggests
that in tcany, if not all, of the above matters,
most valuable work could be done in collecting
data, end in effect making a preliminary census
both as to present discoveries, and the staff
and apparatus available in Australia.”
That together with the second paragraph of th'
letter from the Acting Prime Minister appointing peO|)le to thi;
Council shows what work we have to tackle for the present. It
is a question of getting together a Committee of a few eminent
scientific men and business men in the State to act as a
business/


business body desirous of getting into touch with the different
interests that are likely to be affected by the operations of
the Institute, finding out what we have and forwarding that to
the Executive so that they know what the circumstances are.
The State Committees would sift the evidence.
BUT, F.' 7 . HAGEL THORN. It is necessary to have some man of
scientific attainments.
PROFESSOR CIBSOU. I like a small Committee for doing work,
I think we shall have some difficulty in finding men who have
time to do a great deal of work. If we can devote one man’s
time to doing a particular thing we shall make progress. I
should not object to a committee of 'as many as 10 for our -
purpose. It appears to me that we want to cast out of our
minds the idea that the committees will do research work, We
want to get the data to enable the research work to be done.
PROFESSOR FAWSITT, In answer to the objection raised I should
“ like to say that certain individuals in some States are a lit-
tle aggrieved that they were not appointed to the Council,
and if they can join the local Committee that will help to
appease them. We want in war time to have everything going
as smoothly as possible. It is necessary to have the full co-
operation of the State Governments in this work,
SENATOR GARDINER, I have the motion and the amendment
before me. I will take this opportunity of making a little
explanation before placing matters before you. We. first of
all agreed -
’’That an Executive Committee of not more than
six be appointed”, After discussion the words
"three to form a quorum” were ad^ed.
We decided secondly -
"That the Government be asked to appoint addit-
ional members of this Council ao as to permit
of sub-committees of this Council being formed
in each State".
Thirdly we resolved -
"That the Chairman of each State Committee shall
be ex officio a member of the Executive Committee I .’
That, as I read it, was decided on by
this gathering yesterday afternoon.
Professor Fawsitt has moved -
"That the local Sub-committee in each State con-
sist of State representatives on the Advisory
Council together with any other associate mem-
bers appointed by the State Governments. These
associate members of the State Committees shall
not be members of the Advisory Council. The
members of the State Committee shall be called
together by its Chairman."
It has been moved by Mr. Higgins and
seconded by Mr. Delprat -
"That on the State Committee the number be limit-
ed to five, two Government nominees and three
appointed b]/ the Executive of this Institute ex-
clusive of ex officio members,"
PROFESSOR GIPSON, If we make our committee in Queensland
too small for the work we have to cover nothing will be done.
DR. IYIE. Ton might trust each State Government
to appoint a Committee of their own. assume that they
will have common sense to see how the business can be best
carried on. It may be better that this body should not put
down hard and fast rules for their appointment of additional
members of the State committee.
Professor Orme Masson/


jEOFES SOR DIiME MAS S ON. I have heard Mr. Higgins * view supported
by Mr. Dclprat. There is however something to which Mr.Delprat
may not be accustomed. A word used by Professor Gibson suggests
an idea. He used the word "missionaxy work"• I do not know
whether It Is so much in Mr. Del prat T s line. I think we must
open our arras rather broadly, and trust them to appoint a small
Executive for practical purposes.
-.lk. HIGGINS. I am quite willing to withdraw ray amend-
ment and adopt Dr Iyle T s suggestion.
SHIAT OR GAH DIF EH, I will put Professor Pawsitt's suggestion
to the Committee. As a member of the Government I think the
nomination of the State representatives should be forwarded
here and then go to the Government. Iwant to have one channel
of communication between here and the Government - that is this
Council. This Council will then put them properly before the
Government. I make this statement now believing It is what the
Government desire,
HOP. F. W . HAG EL THORN. The Federal Government creates the Council.
It is now largely superseded by the work of this Council, The
difiiculty I see is this. The Federal Government creates the
Council, the Council creates the Executive. The second creator
writes to State Governments and asks them to do certain things.
I am not a stickler for State etiquette at all, but I think the
Federal Government should send the invitations. I think the
Federal Government should notify the State Governments to do
what they desire them to do,
. PIDDIFGTOF. The Federal Government should invite the
State Governments to nominate additional members,
3 BIT ATOR GAP DI FEE. I think the matter is quite clear even In
this motion. My idea is this institution having been called
into existence will conduct the business. Therefore the State
Governments will he invited to send their nominations to It,
The Government is not pledging itself to accept or confirm any
nominations. D’hat I want to make clear is that in recommend-
ations for appointment to committees controlled by the Council,
I think we should have a knowledge of what they and their
Intentions' are. My own idea is that the Council having been
brought shall control the business. I do not
anticipate the prospect of the Executive or the Government
turning your recommendations down,
HOF, 3. GOODE, I might say I rather take the view that
Mr. Hagelthorn does in respect to this matter. I think the
idea he has in mind is that we do not want communications
coming from different sources. It should only come through
one avenue. Those recommendations should come direct from
Government to Government, It is the ordinary procedure as
between the State and Commonwealth. The communications will
come from the State body to the Executive and from the Exrc-
utive to the Government. I do not think it is a proper proceed-
ing for a State Government to have to make its recommendations
to an organisation such as this Council, and that Council send
it on to the Federal Government, I think they should go
straight from one Government to another,
H 0 F. F. r ' T . HAGEL T H OFF. I suggest, Mr. Chairman, your proposition
may do infinitely worse. Take the Premier of the State; he
nominates them. Some may be approved by the Council and others
turned down. Do you think a Premier is going to be humiliated
in that way? I know I would not. It is true the Executive
here may he ou.lte right in turning down an unsuitable person -
that is to say, a better man may have been chosen. The position
of a Government is such that some dignity has to be observed
in connection with it, I cannot see how we are going to get
men in this way.
Hon, W. lennon/


is
HQ^ f » W. lEM PIT. Your desire* to restrict the correspondence
so far as the Government is concerned. If we resort to a
method of __ submitting the names to the Executive of this
Council, It implies that that Executive would have the power
of veto. If not why is it' in operation? Recommendations
should certainly go from State Government to Federal Govern-
ment. Once the State Committees are appointed future corres-
pondence should he sent from the Committee to the Executive.
The only body that would have a right to veto is the Federal
Government . The Executive has no knowledge of the men sub-
mitted* They might desire to put someone on who understands
mangrove. They might want to add a metallurgist from a place
like Mount Morgan, of a man who understands molasses that can
be used for petrol which might displace alcohol.
HON, F.W. HAGELTHORN. Why not give the State Governments the
privilege of appointing two?
NR. IYIE, These members that aie recommended are
Advisory members of the State* You must draw the line some-
where. A Manager of a big firm like Broken Hill Mr*
Delprat, does not know everybody employed in Broken Hill.
There are a certain number of his employees he knows about.
He cannot follow right down to the lowest man. You ought to
trust the States to appoint advisory members 'who are not •:
members of this body. There is a line you must draw which is
not derogatory to any Government but after that the States
should have full power to carry out their share of business
themselves.
MR. PIPHINGTON. I do not myself quite realise the suscepti-
bilities that seem to be in danger of violation here* The
members of the local committee will he spending Federal
Government money and will be mem embers of the Institute. They
will have certain functions connected with the Institute. In
the last resource surely the Government that finds the money
and the Government whose institute it is ought to have some
knowledge, and, if necessary, some say with regard to who are
to carry out the functions which it inaugurates and pays for.
I think the simplest thing is for the Federal Government to
invite the Sta,te Governments to nominate the associate members,
I think the Executive might be left out altogether. I think
it is necessary that the Federal Government should have the
right to make the actual appointments upon the nomination of
the State Governments and that th*y will do so. There does
seem a necessity for persons who are to serve the Federal
Government being appointed by them.
PROF El?OR QRME MASBON. I was of opinion that we ha d appointed a
Chairman of each State Committee, If that were done, there
would be no susceptibilities hurt. There is no interference
with the State* I think the State Committees and associate
members should be selected by a member of the Council aspro-
posed in Professor Gibson 1 s motion. If the Committee and
the associate members were appointed by this Council there
would be nothing undignified in submitting their names to the
Federal Government for approval. Say we appoint Professor
Gibson to form a State Committee .in Queensland. If he has
the sense that I am sure he has, he will not do so without
consulting the members of the State Government who all would
have a proper interest in the matter, but the moment you ask
the State Governments to make a nomination you go too far,
HON, F.W. HAGELTHORN. I take it that this Council has to undertake
the work on behalf of the nation. I think the State Govern-
ments, up to the present time, have stood loyally. Are you
going to brush them aside and say "We don’t want you".
According to the explanation by the President and the state-
ment by Professor Masson we are going to ignore them. The
suggestion id that one of the Professors should go to the
Premier and say "I invite you to appoint somebody" * who may
/
o e/


be paid by the State. Do a lot of help from the States
Have we not a number of professional men engaged in State
Departments and whose offices could be obtained from the State.
The Commonwealth Government are finding money. I think w§ are
going to have a good result. But, after all, the State Govern-
ments are going to find services wotth a deal of money. I
think the State Governments should have absolute control of
the appointments of all or some of the members, and not even
the Commonwealth Government should attempt to veto such appoint
ments.
MR. BUTTERS. I take it * *. that all State sub-committee appoint
ments should be made by the State Governments. The State sub-
committees should not necessarily be appointed by the Federal
Government at all, or be necessarily part of the Institution
except indirectly through the Chairman. Ido not think there
is any necessity for the State representatives to be appointed
by the Federal Government,
PROFESSOR LABY. These people are to be on the nomination
of the State Government , We have a number of things to do.
We could vote on the question, but I do not think it matters
which way the vote goes. If the State nominates them we get
more State support.
MR. PIDDINGTQN, With respect to appointment by the Commonwealth,
I think it is more technical way, I cannot see any humilirtlun
to the State Governments, any more than the present appearance
of three members (Ministers of Agriculture) who have been
appointed by the Governor-General by Government Go.zette to this
Council. I cannot see that the State Governments would be
ignored or passed over. As to the constitutional position,
we realise all the appointments would be made on the none nation
of the State Governments. It is not a question of overriding
or vetoing or turning them down. It would never be done.
HPIT. F.W. HAGELTHORN. Do not overlook the fact that we are passing out
of existence as a Council for all practical purposes. Y{e will
have a hazy idea of things. Wc will be in touch with the
Federal Government, Ido not think wc will be called together
again. The position of a Minister of Agriculture is not of
importance or consequence. The State Committee will, I hope
endeavour to find problems and keep in active and close
touch with this Committee.
SENATOR GARDINER. I think the motion as submitted will meet Mr._
Hagclthorn*s wishes, I desire to see the Institute removed
from the hands of the Federal Government and the State Govern-
ments and from the boundaries of States, and made a scientific
institution. I want to say that the Federal Government are in
all things prepared to treat the States with the greatest con-
sideration and respect.
"That the local sub-committee in each State consist of
State representatives on the Advisory Council together
with any other associate members on the nom-
ination of the State Government. The associate members
of the State-Committees shall not bo members of the
Advisory Council. The members of the State Commit.ec
shall be called together by its Chairman."
HON. C. GOODE. There is one point - the motion as it strictly
reads will limit representation from South Australia. If it
is interpreted strictly in letter I think it will.
MR* GRIMWADE. I think it should bo called a State Committee.
PROFEO I OR GIBSON. I would call it a Section - not a Committee
PRWFEO.3OR FAWSITT, It should be called a State Committee,
Professor Orme Ifc sson.


PROFESSOR OHME MASSOP. Provision has been made for additional members
to be appointed by the Commonwealth Government; may I then
throw out a suggestion that we should empower the members who
are members of this Council - members who are there by right
as members of this Council - to make nominations for appoint-
ment to the State Committees - to co-opt from outside without
depriving the State Government of the right to nominate.
HOP. F»W. HAG PL THORP. As a matter of fact the State Governments will
~ come to you and say to you and one or two of your Professors
"?/horo shall we appoint,”
PROFESSOR ORME MASSOP, I think there will be difficulties and I
should like to see that members of the State Committee who
have a right to It should not be deprived. The State Govern-
ment would have the right of nomination also>.
3EPAffOR GAHDIPER, It will now read -
"That the Committee in each State cinsist
of the State representatives on the
Advisory Council together with any other
associate members appointed on the nomin-
ation of the State Government, These
associate members of the State Committees
shall not be members of the Advisory Coun-
cil. The members of the State Committee
shall he called together by its Chairman."
(Carri ed)
FIR. PI DPI PG m OP. There should he additional members to meet the
case of South Australia, Western Australia, Queensland md
Tasmania. Re passed a motion that the Government should -.•
appoint additional members of this Council. Another point is
that if they are not appointed, how oan you appoint them for
that Committee? You have not got the nucleus for the States.
3EP ATOR GAR PIPER, Professor Fawsltt moves -
"That a recommendation he made to the
Commonwealth Government that the Increased
representation of certain States on the
Advisory Council consist of two additional
members from South Australia and Western
Australia and one additional member from
each of the States of Queensland and Tas-
mania."
PROFESSOR GIBSOP. X think it would be as well to make two more
from Queensland also. At present the States are very limited.
With regard to the appointment of Ohalrram, this is confined
to myself. There should be a wider field of choice open,
HOP. C. GOO BE. The difficulty in South Australia Is this -
that some of the men pre-eminently suited to act as members
of the Committee are Government officials. It would be
impossible for them to attend, but I understand that our State
Government ha* mu ended a Pro fe" 'or of the to be
a member of this Council. It certainly Is felt In South Aus-
tralia that some additions to th« Council should b e made from
that State, Mr, ls there merely by accident as bains'
the Chairman of the Chamber of Manufactures.
RRQI a: Would It not be Well to have thre~ men on the
Council - not less than three altogether. I will move
"That the Federal Government be asked to
make such extra appointments to this Coun-
cil a* to ensure that no State shall have
less than three members on the Council in
addition to the ex officio members."
Professor Gibson/


PROFESSOR GIBSON'. I will second that.
3ENATO R GAHDINER♦ I have now a motion and a amendment. On the
question of enlarging your Executive last night you decided
by 12 to 10. I think it is a large order to..extend your Exec-
utive to begin with, 'i
MPv. I EVER RISE. The real object is to enable us to appoint from
our own body members in each State. As regards South Australia
for instance'!t is obvious that it is impossible for us to appoint
a local committee consisting-of our own members because there
are no South Australian members. If the Federal Government
appointed or nominated South Australian representative on the
existing Council the Chairman who ever he waa would be an ex
officio member of the Executive. Whot we desire is that members
of this body should be on every local committee.
SENATOR GAR DIRER. The motion is that -
”A recommendation be made to the Commonwealth
Government that the Increased representation
of certain States on the Advisory Council
consist of two additional members from
South Australia and Western Australia, and
one additional member from each of the States
of Queensland and Tasmania’.’
which has been moved -
’’That the Federal Government be asked to make
such additional appointments to this Council
as will ensure that no State shall have less
than three representatives on the Council in
addition to the ex officio members."
(The amendment was carried)
PROFESSOR LABY. ' I submit -
’’That an Education sub-committee be appointed
fa) to report on what supply of men possessing a
scientific training will be available to carry-
out the original investigation and from the
junior staff of the Commonwealth Institute of
Science and Industry and if the supply is foui
to be inadequate to the probable needs of the
Institute to report on what steps should be
taken to ensure that it will be adequate’.’
Our main work i s to establish an Institute to care
out scientific investigations into various problems. We are, I
think, in the position of a staff of an army arranging to operate
without an army. I know there are scientifically trained men in
the Universities, the scientific officers of the Government
Departments, and the experts of certain industrial firms in Aust-
ralia, but I think all those men are fully employed, and if ad-
ditional investigations are to be made, additional men will have
to be found to make them. How it is contemplated by this scheme,
if it receives the confirmation of Parliament, that certain
national laboratories will be established. We shall have a
Rational Physical Laboratory where standardizing work will be
don*.3 for all Australia, Thar particular activity has been
one of the first undertaken in all other countries when starting
as we are. In Germany they have the huge Physikalisch Technis-
ohen Reich sans tatt, I managed to look over h&lf of it in'aday.
In America they have the Bureau of Standards and In England also
there is the National Physical Laboratory which has been pre-
eminent in a crop 7 ane work. 1 think it is necessary for us to
have suchal ‘b~ rat ry among other laboratories which this 1 -
Institute w-wild set up; I believe it was Mr. Hughes 7 idea in
instituting this scheme to mitigate by means of it some of the
effects of the war. He was very definite and clear on the sub-
ject that if this Institute was to be established successfully
it must be established before the war ends. That means that steps
should be taken immediately by us to see that a staff for the


the Institute will be available. It would be impossible to
find in Australia a staff necessary for a National Physical
Laboratory, Sufficient men cannot be found capable of teach-
ing Physics In the schools and Universities. A man cannot be
for that work under at least four years. Either we
will wait four years for a National Physical Laboratory or
import the staff fer it. Such importations are not always
successful. For a man who' would be likely to be a successful
Import would be tbo much In demand In his own country, because
England and the Dominions arc starting schemes similarly to ours
and they will try to retain capable men , There will be requir-
ed for a junior staff more men than are available. If there
is a deficiency of men, it could bo rectified without great cast
to the Institute by sending suitable men to the Universities
to trained in a course by this Committee or the:
Council itself. If the men chosen did not do successful work
at the Universities they could be discontinued at any stage of
their training. Theit is another thing which I think should be
initiated in Australia. That is the study of experimental bi-
ology. I had a letter recently from Dr. Davenport of the Car-
negie Institute who said he considered there was great scope
for experimental evolution in Australia.
The second part of my motion Is -
"The Education Sub-Committee should report on
what supply of scientifically trained crafts
men is available to carry on such industries
as the activities of the Institute bring in-
to existence."
The third part is -
"To frame the details of a system of indus-
trial research Fellowships to be held at the
k Universities and Technical Colleges."
I think a number of the members of this Council
are familiar with the industrial Fellowships which v/ere founded
by Professor Duncan in one of the Universities of the United
States. I have here a report, "An experiment in Industrial
Research ” which is educational pamphlet No. 30 of the British
Government. It has been kindly lent to me by Professor Osborne.
This pamphlet sets out a scheme established in America in that
respect. I think you are familiar with the general idea of the
scheme. If an Industry has a problem which it has to investigate
the matter can be investigated by an Industrial Fellow. Suppose
a baker has difficulty with his baking. The baker goes to the
University and says "I am prepared to pay £2,000 for the solution
of this problem". A contract is entered into between the head
of the firm which is having the problem investigated and tne
Department __which carries on the Industrial A suit-
able man Is appointed by the University to carry out
ation in question. I think the industries in America favor it.
They know that their financial loss is limited by the sum they
actually The University secures for the man a salary to
carry on the investigation. If you examine in this report you
will find that the investigations which are enumerated here have
been successful from the pounds shillings and pence point of •-
view. You will see how* much each investigation cost. In
another part It shows how much wpd" 1 -paidjhy:.,th4ilndustry to the
R'search Fellow in die form of a bonus on the profits arising from
his work. Some paid bonuses O'f 255, some 10$. In one case
£1930 was paid for the investigation and a further £4,000 was
paid in bonuses. If you test it on every page you will find
the same thing true. The bonuses paid exceed the cost of the
investigations and the bonuses arc based on the actual profits
arising from the investigation. I suggest that we have a
committee to report on those three aspects of our work and sug-
gest as members of the committee - Mr. Piddington, Mr. Swin-
burne, Mr. Clark, and Mr. Guthrie, and the Professors who arc
mcmb ers/


members of this body. I shall be glad If there arc an?/ other
members who are prepared to assist, to join the Committee. I
would move that they be a committee to report on these three
questions.
MH. I second the resolution.
PHOFESPOH GIBIOH. The matter brought before us by Professor
laby is of very great Importance, but I think it is a matter
that should be referred to our Executive who could co-opt
members from the Council, If desired, to look into this"work.
The questions raised affect our educational system, and there-
fore the States are dirrctly interested. I think it is one of
the questions that will be referred to the State Committees by
the Executive. They could find out how the States stand in
regard to it. It is part of the census taking functions of
this Institute.
PHOFES°OR OHMS MASSON. I think that is so. Ho one can gainsay the
extreme importance of the questions, but it seems that these
constitute a large portion of the work of this Institute ahead
of us. If you take away these functions from the Executive
Committee has been appointed and from the State Committees
you will take away from them the lion's share of the work for
which they were appointed - work which, by implication, has
been put upon them. Then you take away these functions there
is not much left for the Executive and the State Committees to
do. It seems to me double banking and complicating the mach-
inery. I should rather like to see the Cpuncil give a special
instruction to the Executive to pay attention - full attention-
to the educational aspects of the work, and the Executive
would then make a special point of consultingthe State Committ-
ees on these questions. In regard to matters affecting local
bodies, viz, Universities and State Laboratories and Technical
Schools, these should he dealt with by the State Committees
and the Executive fully Informed through those committees. Ue
have or should have our communications with the States through
the State Committees. It sc r ms to me this motion if carried
would be practicallyan instruction to the Executive and State
Committees not to touch these questions. It would be better
to give the Executive Committee to understand that full attent-
ion is to he paid to the questions and then the Executive and
State Committees could make the necessary investigation*
PEOFESSOE lABY. I believe we have more work than the Executive
Committee can do efficiently in the time available. The motion
is in accordance with the Government's letter to members of
this Council. That letter suggests the sub-committees he
appointed by the Advisory Council consisting of those members
of the Council who are able to devote any substantial amount of
their time to the work. I might say about the State Committee
that it is utterly impossible to remit questions to them.
They would send in different reports. The questions must be
remitted to one committee. There is no doubt the assistance
of the State Committees would he required. The main reporting
must be the work of one committee and the question now raise!
is whether it is the work of the Executive*Oommittee or a
special committee. If we proceeded on the lines that all the
work has to he done by the Executive Committee alone the service
of members whose assistance we desire to have e.g. Mr. Swinburne
who was unwilling to he elected to the Executive, would not be
available.
As to the junior staff they would he the young-
er men who are to staff the Institute when established. The
Committees will find out the facilities existing for the invest-
igation of particular problems. The Executive Committee will
he the body to bring business to the Council in an orderly
manner and with a settled policy. The Council, will agree with
or alter it. The State Committees will not he constituted for
purely educational work,
' ■ Hon. F. T ‘ r . Hag el thorn/


HON . F, U. EAGELTHORN. I think we are all agreed.to the very great
importance of the matter referred to, I do not think we car
relieve the Executive of any responsibility. lip does not
necessarily overburden them, I move as an amendment that this
matter be referred to the Executive Committee.
HR. IYLE. I second that. A short report could be ob-
tained by the Executive and submitted to the Council. That
is the work of the Executive.
PROFESSOR lABY. I should like the Committee to report to the
Executive Committee sc that the report with other matters
could come to the Advisory Council.
SENATOR GARDINER. I think you have all heard the motion - The
amendment is -
"That this matter be referred to the
Executive Committee.”
(Carried)
HON, F.U. EAGELTHORN. M«y I refer to a matter. Although this Council
has been appointed by the Federal Government the idea origin-
ated with the Melbourne University, and it has in turn been
adopted by the Imperial Government. An Imperial Commission
or Committee or Council has been instituted for similar pur-
poses. In the United Kingdom great emphasis has been laid
on the fact that its work was to be a matter common to the
British Islands. We thought it might be made an Brpire matter
That Commission is already in existence, and in one or two
directions which I need not refer to they are taking up one
or two problems which Australia is interested in. I am laying
this before the Council for the purpose of showing them the
possibility and expediency of this Council being linked up
with that Imperial Council, if they think it is desirable and
necessary. I move -
” Tli a t the Executive Committee take into
consideration the possibility and exped-
iency of this Council being affiliated
with or linked up with that Imperial
Council,”
the
MR, BUTTERS. It seems to me that at present time we are
trying to run before we can walk. We have only just been
callei together and the whole matter is new to most of us,
I would like to suggest that we consider purely and simply
the machinery to carry on this business, then ask the Exec-
utive Committee to prepare a plan of campaign, and then we
should adjourn for such a period as the Executive Committee
considers desirable. The Executive Committee would come to
us with a definite plan of campaign which w;e could discuss
fully.
MR. MANN. I support this idea with very great pleasure.
We are felling our way to some extent, and no doubt when the
Executive has got into working order, and such work as Pro-
fessor Laby washes to do comes along, we can do it. The
motion is a little premature and I think the best thing we
can do is to leave it to the Executive at present.
MR. lEVERRIER. Before the meeting is adjourned it serins to
me that it is desirable to know; whether this body should
appoint a Chairman or whether that should be left to the
State Committees or local bodies themselves. I think the
matter might be dealt with. I would suggest it be left to
the Executive Committee. I consider we have elected a body
in which we have full confidence. The Chairman, I understand,
must be a member of this body.
Hon. U. Lennon/


~~ —ii_iS|l~.' I rise merely for the purpose of opposing the
oU t .f X think the appointment of a G- Irman in any
State shoulcl be left to the Committee.
. Do you think it necessary to discuss the
vitli a view to coming to any decision? I think the
Government would appoint a Chairman whoever the St, te
Co.arman of their Committee especially as they are
B '! f , th | Advisory Council. I think the Chairman would
dp a, member of this Connell.
° 7* Mjr 1 HOHI\. In most of the States the appointment is
oi I to The point I want to put is this. I think the
Y , ou f expenses of the respective committees,
th-t? der that tne res i° ective States would be willing to do
r - —-' . 4 bbab be done I think it is important that
>Ji°nld be pointed out that the Chairman of the State Com-
mittee ought to b e one of the members of the State Committee
18 R ™' e ™ b ? r this Council♦ The State Committee will in-
ml d L C +” o S ted . rne?rjbers who are not members of this Council.
:r 0 £te Gom aittee or Government might be asked to nominate
the Chairman. I u would be difficult if one of the Chairmen
Happened to be an associate member of the State Committee and
not a member of this Council.
BUxiSp. f think there was a suggestion made just now
. J 4 ‘/j •dington that this Council should make a recommendation
+.T additional members of this Council to form part of
the State Committee.
ggOFSSSO? QRMB msSOE» I think We must leave that in the hands of
the Federal Government!
------- . - __ P would be better to leave it to negotiations
between the Federal and State Governments. I think if you leave
i . to the States you will find that the Governments will appoint
a most excellent man.
will expect them to advise the Federal
Government in regard to the appointments, if made, in this
matter, and we will act in this way,
ai:JiTBS. To crystallize what Mr. leverrier has said
I move -
"That the Chairmen of the different State
Committees shall be selected from the
Advi sory Council."
FP.OFB3SCR ORME MASSOF. I will second .that.
MS iJiMI \ . If the next thing is the motion for the ad-
journment might I say that it would be of immense advantage to
to the Committee if any member would submit to them any suggestion?
plans or anything else they have in mind.
PEOFBSSQR ORME MASSON. Such suggestions to be in writing,
S ATO R G ARDIF FR. The motion is -
"That the Chairman of each State Committee
shall be selected from the members of the
Advisory Council as enlarged. 11
HOii. LEM OLi. That is still ambiguous, I think the general
feeling was expressed in favor of the State Committee selecting
its Chairman. I move - s
11 That the State Committee shall select its
Chairman but he shall be a member of the
Advisory Council* 11


PROFESSOR ORME MASSOT. The Committee has first to come into -existence
and have a meeting to appoint its Chairman. According to my
way of looking at it, It would he better if the Chairman were
established before it was formed.
EOF, E♦ w. HAGEL'THQRN. The State Government is to be asked to nom-
inate members. They may also be asked to nominate a Chairman,
provided that he shall already be a member of the Advisory
Council.
PR. LYLE. I would suggest
n That tie local State Committee shall select
as its Chairman one of its members on the
Central Council as enlarged.”
PROFESSOR GIBSOT. If the Government selects two or three extra
nominees required on this Council, it could, at the same time,
select one of those to be Chairman on the Council.
S ERA ED R GAR PI PER. 17 e want the State Councils to give the Chairman
PROFESSOR ORME MISSOF, My proposal is that they shall make their
selection of a Chairman before the Committee 4s appointed. I
think Professor Lyle's motion meets the case.
SEF OSR PI HER. Professor Xyle's motion reads -
"That the local State Committee shall select
as its Chairman one of its members on the
Central Council as enlarged."
PROFES ORME MASSON. when is the Council likely to meet again? It
is our business to report as to the proposed lines of procedure.
Hould tie Council like to give the Executive instructions on
that point?
MR * lEVERRIER. I would move it be left to the Council. r ’e
cannot at this stage, propose any time. If we fix a date it
might turn out t l ~at they had not their proposals complete. I
think we should trust the Executive to bring the matter on as
soon as possible. I move accordingly that the next meeting
of this body should take place when the Executive Committee
have notified that their report is ready for submission, say
within six weeks or such shorter time as will enable the Ex-
ecutive to prepare their report.
MR. MATH. I mov e -
"That the Executive be Instructed to prepare
a full report on proposed organisation
and future procedure, and to call together
a meeting of the Advisory Council to receiv
this report when ready - within two months.
SEH A TOR G. iR PI IT ER. I hope they will meet within -a month.
PROFESTOR ORME MASSON. I presume that the Executive Committee will
circulate the report when calling the meeting, so that members
will have an opportunity of considering It.
SET w-OR CARPI FIR. You have heard the motion. The question
before the Committee is the adjournment.
HOT, G. SHIHBURHE. I suggest that the minutes of the last two
days oe circulated amongst the members.
Council adjourned at 12.15 p.rn.
