

REPORT
FROM THE
SELECT COMMITTEE
ON
TRANSPORTATION.


REPORT
FROM THE
SELECT COMMITTEE
ON
TRANSPORTATION.
Ordered, by The House of Commons, to be printed,
10 July 1812.


THE REPORT - - - - - , ■ . pp; 3 to 14,
APPENDIX.'; Viz.- - .
No. I.—Minutes of Evidence - - - - - pp. 17 to 81,
No. a, &c.—Various Accounts and Papers - - - pp. Sa^&c.


REPORT.
The COMMITTEE appointed to inquire into the manner in
which Sentences of Transportation are executed, and the
Effects which have been produced by that mode of Punishment;
and who were empowered to report their Observations, and the
Minutes of Evidence taken before therii, to The House;
Have agreed upon the following REPORT,
THE principal Settlement, on the .eastern coaSt of New South Wales,
was formed in 1788, It is situated in latitude 33 south, longitude 170
east.- The most considerable district, ,is that of Sydney, containing, by
the return dated the Ist of March ,1810, 6,158 inhabitants. Paramatta
contains 1,807; Hawkesbury, 2,389 ; and Newcastle, 100. Of the total
number-10*454, 5,313 are men, 2,220 women, and 2,721 children. Of
these, from I to 4 are convicts ; but the returns of their number have been
so irregular, that Your Committee have not been able precisely to as-
certain it. But they hope that this neglect will be corrected by the
orders lately sent out from this.country. The troops are about IjlOO in
number; and the remainder are , free persons. In addition to these, are
the settlements of port Dalrymple and Hobart’s Town, in Van Diemen’s
Land, about 5 degrees to the south of Sydney; containing 1,321 inha-
bitants; and at the date of the last returns, 177 persons were living in
Norfolk Island, but orders have been since sent out for its total aban-
donment. - The settlement in New South Wales, is bounded on the north
west and south by a ridge of hills, known by the namieof the Blue Mountains,
beyond which, no one has yet been able to penetrate the country;-some
have , with difficulty been as far as 100 miles in the interior ; but beyond
60 miles, it appears to be no where practicable for agricultural purposes ;
andj in many places, the diameter of the habitable country is much less :,
in length, it extends from port Stephens to port Jervis, comprising from
north to south about 4 degrees; beyond these, it is stated, that the
colony will not be capable of extension; and of the land within these
boundaries, about one half is said to be absolutely barren. The ground
actually in cultivation, amounts to rather more than. 21,000 acres, and_
74,000 acres are held in pasture. The stock appears to be considerable ;
by the return in 1810, the amount was,—horses, 521 ; mares, 593 ; bulls, ,
1-93; cows, 6,351 ; oxen, 4,732 ; sheep, 33,818 ; goats, 1,732 ; hogs,
8*992. Of these, a small proportion is kept by Government; of which,
part is killed for the supply of the public store, and the remainder is
made use of to stock the farms of new settlers. It appears from the
Evidence, that the colony has for some" years, except when the crops
have failed, from inundations or other accidental causes, been able wholly
to supply itself with corn; but that it is still necessary to continue, to a
certain extent, the importation of salted provisions. The soihand climate
;are described to be extremely fine, healthy, and -productive; diseases,
is ■with
Appx. No. 2.
A PPx- p. 33-
Appx. No. 6.
Appx. No. 3.
Appx. ,p. 65.
Appx. No. 4 & 5


with the exception of such' as arise from intemperance or accident, am
little known; and fresh fruits and vegetables are produced from the be-
ginning to the end of the year. The river Hawkesbury is however
occasionally subject .to violent , and ejudden floods, which have in some
instances totally destroyed the produce of the farms in its vicinity, upon
which the colony principally depends for its subsistence. Great diffi-
culties have in consequence at times occurred ; and though precautions
are now taken to remove the crops as soon as possible from the low
grounds in the neighbourhood of the river, no perfect security is yet
obtained against the recurrence of these disasters. The out-settlements of
port Dalrymple and Hobart’s Town in Van Diemen’s Land, are represented
as enjoying a purer climate and more generally productive soil than
New South Wales, and to be otherwise prosperous and thriving. Yet
Your Committee must‘concur ip the opinion'already expressed by His
-Majesty’s Government* that more benefit to die colony will be derived
from the cultivation and improvement of the settlements that are already
formed, than from the formation of new and distant establishments,
whatever may be the encouragement that a fertile soil or an advantageous
situation may appear to hold out.
The Currency of the colony consists principally of Government paper and
copper money, but frpm its scarcity, many of the transactions which in
other countries would be accomplished by money, are here carried on by
barter; thus the labourer is hot paid in money but in kind :he demands
from His employer such articles as He is most in needrof, and they are dew
livened to him at the prices which they hear in the market. At times
indeed wheat and cattle have in the Courts of Justice been considered as
legal tender in payment of debts. To remedy these inconvenienqies, a Sup-
ply of .silver coin, to the amount of £. 10,000, has lately been sent to the
colony ; but whilst the necessity of large importations continues, with the
restraints upon exportation, it is not likely that this coin will long re-
main therein circulation.. The exportations from the colony have hitherto
■ principally consisted’ of oil, seal-skins, coals and wool; the Fisheries appear
to have been much neglected; and the. iron ore, of which there is abundance,
apd of very fine quality, has. not yet been worked. The trade in skins and
•Coals 'is the most thriving, but is. much straightened by the restrictions in
favour of the Last India Company. t The. stock of sheep is not yet suf-
ficiently large to make wool an. article of large exportation. The culture
of hemp has been less attended to than might have been expected; a. pro-
fitable trade in sandal wood has at times, been, though illegally, carried on
with the South Sea Islands and China-;, \Voollen Manufactories, Potteries,
arid Breweries have been established, but not with any great success. The
commercial regulations of the. Colony have in many instances been so. im-
politic as much to discourage mercantile speculation ; for many years a-
maximum price was imposed, by the Governor upon all imported merchan-;
dize; and at this price, often too low to afford a fair, profit to the trader,
the whole cargo was. distributed amongst the Civil and Military Officers
-of the Settlement, who alone had. liberty to purchase ; and. articles! of the
first necessity were afterwards retailed by them, at an enormous profit, to the
poorer settlers. Part of these abuses, were corrected, in the year 1800; but,
in the traffic of spirituous liquors, they continued ton very late period,and
it is therefore with the greatest satisfaction .that Your Committee have learnt
that measures have been enforced, as well by the Government here as-in
the Colony, to put an end to these practices. It is stated in a dispatch' from
Governor Macquarie, dated April 30th, 1810, that every eare will be taken
to prevent the Officers of the 73d Regiment nowin New. South Wales, from
resortipg


resorting to any-low or unmilitary occupations, either mercantile or agricul-
tural, for additional means of support; and he justly adds, that such pursuits
and avocations are subversive of all Military disciplinej and incompatible
with the rank and character of Officers in His Majesty's Service. And it is
to be hoped that means will also have been devised to restrain the Civil
Officers from making, as has been too often the case, the authority of their
stations the means of promoting their own mercenary views. It will be for
the executive Government to consider how far the memorial of the Officers
graying for an increase of pay, in consequence of the deprivation of these
emoluments, is to be attended to. But it does not appear to Your Com-
mittee that the Military Officer is in New South Wales exposed to such,
hardship, or obliged to incur such expense, as to entitle hini to benefits
hot generally bestowed upon Officers of the British Army. Your Com-
mittee have also learnt with satisfaction, that many of the improper re-
strictions,by which commercial speculation has been thwarted in the Colony,
have been put an end to. The imposition of a maximum price upon all
imported articles of merchandise, has been discontinued. The maximum
bn the price of grain and butcher’s meat is no longer in existence; and
though a similar limit to the price of labour was formerly frequently at-
tempted, it has been, as might be expected, always either evaded or disre-
garded. One commercial regulation appears however to be still in. full
force, which, in the opinion of Your Committee, ought immediately to be
rescinded; it is that by which no ship is allowed to dispose of any mer-
chandise in Van Diemen’s land, unless it shall have previously touched at
Fort Jackson. By this restriction all mercantile enterprise is at once put
an end to in the dependent settlements; and supplies, absolutely essential to
the support of its inhabitants, may"in their greatest necessity be delayed,
to them; The impolicy and injustice of this regulation are so apparent, that
Your Committee trust it will riot long remain in existence. •
. The greatest difficulties to which the Government has been subject,
have arisen in its attempts to regulate the supply of spirituous liquors.
Their importation used to be limited by licences granted by the Governor'
on the arrival of a cargo, he fixed the price at which it was to be sold,
and distributed it at this price, which was generally very low, to the per-
sons highest in authority in the Settlement. The liquors were afterwards
paid away by them as wages to their labourers, or retailed at a very ad-
vanced rate to such of the inhabitants as wished to become purchasers ;
and the eagerness for spirituous liquors has been so great in the Colony,
that the gains made in this traffic have been enormous. The temptations
too to smuggling and illicit distillation are so great,, and their facilities in
that thinly inhabited country so numerous, that all attempts to check a
clandestine supply have proved in vain; and the qualities of the liquor
thus obtained, are generally infinitely xvorse and more unwholesome than
of ' that which is legally imported/ Governor Macquarie stales in his
■dispatch, dated April 30, 1810, that the various measures that have been
hitherto taken to-check the importation and regulate the sale of spirits have
Invariably failed ; and as it is impossible totally to suppress the use of them,
a certain quantity being esseritially necessary for the accommodation of
the inhabitants, it appears to him that it would be good and sound policy
to sanction the free importation of good spirits, under a high duty of not
less than three or four shillings per gallon. He expects, from this mea-
sure, to put an end to all further attempts at monopoly, and bartering
spirits for corn and necessaries, and to private stills, which, in defiance of
-every precaution, are still very numerous in the Colony; and he is per-
suaded that this measure, instead of promoting drunkenness and idleness,
will tend rather to lessen both. Governor Macquarie’s suggestion met
341. B with


with the approbation of the Government of this Country, and orders were
sent out to permit the free importation of spirits, under a duty of not less
than four shillings per gallon. Upon this subject Your Committee entirely
agree with Governor Macquarie in opinion, .that a less limited supply of
spirituous liquors will not give that encouragement to idleness and inebriety,
which, at the first view of the subject, naturally presents itself as an objec-
tion to the extended importation : it has been stated before them repeat-
edly in evidence, that the scarcity of spirits has had no other effect than
to stimulate the avidity with which they were sought; and that in times
when the supply has been most regular and abundant, drunkenness has,
been the least prevalent. But they are of opinion, that an unlimited supply
of spirits may be furnished to the Colony in a manner much more condu-
cive to its interests than by permitting a free importation. The want of
an extended corn-market, where the prices are regulated by a fair and
liberal competition, is much felt in the Colony. Of 10,452 inhabitants,
4,277 are wholly, or in great part, victualled from the public store ; and
three-fifths of the corn brought to market are purchased by the Governor,
at a price, over which, from the largeness of his demand, he has always a
power of controul, and which many Governors have taken upon themselves
absolutely to limit, so as scarcely to afford to the farmers a fair profit for
their produce; and in the distant parts of the Settlement, they have been
known to feed their pigs with the corn for which they could not obtain a
sufficient price. From the occasional overflowing of the Hawkesbury, and
consequent scarcities, a larger cultivation of corn than is necessary for the
mere annual subsistence of the Colony, is extremely desirable : and Your
Committee are of opinion, that an enlarged market, great encouragement
to agriculture, and a free supply of spirits, mav be afforded to the Colony,
without losing the revenue which would be produced by the duties on im-
portation, if distillation within the Colony were permitted under proper
duties and regulations; and they confidently suggest, that this is a mea-
sure which ought to be substituted for that proposed by Governor
Macquarie ; it would extend agricultural speculation,—it would be a re-
source in,times of scarcity, and, with proper attention, w ould afford a better
spirit than has been hitherto imported; for the importations have, for the
most part, been of Bengal and American rum. But Your Committee
must at the same time regret, that an impediment has arisen to the imme-
diate alteration of the present system, from a contract entered into by
Governor Macquarie, under which certain merchants have agreed to build
an hospital for the Settlement, on being allowed, during the ensuing three
years, exclusively to purchase spirits at the government price, no other
spirits being permitted, within that time, to be imported into the Colony
by private individuals. .
The Courts of Judicature arc instituted by commission ; the Civil Court
is called the Court of Civil Jurisdiction, and consists of the Judge Advo-
cate, and two respectable inhabitants of the Colony, to be from time to
time appointed by the Governor; and they have full, power to hear and
determine, in asummary way, “ all manner of personal pleas whatsoever;"
they have also fuil'power to grant probates of wills, and administration
of the personal estates of intestates dying within the Settlement; and if
either party find him, her, or themselves aggrieved by any judgment or
decree given or pronounced by the said Court, he, she, or they shall and.
■may appeal to the Governor, or in cgse of his absence or death, to the
Lieutenant Governor ; and if any party shall find him, her, or themselves
agg ieved by the judgment or determination of the said Governor, in any
.case where the debt or thing in demand shall exceed the value of £.300.
such party so aggrieved may appeal to the King in Council. An Allow-
ance


ance, to be fixed at the discretion of the Court, is to be made by all
complainants, at whose suit any person shall be imprisoned, to such defen-
dants, provided such defendant make oath that he has no estate or effect
sufficient to maintain himself. It is in evidence that this allowance has
been fixed at 6 d. per day, which is not more in value than 4 d. in this
-Country. It appears also, that no convict can, during the time of his
servitude, sue or be sued in these Courts, or suffer imprisonment for any
debt incurred by him. By the same commission, a Court of Criminal
Jurisdiction is established, upon the authority of the Act 27 Geo. 111. c. 2.
It is a Court of Record, with all such powers as are incident to Courts of
Record in England : it consists of the j udge Advocate and six Officers of
the sea and land service, to be convened from time to time by precept*
under the hand and seal of the Governor, with power (having taken the
oaths directed in the commission) to hear and determine all crimes com-
mitted within the Settlement, and to cause punishment to be inflicted
according to the laws of England, as nearly as may be, considering and
allowing for the circumstances and situation of the place and settlement
aforesaid, and the inhabitants thereof. The verdict to be by the opinion
of the major part of the Court; if the offence be capital, the Court may
pronounce judgment of death, or of any punishment not amounting to
death, .which to the Court shall seem meet. But Unless five of the persons
sitting in the Court, shall concur in the verdict, execution of any judgment
of death shall not be had or done until the proceedings shall have been
transmitted to this Country, and the pleasure of the King had thereon ;
and in no capital case is the sentence to be executed without the consent
of the Governor, who has power to suspend such execution until he have,
the direction of His Majesty. Your Committee have to observe, that all.
the evidence examined on the subject, unequivocally condemns the manner,
in which the Criminal Courts are thus established. Governor Bligh'
having stated that they consisted principally of Military Officers, proceeds—
“ It did not give satisfaction to the inhabitants, —they were particularly.
“ desirous that they might not be so much in the power of the Military,.
<e but might have seme kind of justice that might bring them nearer to.
“ their brethren in Great Britain/' He also states that there were settlers,
sufficient in character and numbers to furnish juries; and thinks their
decisions would have been fairer than those that took place without them. ;
Similar to his, are the opinions of Governor Hunter, Mr. Palmer, and Mr.
Campbell, and upon their evidence Your Committee are of opinion, that
the manner of administering criminal justice may be altered with great
advantage to the Colony. It is not to be expected that its inhabitants
should' view', otherwise than with jealousy and discontent, a system which
resembles rather a,Court Martial than the mode of trial the advantages
of which they have been accustomed to see and to enjoy in their own
Country. However necessary it may have been, at the first foundation of
the 'Settlement, thus to constitute the Courts, as well from the default- of
other members as from the refractory habits of the person then composing
the Colony; that necessity has now ceased to exist ; a numerous class of
respectable persons is now formed within' the Settlement, amply sufficient
to warrant the establishment of that trial by jury, for which they are
anxiously wishing. But. upon this subject Your Committee particularly
refer to a Memorial of Mr. Bent, the Judge Advocate, whose .views have
met with the approbation of Governor Macquarie; in which the inconveni-
ences of the present system are most ably and clearly detailed, and such
regulations are suggested, as appear to Your Committee to be most worthy
the attention and consideration of the Government. It is stated in the
evidence, that the natives of the country find the same protection in these
341. Courts


'Courts of Justice with the subjects of the King. Yet Your Committee
have observed with surprise, in a.report of the prisoners tried before the
Court of Criminal Jurisdiction in March 1810, that a person charged with
shooting at and wounding a native, was tried simply for an assault, whilst
another who had committed a similar offence against an European, was
tried on the same day for his life. It appears proper to Your Committee
here to remark, that great inconveniences are felt in the Colonies in Van
t)iemen’s Land, from the w ant of a Court of Justice. The jurisdiction of
the Magistrates is all that the inhabitants have to look to for their pro-
tection against offenders; and for the settlement of civil differences, they
have no power within the Colony of appealing to the law r ; all causes and
great offences are removed for trial to Port Jackson, to an inconvenience
and expense too manifest to need any remark ; a Judge Advocate is already
•appointed, and. the additional expense to be incurred by the complete
Formation of a Court, adapted to the male population of that colony, would
not be great. The commission and instructions under which the Governor
acts, are given at length in the Appendix. He is made-Governor and
General, with the most enlarged powers, uncontrouled by any
Council, with authority to pardon all offences (treason and murder ex-
cepted), to impose duties, to grant lands, and to issue colonial regulations.
It is in evidence from Governor Bligh, that to the breach of some of these
regulations, issued at the sole will of the Governor, a punishment of 500
lashes is annexed, and to others a fine of yf. too. The manner in which
these extensive powers have been used, has not always been such as to
..give satisfaction to the Colony ; nor can it be expected that where so much
authority arid responsibility are thrown into the hands of one man, that his
will however just, and his administration however wise, will not at times
create opposition and discontent amongst men unused, in their own
'Country, to see so great a monopoly of power.. Under this impression,
Your Committee think it right to recommend, that a Council be given to
•the Governor, for the purpose of sharing with him in: the,responsibility of
the measures vvhich they mav. think.necessary for the security or prosperity
.of the Colony. It may perhaps be doubted how far it will be wise to limit'
the authority of the Governor over u colony in which, more than any other,
the Government ought to be strong and unfettered ; but the vipvs of
Your Committee would -to some degree he obtained, even though the
; Council appointed had no other power than that of protesting against any'
measures of the Governor of which they might disapprove ; and x»f trans-
mitting their protests to the Secretary of State. The acquiescence of the'
-Council would-give popularity, to the measures of which it approved, and
-its expressed disapprobation might have the effect of checking.such as
were evidently inexpedient., .
The: Governor has the power of making grants of land ; and Your Com-
mittee have heard with surprise, that this power has, in one instance at
least,’beeri-used in a manner, to say the least of it, liable to much obser-
vation. It has been stated in evidence, that a grant of land to the ;
apiount of 1,000 acres, was made by a Governor, to the person appointed
■tp succeed him, who, immediately on assuming the government, made a
similar grant to his predecessor. Upon this Your Committee must suggest,
that .no,.Governor ought on his own account to enter into farming . spe-
culationshis salary ought to be sufficient to support him; -he .ought
-never to look to .other and indirect means of enriching himself.
1. For many years the'Governor-was restrained from granting longer leases
.within the Town of Sydney, than’for the period of 14. years, This im-
.politic regulation, which caused much discontent, and materially checked
all enter prize in building, has lately been .rescinded. Many settlers, have
been


been sent out from this Country by Government, to whom grants of
land, sometimes to a large amount, have been made ;nnd in many instances
their want of capital, of character, and agricultural knowledge, have
exposed them to difficulties on their arrival, and excited complaints against
them for misconduct. Your Committee are glad to learn that greater
precautions are now taken in the selection of these persons than appears
formerly to have been the case. None are allowed to go out as free
setllers, unless they can prove themselves to be possessed of sufficient
property to establish themselves there without the assistance of Govern-
ment, and who can produce the most satisfactory testimonials and recom-
mendations from persons of known respectability ; the person allowed to
go, is then recommended to the Governor, to whose discretion it is left
to make what grant of land he may think expedient. The form of the
answer which is given to all applicants, and one of the letters of recom-
mendation, upon the model of which they are generally drawn, are to be
found in the Appendix. Your Committee wish, however, to suggest that-
ft ought to be made a principle, in selecting these persons, to give the
preference to those who have been previously accustomed to agricultural
pursuits.
Though the religious feeling in the Colony appears to have been
weak, latterly the erection of places of worship, and the establishment of
clergymen, have riot been neglected. Churches have been built at Sydney
and Paramatta, and in Hawkesbury the service was performed in houses
appropriated to that purpose; and to each of these districts clergymen
have been appointed, with a sufficient provision front Government. In
Governor Hunter’s time, the attendance of the convicts was enforced at
church. This compulsion appears to have been neglected during the
government of Admiral Bligh ; though during the hours of Divine Service
all loitering was forbidden in the town of Sydney. No restraint is imposed
on those professing a different religion, and Roman Catholic clergymen’
have been allowed to perform the .rites of their church ; Registers of Bap-
tisms, Marriages, and Burials, are regularly kept, and many schools have
been established. The Orphan Female School, supported by Port duties
and fines, has flourished almost from the first settlement of the Colony,
and a Male Orphan School, on a similar plan, has lately been established;
several private schools are also open, ana the education of youth appears,
by no means to be neglected, though the want of proper masters has
been much felt at different periods.
Your Committee have been thus particular in detailing the regulations,
and the natural and commercial advantages of the Settlement, because they
strongly feel that its improvement in wealth, and the means of properly
employing and reforming the convicts, are essential to the progress of each
other ; if the prosperity of the Colony be checked by unwholesome restric-
tions, the exertions and industry of the convicts cannot be advantageously
called into action during their servitude, and, but little inducement will
be held out to them to become settlers after their emancipation. They
will now proceed to detail the manner in which the Transportation of the
convicts is conducted, and what are their government and treatment
within the Colony.
When the hulks are full up to their establishment; and the convicted
offenders in the different counties are beginning to accumulate, a vessel
is taken up for the purpose of conveying a part of them to New South
Wales; A selection is in the first instance made of all the male convicts
under the age of 50, who are sentenced to transportation for life and for
14. years; and the number is filled up with such from amongst those
341. C sentenced


sentenced to transportation for 7 years, as are the most unruly in the-
hulks, or are convicted of the most atrocious crimes; with respect to
female convicts, it has been customary to send, without any exception,-
all whose state of health will admit of it, and whose age doe* not exceed
45 years. •
The Irish convictshave generally been sent with less selection than those
from England; and this has arisen from the want of hulks, and other means
of confining and employing them, which are here often substituted for
transportation; but as this is a subject now under arrangement, and
occupying much of the attention of the Irish Government, Your Com-
mittee forbear making any observations upon it.
The evidence of Mr. M c Leay distinctly and satisfactorily explains the
manner in which they are transported. An order is received from the
Treasury at the Transport Office, to take up vessels for New South Wales.
They are advertised for,'and the lowest tender accepted. Clothing and
provisions for the support of the convicts during the voyage, and nine
months afterwards, are sent from the Victualling Office, and medicines
are furnished from Apothecaries Hall. An account of the stores allowed for
100 male or female convicts, is to be found in the Appendix. The owner of
the vessel provides a surgeon, who undergoes an examination at Surgeon's
Hall and the Transport Office. He is instructed to keep a diary not only
of the illness on board but.of the number of convicts admitted on deck;
of the scraping the decks, cleaning the births, and general treatment of
the transports. The sick are to be visited twice a day, the healthy once.
He is ordered to take the greatest precaution against infection, and to
fumigate the clothes of those taken to the hospital. He has not only
power to use medicines, but also the stores, if any sick be in want ot
greater nourishment. He is further instructed to transmit to the Secretary
of State, any observations which may occur to him productive of improve-
ment in the mode of treatment, and he is paid a gratuity of los. 6d.
for every convict landed in New South Wales. . The instructions to the
master are equally satisfactory. He is to be particularly cautious to.
receive no diseased person on board during the voyage; a proportion of
the prisoners is daily to be admitted upon deck, and the births of all
cleaned and aired ; and these things are to be noted in the log-book, which
is afterwards submitted to the Governor of New South Wales; and if the
conduct of the master appears to have been satisfactory, he receives a
gratuity of £. 50. If the contrary should turn out to be the cake, a power
of.mulcting hiip is given by the contract, and he becomes liable to a pro-
secution. The ration of provision is fixt, and appears to be amply suf-
ficient for the support of the men; about 200 men or women are generally
embarked on board one ship, with a guard of 30 men and an officer.
Such are the present regulations for the voyage; and however bad
the treatment of the convicts on board the vessels may formerly have
been, the present system appears to Your Committee to be unobjectionable.
The Witnesses speak of it in terms of high commendation, particularly two
of those who have been sent out as convicts. Governor Macquarie, in his
last dispatches, mentions .the good treatment of the. prisoners on board
the two transports last sent out; and a still stronger proof of the im-
provement in the mode of conveyance is, that from the year 1795 to 1801,
of 3,833 convicts embarked, 385 died on board the transports, being nearly
l in-10; but since 1801, of 2,398 embarked, 52 only have died on the
passage, being lin 46. The only further observation Your Committee
have to make on this part of the subject is, one of regret that no arrange-
ment whatever is made for the performance of Divine Service during this
six months voyage ; that this, which is the heaviest part 1 of their punish-
ment,


merit, is also the least likely to produce reformation. With the dispatches J
from Government a list of the convicts is generally sent, but this list has
for the most part been very deficient in particularising the offences of
which they have been, convicted; and in distributing them upon their
arrival, the Governor has no clue to guide him in giving to them more
or less advantageous situations, according to the nature of their crimes
and characters : this is a neglect easy and at the same time most ne-
cessary to be corrected. Upon the arrival of a transport, general orders J
are issued for returns of the number of men wanted, ,with the land held
in cultivation by each settler. The trade, age, character, and capacity
of the convicts are, as far as possible, investigated; the artificers are in
general reserved for the service of Government, and as many of the
others as may be wanted. Persons who have been in a higher situation
in life, have tickets of leave given to them, by which they have liberty to
provide for themselves, and are exempt from all compulsory labour ;
similar tickets are given to men unused to active employment, as gold-
smiths and others ; the remainder are distributed amongst the settlers as
servants and labourers. The convicts in the service of' Government, are
divided into gangs,—every gang has an overseer, and every two or three
gangs a superintendent; these are frequently chosen from amongst those,
convicts who best conduct themselves. They work from six in the
morning till three in the afternoon, and the remainder of the day is allowed
to them, to be spent either in amusement or profitable labour for them-
selves. They are clothed, fed, and for the most part lodged, by Govern-
ment; and though in the early periods of the Colony, inconvenience and
distress may have arisen from the irregularity of supply from this Country,
latterly the food and clothing have been good, and, generally speaking,
in sufficient abundance. Should the convicts misconduct themselves at
theii work, the superintendents have no power of inflicting punishment,
but are for that purpose obliged to take them before a magistrate; the
sitting magistrate of the week at Sydney,' may order a punishment of 25
lashes ; a regular Bench, which consists, at least, of three, may order
as many as 300 ; and in the distant parts of the colony,- a single magi-
strate has the same power with the Bench at Sydney; but a heavy
punishment is not executed without the previous approbation of the
Governor. Another mode of correction, and that which Your Committee •
would recommend to be preferred, in as many cases as possible, is to
sentence the culprit to work for a certain number of days in the gaol
gang; he is here obliged to labour at some public work in irons, from
six in the morning to six at night, and no hours are allowed to him for
profit or amusement. The convicts distributed amongst the settlers, are
clothed, supported, and lodged by them; they work either by the task
or for the same number of hours as the Government convicts ; and when
their set labour is finished, are allowed to work on their own account.
The master has no power over them of corporal punishment, and this can
only be inflicted by the interference of a magistrate; even if the master
be a magistrate himself, he can order no punishment to his own servant,
but must have recourse to another magistrate. If the servant feels him-
self ill used by his master, he has power of complaining to a magistrate,
who will, if the complaint be well founded, deprive the master of his
servant. It is so much the interest of the settlers to keep their servants
in good health, and to attend to their conduct, that Your Committee have
heard no evidence but in commendation of their treatment, and of its effects
upon their morals and comfort. Indeed it is most manifest that where
two or three convicts are domiciled in a family, removed from their former
companions, and forced into habits of industry and regularity, the chance
of reformation must be infinitely greater than when they are worked in
341. gangs,


gangs, living with each other amidst all the inducements to vice which
such a town as Sidney must afford to them; and such by all the-Evidence
appears to be the effect of this system of distributing them amongst the.
settlers. Nor is it to be lost sight of, that in the service of settlers
they are likely to acquire some knowledge of farming; and that, if from
convicts, they became well-behaved and industrious servants, a farther
possibility is opened to them of becoming prosperous and respectable
settlers. On these grounds Your Committee recommend as much as pos-
sible their distribution as servants and labourers to individuals ; and they
have observed with much satisfaction, that such appears to be the system
pursued at present by Governor Macquarie ; nor will such an arrangement
materially increase the expense to Government, or impede the progress of
its works. It is to be found in the Evidence of Mr. Commissary Palmer,
_ that the expense of each convict in the service of Government was about
£.40 a year, and that a free labourer at Sydney could be hired for £.70,
but that he would do nearly twice as much work. Mr. Campbell states
the annual expense of a convict at £.30, But * n the other point he agrees
with Mr Palmer. Some of the benefits of this system must be lost where
too many convicts are given to one master, and in some 'instances forty
have been put under the controul of a single settler; but from the extent
of some of the farms, such a distribution appears to be unavoidable. In
the distribution of female convicts great abuses have formerly prevailed ;
they were indiscriminately given to such of the inhabitants as demanded
them, and were in general received rather as prostitutes than as servants;
and so far from being induced to reform themselves, the disgraceful
manner in which they were disposed of, operated as an encouragement to
general depravity of manners. Upon the arrival of Governor Bligh, two-
thirds of the children annually born within the Colony were illegitimate.
Marriages have latterly become more frequent, consequently prostitution
•is stated to have been less prevalent; and Governor Macquarie is directing
his endeavours, under orders from the Government here, “ to keep the
“ female convicts separate till they can properly be distributed among the
“ inhabitants, in such manner as they may best derive the advantages of
“ industry and good character.” He further states in his dispatch, dated
April 30, 1810, that the situation of the Colony requires that as many
male convicts as possible should be sent thither, the prosperity of the
country depending on their numbers; whilst, on the contrary, female
convicts are as great a drawback as the others are beneficial. To this
observation Your Committee feel they cannot accede : they are aware
that the women sent out are of the most abandoned description, and that
in many instances they are likely to whet and to encourage the vices
of the men, whilst but a small proportion will make any step towards
reformation ; but yet, with all their vices, such women as these were
the mothers of a great part of the inhabitants now existing in the
Colony, and from this stock only can a reasonable hope be held
out of rapid increase to the population; upon which increase, here
as in all infant colonies, its growing prosperity in great measure de-
pends. Let it be remembered too, how much misery and vice are likely to
prevail in a society in which the women hear no proportion to the men;
in the Colony at present, the number of men compared to that of women-,
is as 2to 1; to this, in great measure, the prevalence of prostitution is
reasonably to be attributed; but increase that proportion, and the temp-
tathta to abandoned vices will also' be increased, and the hopes of esta-
blishing feelings of decency and morality amongst the lower classes,
will be still farther removed.
The supply of women to the colony, must, however, be materially di-
minished


minished by the proposed system of employing convicts in Penitentiary
Houses; and Your Committee think this an additional reason for affording
increased facilities to the wives of male convicts, who may wish to ac-
company or follow their husbands to New South Wales. This permission
is now ? seldom granted, and that only to the wives of men transported
for life or for 14 years. It is however the most eligible way of providing
the colony with women, and one which may with very great advantage be
much extended.
. At the expiration of the time to which the convicts have been sen-
tenced, their freedom is at once obtained, and they are at liberty either
to return to this Country, or to settle in New South Wales; should the .
latter be their choice, a grant is made to the unmarried, of 40 . acres
of land, and to the married, of something more for the wife and each
child: tools and stock (which they are not allowed to alienate,) are also
given to them, and for 18 months they.are victualled from the Govern-
ment stores. In this manner, they have an opportunity of establishing
themselves in independence, and by proper conduct to regain a respec-
table place in society; and such instances, Your Committee are glad to
learn, are not unfrequent. They also see with satisfaction, that Governor
Macquarie adopts it as a principle, “ that long-tried good conduct should
“ lead a man back to that rank in society which he had forfeited, and
“ do away, in as far as the case will admit, all retrospect of former bad
“ conduct This appears to him to be the greatest “ inducement that
“ can be held out towards the reformation of the manners of the inha-
“ bitants.” ' In these principles Your Committee cordially concur, and
are the more anxious to express their opinion, as, under a former Governor,
transports, whatever their conduct might be, were in'no instance per-
mitted to hold places of trust and confidence, or even to come to the
Government House ; those advantages being, in his opinion, not to be
expected until after generations.
The same advantages as are allowed to convicts having served their time, ,
are given to those who have been pardoned or emancipated by the Gover-
nor; and Your Committee do not wish to dismiss the subject, without
making some observations upon the power possessed by him of granting to
convicts either the entire or partial remission of their sentence, or tickets
of leave, by which they are altogether relieved from its severity. They do-
hot see any necessity for the Governor’s possessing a power to grant these ab-
solute or conditional pardons; it is a power liable to great abuse, and which
appears to have been at times very much abused. It is in evidence, that in
some years 150 pardons have been granted; that pardons have been granted ,
to convicts immediately upon their arrival, without reference to their cha-
racters or merits; and it appears rather to have at times been made an in-
strument to gain popularity, than the means of rewarding exemplary conduct
by a well-deserved extension of His Majesty’s mercy. Your Committee
therefore suggest, that no pardon whatever, real or conditional, be granted
but through the Secretary of State. This may create a delay per-
haps of a year, in obtaining the pardon of any convict, but that inconve-'
nience will not be great, for by granting to him a ticket of leave, the convict
will in the mean time be entirely relieved from the pressure of his sentence.
Upon the subject of tickets of leave, Your Committee feel that the power of,
granting them ought to remain in full force with the Governor; but it is a
power which they would wish to see sparingly and cautiously made use of;
and Avith this view, they recommend that an annual return be made to the
Secretary of State’s Office, of the number of tickets of leave issued in the
year, Avith a statement of the grounds upon which each was granted.
.341* D No


No difficulty appears to exist amongst the major part of the men who do
not wish to remain in the colony, of finding means to return to this'Country.
All but the aged and infirm easily find employment on board the ships
visiting New South Wales, and are allowed to work their passage home;
but such facility is not afforded to the women : they have no possible me-
thod of leaving the Colony but by prostituting themselves on board the
ships whose masters may chuse to receive them. They who are sent to
New South Wales, that their former habits may be relinquished, cannot
obtain a return to this Country, but by relapsing into that mode of life,
which with many has been the first cause of all their crimes and misfortunes.
To those who shrink from these means, or are unable even thus to obtain a
passage for themselves, transportation for seven years is converted into a
banishment for life, and the just and humane provisions of the law, by
which different periods of transportation are apportioned to different de-
grees of crime, are rendered entirely null: To see this defect in the punish-
ment remedied, is the anxious wish of Your Committee; and they trust that
means may be devised to facilitate the return of such women as have
passed their time of servitude, and are unwilling to remain in the Colony,
either by affording them a sufficient sum of money, or by some stipula-
tion in their favour with the Masters of vessels touching at the Settlement.
It will be seen by the accounts laid before Your Committee, that the
expenses of the Colony are considerable. The bills drawn in the year 1810
amounted to 72,600, being a great increase upon any preceding year, and
the expenditure of the year 1811 promised to be still greater; in addition
to these, a great annual expenditure is incurred in the transmission of stores
and merchandize, and in the freight of transports. Your Committee trust
■that when the buildings absolutely necessary for the public service shall be
completed, as the commerce of the Colony shall prosper, the duties be-
come more productive, and, from agricultural improvement, the supply of
■stores to its present amount shall be discontinued, that this expense will be
materially diminished; and it is their opinion, that it might even now be
considerably reduced by the removal of part of the Military force in the
Colony, which appears to them to be unnecessarily large. The whole po-
pulation does not amount to 11,000, and of these, 1,100 are soldiers.
Such is the View taken by Your Committee of the colony of New South
Wales ; and it is, in their opinion, in a train entirely to answer the ends pro-
posed by its establishment. It appears latterly to have attracted a greater
share of the attention of Government than if did for many years after its
foundation; and when the several beneficial orders lately sent out from this
Country, and the liberal views of the present Governor, shall have had
time to operate, the best effects are to be expected. The permission of
distillation within the Colony, and the reform of the Courts of Justice, are
■two measures which Your Committee, above all others, recommend as
most necessary to stimulate agricultural industry,and to give the inhabitants
that confidence and legal security which can alone render them contented
with the Government under m hich they are placed.
ao July 1812.
APPENDIX,


APPENDIX.
£
LIST
341.


LIST OF APPENDIX.
Appendix, No. 1.
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE.
Admiral Hunter - - - page 17. 47.
Alexander M'Leay, Efq. - 27.
'Governor Bligh - - - - 29.
.James Duce Harris ----- 49.
'Thomas Robson - - - - -51.
Maurice Margarot - - - - - 52.
Mr. William Richardfon - » - - 55,
Mr. Commiflary Palmer - page 58.
Captain Matthew Flinder - - - 65.
Rev. Mr. Johnfton - - - - - 66.
Mr. Robert Campbell - 68. 75.
G. Johnfon ------ 72.
Mr. J. H. Capper - - 77,
Lieutenant Edward Lord - - - - 78-
Appendix
Ho. 2.—Statement of the Inhabitants in His Majefty's fettlement on the Eaftern Coaft of New South
Wales, dated i March 1810 - - - - - . . . p a g e g. 2>
Ho- 3.—General Statement of the Inhabitants at Norfolk Ifland, Port Dalrymple, and Hobart Town,
Van Diemen’s Land; with an Eftimate of the Remains of Brovifions - - .ibid!
Ho, 4.—Statement of. in cultivation, &c. at New South Wales - - - - .84.
Ho. s,—General Statement of Land in cultivation, &c. at Norfolk Ifland, Port Dalrymple, and Hobart
Town, Van Diemen’s Land - _ . . . _ _ .
Ho. 6..t0 No. 16. - Extrafts of Gorrefpondence between His Majefty’s Secretary of State, and the
Governor of New South Wales .. . . . . . _ 86—S9.
Ho. 17. —Copy of the Commifiion for eftablifliing Courts of Judicature in New South Wales - 89.
Ho. 18.—Report of Prifoners tried before the Judge Advocate, &c. at New South Wales, on 12 March
1810, and following day ----------- 92.
Ho. 19. —Letter from the Judge Advocate (Ellis Bent, efq.) of New South Wales, to the right
honourable the Earl of Liverpool; dated 19 October 1811 - . -' - - 93.
Ho; 20. —Copy of the Commifiion appointing Lachlan Macquarie Captain General and Governor in
Chief of New South Wales; dated May 1809 • - - - - . - 98.
’Ho. 21. —Copy of the Inftruftions to D* - - - - - . - lo i.
Ho. 22. —Copy of the 78th Paragraph of Letter from Governor Macquarie, dated 30 April 18x0 105.
Ho. 23. —Ext raft of a Letter from the Earl of Liverpool to Governor Macquarie, dated 26 February
1811 .(granting land in Freeboard) - - - - - . -ibid.
Ho. 24.—Inftruftions to the Mailers of Convift Ships ... .... -ibid.
No. 25. —Inftruftions to Mailers of Convift Ships, relative to Viftualling, &c. - - - -ibid.
No. 26.—Inftruftions to the Surgeons of Convift Ships - - - - - - - -106.
Ho. 27.—Inftruftions to Surgeons having the care of Convifts on their voyage to New South Wales j 07.
Ho. 28. —Proportion of Stores fupplied for the ufe of 100 male Convifts ... - -ibid.
Ho. 29. —An Account of the Number of Convifts who have died in the paflage to New South Wales,
fmce the year 179 s - - - - - - - * - -110.
No. 30. —An Account of the Number of Convifts landed in New South Wales, fmce the year 1795, 1 x 1.
Ho. 31.—Extraft of a Letter from Governor Macquarie, dated 14 May 1809 - - - -112.
Ho. 32. Copy of 33d Paragraph of Governor Macquaries’s Letter, dated 30 April 1810 - -ibid.
Ho 33. Extraft of a Difpatcb from Governor Macquarie to Vifcount Caflkreagh, dated Sidney, New
South Wales, 30 April 1810 - - - - - - - - ibid.
Ho. 34. —Extraft of a Dispatch from Governor Macquarie to Viscount Castlereagh, dated Sydney,
New South Wales, 27 oftober 1810 - - ■ * “ 113-
No. 35. Copy of a Letter from R. Peel, Efq. to Governor Macquarie, dated 12 March 18x2 - 114.
No. 36. Copy of Anfwer given to all perfons applying to go out as Settlers to New Simth Wales, 115.
No. 37.—An Account of the Annual Expenfe of the Tranfportation ofConvifts to New Soutb>Wales
' ° and its Dependencies ; and of the Total Annual Expenfe of thofe Settlements, as far a*
the fame can be made out, since the year 1707 - - - - - 114-115.
No. 38. Answers to Queries for the information of the Committee on Tranfportation; from the
’ Inspector General of Prisons in Ireland - - * * * - - - 116.


Appendix, No. 1.
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE.
Committee on Transportation.
Mercurij, 19 die February 1812.
The Hon ble GEORGE EDEN, in the Chair.
John Hunter, Efquire, a Vice Admiral in His Majefty's Navy, called in,
and Examined.
YOU was Governor of Botany Bay ?—-Yes.
In what y card id you fail for Botany Bay ?—When I was appointed Governor
I failed from England in February 1795, arrived there in the end of September
in the fame year.
You was in Botany Bay once before you were fent there as Governor ?—Yes, I
was with a King’s (hip on that fervice.
Had you an •opportunity of obferving how the convicts were treated on the
voyage?—They were treated extremely well on our firft voyage but. No man
poffdTed more humanity than Governor Phillip; he was particularly attentive
to them.
Did many of them die, or were many of them ill on the voyage ? I think the
•whole number that died was about nineteen out of near nine hundred, and feveral
of them were very old people and infirm when they embarked ■, very unfit to be
fent onfuch a voyage.
What was the whole number embarked ?—I think it was between eight and
nine hundred convi&s; there were above eight hundred I know.
Were they equally well treated on your f cond voyage ?—When I went out the
fecond time, I did not carry any convidts: I went with two King’s fhips.
What fuperintendents were there on board the tranfports, to fee that the convidh
were well treated ?—There was an officer and a fmall party of marines to keep them
in order, and to fee they were properly fed, and that the fhip was kept clean and
wholcfbme.,
How were they fumifhed with proviiions?—l believe it was a contract, and a
on the part of the contradt was embarked with them.
Had you opportunities of afterwards obferving whether thofe who were embarked
in later years were equally well treated ?—No, I do not think they were equally
well treated ; there was not the fame attention paid to them.
Had you returns made to you, as Governor, of the number who were fick, or died
on the paflage ?—Yes, always on their arrival in the country.
And was that number much more increafed in the latter years than it was at
firft ?—Corrfiderably, in fbme of the fhips 5 there were fomc fhips particularly at-
tentive to the convidls, and others equally careleft.
To what do you attribute the loft of the convidh on board the fhips ?—From the
■convidh being confined, and being badly taken care of.
Was there the fame fuperintendence of the officers and marines ?—No, the ma-
rines had been removed from the country, and relieved by a corps appointed for
that fervice.
Then latterly there was no officer to fee the convidls were well treated ?—They
have generally a recruiting party on board, arid an officer with them, but they are
Ids qualified to take care of men on board (hips.
Can


Can you recoiled any inftance of a great proportion of the convids dying on the
'paflage?—l think it was the Hilfborough that brought out three hundred, but
they buried a hundred of them on the paffage; and I believe two or three died
after they were landed.
Was there any officer on the part of Government on board the Hilfborough ?
I believe there was, but I cannot (peak with certainty to that.
Do you know what contract the matter of the Hilfborough had entered into?—
I do not.
Is medical attendance provided on board the tranfports ?—The fhips had a fur-
geon on board the fhip, who was fometimes provided by Government, and fome-
times by the owner of the (hip.
What proportion does the number of convids generally bear to the crew?—l
iuppofe the crew of the Hilfborbugh might be five and twenty or thirty people, fo
they bore no proportion to the convidls, and perhaps fifteen or twenty recruits for
the regiments.
Do you know what number of hours were allowed to the convidls to take air
and exercife ?—When we were out the firft time they were half of them allowed to
be on deck at one time; their irons were taken off when they were half a league
from the land. !
How many do you think they could allow on board the Hilfborough ?—lf they
had a proper guard, they could allow a fourth part of the number on the fore-part of
the flrip, and the guard could be on the quarter deck.
Do you recoiled whether there was that guard ?—I do not recolledt.
Had the convidls liberty to fupply themlelves with neceflaries, or was every thing
fupplied by Government ?—All they required was fupplied by Government; if
they had any money, with them they could purchafe what they wanted, when in a
port where it was to. be had.
Was there any difference in the treatment of the men and of the women ?—We
did all we could on board the fhips to keep them feparate, the women on board
•one (hip and the men on board the other ; but there was a neceffity to have (brae
women to wafh the clothes of the men. The proportion of women carried over at
firft was very finall to the number of the men.
Does any alteration cake place in the payment of the contract when fb many die,
as in the cafe you have juft named of the Hilfborough ?—The Governor makes a
report home of the number that have arrived, and, if.it appears' there has been any
fault in the management of thofe people the Navy Board have it in their power to
mulcl them.
Were any reprefentatlons ever made to the Navy Board ?—Yes, in one inftance
made by me; I do not know what fteps were taken, but the Board inquired
into it, and I believe did muld them.
Was the contract at fo much a head ?—That was an experiment once tried, and
it was attended with very unpleafant circumftances, and it was difeontinued.
In what inftance ?—l.do not recoiled; the names of the fhips, but it was about
the time that the Hilfborough came out. Ido not know whether (he was one of
the fhips, but I believe fhe was; and the confequence was they loft fuch a number
of men it was aftonifhing. ,
The con trad was for lb many embarked, and not for fo many landed?—For fb
many embarked, and I believe that occafioned careleffnels with refped to their
health. _
Were there any other fhips which loft a number, any thing like, in .the fame pro-
portion ?—There was a fhip, I believe it was the. Queen, not exadiy at that time,
in which they loft a great number of men ; but I do not recoiled one that loft fo
many after that; Ifhould have mentioned that with refped to this fhip, the Matter
of her was a man who when he arrived in the country exprdftd an intention of
quitting the fhip altogether, and he came to me upon the fubjed, and 1 told him I
could not let him quit the fhip ; and that unlefs it could be made clear to me there
-was a perfon qualified to take the charge of fb large a fhip, I would not fuffer it.
Was the mafter a man of bad character? —Yes. . .
Did this Captain contrad for the taking thofe convids ?—I apprehend the
owners of the fhip were the contradors, for the mafter was merely put -on board the
fhip to navigate her, whether he had any intereft in the lofs of the number, that
died, I cannot fay, but he might have had fome inftrudions on the fubjed.
You do not happen to know any inftances where the. mafter of the-fhip hirafclf
did contrad to carry convids ?—I do not know any inftance.
Docs


Does it not feem to you, that it might be an advifable method ?—Yes ; and it is
a thing I recommended to Government, that the (hip owner and contractor (hould
be the fame perfon for carrying out (lores, and indeed convifls; I recommended it
for Government, but they perhaps had not time to attend to it, or it would have
been a great advantage; and that the (lores (hould be delivered free from damage,
for they often brought clothing for the convifls that was a' great part of it ruined
before it came there, and was loft, which lofs fell upon the Crown, and at a time
when the convifls were in great diftrefs for clothing.
Upon their arrival in Botany Bay in what manner were they claffed to their
employments'?—As foon as they were difembarked they were muttered together,
and then claffed into gangs, and employed in fuch work as required men of par-
ticular profeflions; blackfmiths were employed in making up iron-work, and tools of
agriculture, and carpenters and bricklayers in building; and we had them all claffed
into their different gangs; and every gang of a certain number, perhaps 20, had an
overfeer, and every two -or three of fuch gangs had a fuperintendent; and thofe
people were refponfible to the Governor and the Officers over them, for the labour
and condufl of thofe men, and for their proper treatment. '
How did you employ thofe who had been ufed to (edentary employments ?—When
we had got a fufficient number of (heep in the colony, we ufed to manufacture the
wool of thofe (heep into blankets; we had gangs of all deferiptions, tailors and
(hoemakers, and fuch as required men who were not 10 able to work in the field.,
Of what defeription. of perfons were the Overfeers, were they convifls or free
people?—ln the early part of our time we found it neceffary to feledl the beft
charadlers from the convifls, for we had but few free people; and in order that they
might do their duty properly, they were always rewarded in fome way, by giving
them fome little indulgence.
Were the convifls clothed in uniform ? —We had a particular drels, but they
were not regular in fending that kind of clothing, and they had different colours.
Were they all confidered fervants of Government?—Yes; and Government was
at the expenfe of keeping them, and the labour was the property of Government.
Was their labour ever made over to Officers and other fettlers ?—Yes, it has
been.
Under what regulation ?—That the officers or fettlers (hould maintain and clothe
them, that they (hould be no expenfe to the Crown.
What power or control had the Officers over thefe fervants? —Only fuch as a
matter might ufe over his fervant, for he was not permitted to punifti them, but he
was to complain to the neareft magiftrate ; that was the cafe in my time, for I would
not let them be puniffied in *an arbitrary manner. I thought it was right to let
them be examined by a magiftrate, and bring forward evidence, if they could, in their
behalf.
Might the fervant complain to a magiftrate of ill treatment from his mafter?—
Yes, he might complain.
Were they entirely lodged with their matters ? —Yes, generally upon their pre-
mifes.
Was there any difference made in the claffing of thofe who were tranlported for
a term of years, and thofe who were tranfported for Ufe ?—Not much difference
made in them; it depended very much on the conduct of the men.:
Were there any free labourers during your refidence in the colony ?—Yes, there
were many who had completed their term of tranfportation, and had received a
certificate that they were at liberty to work for any perfon who would employ them ;
their work was harder than that of the convifls, for we were not fevere over the
convifls in giving them too much to do, but they could work for an individual who
would give them fome remuneration, after their regular days labour.
How were the convifls in the fcrvice of Government lodged ?—We had fmall
wooden huts for the purpofe.
Were they lodged a number together?—Yes, they were, and mefled together;
they formed meffes.
What,power had the Governor over the convifls, without reforting to any Court
of Juftice ?—No more than that of another magiftrate without reforting to a Court
of Juftice; for if the man required an inveftigation of his condufl, they muft order
the Court to attend to it; if the man had committed a crime, they would take
upon themfelves to punifh him ; but it is not fair unlefs he is allowed to be heard ;
if a man is feen by a magiftrate to commit a fault, the magiftrate may order him to
be flogged.
341- F In


In what manner were the women difpoled of?—They were a very great trouble to
us; they were generally worfe charadters than any; Tuch as were unable to perform
any of that kind of work, fuch as mending orwafhing, were employed in carding
wool, or doing fomething in that way. I employed Ibrae of them in fpinning linen
out of the white flax of the country, and they made it very good; they were chiefly
Irilh women, who were ufed to fpinning linen.
Were many of them ufed as fervants?—Yes.
During the time of their fervitude as convidls ?—At that time we had but little
work for them, for it was fo common to fee them with a young child in their arms
that they had not time to work.
, Were the marriages frequent?—Very frequent; that was a thing that we en-
couraged upon all occafions.
Was a large proportion of the children born illegitimate ?—Many of them were
born before wedlock, and a great number after; a confiderable number of children
were born without knowing who was their father.
In what manner were thofe children provided for ?—At the expenfe of the
Crown, unlefs the father and mother had the means of maintaining them; but that
has been altered fince; the fathers of the children are obliged to maintain them in
fome way or other.
Is there any punilhment for a woman having an illegitimate child ?—■ No, we
have no particular punilhment- for it.
Can you guide us at all to the proportion of children born in or out of wedlock?
—No, I really cannot.
Did the convidts appear to you, during their fervitude, to become accuftomed to
habits of induftry ?—Many of them extremely lb,'
What was their general health, was it good ?—Very good ; there is not a more
healthy country in the world than that, nor a more beautiful one.
During your refidence there, were difeontents frequently exprefled amongft them ?
-—I. never remember; to have met with any difeontented people in the country,
during the time I was there. They conduftcd themfelves very quietly and decently;
and, notwithftanding I had fo many of them working in a gang, of four or five
hupdred, naked as they were born, they have gone into the fields to work, and they
have coitfe and made complaints to me, and 1 have told them I was concerned to
fee them, and would take the earlieft opportunity of relieving them. Ships from
India enabled me fometimesto buy thin canvafs to make them clothing.
How many hours were they employed in a day?—Generally from day-light in the
morning till three or four o’clock; but in the fummer I ufed to make them leave
off work at eleven, and go to it again at two, to avoid the heat of rhe middle of the
day, and in that cale they worked till about five, and then they had an hour or
two to work for any body elfe after that.
Were they orderly in their hours of leifure ?—Very orderly; we had no com-
plaints ; the Overfeers were always inttrudted to make complaints when they found
any caufe, and never to attempt to conceal thofe who were refractory.
Was there any difference in the condudl of thofe who were tranlported for years,
and thofe tranfported for life —I cannot fay I faw much difference, becaufe we
always held out. encouragement, that, although they felt themfelves exiled from
their country, there was a hope held out to them, that their own condudt might
relieve them from that fituation.
Were the Courts of Juftice open to them as to others?—Yes.
. You lay .they were always open to every perfon who had a caufe to bring before
•them?—Yes. .
You mentioned that they might complain to the Magifirates. Who adl as
Magiftrates?—Some of the principal officers, and fometimes the military officers;
we had occafion for fo many that we were obliged to employ the military.
They are not fent out from this country?—No; I propofed that they fliould be
once. ■ ,
Then you make the belt feledlion you can?—Yes; the Commiflaries ufed to
attend to it,’and the Surveyors of Land, and thofe kind of people; I did duty as
one, all the time I was there, with Governor Phillip.
You mention that the convidts were made over on a contradt that they fliould
be kept by the matter; is that attended to? —Yes, I believe it is. At firft when I
received orders on that fubjedl, it was impoffiblc to attend to it, becaufe the
officers, who were the principal cultivators of land, had a number made over to
them; and they cleared, by that means, a great deal of land at the expenfe of the
Crown, for thofe people’s labour was at the expenfe of the Crown; the officers paid
nothing


nothing for it, they were fed and clothed by the Crown; when I went, I informed
the officers it would not be done in,future. i
When you left the Colony, do you knowat all what proportion of the convicts
were fervants of Government, and what number were fervants of individuals ?
I cannot recolleCt, with any degree of certainty; the proportion of fervants to in-
dividuals was extremely fmall.
Has a Angle Magiftrate the power of inflicting any punifliment ? —Not to a great
extent; perhaps he might order a man 2or 3 dozen laflies.
On,what evidence?—Such evidence as might be brought before him of the
nature of the complaint; there mull be evidence.
What punifliment was inflicted in the cafe of idlenefs ? —The punilhments in thofe
cates were putting the offender in a fituation in which he would have much more
labour to perform; and if he was. a refraCtory fellow, and deferted his work, we
placed him in the gaol-gang, (they are the only people who work in irons,) with a
(hackle on his leg; but if he were put in the gaol-gang, that punifliment was felt
'as a very fevere one, becaufe they worked in irons all the day, and were locked up
in gaol at night.
By whom were the punlfliments of flogging infliftcd ?—By a man appointed for
the purpofe; a man juft like a common executioner.
You fpoke of a want of clothing, was that often felt, or only once ?—-It was felt
feveral times, but once in a very great degree, during my time; they had been
neglefled in fome way or other, whether by the contractor, or whom, I cannot tell;
they had forgotten to fend the clothing, and the people were naked.
Did you make any reprefentations to Government on that fubjecl ?—-Yes, I did,
by every conveyance I could.
In what year was it ?—ln 1796, or 1797, fomewherc thereabouts.
You fay you t|mld not trace any perceptible difference in the moral conduCt of
thofe tranfported for a term of years, and thofe for life ?■—l cannot fay there was
much difference ; there certainly was a defpondency on the one that was tranfported
for life, that did not appear on the other.
Were you able to infer any thing from the number of criminals brought to the
bar of the Courts of Juftice in the Colony, whether the greater number of thofe
criminals confifted of thofe banilhed for a term of years, or thofe baniftied for life ?
—I could not diftinguifli that.
You conceive there was no difference in their conduct ?—No further than the
man who was there for life feemed rather more gloomy and unwilling when he went
to work.
It did not. appear to lead them to any aCts of outrage ? —No, none at all; fome
of them attempted to defert from the colony, and did defert, but they loft their
lives by the attempt, for they were loft oh the coaft.
What is the punifliment for defertion of the Colony, if detected ?—dt lies with the
Governor; but if they have committed a robbery at the fame time they are tried
for that robbery. '
• What is the punifliment for Ample defertion alone ?—When we found them
again we put them in the gaol-gang, where they could not fo eafily efcape. We fome-
times made it a rule to tranfport a man from that Colony to Norfolk Ifland, by a
Criminal Court; that they felt was a very fevere fentence; they would fooner have
loft their lives; becaufe it is a fmall fpot, and they had no chance of efcaping.
The being deteCled in the attempt at defertion does not deprive them of-the
protection of the laws in any cafe ?—No, it does hot. - .
After the fervitude had elapfed, what encouragement was held out to the con-
victs to fettle in the Colony?—A certain proportion of land; and if he were
married, he had a certain quantity for the wife, and fo much for each child, if he
had a family, with tools of agriculture, with a fmall proportion of live flock, and
provifions for a year and a half, and clothing.
What number of acres were granted to thofe fettling?—Generally about forty
acres, and ten for the woman, and eight for each child.
The Governor had power to remit the fentence ?—Oh, yes.
And on remitting the fentence, was the fame grant of land made to him as if he
had ferved but his time of tranfportation ?—Yes, if he was pardoned ; if his.time
was given him, and allowed to fettle, he had the lame proportion of land given to
him as any free fettler, as a reward for general good conduCt. (
What was the general conduCt of thofe fettlers after determining to remain in the
country ?—The conduCt of many of them was highly meritorious, there were a few
that perhaps were not fo well, but generally their conduct was very correCt,
Were


Were their numbers Increafed before you left the country?—Oh, yes; but fince
I came home there have been many families who applied to Government to be per-
mitted to go there; they were referred to me, and I explained to them what the
nature of it was, and I found fome of them fit people, and I reported them fo to
Government; it is defirable to have people there who have been trained to any handi-
craft bulinefs.
Is the grant of land to them for years, or for ever?—lt is for ever; it is a grant
to them and their heirs.
How are the fcttlers from amongft the convidts received by the free let tiers from
this country ?—Very well; I did not fee that they made any diftindtion. There are
many men who have been convidts, and are now fettlers there, who were as reipedtab'e
as any people who have gone from this country. I have feen.many families going from
this country, who when they arrived there were found as bad as any of the convicts ;
fome of the loweft of the people.
Was not drunkennefs prevalent amongft the convidts ?—Very much; it is an
indulgence they were fb fond of they gave us a great deal of trouble foraetimes.
however there are fome refpedtable men there now that were convidts in that country,
and men that are really well provided for, they and their families are living in a very
handfome decent manner; they are very exemplary people; they were very induflrious
when they were convidts, and they met with every encouragement.
And did the refpedtable part of the fociety appear to be increafing ?—Yes, it
did confiderably ; there are many families gone from this country, which induced
me to recommend to Government to make a change in the mode of trial in the
Courts there, and to introduce the trial by Jury there; there are fo many decent
people there now, they may change their Juries as often as they pleafe; there are’a
great many decent people there who are fit to ferve on Juries.
Amongft thofe transported for a term of years, did you obferve any difference in
their condudt towards the end of the term ?—Only that difference that will appear
in a man who is delighted at the profpedt of being a free man.
Was his condudt Jefs orderly ; —No, not lefs orderly ; becaufe if his condudt was
diforderly he ran a great rifk; becaufe we have had free men found guilty of the
crimes with which they have been charged, and they have been tranfported and made
convidts again there. ,
How young were the youngefl of the convidts at the time you were there ?—When
we went out we had boys and girls twelve and thirteen years old, but very few, and
women and men as high as feventyodd.
Did (he boys become more or lefs orderly in their condudt as they grew up ?
We had generally made it a rule to give a particular artificer the charge of a boy to
teach him his profefllon, and make him anfwerable for his condudt.
Did the boys become more or Ids orderly in their condudt as they grew up ?—Some
of them ; but others mixed themfelves with fuch bad charadters in the ifland that
they brought themfelves to the gallows.
How did the girls turn out ?—Many of them very infamous; but while I was
there we laid the foundation for a fund fora female Orphan School which is now
completed ; I faw this was neceffary, becaufe as foon as they grew up they were led
away, and made moft infamous charadters.
How long had the fchool been eftablilhed before you left the colony?—lt was
eftablilhed, but we had not got a houfe large enough to hold them, and there was a
houfe built by an officer, which we thought would anfwer the purpofe for a time,
and that was purchafed by the Government.
Was this a private eftablilhment ?—Yes. '
Were any other fchools eftablilhed at the fame time ?—A great number in differ-
ent parts of the Colony.
And did they appear to you to produce any reformation? —Yes, they did very
confiderable, I thought.
Have the number of private eftablifhmcnts for the inftrudlion of the boys and
girls been increafing over the Colony ?—Yes, they had thefe fchools in the neigh-
bourhood of our head quarters. I made it a rule to fee the children every year
regularly, and they were all brought up, boys and girls, with their matters and mif-
trefles, and produced fpecimens of the improvements they had made, to me, which
.1 kept, and compared when I next faw them.
You mentioned fome time ago the drunkennefs amongft the .fettlers; is private
diftillation carried bri to a great extent ?—-They attempted.it in my time, but I put
a ftop to it. ,
What


- What market had the fettlers for the produce of their fields?—They had no
market, but that of Government; Government purchafed from them what conn,
■they wanted for the feeding of the convids on the hands of the Crown.
How are their prices regulated ?—By the Governor.,
And individuals were not in the habit of purchafing from each other?—Yes, they
were at liberty to purchafe from each other. . ,
What was the number of churches in the colony ?—There was only one at Para-
matta ; there is one now at Sydney, the foundation of which I laid before I left the
.country. ,
And did it appear to you that there was much religious feeling amongft the fettlers
: or the convids?—They certainly attended divine fervice very properly and atten-
tively ; but I was under the neceffity, early in my time, when the clergyman com-
plained to me he preached to five or/ix people only, I toid him that 1 would go to
church myfelf, and expeded my example would be followed by the people; I
therefore gave a general order, that I expeded the people would attend divine fer-
vice, and I fent conftables round different parts of the town, with diredions, that if
they found any perfon idling about during the time of divine fervice, they were to put
■them into the jail, and I fettled that point next morning-; but after I had given this
order the following day, the only, church that we had at that time, which was a
wooden building with a thatched roof, was burnt down after dark; 1 had no means
ofdifcovering the offender, (for 1 was convinced it was wilfully done) but by offering
a reward, that if any perfon would come forward and give fuch evidence as would
convid the offender, if the witnefs was a perfon who had been tranfported for life,
I would give him emancipation and a paffage home, with £.50 in his pocket; one
would have thought that irrefiftible, but it brought no evidence; I never learnt who'
it was; it was a defigned thing. ;
The attendance afterwards was without compulfion ?—Yes; when I found I got
no information, I gave an order that the different gangs of convids fhould be muf-
tered at day-light on a Sunday morning to quarry ftone, and cut timber to build
another church, and they were to work at that till evening; this was to be their
Sunday labour, exclufiveof their weekly labour; but I had no occafion to carry that
on long, for I got another building which anfwered the purpofe.
. Could you judge at all what number chofe to fettle in the country ?—I cannot
fay what proportion, but there were many who did return to this country. When I
returned to England numbers applied to me for permiffion to go out again, for they
laid they could live there, but they could not live here.
What facility had they to return from the colony ?—Only through fome of the
South Sea whalers, or (hips bound to the Eaft Indies, which are fometimes fhort of
men, and will give them their paffage for their work.
Are they not allowed to return in tranfports which took out other convids ?
No; they are fhips under engagement by the Eaft India Company to go to the
Eaft Indies and bring home cargoes for the Eaft India Company; and the Govern-
ment will not pay the expenfe of their return.
Had tirewomen any means of returning? —Only if they could make infereft with
officers of the (hip to give them a paffage,
- Have you known many women return ? —Yes, fome of them after their time was
expired went to the Eaft Indies.
Is it more difficult for the women to find a paffage home than it is for the, men ?
No, I do not think there is much difficulty; the feamen in general are very atten-
tive to the women.
Have you known many women or men remain in the ifland through not being
able to get a paffage home ? —I do not recollect hearing any body complain of that;
when I came home in a King’s fhip I gave feveral of them a paffage home.
Is it at all in the power of Government to prevent their return to this country?—
No, we areftridly enjoined that the very'day the term of tranfportation has expired,
the perfon is to be at his liberty, and not to detain him a moment after the expi-
ration of his fentence.
Is there no provifion in the charter-party of the tranfports by which they are
prevented taking any convids home without leave ,ot the Governor ?—Yes,
there is.
Is that power ever exercifed ? —There have been fome ftolen away by mafters of
fhips, but upon a complaint from the Governor to the Navy Board, who chartered
the (hip, they will mulct him of fo much of his pay. .
. Bias any offender, after his fentence has expired, been prevented from returning
341. G in


in any of thole flilps ?—After their term is expired, the Governor never prevents
their return; they are never prevented returning when their terms are expired.
When you left it was,the ftate of the colony improving, or not?—Very confi-
derably improving the whole time I was there. I fupported the convidts with grain
that we grew in the country; I never had occafion to apply to this country for flour
or bread. »
How near was it to fupporting itfelf in cattle ?—The cattle were too few to break
in upon: I begged in all my letters that the Government would have a little pa-
tience till the cattle were fo increafed that we could venture to break in upon them,
but they were too few then, and it would have thrown the colony back.
Was the expenfe to Government increafing or diminilhing in your time ?—I do
not know how far it was increafing or diminilhing at that'time, but it hasdiminifhed
confiderably fince I left; but I cannot tell why, except that though I had main-
tained the colony by giving a price for grain which the Government approved at
firfl, Government then faid it was too high. I reported to Government that the
price of labour was fo immenfely high that the farmers could not raife it at a lefs
price ; and if I was directed to reduce the price of grain, I knew the colony would
be left without, for the farmers could not raife it without involving themfelves
in debt.
Did the price of labour rife during your refidence in the country ?—lt rofe becaufe
the number of perfons returning to this country increafed.
Was the number of perfons decreafing ?—'Yes, independently of the importation
of convidls.
Have you any means of afeertaining whether the births were more numerous than
the burials?—Much more; it is a very healthy country. There was an attempt,-
I flrould mention, to reduce the price of grain : the order was given out before I
quitted the country, and when it was mentioned to me, I faid, the farmers will be
obliged to give up; it turned out fo; and the Government of this country was
obliged to fend out flour to the amount of £.70,000 fterling.
Was the number of acres in cultivation increafed or diminiftied during your re-
fidence there ?—They were increafed, and were confiderably increafing, at the time
I left there.
You mentioned, that you took every pains to put a flop to private diftillation,
were any breweries going on in the colony ?—Yes, there was a man who ufed to
malt the Indian corn, and brew it into beer; that could do no injury.
Only one man?—No more.
You Hated that the Governor fixed the price of articles brought to market, did
individuals attend to thofe prices, or make their own bargains? —I do not know
what might be done; I never fixed a price on any,man’s articles, but 1 always di-
rected the people, if they thought the price was too great, to inform me of ir, and I
would fpeak to the perfon; but I never fet a price.
I allude rather to corn ?—The corn was at a fixed price, eftablilhed by the Go-
vernor.
Cattle were not in fufficient number to afford any fort of meat to thefe people ?-
No, we had fait beef from this country.
What was the quantity of Kangaroo meat that was brought in? —Sometimes
fomething of that kind was brought in, and fent to the hofpitals; we ufed to barter
with fome of the convidls who ufed to take the trouble of feeking after it.
Some of the convidls ufed to keep pigs ?—Yes, they were very induftrious in that,
and Government ufed to ferve pork out to the convidls. The Government ufed to fix
a price, and if they made it appear that price was not fufficient the Government
would change it.
Do you know what the population of the country was when you left it ?—When
I left it between five and fix thoufand. '
And what proportion of that confided of convidls and fettlers ?—At that time
one half or two thirds were convidls.
How were the Courts compofed ?—The Criminal Court was competed ofthe Judge-
Advocate and fix commifiloned officers of the fea and land forces; I always made it
a rule when the King’s Ihips were in port to appoint three military and three naval
officers.
And they had power to inflidl any punifhment they pleafed ? Yes. _
No referring to the laws of this country ? —Yes, as near as local drcumftances
would permit.
How


How is the Civil Court formed there ?—Of the Judge-Advocate and two refpectable
houfekeepers appointed by the Governor, but they had an appeal from the Civil
Court to the Governor, and afterwards to the King in Council.
Was that appeal ever exercifed while you were there ?-—lt was threatened once;
and that was an appeal to me ; the fum of money litigated was about £. 800; and the
Civil Court, if the fum amounts to more than £. 300, is not obliged to attend to the
Governor’s decifion.
You fpokeof marriages being frequent; if the term of fervitude of a married man
expired before that of his wife, were they at liberty to return home as man and wife
at the expiration of his term ?—lt did not affedt their fituation at alias convidts.
Had they any claim upon Government to be allowed a paflage home, if after the
term had expired they would engage to work for a year, or a longer time?—The
Governor had no opportunity to fend them home, becaufe the tranfports are engaged
by the India Company, fo that the Governor cannot fend any more home by them
than they choofe to admit. -
Has the Criminal Court no power of prolonging the term of banifh'ment after the
arrival of convidts in the Colony ?—I do not recoiled! an inftance in which that
power was exercifed ; but they have the power of tranfportation in that country ;
therefore it is probable they might take the other power, for the free people have been
tranfported there by the Criminal Court.
Suppofing the term of banifliment was to expire during the imprifonment for any
offence in the colony, they would not be fuffered to leave the colony till that im-
prifonment expired ? No.
It appears that the number of female convidts is very much lefs than males ; does
not that lead to a very promifeuous intercourfe ?—-It has that effedl; but I believe
the numbers now arc not very different; I believe there are very near as many women
as men there.
How long' were you at Norfolk Ifland ? —I was upon Norfolk Ifland between
eleven and twelve months ; I was fhipwrecked upon it.
In what degree could-Norfolk Ifland fupport itfclf?—lt could fupport itfelf in
flefh meat, in pork, that is the only animal that profpers there; they are fubjedt to
blighting winds, which would lead them very often to fend to the principal fettlement
for a fupply of grain.
Could they lupply pork in return ?—Yes, the individuals have fold a fmall
quantity to the inhabitants of New South Wales, but nothing confiderable.
Then the great expenfe that Norfolk Ifland was, arofe from the want of a fup-
ply of corn ?—Yes, very often from that; but they, had got a mofl expenfive.
eftablifhment for that ifland, that eflablifhment appeared to me to be unadvifed, and
I recommended to Government to do it away.
What was the population upon that ifland ?—Six hundred and twenty at the
time I was there, but my fhip’s company was a part of that number, having been
wrecked on the ifland.
Was the comfort of Norfolk Ifland equal to that of Sydney or Botany Bay ?
No, becaufe there is nothing raifed there that we could not raife in New South
Wales. -
Was the being fent to Norfolk Ifland ever confidered a punifhment for the con-
vidh ? —Yes, a very fevere one.
Were the whole fix hundred and twenty fent from Botany Bay ?—No, there were
si few military and civil officers, and my fhip’s company.
Were they all convidts who had been fent there ?—No, they were fent there,
fome of them, to clear the ground, and to cultivate it; there was a commandant on
the ifland, who had been there fome time.
When firft that fettlement was made at Norfolk Ifland there was an idea held
out that the quantity of flax grown there would eftablifh fome fort of manufadlory ?
-—Yes.
What fort of a manufadlure might be made with it ?—A fort of canvafs, and I
tried how far it was of any value by mending the old fails of little (hips, and it was
worn out before the old canvafs; it was harlh coarfe fluff, but that might have pro-
ceeded from our want of materials to drefs it. -
Did you cultivate the flax, or merely take that you found there ?—No, wild; I
do not think the experiment of cultivating it was ever tried there. ,
So that you had no means of trying whether it was capable of being manufr.dlured
when cultivated ?—We .know that in New Zealand the natives have, the means of
making ufe of it.
■ Norfolk
25
of Evidence.] ON TRANSPORTATION.


% Norfolk Ifland is excellent for the breed of (wine, how are they Tupported in the
quantity they are ?—rThere is a kind of fhrub that grows in the fwamps, and the
pigs feed upon it, but in that Hate they are fo wild that it is difficult to get hold of
them.
Are there no native animals of Norfolk Ifland ? —None, except'the common rat;
and they put pigs on Philip Ifland, and they eat one another; there was nothing for
them to-fubfift on.
You had conftant communication with Norfolk Ifland Yes, we had when the
King’s fhips were there ; at other times we had but one fmall veflel.
You had then only thofe means of communication by the King’s fhips that were
paffing, or by one fmall veflel ?—We had only one fmall veflel during their abfence
to keep up the communication.
Therefore your communication muft be interrupted ?—lt was a great deal at
that time. .
In what way do you think it would anfwer to keep a fettlement at Norfolk Ifland ?
—The only advantage is that-of fupplying the South Sea whalers with frefh meat
and vegetables ; and it ferves alfo as a punifhment for fome of thofe incorrigible fel-
lows we are obliged to tranfport; Norfolk Ifland has this advantage over Port Dal-
rymple, and the principal fettlement, that convidh tranfported to that ifland cannot
efcape from it. ,
• Is that objedl of fufficient importance to Induce them to keep up the three fettle-
menfs ?—The other fettlements are capable of being confiderably extended, and
containing a much greater number of people than Norfolk Ifland could ; they are of
far more importance in that refpedf. I recommended to Government to move the
eftablifliment at Norfolk Ifland to Port Dalrymple, as being of more importance,
and there is an harbour there.
Do you fay that Norfolk Ifland is of fervice to the South Sea whalers ?—lt is ufed
by them.
But there being no harbour it is inconvenient ?—They can put their boats on
fhore if the weather happens to be good, but it is a dreadful place, almoft inac-
ceflible with any wind. .
Is there any woollen manufadturc at New South Wales? —One at Paramatta,
which we fet up for the women.
Is the fleece good in that country ?—Wonderfully good, fuperior ; there have
been fpecimens of it brought to this country, which were much admired.
What fort of {beep were introduced into the colony, Spanilh fheep?—A few. I
was examined before the Privy Council once on that fubjeft, and I mentioned the
improvement of the fleeces of every generation of the fheep, one after another; and
I w r as alkcd what was the original flock ; I faid they were a few Englifh ewes, and a
few Gape (beep and Bengal fheep; the Bengal and Cape fheep had neither of them
any fleece, but the lambs produced by them were woolly, and as faft as they grew
up, and another generation followed, they were ftill improved to the ftate into which
it was brought into this country, which was much admired. I heard people fay that
it was worth fix fhillings a pound.
At what period was this valuation of the wool ?—lt was brought over, I believe,
by fome individual perfon, and Sir Jofeph Banks had part of it. -
Was that wool from Spanifb fheep?—lt was from thofe fbeep in the country,
and which had been improved by the Spanilh fheep.
They have not any quantity of Spanifh fheep there?—No j the firft that was
carried there was in my time, and they were very few; one of the King’s fhips was
at that time at the Cape of Good Hope, when the property of Colonel Gordon, who
commanded the Dutch troops there, was fold, and he was a .very curious man in
many things. The officer of that Ihip, thinking the fheep would be ufeful at the
ifland, purchafed them of his own authority, on the voyage many of them died; ,
however there were a few male fheep preferved.
You faid the Governor had the power of remitting the fentence of the convids;
are duplicates of the pardons fent to the Secretary ot State ?—Yes, they are always
fent home.
And the reafons for the mitigation of the fentence? —Yes, with the reafons for
reducing the term of tranfportation; they are fometimes emancipated conditionally,
that is, that they are made free in that country, but not at liberty to leave it. ,
By what means is the country fupplied with fpirituous liquors ?—Too much by
the Americans.
Have


Have any means been taken to diminifh the quantity ? —We have taken every
means, but it is fo much fought after that they will fcnuggle it; they will go into
Botany Bay, or Broken Bay, or any of thole places, and purchafe it if they are able.
How is the -fale -of fpirituous liquors regulated after their arrival ?—At the dif- ,
cretion of the perfon who poflefles it, I have heard of its being up to £. sor£. 6
a gallon reduced fpirit.
Has every perfon the power cf felling fpirituous liquors there?—We forbid
mafters of (hips in our port from attempting to land any thing without a permit,
but we cannot prevent it, they fmuggle it alhore; it is a very good article in that'
country, if ufed in moderation, for you can get more work done by a parcel of
labouring men for a Angle bottle of fpirits, than you can get for two or three
Guineas in money.
Arc fpirits ever iffued to the convifts ?—Never but in fmall quantities, fometimes
as a reward for particular fervices; we iflue to the overfeers, and thofe kind of
people who receive no wages, half a pint of fpirits a week, and their provifions, as a
reward for their attention to their duty; they receive no wages, but only little in-
dulgences that the Governor has power to give.
Were there large flocks of Sheep in the colony when you left it ?—-Yes, they
were confiderably increafed.
Do you recollect the number ?—The number was fmall in proportion to what it
is now j the number of large cattle 4s sor 6,000, or more than that; the fheep are.
from 10 to 30,000, but exclufive of the tame cattle which 1 am fpeaking of, there
is a flock up the country, the origin of which 1 carried there, which is full as much
or more than the tame cattle. '
And during the time that you were there did you obferve that the fleeces im-
proved every year?—Every year while I was there; the fleeces of the fheep were
■confiderably more valuable latterly than they were at firft.
Were the wild cattle killed when you could get near them ?—No, they were not
allowed to be killed; I went there myfelf every year to fee that nobody went to kill:
them; but they were increafing to fuch a degree theymuft fpread over the country;
they will be a fource of profit to that country, as much fo as the wild cattle in-
South America is to Spain.
Are there fome wild deer alfo ?—I do not know; there were fome, but if they
turned them loofe I think they would be killed by the native dogs.
Do the goats increafe ?—They thrive, but not equal to the fheep.
Has the breed of fwine much increafed ?—Where they are well taken care of, •
they are a very prolific animal, and they have now the power of feeding them very:
well ; they have a confiderable Hock.
Veneris, 21° die February, 1812.
The Hon ble GEORGE EDEN, in the Chair.
Alexander M'Leay, Enquire, called in, and Examined.
YOU are Secretary of the Tranfport Office?—l am.
Inform the Committee what contrad is entered into with the maflers of tranfports
for the conveyance of convids to New South Wales ?—When we receive an order
from the Treafury to take up veflels for New South Wales, it is cuflomary to adver-
tife at Lloyd’s coffee-houfe, and in the, waiting-room at our own office, that fuch
veflels are wanted, and a day is fixed for receiving tenders, and on that day the
loweft tender is always received, that is to fay, if a large fhip is offered at a price that
will not cofl more, we take a large fhip in preference. We engage at fo much a ton
for the run; if a (hip of 700 tons is offered at a price that will come to lefs upon the
whole freight than a fhip of 400 tons, although the fhip of 400 tons may be fuffi-
ciently large for our purpofe, we prefer the large one.
I prefume tiie furplus tonnage is,employcd in carrying flores?—Entirely fo; and
we accommodate private individuals when we can do it without inconvenience to
the public fervice.
Have you the form of the contrad into which you enter ?—I have, [produces it.']
Is t* e contrador and the fhip-owner always the fame perfon ?—Very feldohi; we
treat for all our fhips with brokers; we have no objedion for owners to come for-
ward with offers, but they feldom do.
341. H Who
27
of Evidence.] ON TRANSPORTATION.


Who contracts for furnifiling the convicts with provifions ?■ —The provifions arc
fupplicd by the Victualling Board; when the Treafury gives us ciders to provide the
fliip, they give orders to the Victualling Board to provide provifions for the convicts
during the voyage, and alfo for nine months after they are landed in New South
Wales.
Is there any perfoa to fnperintend the.giving out the rations of the provifions ?—•
That is left by the contract with the matter.
,Do you take any means that the convicts (ball have fufficient air and cxcrcilc
during the voyage ?—We take care they lliail have futiicient air; and inttruCtions
are given to the matter generally for their treatment of the convids on the voyage.
. Have you a copy of thofe inftructions ? —I have not, but can furaifh the Com-
mittee with them.
What precautions are taken to prevent infectious diforders ?—The convicts are
infpectcd by the furgeon before they depart, and if he finds them infected with any
ferious diforder they are re-landed.
• Are they embarked in their own clothes ?—I think they are fupplied with new
clothes when they are put on board.
■Do you know' with what quantity of clothes? —A complete full of clothing.
What medical attendance is furnifhed to them ? —The owner of the fliip is obliged
to provide a furgeon, that furgeon undergoes an examination at Surgeon’s Hall, and
afterwards, a medical examination at our office.
What is the proportion of numbers between the crews and the convicts ? —The
number of the convicts differ lb very much that we never confider that ; there is
always a guard for the convicts, independent of the crew; the guard of male con-
victs confifts of an officer and thirty men. ,
: What number, of male convicts are generally put on board one Ihip ?—About
two hundred.
Have there not been many inftances where the convicts have been extremely
riotous on board a fliip ?—Not latterly.
■Do you remember any inftance when five convicts were fliot ?-r-I do, but I do,
not' remember the, time.
Are there any agents on the part of Government to fee that the conditions of tha
Gharter-party are attended to by the matter of the Ihip ? —There is not; the matter
has the foie management of them in the paflage.
You receive a regular report from the Governor of the Colony, of the con-
duct of the matter of each (hip ?—Yes, a report is,received from the Governor, and
if favourable, a gratuity of £. 50 is, paid to the matter. •
Do you recoiled: any circumftances relating tothe Hilfbofough, in which a third
of-the convids fent out died before the veil'd arrived ?—I recoiled that there Was
fuch acircumftance, but thatisWlong.time.ago.
You ftated that there was a remuneration paid for good behaviour on the part of
the Captain ?—Yes. ,
Is there any diminution of payment in cafe of bad condud ?—We have a
power of molding the (hip, to any extent that the Board may think proper.
That is inferred in the Charter-party ?—lt is.
Have you not reafon.to believe that there is very great improvement in the treat-
ment of the convids latterly ?—I have reafon to beiie’ye there is.
Do you recoiled'the cafe of the Canada tranfport, the latt Ibelieve that went
out ? —Yes, with 122 women, from this country, I recoiled the Ihip.
‘ Only one died during the paffage ?—That is Very true. ,
And lire was unwell before Hie left England ?—lt was fo reported. The Surgeon
nlfo has a gratuity if he behaves well. If he produces certificates of-his good con -
-dud, he is paid half a guinea for each perfon landed from the fliip at New South
Males.
Can you inform the Committee, nearly, what is the expenfe of tranfporting each
oonyid ?—Exclufive of provifions, within thefe : three years we have taken up.
v’cflTds at 16 guineas a ton ;we took up a veffel the other day at 9. 1 ss. od.
there is fuch a difference as that; and you reckon about two ton and a half, or three-
ton, to each pprlon, that is the whole expenfe of the tranlport; at 9. 15s. od.
.it is about £. 24. yj. 6d. a man. •
Can you ftate the average of the laft five years ?—I think that maybe reckoned’,
at: about £. 15. per ton.
And chat would be £-$7 a man, exclufive of vidualling and clothing ?—Yes.
Is there any agreement for returning home again ?—-No; all the • (hips ,we.
.have taken up, for many years, have been taken up by the Eatt* India Company,
u ‘ ’ ■ • . to


to bring teas from China, fo that we merely engage for the paffage out at a certain
rate.
Then you know nothing of the facilities that there are of returning home ?—-Not
the icaft.
William Bligh, Efquirc, late Governor of New South Wales, called in
and Examined.
WH AT year was you appointed Governor of New South Wales ?—Tn 1805,
Did you fail in that year ? —1 failed in the beginning of the year 1806,
Did you fail in company with a fleet of tranfports?—Yes, there were particular
(hips went out with us.
Had you an opportunity of judging of the manner in which the convicts were
treated on the voyage ?—Yes, I had.
In what manner did they appear to be treated ?—Remarkably well.
Were they fufficiently furnithed with provifions?—l believe fo; I had no com-
plaints made to ,me, and I vifited the {hips for that purpolc, to fee if they were well
conducted.
What precautions were taken to preferve clcanlinefs On board the tranfports ?
Whenever the weather would admit, certain portions of them were allowed to come
upon deck, arid the fhlp fo cleared below that Ihe might be regularly ventilated
and cleaned ; 1 obferved.alfo that there was attention paid to their perfons, in feeing
them walhcd and kept clean ; and during the hot weather 1 obferved that the people
were allowed to bathe whenever opportunity would admit.
Did much ficknefs occur in any of the tranfports during that voyage ?—No, I
believe not; nothing material.
How many hours in the courfe of the day was each man allowed to take cxercife
upon the deck ?—-Ido not know prcdfely, but. I Ihould fuppofe they would have
three, four, or. five hours upon the. deck in the daythe mailers feemed, always
difpofed to give any indulgences, when the weather would allow it.
Afterwards, during your continuance in the Government, had you an opportunity
of judging whether the convids were equally well treated on their voyage ? : —Yes,
they arrived generally in fuch health, that I conceive they were well treated,, unlefs
in an inftance or two there were fome complaints made by a few, but rectified ; and
if ever there was any provifions due to a convid, which had been kept from him by
the mafter of the (hip, on their application they were reimburled the quantity,, fo
that a convid never loft any thing on thepaffage, if he ,made a complaint of it on
his arrival at the colony.
Did their complaints appear to you often to be well founded ?—I have no recol-
ledion of any particular complaints, and. if any one had been material, I think I
fliould not have forgot it; there were however fome trifling things which took place,„
which I know were rectified immediately, and were confidered of no importance
at all.
Will you ftatc to the Committee the manner in, which the convids after their
arrival were claffed to their different employments?'—l know how. 1 have claflcd
them, which was in this way, they were, arranged in our book for the purpofe qf
diftinguifhing their ages, trades, and qualifications, and whether fickly, or not, in
order to enable me to diftribute them accordingly.
Were they all taken and employed as fervants of Government ?—No, upon the
arrival of the Chip, or upon her being expeded, I iffued general orders to the
fettlers in the country, to know what proportion of men they wanted, with the ground
they had in cultivation, in order that I might be prepared when the fliip did arrive, to
make mydiftribution; when the men were landed they were called over by their names,
and I proportioned the numbers to fuch perfons as I. thought were deferving of
fervants, and would take care of them. There was a confiderable deal of Govern-
ment work to be executed, and to that purpofe I took care to keep a fufficicnt
number ofthofe convids duly qualified for the refpedive labours which I might put
them’to. Things being regulated in this manner, the convids were immediately dis-
tributed to their refpedive places, or as Toon as it poflibly coaid be effeded, par-,
ticularly the claffes of convi£ls who might be carpenters and handicraft-men. It did
happen that there were fometimes a few men.fent out who were called, as a term in
that country, gentlemanly convids ; thofe, if they were not capable of labour, had
fometimes tickets of leave given them, by which means they remained on their own
hands to do as they could; a few others of particular trades, fuch as goldfmiths, alfo
' had
29
of Evidence.] ON TRANSPORTATION;


had tickets of leave to do as they pleated with themfelves; and all thofe who held
tickets of leave were at no expenle to Government, they had to maintain them-'
fclves by their own induftry.
Were thofe feryants of Government employed in hufbandry, or otherwite by the
■day, or by the talk ?—-Thole fervants of Government were employed by. the day,
from fix in the morning till three in the afternoon.
Under what fuperintendence ? —The perfons who fuperintended them were a
fuperior clafs, perhaps of convidts controlled and governed by free men, who were
appointed by the Secretary of State at home •, one of thefe men was called a prin-
cipal fuperintendent, a charadter which he fhould really poflefs, as a great deal de-
pended on him ; the other inferior fuperintendents were named by the Governor.
What power of punifhment had thefe fuperintendents to enforce the attention
of the convidts to their work?-—1 fuffered them to have no power but that of com-
plaining to a Mugiftrate. .
And what punifhment had a Magiftrate power to inflidt for their inattention to
their labour ?—He might order them to hard labour, to work in irons, in what was
called the Gaol-gang, who worked from fix to fix, and thofe convicts then loft the
indulgence of having from three o’clock in the afternoon to themfelves. The con-
vidts alfo generally had Saturday to themfelves as their own day.
Had the Magiftrates power of ordering corporal punifhment ? —Yes.
To what extent ?—A regular bench of Magiftrates could inflidt punifhment to
the amount of about three hundred lafhes, but no man received punifhment till the
fentence was approved of by me; and I had it in my power to leflen it. Individual
Magiftrates in the diftant parts of the colony had power to commit, and for trifling
offences to inflidt as far as 50 lafhes.
» Of how many does a regular bench of Magiftrates confift ? —Three of them; fome-
times a bench confifted of five or fix.
Could they order a hundred lafhes without reference to any legal crime ?—The
hundred lafhes were inflidted for the crime they committed, and that crime I con-
ceive was fuclvas to be fubjedl to punifhment; but not carried into effedt without
my perm i fit on. But in all proceedings with Tefpedl to crimes and punifh r.ents it
was my orders that they Ihould ftridlly, and as clofely as poflible, adhere to the Jaws
of Great Britain.
Had the convict any right of appeal from this bench of Magiftrates ? -He might
always appeal to the Governor, at Jeaft during my time mv door was always open
for them to make known any grievance they might labour under.
What interval was there between the fentence and the punifhment, to give him
time to make that appeal?—ln my time 1 believe there was always fufficient time.'
I know of no impropriety being committed by the Magiftracy ; but I believe that
the convidts had been punifhed in a very (ummary way by a perfon who had the
'Control" of them formerly there; and if any thing had happened with refpedl to
punifhing of a convidt unjuftly, and he had not had time to complain to me before
he received the punifhment, I never heard of it; and I believe it was impoflible that
anyfuch tranfadtion could have taken place. As foon as I got into the regular
adminiftration of my government, for a contrary condudt I had difmiflcd a perfbn
who had the command of the Police before, and would notallow him to officiate
any longer in the office.
In what manner were the convidts accuftomed to pafs their time during the
hours of leifure ?—I really do not know that any of them applied their time to very
rational amufements, any further than to go of meflixges, or to work fo far as it was
meceflary for their receiving feme rewards to purchale articles they might (land in
need of.
Were they for the mod part fpent in idlenefs and drunkennefs, or in induftry ?—•
I believe the molt of them were extremely idle, and the giving them that indulgence
I confider as a great injury to the colony, for all deteriptions of convidts lent to
that country fhould be kept fully at their labour ; and they fhould be fo clafled
before they were fent out of England as to be perfedlly fit for it.
Were the convidts fo clothed as to be diftmguilhed from others perfons ?—Yes,
they were ; Government was always gracioufly good to thofe unhappy people; they
took care to fend them abundance of every thing, and it only required the Gover-
nor’s care that thofe things were kept to be appropriated to thofe purpofes.
Was no want of clothing felt at any time during your government ?—There was,
but that was owing to care not having been fufficiently taken of what was fent there
.before, for if there was not clothing immediately, called the convidt clothing, there
were


were large inveftments fent out to-the great expenfc of Great Britain, to be applied
,'to every good purpofe as it might occur.
Did the fcarcity of*clothing arife more than' once ?—I believe it was only at one
' :time, but there were fuppliesfent out afterwards.
In ail other inftances was the fupply* regular ?—ln my time it was as regular as I
-could have expeded it; and from my communication with the Secretary of State I
-dare fay he would have taken care to fend fuch things as I had demanded.
In what manner was food provided for the convids ?—Whenever convids were
fent out from Great Britain the Secretary of State took care that a fupply'of fait
provifions fhould be fent with them, and neceflaries that would fupport them for
fix or nine months after they came into the colony; in fome (hips there were
large proportions of fait meat fent out for the general ufe of the fettjement ; all
which was ftored and taken the grcateft care of; there was an eftablifhed-ration
■ ordered by the Government of this country, and that was complied with .generally,
or particular art ides-might have been changed for others, when there was a neccf-
fity for fo doing. Grain made up the refidue of their allowances, as well as potatoes,
and when grain was fhort, a greater-quantity of meat wasiffued-; and they indivL-
• dually received their allowance.as fo directed by the Secretary of State’s order.
Did any deficiency of provifions occur during your government ? —Yes, there
■was. When 1 arrived there was only gibs, of grain iflued weekly to each man, until the
21ft February, when the harveft being got in, and a.fupply arriving from India, a full
ration was iffued, and continued, during my adminiftration, tothe a6ih January 1808.
Was the fupply front this country regular and abundant ?—1 have faid before
that there was great ,care taken by the Secretary of State to fend out fuch provifions
as were demanded.
In what manner were the convids lodged ?—Government had alfo provided
bedding for every convid, and every man upon his arrival in the colony was Su-
pplied with it ; this belonged to the Commiffary’s department, who always had his
orders to do lb from the Governor.
Had they their feparatc houfes ?—There were houfes which were called Govern-
ment-huts, which by the fuperintendent of convicts were appropriated to their
purpofe; and the others who' were diftributed to the-different fettlers in the
colony. The;fettlers were under injundions to give them lodgings-as well as
board, . :
How many were lodged in each of thofe Government-huts: ? —There might be
dive or fix; I do not know exadly how many might fleep there, but that was, in
the diferetion of the fuperintendent of the convids, according to the fizc of the
apartment.
Was any diftln&ion made in favour of thofe who were married ?—Yes; I made
-very great diftindions,-and gave great-encouragements and preferences to thofe
-who did marry. ' . <
Can you ftate fome of thofe encouragements ?—The principal fuperintendent had
liberty to affifl. them in building a little hovel, which they might build - for them-
felves ; and, on all occafions, where he could oblige them by indulgences, he was to
do it to the married perfons in preference to the lingle, and particularly in, preference
to thofe who cohabited with women in a ftate of concubinagei
What Was the medical eftablifliment for the convids ?—lt confifted of a furgeon,
and, I think, three or four afliftant-furgeons. ' ,
You mentioned that cottages were allowed to fome of the convids, was any
garden-ground alfo given to them during their fervitude? —I believe to moll of
the cottages, there were certain portions of ground given them, which were about
them. The encouragement of gardens was a thing 1 particularly attended to, both
for one clafs. of people and the other. .
Were they in general cultivated, and well taken care of? —Thofe convids that
workedTor-Government at their-leifure intervals, I believe, either grew a few pota-
toes, or what they might find neceffary, if they were difpofed fo to do; but I rather
think that the people who were put to Government labour, were very little attenr
tive to their gardening, or fecuring any additional food for themfelves, but fuch as
they fiiould get from other-individuals for labour, or any work they did for them.
T was ading upon old-principles for fome time, but the regulations were increafing
to fuch a degree, that the convids would have ftill had greater advantages, with
refpeft to the comforts that were due to them. . ,
What convids were allowed as fervants to. officers and fettlers; in what number,
-arid under what regulations ?—Magiftrates had been allowed four qr five fervants,
34V, I I think
31
of Evidence.] t) NTR ANSPORTATIO N.


I think that had been the eftablithed cuftom in the Colony; the military and civil
J officers, had one man-fervant allowed them. I mentioned that thefe men, when
they came, were divided among the fettlers, and in proportion to the ground they
had in cultivation, they had one or more men given them.
What was the greateft number allowed to any one fettler?—Some of .thofe who
cultivated a great deal of ground, had about thirty men, I believe that was the
greateft number; but fome of the fettlers had not above one or two, and fome none
at all.
Was the diftribution entirely in the difcretion of the Governor ?—Entirely; and
it was the Governor’s duty expreflly to look after that circumftance.
Is the tervice of individuals preferred by the convi&s to, that of Government ?
Yes, I think it is. .
Did it appear to you more productive of reformation ?—l'think-there was very
little difference, if we take this into confederation, that the greater part of the men
employed by Government were offenders in the Settlement; but even many handi-
crafts, that were employed by Government, would have preferred going upon their
own hands, or among fettlers, where they would have made charges for their work.
Were the fervants of fettlers, in their general conduct, more or lefs orderly than
thofe employed by Government? —The fervants of fettlers, in general, were more
orderly than thofe employed by Goverment at hard labour.
Were they furniftied with lodging* clothing, and food, by their mafters ?—Yes.
Entirely ?—■Yes; whoever had a Government man as a fervant was bound to
fupply him with food, lodging, and clothes.
What regulations were there to provide for the good ufage of thofe fervants, by
their mafters, during their fervitude ?—The fettler, when he received any of thefe
men as a fervant, came to an agreement to keep the man for a certain time, and if
that man behaved ill, a complaint was regularly brought before a Magiftrate, anti
the Magiftrate decided what was to be done with the fervant.
The matter had in himfelf ho power of punlthmcnt?—No, the matter dare not
lift his hand to a prifoner.
If the fervant made a juft complaint againft his matter before the magiftrate, what
is the nature of the redrefs that would be in the magiftfate’s power?—The magif-
trate would take the man away from the mailer, and perhaps the matter would be
prevented from ever after receiving any indulgences from Government,
' Arc any of the convidts liable to imprifohment for debt? —No, none of them.
■ln what manner are the female convidls difpofed of as fervants ?—The female
convicts that were brought into the country in my time, had. a very comfortable
place to retire to when they come out of the thips; and their perfons were guarded
by fuperintendehts, To that no perfons could be allowed to mix with them until
there were regulations eftablithed for their diftribution, which by me, the Governor,
was by ordering an inquiry of all perfons who wanted female fervants to make their
applications. ,
Whether officers or fettlers ?—Yes, all perfons of every defeription wanting female
fervants, to make their applications; that being done, if any women remained
undifpofed of, they were ordered to the Factory, where they were taken care of by
proper perfons appointed for that purpofe. '
What fecurity had you that they were taken for fervants, and not for the pur-
pofes of proftitution ? —lt was impoflible to prevent proftitution, and therefore there
was no necetfity for any regulations refpefting it, but what retted in the moral
character of thofe perfons who received them as fervants, and no doubt it did take
place; and that men who were fettlers wanted female fervants, and pitched upon
particular women for whom they applied, who perhaps cohabited together; thefe
things could never be prevented, until a general moral character was produced in
the Colony.
- Did that moral character appear to you to be-in any degree formed ?—lt was very
much formed during the lixteen months of my adminiftration, for 1 encouraged
matrimony, not by orders or proclamations, but by giving always to the married
people indulgences which the others never received.
Was the number of natural children born very great ?—Yes, it was.
Can you ftate in what proportion they were to the children born in wedlock ? —I
fhould fuppofe in the beginning there were two thirds of illegitimate children, and
about one third, perhaps, of legitimate children, through the whole colony ; but
latterly, in confequence of the marriages, they come nearly upon,a par; I mean in-
cluding all the inhabitants of the colony.
What


What proportion do the married women bear to thofe Uving in proftitution ?—'
Nearly about the fame proportion; perhaps there might be half and half in the latter '
part of my government.
In what manner were the illegitimate children provided for ?—There was no public
means of providing for them but the orphan fchool, and common fchools,- to which
the people were encouraged to fend their children to learn to read, and to work as
fempftrefles ; in the orphan fchool they were taught writing, reading, and working as
fompftreffes, and itwasavery good inftitution when properly attended to.
■ Were the fathers in any inftance obliged to provide for their illegitimate children ?
, —They generally lived together in that ftate, a man lived with a woman for years,
and had a number of children by her, and during that time he provided for them
as fathers do for their children, but when it happens by accident he would go away
and leave her, juft as men do in all other countries; but this habit of getting chib
. dren and quitting the country, was increafing by men from the (hipping, a ftop to
which, in one inftance, was put by the man belonging to a (hip, being feized, and
forced to leave a proper maintenance for the child.
; Had you many women in the colony who had been born and bred in New South
Wales ?—Yes, there were a good many.
And was proftitution as frequent amongft them as amongft the convids ?—From
the habits of the people in that Colony proftitution is too common a great deal; it
.has been dreadfully bad, I mean extremely common. I did not obferve any differ-
ence between the women convids who had come from Europe, and the women born
in the Settlement, except the daughters of the more refpedable fettlers.
Do the refpedable part of the community bear any great proportion to the other ?
—I (hould think about a fourth part.
Is the proftitution owing, in your opinion, in a great meafure to the greater pro-
portion of male convids in that Settlement than of females? —I do not believe it is,
1 believe the women may by that means have a greater number of men.
What proportion do the convids bear to the reft of the population ? —There are
ten thoufand fouls, one fourth or one fifth.
- What fort of returns of the numbers of offences, and periods of tranfportatiori, are
font from Government with each (hip conveying convicts ?—There is a Charter-party
which is Tent out, and a lift of the mens names, and their times of tranfportation.
; Does that lift ftate their offences ?—No, the lifts arc very deficient, fometimes, as
to their convidion, and the places where they were convided.
And no account of the offences of which they are convided ?—No, it is very
frequently omitted.
•Is that lift annexed to the Charter-party ?—lt -all comes together ,in a difpatch
from the Government to the Governor.
•In diftributing the convids upon their arrival you had no means, of giving more
or lefs advantageous (ituations to the convids, according to the nature of their
offences ?—lf one perfon convided'of a great offence, and another of an inferior
one, come out together, the Governor, having no fuch information, is not enabled to
diftributc them in reference to that circumftancc; upon their arrival in the fet-
tlement they are all treated alike.
Might it not happen that a perfon ading as a goldfmith, or following any other
trade that might be of advantage in- the colony, would receive a ticket of leave, by
which means he might be placed in a much better fituation than a perfon who
had committed a lefs • offence than himfelf?—Certainly; and the other convids
who are put to labour feel themfelves aggrieved that they cannot get tickets of
leave alfo. •
Are tickets of leave generally given to all fuch convids whofe trades and occu-
pations are calculated to .render them peculiarly ferviceablc to the colony ?—lt has
been fo. •
Have you ever knowirany inftance in which thofe tickets of leave have been
recalled in confequence of. mifeondud oh the part of the convids to whom they
have been given ?—I do not recoiled the having ever recalled one myfelf.
: Under what authority are the perfons who ad as Magiftrates appointed ?—By
the Governor alone. . ,
Are there any permanent regulations eftablKhcd by the Governor for the condud
of thefe men ?—Yes, there is lbme;regulation about the Magiftrates; their number,
and what (hall be a quorum.
: Are all punifhments that are inflided by thole Magiftrates, according to their own
diforetion, fubjedonly to an appeal to the Governor ?—Every thing that they do
they
33
of Evidence;] ON TRANSPORTATION.


they report to the Governor. I obliged them-to-do it tome. I never knew but that
i the bench of magiftrates were regular, in my time. All their proceedings"the Judge-
Advocate holds in his poffeffion, and generally reports to the Governor the
decifions. '
From what clafs of perfons are the magiftrates ufually diofen ?—They ought
Certainly to be chofen from the moft pure, and have been* during my time, and the
beft-informed freemen in the colony.
Have you ever known any convid promoted to the fituation of a magiftrate ?
"Not during my Government; I would not have allowed of any fuch thing ; but it has
been done lince. .
Is the number of convids under the diredion of each fuperintendent regulated
by any certain rule ?—The fuperintendents have certain numbers that they go to
their daily work with.
How many generally are under one fuperintendent?—There may be under
fbme, ten or twenty, or there may be more, according to the neceflity of the
work., 1
Does the refponfibility of the fuperintendent ceafe when the convids ceafe from
their daily labour ?—Yes; when the day’s labour is over the fuperintendent leaves
-them, and he mufters them again the firft thing in the morning;‘but they are under
no confinement except thofe at hard labour, and who are ordered to fleep in the
gaol. ,
Are regular returns, made to the Governor of the condud of all the convids in
the fcttlement ?—Every magiftrate of a diftrid generally reports the condud of
the convids within the limits of his jurifdidion.
Are thefe returns made at certain times, and how often are they made?—They
arc generally made quarterly, ! think.’
Do thofe returns notice the good as well as the bad condud of ?—*
fit is always to be underftood,'when a lift is given of men, that unlels fomc offence is
.put oppofite.to their names, that they behave very well.
Has the Governor any other fource of information refpeding the private condud
.and habits of the convids, except what he receives from thofe quarterly returns ?
That will depend upon himfelf; his own wifdom muft guide him how’far he will
Tearch for other fources, and if he is an attentive Governor, no doubt he will endea-
vour by political means to get fuch information as is necclfary for the good of the
.Colony:
■ Are there any, and what, regulations for the police of Sydney and Paramatta
during the night ?—The regulations of the Police are all civil; there are conftables
who .patrole, and go about, arid fee that no difnrderly houfes are open, or any
rioting or exceftes whatever; and if fuch take place, they put the offenders into
confinement till the morning, when an examination takes place before,the magis-
trates.
. You have mentioned perfons who arc called gentlemanly convids ?—That is a ’
•deferiptive nick-name they have got by the people in the colony, for it is a clafs of
men who are not fit for daily labour.
In what way are the female convids,-who are not diftributed to fervice, employed?
—They are fent to the Fadory.
How are they there employedf-rln weaving and fpinning of yam.
Under whole immediate control and diredion are they ?—-It is under a man
who.is beft qualified to fee all the trades carried on there; the magiftrate at Para-
matta is generally the man the people look up to in that fadory; but the Governor
-himfelfvifits it at particular times; it is under the protedion of the Governor and
the Magiftrates.
Are the female convids boarded and lodged in this fadory?—Yes, all of-them?
-whenever Government employ convids they board and lodge them.
Is the perfon under whofe cafe the fadory i;, refponfible for the good condud: of
thofe perfons ?—Yes, he is fo far refponliblej that if they offend he muft bring
them forward , to the magiftrates ; they are under his control.
You have /aid, that whenconvifls arc bound out by Government to fettlers, that
their matters are not at liberty to inflict any punilhment themfelves in cafe of idlc-
nefs, but they may apply to a magiftrate for that purpofe ; what evidence is.nepeflary
for the matter to bring of that idlenefs/ will his own complaint be fufficicjit?—
The magiftrate will confider of the weight of the matter's credit, .who makes a
complaint againft a convict ; if a fervant behaves ill,orisguiltyof.neglpcl, the
matter comes forward and ftates that to a magiftrate, - ■■ >.j


Is it in the power of that mailer to get his fervant punifhed merely by ftatihg a
complaint againft him before the magiftrate ?—That depends upon the magiftrate’s
difcretion.
Is the complaint made upon oath ?—-Sometimes it may, and fometimes it may
not.
Has a tingle magiftrate a power of punilhing?—Yes; upon condition it is repre-
fented to the Governor. During my government I knew nothing of a Angle magif-
trates punilhing men for any offences, otherwife than recommending them to the
Governor to be taken from their mailers fervitude, and changed for others, except
as before ftated in diftant parts of the fettlement.
From your knowledge of the power thofe magiftrates have, do you conceive it
would be illegal in a lingle magiftrate to order punifliment?—l think it fhould be
illegal for one magiftrate to punilh convicts any further than in removing them from
their mailers fervices. >
It is already in evidence before the Committee, that fingle majgiftrates have. had
the power, and have inflidled to the amount of twenty or thirty lalhes? —When the
magiftrates meet as a court, with the Judge-Advocate, they confider what punilh-
ment Ihall bc-inflifted ; with refped to a fingle magiftrate, they do little more than
commit. ,
Whether thofe convifts who are diftributed amongft the fcttlers are left entirely
to the management of the fcttlers, or are they under the care of any fuperintendents'
who are directed to infpedl the conduct of thofe mailers towards them ?—‘They are
under the cafe and charge of their matters only ; they live with therm as fervants.
Is it ufual for the convidls that are employed for Government to make application'
to be diftributed to fcttlers ?—I do not recollect any fuchinftance.! .. . >
Are the; perfons who apply for female fervants, upon a ; freih arrival of fuch. con-
vifts, allowed to feledl the individuals for themfelves? —Yes ; the perfons who want
fervants generally come and name the perfons they would wilh to 1 have-in their
fervitude; others may not do it, but take them accidentally.
Then the i female convidls have no choice, but to go with the perfon who-has-
feleded themf—No,.unlefs the female convifl lays that there is another perfon’
who will apply for her, and with whom Ihe would*more readily engage herfelf.' .
May the woman prefer fervingGoverhmeht ? — Yes;, if Ihe- chufes it ;i there-is'no'
compulfion at all.
In-a:quarterly return; I underftahd that if no objection is made oppofitie to- the
name of thcconvidl, it isTuppofed he has conducted ihimfelf Well ?—-Yes; if a mah*
behaved remarkably well to his mailer, if he went to the magiftrate and-the magifr
trate knew his character to be very good, the magiftrate might fayj this is am ex*
cellent character.
Is it directed. that any fuch notice Ihall'be made ?—No,
Lunœ, 24 ° die February, 1812.
The Honble GEORGE EDEN, in the Chair.
William Bligh, Efquire, again called in, and Examined.
THE'Committee wilh to have the different dafles of fociety in Botany. Bay ftatecF
to them as nearly as you can ftate them ?—Generally we confide? that the-fir Il< clafs 1 '
is the Military 5 the' fecond; the Civil; the third, the Settlers, iri that clafs ! 1 include
not only thofe from England, ; but thofe which were fettled, and had 1 grants after
having received free pardons*; the fourth dais are callcd-Landholders, are’ mad©'
up of perfons-rentitig land, and; I believe, including feme ticket of leave me'h; the’
fifth clafs,- common ‘labourers, free; the fixfh clafs, ticket of leave' men aridcorivicts.;
What particular advantages have the military beyofld any other clafs ?—They had*
a greater ration for fome time, according-to the general-order book, whlchw&s called
amiilitary ration; and was larger than• the' others; but it was : nbt : fo in 'm'y‘ time.
Government’s full ration-to its fervants in'New-South Wales, per’wbek,- is; wheat, 1
ten pounds, or eight pounds of flour-maize, three poundsj or threepintsof peafe,-
Beef feven pounds, or* four* pounds- of pork, failed mteaf; fugar fix ounces; or a
pound of rice; or one-ppundof wheat-in* 1 lieu of it; -it happens lometimes that rice l
and-oatmeal-are cifcumftancd, 1 and maize-isuffued in
3*41. K double
35
of Evidence.] ON r TRA NS FOR TAT I ON.


double quantities for wheat; the military ration, while it was given out, ten pounds
' and a half of flour, or thirteen pounds of wheat, or maize in proportion, four pounds
fix ounces of pork, or ten pounds and a half of beef.
Is there any diftindlion made between the free fettlers and the fettlers from
amongft the convicts ?—Free fettlers of all defcriptions receive equal indulgences
agreeable to their merits. ’
Do they hold the fame rank in the fociety at New South Wales?—Not in my
time, the free fettlers from England always having a preference.' *
Have any of the fettlers from amongft the convicts acquired fuch a character as
to be generally received in fociety?—Not I believe in the fuperior fociety; I never
permitted them to come to the Government houfe •, thofe advantages, in my opinion,
were not to be expected until after generations, when they deferve it.
Were any of them treated with refpect by the: other fettlers ? —They mixed in
fociety together, and had dealings I believe together fometimes.
Were fuch dealings frequent ?—I really do not know how frequently they might
be. ...'■
• But was there in the Colony a great diftinction made between the two, be their
general behaviour what it might?—They received favours equally, provided they
merited them.
Ido not mean from Government, but the genera! fociety of the Colony ?—I
believe, a man who had been a convict was always remembered by others as having
been fuch. •
And was that never blotted out. by any future good conduct ?—lt is impoffible to
lay how far it might be obliterated from the minds of the other free fettlers, but
with refpect to myfelf, the Governor, ITo far made a diftinction, that I would not
advance them to any dignities, Rich as the ftate of magiftracy ; they held fuch offices
as conflablcs. - ' _
Are any of them advanced to the fituation of clerks in public offices?—l believe
they might have been advanced to- do the duty of clerks in public offices; for even
convicts were and are employed as clerks in Government offices, which by a regular
proceeding of the colony in the courfe of a little time might have been held by free-
men, the .defendants of the others; I mean to fay, that in no inftancc whatever
ought it to be allowed; tranfports to.hold places of truft and confidence refpecting
the State, but thofe that come free from England, or the defeendants of the others.
Defcribc the religious eftablilhment of the Colony ?—The religious eftablilhment
of the colony is the Church of England, there are numerous others, Tome Roman
Catholics, and fome Diflenters from the eftablilhed Church, I do not mean to fay
Prelbyterians, Diflenting Proteftants, there might be fome Prelbyterians alfo.
Is the colony divided into parifties ?—Yes. .' •
How many ?—There is Sydney, the Hawkesbury, and Paramatta, I am not fure
whether they are not called diftricts.
Are there churches in each diftrict, and provilion for clergymen ?—'There was no.
church in Sydney, except a place appropriated for that ufe; there was a church
begun to be built, but it was, not completed until after my arrival, when I got it
nearly done, with eight bells erected in the tower, a thing never known before in
New South Wales; there was a church at Paramatta half completed, and the places
of worfhip at the Hawkesbury were only houfes where prayers were held; but during
my time the church was completed with pews and every thing.
Was fervice performed every Sunday in thofe feveral churches or places appro-
priated to public worlhip ?—Regularly; .1 have heard divine fervice -in each of
them, and I never failed ,to attend at Sydney, at the head quarters.
Were any means taken to enforce the attendance of the, conviifts, or any notice
taken of thefe .who were abfent ?—The conftables and certain perfons had orders
to fuffer no loiterings about the places of divine worlhip, and every pcrlbn was
directed, to come as far as the places would hold them, which were very confined :
but in remote parts of the fettlement the fettlers held prayers in their own private
houfes, to which their neighbours attended.
That was, I fuppofe, quite optional ?—Yes. " ,
Was the practice of reading prayers in private houfes general ?—lt was about the
Hawkesbury—fome perfons had it; I cannot fay it was general; befides there were
fo many Roman-Catholic convicts.
The convicts were not allowed by , the fettlers to attend divine worlhip in their
houfes ?—lt was the fettlers and their fervants, who were generally convicts.
What provilion was there for the clergymen in thofe'' different diftricts .? —There
was


was a provifion from Government, and we were in want of clergymen ; the principal
clergyman had gone to Englandfioon after my arrival, by leave. '
Were there any other duties attached to their office befide the mere performance
of religious duties on Sundays ; fuch as the inftruction of the poor ?—They were
always to look after the poor, and to regulate them in their manners wherever they
had the opportunity. The reverend Mr. Marfden had always attended to it, and
Mr. Fulton, the refxdent clergyman at head quarters, had, befides his church duties,
orders from me to attend to all the private fchools, to fee that they were regulated. 1
I ffiould fuppofe there were full four hundred children I had got into training, in
my time. ' j
Private or public fchools ?—Private fchools.
Was there any public eftablifliment for education ?—Only the orphan-fchool;
which Was fupported by duties levied on (hipping,- and feme other means.
Were thofe private fchools fupported by Government ?—The colony was in great
riiftrefs when I went to it ■, in a few months I had begun to felect places where
fchools ffiould be built, and fuch matters as Tcould find out I endeavoured to
remunerate from little advantages, and got to attend and educate the children.
Were there any public places for worihip for any other religion than the church
<eftabli(hment'? —No, none fixed. -
1 Were all deferiptions of places of public worffiip allowed ?—Yes, there were
none ever : forbidden ; the queftion never was afked. I never had an application
from a Roman-Catholic to have a chapel, or a Dill’enter for a meeting.
Then, in' fact, there were no public places of worffiip but for the church of
England?—No. 1
• Was any account taken, or return made, of the religion of the different convicts
and fettlers in the colony ?—None, that I know of.
Was fervice performed on any other day of the week except Sunday in thepariffi
church ?—No, unlefs it was a feftival, fuch as Chriftmas-day, and all the fcftivals.
Then a convict’s merely expreffing that he entertained fentiments of religion
different from, the eftabliffied-church would be held a fufficient excufe for his
non-attendance at the parifli church ?-•-Ifhoiild have confidered that no man (hould
have been forced to go contrary to what his religion was.
Was there then, in fact, a good attendance of the convicts?—No, there was no
good attendance of the convicts, nor was there room to hold them on my arrival.
Was there an apparent unwillinghefs to attend ?—Not that I know of, becaufe 1
ffiould never have alked aTldman-Gatholic to have attended.
But among them whom you fiippofed to be Proteftants?~Many of thofe who
were Proteftants, and did not attend, 1 ! dare fay, bad I held the Government up to
this time,'would-have attended, and there would have been places of worffiip fuf-
ficient to have held them ; the troops always attended.
Was the attendance from amongfT the fettlers regular ?—The places of worffiip
were generally well filled. , :/ *
Do you know whether there was any catholic prieft ?—There were two I believe.
Were thofe priefts free fettlers or convids ?—-They were fent out as convids with
the others. '.
1 Do you know how the religious inftrudors of thofe who diffented from the church
came there ?—I believe they were fent out originally as miffionaries; there were
feveral of thofe men who were lent out by the miffionaries in the colony.
> Did any of thofe who were fent out as miffionaries officiate in the cftabllffied
church ?—There was one by the name of Harris at Hawkeffiury, who I was glad to
get to officiate there for want of regular chaplains. -
.Was Mr. Harris a Diffenter ?—i am not fure he had not taken regular orders in
the church. , ,
■ How were they fupported ?—He was fupported by affiftance from Government,
and by keeping a fchool he received certain gratuities from the fettlers, but which
however were very ftnall,' and I think he fuffered a good deal.
Were thofe miffionaries numerous in the colonies ?—No, they were not numerous,
I believe they are more'fo now than in any time, as they have returned from
Otaheite, and fome other places they had been fent to.
Were they perfons of good charadcr in general ?—Yes, I think very fair cha-
rader, as far as I know.
Did they devote thcmfelves exclufively to the objeds for which they were fent, or
did, they engage in any other purlint ?■—-They did not devote themfelves entirely to
... the
37
of Evidence.] ON TRANSPORTATION.


the obje<st of their purfuit, and were engaged'in fpme trifling bulinefs for their
I fupport and advantage. . • - .
Did you ever know any of them who became retail dealers in articles of general
confumption ?—Yes, I think there were fome of them did.
In what articles ?—ln apparel and food, 1 believe ;or in goods neceflary for appa-
rel, and alfo in food. •
Did you ever know any of them who were retailers of fpirituous liquors?—l'
believe thofe who could get it might have retailed fpirituous liquors, or did barter
with fpiritupus liquors, but they got very little fpirits, but this traffic was princi-
jpally before my Government.
Did any of thofe men, except Harris, keep a fchool ?—Yes, there was another
kept a fchool at Paramatta.
Were they chiefly fupported by gratuities from the convi&s and lettlers, or by
funds from home?—They received gratuities from the fcttlers, and Government
always indulged them.
I thought you confined that to Harris ?—I thought I was asked as to Hawkelbury;
the Governor was always aiding to the fuccour of the miflionaries on account of
their fociety.
I think you ftated, that you are not aware of any meetings of diffenting Pro-,
teftants held regularly in the colonies ?—At their houfes they, might have met,, and
read prayers throughout the colonies ; where pcrfgns were fo. dil'pofed they might
meet half a dpzen or half-a fcore, and there they would, regularly, go through the
fervice; I. knoiv of one upon the Hawkelbury ; the poor fettler lived on his farm,
and the other neighbours lived on their farms, and it was agreed upon, that they
Ihould have prayers at this man’s houfe, and they came to his houle from up and
down the river.
Were-any of the conyifts, who,happened to.be diffenters, allowed to meet in this
houfe ?—The principle of religion would have allowed any man, that, chofe to come,
near them, and hear divine worlhip for the day when, it was adminiftered. I never
heard of any fefit of people, that had divine worlhip,; but what allowed any dais of
perfons to cprne.to them, if they, chofe, who were of their way of thinking..
Would the owner of this particular houfe have admitted a convid ?—Perhaps;
the houle. might not admit all that would.coipe, but I believe, they would admit:all
indifcriminately, that tl}e houle would hold:
Does the revenue of the eftablilhed church-in the colony arife out of land, or
are the clergymen fupported by a ftipend from Government ?—They were fupported
by, Government, and: certain portions, of land were allotted exprefsly. to the church
oy the Government’s, orders; and . will in time arife. to, a conliderable amount, no-
doubt j. in the general inllrudions from his Majefty and, Secretary, of State, all thefe,
things are particularly provided for. .
Dp the prpvifipns.for.thedifferentclergymcmdiffer in proportion to. the fize of the
diftrid and its population ?—No, 1 believe it has not done fo,, they have received-
pay.according.to their rank; .Mr. Marfden is the firft chaplain*, and Mr. Fulton the
I'econd chaplain, whp received lefs< than; Mr. Marfden;, but , there is.a regular
.eftabliflunent ordered by Government.
Is, the Comjpittee-to underftand that, the-clergy, in the eflablllhed church do
not live.injthe-diftrid, to which they, are attached, that therejs not one clergyman,
regularly redding,in eachdiftrid.?—There are not enough for-tbe different'diftrids.
Dp they, refide. on their, particular, diftricts ?—rMr. Marfden refides at Paramatta,
apd_, officiates occafionally. both, at Sydpey and, the Hawkelbury,; Mr. Fulton was.
generally at Sydnej’, but during Mr. Marrden’s.abfcnce alio attended.Hawkelbury.
and ? Paramatta; when!- went into. the interior; the : principal clergyman- always
attended me, and always performed divine worlhip on Sundays.
You haye, ftated,, that-if you bad continued Governor of. the. colony .you enter-
tained- an, expectation, thal; c the churches would have been j very, fully attended ; was-
that expectation founded; upon, haying more rooms and-accommodation for the;
perfonsrW,h.o,,wilhe,d- to.,attend, or. upon any msafures-.you wiflied;to take, for. the
purppfe. of enforcing attendance ?—Upon both j .but not; particularly .-by, enlorcing[
attendance, but by recom mending it,, and that-in-;fucb:a.way, ( that I had no doubts
bu.fmy,ends would:have . .. , , ' .
Were thofe meafures in train during the time you was in.the-fetflement.?—-Yes n
theyjWcrGj.nj.oft.amply. . T- '■ ,
, Wihat.wfre- ?—By,- buijding-ofiiplaq€S; : ofidiyinefiworlhip, and' im--,
paving the morals of the people. ,
By


By what means did you expert to improve the morals of the people?—By fettingv
good examples, and by keeping them as orderly as it was in my power to do.
Were the clergymen in the habits of yifiting convidts in their houfes, and admi-
nlftering advice to the inhabitants ?—I do not know how far they vifited the houfes,
but it was my directions, and their inclination, to give all the advice poffible, and
to improve the'people generally in their ways and doings.
Did you ever receive any reports from the clergymen refpeding the condudt of
the inhabitants ?—By way of information, and oefcriptive, of the inhabitants in
general, the clergymen made various remarks to me, all whicli were intended for the
general good.
Did the clergymen employ thcmfelves in any other way than in their office j did
they employ themfelves in farming?—Yes, they employed themfelves in farming.
But not in trade ?—No, 1 do not know an mftance of their trading, any of them
in my time. .
Have you ever obferv.ed any good effcds refult from the exertions of the Miffion-
aries ?-—No, Ido not recoiled obferving any thing particular from their exertion?,
but it might have added to the morality of fuch perfons as they connected them-
felves with.
But would not the circumftance of a miffionaiy being a retailer of fpirituous
liquors be calculated to produce very pernicious effeCts in the colony?—Either one
or all of them ; if they did that, it was extremely pernicious to the colony; but I
conceive they complied with my regulations, forbidding the bartering with fpirits.'
Then did they retail fpirits until they were prohibited by you from doing lb ?
I have reafon to fuppofe that when they could get them, at leaft, they would barter
them.
Was there any regulation in the colony as to adminiftering, at certain periods,
the holy facrament? —Oh, yes; I always, attended it regularly myfelf.
Was there any regifter kept in the different diftrids of baptifms, foas to enforce
the bringing the children of the convids, and the fettlers, to receive baptifm ?
Yes, there was a regifter kept, and children were publicly baptized ; but I found
that many of thofe children, when it became generally the Cafe in my Government
to receive them at certain periods, as the principal mmifter went round, then fome
of them were eight or ten years old, or more, before they were baptized.
Was there any objed to be fecured by the fettlers, or by the conviCls, by the
baptifm of their children ? None but their own principles, to bring up the children
the lame as in England; we were governed as nearly as poffible as the people in
England are; when we came to a little order and regularity, I found that the peo-
ple would naturally bring their children to be baptized.
But there was no object of inheritance to be obtained by their being baptized ?
Yes, they would be entitled to all the privileges of fubjeds of any part of the
empire. '
How often was fervice performed at Sydney ?—Twice a day, if the clergyman was
there, morning and afternoon; but if there was a neceffity for the clergyman to go
to Paramatta that day, he could not do it; he mull go there.
How many would the church at Sydney hold, do you think?—l Ihould think fix
or feven hundred perfons.
Were all the children that were brought up at the orphan-fehool taken to
church ?—Yes, always.
How are the children admitted into the orphan-fehool ?—The number, I think’
is fifty; when there was a child thatdeferved to be attended to, and had no parents,
the Committee of the Orphan Fund reported it to the Governor, and it was admitted.
Were not illegitimate-children fent there ?—-I believe they were, illegitimate as
well as legitimate; it was all governed by the Committee ; the child was fent to
and upon their approving of its admittance into the fchool, it was reported to the
Governor, and I always affented to it.
Do you know what the fum is which is appropriated to the annual fupport of the*
orphan-fehool ?—I do not recoiled exactly the fum that was expended about it, but
at the latter part of my time I confidered that to keep that fchool in proper deco-
rum and order it would coft about £. 1,500 a year.
That is £. 30 for each child ? —-Yes.
Did you confidcr. that fum neceffary for the fupport of each child in the orphan’-’
fchool ?—I thought it would have been abfolutely neceffary for the fupport of the
children, including the repairs of the houfe, attendance of fervants, and gratuities'to
the matter and miftrefs, and the clothing and feeding of the children,
341. L ' To
39
of Evidence.] ON TRANSPORTATION.


To what age are the children kept in the orphan-fchool ?—I do not Immediately
'recoiled the age, but I know that young women have been married from the
orphan-fchool.
At what age are they taken in ?—At about five or fix years old; I believe, as
young as that; but fometimes they may have been a little older..
How are thefe orphans fupported who have no friends ?—-They are fupported by
Government.
When the children'left the orphan fchool, what provifion was made for them ?
They were frequently taken out upon applications by the rnofi refpedable people,
to be their fervants, and thofe children became very well qualified before they left
the fchool, to read and write, as well as to do all work as fempftreflcs. When I
affirmed the government I found the fchool in a very diforderly ftate, many of the
girls were very loofe in their manners.
What proportion confided of girls ? —They were all girls.
Is there no public fchools for male orphans ?—No.
Who are the perfons who managed thefe fchools ?—-People that were appointed in
the colony. For want of good mailers and raiftrefles I wrote home to the Secretary
of State to have proper people fen tout to me; till they came there were very impro-
per perlbns about the orphan-fchool.
Were the children in thofe fchools taught any trade ?—They were taught to read
and write, and to work as fempltrefles j and the llraw-hat manufadure was beginning
'to be introduced.
‘ Were thofe works fold in the colony for the benefit ol .the children ?—ltwas not
advanced fo far; with refpeifl to felling bonnets and, things, they made them for
themfelves; but they made Ihirts, and all kinds of linen, and money was paid by
people who required them to do fo; and that money went to the fund for their
fupport generally. • . '
Could you, from your obfervation, judge whether the women who had been
brought up at this fchool turned but better than thofe brought up at other fchools?
—I do not know about the other fchools; but I heard that fome turned out well,
and others extremely ill. ■
Were the generality of thofe who had been brought up there, model! and induf-
trlous in their habits when they fettled in life ?—lt is a doubt with me, how far the
generality of the children did turn out fo well as might have been expeded from the
inllitution ; I know.that when I was coming away from the country I doubted it.
Can you Hate the,proportion of men, women, and children in the colony?—By
a muller, made inAuguft 1807, there were 395 married women; 1,035 concubines;
legitimate children 807; natural children 1,025 ; at this time there appeared to be
166 free men, who never had been convids, and were, in my opinion, competent to
have ferved as Jurymen, or in any other fituation of. trull and confidence.
From what document is the muller in 1807 made up, lb far as refpeds the legi-
timate and illegitimate children? —By the perfonal attendance of the men and women
at the general muller.
There are a great many children born where no father or mother is afeertained ?
—The muller is made in this way; there is a general order for every perlbn in the
colony to appear; they do appear; but many of the parents are living with lome of
thofe fettlers, and then they deferibe that they have one child or more living with
them, that has 101 l its father or mother; or a woman may fay the father has run away
and left the colony.
To what age are the children included in this muller ? —Various ages.
Did it extend to perfons of the age of fixteen ?—-When the father and mother
were alked how many children they had, they declared the number by faying, fo
many boys, and fo many girls ; or all boys, or all girls. ,
Then, you fuppofe that the defeription of children applies to all perfons who are
maintained by their parents, or perfons with whom they live ?—Yes, the fame as we
call children here, generally perfons depending on them.
At what age may children, either male or female, generally become ufeful to the
perfons with whom they live, or be ufeful lb as to be employed by other perlbns ?—•
At ten years of age I Ihould think they would be of fome ufe; the poor lettlers fend
their children, when eight or ten years old, to watch their herds, and go with their
flieep.
Are regular regillers kept of baptifms, marriages, and burials ? : —Yes.
By whom ?—By the clergyman.
And


. And do people of all feds of religion enter in thefe regifters the baptifms, mar-
riages, and deaths of the perfons of their families ?—I am not fure huw far this was
done; it was a regulation I .was beginning to eftablifh, in order to have the means of
judging the number of people that were in the colony, and their different claffes, and
their annual increafe and decreafe.
; Are the burial grounds cbnfecrated ?—I believe they arc.
. , How many places of burial.are there ?—There is one at Sidney, one at Paramatta,
and one at Hawkefbury.
Are any fees paid to the clergyman upon regiftering baptifms, marriages, and
burials ?—I do not know of any.
. Is there any general order of Government requiring that all baptifms, burials, and
marriages, (hould be regiftered?—ldo not recoiled that there is.
Then, in fad, fuch regifter depends upon the option of the parties?—lt may, in
fome degree; but wherever the minifters attended, I believe they always regiftered
regularly.
But throughout the colony they were not regularly kept up ?—I do not know that
they were ; I cannot fay with refped to that particularly.
1 think you faid the girls left the orphan-fehool at fixteen years of age ?—I do
not know the exad age at which they left the orphan-fehool; but if any refpedable
perfon applied for them as fervants or attendants, the Committee judged of it, and
allowed them to go accordingly. .
And have feveral perfons left that fchool in confequence of marriage?—Yes, I
believe feveral.
Are there many inftances of marriage taking place at fo early an age?—l do not
know whether there arc many inftances or not.
Mercurii, 26° die February 1812.
The Honourable GEORGE EDEN in the Chair.
William Bligh , Efquire, again called in, and Examined.
HOW are the Courts of Criminal Jurifdidion conftituted ?—They are conftituted
by a regular Patent from Government, and Ad of Parliament.
How often are they held ? —As often as occafion may require, at the will of the
Governor. .-■ ■
Of whom do they confift?—The Criminal Court confifts of the Judge-Advocate,
and fix officers belonging to the naval and land fervice; the Civil Court is formed
of the Judge-Advocate, and two of the moft refpedable houfckeepers of the town
or country.
By whom are thofe houfckeepers chofen ?—By the Governor, concerting with
the Judge-Advocate, in my time. ‘
Under what authority is the Court confifting of the Judge-Advocate and two
houfckeepers held ?—There is a Patent for it.
Do thofe houfckeepers continue in office, or arc they changed at every different
court that is held?—-My regulation was to have been to change them every year;
I have heard that fome of them have been in'office about two years; they are ap-
pointed entirely by the Governor, and it was myTntention to change them, not to
fuffer the fame men to fit conftantly on the Court.
Have they any falary •or fees paid to them ?—I do not know of any falary
or fees.
Do the fame laws of evidence, and the fame criminal law, prevail in the colony
as prevail in England?—Juft the fame; I always did and (hould guide myfelf by
the laws of this country as near as poffiblc.
Are convided felons admitted as evidence ?—They are admitted as evidence ;
but I always, upon reading the records of the Court, confidercd the evidences in-
dividually, and then judged of the cafe. The Governor has power to reprieve; there-
fore all thofe minutes are brought before him; and occalionally, when that took
place, I retired for a day to corifidcr of the evidence. J
Were the Officers conftituting this Court for the moft part military or naval ?
Moft part military*
Did
41
of Evidence.] ON TRANSPORTATION.


Did that arrangement give fatisfa&ion to the inhabitants, or were they defirous
of having trial by Jury edablifhed ? —lt did not give fatisfa&ion to the inhabitants;
they were particularly defirous that they might not be fo much in the power of 1116-
military, but might have fome kind of juftice that would bring them nearer to
their brethren in Great Britain.
Did the Governor appoint the offiters to try criminal cafes?—Yes, I infilled
upon doing it; and was of opinion that it could not with propriety be left to the dif-
cretion of the commanding officer of the military.
To whom were the fines levied in this Court paid, and how applied ?—To the
jail or orphan-fund, and I think fometimes they were to the Crown ; a few of them
were appropriated by the opinion of the Committee; and the others the Governor
was to didribute as he thought bed for public purpofes.
Who regulated the manner in which they were to be appropriated ?—The
Court regulated the appropriation, except where they were retrained by an order
of Government.
Was the criminal law generally aided upon in thefc Courts, or had the Governor
power to extend it by his ordinance?—The criminal law was aided upon as near as
poffible to the law of this country; and for my part, as Governor of that fettlement,
I never departed ft om that courfe. \
Was it not in the power of Governors to iffuc ordinances, and to annex penalties
for the difobedience of them? —Thefe were what we called colonial regulations, and
in my'opinion never to be entered into but when there were no provifions in the
Britifh laws for them. *
What was the lighted penalty which the Governor had the power of affixing to
any crime by thofe colonial regulations ?—1 believe the conviction went as far as
foolafhes; but I leave the books containing thefe regulations, in the hands of this
Committee; and there were alfb perfons tranfported for committing offences in that
country, when prifoners at the time, by extending the length of their fervitude, and
fending them to different out-fettlements.
What was the greated fine impofed by the fble authority of the Governor?—l
believe, when determined by a regular Court, it may have gone as far as £. i 00, except
bonds given by maders of (hips, not to take away convicts or free perfons without
permiffion.
Did it appear to you that there were a number of fettlers diffident in the colony
to furnifh juries?—Yes.
And of characters diffidently good to enable you to place reliance upon them ?
Yes; and I think their decifions would have, been fairer than thofe that took place
without them. .
Was tire proportion of perfons tried in the Criminal Courts much greater than in
this country ?—I rather think, according to the proportions of the people here, and
in that colony, that there were a greater number. By, a lid of trials before the
Criminal Court, from Augud ißos to Augud 1807, the numbers of perfons tried
were 117-. •
Of what clafs of perfons did they principally ccnfid ?—■--They confided of prifoners,
and prifoners who had been emancipated, and free pardoned.
Were more tried from amongd the fervants of Government, than from amongd
the fervants of fettlers? —I do not know that there were; the fervants were nearly of
the fame dais of people ; but I believe there were many ticket-of-leave men among
the offenders. .
Did it appear to you that more crimes had been committed by .perfons tranfported
for life, than by perfons tranfported for a term of years?—l cannot fpeak correClly
to that; I flrould think chat'there were more that had been brought to trial and
punidxed, who were fentenced for a Ihort term of years, than for life.
Was the general conduCt of perfons tranfported for years better than that of
thofe tranfported for life'?—l do not know particularly; I do not think they.were
better than thofe tranfported for life.
Did their indudry appear to you to be the fame?—l fliould rather think the .ad-
vantage would be on the fide of thofe tranfported for life.
Were the indances of peijury very frequent in thofe courts ?—'l believe very
common indeed.
What was the punifhment for it ?—lf they were not fentenced to tranfportation
for life, it was an increafe of the term, of their tranfportation, and theywere Cent to
didant parts of the colony, to the out-fettlements; if fentenced for life, they were
ordered


ordered to hard labour, or flood in the pillory, and received corporal puniffi-
ment.
Was any legal advifer allowed to the prifoner ?—The Judge-Advocate was con-
fidered always to adt on the behalf of the prifoner. There were no lawyers but thofe
who had been prifoners, and they were not allowed to plead.
When convidted, who decided upon the fentence ?—The Court decided, and the
Judge-Advocate pronounced the fentence, and the Governor had power to remit it.
To whom were appeals made from the Civil Courts ?—To the Governor in all
cafes.
Had he any legal adviler ?—He had no advifer as a legal advifer, but the Judge-
Advocate.
Did it appear to you that a legal advifer appointed by Government would have
been advantageous ?—A legal advifer with refpedl to the law, certainly, but no other
advifer appointed by Government was neccflary; the Governor thould decide for
himfelf, particularly in that colony. A Governor Ibould have judgment and wifdom
fufficient to govern himfelf, and never to afk the opinion of any perfon upon all
cafes of right and wrong.
Are- the Civil Courts open to convi&s ?—No,- a convidt cannot fue for any debt
that may be owing to him.
Can he fue for no perfonal injury ?—He is immediately to complain to a magis-
trate, and then the cafe is inquired into, and he receives redrefs accordingly.
Is it by the orders of the Government he can neither lue nor be fued ?—Yes; I
believe it is by the old Handing regulations of the colony, that they can neither fife
nor be fued.
Is imprifonment for debt frequent in the colony ?—Yes, it is frequent.
■ Can you Hate the number of perfons in prifon for debt, at any one time ?—-I have
known that there have been fix or eight, or more in prifon for debt.
Was any provifion made for them ?—I think by the general orders there is feme
allowance the creditor is obliged to make them whilft in prifon.
In what jails were they confined ?—They were confined in the Gaol at Sydney; a
miferable place apart from where the felons were confined.
What is the legal tender for debt ?—The legal tender was in dollars.
Was paper a legal tender ?—Not the paper currency of Individuals, in my time (
I would not allow it.
Is there not much Government paper circulated in the colony ?—Yes,,
Was Government paper a legal tender at that time ?—1 believe it would not have
been refufed ; I think it was confidered as a legal tender.
Was its acceptance in payment of debts enforced by the Governor?—lf it had
come before me in the Court of Appeal, and not-exceeding £. 300, I would have
-enforced it, particularly becaufe I could have made the payment pofitively fure.
Was there no other Government paper in circulation than Government receipts ?
—I do not think there were, except notes iflued by thePaymafter, for the fubfiftence
of the troops.
In what were thofe Government papers payable ?—lt was payable by drafts on the
treafury, and fuch were the demands, that frequently people gave premiums for thofe
Government papers, particularlyPaymafters bills. I believe the officers have got 25 per
cent, for them in exchange for copper coin, and the paper currency of individuals.
Were they not liquidated in goods or cattle, and not in money.?—lf a man had a
Government receipt, he might liquidate or exchange it as he pleated ; but I believe
no money was ever got from them; they were generally collected by feme individuals,
and prelentcd to the Commiflary, and he gave bills upon the Treafury for them.
Were all deferiptions of perfons allowed freely to pafs from one part of the colony
to another ? —Priloners and men who were not regularly fettled in the country, were
obliged to have pafies to go from one place to, another. -
Who had the power of granting thofe paffes ?—The magiftrates had the power*
Was any thing paid for them ?—I really do not know, 1 would not haver allowed
fuch a thing if I had known it.
What were the regulations of the tattoo?—After the tattoo had beat, it was
fuppofed that all perfons had retired to their habitations, and every thing was to be
at reft ; and perfons who in the night-time went out from one houfe to another were
obliged to carry a light, and if hailed by the centinels, if they were officers, or quali-
fied people, they were to anfwer by the word “..Officer,” and they were let pafs without
moleftationj but a parole and counterfign were every day given out, to be ufed in
cafe of emergency.
341. M Who
43
of Evidence.] ON TRANSPORTATION,


Who enforced thefe regulations ?—The centinels belonging to the corps were
at different parts of the town.
Had you no watchmen but from amongft the military ?—Yes, there were under
'Conftables, who were always at the command of the Provoft Marlhal, and they paraded
the town very frequently, and if any riots or troubles were going on, had p.ovver to
take them up and carry them before a magiftrate, and the cafe was inquired into.
From amongft what perfons were the conftables appointed ?—-It had been a cuftom
to appoint prifoners under-conftables, which fhould never be any longer than when
neceffity required. ,
Were any perfons ever punifhed by the order of the Governor without having
been firft tried by feme court, civil or military ?—I never inflidted a punifhment in
my life, and (hould think it highly inconfiftent and improper in a Governor to
do fo. '
Do you'think that It would be pradti cable in the prefent ftate of the fettlement to
form an affembly capable of making laws for the colony ?—I do not think that any
perfon in the colony at this moment fliould have fo much power.
Do not you think that from among the 166 perfons whom you have-deferibed as
being capable of holding offices in the colony, that a limited number of them might
be found who would be capable of affifting in fuch ah objedt?—No doubt many of
them would be found capable of affifting, but it'would require a very juft and wife
man to go among them to form any code of laws.
Did the Governor impofc duties on trade, and on merchants and exports, at his
own pleafure ?—Yes, the Governor had the power of levying duties at his own will,
and was juftified in that power by his orders from home.
. Do not you then think that an affembly might be very ufeful in forming regula-
tions for the impofition of fuch duties?-* If a juft affembly could be formed they
certainly would be very advantageous.
Was there any power of appeal, or was it ufual to appeal to England, againft the
impofition of fuch duties as were impofed by the authority of the Governor?—l
never knew of any appeal, upon fuch an occafion, being made; but if any perfons
had ever felt themfelves aggrieved from any duties whatever, they had always oppor-
tunities of making fuch an appeal, or of feeing the Governor, and converfing with
him upon it.
When thefe duties were impofed, was there an ordinance publifhed 1 , directing in
what proportions, and upon what occafions, they fliould be levied ?—ln my general
orders it was expreflly mentioned the duties that fliould take place.
Did it ever happen that duties were levied without a general order having been
publifhed, for the purpofe of making them known to all perfons concerned ?—No,
never in my time.
In ivhat way were thefe orders made public?—By a general-order book.
Where was that general-order book kept ? —lt was open to every one; and when
a general order was iffued it was fent round to the magiftrates, civil and military
officers; it was regularly fent off by an orderly ferjeant in the morning, and carried
round to the refpeccive officers, and the military, in the different parts of the town.
Was there a general-order book at Sydney, at Paramatta, and on the Havvkeftmry ?
• —The magiftrates of thofe places had all thofe general orders refpectively ; in fliort,
every order that was given was promulgated immediately by the magiftrates.
Were the general orders publifhed in the Sydney Gazette ?—Yes, I believe they
were. _ ‘
What is the punifhment for defertion of the convict ?—As Don as he was brought
back he was fometimes put to hard labour, and fuffered corpora! punifhment, or
had additional tranfportation, as the court thought proper to inflift.
Had the court an arbitrary power of punifhing for defertion ?—No; I think it
was particularly mentioned in the general orders upon thofe heads.
Had the Governor a power to pardon ?—Yes.
. What was the fee on each pardon ?—1 do not know the fum exadfly ; I believe
there is a table of fees.
But there was a fee ? —I have a notion there was fome trifling fee to the fecretary’s
clerk.
Were the convicts fo pardoned entitled to all the advantages of thofe who had
ferved their whole time?—Yes; when they have had their free pardon they were
perfectly as free men as any in England.
. Were, they entitled to the fame grant of land as. the others ?—Yes; I believe if
they had been difpofed to fettle in the country, and made their application, that
> ‘ they


they would receive all the advantages which Government had ordered to all thofe
who fettled in the country under fuch circumftarices; they would not have the
fame advantages as free fettlers, but certain advantages Government had pointed
out, that they thould receive after their term of tranfportation was up.
Were the duplicates of their pardons regularly fent home ?—I am afraid that not
one half of them were lent home. I only pardoned two in the courfe of my govern-
ment, and thofe 1 did fend home duplicates of, to the Secretary of State. Governor
Macquarie informed me, before I left the colony, that 172, free pardons had been
granted during the ufurpation of my government.
Were any of thofe who had been pardoned before your arrival ferving in public
offices when you came to the colony ?—1 think there might have been tome; and
it now occurs to me, that James Meehan was adling as furveyor of lands, and
Thomas Alcock was affiflant engineer. ‘The Rev. Mr. Fulton was acting chaplain,
at Sidney, for this gentleman, Governor King told me, he did not confider like other
perfons fent from home, as it was by fome mifreprefentation of his political opinions
that he had been obliged to leave Ireland, and he was a good character. Darcey
Wentworth, a man tranfported for a highway-robbery, acted as affiflant furgeonof
the colony.
Was not his conduct during your refidence in the colony very exemplary ?-
I do not think it was, but quite the contrary.
Do you think him, independently of his moral character, qualified, from his
"knowledge as a furgeon, to fill the fituation which he now holds ?—I have not had
it in my power to judge of his profeffional abilities. Governor King told me, that
he had been appointed through neceflity, and that he had been a troublcfomc
character to him.
Did you ever make any reprelentation to Government refpecling Mr. Darcey
Wentworth, he having held a fituation during the time you was Governor of the
fettlement ?—I did.
Look at that Order, September 17th, 1802; does it appear by that order that
Michael Robinfon, a perfon tranfported, and afterwards conditionally emancipated,
had ferved as clerk to the Judge-Advocate ?—Yes, it certainly does.
And that he afterwards committed perjury ?—Yes.
And was again tranfported for that offence?—Yes.
Do you know the offence for which Michael Robinfon had been originally tran-
fported ?—He was tranfported for fending a threatening letter to extort money.
Do you know in what year he was tranfported ?—I do not. •
, Have you ever known cafes in which convifts have received a free pardon almoft
immediately upon their arrival ? —I never gave one myfelf; I have heard of fome.
Were any regiflers of perfons receiving free pardons kept by the Governor, the
Judge-Advocate, or any other public officer in the fettlement?—l kept my own;
I had none from Governor King.
Have you any reafon to believe that they were in exiftence in the colony ?—I can-
not fpeak as to that j the general orders from Government were, that when any
pardon was given, the duplicates were to be fent to the Secretary of State; 1 had
given only two pardons, and duplicates of them were font by'me to the Secretary of
State. _
Was there any fee upon tickets of leave ?—Upon all documents there was fome
little fee.
Had the Governor power to withdraw the tickets of leave at his pleafure?—Yes.
"What certificate was neceffary for emancipation, at the expiration of the fentence
,of any convift ? —lt was making him a free man, and the feal of the colony was af-
fixed to it.
Could the affixing of this feal be refufed upon any pretence whatever?—There is
a certificate that the man has duly ferved his time, and is become free by his fervi-'
tude; but this has not the feal affixed to it. •
Who gives that certificate ?—lt is, I think, given by the Governor. Every year, fix
months, or three months, a number of men give notice of their time being up, the
Secretary examines the publick regiflers to fee if they have really ferved the time for
■which they were fent out, and upon that being afeertained certificates are given for
their freedom. ' _
Was the certificate ever withheld ?—No. ■ _ ■ •
Is not the extenfion of the confinement of any convict in Botany Bay fometimes
impofed for a punilhment of offences committed while he is in Botany Bay ?—Yes, at
all times, and for no other offence but what is committed in the country.
When
45
of Evidence.] ON TRANSPORTATION.


When emancipated what encouragement is there to the convict to fettle in the
colony?—I think Government has given them thirty or forty acres of land, and
fomething in proportion to their children, but that is particularly noticed in the
order; the Governor has inftrudlions from the Secretary of State, exprefsly naming
the advantages they fhali receive if they have gone through a juft fervitude.
Are thofe grants of land for any term of years, or for ever ? —They are for ever;
with this advantage, that I believe they do not pay any quit-rent for ten years.
What refervation is there to the Crown upon thefe grants? —They are particularly
•enjoined that they are not to difpofe of them till after five years, I think.
Is there any reservation of timber? —Yes, feveral; fhip-timber, for inftance, they
are not to cut down.
Is there any allowance made to them of tools or of flock? —It -has ever been the
defire of Government that they fhould have certain proportions of tools and imple-
ments, and fuch portions of flock as could be afforded them.
Were there any regulations to prevent their difpofing of thofe allowances to their
own profit ?—They are particularly forbidden to do fo in the flock, as well as the
land, they cannot transfer their flock or fell any part of it until the third generation.
For,how long after being fo fettled are they fupported from the Government {lores?
—I think they are allowed twelve or eighteen months to be victualled alfo.
What facility is there to a convict having ferved his time to return home, if fuch
fhould be his choice ?—I do not recollect any particular facility being ordered by
Government, but they do get on board of fhips and return to England.
Does the larger proportion of them, in your opinion, return to England, or fettle
in the colony ? —The greater number of them have returned to England, I believe,
and many of them have runaway on board of fhips, not being kept under proper
reftraint.
• When you fay that the greater proportion of them have returned home, do you
include female convicts as well as males ?—No, 1 think they fhould not be included;
I rather think that the greater part of the female convifts do not return home, they
•cannot fo regularly meet with the accommodation on board fhips.
By what means is it poffible for a female convict to find a paffage home ■?—l
believe in general it depends upon her having realized fome money or fome flock,
by which means fhe is enabled to make fome bargain with the mailer, or mates, or
men of the (hip.
Is there not a claufe in the charter-party of tranfportation, forbidding the mafler to
take paffengers home from the colony without permiflion of the Governor?—l
cannot recollect the claufe, but I fuppofe it exifts there, becauJc no man is to lake
a convict out of the colony, or any perfoh whatever, without the confent of the
•Governor.
What other methods-of difpofing of themfelves have the emancipated convicts,
befides occupying land, and returning home ?—lt they fhould be carpenters, or any
handicraft-men, they may remain in the colony and fupport themfelves.
What manufactures are there in which they can find employment ?—There is a
pottery; a hat manufactory; there are carpenters, and a making of coarfe cloths
and woollens; there is a tannery, and a manufactory of tobacco-pipes; there are
fcveral breweries, and fhocmakers, taylors, and tinmen, and a number employed in
-fifheries and coafling veffcls. •
Were the prices of thofe articles fo great as to encourage many to fettle in them ?
—I believe their prices in general of every defeription were high.
Were the prices of labour fettled by the Governor?—The prices of certain
labourers in agriculture were fettled by certain perfons appointed by the Governor to
judge of what the prices fhould be, but I never would interfere in the prices of
mercantile concerns except the barter of fpirits.
Were any perfons emancipated by enlifting into the army ? - I do not recollect
a circumflancc of that kind in my time; but there were many who had been con-
victs, in the New South Wales corps.
• What was the general conduct of the fettlers from amongfl the convicts, compared
to that of the .free fettlers ? —I do not know exactly; I believe fome were equally
good with the free fettlers with refpect to induflry ; the free fettlers were much in
want of fervants, and the convicts unite one with another, and get on very well.
Was drunkennefs very prevalent amongfl the people in general ? —lt was, when
they could get liquor, for it had been fo rcflricted, and fo unequally divided amongfl
them, that for months, many of them could get none, and in the courfe of this
time a monopoly was fo great, and the third after fpirits was fo very flrong, that they
facrificed every thing to the purchafe of them, and the prices were raifed by that
monopoly to fo high a degree that it was the ruin of many of thofe poor people.
Notwithftanding


Notwithftanding the regulations to the contrary, was not the traffic in {pirituous
liquors carried on to a great extent ?—Yes, very great.
Had the miffionaries in the country taken any (hare in that traffic?—l cannot fay
that the miffionaries were particularly guilty of fuch an, offence; if they-had any
liquor to act with in that way it mull have been what they got from the military, and
forae others'who were the particular monopolizers, and got moll of the fpirits, and
therefore I think the mischief they did mull have been very fmallthat way.
You have laid that the miffionaries took articles of fale into the interior of the
country, did they always take out licences ?—They might deal in articles of apparel,
if they had any; 1 do not know any thing of their carrying liquor into the country ;
if the miffionaries did any thing that was wrong it mull be in a very fmall degree ;
I do hot know of any egregious complaints to ftate againft the miffionaries; the
complaints under that head, are complaints of other particular perfons who had been
in the colony before them, who had (hipping, and imported fpirits.
What advantages had the officers of Government in commerce beyond other
perfons?—The military had been accudomed to be indulged with demands upon
the (lores, which they got out of the {lores from Government; they had alfo been
accudomed to receive greater proportions of liquor than any other clafs of men, and
it is remarkable that in the general orders it will be obferved that the diftributions of
fpirits were generally to the civil and military officers without the fettlers being par-
ticularly fpecified as receiving any, which they did not.
Upon the arrival of a (hip, were the fpirituous liquors on board diftributed prin-
cipally to the military and civil officers of the Government ?—Yes, and to licenfed
people, the fettlers had very little; and the fmall portions they were allowed to have
occafionally they were under the neceffity of coming, perhaps, forty miles to rfeceive
a gallon of fpirits, in doing which they {pent ten times more than it was worth, and'
Ion; their time in agriculture.
Was didillation in the colony forbidden?-—Yes, it was particularly forbidden by
all the Governors; I endeavoured to give a general diftribution of liquor to all the
fettlers, and Tent large quantities round at a time to be fo diftributed.
During your refidence in the colony did the cultivation appear to increafe ?—Yes,
very much and highly improved.
Did the {lock appear to increafe in the fame proportion ?—Yes.
Were there any means of difpofing of the {lock and produce in the markets ?
Yes; I had ordered the markets to be open to everyone to bring any thing into
them that they pleafed; and every man in the colony that produced grain Ihould
be allowed to enter as low as five bulhels into Government (lores.
Were the prices fixed by Government?—l iffued orders that public tenders
fliould be given in; different people fent in at different prices, and Government
took the lowed, or a medium as they thought was bed; and by-way of encourage-
ment I offered ten {hillings per buffiel for wheat the enfuingyear.
Can any body but the Governor give tickets of leave ?—No.
How foon after the arrival of the convicts have you ever granted tickets of
leave I did grant tickets of leave, it was from people writing in petitions.-
I took their cafes under my confideration, and got the bed opinion 1 could of the
character of thofe perfons, and I felected very few for tickets of leave; 1 did not
approve of the fyftem.
When convicts, either male or female, who had ferved their time, and not being
able to find the means of returning to Europe, and consequently remaining in the
colony, who provided for them ? —There is no general provifion for them, they offer
their fervice, and they can always get employment in that country, provided they
will work, and behave well; if they become good fervants every thing in that country
will be the fame as it is here. The out-fettlcments were very improperly and
unjuftly managed.
Veneris, 28° die Februarii, 1812.
The Honourable GEORGE EDEN, in the Chair.
Admiral Hunter, formerly Governor of New South Wales, again called in,
and Examined.
- WERE tickets of leave granted in your time?—They were; they were given
as certificates to thofe whole term was expired; they were given as certificates to
inform thole that might wilh to .employ them, that they were tree.
341.; ’ N , Were
47
of Evidence.] <)


Were no tickets of leave granted to thole who had not ferved out their time to
enable them to work for theml’elves? —They never were in my lime.
During your time, were convicts liable to imprifonment for debt ?—They had
been imprifoned for debt, but when I difcovered that they were fo, I forbad the
Judge-Advocate from allowing any thing of that kind; fori would not allow the
public fervice to be impeded by any private dealings.
Had the civil and military officers any commercial advantages in your time ?
They dealt, but it was in a lecret and indirect way; they were not allowed to do it;
it was forbidden ; it was ruinous to the colony dealing fo much, particularly in
fpirituous liquors.
By what means were they enabled to carry on that traffic beyond other perfonsi?—
From their pofleffing more property.
Had they no other advantages derived from their official fituations ?: —No par-
ticular advantages, but that of a tract of ground, and a few convicts to work that
ground.
When a cargo of Ipirits was diflributed amongft the perfons of the colony, was
not a greater proportion diflributed to the officers than to any other perfons ?
Yes, I think there was.
Did not the free fettlers find it difficult to acquire any part of that cargo ? —Very
frequently ; but when they complained to me of their being prevented from going
on board of fhips and purchafing for (hemfelves, I redreffed that grievance imme-
diately, and ordered that they (hould never be prevented : they were limited in the
quantity they were to purchafe.
Notwithftanding your regulations, did not the grievance exift ?—lt did exifl.
And was not that the caufe that many of the fettlers were ruined by purchafing
thefe fpirituous liquors?—lt was the caufe of many of them being completely
ruined.
Was the conftitution of the Criminal or the Civil Courts complained of in the
colony during your rdidence ?■ —The decifions were complained of certainly, and
many of the moft fenlible and knowing of the convicts very often could anticipate
the fentence of a criminal that came before the Court, that have been known from
the difagreeable circumflance of party having crept into our courts of law, which
was dreadful.
Did it appear to you that the eftablilhment of trial by jury would have been
advantageous’ to the colony ?—After we had a fufficient number of people
to fummon as jurors it would have been highly advantageous, and very fatisfactory
to the people at large.
Were there a fufficient number of fuch perfons in the colony before you left it ?
There were.
And did that number appear to you to be annually increafing ?—Yes, I
thought fo. ■
. Appeals from the Civil Court were to the Governor ?—They were.
In thole appeals had he ever nice legal queftions to decide upon ? There were
feme very nice legal queftions. ' . '
And upon that account, did it appear to you neceflary that he (hould have a
legal advifer ?;—I thought fo, indeed; for as the Judge-Advocate had prefided at
the Civil Court, I could not have his afliftance in the appeal made to me.
Did it appear to you that there were a fufficient number of rcfpectable inha-
bitants in the colony to form a council, either of advice or control ?—lf the .officers
of the navy and army were called into that council it might have been fo, but I
(hould have preferred civilians who had refided in the colony for fome time; but
we had not a fufficient number of them, and what made it more difficult, many of
thefe civilians were engaged in the nefarious traffic in fpirituous liquors.
Could fuch a Council have been eftablifhed, you think it would have been ad-
vantageous ?—I do think fo.
Were any inconveniences felt during your time from the whole refponfibility being
upon the Governor ?-—Very great.
Can you (late any of (hem ?—-In matters of law the Governor could only confult
his law books, he had no perfon to advife with ; that was a great inconvenience, and
another inconvenience was that various works were carrying on in difiant parts of
the colony, he fuffered much inconvenience from the want of proper perfons to fu-
perintend thofe works ; he felt great inconvenience in not having proper perfons to
affift him in carrying on thofe works, for he was obliged to travel from one end of
the colony to (he other, a diftance of not lefs than forty or forty-five miles, and in
thofeparts his prefence was wanted almoft every day.
Would


Would not his orders have been more cheerfully acquiefccd in had there been
a Council to ftiare in the refponfibility of uttering them ? —There is no doubt of
it; an order from the Governor in Council would have carried much more weight
with it.
You faid in your former examination that the women had no means of returning
except by making intereft with the officers of the Ihip to give them a paflage ?
Very true.
Had they then any means of returning, except by proftitution r—l ftiould think
they had no other means.
The clothing was fent out ready made in your time for the convicts ?—Yes,
.and by that means much of it was wafted and deftroyed.
Would it have been advantageous and economical to have fent the cloth and to
have made it up in the country ? —I think fo, and I recommended that from that
country.
James Duce Harris, was called in, and Examined.
In what year was you at Botany Bay ? —I arrived there on the 13th of June
1802.
How long did you remain there ?——Till Odlobcr 1808.
I n what tranfport did you go out?—The Coromandel.
How many were embarked on board the Coromandel ? —I cannot rightly fay.
■ Were you much crowded on board the (hip ?—No, there was fufficient room.
Was there much licknefson board the (hip ?—Very little ; there was not above
one or twO that were lick; there were not any died.
Was there a liberal allowance of provifions to you ?—Plenty; I never heard any
man complain.
How many hours In the day were you allowed to take air and exercife on the deck?
—Three days after we left the Mother Bank, moft of the men were upon the deck
all day ; the prifon doors were open, and they went up and down as they thought
proper.
What clothing were you.allowed ?—I forget now; there were two Hurts, a pair of
ftioes, two pair of {lockings, a pair of trowlers, and I think two jackets.
How often was the linen waftied ?—The men were ordered to wafh as often as
they thought proper ; there was water allowed for wafhing twice a week, they had
half a gallon a day allowed.
Was the deck on which you flept frequently waftied ?—Yes, every day it
was fwept, fwabbed out, and feraped evey day ; and twice a week waftied with
water.
When you arrived, in the colony were you employed in the fervice of Govern-
ment, or any of the fettlers ?—ln the fervice of Government.
. Had you been bred up to any employment before you left this country ?—A ftiip-
wright ; I worked in theclock-yard at Sydney.
How many hours in the day did you work ?—From half after five to half after
three.
In what manner, after that time, was you allowed to employ yourfelf?—Any way
that I could in honefty. I was in general working on board the different ftiips
that arrived, that wanted repairs. .
Were you enabled in that manner, to earn money to purchafe additional comforts
toyourleif?'—Y’es.
Did you work the whole time you were there, for Government ?—I worked for
Government till the 25th of March 1808, I believe.
Did you then become a free man r—Yes.
In working for Government, did you work in gangs?—Yes.
Who fuperintended your work?—Mr. Moore, he was a fuperintendent of the
Dock-Yard, and a builder.
If any of the men were refra&ory or idle, how were they compelled to attend to
their work ?—lf they did not attend, if Mr. Moore thought proper to lodge a
complaint to the magiftrate, a conftable was fent after them ; they were lodged in
jail, and received corporal puniftiment.
Had Mr. Moore himfelf, any power of inflifting corporal puniftiment ?—None.
Were you clothed, lodged, and fed. by Government ? —Clothed about once or
twice a year: there were rations allowed by Government.
How
49
of Evidence.] ON TRANS POET ATI ON.


j How* were you lodged ?—We had the liberty of building houfcs for ourfelve?.
Were there no Government huts? —There were very few..
Tn what manner were you enabled to furniih the houles you built r —By our
labour.
Was no allowance made by Government ? —None for any thing of that kind;
there were blankets allowed once in the courfe of the year.,,
Did you prefer the fervice of Government to that of the fettlers?—Yes.
Could you have gone to the fervice of any free man, any individual ?—lf a free
man had applied for me, mod likely I could.
But you preferred to remain in the fervice of Government ?—Yes.
Were you forced to attend the church ?—Yes, we muft either attend the
church, or keep clofe in our huts; if any perfon was found loitering about the ftreets
the time of fervice in the church, they were taken up by the conllables, and taken
to Gaol.
Did you obferve, whether there was any difference in the conduft between the
men who were tranfpovted for? life, and thofe who were tranfported for a certain
number of years ?—No.
Did it ever happen to you to have any fit ofillnefs during your fervice?—l had
no illnefs; I once cut myfelf with an axe.
In what manner were you taken care of?—I was exempted from work, and at-
tended at the Hofpital every morning.
Was the care taken of you in the hofpital, fuch as you felt contented with?—
Yes.
Had you ever any complaints to make againft the overfeers who fuperintended
you ? —None whatever.
Was the fupply of provifions to you during your Service, regular and good ?
Yes.
Was there at any time, any want felt ?—At one time they were fliort in the
Stores; there were not diffident provifions to ferve full rations.
Whether during the time you were there, the clergyman attended in any
degree to the convidts, did he vifit them at any time in their huts ?—No.
Did he vifit them when they were tick?—l do not know.
Were any religious duties performed in the Ihip in which you went out ?
No. . . ,•
Did not the captain read prayers on a Sunday to his own Ihip’s company ?
No.
Were there any women in the fliip in which you went out?—There were no
convifts, there were fome fettlers.
When your time was out, did you at once become free?—Yes.
Had you your choice of fettling in the colony if you had pleafed?—l never ap-
plied for it. I might have remained in the colony.
How long did you remain after your time was out ?—From the 25th of March
till the Bth of OdVober.
Was you put off the ftore during that time?—l applied for it the day my time
was out.
Was it at once granted to you ?—Yes.
•In what .manner did you employ yourfelf till the time of your departure?—l
worked on board the different ihips that arrived that wanted repairs, and in
building boats _ . •
Were you able, in that manner, to acquire a competent livelihood?—Yes;
when I worked on board a fliip I earned ten ihillings a day, and provifions on board
of moll Ihips.
Did you find any difficulty in obtaining a paffage home? —None.
Were you obliged to pay for your paffage, or did you work your paffage ?—I
worked my pafl’age.
Are yon enabled to fay what they would have charged for a paffage ?—They- have
charged fifty pounds. -
Were there any paffengers from the colony on board? —One foldier officer
came home under an arrell.
Any of the convidl women ?—None. ■■■--,■
Luna,


Lunœ, 2 ° die Martii, 1812.
The Honourable GEORGE EDEN in the Chair.
Thomas Robfon, called in; and Examined.
IN what years were you in New South Wales ?—From the year 1806 to xBto.
What are you now ?—A clerk to the Commiffary.
Were you clerk to the Commiffary in Botany Bay ?—I was from my firft
landing. '
In what (kip did you go out ? —ln the Falcon; in the fame fleet in which
Governor Bligh went. .
How many convi&s were embarked on board the Falcon ?—Two hundred and
fix, I think; all men, except two wives to two of the convicts; there were troops
betides. . '
Did much ficknefs prevail on the paffage ?—No; very little.
Do you know what the number were who died ?—There were five or fix died;
one of whom was very much am invalid when he went on board. There was one
convict about fixty years of age, and another about feventy.
Were thofc two tranfported for life ?—The one about feventy was for life; the
Other for 14 years, I think. ■*. ■
Did they both arrive in health ?—Yes.' .. , ..
Was there a fufficiency of provifions on board r—Plentya fufficiency for every
man; the bread was found deficient. , .
Were you ever put on fhort, allowance during the ‘ voyage r—Never ; becaufc
one thing was given in lieu of another.
How many hours of the day were allowed you for air and exercife ? —Sometimes
the whole of the day, except meal-times; one half were brought up at one time,
and the,other at another; but in general the whole were up, excepting thofe who
were refradory. - . ,‘Y '
What clothing- was allowed to you?—A jacket, a waiftcoat, a pair of duck
trowfers, a pair of {lockings, a hat, and a pair of shoes.
How often was the linen wafhed ?—Regularly every Week.
Was the deck on which you flept frequently walked? —It was walked every
day. ,
Was (kere any agent onboard on the part of Government to fuperintend the
diftribution of provifions to the convicts?—None whatever; the ferjeant of the
troops always, attended to fee the rations ferved out; there was a ration ftuck
up, fo that every one knew what he was to receive; and the convidls appointed fo
many perfons to fee it was regularly done. .
Was there any furgeon on board ?—Yes.
~ .Any clergyman ?—None.
. Did any perfon read the fervice to the convicts ?—None.
~ Were there any religious duties performed during the whole voyage?—There
was not,, that I ever heard of; and I Ibould have known it if there had been any.
Was any defeription of the convidls placed under tnOre reflraint than the otheis
during the voyage? —There was.
What was that defeription?—Men that were troublefome, and likely to excite
mutiny on board. ■
Were they at firft, when they went on board, all treated alike ?•—They were, to
the beft of my knowledge.
Then fuch reftraints as were impofed, arofe through the mifeonduft. of the perfons
thcmfelves,'when on board r—Certainly.
What were the reftraints fo impofed ?—-They were confined in the rooms in which
they flept, and ironcd> fometimes fingle, and fometiraes double.
Were they kept in that ftate of reftraint during the whole of the voyage ?—No.
Then fuch reftraint was according to the diferetion of the Captain ?—Yes;, and
the Surgeon, from y the reports they had heard of the different officers that were upon
the watch. _
You was pardoned- immediately upon your arrival ?—I was, I believe my,pardon
went out with me.
A free pardon ?—lt was a free pardon; but it was left to the option of Governor
Bligh to deliver it, according as I conducted myfeli there, as I was cold afterwards.
341. O ‘ And
51
of Evidence.] ON TRANSPORTATION.


And you was taken into the employ of Mr. Palmer the Agent ?—I had ftrong
’recommendation from the Navy Board to Mr. Palmer, as well as from'other
gentlemen.
What was your fituation before you went to Botany Bay ?—A clerk in the Navy
Office.
What was the nature of your duty under Mr. Palmer?—-The fame as another
clerk in the Commiffary Department, in keeping the Accounts; the chief clerk
left about nine months after I went, and I fucceeded him.
Whether the refult of your obfervation in Botany Bay led you to confider that,
as a mode of punilhment, it was calculated to prodilce any reformation in the morals
and conduct of the perfons lent there ?—-I do not think it was; I think they were
in general better treated than they deferved.
Did you obferve any difference between the condudt of thofe convifts who were
.employed in the Government fervice, and thofe who were diftributed amongft the
free fettlers?—l have, a great deal; thofe that were confined to the fervice of
Government rather wjftied to ferve the fettlers.
, On what account did they prefer the fervice of the fettlers ?—They thought
greater indulgencies would be granted to them, fuch as having frefli provifions.
Did you obferve that the morals and conduft of thofe who ferved the fettlers,
Was better than that of thofe who ferved the Government?—! have, with the ex-
ception of thofe who ferved in the gaol-gang, who worked in irons, and the camp-
gang-
Then, upon the whole, you think that more advantage refults from employing the
convifts in the fervice of the fettlers, than in the fervice of the Government ?—I do,
with refpedl to morals, becaufe they are not in the habits of being in gangs, in the
fociety of one another; but they are in general treated as one of the family.
Did you obferve any difference in the condufl of thofe tranfported for life, and
thofe tranfported for years ?—Very little; one had as good a chance as the other of
emancipation. '
During your refidence there, did the number of fettlers, who took fervants, appear
to be increafing ? —They were certainly; every deferring fcttler had advantages
given to him, both in Governor King’s time and Governor Bligh’s time. ■
Did you obferve in general, that thofe perfons who had an opportunity of making
their own livelihood, and eftablilhing themfelves creditably in the fettlement, were
thofe who generally conducted themfelves beft ?•—’ They certainly got more encou-
ragement than the others did, and behaved better.
In what fhip did you return ?—ln the King’s Ihip, Hindoftan.
: Were therdany convidtson board? —None.
What is the condition of the women, who having ferved their time are unable to
return to this country, no provilion being made by Government for that purpofe ?
—lf they do not fave money by one means or the other, they get to England by
cohabiting with mates or mailers of veffels, or feme other perfons.
Have you known any inftances in which the fettlers have ill-treated the convicts
who were diftributed amongft them, and the convifts have found difficulty in ob-
taining redrefs ?—I have known one or two inftances where they have made com-
plaints, and the man has been taken away and given to a more deferving fcttler, or
taken into the fervice of Government.
Did many of the women in the fettlement live in a ftate of prdftitution ?—Molt
of them.
Were any means taken to difeourage that?—There was, in Governor Bligh’s
time, for he would not fuffer a woman to be taken off the ftore by any man, with-
out being married, unlefs it was as fervant to an officer.
Did the fervants of the officers live in a ftate of proftitution ?—-Not all; but
there were feveral women who were rather taken by the officers as proftitutes than
as fervants.
How did you return; did you pay for your paffage? —No; I was brought home
as an evidence on the part of the Crown; and I am now affifting Mr. Palmer to
make out his accounts.
Maurice Margaret called in; and Examined.
IN what year did you fail to New South Wales ?—ln the year 1794/
And to what period did you remain ?—Till the year 1810.
Did


Did you obferve that, in confequence of the mode in which the convicts at
Botany Bay were treated, that their morals and conduft were improved by their 1
treatment ?—No.
What do you conceive to be the obftacles to their improvement ?—The felection
of the officers by Government who are fent out there, and the arbitrary mode in
which that government is carried on, forafmueh as they have no rule to go by
but one Aft of Parliament, which enjoins them to keep as near to the laws of
England as they can.
Point out what you conceive to be the principal defects in the (yftem adopted by
the officers fent out by this country ?—Trade, and perfonal ignorance, for to nothing
elfe can their behaviour be attributed; it is barbarous and cruel in the extreme.
Do the majority of the officers to whom the government of the colony is intrufted
■embark in trade ?—All, to a man.
, What is that trade?—lt confifts, firft of all, of monopoly, then of extortion; it
includes all the neceflaries of life which, are brought to the colony.
Are not the convifts fuppliedfrom a Government ftore ?—They are fo.
Then if the convifts arc fo fupplied, how can the officers make a profit of that
which belongs to the Government?—The diftribution of the ftore is very partial;
they are allowed from the (lores two (bits of clothes per annum; they arc allowed
weekly four pounds of pork, or fix or (even pounds of beef; in fhort their animal food
is fcarcely fufficient to keep them alive, fome convifts have been known to eat it
before the Wednefday night, and to labour without food till the next Saturday, when
the ration is diftributed. The clothing is not regularly ferved; it is regularly adver-
tifed in the Newfpaper, but not regularly diftributed to the prifoners. The Newf-
papers come home, and the prifoners cannot make their voice be heard here. The
trade the officers are engaged in, is firft, the fupply of (lores, with wheat and pork,
fometimes beef and mutton, to the exclufion of the fettlers; next, veflels arrive from
different parts of Europe, and from India, with fuch articles as may be deemed
luxuries ; tea, fugar, rum, wine, little matters for clothing, filk handkerchiefs, See.
&c. a variety of articles, the officers purchafe them; and retail them at perhaps 500
per cent, profit. There is likewife another monopoly: the Government has been very
kind to the colony, and fent out various articles for the ufe of the fettlers and pri-
foners, fuch as fieves, hats, clothes, linen, coarfe cloth, and a thoufand other articles;
when a fhip of that kind has arrived, and the goods have been landed in the King’s .
(lores, after a few days the (lores are opened to the officers, who go in, lay their
hands upon every thing of value, and have their names affixed to it as purchafers,
and they leave nothing but the refofc for the colony; having fo done by themfelves
or by their agents, they retail that; as I faid before, at 500 per cent, profit. I believe I
am not out when I fay, that a fieve to lift meal, which coft them ss. 9 d. has been fold,
for three guineas, and rum I have known fold at £. 8 a gallon, which coft 7 s. 6d.
. Do you mean that civil officers, or military, or both, are engaged in this trade ?
-—All of them to a man. In the year 1797 a combination-bond was entered into by
them, by which they were neither to underbuy or underfcll the one from the other;.
How was that known in the colony ?—Bccaufe it was offered me to fign, and I,
refufed it, and from thence began my perfecution ; fome of the upper inhabitants
had that bond tendered to thermto fign; it was brought to me, I refufed figning it;
it went in (aft to do, what they have done ever lince without it; there was an esprit
du corps among them, that although they might jar between one another, if you of-
fended one you offended the whole; and any poor prifoner that had the misfortune to
offend any one officer would be fure to get a flogging from fome other.
, Were the provifions delivered to the convifts of a good or bad quality, generally
(peaking ?—Very often of a bad quality.
. Were they of a bad quality at any other times than thofe of accidental fcarcity ?
That I will explain; there have been various captains there with veflels-with goods
upon their own intereft, they have been connefted with the Governor and others ;
they have depofited a quantity of meat firft in the ftore by the permiflion of the
Governor, the Governor has admitted that meat into the (lore when it has been
(polled; and it has been ferved out to the prifoners, and paid for to the captains.
Were the provifions purchafed by Government for the ufe of the prifoners pur-
chafed at a cheaper rate than that bought by individuals ?—I cannot tell.
The wheat purchafed in the colony ?—-It was dearer than it ought to have been ;
it was kept up at ipr. a bufliel, and the officers|had alraoft the exciufive privilege
p( turning their wheat into the ftore; in confequence of which, the wheat was often
vey much damaged.
53
of Evidence.] ON TRANSPORTATION,


If any free fettlers had tendered corn at a lefs price, would.it not have been
p'urchafed by the Government?—l do not know that the fettlers, could have
afforded it at a'lefs price, from the difficulties naturally arifing in a young colony,
and from thofe further difficulties which the officers put in their way.
In your opinion, does any inconvenience arife from employing convifts to work
in a gang, and from not feparating them according to the nature of their offences ?
—I rather believe, that if the plan was adopted of working them alone in feparate
gangs, that very beneficial effefts might arife; and l am certain'that a very great
fum would accrue to Government, were Government to let them out inltead of
granting them to officers.
- What good effects do you apprehend would arife from working them in feparate
gangs? —Firft they would be employed in the country* diftant from bad example, from
contagion ; at prefent the colony of New South Wales confifts chiefly of one large
town, and we all know the effects in general of large towns upon the inhabitants;
the opportunities it gives for vice.
Do you not fuppole then, that todiflribute the convifts among the fettlers would
be better than to have them employed in the Government fervice ? Undoubtedly;
it cofls Government, at prefent, double the value of every thing that is done for
them. •• - -
Did the fettlers in general appear to you to care of the fervants intruded
to them ?—ln general, I think, they did ; but there is one diftinftion to be made,
it is only the greateft ruffians that are lent away;-the fettler who applies for a man,,
has the worft fubjeft that can be picked out'fent to him ;• it is not the intereft of
officers that the fettlers fhould get forward.
Are not the fettlers fupplied with fervants upon the firft arrival of the convifts?
—No, they are not; they mud wait till all the officers areferved; they muft wait
till they can make intereft with fome perfon in office to obtain one.
Is there any police during the night, in the town of Sydney ?—Every thing is in
a very lax ftate there; however Sydney is a camp, not a town; it is under a military-”
difeipline guard ; there arc centinels placed in different parts of the town, that would
prevent any diforder taking place, or any flight of the convifts.
Do the convifts ; in ficknefs find any difficulty im obtaining medical affiftance ?
-—Much.
Was not the hofpital open to all that were fick?—lt was not.
Upon what grounds was affiftahee' ever refufed r—l do not know that any rcafon
has been given for it, further than the hofpital was full, or the will of the furgeon
general; he is now dead.
Was that an evil generally felt and complained of by the convifts? —No, it was
feltby them,-but not complained of; for fevexal of them thought that to go to
the hofpital was the fure road to go to the grave.
Had any officer, of his own authority, power-of ordering a convift to be flogged ?
—Yes, every officer. "
Had he the power legally, or was it an abufe of his office?—l apprehend it to be
an abufe, for I cannot conceive a power in England that could delegate fuch a power
to him. ■ :
And was their power frequently fo abufed ?—Yes, every day, and every hour in
the day almoft.
And had the convifts fo punifhed, any means of obtaining redrefs?—None, but
the confequence was, that many of the convifts have taken to what they call the bulb,
the woods, and perifbed there.
When' you talk of employing the convifts in feparate gangs in the country, do you
mean that they ought to be removed from Sydney altogether ?-- Undoubtedly
How do the convifts generally pafs their time when their days labour is ended ?
They generally, and almoft without exception, work at fomething, or for fomebody;
there are men who can earn from four to five pounds a week, exclufive of their
Government work.
In what way are thofe perfons generally employed when they work for themfelves?
—ln various handicrafts, fmiths, carpenters, tailors, flioemakers, &c. &c.
Is the ufeof fpirituous liquors general in the fettlement ?—Thofe who work over-
hours on their own time, as it is called, are compelled by the officers to take rum in
payment, or tobacco; filk handkerchiefs; tea and fugar; or white'cotton ftockings,
or fheeps rumps, from the cape, at an extravagant high price.
Were the convifts compelled to attend church on a Sunday ?— I think what was
called the camp-gang was compelled; but I believe not any other.
Were


Were great fees often given to the Governor for pardons?—Very often.
Was any trial neceffary previous to a removal to a diftant fettlement ?—No, the
will of the Governor was fufficient.
Were certificates to prifoners who had ferved their time ever denied ?—Very
often.
Do you think the colony in a more flourifhing ftate when you came- away, than
when you went there firft Proportionably lefs. There were about 4,000 inhabit-
ants when I went there; there were but about n or x 2,000 when I left it.
Did the refpedtable part of the focicty appear to you to be increafing?T—There
was very little refpeCtable there.
Did it appear to you that there were in the colony, inhabitants fufficient in num-
ber, and of fuch a character, as to warrant the eftablifhment of a trial by Jury?—
Undoubtedly there are many capable of being jurymen, though they might not
form what is deemed a refpeCtable fociety. :
By what means did you procure a paffage to return to Europe ?—At my own
expenfe. To reach London it coft me within a few fhillings of £450, and a fervant.
I paid for my wife, and my own paflage and a lervant’s, as far as Rio.
What means had the women of procuring a paffage to return to, Europe ? —By
proftitution. - V
Have you never known any woman whofe period of tranfportation was expired
obliged to remain in the fettlement becaufe fhe could not procure the means of
returning to Europe ?—Many hundreds; they had generally cohabited with fome
man or other, and they continue in the fame way.
Is there not employment for them in the woollen and linen manufactories ?—-There
was an attempt at both, but they do not get employment in them after, their time
was expired. - -
Do you know the cafes of any men being detained in fhe fettlement from their
not being able to obtain a paffage home ?—Many: fome. are capable ,to work their
paffage home, but when men get infirm and old they are precluded from that
advantage.
Veneris, 20° die Martii, 1812.
The Honourable GEORGE EDEN in the Chair.
William Richardfon, called in; and Examined.
IN what year did you go to Botany Bay ?—I do not recolleCt the year; I went
out with Governor Phillip in the firft fleet.
Till what year did you remain there?—l came home laft Chriftmas was twelve
months, Chriftmas 1810.
: What was the length of your voyage in coming home ■?—About feven months j
I came on with Governor Bligh. I left the colony in May,
You went out as a convift ?—Yes.
For what term of-years ?—Seven years.
In what manner was you employed while you was there ?—I was fervartt to one
of the officers; Captain Meredith of the Marines.
Was you fervant-to him, or with his family ?—I was fervant to him; I was
allowed to be fervant to him by Governor Phillips.
You was fed and fupported by Captain Meredith ?—No ;-I was fed and
fupported by Government.
Was you clothed by Government alfo ?—I was clothed by Government.
What was the nature of the provifions and clothing allowed to you; was it
liifficient in quantity, and good in quality ?—-Very good in quality, and there
was a fufficiency where I was upon the colony; the clothing was very good, and
very fufficient.
Was you at no time employed in the fervice of the Government ?—-No; I
ferved the remainder of the years I had to ferve as a prifoncr, with that gentleman.
I ferved four years in England; and I ferved half a year more than my time;with
that gentleman ; and I enlifted in the army after my fervice was out, and I remained
in the Army till I got my difeharge through affliction. .
• What power had your mafter over you ?—I was treated juft the fame as fervants in
general ares and if I did not behave well, there was the law of the colony againft me.
34 i. P What
55
of Evidence.] ON TRANSPORTATION.


What power had your matter of punifhing you ?—He had the power of bringing
1 me before a Magiftrate. ,
Had he any power of ordering corporal punifliment by his own authority ?—No,'
not in Governor Phillips’s time. -
Was there any fuch power after Governor Phillips’s time ?—I have heard fo,
but I know of no ihftancc of it myfelf; there has been a talk of fuch a thing,
but Ido not know it from experience ; I was orderly ferjeant to Governor King
five years, and I can fay there was no fuch thing during his time.
Then you mutt have known it if it had taken place ? —I could not' have been
. off it.
Was you fick during your fervice at any time ?—Yes.
- In what manner was you taken care of; Was yoU ferit to the hofpital ?—-No ;
I was upon my own hand; there was no hofpital in the colony.
During your lickncfs you took care of yourfelf ?—Yes.
Did Government provide you with medicines ?—No, I chiefly provided myfelf.
Was this during yoUr fervice ?—No; while I Was a fervant Government found
me in medicines. 1 never was afflided at that time; but if I had Wanted any thing
then, there Was an hofpital for the prifoners.
Was you at Sydney ?—Yes, all the time from the day I landed till the day
,1 embarked to come home;
Was you made to attend Divinfe Service regularly Regularly.
Had yob ari opportunity of obferving how the other convids were treated?—*
They were treated remarkably well, according to their fltuations; there was hot a
blufli thrown in their faces; they Were treated With refped, according to their
fltuations ; and agteat reformation tookplace amortg them ; thbfe who Wire the molt
notorious villains in this country became in that country very good members of
fociety, both men and Women; and there was the beft of treatment for them. I
tanhot anfwer for the out-fettlemerits; but in the capital fettlemeht of Sydney
there was the beft-of treatment fhOWn them ■; and every refped paid to them,
according to their good condud.
. Was drunkennefs frequent among them ?—Very much fo.
And proftitution among the women Very much; but it has very much di-
minifhed of late years; very much .indeed.
You had no land given you ?—Yes; there Was land given on my firft arrival;
that is, after my time was expired. .
What quantity ?—I think it Ws 6o acreS;
Did you cultivate them ?—No, I could not; I was not in the way of cultivation;
I made it over to a friend of mine.
Did you make it over by fale ?—Nb.
Do you ftill retain an intereft in it ?—No, it was of no ufe to me, and I made
a free gift, of it; GehetalGrofe gave it to every military perfoh.
He had the (Attribution of it?—Yes, he was Colonel of the Regiment, and was:
Governor for the time being; According to their families, they had the land given
them.,- _ , ■
Were the Criminal Courts complained of, or, did tfifey giye fatisfadion?—They
gave perfed fatisfadion till the difturbancc took place between Governor Bligh and
Colonel Johnftone.
Had you an opportunity of obferving' the fxtuation of ’ the. fettlfers there ? —No,
I had not, any.further than when Ii came to the Governor at Sydney. I did not.
traverfe the country.
v. Can you tell what was the comparative price, of flop-clothing whfen bought." in
the colony, with the price of clothing when bought here ?—No, LcannOt.
Was you in the habit of attending the Market ?—No;
■ Were there-frequent complaints among the convids who had ferved out their
time, of the difficulty, of getting home ?—No, they went to .the Secretary’s office,
and gave in their -names; their names were advertifed in the Sydney Gazette, and
there was no ftoppage whatever.
There were fometimes ftbppages owing to their not being able to get a paflage ?
—That was owing to-themfelvcs; they could hot get-away from the country unlefs
they could procure a paflage for themfelves. :
Do you think-* that- having been at Botany *Bay is any impediment to your:
finding employ at home?—Yes; perfons that know! have been there, are -Very
unwilling to employ me;: the Reverend Mr. Johnfon, the Minifter of the Re-
giment, ftill eotrefponds with me ; I was clerk to him for manyiyca'rs; :
, , ■ Do


Do you mean Public Clerk? —Yes, I was Public Clerk in the Church before
Governor King arrived; I was Schoolmafter and Clerk. ,
Did Mr. Johnfon, or the other clergyman, do any thing towards reforming the
Colony, befides doing their duty in church?—He frequently attended them in
private, when they were lick, and he ufed to give private ledures at his own;
houfe.
Were thofe private ledures well attended: ?—Yes, by great numbers of the
inhabitants. " .
, Were the articles you bought for ydurfelf expensive td you?—Very expenfivc,
(hoes, zos. a pair, for a fhirt, zos. Sugar, js. per pound, and tea a dollar an ounce,
spirits, generally 20's, a bottle.
Were thofe high prices owing to a temporary fcarcity, or was it a general
thing?—lt was general for the poor, the rich could get it cheaper.
Ate you at all able to account for thefe high prices? : —No, I cannot; but from
gentlemen having an opportunity of going abroad, and buying things of the cap-
tain ; we could not go on board, becaufe we were always paid with copper, coin,
and therefore We could buy nothing; if I had got ao foldiers pay, I could not
get one individual thing from a Ihip. I have known men receive dollars, but very
feldotn, perhaps-5 or 6 in a year,' and they take them at 6s. on board.
In what coin did the dealers; in thofe commodities pdy ?—By bills; the officers
ufed to give them their Payrrtafters bills, but when Governor Bligh arrived/Wc
had proper Paymaftets bills given out, - and then we could go on board the.(hips,,
but till he arrived we had nothing but copper coin; the officers had a view of'
paying thefe payrrtailers bills for 4 or ss, in the pound, and then they paid us in
copper coin ; but when Governor Bligh came it was quite altered. The Paymafter
came With them, and iffued them out to the amount of our pay, every month ;
we were paid in Pay matters bills, and we could go on board and furnilh oUrfelves,
and that Was a great bleffing to every man in the army.
Did you ever hear in the colony that fees were given to the Governor for pardons?
—No, I never did.
Did you ever hear that certificates to be granted to prifoners who had ferved their
time, were denied them?—Never.
What were your means of knowing whether they were or I; was
always in the office. I carried every meflage out from the clerks and the Governor,
and nobody attended the Governor without me; upon every public bufinefs the
Governor would always have me prefenb
What was the duty upon fpirits while you was there ?—A (hilling a gallon; it
was raifed in Governor Bligh’fJ reigft; but I cannot tell; to what in Governor
King’s and Governor Hunter’s time, and all the others; it was a (hilling per gallon for
fpirits, and lixpence for wine. • r , v ; / , -
Do you recoiled at what price you bought fpirits after you got the Paymafters
bills?—We only had it by proportions,, fuch a proportion for fuch an officer per
gallon.
At what price did you get it,?—At zos. per gallon at firft,.and every gentleman
paid the iame; but in general it came to Tor. per gallon; the Jamaica riim that was
brought from England,' the Governor allowed them zos, per gallon, but fpirits that
came from the Eaft Indies came toTor, .
Arrack ?—No, Bengal rum. When the Americansufed to trade there we got it
at SJ. per gallon; , , .
When a perfon entered into a contract for wheat he was allowed to have a con-
tract for rum too ?—Not that I know of., ,
What was the contract for importing wheat frdrn Bengal ?—I do hot know.;/
When a free pardon was granted, which enabled a perfon to return if he pleafed,
did he generally choofe to return, or fettle in the colony ?—There was as many
fettled in the colony as there were returned; I know a great many gentlemen,
who live dote by me, Who have left that country, and Who are now very refpectablc
men.,
Do you know of many having received free pardons immediately upon their
arrival ?—No, I cannot fay that. I know fome who had not been there long.
Mr. Crofsley, for inftance ?—He did not receive a free pardon in Governor King’s
time, but emancipation; it makes them free of the country; not to come home
again. .
Was he appointed to any office immediately after that emancipation ?—He was
never appointed to any office while I was there. ■ •
Was
57
of Evidence.] ON TRANSPORTATION.


-Was'he never appointed a Juftice of the Peace ?—No ;he was engaged in mer-
'chandife and felling goods, but he never, was in any office till Governor Bligh
employed him as a lawyer.
What could a man earn there by his daily labour ?—From to ys. a day.
You mean by the mod common labour ?—Yes.
- And that to be paid in copper coin ?—No; they pay in fpirits and tobacco, and
all forts of traffic; there is very little money; there is a price fixed upon all thefe
things.
.By the Governor?—Among the.inhabitants themfelves.
Did the Governor ever attempt to fix the price ?—Yes, he did ; he put it re-
peatedly in the orderly book and in the Sydney Gazette, but it was never acted
upon. ; ' . .
In want manner did the inhabitants fix the prices ?—According as they went in
the market. ; Tobacco was fometimes ia fhillings a pound, arid fometimes two
pounds a pound, and liquors 10s. and from that to 3or. a bottle; they paid juft
according to the traffic of the colony. ,
When you was paid for:your labour was you paid in articles at the fame price as
that at which they were generally fold in tbe.fhops ?—Yes.
And have you the choice of the articles in which you wifh to be paid ?—Yes.
Was the price of labour fufficient to fupport you ?—Yes. .
Was it higher than it is in this country ?—A confiderable deal; if I had not
been afflicted I never would have left the country. I was afflicted with the
rheutnattfm. .
Are the comforts of a day labourer much greater than in this country ?—Much
greater.
Are the inhabitants in general healthy ?—Yes, there are no diforders among them,
and particularly no diforders among children; after we left the colony with the
regiment, out of 150 we loft 60 .children in one fortnight with the meafles. We
have no diforders there at all, except what are brought on by drinking.
You came home with the regiment ?—Yes, I went to Guernfey with it, and was
difeharged from Guernfey. V.
Was it at the hofpital at Guernfey that you became ill?—No, I was brought
home ill in the (hip.
.Was you married at Botany Bay?—Yes.
Did you marry one of the convicts?—Yes.
Had (he a pardon upon her marriage ?—No, fhe Had ferved her time out before
we were married. ' . .
In what lituation was fhe ?—She was a fchoolmiftrefs.
Mr. John Palmer called in; and Examined.
IN what year did you go to Botany Bay ?—ln the year 1787, at the firft forming
-of the fettlement. , • ~
And remained till what period ?—I remained till the month of May 1810.
What was your office in Botany Bay ?—When I firft went out I went as purfer
of the Sirius, and in the year 1790 I was appointed Commiffary; Mr. Commiffary
Miller’s ftate of health having rendered him unable to continue in the colony.
What were your duties as Commiffary ?—I had charge of all kinds of ftores, ne-
ceffaries, ordnance ftores, in fhort every thing that belonged to the Government. I
had to keep an account of the expenditure, and give receipts.
Were the provifions of the convicts in your department ?—Yes, every thing.
Be fo good as ftate to us in what manner they were provided ?—They were vic-
tualled from the Government! ;
Arc the provifions purchafed moftly in the icoloriy?—No, they have been prin-
cipally fent out from. England; but latterly grain has been principally purchafed
there.
. In what manner are the purchafes made ?—The Governor of the colony gene-
rally fixes the price himfclf; it would not have done for him to advertife, becaufe
he was afraid of monopoly. The price of every thing was fixed as low by the Go-
vernor as they could poflibly grow it at, and fometimes it has been lower; grain
has been fold at Bj. a buftiel, and the fettlcrs found it was impoffible to grow it at
that ,price. ■ - , ,
Did the Governor take what quantity he plcafed?—No; he never took more
than he wanted,
When


i When he charged Br. were the fettlers at, liberty to fell their grain at a higher
price? —Yes; when the Governor fixed the price at Bs. I have known an inftance
of their felling it at 20s.
And was fuch fale at all impeded by the Governor ?—Not at all.
Was there any preference fliown by the Government to one feller, beyond
another ?—No ; there was generally a lift made out of what each could furnifti, and
if there was more offered than the Government wanted, a proportionable quantity
was taken from-each perfon.
There was no preference fliown to an officer, above a private fettler ?—No,
none.
Was meat provided in the fettlement at all?—-Yes, pork; that was at a very
low price, at one time 9d. a pound, and at another time 6d.
Does the Government fix the price at which it is taken into the ftore?—Yes ;
but they fold to other people dearer.
In what manner was clothing provided ?—lt was fent out by Government, princi-
pally, and fome fmall quantity was made from the wool procured from perfons who
had flieep, but it was very little-
Was the clothing lent out ready made?—Principally; but they made purchafes
from India of that as well as of rice.
Did it appear to you that it would be advantageous to fend out the clothing
unmade ?—No; I think it would be much better to fend it out ready made, becaule
you cannot keep the tailors honeft, they commit depredations, and you cannot keep
them fteady- - _ _ > , ,
Labour is dearer than it is here ?—Yes; that is owing to the way in which they,'
have been paid.
In times of fcarcity and diftrefs, were ftores ever fold ?—Only in cafes of neceffity, .
except for barter; when the fettlers were firft formed, there was a deal given them,
but that lay entirely in the breaft of the Governor. ■ _
Were complaints frequently made of the quality of the ftores ?—I cannot fay ,
that I recollect any; we were generally very well ftored ; we have fometimes been
very fhort of provifions, but that could not be helped.
Beef and pork were the only fupplies fent out from this country ?—Yes, of pro- -
vifions, except at one period, there was a confiderable quantity of flour fent out.
Can you ftate any comparifon between the expenfe of fupplies of the colony now,
and when the whole of the fupplies were fent out from this country? — lt depends
very much upon the crops of grain; if there were good crops of grain, I fliould think
they would be furnilhed much cheaper than if it was fent from here; but with
refpeft to meat, I doubt it very much; the floods have deftroyed a great deal of.
the ftock of late.
. You do not think it would be advantageous to withhold the, fupplies of fait pro-
vifions at prefent ?—No; there is hardly any expenfe attending the keeping the
cattle, for there is but one perfon who is allowed a falary of £. 100 per year, the reft
are prifoners, and muft be fed and clothed.
What ufe is made of the Government farm, are the cattle flaughtered there ?—-
No ; the cattle are kept there.
Do you not think that that is'a dearer mode than if the Government farm were
given up, and all provifion purchafed ?—No; there is no expenfe hardly; there is
only one perfon who is allowed a falary of a year, the reft are prifoners, who
-muft be fed and clothed.
Are there a great many fettlers in a lituatiori to receive the cattle with benefit ?
Yes; and there are a great number who have a great many cattle; thofe that are
induftrious are allowed to purchafe from Government occafionally.
Is there fufficient to fuftain the fettlers ?~Yes; in grain and meat too.
Is there any arable land in the hands of Government ?—There is fome, but I do
not know whether they cultivate it; I fuppofe there are 7 or 800 acres that have
been cultivated, but they have been uncultivated for a long time.
What is-t he Government farm, and what means have they of preventing the cattle
from ftraying?—The Government cattle are drove into pens of a night and fecured;
many people let their cattle range.
. Do you ever draw any bills without the landion of the Governor?—No. ,
In building a barrack or an hofpital, did you not draw bills upon the Treafury
for the expenfe ? —Yes; there was an hofpital and barracks, built chiefly by the
prifoners, and the free people employed were paid by Government; but whether
I drew bills or not on Government, 1 cannot recoiled,
, J4l. Q, Did
59
of Evidence.] ON TRA N S P OUT ATI ON. ,


Did you provide the hofpital with any thing?—Yes, the neceflkries were always
fent out.
Was there ever any fcarcity cjf medicines? — There .has been foraetimes, but very
Tartly. ,
Was the fervice of individuals generally preferred by the convids to that of Go-
vernment?—Yes, I think it was.
Did it appear to you to be more produdive of reformation ?—Yes, a great deal
more fo; they were not mixed together -fo much, and they were more induf-
■trious,
■Did you ever know the matters of thofe fervants exercife a power of punilhing
:them?—They are not allowed to do it; I have known,one or two inttances, and one
was brought to a Court Martial for it.
Had no officer the power of punching his fervant?—No, aMagiftrate had not the
(power of punilhing his own Servant, but generally had him brought before another
Magiftrate. '
What was generally the punlfhment ordered by a Magiftrate for the mlfcondud
•of a fervant? —I have known one .Magiftrate order 25 ladies, or perhaps 50, in the
out-fettlements, where they could not get another immediately.
Were fuch punilhments very frequent ?—No, Ido not think they were; the people
ibehaved tolerably well confidering, much better than could be expeded.
Ufcd thofe punifhments to occur every day ?—No, nor any thing like it.
Had-you an opportunity of obferving whether any confiderable amelioration took
place in the condud of the convids the latter part of the time you was there ?—-
Yes, I had a great deal of opportunity of feeing it. •
Upon the whole, was the appearance ot things improved ?—Very much in-’
»deed. '
And you believe the colony, generally fpeaking, was produdive of reformation?—
I do think it was ; there were bad people among them, who would commit depfe-(
■dations at limes, and would break out of gaol occalionally.
What power had the convid ofcomplaining of his matter in cafeof ill-ufage?—He
could go to a Magiftrate, and if he could not get redrefs there, he could go to the'
‘Governor.
And was it in the powerof his mafter to throw any impediments in his way?—None-
whatever, I never knew an inftanceof it.
What defeription of men were the Magiftrates ?—There have been fome taken
■from the Military, and fome from the Civil department. ' '
, Did you ever knowa man that had been a convid appointed?—Thfere was one'
.appointed juft before I came away. ... . :
What was his name ? —Andrew Thompfon,
Do you know what had been his crime ?—I heard it was, when a boy, fetfmg fire
lo a wheat-ftack.
Had-his condud been fuch in the colony as to make him a fit objed for the office'
•of Magiftrate ?—1 cannot fay that. •
By what Governor was he appointed?—By Governor Macquarie, the prefent
■Governor,
Did the criminal jurifdidion of the colony give fatisfadion ?—Yes, I think it did ;
it would have been thought very defirable it a jury could have been formed in the’
colony; but as far as we were circumftanced, 1 think every thing was conduded very
•well. 1 • • '
Is it the wilh of the Inhabitants to havea Jury inftituted?---Yes, of every one.
Did it appear, to you that there was a fufficient number of reipedable inhabi-
tants to eftablifh a trial by jury ?—Yes, there are a great number of free fettlers now. ■
Is that refpedable part of the fociety increafing ?—Yes, there are a great number
of families and children.
The manners of the women, generally fpeaking, are very diffolute ?—I-cannot fey
.it is fo bad as you might e-xped.; many of them are reformed, and behave extremely
well; thofe ofthem who have.been fervants, and-got married, have done extremely
.well. ;
Did it appear to .you that marriage was-increafing, and proftltution diminilhing?
—Very much, and particularly in Governor Bligh’stime ; he would not allow the
■ women to be taken, if he could help it, unlefs they were married.
,ln what manner were the female convids difpofed of upon being landed ?—Thole
■who were weavers were fent up to the fadory to work for Government; others were
;taken by different families, and by the ..fettlers. as Servants.
■’tWerc


Were they not taken ;more for the purpofes of proftitution than for fcrvants ?
No, in general for fervants; they might in fome inftances, but the Governor endea-
'Voured to prevent it as much as he could.
Had you an opportunity of knowing the manner in which the convids were
-treated on board the tranfportsf—Yes; .if they'had any complaints to make, it was .
put down, and delivered to the Governor in writing, '
Were fuch complaints frequent?—No, very rare. Sometimes their moneyhas
been intruded to the mates, and not returned, and the bufinefs has been inquired
-into before the magiftrates, and-they have been redrefled.
Was the avidity for fpirituous liquors very great in the colony ?—Yes, it was. >
Was the price very high ?—The price was regulated by the Governor.
•Of all fpirituous liquors?—Yes.
Were they fold in the colony at the price at-which they were landed ?—No ; they-
‘were bought at 6 and ys. and fold fometimes as high as z and 3 and
Was not the greated proportion bought by the officers of Government.?—Each-
■officer was allowed to take a certain quantity, the licenfed people had the fame; in
general the officers had the fame as the licenfed people.
Mod of the officers in the colony trafficked in fpirituous liquors ?—Yes, they dicL
Did the miffionaries traffick in fpirituous liquors?—l do not think they had an
opportunity, becaufe they had not fo much allowed them; they had a very fmall pro-!
portion indeed. I paid away fpirits for the purpofes of agriculture. I had more
ground than any body elfe; I farmed more than any other perfon did. You may
get more ground worked for a little fpirits than you can for-any thing elfe, and that
I fancy is the reafon of labour being fo high.
Was there much fmuggling?—Yes, there was fome fmuggling, and there was a
great deal of fpirits-diddled in the country.
Were there any attempts to prevent .the didillation? —Yes, there were encourage-
ments held out to the people that could find it out, and punifhments infiided.
Did you ever know any indance of large fees being received by the Governor for
granting-pardons?—Never.
Can you tell us how many pardons were granted in any one year ?—I cannot fay;
there have been a great number, I dare fay better than 100 in one year, but I can-
not fpeak pofitively as to that. ..
Was the conduCb of the perfons who had received pardons from the Governor,
while you was there, and of thofe whofe times had expired, in general good ?—Yes;
they were very indudrious, and, for the mod part, their conduct appeared to be
regular.
How were the fettlers from among the convids received by the other fettlers?
—Tolerably well.
■ Were any of them admitted‘into the fociety of the others?—Yes, fome few, but
not in general,. . .
Were any great numbers of the fettlers from among convids becoming good
members of fociety ? —-Yes, many.
Were many of them acquiring large property ?—Yes, a great number; thofe who
were indudrious. ’ .
Are there any extenfive flocks of fheep, as well .as cattle?—Yes; but there have
been great loffes among the fheep.
The climate is very’ favourable to fheep?—Yes, very good indeed ; we have as
fine mutton as any in England; the fouth-down is very good indeed.
Do the fettlers feel any difficulties from the want of labourers? —A great deal.
Were there a fufficient number of fettlers to employ all the convids in the colony ?
—Yes, I think fo; Government could not fpare them very well; they were obliged
to keep a great many to carry on the public works, carpenters, bricklayers, and per-
fons of that defeription.
Does Governor Bligh' hold any land in the colony ?—Yes, he has a farm there.
To what extent ?—I believe it is 6or 700 acres.
Has Governor King any farm there ?—Yes.
To what extent ?—1 fancy about 4.0 r 500 acres. Ido not know whether he has
Pot more.
Had Governor Phillips, or Governor Hunter, any land there ?—No, they never
had. >
Had you any opportunity of knowing how they acquired their land ?—Yes;
Governor Bligh gave Governor King a grant, and he purchafed a farm befides, upon
iwhich he was building a houfe, for the purpofe of fetting an example to the fettlers.
How did Governor Bligh acquire his land?—l cannot fpeak pofitively to that.
61
'Of Evidence.] ON TRANSPORTATION,


Lun œ, 23° die Martii, 1812.
The Honourable GEORGE EDEN in the Chair.
Mr. John Palmer again called in, and Examined,
YOU (aid you would tell the Committee the way in which Governor King had
acquired his land ?—Governor Bligh gave Mrs. King a grant of 1,000 acres of land,
-where all Governor King’s (lock was kept. , •
Was it cultivated ?—No, uncultivated ; it was merely grazing ground in the heart
of the county, except a few acres where the houfe was.
Does Governor Bligh poffefs no land?—Yes, about 1,300 acres, which he always
returned to Government as poffeffed by himfelf. Governor King gave Governor
Bligh a grant of this land, and Governor Bligh afterwards gave Mrs. King a grant of
1,000 acres, which I have already mentioned. Governor Blighalfo purchafed a farm
on the banks of the Hawkcfbury, containing about 150 acres, for the purpofe, as I
underftood, of fetting an example, and encouraging agriculture.
Do you happen to know how thole lands are cultivated now ?—The greateft part
of them is grazing ground.
How.are they (locked now, are they in the hands of tenants, or in the hands of
agents ?—ln the hands of agents.
Did Governor King make the grant of land to Governor Bligh immediately be-
fore his refignation ?—Yes, a fhort time before. .
And immediately after did Governor Bligh make a fimilar grant of land to Go-
vernor King?—Before Governor King quitted the colony, 1 do not exactly know the
time, it was granted to Mrs. King the wife of Governor King.
Was you amagiftrate ?—Yes, I was.
What power, had you of ordering corporal punifhment upon any convict—We
did not exceed 24 or 25 ladies, without having another magiftrate, and that was never
done till it was laid before the Governor for his fan&ion.
Could you order 25 ladies without any fpecific charge laid before you ?—No.
Did any of the officers in the colony make fuch an. order ?—No, none.
•• Were many pf the military officers employed dn the capacity of magiftrates ?
—Some few, nearly about half j lately there were not fo many.
How often was the regiment changed during your refidence there? —Only once,
the marines were exchanged for the New South Wales Corps, and Governor
M'Quarrie fucceeded juft before I come away. , .
Did any of the military officers hold civil offices ?—Yes, they commanded different
diftrifts, Newcaftle and Port Dalryfnple. . .
Was it the with of the colony, and did it appear to you that it would be advan-
tageous that all the civil offices fhould be held by other than military perfons ?—Yes,
it would have given more fatisfa&ion.
In what manner was corporal puniftiment infli&ed, was it public ?—Yes, it was
public, generally in the gaol-yard, the place in which they were confined.
Were any but convifts ever ordered to be flogged ?—Yes, in one inftance, I
remember a poor man being punifhed.
' By what authority?—He was brought before the Magiftrates, it was in Governor
King’s time. ■
• Do the regulations ordering the punKhment of flogging apply equally to free
men as to convifls ? —No, I do not think they do, at leaft it is very rare; the. con-
vidls are confidered as belonging to Government, the free men are independent.
Do you recolledl in the year 1797, or thereabouts, any combination formed or
entered into by the principal inhabitants of the colony, by which they agreed no to
underfell or overbuy each other?—Np; I heard of it, but I was not prefent, I left
the colony in 1796, and returned to it in 1800; I have no doubt it did take place.
Is there any regifter kept in the fettlement of births, baptifms and marriages?—.
It was always ordered to be done,.and I believe was done, but probably not fo exadl
as it ought to have been; Mr. Johnfon the clergyman ufed to keep a regifter, and
Mr. Marfderi, but a great number of children are born that they do not think it
-worth while to mention. .
Is there any office for regiftering or proving Wills?—The Judge-Advocate's
.-office.
What fees are paid upon regiftering and proving a Will? —I cannot fay; it is
very trifling, I believe; I know bonds have been regiflered. Mr. Bent, the new Judge-
Advocate, was regulating the fees when I came away.,
Js


Is there any table of fees hung up in the office, or any where expofed to view,
fo that it can be conveniently referred to by.the people of the Colony?—I believe
only in the furveyor’s department, upon grants of land, that is all that I know of.
Then there is no public table of fees refpeding the regiftering and proving of
Wills ?—No, not that I know of.
What arrangements were made for prefervirig the Police of Sydney, during the
night ?—There was a night-watch, formed of conftables, and there was a body of
men feleded from the moft creditable inhabitants, who patroled the ftreets. They
were volunteers. ' .
Was it found neceffary in confequence of the frequent occurrence of dif-
turbances in the night, to increafe, at any time, the watch or the patrole?—No.
Is then the Police appointed for the prefervation of the peace during the night
the fame that it has been during all the time you have known the colony?—Yesj I
do not know of any alteration ; the foldiers were at hand in cafe they were wanted.
The people were very orderly in general.
When the convids who have been employed during the day to work for Govern-
ment are difmiffed, is there any control over them during the remaining part of
the day?—No, not until the evening.
What control is thereover them in the evening ?—At 9 o'clock in the evening
they are obliged to go to their different dwellings.
Are they allowed to work for whom they pleafe ?—Yes, after their time is done for
Government; and they earn a great deal of money.
Do you know of any reports being made to the Governor refpeding the conduit
of the different convids, either as to thofe who were employed for the public, or of
thofe who were diftributed among the fcttlers ?—Yes, from the diftant fettlements,
reports were made by the magiftrates weekly, of all offences, or as foon as poffible,
if of importance.
Was no report made except in the cafe of offences being committed ?—Reports
of the working people under Government were always made; there was a return of
all the work that had been done weekly.
But was there any report of the conduit of the individuals ?—Yes, of their con-
duit alfo.
Were any printing preffes eftablilhed in the colony ?—None that I know of.
Had any attempt been made to eftablilh private printing preffes ?—No; I believe
the man who prints for Government would be very glad if they would permit him
to print for private, perfons. .
Under whofe authority is the newspaper, called the Sydney Gazette, publifhed ?—*
Under the Governor’s authority, and the Governor fees the proof-fheet before he
allows it to be made public.
Have all perfons a right to infert advertifements in it ?—Yes, there is no denial
that I know of; they pay for it, except thofe who are fubferibers; fome perfons fub-
feribe, and pay fo much a year.
Are many books printed in the colony ?—No, only juft a few forms for the
public offices, which are ftruck off occafionally, arid an annual almanack.
/ Are there more public fchools than one ?—There are feveral fchools, but only
one that can be called a public fchool, and that is the female orphan-fehool j
they were going to ered a public fchool for boys, when I came away, at Pa-
ramatta.
Can you ftate with any exadnefs what is the expenfe of a convid in the feryice
of Government, in the courfe of a year ?—lncluding his clothing, nearly £, 40
a. year j from £. 36 to £. 40, as near as I can ftate.
What proportion would his labour in the courfe of a day bear to that of a hired
labourer in the Government fervice ?-—Very little more than half, or perhaps
three fifths.
For what could a labourer be hired ?—Twenty-four {hillings a week at the least.
. Was there any imprifoment for debt in the colony ? ; —Yes.
What is the greateft number of prifoners for debt that you remember ?—I do
not think more than from ao to 30 at one time.
What is the loweft fum for which - they can be arrefted ?—I think it is £. 10,
to the beft of my recolledion; they are governed, as we are here, by the laws of
England.
■ What provifion is made for them ?—I think they are; allowed fix-pence a day,
by the perfon who puts them in, after a certain- time, I think it is 2 8 days.
Who maintains them for the firft 28 days ?—They get their friends to affift them;
‘341. R What


What is fixpence a day in that country equal to in this ?—I fhould fuppofe equal to
about four-pence, becaufe meat is dearer than it is in England, and bread is rather
dearer; the proportion is fomewhere thereabout.
■ Can a convidt who works for Government be arrcfted ? —No, at leaft I think not,
but I am not certain. .
' What is the legal tender ?-—lt is principally grain receipts and copper coin,
which is iffued for double its value; the penny pieces are iffued at two-pence to the
people of the colony.
Is wheat or cattle conlidered by the Courts of Juftice as a legal tender?—ln Tome
inftances it has, and in others it has not; fince I have been there I have known lome
inftances where they would not take money, they would have wheat.
Has merchandife at different periods been fent out by Government for the ufe of
the colony ? —Yes.
■ In what manner has that been diftribu ted ?—To all ranks of people.
Has not the greateft proportion of it been given to the officers ?—Yes, they had
a larger proportion than any body elfe.
A greater proportion than they were able to confume themfelves ?—Yes, very
often.
And which could be of no other ufe to them than for the purpofeof retailing it?'
—Yes, or paying it away to the men for their labour.
Were they retailed by the officers at moderate prices ?—By no means; the prices
were very extravagant.
The fame practice took place with refpect to fpirits that were imported into the
colony ?—Yes, they were fold at an immenfe profit. The officers did not exactly
fell it themfelves, but they kept women, and thofe women ufed to difpofe of it,
which was the fame thing. Immenfe quantities indeed have been fold in that way.
Was there much intercourfe with the natives ?—Yes, a good deal, as much as you
could poffibly wifh, indeed.
Were their numbers increafing or decreafing ?—I think lately increafing.
Did they adopt any of the European habits ?-—No,
■ They had the protection of our laws ?—Yes. -
What do you fuppofe to be the native population, as far as comes within your
knowledge ?—Not more than 1000 men, women, and children; I think I have
never feen more, and I have been a great deal among them.
- Do they trade with the fettlement in any way ?—Yes, with fifh ; nothing elfe.
How far have you ever penetrated into the interior ? —About fifty miles from
Sydney. '
Did you find between the hills a fucceffion of vallies capable of cultivation?—ln
the greater part of the country that I travelled over.
What is the diftance from Sydney to the foot of the Blue Mountains ?—-It is about
forty miles.
How much of that might be cultivated ?—I conceive more than half of it might
be cultivated. n ; T
Are there barrifters and attornies in the colony?—There are attornies, but they
are not allowed to plead. ■
• Are the attornies in the colony convicts ?—They have all been convicts, and that
is the reafon. .
In what character was Mr. Crofsley employed ; was he employed as the lawadvifer
of the Government?—ldo not know that he was particularly employed, he has
been, upon feme occafions, fent for. : . . '
Was Mr. Darcy Wentworth’s character very high in the colony ?—I do not think
it was.
Had it been the policy of the Governors, from the time you have known the
colony, to give encouragement to free fettlers ?—Yes, agreeable to the inftriictions
received from Government.
Are the coal-mines worked by Government? —They are worked by Government.
At what price are the coals fold ?—About forty (hillings a chaldron when I came
away; but then thevcffcls had to go and fetch them; it is a very dangerous place to
go into, you cannot go in but in fmall vcffels.
Do you know any thing of the manner in which the expenfes of the colony, are
charged to Government ? —The bills are drawn feparately at different ports..
Was the expenfe increafingordiminifhing?—lncreafing very much indeed, owing
to a great number of foldiers coming out, and the colony having been very much
diftreffed before.
. Were


Were thofe caufes likely to operate for any length of time ?—For fome time, I
fhould fuppofe, till the colony is brought about again.
Was not. Norfolk Ifland evacuated before you came away?—Yes, except a few
fettlers, and about 35 foldicrs, and I underftood they were to be recalled
Who manages the Poft-office ?—lfaac Nichols.
What was he?—He was formerly a convict, and had been fentenced to death in
the colony.
What crimes had he committed ?—I cannot fay exactly.
. The Government reprieved him ?—His cafe was referved for the opinion or tnc
twelve Judges.
Mercurii, 25° die Martii, 1812.
The Honourable GEORGE EDEN in the Chair.
Captain Matthew Flinder called in; and Examined.
WHEN wasyou in New South Wales?—l went there in year 1795', and remained
there, for the greater part, till the end of the year 1800. I was there 3 months in
1802, and I was as long in 1804. .
Had you an opportunity of becoming acquainted with the fituation of the colony
and its improvements?—l had fome opportunity.
Did it appear to you to be in a ftate of gradual improvement ?—lt did, from
the year 1795101803.
Did the improvement appear to be more rapid at one time than at another ?
I think its improvement from 1802 to 1803 was greater than any one year I had
ever feen before.
To what circumftances do you attribute that ?—I fhould attribute it to the
inundations not having been fo great as in former' years, and ; confequently lefs
damage was done to the cultivation.
Did you vifit the out-fettlements ?—I vifited fome of them, fuch as were then
eftablifhed.
Which were thofe that you vifited ?—I vifited the fettlement of Hawkefbury,
the fettlement of Profpeft Hill, and the fettlement of Caftle Hill.
None of thefe are far diftant from Sydney?—The greateft diftance is 40 miles;
they are all inland fettlements. 1
Were you acquainted with Port Dalrymple ?—I difeovered Port Dalrymple, but
I am not acquainted with the colony.
What is the diftance of Port Dalrymple from Sydney ? —About 6 degrees of lati-
tute to the South.
Had you ever an opportunity of judging of* the climate and foil ?—I had.
What appeared to you to be their nature? —More favourable for a pafture
country, than for agriculture 5 the climate is confidered to be excellent.
Did the climate vary materially from Botany Bay ?—There are none of thofe hot
days that there are in Port Jackfon. I was there-'only one month, and therefore 1
cannot fpeak very pofitively.
Did the foil appear to you calculated to produce hemp ?—I fhould think it is j
if I underftand right with refpeft to hemp, it requires a low marfhy foil; I cannot
fay whether there is much of that nature about Port Dalrymple.
When was the colony of Port Dalrymple eftablifhed ?—I think in 1803. I dif-
eovered it in 1799.
What other out-fettlements are there at a diftance from the colony ?—'There is
a fettlement in the Derwent river. ■ '
Was you ever in that place ?—I was; and from my report I believe it was that
the firft fettlement,was made there.
What is the diftance of that fettlement from Port Jackfon ?—That is nine
degrees of latitude to the South.
Is the connexion between the three - eafy or difficult to be kept up ?—I do not fee
any other difficulty than what arifes from a common fea voyage of that diftance.
Are the harbours good ?—The harbours are excellent. Port Dalrymple is difficult
of accefs, but it is very good when a fhip gets in. The harbours in the neighbour-
hood of the Derwent river are capable of receiving all the Britifh Navy, and perhaps
all the navies of the world.
65
of Evidence.] ON TR ANSPORTATION.


, Did it appear to you that the progrefs of the principal colony was impeded by
' the eftabliihment of thefe colonies ?—I cannot anfwer that queftion; becaufe thofe
obfervations which have been made, have been fince I left the.country.. I Ihould
fuppofe what.was added to the one, if it had been lent to the other, would have
been an addition to the principal colony; and therefore I fhould fuppofe it would
produce a diminution. Brit they are advantageous, and more efpecially for the
railing of feamen, which is, I fuppofe, an objeft.
Were there any productions in thofe out-colonies which did not exift in the
principal colony?—I know of none; but it is to be noticed, that my obfervation
could not extend very far, particularly as to minerals; precious ftones have been
found, which were not to be found in the principal colony. But I beg leave to
obferve, that I ftate this only from general information.
Did you penetrate at all into the interior during your relidence in Sydney?—l
have not been farther than fifty or fixty miles into the interior.
Have any perfons penetrated farther ?—They have, I believethere are perfons
who have gone more than one hundred miles into the interior.
Could you judge what the nature of the country was beyond the point to which
you proceeded?—lt appeared to me to be exceedingly mountainous, and not practi-
cable for agricultural purpofes; I found the foil very good, fo far as I went myfelf,
but I.did pot penetrate much into the mountains; it was indeed the fineft country
I ever faw.
Did the difficulty of penetrating the country exift only in one particular direc-
tion?—l believe it exifts in every direction from Port Jackfon, the country cannot
be penetrated from Port Jackfon, as I know from experiments that have been made,
which have all proved fruitlefs. . i
, What is the extent of the traCt of country from Port Jackfon, which is capable
of being inhabited and of being cultivated ?—I conceive it is , capable of being
inhabited and cultivated from Port Stephens, as far as Port Jervis, one of which is
on one fide; and. the other on the other fide of the colony.
What is the diftance from one to the other ?—I can only judge from the latitude ;
I think the extent muft be four degrees of latitude along the coaft, containing a
great variety of harbours, r . , .
What would be the diameter of that traCt of country ?—The diameter will be very :
various, but I think the extent of it will not be more than fixty miles, and in many
parts of it much lefs. .
- Did the whole of that country, generally fpeaking, appear to be fruitful ?—lt is
fruitful only in parts, and thofe parts that are fruitful, I believe, generally fpeaking,
are made fo by the inundation. '
Is there any great proportion of it barren ?—A large proportion, I conceive
one half. .
Did the colonies at Port Dalrymple and Derwent appear capable of greater ex-
tenfion ?—I think the whole of Van Diemen’s Land capable of making a very
fine colony. ; ■ , /
What is the extent of Van Diemen’s Land ?—lt extends in latitude three degrees
and ah. half north and fouth, and its extent eaft and weft is in the northern part
nearly as much ; in the fouthern part it contrails to a final! point, much fimilar to
Africa and America; it is particularly a fine cattle country, as I have underftood. ;
; What do you fuppofe; with relation to the convenience of harbours and all other
convcniencies, would be the moft defirable fituation for the eftabliihment of a
colony?—I Ihould almoft think the fouthern part of Van Diemen’s Land; there is
perhaps, , no particular harbour fo good as Port Jackfon, upon the whole, but it
contains fuch an immenfe number of harbours, that I conceive it would be more,
advantageous, and the country, generally fpeaking, I think, would be better at
Van Diemen’s Land.
. Is the native population at Van Diemen’s Land greater or lefs than in the neigh-
bourhood of Sydney ?—1 conceive it to be lefs..
The Reverend Mr. JOHNSTON called in; and Examined.
In. what year did you go to New South Wiales?—At the firft of the fettlement
in 1787. /
In what capacity ?—As chaplain, •
Until what year did you remain there ?—I returned in Oflober 1800.
Had


Had you any chaplains officiating under you ?—One came out to my affiftance in
the year 1794, Mr. Marfden, who is the prefent chaplain.
How foon had you a place for divine worfhip ?—Not all the time I was there,
except one that I built,myfelf, a temporary place, which Government were kind
enough to reimburfe me far, after Governor Hunter came out.
How many years had eiapfcd before you built that chapel ?—About 6 years,
when I fet about building it after Governor Phillips came away; there was a church
■ building before I came away, but it was not finifhed. The foundation of it was laid
at Sydney.
When a place ofdivine worthip had been eftablifhed,was the attendance regular ?~
Not lb much fo as I vvilhed, it was certainly better, but not fo well as I could have
vvilhed to havefeen it.
What defcription of perfons were the mod regular attendants'?—l cannot tell.
They ieemed to me all alike, I could fee no difference.
Before you left the colony, did it appear to you that there was any increafe of
religious feeling?—l am furry to fay, that there was not much, with fome few
exceptions.
Did you endeavour to eflablifli any regiders for baptifms, marriages, and
burials? —1 kept a regular account of them.
What means had you of afcertaining that that regider was regularly kept up ?—I
kept it in my own hands, and regidered it myfelf all the time I was there.
Was it a common practice for all the inhabitants of the colony to enter the births
of their children ?—All that I baptized, and I believe there were few or none that
were not baptized, whether the parents were living in one way or another. They were
perhaps more regular than fome paddies in England in having their children
baptized. *
.Was there any fee upon the; baptifms?—No.
Nor upon the burials ?—No.
Was the regider of the burials as regular as that of the baptifms ?—Yes, exa&ly
the fame
In the latter years of your refidence,did the marriages appear to you to be increafing
in number beyond what might be expedited from the increafe of the population ?~
It is lb longlince, that I cannot fay without reference to my books.
Have you got the Regiders ?—No, I lett them behind me lor the diredion of my
fuccedbr. _ , _ .
Did the number of perfons living in a date of .proditution appear to you to be
decreafing ?—J hope fo-towards the lad, but 1 think not much.
In what manner was the clergyman paid ? —Regularly, by the Governor fending
over'a certidcate to the Treafurer.
What was the amount of yourfalary ?—Ten diillings per day, £. 182 a year.
From your obfervation, did the colony appear to you to produce reformation
among the convids that were fent to it ? —I think if a clergyman was fent to that
country with a proper falary, a great deal of good might be done, particularly in
paying reverence to the fabbath day.
Were there no regulations to enforce attendance at church,on Sunday?—There,
were orders given but, particularly by Governor Hunter; he was the mod attentive.
Did you, as a clergyman, frequently vifit the convids in their own houfes, for the
purpofe of affording' them advice and indrudion ?—Yes, from fettlement to fcttle-
ment, and from hut to hut, and alfo the out-fettlements, which were at a didance,
from where I redded, as far as I could. • 1 ufed to get as many of them together as
I could, and after reading part of the fervice, I gave them an exhortation. -
Did you dnd that the removal of convids, to fo .great a didance from their native
country, produced a condderable died upon their minds ?—1 cannot fay much
about that; with fome few exceptions, 1 found them as contented as they are in
England, and perhaps fome of them more comfortable.
Did it appear to you that many of them were felicitous to return to England ?—-
Not many.
Did you colled, from your converfations with the convids, that the fear of being
fent to Botany Bay, or the fear of being tranfported, had operated on their minds
as a fubjed of alarm before they left England ? —I did not obferve that.
Did you obferve any difference between the conduct of thole who were tranf-.
ported for life, and thofe who had been only tranfported for a term of years ?—No.,
Did both appear to fubmit to their lot with equal cheerfulnei's ?—I faw no
difference.
S Were-
67
of Evidence.] ON TRANSPORTATION.


. . Were there many eftablifhments, before you left the colony,for the education of
children?— Yes; there were forne that I fuperintended myfelf, in the little church
, that I built; 1 fuppofe at one time above 100 children ufed to attend under three
fchool mailers.
’Were there many other fimilar eftablifhments in the colony?—There were
fimilar fchools, where I ufed to give lectures.
The education of children was not neglected in the colony, even in that early
period?—No; as far as circumftances would permit, I mean with refpect to myfelf. •
Veneris , 10° die Aprilis, 1812.
The Honourable GEORGE EDEN, in the Chair.
Mr. Robert Campbell called in ; and Examined.
IN what year did you go to Botany Bay ?—ln the year 1798 from Bengal,
To what year did you remain ?—I was there, with the exception of two or three
fliort intervals, down to the year 1810.
For what purpofe did you go?—On a-mercantile fpeculation, to procure feal-fkins
for the China market, and fupply the colony with neceffary articles of merchandife
from Bengal. .
Did you receive, that encouragement from the Governor, which you had reafon to
•cxpefl ?—When I firft arrived in 1798, no clafs of fettlers were allowed to purchafe any
articles of merchandife but the officers on the eftablifliment, civil and military.
Were you allowed to fell your merchandife at your own price ?—No.
In what manner were the prices fixed ?—ln 1798, the officers fixed the price of all
the articles of merchandife which I had then for
my departure in 1810, the Governor fixed the price, of fpirits and wine, the other
articles we were allowed to difpofe of to the beft advantage.
Had you an opportunity of feeing the manner in which the merchandife fold to
the Military and Civil Officers was afterwards retailed to the colony ?—Yes.
At what profit were the articles' retailed ?—Spirits fometimes at 500 per cent,
at leaft; on other articles generally about from 50 to. 75 per cent.
Were no difficulties thrown in your way in the difpofal of the other articles,
befides fpirits and wine ?—On my firft arrival there were.
. Were they completely removed during the laft 10 years?—Except on fpirits and
wine they were.
Were the officers allowed to take any quantity of fpirits or wine which you might
have to difpofe of?—ln 1798 the officers had the whole of my fpirits at their own
prices; from 1800 to the time of my departure the price was fixed by the Gover-
nor, and the fpirits principally diftributed among the officers and licenfcd people,
with a few exceptions to the iettlers, but not in the fame proportion.
Was the price fixed by the Governor or the officers much lower than you had.
reafon to expedl upon fpirits ?—Certainly. -
Was it fo low as not to afford you a fair profit for the voyage ? ; —Not fo large a
profit, and frequently a lofs, efpecially on fpirits from England.
- Was it ever fixed fo low as to induce you to leave the colony without difpofing
ofyour cargo ?—No; we had no other market to carry it to.
. When the price was fixed by the Governor, in what manner was payment to be
made to you?—Payment was made by the officers, or their agents, who. received the
fpirits for them, in paymafters notes, or wheat receipts, or in dollars.
What are the wheat receipts ?—The receipts iflued by the Storekeepers for grain
taken into the public (lores, and confolidated afterwards by bills on England on the
Treafury.
And if it frequently happened that you made little or no progrefs with a cargo of
fpirits, what induced you to continue the trade in fpirits down to the year 1810 ?
The importation of fpirits from England was a lofing trade, and I did not continue
it.
Then the importation of fpirits from Bengal did afford fomc profit?—Yes, when
it was allowed to be imported. .
Were there any reftridlions upon the quantity you was allowed to import ?—Yes.
What was the nature of thofe reftriftions?—Spirits being prohibited in India, it
tvas neceffary for the Governors of New South Wales to give a licenfe for.a certain
quantity


quantity of fpiritsto be exported from India, which did not exceed fix, feven, or eight
■thoufand gallons by any one fhip. ‘ -
Was any fee paid to the Governor, or to others, for obtaining that licenfe ?—None.
Was the licenfe. granted gratuitoufly ?—Yes.
Did the reftridtions and regulations upon the trade vary with the fucceding Go-
vernors? —Yes, it did, withrefpedt to fpirits.
.Was that productive of much inconvenience to you?—Not a great deal; latterly
we were obliged to make a more general diftribution of our fpirits among the
fettlers, there was ho other inconvenience attending it, but that.
In that latter diftribution, was that price ftill fixed by the Governor ?—Yes,
In what other articles did your trade principally confift?—Principally in Teas
•and Sugars from Bengal; and in Britifti manufactures from England, fuch as cotton
-cloths and woollen cloths, hats, and other manufactures of all deferiptions.
Did you obtain any cargo, to return to this Country from that?—Ves; firft;
we did of oil and (kins ; latterly we have been obliged to relinquifh the procuring
of oil, from the prefent duty that is impofed on importation to England.
Was the Filhery capable of great extenfion?—Very great; when I left the
colony we had about 128 people, including our apprentices, employed in the
Filhery, and other fources of trade.
And is that Filhery entirely Hopped?—The oil is; wc go on with feal-lkins;
but w'e cannot bring our oil to England, on account of the duty, and the heavy
freight that we pay to England ; colonial veffels not being allowed to navigate beyond
the limits of the territory.
Are there any productions of that country that could find a market in this ?
Yes; I think that hemp and flax might be cultivated in New South Wales,
encouragement being given by the Government; the price of labour being
very high.
Has the experiment yet been tried?—Very little; Government have attempted
it in a finall degree, merely as an experiment. There are many productions on
the coaft and the adjacent Iflands calculated for the Indian market, that give
employment to a number of people, fuch as fandal wood, bich-le-mar.
In what manner are they conveyed to India ?—By the Eaft India Company’s
. fhips, or by the fhips of individuals refident in Bengal, failing under a licenfe from
the refpeClive Governments in India.
Was the exportation of coals ever attempted ?—lt was; I exported a quantity
myfelf to Bengal.
. Are there any minerals in the country?;—Yes, iron ore in abundance; on Van
Diemen’s land the beft quality is found.
Was brewing carried on to a great extent in the colony ?—Yes, not to a great
■extent; the beer made there is of a very indifferent quality; we generally give a
preference to the Ale and Porter imported from England, ’
Is there any private diftillation of fpirits there ?—A great deal carried on in an
illicit manner in the woods, by many of the fettlers, notwithftanding the fevere
penalties and prohibitions of the Government.
What, in your opinion, would be the effeCt to the colony if diftillation were
there allowed ?I. think it would produce fobriety in the courfe of a few years;
people would not then have fuch a thirft or longing after fpirits as at prefent.
Is drunkennefs already very frequent in the colony?—lt is more frequent on
the importation of fpirits, but that continues only a fliort time; fometimes they
have been deprived of fpirits for fix, nine, and twelve months.
Do the fettlers feel any difficulty from the want ot a market within the Colony
for their grain ?—At one time they did, 1 can mention the year, from 1801 till
the end of the year 1803.
For what reafon was the want of a market then felt ?—By the large importation
of flour from England.
Did that large importation check the progrefs of cultivation in the colony ?—Ex-
tremely fq. ,
And would an enlarged and regular market of grain be beneficial to the fettlers ?
—Yes. , , .
Would not the allowance of diftillation within the colony, under certain regula-
tions, afford that market?—No doubt of it.
Notwithftanding the regulations of the Governor, are not fpirits to a large
quantity fmuggled into the colony?—Not in large quantities; there is always a
guard put on board the different veffels that import fpiritsto prevent fmuggling.
Did
69
of Evidence.] , ON TRANSPORTATION.


Did you hold any office in the colony?—I did as magiftrate, a naval officer, for
about eight months previous to the 26th of January 1S08; and I acted in the fame
fit uation-from the ift of January 1810, to the 31 11 of March 1810, when I was
ordered to England. I alfo adted as treafurer to the orphan fund during Mr.
Marfden’s abfence, during the fame period in fadt.
What punifhment had you the power of ordering to any convidt as a fingle ma-
giftrate?—The fitting magiftrate for the week, upon a complaint being made before
him, can order a punilhment not exceeding 25 ladies. .
Could he order that punilhment upon his own view of the offence, or muft a
charge be made before him by fome other perfon ?—A charge is always exhibited
upon oath before him.
Could he order a punilhment of his own fervant, or if the fervant offended, was he
obliged to take him before another magiftrate ?—He was always obliged to take him
before another magiftrate.
Is there only one magiftrate in Sydney during the week who has power of ordering
punifhment ?—Only one, except on Saturdays, when the bench meets.
In the out-fettlements has every magiftrate the lame power us the fitting magiftrate
in Sydney ?—ln Imall offences I think they have, but when they are of magnitude;
they are returned to the bench. - .
Did many of the military and naval officers hold the office of magiftrate?— Se-
veral of the military did, and one naval officer. ' ,
Did they hold other civil offices within the colony : —The military did as com-
mandants of the out-fettlements.
Would it have given greater contentment to the colony if all the civil offices, had
. been held by perfons not in a military fituation ?—Yes, it would.
Were there a fufficient number of refpedtable perfons in the colony to fill thofe
offices ?—I think there were of late years.
Were there a fufficient number of perfons to eftablifh a council to affift or con-
trol the Governor, and regulate the laws of the country ? —Not in the colony.
Were there a fufficient number of refpedtable'perfons to eftablifh the trial by
jury?—l think there was a fufficiency to have formed a jury, although certainly it
would have come very hard upon them, unlefs there was a feledtion from thofe who
were free by fervitude or otherwife.
Were the people of the colony generally contented with the courts ofjuftice as they
are now conftituted ?—I think not, they would have preferred a trial by jury cer-
tainly.
Do you hold any land ?—Yes, by purchafe ; I was not admitted to the fame pri-
vilege as a feeder from England, having come from Bengal. - ,
Had you any convict allowed to you ?—None.
How much a day did you pay for a labourer?—At firft feven, drillings, and latterly
five fhillings.
Did you find any difficulty in procuring free labourers?—No, the Government
people were allowed to work for themfelves after they had performed their Govern-
ment talk, and there are a number of people to be hired, whofe time of fervitude
had expired. , - ,
Whac proportion does the day’s work of a free labourer bear to that of a con-
vidt ?—A free man would do twice as much as a convidt.
Whether he was working by the piece or by the day r—The free people always
work by the day; the convidh have a certain talk to perform, which they can, if
they work well, accomplifh in two or thee hours.
How many hours is a day’s work for a free labourer ?—From fix to fix.
Can you ftate what is the expenfe to a fettler of keeping a convidt by the year ? '
To pay him for his extra labour, I (hould think about C-AS a y. ear *.
How much would the fupport of a convidt coft the fettler who did not employ
him in his after hours ?—• From thirty to thirty-two pounds a year.
Are the convidts in the fervice of the fettiers better treated, and more likely to ,
be reformed, than thofe in the fervice of Government ?—I think they are j thote of .
the beft charadter are generally allotted to the fettiers. _
What is the greateit number of convidts that any one fettler has in his employ-
ment ?—About 40 is, I think, the largeft number that I have known, or heard of,
that was allotted by Government.
In what manner are thofe 40 convidts lodged ?—ln feparate huts.
Then they have not the advantage of being under the fame roof, and domefti-
Cated with their mafter?—Not fuch numbers as thofe ; but when they are with the •
other


other fettlers, where they do not exceed two or three convicts, they are generally
under the fame roof with their mafters.
Did you obferve that the reformation was greater where a fmall number of con-
vlfts were allowed to the fettlers, than where a greater number was given ?—I never
obferved that particularly, but I fhould fuppofe where the fmall number was, there
was a greater chance of reformation.
Was the price of free labour much dearer at the diftant fettlements than near
Sidney?—l have underftood fo, efpecially in the time of harveft.
Would the cultivation be much increafed if a greater number of convi&s were
allowed to the fettlers ?—I think it would.
Are there now a fufficient number gf fettlers to give employment to all the con-
vifts within the colony?-—I think there is; but there are numbers of them fuch
notorious characters, that a fettler is not much inclined to take many of fuch bad
character. -
Did the colony, upon the whole, appear to you to be productive of reformation,
among the conviCls ?—I think they are reforming.
Are many of thofe who have been conviCls now fettled with refpeClable characters
in the colony ?—Not a great many. ■
Was that number increafing when you left the colony?—-I think they were, from
the encouragement that was given to them by Governor Macquarie.
Were marriages more frequent, and was proftitution lefs fo ?—I think proftitu- '
tion had decreafed for fome time previous to 1810; it was very prevalent before;
very few marriages, I believe, had taken place in the colony.
To what market did you take the produce of your farm ?—1 generally confumed
it amdngft the vaft number of people X employed in the filhery, with other’
mechanics. ...
What market was open to the fettlers for their grain ?—The Government (lores ■
.chiefly.
What were the regulations upon the fale to the Government ftores?—The price
was fixed by the Governor.
Were there any other grain-markets open to the fettlers, befides that of Govern- ‘
ment ?—There is a great deal of confumption among the free inhabitants.
Was the price of the fales to Government as high as of the fales of one individual
to another ?—lt was much lower to Government.
"Was it ever fo low to Government as not to afford a fair profit to the fettler? —
When the wheat was taken into Government ftores at feven (hillings, it was im-
poflible for the grower to grow it at that price. ■
But was the fettler, from the want of any other market, obliged to fell it even
at that lofing price ?—He was, except where he could difpofe of it to indi-
viduals. .
Were they in any way forced to fell it to the Government ?—They were obliged to
fell it to Government in order to purchafe other heceflaries of life, fuch as
clothing.
What proportion do the wants of Government bear to the wants of the reft of
the market ? I fuppofe about three fifths.
Is that proportion increafing or decreafing?—Certainly increafing, from the num-
ber of troops latterly introduced into the colony.
Were duties impofed upon the importation, of merchandife by the Governor ?
—Yes. ' . ■ ■■ .
On merchandife of every nature ?—On goods from the caftward of the Cape
of Good Hope there was a duty of 5 per cent, ad valorem; none on Britifti ma-
nufactures. • ,
■ What land in the colony was held .by perfons who had been Governors ?—I
never knew of any Governors holding land, except Governor King and Governor
Bligh.
■ Did Governor Bligh hold this land during his own Government ?—Yes, I under-
ftand the land was given to him previous to his entering on the Government, by
Governor King ; indeed I know it was.
And did Governor Bligh make a fimilar grant of land to Governor King ?
I underftand the grant was to Mrs. King.
Do you know what were the number of acres in each of thofe grants ?—I think
Governor Bligh’s was between thirteen and fourteen hundred acres; Mrs. King’s was,
I believe, a thoufend.
Was it land near the fettlement ?—Governor Bligh’s was at all the three fettle-
-341. ■ . T • ments ;
71
of Evidence.] ON TRANSPORTATION,


ments; Hawkefbury, Paramatta, and Sydney diftrift. Governor King’s was all at the
1 Hawkefbury,
Were inftances of pauperifm frequent in the colonies?—Very frequent, there
are a number of poor objefts, particularly in the town of Sydney,
In what manner are they provided for?—By voluntary contributions.
Were they at all helped from the Government ftore ?—I believe very fcldom, as
far as my knowledge goes.
What is the greateft number of pardons that you remember to have been granted
by ar./ Governor in one year?—l think about one hundred and fifty pardons and
emancipations in one year in Governor King’s time.
In what year was that ?—I think in 1804 or 1805.
Dp you remember any combination bond entered into by the officers for
the purpofe of keeping up the price of merchandife, and what was the nature
of that bond?—ln .1798 they entered into that bond for the purpofe of purchafing
all fupplies that came to the colony, which they could not do but byconfent of two
of their own,plumber, who were named as Commiffioners to aft for the whole on the :
arrival of any fhip.
Who were the perfons that entered into that bond ?—-Principally the-military'
officers; it was under that bond that I was'forced to fell my firft cargo when I came
from Bengal at their own prices.
Do you recolleft any perfons who have been'convifts in civil offices ?—Yes,
feveral.
Had the conduft of thefe perfons in general been fucli as to make you think
ihem worthy of filling thefe offices?—Some of them were.
Had they been, appointed from the want-of other perfons, or from their own
perfonal merits ?—lt was the choice of the Governors in appointing them.
Did it appear to you that there were other perfons in the colony, who had not
been convifts, who were able to fill thofe fitiiations ?—Yes.
What is the price of coals per ton in the colony?—With the exportation duty
A* 1 15J. in large quantities! :
What are the number of military in New South Wales ?—Eleven hundred.
What is the neceffity for lb large a number?—l fliould fuppofe apprehenfions
ofinvafion. - . ■
What was it before the late increafe ?—-Seven hundred.
Is fo laVge a number at all neceffary for internal purpofes ?•—I do not think
it is.’ ■ ' ■
What number.will be Efficient to keep up the different patrolcs at the different
fettlements ?—From five to fix hundred.
Lunœ, 13° die Aprilis, 1812.
The Honourable GEORGE EDEN in the Chair.
George Johnfon , Efquire, called in; and Examined.
WHEN did you firft go.to Botany Bay ?—I failed from England in 1787, with,
the firft fleet, and came away the 28th of Marais 1809. -
What was your fituation in Botany Bay?—When I'firft went out, I was fenior
Lieutenant of Marines; and upon the death of Captain Shea I fucceeded to his
company. When the two companies of the New South Wales Corps came out I was
kept behind with a company, of Marines until Major Grose arrived; Governor
Phillips had then orders to raife a company, to be added to the New South Wales
Corps, arid lie gave it to me. I had been his Aid de Camp from his firft landing
there till Governor Phillips went away; I remained in that regiment until I fuc-
ceeded to. the Majority from length’ of fervice; and then arrived to the rank of
Brevet Lieutenant Colonel, and was in that fituation when I left the colony.
What civil offices did you hold ?—I ufed to aft as a Magiftrate j I was Aid dc
Camp to both Governor Phillips and Governor Hunter.
What advantages had the military officers in matters of commerce? —They had
no advantage at all.that I know of. in matters of commerce; there was a ftrift order
from the War Office that no officer was allowed to trade at all.
Were not large allowances of fpirits and other merchandifc-made to the officers
by the Governor ?~I do not' know of any large allowance, there was a proportion
allowed to the officers both civil and military j fometimes I ufed to get 30 gallons
- for


for fix, eight, or ten months perhaps; in Major Grose!s time there was no prohi-
bition of fpirits at all; if any American (hip, or any other arrived, the officers, or any
others who had money, were allowed to purchafe as much fpirits as they liked ; fome
of us had grants of land at that time, and we ufed to barter the fpirits to pay the
labourers for clearing our grounds. ' -■ • .
What was the largelt quantity of fpirits you ever recollect being given to one
officer by the Governor?—l think the moft that ever I was allowed to purchale was
a couple of calks of fpirits in Governor Hunter’s time, out of the Ganges, or the Bri-
tannia. I was enclofing a very large piece of ground, and building houfes upon it
in the country, and I afkcd that as a particular favour.
Do you recolleCt at what price thefe calks of fpirits were allowed to you ?—I do
not exactly know whether it was five (hillings, or nine (hillings, it was one or the
other, but I have "paid as high as £, 3 a gallon for fpirits, and I have the Bill to
Ihbw. 1 .
~ At what price were thofe fpirits bartered to your neighbours?—-At the fame
price they were fold at in the drops; they have paid at from twenty to thirty dril-
lings a gallon, and when our ground was cleared, the labourers ufed to have dops
and dour from us, and fome fpirits.
• What quantity of land had you in your hands ?—I do hot think, it is 3000 acres.
Governor King gave me 2,000 acres for quelling an infurreCtion that happened in
the country from the Iridr convicts. . -
What number of conviCts were allowed you to cultivate this land ?—ln the firfl
inftance, Governor Grose allowed me ten men, but they were not turned over to
me till I had a comfortable houfe to Ihelter them in.
Did you maintain thole men yourfclf at your own expenfe ?—Not in Governor
Grose’s time. There was an order came that all the people that were allowed by
Government, were to be victualled, except the people who were in civil fituations j
and, as a magiftrate, I was allowed four by Government, and three as commanding
officer; latterly I had only two, and did not apply for a third; when I came away
1 victualled and clothed twenty-three off the (lores, befides tny own family.
Did thefe men live under your own roof?—No, they had a houfe by themfelves,
but they lived immediately under my eye; that is, the labouring men.
How many conviCts had you immediately under your own roof?->-Two women
conviCts, and I think four men in the houfe 1 lived in. -
Did you choofc thofe for their good character ?—No, we were not allowed to
choofe them; when a (hip came in, we applied to the Governor for one, two, of
three fervants, whatever number we might want, perhaps we might get ope of two
men that had been ufed to it. .
Had you any means of becoming acquainted with the character, of the men about
you before you had taken them into your fervice ?—No further than what the captain
of the (hip might give us of their behaviour on the voyage. - >
Were the fervants allowed to fettlers of a better defeription than thofe kept for
the fervice of Government?—l do not think there was any diftinCtibn; the Govern*
merit ufed to take all the artificers entirely to themfelves.
Did the conduct of the fervants of fettlers appear to you to be better in the general
than that of the fervants of the Government ?—I do not think it did ; my people ufed
to behave very well, and the only reafon 1 can give for that is, that 1 had an excel-
lent overfeer,. who ufed to make them (lick to their work. . '
Did the fervants of the fettlers behave better than thofe kept in the fervice of the
Government?—l do not think they did, for fom,e of the fettlers are not much better
than the people fent out from this country.
. Did the good or the bad preponderate ?-—The convict who was with an officer
would take pride in behaving well, and my people behaved well, and the reafon I-
believewas I kept them hard at work, and if they neglected it I madc the overfeer
turn them back from the beginning and make them do it over again, in confequence
of which they did it very well.
( ,Was not the general conduCt of conviCts domefticated in the fairaily of indivi-
duals, better than thofe who were working in gangs for the purpofes of Government ?
—Yes, I Ipeakfor myfelf, I had a large garden, I gave them plenty of vegetables.
Was not more reformation produced among them ?—Yes, there was a particular-
order that no’conviCt fervants were allowed to leave their matters premifes without a
written permiffion, which prevented them from idling about.
Were not the conviCts allowed to work on their own account after Certain hours f
—Yes, after their talk was done.
■ In
73
of Evidence.] : ON TRANSPORTATION.


In what manner could they obtain employment without a pafs ?—The overfeers-
of the different farms about, ufed to inquire of them if they had any fpare time,;
and wanted employment; and if their matter did not hire them they were at-
liberty to go to other people. -
In what manner could they obtain employment, if the matter refufed to give:
them a pafs to leave his premifes ?—lf the matter refufed to give them a pafs, they
had a right to complain to the bench of magiftrates; in the firft inftance they were*
obliged to offer their Services to their matter; and if they were not contented with,
the wages offered them by the matter, they had a right to hire themfelves to-
another perfon. ' *. ■
Was the price of labour ever fixed by the Governor ?—Yes, it was.
Was that price acquiefced in ? —I have heard it was not; up at the Hawkefbury
the people would not work at the price that was fixed for their labour.
Was the price of labour in the neighbourhood of Sydney regulated by the Gover-
nor?—There were prices put upon the different articles, fuch as fplitting paling,
fplitting Ihingles, felling timber, and in fhort all field 1 labour; but you were in
general obliged to give more than the Governor had ordered, for the people would
not work for it.
What part did the military take In the police of the colony?—There were mili-
tary watchmen in the military diftrift.
What is called the military diftrift ?—The military diftridb confifts of three on
four ftreets near the barracks, and was immediately under the - orders of the com-
manding officers; the huts that were built there, were occupied by foldiers and-
their families, who have their little gardens and their comforts about them; ours
barracks were not large enough to contain all the foldiers, and it was an indulgence
to allow them to be out there with their wives and families; and if any of them
.behaved ill, they were immediately ordered into the barracks; indeed the fartheft
from the barracks was not two minutes walk. •
. What was the number of the military when you left the colony ?—About 550
in New. South Wales. !;.■■■
©id it appear to you that that number was quite fufficieht for all the purpofes
■of the colony?—I do not think it was; in my opinion there ought to be a body of
cavalry there; when thefe people broke out in rebellion in March 1804, I was
Tent againft them with only 25 foldiers, and they had 136 ftand of arms, befides-
bayonets, piftols, and reap-hooks tied to poles, and a variety of other things; but
I,fucceeded in fecuring the two ringleaders; then a firing took place between us for.
about 15 minutes, when they fled in all directions, and we found 16 of them dead,
and there were about ten ora dozen wounded; we took about 30 prifoners, and 10
of them were hanged. • , -
Does not the probability of infurredlion become every day lefs, from the in-
creafed population, and improvement of the colony?—I do not think fo myfelf;.
I think there are a great number of very dilcontented people there, that would
be very glad to overturn the colony. *
Do you mean that there are dilcontented people, exclufive of the convicts ?
Yes, I think fo; fome of the people that were convicts, that have been allowed to
become Tettlers, are the beft people we have there, and far Tuperior in point of
induftry to fome that come from England as free fettfers. -
Do the refpedtabie part of the fociety in the colony appear to be increafing ?—I
do not think it did; thefe were fome people that came out there with orders for
grants of land, and the orders were not complied with ; and that I fuppofe difeou-
raged other fetclers; there were a few free fettlers from England, with whom the
officers civil arid military would aflbeiate,; I believe their number did not exceed
half a dozen.;■ •
In what manner was the fabbath kept in the colony ?—Very ftridt, as far as ever
I faW; for there was pofitive orders for all perfons to attend divine fervice, and
during the time it was performing the conftables were going about to fee that there
Were no people idling about, if there were, they were taken up and punilbed ; the
vfromen and their children ufed to feem to take a pride, in general, to make a
decent appearance of a funday, and behaved as decently as you fee people in this
country. , ,
Was drunkennefs frequent of a Sunday ?- —I never faw any thing of the kind.
Did you attribute that to the difficulty of obtaining fpirituous liquors ?—When
.there was the greateft abundance of fpirituous liquors in the colony, and there was
no


no reftriftion. I. think there was lefs drunkennefs when they could get it, when they
had money, juft as they do here; they did not Teem fo eager about it. ,
Do you think that drunkennefs would be much increaled by the permiflion of
diftillation within the colony?—No, 1 think the reverfej and I think it would be
cf great benefit to the colony if ftills were allowed under certain reftri&ions, and
they might by that means raife a large revenue ; I myfelf, for the laft twelve or
fourteen years before [ came to England, have fed my, pigs upon peaches, as I was
not allowed to diftil them, and the people in the interior, when they could not get
their grain immediately turned into (tore, ufed to throw {heaves of corn to the pigs.
If their peaches, and that grain had been diftilled under proper regulations, it would
have kept a great quantity of money in the colony which would have ferved to
improve and clear it, and which is now carried away by the Americans in exchange
for yanky rum, as it is called, and which is a worfe fpirit than what we could have
diftilled in the colony. Notwithftanding the prefent regulations, illicit diftillation-
of a very bad fpirit is daily carried on ; there would never be a famine if they were
allowed to diftil the furplus grain, becaufe, whenever there was a fcarcity of grain,
prevent the diftilling, and they would immediately turn all their wheat into the
ftore, and be very glad to get the Government bills for it then.
Is the want of an enlarged market feverely felt by the,fettlers ?—I think it is. I
think much advantage might refult if the colony were allowed to export grain to the
Mauritius, or any other place that might want it.
Veneris, 12° die Junii, 1812.
The Honourable GEORGE EDEN, in the Chair.
Mr. Robert Campbell called in; and Examined.
■ I N-what manner is the colony of New South Wales fupplied with Englifli goods ?
—By private (hips from London, and very frequently through (hips that bring out'
convicts; the mailers have generally had an inveftment on board.
; Are they allowed to come direct to New South Wales?—Yes.
From what reafon did you find it inconvenient to yourfelf to fupply the colony
with Englifh fpirits ?—The price.allowed by the, Government was not fufficient to
pay the freight, infurance, and other charges. .
In what manner are leafes of land within the town of Sydney granted to the inha-
bitants ?—The leafes are for fourteen years, and in one or two infiances, where a great
deal of money was expended in improvement, there was a recommendation to the
next Government to renew them.
Generally fpeaking, no leafes were granted for longer terms than fourteen years ?
Never. •
Was any inconvenience felt by the inhabitants from that fyftem?—l (hould
conceive lb.
Is that a fyftem that has frequently been complained of?—Not that I know of,
particularly; I have applied to the Governor for a grant myfelf, and it has been
referred to the Secretary of date for the Colonics.
Was it not one of the caufes of difcontent againft Governor Bligh ?—No, becaufe
it has always been the ufual practice to grant leafes of that kind; they were never
(hortened that I know of during his government; the complaint againft him was for
breaking through former leafes.
r What is the nature of the office of Provoft Marfiial in the colony ?—Similar to
that of the Sheriffs in England j he attends all executions, and iffues his writs.
; Does he execute procefs?-—Yes.
Are the courts of civil judicature in no inftance open to convidls ?—ln none;
ho convict can profecute in the civil courts there; 1 have known feme inftances of
cdgnifance being taken by the magiftrates of a prifoner owing money, ordering him
to pay fo much out of his weekly earnings.
If a debt be due to a prifoner, in ,what manner does he recover it ?—He has no
means of recovering it by the prefent regulations of the colony.
Though he has none by the laws, has he any by the practice ; is there any way by
magiftrates?—l have known one or two inftances of the magiftratcj interfering when
a prifoner was indebted to a prifoner.
But when another was indebted to a prifoner ?—None.
341. U If
75
of Evidence. ON TRANSPORTATION.


If perfonal'violence be offered to a prifoner has he no means of bringing an
action.?—He coraplairls to the magiftrate ;no perfon can ftrike a convict. -
Then the convict has no pdffible means of obtaining rcdrefs for any perfonal
injury ?—Not for debt.
For violence ?■—Yes, on complaint to the magiftrate.
In that cafe the offender would be punilhed ? —Yes. ,
But no rcdrefs would be given to the convict ?—None, if the offender was an
officer he would be brought to a court martial.
is the corps called the New South Wales Corps difbanded, or does it exift now ?
—lt is not disbanded, it is now called the 102 nd . -
It is a regiment of the Line, and not confined to New South Wales ? : —Yes, they
are not confined to New South Wales.
Are there regifters of births, marriages, and burials, at Paramatta and Hawtef-
bury, as well as at Sydney ?—There are orders to the clergymen to that effect by the
Governor. ; ' ' : -
Has wheat latterly been frequently imported into the colony ?—Frequently.
Then the colony does not grow fufficient wheat to fupport itfelf? —l do not think'
it does -’•- ■■■
Might it'with proper encouragement ? Tthink' fo; there have been feveral im-
portations laft year of wheat from Bengal.
Was that owing to any accident, fuch as the overflowing of the Hawkefbury ?
I think the firft importation was owing to tire overflowing of the Hawkefbury.
How frequently have thole overflows occurred ?—I cannot call to my memorj%
they have been more frequent within the laft ten years than before.
Are the latter floods equally deftruflive with the former ?—I think they are; the
fettlers are now getting.more into the practice of clearing the back, grounds, and
getting their crops Into the high grounds, formerly they ufed to keep their crops on
the banks of the riyer.. . .V . . ......
Bythefe precautions have the floods been rendered- lefs mifehievous ?—Certainly.
’ \Vh'ar dre the timber trees in the ftttlernent ?, Avaft variety of very hard timber,
Very difficult to work; except the cedar,which grows dt Hunter’s River, diftant from
Sidney fome miles. ' ,
Is any of the cedar fit for flflp-building ?—Yes, but the hard wood is more
durable.
cts not-the generality- of -the timber rotten in* the middle?—Ob, no; part of it-is;
about Sydney ; it is very rotten on account of the bad foil.
Owing to the Want Of drainage perhaps ?—-Certainly.
■ Does the fandal-wood-grow dt all there ?■—No; •
r .po you import it from the iflands.?—'Yes, from -the Fejee iflands which lie to
the eaftward and northward .of us about aoco.miles.-
> Is that a trade capable of cxlenfion ?-—I think it is.
Is it one that is profitable?—l think it is.
How Is it profitable ?—The Ihips that come from Bengal carry it to China, where
it goes to an excellent market; it is only of late it has been difeovered, within theft
four or five years, I believe, was the firft cargo imported. - ■-- ,
Can that ttade by the charter of the Eafl India Company be carried on direct!/
from the colony ?—No, not direct from the countryi .
Does the Eafl India Company’s charter in other refpects materially impede the
profpevity of commerce ?—I fhonld confider fo. ;
In what month is the fpring of the year ?—The fpring is in the month of Auguftv
the commencement of it.
In what manner do the fruits and vegetables fucceed each other? —The China
fruit, the loquateS) are ripe in Auguft,- the ftrawberries in the latter end of September
and beginning of October, and the peaches fucceed them* apples and pears, dnd
oranges ;we have no plumbs, nor goofeberries, nor currants. . ,
At what time do the grapes ripen ?—ln januarj r , and continue to the latter end
of February.
How do the vegetables fucceed each other? —We have potatoes all the year; and
our peas are all the year, except about a month at the hottefl: time of the year. •:
In ILort, all vegetables gfdvv there?—Yes, remarkably well* they are very abunt-
dant; if a prifoner is indutliious there be need not want vegetables throughout * the
whole year. ■ ■ . .
Has the tea-plant been tried there ?—No.
Is the climate as healthy as it is productive? —It is a.very healthy climate indeed.
Is


Is it liable to hurricanes ?—Very feldom‘indeed; there are ftorms of. thunder
and lightning in the fummer-months.
,is the nature of your winter, is it heavy rains ?—No,. fine weather ; the
rains we have moft are in the month of March, there are very heavy rains in .the
month of March, the winter is dry in general.
Mr. John Henry Capper called in ; and Examined.
IN what office are you ?—ln the Secretary of States Office for the Home De-
partment. ' • , ; ...
. Can you inform the Committee in what manner, from the convidts fentenced to'
tranfportation, thofe are feledted who are lent to New South Wales ?—The firft
proceeding, is to feledt thofe whoare unxier fentence of tranfportation for life, that
may have been removed from the different counties to the Hulks; then thofe
under fentence for fourteen years tranfportation, and others under fentence for feven
years tranfportation, who from bad condudt, it is neceflary to fend out of the
country. ' ‘ ‘
‘ Are all perfbns under fentence of tranfportation for life, and for fourteen years,
lent to New South Wales ?—There are many not fit to fend there, and many
not fit from old age, which would render them a matter of great burthen to the
colony. • -
, Is there any limitedage, or are they chofen from the judgment formed of their
probable utility ?—We feldom exceed the age of fifty; where a man is fifty years
of:'age he is'not Tent. ‘ r : ; ‘ ■’ J .c '. *
In what manner is the feledtiori made from thofe who are fentenced to tranf-
portation for feven years ?—-We have references to books where Magiftrates in the
different counties inform iis of the atrocious conduct in fome adts they have
committed in the refpedlive counties; or from the condudt on board the'Hulks;
in attempting to efcape, and ftriking officers, and fuch like.
Then you contider the execution of the fentence of tranfportation, heavier than
the confining the prifoners on board the Hulks?—lt is abfolutely neceflary for the
fafety of the Hulks to remove thofe who have been guilty of the moft atrocious
crimes. ( 4
In feledting the convifts for tranfportation from among thofe fentenced for feven
years, is reference only had to • their crimes, and not to their probable utility within
the colony ?—To their crimes.only.
And thofe who have committed the heavier crimes are tranfported ?—They
are tranfported ; fome;of them are under a fecond fentence of tranfportation, and
then it is conceived neceflary to tranfport them.
In what manner are the women feledted for tranfportation? —Thofe we take
generally all over the country, excepting thofe who are too old. Returns are
made from the refpedlive counties when a veflel is.about to be employed for their
conveyance, and then all are feat whole ages or ftate of health allow, of it.
To what ages are women limited ?—We generally confine it, as nearly as poffible,
about two-and-forty, and not ,more than five-and-forty ; there have been inftances,
where we have been impofed upon, where they wilhed to go, but we have brought
them back. _ . ...
Is that with the idea of their being pad child-bearing?—With a view, to the
fervice of the Country generally; but generally fpeaking, they are very young that
go Out, from London in particular, ; ;
Is the feme Tyftem purfued in Ireland, as in England?—That I do not know,
: We have not the means of afeertaining that, it being left to the Government; we
merely procure fliips for them here.
Are there inftances in which convidts have been tranfported for a Ihorter period
than feven years?—From Scotland only, the Scotch laws do not limit them as
to periods.
Are convidls ever fent whofe fentence is within two or three years of its expi-
ration ?—Cafes- have occurred where that has taken place.
Upon what principle are they fent?—Thofe were about three or four years ago ;
two cafes, in conlequence of their attempting feveral times to cut through the Ihip,
and one fur wounding one of s the guards; there are cafes freo,uently occur ; and
there is one at prefent, of a man applying to go out in confcquence of his wife
having been tranfported ; we cannot refill it of courfe, but generally fpeaking, the
line I have pointed out is adopted.
77
of Evidence.} ON T RANSPORTATION.


If convl&s cxprels a defire to be tranfported, rlther than to be confined on
board the Hulks, is that defire generally attended tor —No, unlefs under very
(peculiar -circuraftances.
■ You mean -fiich circumftances as you- have dated in your laft anfiverr—
Exactly fo. .
If a conviCl be married, is any facility afforded to his wife to accompany him
if (he fliould choofe r —lt was formerly attended to, but ftrong objections have
arifen on the part of the Tranfport Board, in allowing them at ail events to ac-
company them; in fome inftances, we have allowed them to follow in other Ships.
Are you acquainted with the nature of the objedtions ?-—No, lam not, I may
venture, 1 believe, to fay, that it generally caufes, by fending a few females, a degree
of jealoufy on the part of thofe men who are obliged to be feparated off from the
others, on account of their wives, and (in point of morality) the inducement on the
part of the others to get at thofe women.
Are they now generally allowed to follow in other fhips?—Not generally.
By what rules is the permiflkm granted or refilled ?—We Ihould not allow a
female to go out whofe hufband was under a feven years tranfportation; in thofe cafes
where they are under a lenience of tranfportation for life, we have endeavoured to
fend them out, and we have in moll cafes done it.
If a convidl had a wife and children, are his children in any inftance allowed to
accompany him ?—Yes, they have been.
■Upon the fame rule ?—Yes.
... At what.periods are thofe convicts fent out from England? —It entirely depends
upon the accumulation of the various offences committed in the various counties,
and when the hulks are full to their eftablilhment, we then take a veffel up in order
to convey them to New South Wales; generally two hundred males and one
hundred females; but with refpeCt to the females it is quite adiftinCt proceeding,
we are obliged to fend round to the different counties, and procure returns of the
prifoners in the refpeCtive gaols.
Have they increafed laterly ?—Yes, they have; we have found it neceflary to take
fhips up more frequently than formerly.
Lieutenant Edward Lord called in; and Examined.
WHEN did you leave New South Wales?—ln September.
In what year?—ln.iSti, and landed in England on the twelfth of May laft.
At what time did you leave Van Diemen’s Land?—l left in February 1811.
Had you refided there for any length of time ?-—I was at the formation of the
fcttlement, from-February 1804 till that period. '
Of both fettlements ?—No the fettlement of Hobart’-s Town. =■
Did you refide at Port Dalrymple at all ?—No, I did not; I have been there;
the iflund of Van Diemen is divided into two counties, the one called Bucking-
hamfhirc, to which I belonged.
What is the extent of the ifland ?—I do not remember the degree, but wc ufed
to calculate about the fize of Ireland, the fame number of fquare acres; it is not
fo long as Ireland, but it is wider; the diftance from the two fettlements is one
hundred and twenty miles by land.
What is the nature of the climate ?—Wc have neither the extreme heat of*
England, nor the feverity of cold ; it is an uncommon fine climate. ■
Is jt equally healthy and productive with that of Sydney?—Much fuperior, both
in health and climate and foil, and in every refpeCt far more productive; and I
rather think, there are as many fquare acres as in the principal fcttlement; for though
that is an ifland large enough to delerye the name of a continent, it is bounded
in the rear by mountains, which are almofl infurmountable, and they form nearly a
half circle, extending, I believe, from fouth to north. ,
Have you any productions in Van Diemen’s Land, which they have not at Port
Jackfon ?—We have none cf any confequence that 1 know of; the iron ore is cer-
tainly fuperior to any of that in the principal fettlement, that which has been
tried has yielded firventy-five per Cent, the common ore of the country is fifty,
and we have coals alfo, which are not worked, I have no doubt very extenfive
coal.
Is the country covered with wood ?—I think the foreft land has about one tree
for every ten there are in the principal fettlement, it is very open. To give an idea of
• the


the open country, the firft intercourfe vvc had by land from Hobart’s. Town to
Launcefton, a loaded cart was drawn without the neceffity of felling a tree.
, What is the ground covered with? —In general with very rich pafturage; it is
a fine, beautiful pidhirefque country as can be ; in fadt a grazier would be a better
judge than myfelf; we firfl: of all exported the fmall cattle from Bengal, none of
them exceeded one hundred and eighty pounds, and with the crofs of the Englifh
bull, their firft increafe obtained the weight of feveh hundred pounds, of courfc
the pafturage muft have been very good for the cattle to obtain that weight,
though the breed muft have been improved by the male animal.
Has much of the country been explored?—lt is pretty generally known by the
inhabitants, except the Weftern coaft, which is mountainous. .1 have myfelf been
a good deal in the interior.
Does the fertility of the country appear generally fuch as you have deferibed
it, as far as it is explored ?—Yes, it is in general.
Do the fame laws and regulations exift in the colonies in Van Diemen’s land,
as in the principal fetllement ?—There has been no Patent for eftablilhing a
Court in Van Diemen’s land, though we have a Judge-Advocate, confequently
the only Court is the Bench of Magiftrates, except a Military Court Martial,
Do the Bench of Magiftrates decide all civil lulls, or are they transferred to
the principal fettlement ?—They are transferred to the principal fettlement in
general; the Magiftrates try fometimes, on trifling difputes, to fettle fuch difputes
if.they can.
Acting as arbitrators?—Yes; it is a great inconvenience not having a Court
in the Ifland. .
What is the number of inhabitants in that fettlement ?—I think I left between
thirteen and fourteen hundred, men, women, and children. I fucceeded to the-
command on the death of Lieutenant Colonel Collins, as the fenior officer.
And what proportion of that number are convi&s?—Between three and four
hundred convidfs, male and female ; three hundred and fifty , I Ihould think, or:
near about that. ' •
Is the greater proportion of thofe kept in the hands of the Governor, or are
their fervices transferred to individuals ? ; —To individuals. Government entered
into an engagement fome years ago, I think during the period Mr. Windham was
Secretary at War, with the fettlers of Norfolk Ifland, to fettle where they pleafed,
either in the principal fettlement of Port Dalrymple, or - the fettlement of
Hobart’s Town, and they made choice of the latter. 'The inftrudtions from the
Secretary of State were, that they , Ihould be divided into three diviflons; fome
of them were the Marines who firft went out, and part of the Sirius’ (hip's com-
pany, who formed the firft clafs, and the convidts were the fecond and third, ac-
cording to their merits; Government agreed at that time, on their removing, to
allow the firft clafs four fervants, and the fecond and third two ; but in confequence
of their being fo fcarce, they were not able, when I left, to complete the engage-
ments they had made with them.
How nearly does the colony fupply itfelf With provifions; do you import any
wheat? —It grows wheat, and barley, and potatoes; I think it, fupplied itfelf for
more than two thirds of the year when 1 left it, but before that we had been lubjedt
to great inconvenience and privations for want of provifions; with proper encou-
ragement from the officers in the Government it Could very eafily fupply itfelf.
Have you any church eftablifhment there ?~Yes, we have a'chaplain; and when
I left, there was a church about half finifhed. ,
Have you regifters of births, and marriages, and'burials?—Yes.
Was the population increafmg r—Yes, it was very faft;, the young population.
Was it a fuuatkm preferred by the convidls to that of the principal fettJemcnrP—»
No; I think it being on jb confined a fcale they in general prefer the principal
fettlement.
.• -Is it made a punifbment to fend a conviift from the principal ft ttlcmcnt to Van
Diemen’s land ?—Yes; but the fettlers particularly prefer the principal lertlcmcnt,
and bad charadlers prefer being in the principal fettlement, where their faults arc
not fo much obferved as they would be cllewherc, perhaps. .
Who appoints-the Magiftrates ?—The Governor; the principal Governor in the
latter inftances, fince the officer 1 left in the command was appointc ! ; prevtoufly
it was by the officer in command, with any-addition-the Governor of-New h'ui u.nd
chofe to appoint; they acted in conjunction together. Dur ng Colonel Collins* tints
the Magiftrates always allcmbled once a week, befldes then regular meetings,
34 i. X ■ Do
79
of Evidence.] ' ON TRANSP'ORTATION.


Do you know the proportion between the men and women?—l really do not,
but the women are very few. -
What is their general conduct?—We have had very little trouble in our fettle-
ment; during a fcarcity, the men have run away into the woods, and maintained
themfelves; during the eight or nine years I was in the colony, during the early
periods, we ufed to be entirely dependent upon the produce of the woods for
fupport.
What is the produce of the woods ?—We have kangaroos, which the feltlers
have lived on for months, not having a bit of other provifions.
Is your flock now fo large as to free you from all apprehcnfion of thcfe difficulties
recurring?—Yes; I think it is, unlefs there is a vail iuflux of population, which
coming fuddenly, without provifions, for a few months, would perhaps bring
a fcarcity again ; the country has capability ; and I am fure, with common attention
to indullry, the inhabitants would be capable of maintaioing themfelves.
Are there any rellridlions on the importation of fpirituous liquors ?—Yes, there
are; in faft, on every article of commerce ; there are now reftrictiohs in that fettle-
ment which are very injurious to the fettlement of the inhabitants; from a letter
of the Governor in Chief, a fhip is not allowed, though fhe fhould arrive in a
period of fcarcity, when the inhabitants are deprived of every comfort, to open her
hatches till fhe has been to Port Jackfon, and got permiffion to go, by which means
they are compelled to pay a hundred per cent, more than they do at Port Jackfon ;
but previous to this, there were rellridlions on fpirits; there were no fpirits landed
without a duty of is, 6d, which has been lately increafed to js. per gallon to the
Crown.'
Are the expenfes of that colony paid by bills drawn directly upon England ?—-
No; they were, till the appointment of the officer who relieved me; now they are
drawn by the deputy CommifTary in that fettlement, on the principal CommifTary
in the principal fettlement, and then the amount is drawn from England by the
principal CommifTary.
When you fpoke of the number of the inhabitants, did you mean in Hobart's
Town only ?—Only in Hobart’s Town, the men, women, and children there; under
Hobart’s Town we include the whole of the fettlement of Hobart’s Town.
What is the farthefl; extent of the fettlement as far as the cultivation has'pro-
ceeded ?—lt is generally cultivated on the banks of the river for three or four miles.
For how high up ?—Forty-one miles on the banks of the. river; but It does not
extend into the country more than three or four miles, the river is generally abreafl
of the fettlement, from fix to three miles wide, and the general depth of water teii
fathom.
Is it navigable a great way up in the country?—Fora fhip about five miles higher
than we have fettlements, and we cannot get a boat, only at very high water, more
than four-and-twenty miles above the Town.
What rcfidence did you make at Sydney on your return home?—From the latter
end of February to September, waiting for an opportunity. - ' -
Was the appearance of the colony much improved during your abfence ? —Yes,
I think they were getting on in building; they, were improving the Towns very
much, and the. roads; but unfortunately the cultivation in the principal fettlement
has been confined to the. banks of the Hawkefbury, and as it is liable to floods they
are fubject to a flate of ftarvation; the ground there is certainly.very rich.
Did the manner and general condudl of the lower orders of people appear to you
to be improved during the time of your abfence from the fettlement ?—I did not lee
much alteration, they were much the fame; the lower orders of people are much
addi&ed to drinking, and it confined to the convidls; the fettlers and foldiers
of the lower kind are much addided to drinking; the foldiers on the pay-days are
■in a beaftly flate of intoxication almofl always, and they would be at all times, had
they money, no doubt.
Do you confider the climate of Van Diemen’s land, preferable to that of Sidney ?
—Yes. -
Is it equally healthy ? —More fo; during the great fcarcity, when we lived for
thirteen months, except at final] intervals, upon two pounds of bifeuit per week,
we had not a Angle death, they were living on the wild game of the country; the
people certainly fullered very great inconvenience, and very great privations from
want of provifions ; I have often myfelf been glad to go to bed from want of bread,
and have very often been without the little comforts of wine and fugar.
. But that is not latterly ? —No, Ido not conceive they can ever be liable to that
again.
What


What is the number of foldiers at Van Diemen’s land?—When Heft it there were
150, but during the command of Colonel Collins there were only 50, we were
confined then to marines only.
Do you think the number now is hot more than neceflary ?—I think a company
is fufficient; but I rather, think they will be reduced to a company, unlefs they
fend them more, as the marines are recalled.
In importing fpirits, have the officers and other principal inhabitants of .the
country any privileges beyond other perfons?—Formerly they ufed to have ; they
have not had an opportunity of having fpirits fince I came away, from the order
Governor Macquarie had given ; and (hips going to Port Jackfon are glad always
to take out the fpirits at the principal fettlement; at the principal fettlement there
is a contract given by the Governor, which would preclude any other perfons, but
the Governor, importing fpirits.' They are building a general hofpital there, he
had formerly given a merchant permiffion to land 17,000 gallons, a fecond 10,000
gallons, and a third 5,000 gallons, and then the contractors had permiffion to land
45,000 gallons; they were to be allowed a period of three years, during which time,
the doors were (hut againft any other importation.
Was Van Diemen’s land entirely without fpirits ?—No, it was not; before Gover-
nor Macquarie fent down this pofitive order, they had an opportunity, I believe,
of obtaining 20,000 gallons. r
Is it equally looked for with avidity by the lower orders of the people there?—
Yes, equally fo, and in fome inftances in the higher; but it is very probable, that
from being fo long without, that they .will take it with more avidity when they
can get at it.
Has a convict, who has ferved his time at Van Diemen’s land, a right to a grant
of land at the expiration of his fervice? —It never was confidered as a right, but on
the expiration of their term they are given thirty acres, if they are men that behave
well, and choofe to fettle.
Do they prefer fettling there to fettling at Port Jackfon?—Yes, I think they do,
when they are inclined to fettle.
What is the number of convicts in the fervice of Government at Van Diemen’s
land? —About forty; I do not believe there are more.
What is the number in the fervice of individuals?—There mud be the remain-
der, with the exception of twenty; I believe there are twenty who are old, and who
have tickets of leave. '
_ Do you know how many there are altogether ?—About 350 together; I believe
they are fhort of 400.
Appendix.
81
of Evidence,] ON TRANSPORTATION.,


t>
>
>
O
fD
s
r+
r»
w
K4
>
►3
>-
C/5
•“!
P
H
o
H
<J
o
S'-
in
H
53
W
in
b)
, S3
»>
C*
*«-*
U>
H
o
«
w
■
1
f
i
■
t-
K
C
S3
«3
*
H
>
1
•
1
37
.a
CO
to
to
Men.
n"
a
«
n
p
n
»
-
1 1 * _.
Women.
§.
3
<.
O
CD __
•
•
CO
( LhiJdrcn.
c-
o
c
—
M
»
C-
4
to
to
CO
'to
Men. 1
■
Cl
Cn
u<
tA
S*
2
to
c
c
c
<o
to
M
4
o
CO
Women,
n
i
&>
4
£
4
Cl
Children.
W fj-
f/J
4**
cn
o
to •
rp
•*
....
C <
O
CO
4
Men.
c 5
*vj
4
■ to
*n
2 &
o
►-
Women,
<_
V/ ~z
c •
uo .
CD
cn
4
M
to
n
s
<*
w
cc
CS
n
cr -T
o
to
cn
to
-4
to
Children.
c.
o
c £>.
00
4
to
o
cr; —.
» „„
tc
ft
i
co
z
Orphans.
e
»-
>o s
•n
o
n
CO
4-
cn
to
4
79
Men.
*v
rT
5* o
o’
»o
Ci
*“*
CO
to
c
o *
cT
“
f» -r*
U«
M
Cl
Cl
Women.
cn
►*
Cl
-4
CM
to
z?
(>
o
Cr it
c
?
3
CA
4
M
CO
Children.
c.
rt •
Cf>
4
o
►*»
'
10
O
tJ
tb
o
M
to
CD
-4
10
4
At Full.
a
4
to
Cl
•— .
Cn
=;
FT
t?;
o
CA
4*.
c
to
M
to
to
to
At Two Thin’i.
4*
C)
4
Cl
CO
CA
y
to
to
o
cn
At Half.
C
o
4-
M
co
CO
Ol
**
jj
-\
_
D-
CO
ca,_
to
to
CO
At One Quaiter.
ft
P *
Ul
4
CO
CO
.
4- ’
Td
CO
Cl .
CO
>—
Total Number of Persons
-4
-4
o
o
CO
N|
to
CO
to
victualled from the Stores.
1
General Total
N4
o
w
> ■
tO
H
H
o
3
X
•
Port Dalkymple
o
to
*»i
o
p*
X
h-4
C/l
P»
• >
ttf
■ ' 1 Coveiuor and Comm aider m Chxf.
'tJ
i4 ;
—
■
lieutenant Oov nun
p
1 *” 1 1 ( Deputy Judge Advocate.
■ c
1 1 1 1 | Commissary,
-
- i
t
1
Principal Surgeon.
o
n
~ i
»
Deputy Provost M<Mial.
<
ci
. . f
-
Secretary lo th- Governor.
a
c
- i
"
* | t lergymen.
w
7r
i
>-
-
Assistant Surgt-ons.
>
*
1
' { • • • | Suneyor of Lands.
H .
s
£5
C ° o
» i
-
■
Deputy Surveyor of Lands.
PI
>25
■ p p •
■=> l
-
M
•
Deputy Commissaries.
, H
- I
■
1
-
Beach Master.
<
►H
2 ■< ?.
w -1
CO
’ 1
• | Overseers.
o 1
V\
to
(4
Superintendents and Storekeepers.
c
>'
CO
•
Women of the Civil Department.
1-* ■ •
“
to
Children above Two Years of Age,
w
o
-
•
I
Children under Two Years of Age.
< • •
s
' to •
■
Tot al of the Civil Department victualled.
w t 3 w
• ! • • • I Colonel.
t-
1 1 * • • | Lieutenant Colonel.
SC T ~
* • C
1 1 1 11 | Major.
2
1—*
M »4 P~
CO CO m
“
1 | Captains.
t- 1
1-4
2C
o o -
to
--
| Lieutenants.
* O
•
-
t
Ensigns.
h; ■
t
| Adjutant Paymaster and Quartermaster.
o
1 1 1 * | Surgeons.
Pi
• » | Assistant Surgeons.
rr
Oi
c n
j Serjeants and Corporals.
2
. _
,10
jO
to
Drummers and hiiors.
PI
«
H
CO
*d
Privates.
'
Co
, oc
00)
t— 1
c?.
to
I Women.
H
• 1
* » • ('Children above Ten Years.
c3
>
■ £
cn
to •
Cr .
| Children above Two Years.
t*
f«
r
-i*.
t
| Children under Two Years.
PJ
O
to
Total of the Military Department
to
oo
*-4
-4
victualled.
Appendix, No. 2.
GENERAL STATEMENT of the Inhabitants in His Majesty’s Settlement on the Eastern Coast of
Appendix, No. 3.
GENERAL STATEMENTS the Inhabitants in His Majesty’s Settlements at Norfolk Island, PORT DALRYMPLE


■
People net victualled
•from the .
Public Stores.
Setters not vicuuiltfd
from the
Public Stores*
O
s
3
Week’s Pi ©visions
in the
Public Stores.
*5
O
S
C
B
i
C
O
u
U
ts
4) '
2
c
0
g .
C
'
to
V
u
C/7 -3
Im, ,2
0 2
ts:
j- *>
«<•«
K 2
0 “■
K
Total. Number of S
Settlement.
Salted Beef.
r* ‘
' 0 <
0- -
"3''
*rt ,
co
rt
w
0
2
-0
a
rt t*<
a
d O
0) -S
~ t5t
tl
K
, to
0
tn
1 986
' 381
539
939
298
407
1,012
306
620
98
187
430
: 9 ■
7
6
107
194.
436
6,156
1,807
2,389
100
—
—•
—
—
At SYDNEY.
At PARAMATTA.
At HAWKESBURY.
At NEWCASTLE.
. -
1,906
1,644
1,938
715
' 22
737;
- 10,452:
—
' i
1
’ Sydney, 30 April 1810
■ •'
i
(
Signed)
L. Macquarie,
Gov r in Chief, N. S. Wales.
/
- - -
. /
Co
«— i -
03
Ot
tn
to
vl
03
10
Ct
t*
Men. —•
V.
c.
-4
<0
H#
O I
O
*-*
00
Women. 4 - - . {
: . • - 1
5. S
o •
vU
■
■ - ■ ■■-
v-hiUlren ’<■'■■v <; T- '■ V-j --s T
£ CT ,
c *0 •
' >
-4
_iu
•4
Ol
ChiL.rt.n above i wo Ve.us < 1 Age.
- £L n
N— •-»
2. o
■ M
2. 3
••4
♦
•«• ■ i
Children under Two Year*.
C/3
4-
03
-1
1
w ■•
Orphans. -
CO £
o ~
•
00
u»
- CO ..
- c>
<o
-4 .
, CO
.00. . _
to
. SO... - .
To t at. Number of Free Persons victualled.
I
<
- - *ia
4»*
- .
Ot
. . v> .
tn
"is" ‘
{
t
‘ 3
-4:
- -to
• ZL
Women.
S 3 o
. . 1 _ .i » • 1 Children above Ten Years. ;
• "
° 3 “
-*-
•
4*
i
Children above Two. - <
U)
* C - a '
-
... | -. . --■ .
Children under Two Years. ?
r a sJ .
.
-4
4*
CO
*>4
O
" to
Oi "
Total Number of Prisoners. victualled.,..
•1 £ :
cp
; cn
o>
CO
• ■£
C3
to
o
At Full.
i
CO
' .4*
O
10
vj
to
4^
to
>0
08
At Two Thirds.
I CL
3 ? -
c n
rO
-4
to
. U1
to
to
; At Half.
: S 3 r
a* ►
JO
i w *t .
OO
0-3
C»
1
i
1
At One’Quarrer. —*
o ■**» ,
3
/^>
cn
uEi‘i
. CO
10
. to
-■ 1
to
|
Total Number of full Rations.
• ’ ■
c-
• - CO .
CO
00
974
10
- C3
•4 :
-4
- *-4
Total Number of Persons victualled from the Stores.*
-ft,
o
■
Men. 1
*13 3
s o
. -h -
Wl
o
1 b
' " »r>
t
Women.!
■3- w..
i n 5 < *0-
•
•i—
Children.
£ c
£
O
QO
CO
10
to
t
Total Number.
o w nr -
jrt c-
c^§
■ • .1 •
.
j Men.
iO T3 3 2 .. X*
' S
■ 1 •
I
IT/omen.;
£ rt
3*. »-* — <8
=T'3'
' j
•
: . :
' l
| Total Number of Settlers.
n o S. “
O;
T*
4^
<0
GO
'o
Ot
10
to
tn
<o
-4
-4
Total Number of Souls in Ihe Settlement.
CO .
‘I
CO
to
<o
-
Reef and Pork. '
1..?,
3 c
aT
rT
I
-
-1m
to
' o
to
Ci
Wheat, Maize, and Rice, and Sugar as
Wheat.
ics-5;s-
s ° 1 "
.
♦
to
*4
1
Sugar.
Appendix, No, 2.
New South Wales ; with an Estimate on the remains of Provisions in the Public Stores, Ist March 1810.
Appendix, No. 3.
and Hobart Town, Van Diemen’s Land; as accounted for by the respective Returns transmitted to Head Quarters.


Number of Acres in
Horses.
To whom belonging.
Cl
V
t
O
.53
*CJ
S
1 Barley.
r3
0
to
r3
a
z*
S
V
M
O
O
rt
9
o.
M
£.
c
H
T3
(3
JZ
u
u
0
V)
C.
£
£
d
0
rt
CL
Total held.
U
4>
6
Cl
-
-
'
*
38
22
To Settlers, See. at Sydney and its vicinity *
-
476
-
-
l
z
331
1*
230
2,605!
20,949!
24,301
141
143
To Settlers, &c. at Parraniatta and its Vicinity
-
1,285
-
-
4
77k
264
1
4<794*
36,020!
42.627
152
201
To Settlers, &c. at Hawkesbury and its Vicinity
-
4.5981
10
-
‘a
25J
7
2524
-
5,2i4S
18,538!
28,708!
190
227
— - Total -
-
6,359s
IO
-
6
136*
104
74 6 i
12,7941
74,568!
95,637
521
593
Sydney, 1
31st April, 1810. J
. ■
Number of Acres in )
f
To whom belonging.
At what Settlement.
Time;
£
CL
f
M
0
23
*0
i/T
«
(A
•3
•3
u
'
«
£
O
H
JT
Vi
n
0
•g
ja
fS
•6 '
O
3
rt
it
ca
”
0
a>
a.
£
3
Ui
0
c*
£
(2 ■
0
H
To Individuals, at
Norfolk Island
31 March 1810
-
•74i
172$
ais
559v
To the Crown, at
Norfolk Island
31 March 1810
To the Crown, at
Port Dalrymple
31 December 1809
■
To the Crown, at
Hobart Town -
31 January 1810
Total belongi
ng to the Crown, in the
above Settlements
Sydney, New South Wales, 7
-1
30th April, 1810.
s
Appendix, No. 4.
STATEMENT of the Land in Cultivation, &c.; the Quantities of Stock, &c. as accounted for at the General
of his Excellency the Governor, by his
Appendix, No. 5.
GENERAL STATEMENT of the Land in Cultivation, &c. The quantities of Stock, &c. in His
accounted for by the respective Returns


T1
vj
Oi *-
Bulls.
1
“ I
to
to
CO
a
Ci
M -
O
•1
"o
* *b
to
Oi Ci t
Cows.
cn
c
to
•v| SI
c-
i—
Ci
00 03
O
M
M
*4
To
tc 00
Oxen.
CO
O
Oi
Oi ►*
to
o
03
— oo
0
to
Oi
—
tb
03
• To to
Male.
4s
01
to
Ci M
in
«0
**
Oi
w •“•
et
<»
to
CO
O
10
7
~b
To
CD
4* Oi
Female.
Ci
0
Ci
oo **^x
to
03
-*
to 00
■ ,
4“
o>
to
CO
a>
to I
Male.
-
to
Ci
o
03 1
o
0
M ■
4s
Female.
*•
,a>
- 4S ■
to
to •
CO
•sj
Ci
o
(0
«-<
Ct
00
oo
cn 1
Male.
Ci
Cn
03
Si 1 .
8
o
10
on
O
•vl
-Is
>0
•
o
4s (
Female.
CO
Oi
CO
to 1
o
to
—
o
to
M •
tp
o>
4s
i» 1
Bushels of Wheat in hand.
oo
tO
M
to I
N
00
to
. o
to
Ci
CO
9-
si
c^‘,
4*
o
to
03 *
O I
Bushels of Maize in hand. •
a>
CO
o
4“
to 1
Q-
•“0
CO
CO
10
to I
Victualled.
o
- o
Ci ■
**
<s
-
4*-
On
CO
.to I
Not.
o
►1
• o
ba
CO
OI
O0
o
s
4*
M -
to
Cn 1
Victualled.
P
rP
o
13
oo
<
ca
Ci
4s
03
Oi
Oi
OO
95
Not.
p
2 S
£? K .
a e-
|P
O v*
pm
4s
00
VI
*£
5-1
Victualled.
n
1 ;
P
B S:
Oi
to
to
00
.£ 1
Not.
&
•-»
o
P .
o
r*
<!
o
*3
on
VJ
,0 • . .
o
C
*
2
CO
03
M
03 1
Victualled.
o
<T
s
00
00
to
•
4*-
to
M
Oi
Oi 1
Not.
to
■vl
Ci
'*3 1
4-
(0
a>
10
to i
Number of Freemen employed.
•vl
*4
CO
to *
CO
to
**
bi
to
a
0>
b
Ci I
-K I
Total number in Family.
pm
/
M
■ o
10
cn
CO
CO
Male,
w
o
•
O '
+■
■ M
o*
Female.
<?
M
>0
-£
CO
Cn
to
to
to
OO
Bulls. >
- 35
o
CO
Cn
cn
o
o
CO
o
»o
to
Cows.
a
c-
O
p
Co
■*-1
to
CO *
1
» -
1
I "
Oxen.
jT
*b
o>
Oi
C>-
10
o
to
00
to ■
v|
**
Male.
cn
3*
to
to
• O
*3
o
o
4*
Cn
10 '
•>
cn
w
CO
o
•vj
CO
Female.
OO
o> '
kO
CO
CO .
cn
Male. ■
o
o
&
cn
<0
CO
to
frO
o
-a
co
Female.
1
1 1 .
CO
cn
O
Male.
c?
‘
£
f
1 1 1 -
to
to
10
Female.
W
SJ
re
c_
1 1 1-
to
00
CO
Wheat in hand.
,
I
c*
Maize in hand.
.
1 1 I'
to
Oi
Victualled.
*6
>
1
1 1 1
cn
N ot.
s*
o
•
cf
& .
< ***
•n
n
O Cfe *
1
1
1
v|
Victualled.
%
s.
o*
3*
1
1
1
to
Kot.
o £
o s
<n
n ..
C*
> *
1 - 1 i
to
Victualled.
o
’ 3 ■ O
3, *
a 3 '
3,0-'
p£
r xr
ill J 1 | -5
Not.
a.
o
□
4
■ ; cT-
- B
P ->
3
3
1
1 I i
o»
Victualled.
O
o
3
a* *
c.
3*
r>
cn
■ i | i ' ; i
-
Not.
o
«•
Appendix,.No. 4.
Muster in Ills Majesty’s Colony of New South Wales; between the 1st and 2nd February 1810; taken agreeably to the order
Honour Lieutenant Governor O’Connell.
Appendix, No. 5.
Majesty’s Settlements at Norfolk Island, Port Dalrymple and Hobart Town, Van Diemen’s Land; as
transmitted to Head Quarters.


Appendix, No. 6.
Copy of a LETTER from Earl of Liverpool to Governor Macquarie, dated 25 June 1810.
Sir, -■ ©owning-street, 25 June ISIO.
I herkwith transmit to yon the copy of a communication from His Majesty’s principal
Secretary of State for the Home Department,, representing the inconvenience experienced
from the neglect of mustering the convicts in the colony under your government, and of
making returns thereof; no return either of.convicts or settlers having been received in this
country since the year 1 Sod.
I am therefore to signify to you the King’s pleasure, that you do direct, a general muster of
all the convicts to be made, and a return thereof sent home, according to the form herewith
transmitted, and that the same be continued twice a.year, or as often as it can be
conveniently, done, and transmitted lor His Majesty’s information, as opportunities
may occur. _
A similar return may be made of the settlers ; and you will direct the Lieutenant Governors
of the respective subordinate settlements, to make the same musters periodically, and inclose
the returns thereof to y r ou, in order to be forwarded to Europe.
1 have the honour, &c.
Gov r Macquarie, (Signed) LIVERPOOL.
See. &c. &c.
Appendix, No. 7.
EXTRACT of a Letter from Lord Liverpool to Gov. Macquarie, dated 26 July 1810.
The impolicy of the original settlement of this island has been fully demonstrated ; and
His Majesty’s Government are convinced that more benefit to the colony will be derived from
the cultivation and improvement of the settlements that are already formed, than from the
formation of new and distant establishments, whatever may be the encouragement that a fertile
soil or an advantageous situation may appear to hold out.
Appendix, No. 8.
EXTRACT from Gov. Macquarie’s Letter of 30 April 1810.
The practice established at Port Jackson, alluded to in your Lordship’s instructions,
namely, of imposing a maximum price upon all imported articles, which has been generally
laid at fifty per cent, profit, does not appear to. have, answered the.purpose,in. view*..and. it
therefore seems advisable to discontinue the practice, and have the importation trade
entirely free.
Appendix, No. g.
EXTRACT from Gov. Macquarie’s Letter of 30 April 1810.
The impolicy of establishing a maximum in the price of grain and butcher’s meat, is so
apparent, and so adverse to the interests of the farmer and grazier, who ought to be
encouraged by every possible means to increase their agriculture and stock, that it became
absolutely necessary to discontinue it, and this has been accordingly done. The markets are
now, in consequence of tips measure, very well supplied with those articles, although generally
at high prices.
Appendix, No. 10.
EXTRACT from Gov. Macquarie’s Letter of 30 April 1810.
I take the liberty to transmit to your Lordship herewith, a Memorial addresssd to me
by the Officers of His Majesty’s 73d: Regiment, and which L most respectfully request may
be submitted to His Majesty, for his gracious and favourable consideration and decision;
and I indulge a hope that your Lordship will be kindly pleased to give it your own sanction
and support. Were 1 not convinced, from my own experience and observation, since my
arrival here, that the representation now made by the Officers of the 73d Regiment, of the
inadequacy of their pay to support their rank, is just and well founded, I should not
presume to transmit it to your Lordship. Under the conviction that they labour under
,34* • unconquerable


unconquerable difficulties in maintaining themselves in the character of gentlemen on theiv
present;pay, I take the liberty most earnestly and strongly to recommend that an adequate
■Colonial Allowance may be granted, to enable them to support their rank as British
Officers in a suitable and proper manner. I shall not presume to say what the Colonial
Allowance ought to be, but it should certainly be sufficient to preclude the painful
necessity of their-resorting to any low or unmilitary occupations, either mercantile or
■agricultural, for additional means-of support .; and I am sorry to add, that-such has been too
frequently the case with'the Officers of the toad Regiment. Such pursuits and avocations
being subversive of all military discipline, and incompatible with the rank and character of
Officers in His .Majesty’s Service, I shall.take care that no Officer in the 73d Regiment
-shall resort to such improper expedient.
Appendix, No. 11.
COPY of the 26th Paragraph of a Letter from Gov. Macquarie, dated 30 April 1810.
26 Par. As however the various measures that-have been taken hitherto to check the i;n r
;portation, and regulate the sale of spirits, have invariably failed, arid as it is impossible
totally-to suppress the use of-them, a certain quantity -being essentially necessary for the
accommodation of the inhabitants; it appears to me, that it would be good and sound
.policy to sanction the free importation of good spirits, under a high duty of not less than
three or four shillings per gallon. lam persuaded that the adoption of this measure would
be attended with very good and beneficial effects; it would end to all further
attempts at monopoly and bartering spirits for corn and necessaries, as likewise to private
stills, which, in defiance of every precaution, are still very numerous in this Colony; but as
.the free importation of spirits would greatly.reduce the general price, the private distillers
would be undersold by the fair licensed trader. lam at the same time persuaded that
•this measure, instead of promoting drunkenness and idleness, would tend rather to lessen both,
for it has generally been observed that the avidity of the lower orders of the people is in
the inverse ratio to the quantity of spirits imported. From all these considerations, I am
decidedly of the opinion, that.the free importation of spirit-sought to be sanctioned,'but
I shall nevertheless still defer the doing so, until 1 shall receive your Lordship’s furthe
-rlirectious on this head.
Appendix, No. 12.
EXTRACT of a Letter from the Earl of Liverpool to Gov. Macquarie,
dated 26 July 1811.
There appears great-reason to apprehend that thc-reduction of the duties upon-the free
importation of spirits, and the consequent fall of the retail price, might lead to the reverse of
'the consequences which you expect. Inveterate habits of drunkenness and dissipation among
the lower orders of the People, are, I fear, more likely to be increased than checked by the
■facility of indulgence.
To the free.importation of Spirits there can be no objection, provided that the duly upon
them is fixed at that rate which shail on the one hand prevent excess by the dearness of the
■article-; and-shall not at the same time hold out an encouragement to private distillation,
•which the utmost vigilance and severest penalties on detection cannot counteract.
Appendix, No. 13.
EXTRACT of a Letter from the Earl of Liverpool to Gov. Macquarie,
dated 10 March 1812,
I herewith transmit to .you the copy of a letter, written by order of the Committee of
jPrivv Council for Trade, in answer -to a communication made to that Board upon the
subject of license* to be granted -by the Court of'Directors of the East India Company, for
supplying goods for New South Wales, on board vessels proceeding to the Southern "Whale
Fishery. The opinion.therein given, that spirits may be exported from this country to New
South Wales, has been chiefly founded on the suggestions contained in your dispatch
(No. 3.) respecting the policy of that measure-; and 1 am to desire, that upon all spirits
thus imported into the colony under - your command, there be levied a duty of not less than
4s. per gallon.
You will consider the duty of 4s. in this and all other instances, to be the minimum
duty to be levied on the importation of spirits into the colony; and you will regulate the
increase of the duty above that sum, in proportion to the demand which exists lor the
article and the profits derived from the sale by the importers. ‘
Z


COPY of a Letter from Lord Viscount Chetwynd, to Robert Peel," Esq.
dated 7 March 1812.
Office of „Committee of Privy Council for Trade.
Sir, Whitehall, 7 March 1812,
Having laid before the Lords of the Committee of Councillor Trade and Foreign
Plantations, your letter of 24th ultimo, with the copy of a letter and its enclosures, received
from the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the. Court of Directors of the East India
Company, stating that applications have been made to them for licenses to ship goods
to be landed in New South Wales, by vessels proceeding on the southern Whale Fishery,
and requesting to be informed of the sentiments of Government as to the propriety of
granting such licenses ; and their Lordships having taken also into their consideration, the
extract of a letter from Governor Macquarie to Lord Castlcreagh, of the 30 April 1810,
on the policy of sanctioning the free importation of good spirits and other articles into the
colony of New South Wales; Fam directed to acquaint you, for the information of the Earl
of Liverpool, that the Lords of the Committee are of opinion, that spirits may be exported
from hence by individuals for the consumption of the colony of Botany Pay, provided
there be levied a duty of not less than 4s. per gallon oh the importation of such spirits;
and their Lordships are further of opinion, that the exportation of other articles of mer-
chandise to Botany Bay should not be discouraged, provided such articles arc confined to
the consumption of the inhabitants of the said colony.
I am, &c,
Robert Peel, Esq. (Signed) CHETWYND.
Sec. &c. Sec-
Appendix, No. 14.
COPY of the 14th Paragraph of a Letter from Gov. Macquarie, dated 18 Oct. 1811.
14' Pa n. Previous to the present time, I have not had an opportunity of reporting to
your Lordship, that finding it absolutely necessary to build a General Hospital, the old one
being in so. wretched a stale of decay as to threaten tumbling down, and being also
inadequate in size to the increased population of this place ; I received proposals for building
one by contract, and the terms offered by Messrs. Wentworth, Blaxcell, and Riley,
appearing highly advantageous, I have now the honour to inform you, that I have sanc-
tioned a contract being entered into between the acting commissary and those gentlemen,
for their erecting a General Hospital at Sydney, on terms and conditions which I have
deemed highly advantageous to Government, The building is to be elegant and com-
modious, and sufficiently large to accommodate comfortably at least two hundred sick
"persons, and is also to comprehend suitable quarters for all the Medical Officers who may be
required at Sydney. Ido myself the honour to transmit herewith for your Lordship’s
inspection and approval, a copy of the contract entered into with those gentlemen, accom-
panied with the elevation and ground plan of the whole. The terms of the contract having
appeared to me so very advantageous, and the necessity for a new building of this kind so
imperious, that I flatter myself the measure I have adopted, will meet your Lordship’s
fullest concurrence and approbation. On perusal of the contract itself, your Lordship will
perceive that a spacious, elegant, and indispensably necessary public building will be erected,
without any tax proportiohal to its magnitude being laid on the Government; the oxen
given for slaughter to the contractors, forming almost the entire, of the. expense that
Government will be at for its erection. ‘ The contractors have engaged to perform the whole
work in the course of’ three years, and in remuneration or payment for said building, their
contract entitles them to the exclusive privilege of purchasing spirits within the same
period, to the amount of forty-five thousand gallons, at the government price, no other
spirits being permitted within that time to be imported into the colony by private indi-
viduals, whilst Government relinquishes no part of its right to import such quantities as
may be required for its own special purposes, and for the accommodation of the Civil and
Military Officers in the service of Government. The duty on the import of spirits, which
was only eighteen pence per gallon on my assuming this government, I have increased
to three shillings, and the contractors for the hospital have to pay this duty upon, the
quantity allowed them, in payment for the building. My sole object and ambition, in
sanctioning this contract, having been to procure expeditiously and cheaply executed a
.building which the circumstances of the country demanded, will I trust induce your
Lordship’s approbation of the terms themselves. Your Lordship will perceive, from the
inspection of the ground plan, and elevation of the building, that it is to be erected on
a large scale. The site is well chosen, being on an airy and elevated situation, whereby
it is. rendered a conspicuous and handsome object to behold. The situation is in the
eastern extremity of the town, open to the sea breeze, and fronting towards Fort Jackson.
The building is now in progress, and will I trust be finished in less than two years from the
present time.


Appendix, No. 15.
EXTRACT from Governor Macquarie’s Letter of 30 April 1810.
In respect to the practice that has for a long time prevailed of sending out from England
■supplies'of various kinds, on account of Government, to be sold or exchanged in barter for the
produce of this colony; lam of opinion that this practice cannot yet be discontinued without
great inconveniertce and loss to the settlers in general, there being no regular supplies
imported by private merchants, sufficient to answer the demands of the inhabitants; and the
prices laid on by individuals on European articles imported by them, arc so enormously high,
that the lower orders of the people cannot afford to purchase them, however much they may
stand in need of them ; but by encouraging the free importation of ail sorts of merchandize,
lam of opinion, that in a few years the practice of sending out supplies on account of
Government, might cease, without prejudice to the colony.
Appendix, No. 16.
EXTRACT of a Letter from the Earl of Liverpool to Governor Macquarie,
dated 5th May 1812.
I acquainted you in my dispatch, No. o, that objections had occurred to the plan of
establishing a Colonial Bank in New South Wales; and I stated the measures that were in
frrogress for sending you a supply of specie. lam now to inform you, that an arrangement
tas been made with the Court of Directors for the purchase of dollars in India, to the amount
of £. 10,000, and that directions have been given to the Officer commanding His Majesty’s
ships on that station, to forward the same to you with as little delay as possible. I trust that
before this letter reaches you, a part, if not the whole of this specie will have arrived at Port
Jackson,
Appendix, No. 17.
Copy of the Commission for establishing Courts of Judicature in New South Wales.
George the Third, by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, £cc. To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting : Whereas by
virtue of an Act of Parliament passed in the twenty-fourth year of Our Reign, We have
judged fit, by and with the advice of Our Privy Council, by two several Orders, bearing
date respectively on the sixth day of December one thousand seven hundred and eighty-
six, to declare and appoint the Place to which certain Offenders should be transported for
the time or terms in their several Sentences mentioned, to be the Eastern Coast of New
South Wales, or some one or other of the Islands adjacent: And whereas we find it neces-
sary that a Colony and Civil Government should be established in the place to which such
Convicts shall be transported, and that sufficient provision should be made for the reco-
very of Debts, and determining of private Causes between Party and Party, in the Place
aforesaid ; We, taking the same into Our Royal consideration, and being desirous that Jus-
tice may be administered by all Our Subjects, have of Our especial grace, certain knowledge
and mere motion, thought fit to grant, ordain, direct and appoint, and by these Presents do, for
Us, Ourlleirs and Successors, will, grant,, ordain, direct and appoint, that there shall be
within the Place aforesaid a Court, to be called the Court of Civil jurisdiction, and that
such Court shall consist of the Judge Advocate for the time being, together with two fit and
proper Persons, inhabiting the said place, to be appointed from time to time byOur Governor,
or in case of his death or absence, by Our Lieutenant Governor for the time being, or of any
two of them ("whereof the Judge Advocate to be one), to which Court We do hereby give
full Power and Authority to hold Plea of and to hear and determine in a summary way
all Pleas concerning Lands, Houses, Tenements, and Hereditaments, and all manner of
Interests therein, and all Pleas of Debt Account, or other- Contracts, Trespasses, and all
manner of other Personal Pleas whatsoever.
And We do further will, ordain, and grant to the said Court, full Power and Authority
to grant Probates of Wills, and Administration of the Personal Estates of Intestates dying
within the Place or Settlement aforesaid.
And Our further Will and Pleasure is, and We do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs
.and Successors, direct, ordain and -appoint, that upon Complaint to be made in writing
to the said Court by any Person or Persons against any other Person or Persons residing or
being within the said Place, of any Cause of Suit, the said Court shall or may issue a War-
rant m writing under the Hand and Seal of the said Judge Advocate for the time*being,
to be directed to the Provost Marshal, or such other Officer as shall be appointed by Our
Governor to execute the process thereof) which Warrant shall contain shortly the substance
of the Complaint, and shall either command such Officer to summon the Defendant or De-
fendants to appear-, or in case the Value of the Demand be Ten Pounds or upwards (of which
,Oath shall first be made) command him to bring his, her, or their Body or Bodies, or take
Bail for his, her, or their appearance before the said Court at a certain tune or place therein
341 tc*.


•toie-named, to answer to the said Complaint, and to find sufficient Security for his or their per-
formance of such Judgment, Sentence, or Decree as shall be pronounced thereupon or finally
•given upon an Appeal, and upon Appearance, Arrest, or Non-appearance, or Heturn by the
Ofiicer that the Defendant or Defendants cannot be found; We do hereby, for Us, Our Heirs
mnd Successors, ordain, direct, and authorize the said Court to proceed to the examination
■of the matter and cause of such Complaint, and upon due proof made thereof, .either upon
the Oath or Oaths of an}' Witness or Witnesses in writing, to be by him, her or them sub-
scribed (for which purpose'We do by these Presents empower and require the said Court to
administer an Oath to such Witnesses as shall be produced by either Party, Plaintiff' or
Defendant, or by the voluntary confession of such Defendant or Defendants) to give
.Judgment and Sentence according to justice and right, and to award and issue out a War-
rant or Warrants of Execution under the Hand and Seal of the said Judge Advocate for the
time being, for levying the Duty adjudged or decreed to the Party or Parties complainant,
together with Costs of Suit, upon the Goods and Chattels of such Defendant or Defendants,
; and to cause Sale to be made of the said Goods and Chattels, rendering to the Party the
overplus (if any be;) and for want of sufficient Distress, We do hereby, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, .give full Power and Authority to the said Court to imprison the Defendant pr
Defendants until satisfaction be made by him, her or them, to the Plaintiff" or Plaintiffs, of the
Duty decreed, together with the Costs; and in case Judgment shall be given for the
Defendant or Defendants, We do hereby likewise give full Power and Authority to the said
•Court to award Costs to such Defendant or Defendants, and to issue the like Process of
Execution for the same, as in cases where Costs are awarded to any Plaintiff’ or Plaintiffs; and
if either Party shall find him or themselves aggrieved by any Judgment or Decree to be
given or pronounced by the said Court, Our Will and Pleasure is, that he, she or they shall
.and may appeal to the Governor of the Eastern Coast of New South Wales and the Parts
adjacent, or in case of his death or absence, to the Lieutenant Governor for the time being,
.whom We do hereby empower and authorize to hear and determine the same, and to issue
Process of Summons to answer to such Appeal, and the like Process of Execution as the
-said Court is hereby directed and empowered to issue; and if either Party shall find him, her
or themselves aggrieved by the .Judgment or Determination of the said Governor, in any
•case where the Debt or Thing in demand shall exceed the value of three hundred Pounds,
and not otherwise, Our Will and Pleasure also is that such Party so aggrieved may appeal,
■to Us, or Our Heirs and Successors in Council.
And we do further will and ordain, that no Appeal shall be admitted from the Judgment of
the said Court, unless the same shall be interposed within eight days after the said Judg-
ement, nor from the Judgment of the superior Court, unless the same shall be interposed
-within fourteen days after the Judgment of such superior Court,; and further, that the said
•Court may proceed in a summary way, by foreign Attachment of Goods, Debts and Effects of
Debtors in the hands or possession of other Persons residing in the Place aforesaid.
And We further will and ordain, that all Complainants at whose Suit any Persons shall
be imprisoned, shall make an Allowance to each of such Defendants, after such rate, for every
-day so long as such Defendants shall be hept in Prison, as the said Court shall direct, and in
-default of payment thereof for one week, such Person shall be discharged out of 1 bison, and
.such discharge out of Prison shall be a discharge of the Debt, unless the Complainant shall,
before any new Proceedings against such Defendants, pay or tender to them all the Arrears of
.such Allowance, from tltc time of the last payment to the time of such new Proceeding:
Provided always, that such Defendants do make Oath before the Judge Advocate to his
and that be bath not any Estate or Effects sufficient to maintain himself with
.necessaries in the Prison, otherwise (hat such Allowance be not made ro him.
And whereas it is necessaiy that a Court of Criminal Jurisdiction should also be established
within the Colony or Settlement aforesaid, with authority to proceed in a more summary
way than is used within this Realm, according to the known and established Laws thereof:
And whereas by an Acl of Parliament passed in this present year of Our Reign, it is
enacted, that His Majesty may by his Commission under the Great Seal, authorize the
Person lo be appointed Governor, or the Lieutenant Governor in the absence of the
Governor of such Place as aforesaid, to convene from time to time, as occasion may require,
a Court of Judicature for the trial and punishment of all such Outrages and Misbehaviours,
as, if committed within this Realm, would be deemed and taken, according to the Laws of
■this Realm, to be Treason or Misprision thereof, felony or Misdemeanor; which Court shall
•consist of the Judge Advocate to be appointed in and for such Place, together with six
Officers of His Majesty’s Forces, by sea or land; which Court shall proceed to try such
Offenders, by calling such Offenders respectively before that Court, and causing the
■Charge against him, her or them respectively, to be read over, which Charge shall always be
•reduced, into writing, and shall he exhibited to the said Court by the Judge Advocate, and
by examining Witnesses upon Oath, to be administered by such Court, as w ell for as against
such Offenders respectively, and afterwards adjudging by the opinion of the major-part of
the Persons composing such Court, that the Party accused is or is not (as the case shall
appear to them) guilty of the Charge, and by pronouncing Judgment therein (as upon a
•conviction by verdict) of Death, if the Offence be capital, or of such corporal punishment,
mot extending to capital punishment, as to the said Court shall seem meet; and in cases not
•capital, by pronouncing Judgment of such corporal punishment, not extending to life or limb,
,as to the said Court shall seem meet; and that the Provost Marshal, or other Officer to be
J'or that purpose appointed by such Governor or Lieutenant Governor, shall cause due
execution of such Judgment to be had and made under and according to the Warrant of
such


such Governor, or Lieutenant Governor in the absqnce of the Governor, under his Hand and
Seal, and not otherwise: Provided always, that Execution shall not be had or done on a
•capital Convict or Convicts, unless five Persons present in such Court shall concur in
■•adjudging him, her or them, so accused and tried as aforesaid, to be respectively guilt}',
until the proceedings shall have been transmitted to His Majesty, and by him approved; and
ithat the said Court shall be a Court of Record, and shall have all such Powers as by the
Laws of England are incident and belonging to a Court of Record. Now Know ye, that
We, upon full consideration of the Premises, and of our especial grace, certain knowledge
and mere motion, have thought fit to grant, direct and appoint, and by these Presents We
■do accordingly, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, grant, direct, erdain and appoint, that there
shall be within the Settlement and Colony aforesaid, a Court which shall be called the Court
of Criminal Jurisdiction, and We do hereby create, direct and constitute the said Court of
Criminal Jurisdiction to be a Court of Record, and that Our said Court of Criminal
Jurisdiction shall have all such Powers as are incident to a Court of Record by the Laws of
that part of Our Kingdom of Great .Britain called England. And we further will, ordain
and appoint, that the said Court of Criminal Jurisdiction shall consist of Our JudgcAdvocate
for the time being, together with such six Officers of Our sea and land service as Our
Governor, or in case of his death of absence, Our Lieutenant Governor shall by Precept
issued under his Hand and Seal convene from time to time for that purpose; and that the
said Court of Criminal Jurisdiction shall have power to enquire of, hear, determine and
punish all Treasons or Misprision thereof, Murders, Felonies, Forgeries, Perjuries,Trespasses
and other Crimes whatsoever committed in the place or places aforesaid, such punishment
so to be inflicted being according to the Laws of that part of Our Kingdom of Great Britain
called England, as nearly as may be, considering and allowing for the circumstances and
situation of the Place and Settlement aforesaid, and the inhabitants thereof. And it is Our
further Will and Pleasure that Our said Court of Criminal Jurisdiction shall proceed to try
all Offenders, by calling them respectively before such Court, and causing the Charge or
Charges against him, her, or them respectively, when reduced into writing and exhibited
by Our Judge Advocate, to be read over 10 such Offender or Offenders respectively, and by
examining Witnesses upon Oath, to be administered by the said Court of Criminal Juris-
diction, as well for as against such Offenders respectively; and that the said Court shall
adjudge, by the Opinion of the major part of the Persons composingthe same as aforesaid,
that tire Party accused is guilty, or not guilty of the Charge so exhibited as aforesaid, and
if adjudged guilty, that the Court shall proceed to pronounce Judgment of Death if the
Offence be capital, in like manner as if the Prisoner had been found guilty by Verdict of a
Jury in that part of Our Kingdom of Great Britain called England, or by pronouncing
Judgment of such corporal punishment, not extending to capital punishment, as to the
said Court, or major part of the Persons composing the same, shall seem meet; and in cases
not capital by the Laws aforesaid, by pronouncing Judgment of such corporal punishment,
notextending to life or limb, as to the said Court, or the major part of the Persons composing
the same, shall seem meet: And it is our further Will and Pleasure, and We do hereby
ordain, direct and appoint, that Our Provost Marshal, or such other'Officer as shall be
appointed for that purpose by Our Governor, or in case of his death or absence, by Our
Lieutenant Governor for the time being, shall cause due execution to be had and made of
such Judgments as aforesaid, according to the Warrant of Our Governor, or in his absence,
of Our Lieutenant Governor for the time being, under their Handsand Seals respectively,
and not othervyise; And We do hereby ordain and direct, that Execution of any Judgment
of Death shall not be had or done on any Offender or Offenders, unless five Persons present
sitting in Judgment in Our said Court of Criminal Jurisdiction shall concur in adjudging
such Offender or Offenders so accused, and tried as aforesaid, to be'respectively guilty, until
the Proceedings in the Trial of such Offender or Offenders shall have been transmitted to
X] s, Our Heirs or Successors, and Our or their Pleasure shall have been signified thereupon;
and that Execution be not done in any capital Case whatever, without the consent of Our
Said Governor, dr in case of his death or absence, of Our Lieutenant Governor; and in case
Execution shall be suspended, that the said Governor or Lieutenant Governor shall apply
to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, for Our or, their direction therein: And Our further Will
and Pleasure is, that all and every the Members of Our said Court of Civil Jurisdiction
respectively, shall, before they proceed to sit in J udgment, severally make Oath well and truly
to try the several Issues brought before them, and to give true Judgment according to the
Evidence ; and that all and every the Members of Our said Court of Criminal Jurisdiction
shall, in like manner, make Oath to make true deliverance between Us, Our Heirs and Suc-
cessors, and the several Prisoners who shall by them be tried, and to give a true Judgment
according to the Evidence; and We do hereby give full Power and Authority to Our Judge
Advocate for the time being to administer such Oaths to the respective Members of Our
said several Courts: And further Know ye, that We, for preserving the Peace of Our said
Settlement and the Islands thereunto adjacent, of Our especial grace, certain knowledge
and mere motion, have granted, ordained, directed and appointed, and by these Presents
do grant, ordain, direct and appoint, that Our present, and all Our future Governors and
Lieutenant Governors, and Our Judge Advocate for the time being, shall be Justices of the
Peace within the said Place or Settlement; and that all and every such Justice and Justices
of the Peace shall have the same Power to keep the peace, arrest, take bail, bind to good
behaviour, suppress and punish Riots, and to do all other matters and things with respect
to the Inhabitants residing or being in the Place and Settlement aforesaid, as Justices of the
341. A a Peace


Peace have within that part of Great Britain called England, within their respective Ju-
risdictions: And these Our Letters Patent, or the Enrolment or Exemplification thereof,
shall be, as well unto the said Courts respectively, as unto all and every other Person or Per-
sons whomsoever, a sufficient Warrant and Discharge from time to time for all and whatever
they shall do or execute in pursuance of Our Royal Will and Pleasure hereinbefore declared:
And lastly, Our Wiil and Pleasure is, and We do hereby declare, that this Our Charter
shall be and remain in Force only and until We shall be pleased to revoke and determine
the same. In Witness whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patent.
Witness Ourself at Westminster, the second day of April, in the twenty-seventh year of
Our Reign.
By Writ of Privy Seal,
YORKE.
Appendix, No. 18.
REPORT of Prisoners tried before the Judge Advocate, and other the Members of
a Court of Criminal Jurisdiction, holden at Sydney, in and for the Territory of New-
South Wales, on Monday the 12th day of March 1810, and the.following days.
No. 1. John Burges. Charged with feloniously stealing, taking and carrying away
* a large quantity of W’heat and Salt Beef, of the value of 40 s. of the Goods
and Chattels of Our Lord the King, from and out of His Majesty’s Stores
at Paramatta in this Territory.— Plea —Guilty.
Sentenced by the Court to be transported for the term of Seven years, to
such place within the said Territory, as his Excellency the Governor shall
appoint.
No. 2. James Ratty and Edward M‘Gee. Charged with feloniously stealing, faking
and carrying away a quantity of Wheat, of the value of 40s. the Goods and
Chattels of Charles Throsby, Esq. at Paramatta.— Fzrdict —Guilty.
The Sentence of the Court wps, that the said James Ratty be sent to the
Coal River, and there kept to hard labour for the space of Two years; and
that the said Edward M c Gee be confined to hard labour in the Gaol Gang at
Sydney, for the space of Six months.
No. 3. W. Wade. Charged with receiving one Keg of Paint, value 20s. of the Goods
and Chattels of Our Lord the King, well knowing the same to have been
feloniously stolen.— Verdict —Not Guilty.
No, 4. Edward Luttrell. Charged with unlawfully assaulting one Tedbury, a native of
this Territory, and wounding him by discharging at him a Gun loaded with
Gunpowder and a leaden Bullet. — Verdict— Not Guilty,
No. 5. James Hutchinson. Charged with feloniously and burglariously, breaking and
entering the House ot one David Lloyd at Sydney, in the night-time, with
intent feloniously to steal, take, and carry away the Goods and Chattels of the
said David Lloyd. —Verdict (by the whole Court) —Guilty
Sentence of Death pronounced upon the Prisoner.
No. 6. Thomas Gorman . Charged with feloniously, maliciously, and unlawfully shooting
a Gun loaded with Gunpowder and a leaden Bullet, at George Wheeler,
one of the subjects of Our Lord the King, at Van Diemen’s Land, and then
and there severely wounding him the said George Wheeler. —Verdict (by the
whole Court)—Guilty.
Sentence of Death was pronounced upon the Prisoner: but he was recom-
mended to Mercy on the ground of previous good character.
No. 7. George Parr. Charged with stealing a Sheep, value 40s. of the Goods and
Chattels of John Bowman, at the Hawkesbury.— Verdict —Not Guilty.
No. 8. Thomas Brown. Charged with stealing divers articles of Wearing Apparel,
value 20s. of the Goods and Chattels of George Carman.— Verdict— Not
Guilty. ‘
No. 9.


No. 9. William Hoi ness. Charged with receiving divers articles of Wearing Apparel,
well knowing the same to have been feloniously stolen, tiken and carried
away.— Verdict —Guilty,
Sentence o f the Court, (on account of some circumstances favourable to the
Prisoner), that he do pay a Fine to the King of <£.s. which being done, he
, was discharged.
No. 10. W. Cummings, Alexander Hewitt and John Hay. Charged with feloniously
stealing, taking and carrying away one copper Boiler, of the value of 40s. of
the Goods and Chattels of Our Lord the King, at Sydney.— Verdict —Not
Guilty.
No. 11. Joseph M c Kinley. Charged with feloniously stealing, taking and carrying away
a quantity of Lead, value 40s. the Goods and Chattels of Our Lord the King,
at Sydney. — Verdict— Not Guilty.
No. 12. Henry M c Cale. Charged with stealing a certain Coin, current in this Territory,
known by the name of a Dollar, value ss. of the Goods and Chattels of
Patrick Purcell, at Sydney in the said Territory.— Verdict —Not Guilty.
Judge Advocate’s Office,
30 April 1810. (Signed) ELLIS BENT.
(True Copy) Approved,
(Signed) L. MACQUARIE.
(Signed) L. Macquarie.
Appendix, No. 19.
Letter from the Judge Advocate (Ellis Bent, Esq.) of New South Wales, to the
Right honourable the Earl of Liverpool.
My Lord, Sydney, N. S. Wales, 19 October 1811.
1. A few days previous to my departure from England to fill the situation of Judge
Advocate of this territory, I was informed by Mr; Cooke, that it was the wish of Viscount
Castlereagh (then at the head of the Department over which your Lordship now presides,)
that 1 should communicate to him, for the information of His Majesty’s Ministers, my
sentiments upon the means hitherto adopted for the administration of justice in New South
Wales; and that I should more particularly enquire, whether the trial by jury, in criminal
cases, could be easily and advantageously introduced into this territory. '
2. In obedience to that wish, a few months after my arrival here, I availed myself of the
return to Europe of the Hindostan, Captain Pascoe, to address a Letter toMr. Cooke, under
date I believe of the gth of May 1810, in which I endeavoured to explain my sentiments
upon those topics; but the very reduced state of my health at that period, prevented me from
writing in so satisfactory a manner as the importance of the subject demanded.
3. Conceiving however that your Lordship will be equally anxious to obtain correct
information, relative to points so essential to the well-being of this part of His M ajesty’s
dominions; urged, too, by a strong sense of duty, and by the earnest wishes of his
Excellency the Governor, I now venture with much submission to transmit to your Lordship
some more detailed observations upon the constitution, of the Courts of Justice in this
Colony, wherein I shall humbly endeavour to point out to your Lordship their present
inaptitude to the purposes of their formation; and also, with the entire concurrence of
his Excellency the Governor, to direct the attention of your Lordship to a plan for the
more effectual administration of Justice, the adoption of which will be attended with a very
little additional expense, but, I sincerely trust, with much benefit to every individual of this
community.
4. Your Lordship is no doubt aware that His Majesty’s Patent, by virtue of which the
Courts of Civil and Criminal Judicature are held in this Colony,- has received no alteration
since its first promulgation. A cursory review of the provisions of that Instrument will
satisfy your Lordship, that it could be intended only for a very small community, where the
mutual dealings between man and man are of the most simple nature, and the disputes'
which arise may be very easily and satisfactorily decided in a summary manner.
5. But that state of society is now passed ; the free and respectable population is much
more numerous; the commercial dealings between this Colony and other parts of the
world, particularly India, are of very considerable extent; cases of great legal difficulty are
daily arising; and complex questions of account, involving large masses of property, form the
frequent subjects of deliberation of the Court of Civil Judicature.
• 341- 6. I*


6. In the course in which I now propose to myself to lay before your Lordship the
observations 1 am about to make, I will lirst beg leave to call your Lordship’s. attention to
the constitution of the Court of Criminal Judicature.
7. That Court consists of the Judge Advocate and six Officers belonging to His
Majesty’s Forces by sea or land, appointed by the Governor or other Officer in command.
8. The Judge Advocate is the President of the Court, and it is his duty to examine the
depositions taken (perhaps by himself), upon the committal of offenders, to prepare the
informations upon which they are to be tried, to cause the necessary witnesses to be sum-
moned, to exhibit those informations to the Court, to conduct and make minutes of the
trial, to take down the evidence, to make such observations thereon to the other Members
of the Court as he may deem expedient, to pronounce the Judgment of the Court, to make
up the record of the conviction, or acquittal of the Prisoners, and to take charge of all
the records of the Court.
9. Your Lordship will observe that this duty is both laborious. and complicated. The
Judge Advocate is thus at once the committing Magistrate, public Prosecutor, and Judge;
and he is called upon to decide upon the legality of the informations drawn up and
exhibited by himself.
10. It may also be observed, that from being so intimately concerned inthe preliminary steps
of every prosecution, it is hardly possible for the Judge Advocate to free'his mind, from
some degree of bias against the innocence of the Prisoners ; and 1 need hardly add, that his
opinion must necessarily have great weight with the other Members of the Court.. ...
11. Another observation, which I should wash to suggest to your Lordship relative to the
Court of Criminal Judicature, is, that in its constitution it bears a too strong analogy to
that of a Court Martial. The title of Judge Advocate, with the circumstance of so large
a majority of the Court being composed of Officers either Military or iSaval, gives the
.Court so strong a Military cast, that 1 may say, all the Officers and most of the Inhabitants
•of the Colony look upon the Court 'in no other light than as a Court Martial.
12. On this account, the Court of Criminal Judicature does not command that veneration,
awe or respect, which ought ever to attend upon a Court of Justice; and the numerous free,
respectable and affluent Inhabitants of the Colony, are rendered amenable to a jurisdiction
originally intended for the summary investigation of the crimes of Prisoners, and established
too at a time when there were no others but- Military or Naval Officers proper to be
appointed to act as Members of a Court of J ustice.
13. But whatever defects are attached to the constitution and practice of the Court of
Criminal Jurisdiction, they are much exceeded by the inconveniences which resuit from the
course of civil procedure established in this Colony, as the objects of the latter jurisdiction
are infinitely more varied, embrace every possible degree of complexity, and are more or
less felt by a vast proportion of the individuals composing this community. But this
subject is so extensive, that 1 am sure I should weary your Lordship, w’ere i to attempt to
develope all the inconveniencies resulting from the limited means of this Court, and the
great mass of business which comes before it; I will therefore entreat permission to select
a very few of the leading defects of this-department of our judicial system, and very
.shortly to submit them to your Lordship’s consideration.
14. By His Majesty’s Patent, to which I beg leave to refer your Lordship, the Court of
Civil Jurisdiction is ordered to consist of His Majesty’s Judge Advocate and any two
respectable Inhabitants of the Colony, to be appointed by virtue of a Precept from His
Excellency the Governor. And 1 would particularly call the attention of your Lordship to
one circumstance, that this Court is directed by the Patent to decide all Causes whatsoever
which may come before it, in a summary manner.
15. The first inconvenience to which I would wash to direct your Lordship’s attention, is
the total want of a regular judicial body, and of proper Officers of the Court: the con-
sequences of this defect are two-fold, for it throws an intolerable burthen upon the Judge
Advocate, and causes great delay and grievance to the Suitors of the Court.
16. In consequence of the want of regular Council arid Solicitors to afford legal advice
to those who have occasion to apply for it, the Judge Advocate is constantly called upon
to give his advice upon all occasions where an Action is about to be brought or defended :it
is his duty to state in writing the cause of Action, to issue all processes, to prepare the
evidence in many cases, to preside at ihe trial, to take down the evidence, and keep correct
minutes of the proceedings: it is also his business to make out all orders and decrees of
the Court whatsoever. Having so much to do, it can be done but imperfectly ; for Ido
assure your Lordship, that the labour it imposes, to be executed properly, is beyond the
power of one man.
17. From this motive, and also from a wish to avow the embarrassment which might’
perhaps result from-it in my decisions, I have lately, in most cases, declined giving anv
opinion out of Court; but the consequence of this has been, that lam frequently called upon
to try Actions of great importance, without the smallest previous knowledge of the nature
of the facts at issue between the parties.
18. Another unpleasant consequence arising from-the want of regular Advocates and
Solicitors is, that, as in most cases tne parties themselves appear m person to prosecute or
defend


defend Actions in which they are concerned, they bring into Court with them all their
passions-and enmities towards each other, by the effect of which, Justice is much obstructed,
order subverted, solemnity and decorum set at defiance, and an inconceivable degree of dis-
credit thrown upon the proceedings and authority of the Court.
- 1 9. The want of proper rules and forms, pointing out the due practice of the Court in
all cases, is another defect which I should wish to mention to your Lordship, and it is one
which, on the present system, is almost irremediable ; for though it were an easy matter, it
would be of but little ,use, to establish forms and rules, when there are no persons whose
immediate duty and interest it is to make themselves acquainted with them; and where the
only persons whose business it is to take notice of them, are those wdtose hours are occupied by
other avocations, and whose education and pursuits through life have never afforded the
opportunities of attending to or understanding them.
’ 20. But though these evils, my Lord, may be considered as sufficiently palpable and mis-
chievous, they are not the only ones incidental to our present judicial system; for there is
one, and it is the - last to which I shall beg your Lordship’s attention, the consequences of
which are of a most alarming nature to the interests of this Colony; 1 mean, the right which
is given to all persons who feel themselves aggrieved by the decrees of the Colonial Courts,
in cases where the debt or demand is of greater value than the sum of £. 300, to appeal
from those decrees to His Majesty in Council. The consequences of this right are rapidly
undermining, and must soon accomplish the ruin of the credit of this Colony. All debts
above the sum of £. 300. are now looked upon as debts of honour; and by the acquisition
of this right, the fraudulent debtor obtains such a manifest advantage over his creditor, that
he can force him to the acceptance of any terms, however unjust. lam very sorry to be
obliged to add, that but too many of the traders of this Colony are in general so. devoid of
principle, that they in all cases make use of this advantage. The consequence is, that a'
private bill of exchange drawn,here for a larger amount than the sum of ,£.300. is not
negociable upon any terms; and the, merchants, more especially,the foreign merchants,
will not take in payment any. other bills than those drawn on the behalf of Government, or
by the Paymaster of the Regiment stationed in the Colony.
.21. Upon the whole view of the judicial system of the Colony, I would humbly submit
to your Lordship, that its general faults are—that it does not now meet the wants of its
increased and ameliorated population and commerce; that the officers attached to it, are
too few, either for the convenient or orderly dispatch of business-; and that its proceedings
are of a nature too summary, not sufficiently final, and too much wanting in
to command the respect and deference which ought ever to be paid to Courts of Justice.
- 22: I trust your Lordship will excuse me, in now offering a few observations in the
situation’which I have the honour to hold. lam inclined to believe, from what I have
already stated, that your Lordship will think the duties of the Judge Advocate are too mul-
tifarious, and too heavy to be discharged satisfactorily’by one person, many of those duties
appear to be inconsistent with the character of a Judge, and to belong rather to that of ,an
Advocate. I will also venture to add, that his situation is too dependant, as he is bound by
the very tenor of his commission, to obey any orders he may receive from his Excellency
the Governor, or Lieutenant Governor, or other his superior Officer. This circumstance
must certainly diminish the confidence of the public in his character, and expose him to the
suspicion of being liable to undue influence, and therefore prevent him from commanding
that respect which is the just title of all who fill a judicial situation of importance. Con-
sidering this want .of independence in a personal point of view, I can assure your Lord-
ship, that the comfort and happiness of any Judge Advocate, nay even the proper discharge
of his duty, must depend entirely upon the personal character of the person in whose hands
the executive power of the Colony happens to be vested. Permit me here to add, my
Lord, that this observation is very far from being meant to apply to my situation at present;
for the courtesy and conduct of Colonel Macquarie, bespeak so strongly his uniform wish to
promote the happiness of all, that 1 cannot but feel it a pleasure to serve under him.
23. In order to afford your Lordship every means in my power, of forming a correct
judgment "of the weight that may be due to the opinions I have ventured to lay before
your Lordship'upomthis important subject, and of the great benefits that would be derived
by this Colony from the establishment of anew and more enlarged judicial system, I beg to
refer your Lordship to the accompanying Report of the number of causes which have actually
come before me for trial, during the eighteen months which have elapsed since my arrival
in this Colony; in which, are stated the amount of the sums sued for, that of the sums
recovered, and that of the whole -costs incurred in the recovery of the same. This Report
has been made out under my own immediate inspection, and I can confidently add, that
your Lordship may depend upon its accuracy. From this, your Lordship will be- able to
obtain a tolerably correct idea of the extent of the legal business, dealings and commerce of
this country. Many of these Causes are still undecided, and there are now application for
Actions, involving a mass of property; not less than £. 60,000. due from different merchants
in this Settlement, to mercantile houses of the first respectability in the City of London.
24. I have now, my Lord, to request your Lordship’s attention to a. plan for the re-
modelling of the judicial system of this Colony, which I have vejy maturely considered,
and have now the honour of laying before your Lordship, with the entire concurrence,, and by
the immediate desire of his Excellency the Governor: hut I have already trespassed so
34i. B b long


long upon your Lordship’s attention, that I will not venture to do more than sketch
out the outline of the plan, without entering into any detail upon the minuter part
of it.
25. I should propose to your Lordship, that a Supreme Court of Judicature be established
at Sydney for the territory of New South Wales, consisting of one judge (being a barrister
-of not less than five years standing) and two persons to be chosen by .rotation ’from the'
magistrates of the territory. That in this Court should be vested full power to exercise all
■civil, criminal, and ecclesiastical jurisdiction; to form such rules of practice, and rules for the
process of the Court, as might be found necessary to the due administration of Justice.
That this Court should be a Court of Record, and also a Court of Oyer and Terminer and
•Goal delivery for the territory of New South Wales; and that thejudgeof this Court should,
an the exercise of his functions, be perfectly independent of the executive power of the
Colony, and removable only at the pleasure of His Majesty, expressed through his
•ministers. •
26. I should further propose to your Lordship, that this Court should be guided in its
.decisions by the common and statute law of Great Britain, except in cases where that law
is altered by the bye-laws of this territory, or is inapplicable to the local circumstances of the
country. 1 think it would be advisable that all the bye-laws of the' territory should be
drawn up by one of the Officers of the law, - and registered in the Supreme Court, These
bye-laws are at present extremely' vague and contradictory, and are only to be found
Among the general orders of the different Governors of the territory. If my leisure and
health permit, I propose collecting and arranging them; and, under the authority of
the Governor, from the .present undigested mass, to endeavour to select a consistent and
judicious body of regulations, applicable to . the circumstances and wants of the Colony.*
Amon'gsfthe alterations 'of the law of England, I should earnestly recommend it to your
Lordship,'as a measure highly calculated to promote the ends of justice, that real estates,
lands, houses, &c. .in this Colony', or its dependencies, be rendered liable* to all just'debts
and'demands," and to be seized and sold by virtue of the process of the .Supreme Court,- inf
the same manner as personal* chattels. Such a measure was adopted in regard to -the
plantations in America, by virtue of a statute passed in the. 5 Geo. 11. chap. 7.
gect. 4.,
ey.’Tri considering the extent of* jurisdiction to* be allowed to this Court, it will be
hccesSarv for your Lordship to advert to the situation bf His Majesty’s settlement in Van
'DieinanV Land, which your Lordship knows was once thought to be part of the continent
of New South Wales,' and is now one of the dependencies of this Government. The distance
of either of those settlements from this part of the territpry, and their insular situations,
■would perhapsdorm an objection to the processes of this Court issuing there; and as I am
-very imperfectly acquainted with their state and condition, I feel at a loss to give an opinion
in regard to the mode best adapted .for the due administration of justice there.
-■'.gSl To obviate many of those ineonveniencies which I have already enumerated, I
■Should earnestly'recommend that barristers and two attorhies be induced to come out to
£racfise'their professions in this Colony; 1 have no doubt that it might be practised here
with'milch benefit tp themselves,, and the community. Considering the extent of the
■profession o'f the law, and the different advantages which might be held but to them by the
moderate giants of laud and cattle, I entertain a very confident hope that the number of
young "men I hkv'e mentioned,-' could be selected 1 from the profession, 'who would readily
-embrace any reasonable proposition of, this nature, which might be made to them,
f 20. Of the barristers, one might come out with a salary in the situation of King’s Ad-
vocate, the other might perhaps with much advantage be placed at the head of the -Police*
.and have a general cognizance of the crimes committed by convicts.. Of the attornies,
•one might also have a salary, and fill the situation of King’s. Proctor, and the other could
be appointed Coroner, of . the territory, with, a power ;to take certain fees, or with, a
moderate salary; both of which might be charged on.the Police Fund.
30; I should also recommend to your Lordship* that a professional person be sent out as
-Clerk of the Peace, whose duty it would be to draw up all indictments, and. informations,'
•to manage the.formal parts of all prosecutions, to. draw up all the orders of the Court, lb
make up and to have the custody and charge of all its records; the same person, might also
hold the situation of Registrar or Prothonotary in the Civil HeparUnent of the Court, and
as a Notary Public.
31. After a very mature consideration bf the state and condition of the Colony, I feel
myself justified in recommending to your Lordship, that all offences; crimes, and misde-
meanors to be enquired of by the Supreme Court, be tried by’a Jury of twelve free
British subjects resident'in the territory; and that ho indictment'should be enquired by
such Jury, until it had previously been laid before a Grand Jury, consisting of twenty-
tbreq free British subjects, also resident, and having lands' or houses in the territory. I
have no doubt that grand and petty Juries so constituted, of great respectability, may be
impannelled in this Colony with much facility,..and, that such an establishment would-be
considered as a blessing to the country, aqd received with the most perfect satisfaction. ,
32. In the consideration of this plan; it will be a question well worthy of your Lordship'*
attention, whether the benefits of such a 'trial by Jury should be confined to the free rest*
• dents


LIST of Causes tried, amount of Money sued for, and amount of Verdicts recovered in the
■Courts of Civil Judicature held at Sydney, in the territory of New South Wales.
No. of Court.' j
When assembled. .
Wien adjourned.
Number
of
Causes tried.
Amount
of
Money sued fur.
A mount .
of
Verdicts recovered.
Amount
of
Costs,,
. ‘
£. s. d.
£. s. d.
A •
£.
1.
March 19, 18 to
Aprils - 1810
187
64,221.15 3
5,686 10 8
374
2.
August 13, 1810 October ir, 1810
3»3
•37*529 *5 8
20*937 8 9
. 626
3*
January 11,1810 February 5,1811
182" ■
12,239 *3 8
5* 2 9 6: 1 3
364
4-
April 1 - 181 lUpril 30* - 1811
181
25,79 6 12 • 1
5* s 34 1 9
. 362
5-
July 1 - 181J July 36 - 1811
145
44*7 8 3 2 6
12,643 11 5
> 290
Total - -
1,008 ’
184,57019 2
50*197 13 10
2,016
Judere Advocate’s Office, Svdnev,
ipth October 1811.
ELLIS BENT, Judge Advocate;
341*
dents of tliis Colony, or whether they should be extended to the numerous Convicts in tiie.
Colony, in any cases except those which affect the life of the accused, if I might be al-
lowed to offer an opinion to your Lordship upon this point, I should deem it advisable, that
except in cases of a capital nature, or of great enormity, they should remain under the im-
mediate controul of the Police, and that the offences committed.by them should be entirely
under the cognizance of the Superintendent of that department. By these means they might
be kept more orderly, and induced, by sobriety and regularity of conduct, to merit a re-ad-
mission of those privileges once forfeited by their crimes.
' 33- With regard to the trial of pleas, and suits of a'personal nature,’ I beg leave to submit
it as my opinion to your Lordship, that in those cases where the points in dispute can be
reduced to one or more plain issues of fact, the trial by Jury might also be introduced with
great benefit to the Public ; but as many questions may arise of too complicated a nature to
be advantageously submitted to the consideration of a Jury, it would be also necessary that
the Court should be enabled to act as a Court of Equity, so that its whole constitution would
be somewhat on the model of the Court of Exchequer in England, which is at once a Court
both of law and equity.
34. In the event of your Lordship deeming it advisable to recommend to His
Majestv the adoption of such a judicial system as that which I have had the honour to lay
before your Lordship, I conceive that the right of.appeal, as it now stands, might admit of a
very considerable, and, beneficial limitation; for as such a system seems to me to justify
a well-grounded confidence that the rights of individuals would be both ably discussed and
impartially determined, I think that the right of appeal to His Excellency the Governor
might be altogether dispensed with ; and that no appeals whatsoever should be allowed to
be" interposed from the decrees of the Court to His Majesty in Council, except in cases
tvhere* the debt or demand in dispute exceeded the value of £. 6,000.
35. Tliis is the whole of the Plan which I have to lay before your I have
indulged,a strong hope that much benefit might be derived from its establishment; and am
happy in being able to assure your Lordship, that the whole of it might be carried into,
effect with the additional expense of;£. 2,0c0 per annum;
■ 36: I have now only to express my fear that I have trespassed too much upon the
attention of your Lordship, and yet failed in the due illustration of the topics I have ventured
to discuss. I will not therefore detain your Lordship longer than merely to add, that in the
observations I have taken the liberty to make upon the,judicial system of this Colony, and
in -the plan! have humbly suggested to your,Lordship for its improvement, 1 entreat your
Lordship to. believe that ,! have not been actuated by any selfish , consideration of future
personal advantage, but solely by a regard to the welfare of this remote and little known
part of His Majesty’s dominions ; and from ,a conviction that the present charter offthe
Colony does ,not sufficiently provide for the due administration of Justice in such manner
as the state and condition of the Settlement require.,.
' 37th. Lieutenant Ovans, of His Majesty’s 73d Regimeht, who is- proceeding to. England
(via China) in , the ship, Providence; is the bearer of this public Letter to your Lordship'; and,
from the, situation he has held in the Colony, will be able to answer such questions relative
to the state of this Settlement, as your Lordship inay be pleased to'ask.
1 have the honour to remain, my Lord,
Your Lordship’s most obedient and most humble Servant,
w.?- ight Honourable .die ’ ELLIS BENT.
Earl or Liverpool, &c. See. Sec.


Appendix, No. 20.
COPY of the COMMISSION appointing Lachlan Macquarie Captain General and
Governor in Chief of New South Wales; dated May 1809.
GEORGE R.
©
Geokce the Third, See. To Our trusty and well-bcicvcd,Lachlan Macquarie, Esq.
Greeting: Whereas We did by Our Letters Patent under the Great Seal of Our United
> Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, bearing date at Westminster the 24th day of May,
in the 45th year of Our Reign, .constitute and appoint Our trusty and well-beloved William
Bligh, Esq. to be Our Captain General and Governor in Chief in and over Our territory
called New South Wales, extending from the northern cape or extremity of the coast
called Cape York, in the latitude of 10 deg. 37 min. south, to the southern extremity of
the said territory of New South Wales, dr South Cape, in the latitude of 43 deg, 39 min.
south, and of all the Country inland to the westward as far as 135th degree of east lon-
fitude, reckoning from the meridian of Greenwich, including all the Islands adjacent in the
acific Ocean, within the latitude aforesaid of 10 deg. 37 min. south, and of 43 deg.
39 min. south; and of all Towns, Garrisons, Castles, ports, and all other Fortifications or
othej Military Works which might be erected upon the said Territory or any of the said
Islands, for and during our Will and Pleasure, as by the said recited Letters Patent, relation
being thereunto had, may more fully and at large appear: Now Know you, That We have
revoked and determined, and by these Presents do revoke and determine the said recited
Letters Patent, and every Clause, Article, and Thing therein contained : And further Know
you, that We, reposing especial Trust and Confidence in the Prudence, Courage, and
Loyalty of you the said Lachlan Macquarie, of Our especial grace, certain knowledge,
and mere motion, have thought fit to constitute and appoint you the said Lachlan Mac-
quarie, to be Our Captain General and Governor in Chief in and over Our territory called
New South Wales, extending from the northern cape or extremity of the coast, called
Cape York, in the latitude of 10 deg. 37 min. south, to the southern extremity of the
said territory of New South Wales, or South Cape, in the latitude of 43 deg. 39 min.
south, and of all the Country inland to the westward, as far as the 135th degree of east
longitude, reckoning from the meridian of Greenwich, including all the Islands adjacent
in the Pacific Ocean within the latitude aforesaid of 10 deg. 37 min. south, and of 43 deg.
29min. south; and of all Towns, Garrisons, Castles, Forts, and all other Fortifications or
other Military Works which are or may be erected upon the said Territory, or any of the
said Islands: And We do hereby require and command you to do and execute all things in
due manner that shall belong to your said command and the trust we have reposed in you,
according to the several Powers and Directions granted or appointed you by this present
Commission, and the Instructions and Authorities herewith given to you, or by such further
;Powers, Instructions, and Authorities as shall at any time hereafter be granted or appointed
you under Our Signet and Sign Manual, or by Our Order in Our Privy Council, or by Us
through one of Our principal Secretaries of State: And Our Will and Pleasure is, that you
the said Lachlan Macquarie, after the publication of these Our Letters Patent, do in the
first place take the Oaths appointed to be taken by an Act passed in the first year of the
Reign of King George the First, intituled, “ An Act for the further Security of His Majesty’s
“ Person and Government, and the Succession of the Crown" in the Heirs of the late Prin-
“ cess Sophia, being Protestants; and for extinguishing the Hopes of the pretended Prince
"of Wales and his open and secret Abettors,” —as altered and explained by an Act passed
in the sixth year of Our Reign, intituled, “ An Act for altering the Oath of Abjuration and
“ the Assurance,” and for amending so much of an Act of the 7th year of her late Majesty
Queen Anne, intituled, “An Act for the Improvement of the Union of'the two Kingdoms,
" Its after the time therein limited requires the delivery of certain Lists and Copies therein
“ mentioned, to Persons indicted of. High Treason or Misprision of Treasonas also that
you make and subscribe the Declaration mentioned in an Act of Parliament made in the
25th year of the Reign of King Charles the Second, intituled, “An Act for preventing
“ dangers which may happen from Popish Recusants;” and likewise that you take the usual
Oath tor ihe due execution of the office and trust of Our Captain General and Governor in
Chief in and over Our said Territory and its Dependencies, for the due and impartial admi-
nistration of Justice; and further, that you take the Oath required to be taken by Governors
in the Plantations to do their utmost that the several Laws relating to Trade and Plantations
be duly observed; which said Oaths and Declaration Our Judge Advocate in Our said Terri-
tory is hereby required to tender and administer unto you, and in your absence to Our
Lieutenant Governor, if there be any upon the place ; all which being duly performed, you
shall administer unto Our Lieutenant-Governor, if there be any upon the place, and to Our
Judge Advocate, the Oaths mentioned in the first recited Act of Parliament altered
as above, as also cause them to make and subscribe the aforementioned Declaration;
and We do hereby authorize and empower you to keep and use the Public Seal,
■which will be herewith delivered to you, or shall hereafter be sent to you, for sealing
all things whatsoever that shall pass the Great Seal of Our said Territory and its Depen-
dencies. We do further give and grant unto you the said Lachlan Macquarie, full
Power and Authority from time to time and at any time hereafter, by yourself, or by any
40tlier to be authorized by you in that behallj to administer' and give the Oaths mentioned in
'■ 'the


•the said first recited Act of Parliament altered as above, to all and every such person or
•persons as you shall think fit, who shall at any time or times pass into Our said Territory
and its Dependencies, or shall be resident or abiding therein; and We do hereby authorize
•and empower you to constitute and appoint Justices of the Peace, Coroners, Constables
and other necessary Officers and Ministers in Our said Territory and its Dependencies, for
■the better administration of Justice and putting the law in execution; and to administer
•or cause to be administered unto them such Oath or Oaths as are usually given for the
execution and performance of offices and places. And We do hereby give and grant unto
you full Power and Authority, where you shall see cause, or shall judge any offender or
offenders in criminal matters, or for any fines or forfeitures due unto Us, 'fit objects of Our
mercy, to pardon all such offenders, and to remit all such offences, fines and forfeitures,
treason and wilful murder only excepted; in which cases you shall likewise have power, upon
-extraordinary occasions, to grant reprieves to the offenders, until and to the intent Our
Royal Pleasure may be known therein: And whereas it belongeth to Us, in Right of Our
Royal Prerogative, to have the custody of idiots and their estates, and to take the profits
thereof to Our own use, finding them necessaries; and also to provide for the custody of
lunatics and their estates, without taking the profits thereof to Our own use: And
whereas, while such idiots and lunatics and their estates remain under Our immediate care,
great trouble and charges may arise to such as shall have occasion to resort unto Us, for
directions respecting such idiots and lunatics and their estates; We have thought fit to
-entrust you with the care and commitment of the custody of the said idiots and lunatics
and their estates. And We do by these Presents give and grant unto you full Power and
Authority, without expecting any further special Warrant from Us, from time to time
to give, order, and warrant for the preparing of Grants of the custodies of such idiots
and lunatics and their estates as are or shall be found, by inquisitions thereof, to be taken
by the Judges of Our Court of Civil Jurisdiction, and thereupon to make and pass Grants
and Commitments under Our Great Seal of Our said Territory, of the Custodies of all
and every such idiots and lunatics and their estates, to such person or persons, suitors in
that behalf, as according to the rules of law, and the use and practice in those and the like
cases you shall judge meet for that trust, the said Grants and Commitments to be made in
such manner and form, as nearly as may be, as hath been heretofore used and accustomed
in making the same under the Great Seal of Great Britain, and to contain such apt and
convenient Covenants, Provisions and Agreements, on the parts of the Committees and
Grantees, to be performed, and such Security to be by them given, as shall be requisite
and needful. And We do hereby give and grant unto you the said Lachlan Macquarie,
by yourself, or by your Captains or Commanders by you to be authorized, full Power
and Authority to levy, arm, muster, command, and employ all persons whatsoever residing
within Our said Territory and its Dependencies under your government, and as occasion
shall serve, to march from one place to another, or to ernbaik them, for the resisting and
■withstanding all Enemies, Pirates and Rebels, both at sea and land, and such Enemies,
Pirates and Rebels, if there shall be occasion, to pursue and prosecute in or out of the
limits of Our said Territory and its Dependencies, and (if it shall so please God) them to
vanquish, apprehend and take, and being taken,according to law to put to death, or keep and
preserve alive at your discretion, and to execute Martial Law in time of invasion, or other
times when by law it may be executed, and to do and execute all and every other thing
•and things which to Our Captain General and Governor in Chief doth or ought of right to
■belong. And We do hereby give and grant unto you full Power and Authority to erect,
raise, and build in Our said Territory and its Dependencies, such and so many Forts, Plat-
forms, Castles, Cities, Boroughs, Towns, and Fortifications as you shall judge necessary',
and the same or any of them to fortify and furnish with-ordnance and "ammunition, ami
all other sorts of arms fit and necessary for the security and defence of the same, and the
same again or any of them to demolish or dismantle as may be most convenient; and for-'
asmuch as divers mutinies and disorders may happen by persons shipped and employed!
at sea during the time of war, and to the end that such persons as shall be shipped and
at sea during the time of war may be better governed and ordered, We do’
hereby give and grant unto you the said Lachlan Macquarie, full Power and Authority to
•constitute and appoint Captains, Lieutenants, Masters of ships, and other Commanders and
Officers, and to grant to such Captains, Lieutenants, Masters of ships, and other Commanders
-and Officers, Commissions to execute the Law Martial during the time of war, according to the.
directions of an Act passed in the 22d year of the Reign of Our late Royal Grandfather, inti*
tuled, “ An Act for amending, explaining, and reducing into one Actof Parliament, the Laws
“ relating to the government of His Majesty’s Ships, Vessels and Forces by sea, as the same is
“ altered by an Act passed in the 19th year of Our Reign, intituled, “ An A(ff to explain and
“ amend an Act passed in the 22d year of the Reign of his late Majesty King George the 2d.
“ intituled, “An Act for amending, explaining, and reducing into one Actof Parliament, the
■**• Laws relating to the government or His Majesty’s Ships, Vessels, and Forces by sea;”
and to use such Proceedings, Authorities, Punishments, Corrections and Executions, upon
any offender or offenders who shall be mutinous, seditious, disorderly, or anyway unruly
either at sea or during the time of their abode or residence in any of the Ports, Harbours
or Bays of Our said Territory, as tire case, shall be found to require, according to Martial Law,
ant} the said directions during the time of War as aforesaid; provided that nothing herein
contained shall be construed to the enabling you or any, by your authority to hold Pleas, or
have any Jurisdiction of any Offence, Cause, Matter or Thing committed or dohe upon the
High Sea, 01 within any of the Havens, Rivers or Creeks of Our said Territory and its
341*, C c Dependencies ■


Dependencies under your government, by any Captain, Commander,'Lieutenant; Master,
Officer, Seaman, Soldier or other Person whatsoever, who shall be in actual Service and
Pay, in or on hoard any of our Ships of War or other Vessels, acting by immediate
Commission or Warrant from Our Commissioners for executing the Office of Our High
Admiral of Our said United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, or from Our
High Admiral of Our United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland for the time being,
under the Seal of Our Admiralty ; but that such Captain, Commander, Lieutenant, Master,
Officer, Seamen, Soldier or other Person so offending, shall be left to be proceeded against
nnd tried as the merits of their offences shall require, either by Commission under Our
Great Seal of this Kingdom, as the Statute of the sßth ot King Henry the Bth directs,
•or by Commission from Our Commissioners for executing the Office of Our High Admiral
of Our United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, or from Our High Admiral of Our
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland for the time being, according to the afore-
said Act, intituled, “An Act for amending, explaining, and reducing into one Act of
“ Parliament, the Laws relating to the government of His Majesty’s Ships, Vessels, and
Forces by sea,” as the same is altered by an Act passed in the 19th year of Our Reign,
intituled, “ An Act to explain and amend an Act passed in the 22d year of his late Majesty
xt King George the 2d, intituled, “An Act for amending, explaining and reducing into one
“ Act of Parliament, the Laws relating to the governmentof HisMajesty’sShips, Vessels, and
“ Forces by Sea provided nevertheless, that all disorders and misdemeanors committed on
shore by any Captain, Commander, Lieutenant, Master, Officer, Seamen, Soidieror any other
Person whatsoever belonging to any of Our Ships of War or other Vessels acting by immediate
Commission or Warrant from Our Commissioners for executing the Office of Our High
Admiral of Our United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, or from Our High Admiral
of Our United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland for the time being, under the Seal of
Our Admiralty, may be tried and punished according to the Laws of the Place where any
such disorders, offences and misdemeanors shall be committed on shore, notwithstanding
such offender be in Our actual Service and bornp in our Pay on board any such Our Ships of
War or other Vessel acting by immediate Commission or Warrant from Our Commissioners
for executing the Office of Our High Admiral of Our United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, or from Our High Admiral of Our United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
for the time being as aforesaid, so as he shall not receive any protection for the avoiding
of justice, for such offences committed on shore, from any pretence of his being employed,
in our Service at sea. Our Will and Pleasure is, that all public Monies which shall be raised
be issued out by Warrant from you, and disposed of by you for the support of Government,
or for such other purposes as shall be particularly directed, and not otherwise ; and we do
hereby give and grant unto you full Power and Authority to agree for such Lands, Tene-
ments and Hereditaments as shall be in Our power to dispose of, and them to grant to any
person or persons, upon such terms and under such moderate quit-rents, services and
acknowledgments, to be thereupon reserved unto Us, according to such instructions as shall
be giVen to you under Our-Sign Manual; which said Grants are to pass and be sealed by Our
Seal of Our said Territory and its Dependencies, and being entered upon record by such
Officer or Officers as you shall appoint thereunto, shall be good and effectual in Lawagainstr
Us, Our Heirs and Successors ; And We do hereby give you the said Lachlan Macquarie full
power to appoint Fairs, Marts and Markets, as also such and so many Ports, Harbours,
Bays, Havens, and other Places for the conveniency and security of shipping, and for the
better loading and unloading of goods and merchandizes, as by you shall be thought lit and
necessary ; and we do hereby require and command ail Officers and Ministers, Civil and
Military, and all other Inhabitants of Our said Territory and its Dependencies, to be obedient,
-aiding and assisting unto you the said Lachlan Macquarie, in the execution of this Onr
Commission, and of the Powers and Authorities herein contained ; and in case of your death,
or absence out of Our said Territory, to be obedient, aiding and assisting unto such person as
shall be appointed by Us to be Our Lieutenant Governor, or Commander in Chief of Our said
Territory and its Dependencies; to whom We do therefore by these Presents, give and grant
all and singular the Powers and Authorities herein granted, to be by him executed and enjoyed'
during Our Pleasure, or until your arrival wilhinOur said Territory and its Dependencies; and
if upon your death, or absence out of Our said Territory and its Dependencies, there be no
person upon the place commissioned or appointed by Us to be Our Lieutenant Governor, or
Commander in Chief of Our said Territory aud its Dependencies, Our Will and Pleasure is,
that the Officer highest in rank who shall be at the time of your death, or absence upon
the Service, within the same, and who shall take the Oaths and subscribe the Declaration
appointed to be taken and subscribed by you or by the Commander in Chief of Our said
Territory and its Dependencies, shall take upon him the Administration of the Government,
and execute Our said Commission and Instructions, and the several Powers and Authorities
therein contained, in the same manner find to all intents and purposes as other Our Lieutenant
Governor or Commander in Chief should or ought to do in case of } r our absence until your
return, or in ail cases until Our further Pleasure be known therein; and We do hereby declare,
ordain and appoint, that you the said Lachlan Macquarie shall and may hold, execute and
enjoy the Office and Place of Our Captain General and Governor in Cnief in and over Our
«aid Territory and its Dependencies, together with all and singular the Powers and Autho-
rities hereby granted unto you, for, and during Our Will and Pleasure. In Witness, &c.
Witness, See. the day of May, in the forty-ninth year of Our Reign.
By Writ of Privy Seal,
BATHURST & BATHURST.


Appendix, No. 21.
GEORGE R.
INSTRUCTIONS to Our trusty and well-beloved Lachlan Macquarie, Esq. Out
Captain General and Governor in Chief in and over Our territory of New South.
Wales, and its Dependencies; or, to the Lieutenant Governor or Commander in Chief
of the said Territory for the time being. Given at Our Court at Saint James’s,
the day of May 1809, in the forty-ninth year of .Our Reign.
ist. With these Our Instructions you will receive Our Commission under Our Great
Seal, constituting and appointing you to be Our Captain General and Governor in Chief of
Our' territory, called New South Wale?, extending from the northern cape, or extremity of
the coast, called Cape York, in the latitude of 10 deg. 37 min. south, to the southern
extremity of the said territory of New South Wales, or South Cape, in the latitude of
43 deg. 39 min. south, and of all the Country inland to the westward, as far as the 135th
degree of east longitude, reckoning from the meridian of Greenwich, including all the
Islands adjacent in the Pacific. Ocean, within the latitudes aforesaid of 10 deg. 37 min. south,
and 43 deg. 39 min. south; and of all Towns, Garrisons, Castles, Ports, and all other
Fortifications or other Military Works which now arc or may he hereafter erected upon the'
said Territory or any of the said Islands, with directions to obey such Orders and instruc-
tions as shall from time to time be given to you under Our Signet and Sign Manual, or by
Our Order in Our Privy Council; you are therefore to take upon you the execution of the
Trust We have reposed in you, and as soon as conveniently may be, with all due solemnity,
to cause Our said Commission under Our Great Seal of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland, constituting you Our Governor and Commander in Chief as'aforesaid, to.
be read and published.
ad. It is Our Royal Will and Pleasure that you do pursue such measures as are necessary
for the peace and security of the same, and for the safety and preservation of the public
stores and stock of every description ; and that you do proceed without delay to the culti-
vation of the Lands, the curing of Fish and other Provisions, distributing the Convicts for
those and other purposes, in such manner and under such Inspectors or Overseers, and under
such Regulations as may appear to you to he necessary, and best calculated for procuring
3 lies of Grain and Ground Provisions, and for curing Fish and other Provisions, and for
3iing their services most useful to the community. The assortment of tools and
utensils which have been from time to time provided for the use of the Convicts and other
Persons who compose the said Settlement, are to be distributed according to your discretion,.
§ aided by such farther Instructions as j t ou may receive from Us; through one of Our principal
ecretaries of State, and according to the employment assigned to the several Persons: in
the distribution however you will use every proper degree of economy, and be careful that
the Commissary do transmit an account of the issues from time to time to the Commis-
sioners of Our Treasury, and to one of Our principal Secretaries of State, to enable them
tojudge of the propriety or expediency of granting further Supplies. The Clothing of
the Convicts, and the Provisions issued to them and the Civil and Military''Establishments,
must be accounted for in the same manner, pursuant to such Instructions in that behalf as
you from time to time shall receive from the Commissioners of Our Treasury, or one of Our.
.principal Secretaries of - State. ■
3d. And whereas the Commissioners of Our Admiralty have commissioned certain
Our ships to be employed at Our said Settlement under your orders, for the purpose of supy
plying the same with Live' Stock and other necessaries from such places as shall be found
most convenient for that purpose, you are in consequence thereof to consider the providing
such supplies of Live Stock and necessaries, as an object of the first importance; and you
tire to follow without delay such directions in the execution thereof as you shall from time
to time receive from Us, under Our Sign Manual, or from one of Our principal Secretaries
of State in that behalf; and all such Live Stock as shall be brought into Our said Settle-!
•ment by means of Our aforesaid ships or otherwise at the public expense, are to he consi-
dered as public Stock, and for the use of the Settlers and emancipated Convicts being,
Settlers; and under no pretext whatever to be sold, given away, made over or transferred
by them, or any of them, to whom such Live Stock shall be granted by you, without your,
special leave and license in writing first had and obtained for that purpose, on pain of for-
feiting the same, which shall, in such case, revert and be added to the public Stock of Our’
said Settlement. ' ' ■ -
4th. And as the increase of the stock of Animals must depend entirely upon the measures
you may adopt for their preservation, you are hereby particularly charged and directed to be
extremely cautious in preventing all Cattle, Sheep, Hogs, &c. (which are to be preserved as.
much as possible for propagating the breed of such animals), from being slaughtered or
taken away from Our said Settlement, on any pretence vyhatsoever, by any vessels or craft,
which shall come there, until a competent stock maybe acquired to admit ofyoursupplying,
the Settlement from it with animal food, without having further recourse to the places from.,
whence such stock may have originally been obtained.
sth. It is Our Will and Pleasure that the productions of all descriptions acquired by the
labour of the Convicts, shall be considered as a public Stock, which We, so far leave to
341. yonf


your disposal, that such parts thereof as may be requisite for the subsistence of the said
Convicts and their families, or the subsistence of the .Civil and Military Establishment of
the Settlement, may be applied by you to that use, the remainder of such productions you
will reserve as a provision for such further number of Convicts as you may expect will
from time to time be sent from hence to be employed under your direction, in the.manner
pointed out in these Our Instructions to you; and yoa are always to take care, on the arrival
of such Convicts, to obtain an assignment to you, or the Governor in Chief for the time
being, from the Masters of the ships bringing the said Convicts, of the servitude of
such Convicts, whose services are assigned either for the remainder of the terms which
•shall be specified in their several sentences or orders of transportation, or for such less time
as shall be specified in their respective sentences in that behalf.
6th. And whereas We are desirous that some further information should be obtained af
the several ports or harbours upon the coast and the islands contiguous thereto, within the
limits of your government, you are, whenever any of Our said ships can be conveniently
■spared for that purpose, to send one or more of them upon that service; you are to endea-
vour by every possible means to extend your intercourse with the natives, and to conciliate
their affections, enjoining all Our subjects to live in amity and kindness with them; and if
any of Our subjects shall wantonly destroy them, or give them any unnecessary interrup-
tion in the exercise of their several occupations, it is Our Will and Pleasure that you do
■cause such offenders to be brought to punishment, according to the degree of the offence;
you will endeavour to procure from time to time accounts ol the numbers of. natives inha-
biting the neighbourhood of Our said Settlement, and report your opinion to one of Onr
■Secretaries of State, in what manner the intercourse with these people may be turned to the
-advantage thereof.
7th. And it is further Our Royal Will and Pleasure that you do by all proper methods
■enforce a due observance of religion and good order among the inhabitants of the said Set-
tlement ; and that you do take particular care that all possible attention be paid to the due
■celebration of public worship.
Bth. And whereas it hath been represented to Us, that great evils have arisen from the
unrestrained importation of spirits into Our said Settlement, from vessels touching there,
.whereby both the Settlers and Convicts have been induced to barter and exchange their
Live Stock and other necessary articles for the said spirits, to their particular loss and detri-
ment, as well as to that of Our said Settlement at large; We do therefore strictly enjoin
you, on pain of Our utmost displeasure, to order and direct that no spirits shall be landed
from any vessel coming to Our said Settlement without your consent, or that of Our Go-
vernor in Chief for the time being, previously obtained for that purpose; which orders and
■directions you arc to signify to all Captains or Masters of ships immediately on their arrival
at Our said Settlement, and you are at the same time to take the most effectual measures
that the said orders and directions shall be strictly obeyed and complied with.
9th. And whereas We have by Our Commission, bearing date the day of
May 1809, given and granted unto you full Power and Authority to emancipate and
discharge from their servitude any of the Convicts under your superintendence, who shall
from their good conduct and a disposition to industry, be deserving of favour; it is Our
Will and Pleasure that in every such case you do issue your Warrant to the Surveyor of
Lands to make surveys of, and mark out in lots, such lands upon the said Territory as
may be necessary for their use; and when that shall be done, that you do pass Grants
thereof with all convenient speed, to any of the said Convicts so emancipated, in such
proportions and under such conditions and acknowledgments as shall hereafter be
specified; viz.
To every male shall be granted 30 acres of land, and in case he shall be married, 20 acres
more; and for every child who may be with them at the Settlement, at the time of making the
-said Grant, a further quantity of ten acres, free of all fees, taxes, quit-rents, or other acknow-
ledgments whatsoever, for the space of ten years; provided that the person to whom the said
land shall have been granted snail reside within the space, and proceed to the cultivation
-and improvement thereof, reserving only to Us such timber as may be growing or to grow
hereafter upon the said land, which may be fit for naval purposes, and an annual quit-rent of
sixpence for every thirty acres, after the expiration of the term or' time before mentioned.
You will cause copies of such Grants as may be passed, to be preserved, and make a regular
return of the said Grants to the Commissioners of Our Treasury, and the Lords of the Com-
mittee of Our Privy Council for Trade and Plantations.
10th. And whereas if is likely to happen, that the Convicts who may, after their
-emancipation, in consequence of this instruction, be put in possession of lands, will not have
the means of proceeding to their cultivation without the public aid, it is Our Will and
Pleasure, that you do cause every such person you may so emancipate, to be supplied with
such a quantity of provisions as may be sufficient for the subsistence of himself, and also of
his family, until such a time as their joint labour may reasonably be expected to enable
them to provide for themselves, together with an assortment of tools and utensils, and
such a proportion of seed, grain, cattle, sheep, hogs, &c. as may be proper, and can be spared
.from the general stock of the Settlement.
11 tli. And whereas it is Our Royal Intention that every sort of intercourse between Our
said Settlement or other Places which may be hereafter established on the coast of New
South


South Wales and its Dependencies, and the Settlements of Our East India Company, as well
as the coast of China and the islands situated in that part of the world, to which any
intercourse has been established by any European nation, should be prevented by every
possible means; It is Our Will and Pleasure that you do not upon any account allow craft
of any sort to.be built for the use of private individuals, which might enable them to effect
such intercourse; and that you do prevent any vessels which may at any time hereafter
arrive at the said Settlement from any of the ports before mentioned, from having commu-
nication with any of the inhabitants residing within your Government, without first receiving
especial permission from you for that purpose.
12th. And whereas certain of Our subjects now resident within Our said Settlement, and
others from hence or from other parts of Our Dominions, may be desirous of becoming
settlers in Our said Settlement; Oitr Will and Pleasure is, that in case such person shall
apply to you for Grants of Land, you do afford them everyencouragcmcntthatcan.be
given in that undertaking, without subjecting the public to expense; and that Grants of
Land, to such amount as you shall judge proper, shall be made out for each person applying,
not exceeding 100 acres over and above the quantity hereinbefore directed to be granted to
such convicts as shall be emancipated or discharged from their servitude, free of all
fees, taxes, quit-rents and other acknowledgments, for the space of 10 years; but after the
expiration of that time, to be liable to an annual quit-rent of one shilling for every 50 acres.
13th. It is nevertheless Our Royal Intention, in case of any peculiar meritorious settler, or
well deserving emancipated convict becoming a settler as aforesaid, that you shall be at liberty
to enlarge the said Grants so respectively to be made to such settler or emancipated convict
as aforesaid, by the addition of such further number of acres to be granted to them
respectively, as you in your discretion shall judge proper, subject nevertheless to Our
approbation thereof, upon your transmitting to one of Our principal Secretaries of State,
which you are hereby directed to do by the first opportunity, your reasons for making
the same.
14th. And whereas such persons as are or shall become settlers upon Our said continent
of New South Wales, or the said Islands dependent thereupon, may be desirous of
availing themselves of the labour of part of the convicts who are or may be sent there;
it is Our Will and Pleasure, that in case there should be a prospect of their employing any
of the said convicts to advantage, that you assign to each grantee the service of any
number of them that-you may judge sufficient to answer their purpose, on condition of then-
maintaining, feeding, and clothing such convicts, in such manner as shall appear satisfactory
to you, or to Our Governor of New South Wales for the time being.
15th. You are to take care that all Grants to be given of Lands in Our said Continent
or Islands, be made out in due form, and that the conditions required by these Our
Instructions, be particularly and expressly mentioned in the respective Grants; that the
same be properly registered, and that regular returns thereof be transmitted by the proper
Officers .to Our Commissioners of Our Treasury,' and to the Committee ot Our Privy
Council appointed for all jnatters of Trade and Eorpign Plantations, within the space of
x 2 months after the passing of such Grant.
16th. It is also Our Will and Pleasure, that in all Grants of Land to be made by you as
aforesaid) regard be had to the profitable and unprofitable acres, so that each Grantee may
have a proportionate number of one sort and of the other, as likewise that the breadth of
each tract to be hereafter granted, be one-third of the length of such tract; and that the
length of such tract do not extend along the banks of any bay or river, but into the main-
land ; that thereby the said Grantees may have each a convenient share of what accom-
modation the said harbour or rivers may afford for navigation or otherwise.
17th. It is also Our Will and Pleasure, that.between every thousand acres of land so
to be allotted to Settlers or emancipated Convicts, being Settlers as aforesaid, you do
reserve not less than 500 acres adjacent, thereto, for the benefit of Us, Our Heirs and
Successors; which spaces so reserved, you are not to grant without Our especial direction
and license; but you are at liberty to-lease the same for any terra not exceeding 14 years,
and on such terms and conditions as you shall judge advantageous to Our Service, subject to
such orders as shall be given to you in that behalf-under Our-Sign Manual, or by one of Our
principal Secretaries of State.
18th. And whereas it has been found by experience, that the settling of Planters in
Townships hath very much redounded to their advantage, not-only with respect to the
assistance they have been able to. afford each other in their civil concerns, but likewise with
regard to their security; you are therefore to lay out Townships of a convenient size and
extent, in such places as you in your discretion shall judge most proper, having as far as
may be natural boundaries extending tip into the,country, and comprehending a necessary
part of the sea coast, wherc-it can be conveniently had.
' 19th. You are also to cause a proper place in the most convenient part of each Township,'
to be marked out for the building of a Town sufficient to contain such a number of families
as you shall judge proper to settle there, with Town and Pasture Lots convenient to each
tenement, taking care that the said Town be laid out upon or as near as conveniently may
be to some navigable river on. the sea coast; and you are also to reserve to Us proper
34 1, D d quantities


quantities of lafid in such Townships, for the following purposes, viz. For-erecting
Fortifications and Barracks, or for other Military or Naval Services, and more particular!
for the building a Town-hall, and such other public Edifices as you shall deem necessary, and
also for the growth and production of naval timber, if there are any woodlands fit for that
purpose.
' 20th. And it, is Our further Will and Pleasure, that a particular spot, in or as near each
Town as possible, be set apart for a building of a Church, and 400 acres adjacent thereto
allotted for the maintenance of a Minister, and 200 for a Scholmaster.
21st. And whereas it is necessary that a reasonable compensation shall be made to the
Surveyor General of Our Lands, for surveying and laying out the said Lands for the use of
such persons who may disposed to become Settlers in the said Continent, or Islands dependent
thereupon, We have thought fit to establish the Table of Fees hereunto annexed, which you
are to allow him to demand from .all persons whatsoever, excepting the Non-commissioned
Officers and Men of the detachment of Our Marine Corps, or to the convicts emancipated
or discharged, who are not to be subjected to the payment of such fees.
2 2d. You are to cause the above-mentioned Table of Fees to be hung up in one of the
most public places, that all persons concerned may be apprized of the charges which may
be demanded from them on their taking up lands within the said Continent, or Islands
dependent thereon.
G. R.
Lachlan Macquarie, Esq.
&c, &c. &c.
LIST of FEES upon GRANTS of LAND.
Governor’s Fees:
For the Great Seal to every Grant, not exceeding One thousand £. s. d.
Acres - - - - - - - - - 5
For all Grants exceeding t,OOO Acres
For every 1,000 each Grant contains - - - - - 2 6
For a License of Occupation - - - - - - 5
Secretary’s Fees :
For every Grant, and passing the Seal of the Province, if under
One thousand Acres ' - - - - - - - s—.
Between 1,000 and 5,000 Acres - - - - - - —io
All above - - - - - - - - - - —l5
In Grants of Land, where the number of Proprietors shall exceed
20, each Right - - - - - - - 26
In Grants of Land, where the number of Proprietors shall not
exceed Twenty, the same as for Grants, in proportion to the
quantity of Land
For every Licence of Occupation of Land - - , - - 2 6
For every Grant of Land, from 1,000 to 20,000 Acres, —take for
the first One thousand Acres, Fifteen Shillings ; and for every
One thousand Acres more - - - - - 26
Fees to be taken by the Chief Surveyor of Land :
For every Lot under One hundred Acres - - - - 2 6
From 100 to 500 Acres - - - - - - - 5
Above 500 Acres - - - - - 7
Every Township, if above Twenty Rights, each Right - - 26
Auditor’s Fees :
For auditing every Grant - - - - - - 34
Register’s Fees:
For recording a Grant of Land, for or under 500 Acres - - 13
For recording a Grant of Land, from 500 to 1,000 Acres - - 2 6
For every 1,000 Acres, to the amount of 20, 000 - - -—— 6
For recording a Grant of a Township - - - - - l ——*


Appendix, No. 22.
COPY of the 78th Paragraph of Letter from Gov. Macquarie, dated 30 April 1810.
78 Par. As there are now' a considerable number of opulent merchants and others
residing in the town of Sydney, who would build handsome and permanent houses, if they
could obtain grants, instead of leases of the grounds; I respectfully submit, that I may
be permitted to use my discretion, in giving persons of this description permanent
grants to build upon, both here and in the, other parts of the territorj', Mr, Robert Campbell
and Mr. Simeon Lord, both opulent and respectable merchants, having already built very
spacious and elegant houses and warehouses in the town of Sydney, at a very great expense,
I have taken the responsibility on .myself, of promising to convert their leases into permanent
grants ; and I conceive it would be good policy to extend the same indulgence to all such'
other persons as are able and willing to erect substantial and handsome buildings within
the town. It will be my particular study to have edifices of all descriptions within the town
built on a regular plan, so as to combine convenience with ornament, and preserve the re-
gularity of the streets and houses.
Appendix, No. 23.
EXTRACT of a Letter from the Earl of Liverpool to Gov. Macquarie,
dated 2 6 July 1811.
I am not aware of any objection to the grant of lands in freehold, if encouragement will
be given thereby to the construction of more permanent .dwellings ; you will of course take
care that no land within the tow n is alienated, of which the interests of the Crown, or the
Public Service, are likely to require reservation.
Appendix, No. 24.
INSTRUCTIONS to the Masters of Convict Ships.
Sir, Transport Office.
It being absolutely necessary that the Ship under your command should be furnished
■with .a sufficient number of Scrapers, and every thing proper for beeping the vessel sweet
and clean, the better to preserve the health of the Convicts and Passengers during the
voyage to New South Wales; we desire that every requisite article of may be
laid in previously to the vessel’s sailing; and we inform you, that you are every day, when
the weather will admit of it, to cause a proportion of the Convicts to be brought upon
deck for the benefit of air, and see that their births be properly cleaned and ventilated. 'You
are carefully to note these particulars in your log-book, which you are to produce to the
Governor of New South Wales, upon the landing of the Convicts, on Oath, if required.
A Certificate must be produced at this Office upon the return of the Ship, setting forth
that the Governor is satisfied with your conduct, particularly as to what relates to the vic-
tualling and treatment of the Convicts on the voyage; and you will be recompensed for your
assiduity and humanity by a present, at the discretion of His Majesty’s Secretary of State.
On the other hand, for any neglect in performing these essential duties, you will be prosecuted
with the utmost severity.
We inclose, for your information, an account of the several articles which we have pro- '
vided and caused to be shipped on board the • for the use of
the Convicts and Passengers while on their voyage from this Country to New South Wales. ■
We are, Bcc.
(A Copy,)
Transport Office, ALEX. M'LEAY, Sec.
21st February 1812. ,
Appendix, No. 25.
INSTRUCTIONS to Masters of Convict Ships, relative to Victualling, &c.
By Captain Young, Inspecting Agent for Transports on the River.
Pursuant to Directions from the Commissioners for conducting His Majesty’s Transport
Service, you are hereby required and directed not to receive on board the Indefatigable Convict
Ship under your command, any Convicts that may be the least diseased, nor without a cer-
tificate of health, which they are to produce upon their arrival on board.
341. " The


RATION of Provisions which has been established for each Mess of six Male Convicts, for
seven days successively, on the passage to New South Wales.
Days of the Week.
C9 J?
v £
li
c
-M
« s
a «
o .3
la
3a v?
*« JS
"3 .
ir.
a =
M
, a U
2*5
fe —
K~
a.
cua*
CQ —
«-
CQ —
C5
o
w O
Sunday -----
20
4
8
1
I
- -
—
Monday - -
- -
- -
- -
3
1
2
4 oz.
- -
- -
2
o
Tuesday -
4
- -
- -
- -
- -
- -
J
1
-
—
Wednesday - - - -
- -
- -
6
3
i.
—,
Thursday _ - - -
4
1
2
—
Friday -----
•
8
- -
3
—
Saturday - - - -
- -
“ -
**
3
* “
4 oz
• "
2
a
The Convicts are to be victualled agreeably to the scheme inclosed, and the Passengers, at
two-thirds allowance of all species.
Transport Office, Deptford,
1812. (A Copy,)
ALEX. M'LEAY, Sec.
To the Master of the
- Convict Ship.
And the period for which it has been usual to put the same on board the ship transporting
the convicts, has been eight months ; besides which, each convict is allowed 120 gallons of
water and two gallons of wine during the voyage.
One of these Copies to be stuck up between decks, for the information of the convicts.
N. B. The Rice and Sugar on Mondays and Saturdays, is in lieu of one Stockfish.
Appendix, No. 26.
INSTRUCTIONS to the Surgeons of Convict Ships.
Sir, Transport Office,
We inclose to you Instructions for your guidance in tlie care of the convicts on board
the ship for New South Wales, and inform you, that you are to
beep a Diary during the voyage to that colony, not only relative to the sick and medicines
and the manner of treating the different disorders, but also to the daily number of convicts
admitted upon deck, to the times when the decks were scraped, the ship fumigated, the
births cleaned and ventilated, and all other circumstances which may either immediately or
remotely affect the health of the crew or convicts. No Reward will be given to you in case
of your omission to state these particulars. You are to shew your Diary to the Governor,
upon your arrival at New South Wales, for his examination, upon oath if required, and to
receive a certificate from him that you have done so, and that your duty has in every
respect been properly performed; on the production of which, you will be recompensed for
your assiduity and humanity by a present, at the discretion of His Majesty’s Secretary of
•State. On the other hand, any neglect in performing these essential duties, will not fail to
be properly noticed.
We also inclose for your information an account of the several articles which we have
provided and caused to be shipped on board the for the use of
the convicts and settlers while on their passage from this-Country to New South Wales.
We are, &c.
(A Copy,)
Transport Office, ALEX. M'LEAY, Sec.
21st February 1812.


Hospital Clothing and Furniture:
" Canvas jackets - -
- 6 number
For every
trovvsers ------
6 - -
ibo
Calico waistcoats ------
Men.
Cotton stockings ------
- 12 pairs
Linen pocket handkerchiefs - - - -
12 number
34i-
E e
Night
Appendix, No. 27.
INSTRUCTIONS to Surgeons having the care of Convicts on their voyage to
New South Wales.
1. You are to visit.the sick twice a day, or oftencr if necessary ,’and not only to administer
rsuch medical treatment as you may judge advisable, but to enquire minutely into their
•.management, with respect to their diet, nursing, and general comfort, and to give due
■directions on those points,
2. You are also to go daily among the people in health, and make a general inspection of
them, with a view to discover their complaints, and particularly to examine whether any
■of them are afflicted with fever, flux or scurvy, in order that early and effectual means
may be taken to stop the progress of their diseases,
3. As few complaints as possible, bsides those that are infectious, are to be conveyed to the
■hospital, which is chiefly intended for those labouring under fevers and fluxes, or such com-
' plaints as render confinement to bed necessary. Cases of incidental scurvy, and other slight
■or chronic complaints, need not be treated in the hospital, but supplied with such medicines
and diet in their own births as their cases may require.
4. When men with infectious complaints enter the hospital, you will take care to have
their clothes stripped off, their hair cut off’, and to cause them to be washed, if possible, in a
bathing tub ; or if this cannot be done, to have their hands, face and feet, well washed with
warm water and soap; the shirts, trowsers and stockings which they throw off, are to be
steeped for some time in cold water before they are handled and washed, and the coat and
waistcoat to be exposed to the fumes of sulphur, if this can be done, and if not, let them be •
exposed to the open air for two or three days before they are stow r ed away.
5. In regulating the diet of the sick, you are to employ not only the articles specially pro-
vided for the sick, but such articles of their provisions while in health, as may in your
judgment / be applicable to their cases, such as rice, oatmeal, flour, biscuits, raisins and wine,
which are to be demanded from the purser occasionally.
6. You are to take care that the utmost cleanliness be observed both with regard to the
hospital and the people’s persons, and that as much purity r of air and free ventilation be
studied as may be consistent with due warmth, dryness should also be particularly attended
to ; for which purpose, as well as for warmth, and for promoting a removal of air, an airing
stove with embers should frequently be carried to different parts of the hospital.
7. You are to keep a journal, wherein you are to specify the nature of the diseases which
fall under your care, also your methods of treatment of each case day by day, and to assign
the causes to which such diseases are, in your opinion, owing; together with the methods of
-preventing them, particularly if they are of an infectious nature. You are to deliver this
journal into the office of the Secretary of State for the home department, as a requisite
condition for receiving your wages.
8. You are to request the proper Officer to appoint from amongst the convicts in healtll»
such as are most fit and most worthy to act as attendants on the sick.
9. You are to be particularly careful to observe all due economy in the expenditure of
■medicines, necessaries, utensils and instruments; and on your arrival in New South Wales,
you are to deliver into the public stores there the remains of them. A- certificate to this
effect from the proper Officer, will also be considered as necessary for receiving your
wages. „
to. In case any remarks should occur to you, respecting the general management of
convicts in their passage, with a view still better to preserve their health, you wall com-
municate this to the Secretary, of State.
Appendix, No. 28.
Transport Office,
24th February 1812.
PROPORTION of STORES supplied for the use of One hundred Male Convicts.


Hospital Clothing, See. — continued.
iS i got-caps
-
- - -' -
1 2 number
Coarse towels
-
_ - _ - , -
13 - -
Spare bedding (besides
one
sol for each person cm-
barked)
-
-----
io sets
Sheets -
lo pairs
For every
Pillow-cases -
-
-----
io number
100 i,
Bed pan«, pewter -
-
- - - -
i number
Men.
Urinal -
Spitting-pot -
-
-----
i - -
i - -
Tea-kettles
-
-----
2 - -
Saucepans, of sorts
-
6 - -
Tin japanned drinking mugs
-
12 - -
Knives and forks
-
-----
12 pairs
Pails - -
2 number
Bathing tub
_ - _
, i - -
Close-stool pans and chairs
-
2 - -
For each/
Ship.'
Water purifier
-
- - - * -
1 - -
Charcoal for d“
-
-----
i hhd.about 2obush*.
Airing stove -
-
-----
i number
Ventilator
-
- - -
x - -
For every |
f Tar -
Fumigating Articles;
100 -<
Brimstone, crude -
-
30 lbs.
Men. (
L Vinegar
1 barrel, about 30galls.
For each J
f Fumigating; lamps
1 Oil for d°
-
2 number
Ship. I
1 Extra wicks -
L Oil of tar
Articles, in case of Sickness:
fTea - -
Sugar - - - - - - -
- 5° - '
Chocolate - - - -
6 -
Sago -
- 12 -
For each
Scotch barley - .
- 200 - ,
100
Ginger - ' - - - - - - , -
- h -
Men, j
Allspice
4 -
during 'J
Black pepper -
2 -
the
Lemon Juice (as prepared for the Navy) -
50 gallons
Voyage.
Portable soup - -
- 100 lbs.
Red port wine - - - - • -
5 dozen
Bedding, for each man - -
X set
W
A proportion of Medicines and Medical Stores.
Articles of Comfort:
For each f Mustard -------
Ship for Soap - - - - - - - -
100 Men,! Combs, large - -
during \ 13° - small -
the Razors ---------
Voyage. Hone and strap - - - - - -
- 300 -
18 number
- 18 - -
1 - -
For each
' Articles of Security:
'Jointed barrels with chains -
New strong oak blocks, with large stake and iron-work
complete --------
i oo pairs
2 number
Ship,
Hand hammers and helves - r
2 - -
for 100
Chisels - -- - - -- -
4 - - ■
Men.
Punches
4 - -
Extra rivets - - - - - - -
- - - - ' -
3 dozen
18 pairs


Clothing for use upon
Arrival:
•Blue "kersey jacket -
- - - too number
1)° waistcoat with sleeves
- too - -
Haven duck trowsers -
- 100 pairs
Checked shirts - - -
- 300 number
Yam stockings -
- - - 200 pairs
Shoos ------
- 100 - -
Woollen caps -
- - - 100 number
A proportion of Medicines for the Convicts, is
supplied from Apothecaries Hall.
Hospital Clothing and Furniture
;
Suits of bed-gowns and petticoats -
6 number
Cotton stockings - - - - -
J2 pairs
The remainder as for Male Convicts,
Articles of Comfort:
Common sugar ------
- i,3oo lbs.
Tea - - - - -
- 108 -
[3 lbs. Sugar, lb. tea per week, for each
mess of 6 women.
for 6 calendar months.]
Tin kettles, to serve as tea-pots - - - -
17 number
[one to every 6 women.]
Tin japanned half pint mugs, or horns
100 -
Mustard - - -
100 lbs.
•Soap - - - - - -
O
O
SO
Combs | Smah} ' “ '
36 number
Needles - - -
1,000 - -
Thread - -- -- -- -
20 lbs.
Scissars - -- -- -- -
10 pairs
Beds complete - - - - - -
100 set#
Child-bed Linen, for use during the Voyage.
ao Sets to every 100 women, for contingencies.—Each set to consist of the following Articles;
Shirts
Caps
--------- 4 - -
downs, white cotton - - - - - - 3 - -
Skirt,
1
CL
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
M 1
1
1
Swathe
Pilches
Blankets
ISapkins
- • - 2 - -
For use after Arrival:
Brown serge jackets -
D° - • petticoats - -
Linen shifts -------
Linen caps - - - - -
Yam stockings ------
Shoes - • - ’ -
• Neck handkerchiefs -
- ioo number
- too - -
200 - -
- ioo -
- ioo pairs
- ioo - -
- ioo number
Articles of Fumigation, and in case of sickness, the same as
for male Convicts.
A proportion of Medicines for the Convicts, is supplied from Apothecaries Hall.
PROPORTION for 100 Female Convicts.


Transport Office, "> An ACCOUNT of the number of Convicts who have died in the
5th May 1812. j Passage to New South Wales, since the year 1795 ; distinguishing
the names of the Ships in which the deaths have occurred :
Number of Convicts died
during the passage.
YEAR,
SHIPS NAMES.
\
Male.
Female.
*795-
•Marquis Cornwallis - - - - -
11
Indispensible - - - - - - - -
2
1796.
•Britannia - -- -- -- -
io
1
Ganges - - - - - -
J 3
—
*797-
Barwell - - - - - - -
9
—
Britannia - - - - - - -
2
1798.
•Minerva - -- -- -- -
3
—
Hillsborough ----- -
94
6
Friendship -
. *9
—
*Luz St. Ann --------
15
—
1799-
Speedy - - - - - - - -
3
Royal Admiral - - -
43
■ —
1800.
Earl Cornwallis - - -
. 2 7
8
x8oi.
Minorca - - - - - -
2
—
•Hercules - - -
44
—
•Rolla - -
8
. —
■
Canada - - - - - - -
a
*—
•Atlas - - - - - - - -
61
2
1S03.
Experiment .- - - - - - -
2
1805.
William Pitt - -' - - -
3
Fortune ---------
3
—
Alexander - - - - - -
1
—
1806.
Sydney Gove --------
3
Duke of Portland - - - - -
9
—
1807.
Speke - - -
1
1808.
Admiral GamUier - - - - - - -
3
T-
•Boyd' - -
6
•Indispensable -
X
1809.
Ann ----------
3
—
18,10.
Indian - . - - - - ■ -
7
—
Total -
3 8 7
4°
• Irish Convicts.
Appendix, No. 29.


Transport Office, \ An ACCOUNT of the number
57th February 1812. j Wales, since the year 1795 ;
they were conveyed from this
of Convicts landed in New South
distinguishing the Ships by which
Country.
Number of Convicts
landed.
YEAR.
SHIPS NAMES.
r~
'
Male.
Female.
1795.
Sovereign -
1
Marquis Cornwallis
-
-
-
152
70
Irish.
Indispensable -
131
1796.
Britannia -
-
-
-
. 134
43
Irish.
Ganges
-
-
-
-
iqo
1797*
Barwell
-
-
-
-
287
Britannia -
94
1798.
M inerva -
-
-
-
-
162
26
Irish.
Hillsborough
-
-
-
-
206
Friendship
-
-
-
-
1X4
—
Irish.
Luz St. Ann
-
-
-
-
126
24.
Irish.
1799-
Speedy
50
Royal Admiral -
-
-
-
-
2.57
'
1800.
Earl Cornwallis -
-
-
-
-
166
87
1801.
Minorca -
-
-
-
-
99
Hercules -
-
- -
9*
*5
Irish.
Rolla
-
-
-
-
118
37
Irish.
' Canada
-
-
-
m
101
Nile
-
-
-
-
' -
- .
9 s
Atlas
-
-
m m
-
88
26
Irish.
Atlas
-
-•
m «
m
194
. Irish.
Coromandel
-
-
-
-
136
Perseus
-
-
•
-
‘ 112
1803.
Experiment
-
-
•> *
m
2
136
Coromandel
-
-
-
200
1805.
Tellicherry
at
-
-
-
125
35
Irish.
William Pitt
- ,
•
-
-
1
ll7
Fortune -
-
-
-
-
239
Alexander
m m
m
14
48
1806.
Sydney Cove
-
-
-
-
4 Boys
106
Duke of Portland
-
-
• m
m
101
1807.
Speke
-
-
-
-
' -
-
97
■*
1808.
Admiral Gambier
-
-
--
197
iEolus
79
Boyd
-
-
-
-
132.
r ,
Experiment
-
-
-■
-
-■
60 ■
Irish.
Indispensable -
-
-
-
61
1809.
Ann - -
-
-
-
■ 197
1
1 Canada
121
'
1810.
Indian
-t
-
192
'
r Providence
-
•
139
40-
Irish.
'
' Friends.
100
Admiral Gambier
-
-
-
-
soo
,
1811.
Guildford -
-
-
-
-
200
— 4
N.B.
The ; Ships distinguished in Italics, have saile
d with tht
: number
>f convictr
expressed against them respectively; but no returns have been received of"
their arrival at Hew South* Wales.
ALEX. M e
LEAY, Sec r ,
Male.
Female.
1802.
* Glatton’ -
m- <•*
271
130'
1803.
♦‘Calcutta -
-
-
-
-
292
—
* 4 These Shi
ps belong to the King’s
Service,- and were empl
oyed to cc
nvey the above
number of convicts to New South Wales, and to return with timber, the produce of that’
Colony.
-
34 1 *
F f
Appendix, No. 30.


Appendix, No. 31.
No. 1.—EXTRACT of a Letter from Lord Castleragh to Governor Macquarie,
dated 14th May 1809.
It has been represented to me, that upon the arrival of a ship with female convicts in
New South Wales, the unfortunate Females have been given into the possession of such of
the inhabitants, free settlers, and convicts, indiscriminately, as made a demand for them from
the Governor. If a practice so extraordinary and disgraceful has not been abolished, you
will by no means suffer it to continue ; and lam to desire } r ou will take the proper means for
having the female convicts upon their arrival kept separate, till they can be properly dis-
tributed in such a manner as may best encourage attention to industry and character.
Appendix, No. 32.
No. 2. —COPY of the 33d Paragraph of Governor Macquarie’s Letter, dated 30th April 1810.
33 Pae. In the additional Instructions furnished me by your Lordship, a more just and
equal distribution of the male and female convicts is recommended on their first arrival in
this country; and the shameful practice of giving the female convicts indiscriminately to
such as made a demand of them, is very justly and properly prohibited. lam sorry to say
that these unfortunate females have been in general very improperly disposed of heretofore,
which has led to great depravity of manners, and most vicious habits among the lower
orders of the people. In future I shall take care, agreeably to your Lordship’s directions, to
keep the female convicts separate, till they can properly be distributed among the inhabitants,
in such manner as they may best derive the advantages of industry and good character.
Appendix, No. 33.
EXTRACTS of a Dispatch from Governor Macquarie to Viscount Castlereagh; dated
Sydney, New South Wales, 30 Ap r il 1810.
so. The Ship Anne arrived here from England on the twenty-seventh day of February,
having a detachment of the 73d regiment, and one hundred and ninety-seven male convicts
on board; they were well treated on the voyage, and arrived in good health. Male convicts
are much wanted to carry on the agriculture of the country, and 1 have distributed the
greater number by the Anne, among the settlers here. I sent sixty of them to the Derwent
for the use of the settlers there, reserving only a few who are mechanics for the public works
at Sydney.
21. The situation of the Colony requires that as many male convicts as possible should be
"sent hither, the prosperity of the country depending on their numbers; whilst on the
contrary, female convicts are as great a drawback as the others are beneficial.
34. As yet no complaint has been made to me by any of the settlers, respecting the high
rate of wages given to such convict servants as are allowed them by Government; but if it
should appear on further enquiry, that the wages hitherto allowed are too burthensome
to the settlers, I shall frame such new regulations on that head as may appear ad-
visable.
39. Hitherto it has been the practice to appropriate the whole of the duties and customs
collected at this Port, and the others of the Colony, to what was termed the Female Orphan
School, andGaolFund; instead of continuing this system, I have deemed itadvisable, as better
adapted to the improvement of the Colony in general, and of the town of Sydney in particular,
to divide the money so collected into two distinct funds, naming pne of them “ The Police
Fund,” and the other the “ Orphan Fund.” I have ordered three-fourths of all the customs
and duties to be appropriated to the Police. Fund, and the remaining fourth to the Orphan
Fund, each under the management of distinct trustees: out ofthe former is to be defrayed
the expense of the Jail and Police establishments, the erection of wharfs, quays, bridges,
and


and tbe making and repairing of streets and roads within the limits of the town of Sydney :
out of the latter is to be defrayed the expense of the Female Orphan School establishment,
and also that of the other charity schools intended to be established here and at the other
principal settlements in the Colony. Increasing the duties on spirits to three shillings per
gallon, and raising the license to publicans, I nope will afford me sufficient funds to carry
these measures into complete effect.
76. I have been myself induced to grant more free pardons than I could have wished;
but in order to enable a number of women, who had lived for many years with and had
children by soldiers of the toad regiment, to marry those men, and accompany them
home. I judged it expedient, with that view, to grant them free pardons, as it relieved the
government from the expense of victualling and supporting those unfortunate women and
their children. I have heretofore renewed very few grants of land, and those few, with the
free and conditional pardons I have granted, 1 transmit herewith regular returns of to your
Lordship.
94. I have taken upon myself to adopt a new line of conduct towards those men who
had been originally sent out to this country as convicts, but who by long habits of industry
and total reformation of manners, had not only become respectable, but by many degrees
the most useful members of the community ; conceiving that emancipation, when united
with rectitude and long tried good conduct, should lead a man back to that rank in society
which he had forfeited, and do away, in as far as the case will admit, all retrospect of former
bad conduct. This appears to me to be the greatest inducement than can be held out
towards the reformation of the manners of the inhabitants, and I think it is consistent with
the gracious and humane intentions of His Majesty and his Ministers in favour of this class
of people. lam aware, it is a measure which must be resorted to with great caution and
delicacy, but I am hopeful that in time it may be extended beyond the line within which I
must restrict myself for the present
Appendix, No. 34.
EXTRACT of a Dispatch from Governor Macquarie, to Viscount Castlereagh;
dated Sydney, New South Wales, 27th October 1810.
2. The Canada transport brought hither one hundred and twenty-one female convicts,
all of whom arrived in good health, and had been well treated by the Commander and
Surgeon of that ship during the voyage, one only having died on the passage, who, accord-
ing to the Surgeon’s Report, was in ill health wnen she was embarked.
3. The greater part of these convicts, soon after their arrival, were assigned over as
indented servants, for the space of three years, to the different settlers, who were on the
occasion required to execute bonds for the retaining them for that period in their respective
services, and for their humane and proper treatment of them. - Out of the entire number
of one hundred and twenty-one, there are now only thirty-two remaining undisposed of;
and they are usefully employed in the Government Cloth Manufactory, some time since
established at Paramatta.
14. tam rejoiced to have it in my ppwer to inform your Lordship, that there is already,
within the short period of my government, a very apparent change for the better in the
religions tendency and morals of all the different classes of this community. Persons of all
religious persuasions and descriptions attend divine worship on Sundays, and I have all the
convicts of both sexes, here and at the different Dependencies, mustered every Sunday
morning, and marched to church in their best clothes, under the direction of their respective
Overseers and Superintendents.
15. With a view to the decent education and improvement of the rising generation, I
have already established several Schools at Head Quarters and the subordinate Settlements,
which I trust will not fail of being attended with very desirable effects.


At{ ACCOUNT of the. Annual Expense, of the Transportation of Convicts to New
ments, as far as the same can be made out, since the year 1797, according to the form
26th June 1798.
YEARS.
Expense
of the Transportation
of Convicts.
Expense of
Victualling the
Convicts, and the
Settlement from hence.
Expense of Clothing,
Tools,
and sundry Articles.
Blits, drawn by
• the Governors,
Commissaries, &c.
fur the purchafe of
Provisions, &c.
for the use of the
Colony, and
paid at the Treasury ;
together with
sundry small Sums.
. £.
s.
d.
; £■
s.
d i
£. s. d.
£•
s. d.
1798
-
- -
38,989-
J 9-
ii.
22,033.
8.
4f.
4,639. 0. 9.
26,936.
ii.' 8.
1799
-
- -
7,671.
*9-
11.
6,568,
2.
74-
-
43,535-
18. 5 |.
1800.
-
-
8,276.
5-
10.
‘ 13,834-
3-
3-
3- 5>
. 5 2 ,39°-
7- 5i-
1801
-
- -
; 61,260.
15-
8.
12,125.
17-
il
7,187. 16- 0.
17,267.
1. ok.
1802
-
- -
i,6u.
2 5-
10.
93, 2 7 2 -
10.
oh
10,786, 7. 7.
18,239.
17- 9-
•
1803.
t
-
U5.915-
14.
9-
16,609.
7-
5-
13,790. 3- ’ll-
43,312.
12. 1,
J804
-
246;
12.
0.
-
-
-
-
i 19,604.
16. 6|.
-
,30,i9 6 -
7-
11.
; 9,510-
1 ft-
Of:
20,116. 13. 11.
; 3 2 ,383-
9. ih
1806
- -
.13,588.
2,
1.
36,781.
16.
6|.
6,504. 4. 8-
• 14,290.
2. lof
1807
-
- -
, 7»i55-
14.
7-
21,772.
7-
9-
14,504. 15. 1.
3U499-
12. 3.
1.808
-
'32,271.
6.
5-
; 35,875-
14,
10,
-
i, 25,012.
3. 81
1809
-
- -
1 19,956.
9-
8.
11,000.
13-
10.
-
11 49,629.
12. 3-
i8ip_
-
40,766.
11.
4-
, 18,136.
7-
iqi.
1,967. 11. 4.
72,690,
6. io|.
1811
-
-
5, 6 37-
5-
7-
! 55,ii4-
0.
5h
20,078, 12. 2.
*21,8831
11. oj.
this column, are those drawn
the 11th March 1811.
n each jear, and, the last sum
■ j ' ’
* The Bills included in
does nut .include any Bills drawn subsequent to
Whitehall Treasury Chambers,
29 July 1812.
Appendix, No. 35.
COPY of a Letter from R. Peel, Esq. to Governor Macquarie; dated 12th March 1812.*
Sir, Downing Street, 12th March 1812.
I am directed by the Earl of Liverpool to acquaint you, that the bearer of this Letter,
Mr. W. Hovell, lias been recommended to his Lordship as a proper person to proceed as a
settler to the Colony under your Government.
You will perceive from the enclosed Memorial, that he proposes to carry out property
with him to the amount of £. 500. And lam directed, by his Lordship, to desire that you
will grant to him an allotment of land, corresponding to the amount of capital which he is
able to satisfy you he has the means of commanding for its cultivation, together with any
other encouragement which has usually been given to deserving free settlers.
I have the honour, &c.
Gov. Macquarie, R. PEEL.
&c. &c. &c.
Appendix, No, 37.


South Wales and its Dependencies, and of the Total Annual Expense of those Settle-
of Appendix (0) to the Report of the Committee of Finance presented to that House,
Expense of
Expense of Mi-
Expense of
TOTALS.
YEARS.
Civil Establishment
litary Establishment.
Marine Establishment
£•
s.
d.
£•
s.
<7.
£■
S.
d.
£.
s.
d.
6,157-
2.
0.
1 9>T 2 S-
15-
4-
3,032.
8.
7-
111,514.
6.
7i-
- - -
1798
6,016.
15-
0.
16,481,
8.
9-
-
-
80,274.
4.
83.
« W M
1799
6,309.
16.
8.
18,953-
9-
9-
1,107.
4-
5-
110,235.
10.
9^-
~ -
l800
7,146.
0.
0.
30,575-
19-
3-
-
-
125,563.
9-
1.
- - -
iSOl
5,908.
0.
O.
19,591.
19-
4-
-
-
149,410.
10.
64.
- - ~
1802
9, 12 4-
17-
6.
16,222.
18.
7-
1,419-
5-
4-
116,394.
19-
7-
- - -
1803
10,049.
4-
5-
15,386.
6.
6.
1,232.
0.
0.
46,518.
i9-
5i-
~ "
1804
7,225.
12.
6.
15-383-
18.
7-
3,640.
3-
O.
118,457.
4-
of.
-
1805
12,819.
9-
4i-
19,982.
9-
1,
1,232.
0.
0.
105,198,
4-
7i-
- - -
l806
12,705.
O.
0.
30,663.
6.
1.
1,232.
0.
0,
119,53 2 -
15-
9-
- - -
* M
CO
0
•vj
11,165-
6.
3-
25,101.
4-
8.
2,058.
5- ’
8.
131,484.
1.
63-
- * -
1808
»5» 1 34-
10.
of.
26,376.
16.
8.
1,232,
0.
0,
124,230.
2.
53-
• • •
1809
12,268.
*5-
0,
2 5-357-
7-
0.
1,232.
0.
0.
172,328.
19.
4f-
- - ' -
1810
i3>3°8.
15-
0.
24,312.
2.
11.
03
4*.
GO
l 7-
9-
143,783-
4.
nf.
* m *
1811
Appendix, No. 36.
COPY of Answer given to all Persons applying to go out as Settlers to
New South Wales.
Mr. Peel is directed by the Earl of Liverpool to acquaint in answer
to his application for permission to proceed to New South Wales, that no persons are
allowed to go out as free settlers to that Colony, unless they can prove themselves to be
possessed of sufficient property to establish themselves there, without the assistance of
Government, and who can produce the most satisfactory testimonials and recommendations
from persons of known respectability.
Appendix, No. 37.
R°. ’WHARTON.
G g


Appendix, No. 38.
ANSWERS to Queries, for the Information of the Committee on Transportation.
Question 1.
In what manner are sentences of trans-
portation executed in Ireland ; upon what
.principles of reference to age, sex, character,
crimes, or term of transportation, are those
selected who are actually sent to New South
Wales; and in what manner arc those dis-
posed of, and employed, whom it is thought
expedient not to transport?
Answer 1.
■Reports are made to Government by the
Inspector General of Prisons, containing
the names, ages, sex, characters, crimes and
sentences of all Convicts remaining- in the
Gaols.
Corresponding lists, together with all peti-
tions addressed to the Lord Lieutenant in
their behalf, are sent to the respective Judges
before whom they were tried, requiring their
several opinions, whether sentence may be
remitted or mitigated. “
The several Sheriffs are ordered to have the Convicts examined by
a Physician, lest persons infected with epidemic disease, or such de-
■bility as would endanger life, should be transmitted to the general
depots at Dublin or Cork for transportation ; there is also an eminent
Physician who attends at Cork, during the embarkation, to see them
xlothed, cleansed and selected, that none unfit by age or infirmity
should proceed on the voyage.
In respect to age, very old persons of either sex, unless they are
■habitual offenders, or persons guilty of atrocious crimes, are seldom
transported. They are detained in the respective Prisons after the
embarkation, and generally, with the Lord Lieutenant’s approbation,
are liberated, on giving security for future good behaviour.
Of the female sex, noted offenders are selected for transportation;
the most youthful of that class are fiist chosen.
The proportion of males to the number of females transported, it
about three to one.
Males and females of previous good characters, if approved by
Government, are sometimes pardoned, on giving security for future
good behaviour.
Some, selected for their industrious habits, are, with the Lord
Lieutenant’s approbation, sent to Penitentiaries.
Persons who have received sentence of death, when respited, are
almost universally transported for life.
A few primarily receive a similar judgment, and a few are trans-
ported for the term of fourteen years.
The greater number are they who receive sentence for seven years.
A few male Convicts, when their cases are of a favourable nature,
if well recommended and approved, are permitted to enter the Army
or Navy,
Question 2.
Can it be stated, with any degree of ac-
curacy, what proportion those actually trans-
ported, bear to those who are sent to peni-
tentiary houses ?
Answer 4.
A penitentiary for boys guilty of petty
larceny and misdemeanors, was first esta-
blished in the year 1706 in the city of
Dublin.
Three others for adult Convicts were
established about two years ago in temporary
buildings in the Metropolis.
In this incipient state they must be considered experimental, no
adequate building being yet completed; there is one on a considerable
scale now building, placed under the direction of the Governors of the
House of Industry. A large sum was presented at last November
Term by the Grand Jury of the city of Dublin, for erecting a
Bridewell and Penitentiary ort an extensive and approved plan.
Since the establishment of those temporary buildings, several ap-
proved Convicts, especially females, have been transmitted to them,
and are generally usefully employed.
Within the same period two transportations have occurred, one in
December 1810, the other in May 1812.
The proportion of those transported to those sent to Penitentiaries
in that time, are nearly as two and a quarter to one.
Hovr


Question 3.
How' are the Convicts disposed of till
embarked: how are they conveyed to the
1)1 aces of embarkation: under what regul-
ations, and at what periods are transports
provided ?
Answer 3,
Convicts are detained in the County Gaols,
unless those Prisons are crowded or insecure,
until Government directs their removal.
When the Sheriffs receive the order for
transmitting the Convicts, those from the
Gaols in the northern, western, and counties
adjoining Dublin, are brought on open
carriages, guarded to the Prison of that
county; here they are again c ammed by an
| 7 J J
intelligent Physician, lest any should be afflicted with acute disease,
or infectious disorder. Such as are in a fit state for transportation are
then put on board vessels appointed to take them to Cork, where the
Botany Bay ship is stationed to receive them.
The Convicts m the south of Ireland are sent in like manner to the
Gaol of the city of Cork, from whence having also undergone a second
medical examination, they are conveyed by water to the Port (Cove)
and embarked as the others.
There is no fixed period for transporting Convicts, that depending
on the state of the Prisons, but they are generally sent off about twice
in three years.
Ships of about 600 tons are usually pro-
vided at each period of exportation.
The numbers embarked are generally about
150 males and 50 females in each ship.
Regulations directed by the Lord Lieu-
tenant are, that each convict be provided
with two full suits of clothing; the same
allowance of provisions be given as to the
seamen and soldiers. Tea and sugar is
allowed to females on the passage. There is
an agent appointed at Cork to provide all
those necessary matters. Besides the final
examination of the Physician, under whose direction medicines are
chosen, an approved medical assistant accompanies them on the
passage. .
The good effects of this compassionate consideration for those
unfortunate exiles, are exemplified at the termination of the voyage,
not more in the general good health in which the Irish Convicts are-
landed, than in the superior condition of their clothing, stores. Sec.
T , Q „ FORSTER ARCHER, Insp' Gen'
Ju, y 8 > 1812 ~ of Prisons in Ireland.


REPORT
FROM THE
SELECT COMMITTEE
ON
TRANSPORTATION.
34-1.
Ordered, by The House of Commons, to be printed
10 July 1812,
