

REPORT
ON THE
Montessori Methods
of Education.
BY
M. M. SIMPSON,
LECTURER IN KINDERGARTEN AT THE SYDNEY TEACHERS’
COLLEGE, AND MISTRESS OF THE KINDERGARTEN
PRACTISING SCHOOL AT BLACKFRIARS.
77013—A
SYDNEY, W A. GULLICK. GOVERNMENT PRINTER.—I9I4.


REPORT
ON THE
Montessori Methods
of Education.
BY
M. M. SIMPSON,
LECTURER IN KINDERGARTEN AT THE SYDNEY TEACHERS’
COLLEGE, AND MISTRESS OF THE KINDERGARTEN
PRACTISING SCHOOL AT BLACKFRIARS.
77013—A
SYDNEY, W A. GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER. —1914.




INDEX OF SUBJECTS.
PA OK
World-wide Interest ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1
Dr. Montessori and her Method ... ... ... ... ... . ... ... S
Leading Principle of the Montessori Method ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
The Equipment and Didactic Material ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
Montessori Discipline ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
The Montessori Movement in England ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22
The Jews’lnfant School, Buckle-street, Whitechapel ... ... ... ... 23
The Montessori Experiment at Blackfriars, Sydney ... ... ... ... ... 25
Abolition of Class Work and substitution of Individual Teaching ... ... ... 27
Retardation and its Remedy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31
Introduction of the Montessori Method into Small Schools ... ... ... ... 33
The Teaching of Writing and Reading .. ... ... ... ... ... ... 34
Revised Furniture ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 35
Smaller Classes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 38
Larger Class Rooms... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 39
More Liberty for the Teacher ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 40
Mistresses of Departments should be free from a Class ... ... ... ... 40
More Open-air Schools .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 40
The Cost of the Montessori Material ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 41
Defects of the Montessori System ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42
Concluding Remarks ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 44


The Staff of the Blackfriars Kindergarten Practising School, at which the Experiments in Montessori Methods were conducted.


The Montessori Method.
World-wide Interest.
N Rome, at the beginning of this year, there were gathered
together from every part of the earth more than eighty
students, intent upon gaining some first-hand knowledge
of the Montessori System of Education, which has
been, and still is, engaging the attention of the whole
educational world. The eighty students comprising the
class came from such widely-distant parts of the earth as
China, South America, Japan, Canada, India, Russia,
Holland, Sweden, Germany, France, Spain, South Africa,
Great Britain, the United States, and Australia. Many in the
class were sent by Governments, Education Departments, or
Colleges, and almost all, whether sent officially or whether
there of their own accord, were teachers of distinction in their
own country.
Of the private students attending the class, not a few had
made enormous sacrifices. Many spent the hoarded savings of years
on the course, and one woman even went the length of mort-
gaging her home in order to raise
In addition to the class of
the necessary funds,
regular students, each
of whom
months’
expenses of
constant
paid £5O for the four-
course, over and above
travel and board, a
stream of visitors from
Learning to Read, Various stages in Montessori.
every part of the globe continued to pour into Rome. These c omprised
Cabinet Ministers, doctors of medicine, doctors of philosophy, university


professors, principals of schools and colleges, and a large number of ordinary
fathers and mothers, anxious to lay hold of this new thing for the benefit of
their own offspring. If Dr. Montessori had done nothing else but receive
visitors, she could not possibly have seen all the people who were seeking
information as to her methods.
What was the cause of this widespread interest? From what source did
it arise? And how were the ideas spread all over the earth?
The cause —in Dr. Montessori’s own words—
“ A small school of children started five years ago in a squalid
quarter of Rome, where in mean streets and in a few houses 10,000
delinquents without fixed dwelling-places were huddled together, and
where almost all the inhabitants were illiterate. In a tenement house
of working men, forty or fifty little children from 3 to 6 years
The “Naming” Game.
old received those who went to see them, showed a remarkable
activity new to their existence, and made progress superior to other
children, in that at the age of 4% to 5 years they wrote better than the
children in the elementary schools. This is the cause.”
There were no great institutions, no demonstrations, no great w T ork of
propaganda, by which the Montessori doctrine might be spread all over the
world, but people came and saw and believed, and went forth to preach the
new gospel of liberty for the children.


The first training course for teachers was held in 1909, in Baroness
Franehetti's house, at Citta di Costello. Teachers came to this course from
every part of Italy. Then the Queen Mother became interested, and arranged
A “ Garden ” Party.
a course for Italian nurses, besides founding the school in the Via Giusti.
About the same time the Syndic of Rome instituted a training course for
teachers in municipal schools.
Another proof of interest in the method were the schools which sprang
up everywhere—in Italy, in Switzerland, in Paris, in England, in America,
in the Argentine Republic, in India, in Syria, and in Australia.
Such, briefly, is what I found upon arriving
in Rome in January of this year. I was fortu-
nate enough to get in tfmch with Dr. Montessori
immediately upon my arrival, partly through the
good offices of Colonel the Hon. James Allen,
Minister for Education in New Zealand, and
partly through the doctor’s interest in the
working of the experiment in Sydney. I was at
once invited to attend the lectures as the doctor’s
guest, and without fee. This I regard as
a compliment to the State of New South
Wales, and not in any way as a personal
matter.
During my stay in Rome every oppor-
tunity was given me of inquiring into the
method in the schools there, and much
valuable information on various points
was given me by the doctor herself,
and by her friends, the Marchesa di
Viti di Marco, the Donna Maraini
Guerriere-Gonzaga, and other Italian
ladies.
“Good-bye, Teacher!”


The American women attending the class were mostly well-known kinder-
gartners. I saw a great deal of these women, and we were able to discuss
the method very fully, and to compare it with kindergarten methods in
America and Australia. Not the least interesting and profitable of my
experiences were the conversations and interchange of ideas with these keen,
practical, far-seeing, enthusiastic Americans.
After seeing the schools at Milan, Germany, and Great Britain, I returned
through Rome at the invitation of Dr. Montessori, in order to see the result
of her experiment with older children. Of this experiment I am not yet
at liberty to speak. It has been shown only to a few privileged persons.
The doctor's own book on it will be out shortly. So much, however, I
may say: that it fully bears out the wisdom of her method, and shows, with
children from 7 to 10 or 11, the marvellous results that follow the application
of the master principle—self-education through liberty. Much valuable
didactic material for use with these older children has been devised by
Dr. Montessori. By means of this material grammatical rules and the use
of correct and exact language become an absorbing play, the solving of
intricate geometrical problems a game, and number work a delightful and
fascinating occupation.
As showing the world-wide interest in Dr. Montessori’s system of educa-
tion, the following facts may be enumerated: —■
(а) Newspaper and magazine articles in every tongue.
(б) Students and visitors from all parts of the world.
(c) Montessori schools in Italy, Switzerland, France, England, Argen-
tine Republic, India, Syria, Japan, America, and other places.
( d) Translations of the “Montessori Method” into English, French,
German, Spanish, Roumanian, Polish, and Russian.
(e) The great demand for the book. Five thousand copies of the first
English edition were sold in four days, and the book was in its
sixth edition in five months.
(/) The fact that Dr. Montessori has not only stirred the whole educa-
tional world profoundly, but that she has also stirred and moved to
an extraordinary degree the world of ordinary men and women —
a world that does not, as a rule, trouble its head overmuch about
i educational methods.
DR. MONTESSORI AND HER METHOD.
Who is Dr. Montessori, and in what way is she qualified to speak with
authority on things educational?
Dr. Montessori is an only child. Her mother died at the end of last year,
and her father is still alive. As a girl she decided on a medical career, and


■was the first woman to take the degree of doctor of medicine in the University
of Rome. After taking her degree, she was engaged as assistant physician
to the Psychiatric Clinic at Rome, and it was while occupied in this work
that her attention was drawn to the matter of defective children. She soon
came to the conclusion that “ mental deficiency presented chiefly a peda-
gogical rather than mainly a medical problem,” and so convincingly did
she put forth her view on this subject before a conference of teachers and
educationists at Turin, in 1898, that the then Minister for Education,
Guido Barcelli, asked her to deliver to the teachers of Rome a course of
lectures on the education of feeble-minded children.
The school established was composed of children who, in the elementary
schools, were considered hopelessly deficient. Later on all the idiot children
from the insane asylums in Rome were also brought together. In this school
Dr. Montessori herself, in addition to training students, actually taught
•every day for two years.
Her experience with these defective children soon led her to the further
conclusion that the methods used with defectives might with normal children
bring about self-education. Her own words are: —“ From the very begin-
ning of my work with deficient children —1898-1900—I felt that the methods
which I used had in them
to the instruction of idiots. I
contained educational principles
in use, so much so, indeed,
an inferior mentality -vould he
Little by little I
similar methods applied to
develop or se h , free their
vellous and surprising
nothing peculiarly limited
believed, indeed, that they
more rational than those
that through their means
able to grow and develop,
became convinced that
normal children would
personality in a mar-
way.”
Nature Study at the Fountain.
In order to better qualify herself for work with normal children, Dr. Mon-
tessori resigned her position at the school for defectives and re-entered the
University of Rome as a student of philosophy. She followed the course in
■experimental psychology, which had just been established in Italian univer
77013 —b


sities, and visited the primary schools for the purpose of studying the children
and the pedagogical methods in use in educating them. Apart from her
researches in anthropology, which afterwards led to the teaching of pedagogic
anthropology in the University of Rome, Dr. Montessori does not appear to
have found much field for child in the elementary schools. How
indeed could she, since the first pre-requisite of any scientific investigation—
a prolonged scrutiny of the natural habits of the subject—was impossible ?'
She found just what we still find in schools all over the world —“ Rows of
immobile little children nailed to their stationary seats, and forced to give-
over their natural birthright of activity to a well-meaning, gesticulating,
explaining, always-fatigued and always-talking teacher.”
After six years of philosophic study, thought, and research, Dr. Montessori’s
opportunity came to her. Signor Edoardo Talamo had solved the problem
of the housing of the poor by the establishment of the model tenements of
the “Bene Stabili” Society, of which he was Director-General. There
were at this time 400 of these model tenements in Rome. But the clean
halls of the tenements, and the smooth walls and handsome stairways, were
scratched and defaced by the large numbers of little children below school
age, who had of necessity to be left alone all day by their mothers, whom
grinding poverty compelled to go forth to help earn bread for the family.
Signor Talamo believed that the money spent in repairing the damage done
by these little ones would be more profitably expended in providing a house
for them. He accordingly set about building a children’s house in each
tenement block. This meant that a grown person would have to be in this
“ children’s house ” to look after the children, and hence it came about that
Dr. Montessori was asked to take the directing of the various “ children’s
houses ” in the tenements. Here was the laboratory she wanted ready to
her hand, and it was in these schools that the methods which have made her
name famous throughout the educational world were first tried. The first
Montessori school was established in January, 1907, in a large tenement
house in the Quarter San Lorenzo. Mow Montessori schools are springing
up everywhere in every civilised land, and the Montessori spirit is leavening
the whole educational thought and practice of the world.
THE LEADING PRINCIPLE OF THE MONTESSORI
METHOD.
Self-Education through Liberty.
That freedom should be the basis of all education is certainly no new
thought. All educationists have preached it, but it has remained for Dr.
Montessori to actually put it into practice. One very simple concept of
freedom is that children should be able to move about freely; yet where,
except in our kindergarten rooms, has this concept been carried out? In


every country visited, little children of 5 and 6, and in many cases of even
such tender age as 3 or 4, were to be seen sitting in rows in fixed desks, for
all the world like neatly-arranged specimens in cases. They listened with
preternaturally old, wise faces to a teacher who talked to them almost inces-
santly. When they moved about they did so by order or direction of the
teacher. In very few instances did) I actually see a child do anything that
was not ordered or suggested by the teacher. The only movement permitted
in most schools is the action song between lessons, and this usually exercises,
or makes a pretence of exercising, the upper part of the body only. Occasion-
ally children are made to stand up, and there is an attempt at movement
of the lower limbs, but this is so seldom done that it is not worth consider-
ing. Even if done between every lesson it is worthless, since the few move-
ments given are in the nature of drill, and devoid of that feeling of joy
Developing the Sensory Organs by Montessori Methods.
without which no exercise for little children is truly beneficial. Over and
over again the pitiful spectacle was seen of young children, whose every
instinct is movement, cooped up in desks for five or six hours a day. Often,
indeed, in the best schools individual children, or groups of children, were
called out to the front of the class to do something, but this was always by
order of the teacher, and was so infrequent and confined- to so few individuals
in the class that it is scarcely worth mentioning.


The pathetic part of all this is that infant teachers all over the world are,
almost without exception, the most human and motherly of women. They
love the children in their schools with tenderness and devotion; and this
very love and devotion makes the atmosphere of the schools so sunny and
pleasant that one is rendered almost blind to the lack of liberty. Most of
the teachers with whom I talked were quite aware of the lack of freedom;
but they did not see how to remedy it, and they themselves were hampered
and bound by regulations, dogmas, and traditions. The idea of liberty is
so new to most that anarchy is predicted if the principle is put into practice.
Yet in Rome, and in other Montessori schools visited, there was no anarchy.
In these schools children move freely about the room, choose what they wish
to do, and continue doing it for as long or as short a period as they
please, without interference from the teacher. Instead of anarchy there is
vigorous life, joy in the work, and the order and harmony that joy and
freedom engender. Indeed, I have never anywhere seen more diligent and
orderly children than those of the Montessori schools in Rome and elsewhere.
But the physical freedom permitted in the Montessori schools is only the
outward sign of the inward freedom of mind and spirit which prevails. Not
the least important part of the Montessori method is the fact that the child
is freed from the teacher. In other words, the liberty given makes self-
education possible. Teachers of the present day, no matter how kind and
well-meaning they may be, resemble greatly the despotic kings of old, who
forced men to think as they thought, to believe as they believed, and to
act as they directed. In many cases, no doubt, the despots of old were kind-
hearted men, actuated by the best of intentions, but keeping people in a
state of slavery nevertheless. They feared to grant liberty on the plea
that people would misuse it. We teachers are pedagogical despots, in that
we force children to think as we think. We pin the child into a desk that
we have designed for him, and we pour our thoughts into him. We stamp
ourselves upon him with all our defects, limitations, and prejudices. We
endeavour to do what Tolstoy declares is “ sterile, illegitimate, and impos-
sible,” namely, to mould our pupils into set forms. And then we wonder that
our young people are so commonplace, so lacking in resource, and so wanting
in originality! Never for one moment during the day in most schools is the
child free from the dominance of the teacher’s mind and spirit over his
mind and spirit. We crush out individuality in our classes, large or small,
by treating children in the mass as puppets instead of living, self-acting
individuals. We force a dogmatic discipline of drill from without, instead
of requiring the child to discipline himself from within; and so we pass oh
the shackles of pedagogic dogmatism from generation to generation.
In the Montessori schools all this is altered, and the child is free. Instead
of being required to sit still, he learns to move about without upsetting
things or annoying his neighbours. There are no fixed 1 desks, and the small
tables and chairs can be lifted and placed anywhere by the children them-
selves. No child need remain in one position any longer than he wishes.
There is no hard-and-fast time-table, which compels going on to weariness,
or which orders leaving off when interest is at its keenest. There are.no


collective lessons, where a whole class of forty or fifty children are treated
as one, and in which the teacher does most of the talking and three-fourths
of the work. There are no children sitting still and listening with bored
faces to something they know quite well, and could apply with zest if per-
“Freedom of Bodily Movement and Choice of Work...”
mitted. Instead of this, each child is intent on his work, and
is going about it joyously. The teacher is moving unobstru-
sively about the room, giving help, where help
is needed; but her words are few, and she has
in her mind the individual, and not the class.
Each child is doing his own growing. He is doing the thing in hand himself,
not sitting still and seeing it done for him by the teacher, as is so often the
case in class teaching.
The Montessori teacher is not afraid to give the child freedom, and she
does not hold herself responsible for the good or bad conduct of anyone in
the room. The child is made to shoulder his legitimate responsibilities.
The teacher no longer assumes a dogmatic attitude; restraint is reduced to
a minimum, and the child is given freedom within the law, the law in this
case being:—“ No child shall use his freedom to offend or annoy others, or
to commit any rough or ill-bred act.”
Freedom of bodily movement, of choice of work, of materials with which
to express himself, is not enough, however.. To quote Dr. Montessori in one
of her recent lectures: —
“ There is something else which assists in obtaining education on
this basis of liberty—something which includes both instruction and
discipline. In order that children may live in these conditions of free-
dom, they must find a way of busying themselves in a manner adequate
to the need of the unfolding of their inner life. This is the pivotal
point of the whole method , namely, to offer the child work —not just
any kind, but that work which at that particular moment is the one
thing necessary for the development of his inner life.”


THE EQUIPMENT AND DIDACTIC MATERIAL.
The equipment of the Montessori schools is simplicity itself. Small, light
tables, of a height suitable to the children, and little, comfortable chairs;
these, together with cupboards for storing material, plenty of floor space,
and a supply of light mats, constitute the furniture.
The didactic material , about which so much discussion centres, has been
invented and designed by Dr. Montessori with a view to training definitely
the senses of the child. It is briefly as follows (I quote from the official
booklet supplied with the English material) :
Exercises of Practical Life.
A series of eight wooden frames, to enable the children to practice co-
ordinated movements of the fingers and the everyday exercises which occur
during the process of dressing, viz.:—
1. Buttoning large buttons.
2. Buttoning small buttons.
3. Buttoning boots.
4. Lacing leather.
5. Lacing leather with eyel hooks.
6. Patent snap fastenings.
7. Hook and eye fastenings.
8. Bibbon bow tying.
Sense Training—Touch.
1. A rectangular wooden board, one half with smooth surface and the
other half covered with sandpaper.
2. A rectangular wooden board, with alternate strips of sandpaper and
plain smooth surface.
3. A polished wooden cabinet of seven drawers, containing pieces of
different fabrics in duplicate—silk, muslin, calico, linen, cloth,
Berge, velvet —by means of which the child learns by feeling the
difference in texture and quality—coarse, fine, rough, smooth, thick,
thin, tfcc. —of the various materials.
The Sense of Hearing.
Perception of sound is taught by means of duplicate sets of six cardboard
cylinders containing different substances —sand, flax seeds, corn, gravel,
pebbles, stones —which, when shaken, produce gradations of sound according
to the contents of each cylinder.


Weight.
Exercises in perception of weight are given by means of tablets of wood
of the same size and thickness, but of different weights. The didactic
material provides three boxes, each containing a number of thin wooden
tablets of (a) mahogany, (b) oak, (c) poplar.
Visual Perception of Dimensions.
This didactic material consists of:—■
1. Solid insets. —Three solid wooden blocks, each containing ten wooden
cylinders, which fit into the corresponding number of holes. In the first of
these blocks the cylinders are of equal depths but of varying diameters; in
the second, the cylinders are of equal diameters but of varying depths; in
the third set the cylinders vary both in diameter and in depth. With these
solid insets the child learns to dififerentiate objects according to thickness,
height, and size.
The Broad Stair.
Thickness. —Ten solid wooden bricks, enamelled and brown, of equal
length but varying in thickness. These blocks, when placed in position
according to their thickness, form steps, which grow broader towards the
top.
The Long Stair.
Length. —The long stair consists of ten enamelled, square, wooden rods,
varying in length from 1 metre to 1 decimetre, each decimetre being en-
amelled alternately red and blue, and when arranged in order according to
their lengths, these rods 1 form a series of long stairs.
The Tower.
Size. —Ten square wooden blocks, enamelled in pink, varying from 1 deci-
metre to 1 centimetre square, which, when placed one upon another accord-
ing to size, the largest at the base and smallest at the top, form a pyramidal
tower.
Visual Perception of Form.
1. A polished wood cabinet of six drawers, each containing six wooden
frames with geometric insets of various shapes—squares, rhomboids, rect-
angles, circles, triangles, polygons, ellipses, &c.
These insets are fitted into position by the child, the frames acting as a
control.


By passing the fingers round the outlines, the child, through the tactile
muscular sense, receives the perception of the form of each shape, and at
the same time is taught the names of the various geometrical forms.
2. Three Series of Cards. —In the first series the cards represent the same
geometrical forms in the same size as the wooden insets, and are printed in
solid blue.
In the second series the same geometrical forms are depicted by a thick
blue contour about a quarter of an inch wide.
In the third series the geometrical forms appear in thin outline.
Thus the child passes by easy stages from the concrete form of the wooden
shape to the abstract outline.
The Sense of Colour.
This didactic material consists of duplicate sets of sixty-four colour
spools, each containing eight carefully graded shades of eight colours —
blues, browns, greens, greys, rose-pink to red, salmon to scarlet, mauve to
violet, yellow to orange. Each set of sixty-four tablets is contained in a
wooden box divided into eight compartments.
Design as an Introduction to Writing.
Metal insets and frames, similar in size and shape to the wooden geomet-
rical figures, with which the child can, by drawing round the edges, form
outlines on card, to be afterwards filled in with coloured chalk, and thus
obtain the necessary control of the pencil and hand before proceeding to
writing.
Visual and Tactile Perception of Alphabetical Signs.
Reading and Writing. —The didactic material for this purpose consists
of: —A set of script letters, the vowels cut from sandpaper and mounted on
blue cards, and the consonants of black emery cloth mounted on white cards.
By passing the index and second finger over these letters, following the
direction in which they are written, the child obtains the tactile perception
of the form, and at the same time is taught the sound of each letter.
Composition of Words. —For word-building the letters are of the same size
and shape as the sandpaper letters on card, but are cut out of cardboard
and unmounted, the vowels being made of blue and the consonants of pink
card.
Four sets of these cardboard letters are contained in two flat boxes, each
letter having its special compartment.


Numeration and Arithmetic.
In teaching arithmetic the ten rods composing the long stair previously
described are used in conjunction with a set of the number symbols, cut
out of black emery cloth, mounted on cards, and two wooden trays, each
divided into five com-
partments, with fifty
counting sticks.
Busy Little Gardeners.
Two number frames, with grooves to take a set of printed numbers, are
also supplied to demonstrate the various arithmetical operations.
The retail price of the complete set of the Montessori material in England
is £8 Bs.
77013—c


MONTESSORI DISCIPLINE.
JW“UCH misconception appears to exist with regard
to tbe Montessori idea of discipline. Many people
appear to think that the children in Montessori
pKlgy schools are never to be checked or corrected, no
' matter how rough, injurious, or unbecoming their
acts may be. I have already stated that I saw nothing but
order, harmony, industry, and happiness in any Montessori
school. How this result is obtained may probably be made
clearer by the following quotation from Dr. Montessori herself,
and from Dorothy Canfield Fisher, the authoress of A Montessori
Mother. Dr. Montessori says in her chapter on “ Discipline,”'
pages 86 and 87 of her book : —
The pedagogical method of observation has for its base the liberty
of the child; and liberty is activity.
Discipline must come through liberty. Here is a great priiiciple which
is difficult for followers of common-school methods to understand. How
shall one obtain discipline in a class of free children ? Certainly, in our
system we have a concept of discipline very different from that com-
monly accepted. If discipline is founded upon liberty, the discipline
itself must necessarily be active. We do not consider an individual
disciplined only when he has 1 been rendered as artificially silent as a
mute and as immovable as a paralytic. He is an individual annihilated ,
not disciplined.
We call an individual disciplined when he is master of himself, and can,
therefore, regulate his own conduct when it shall be necessary to follow
some rule of life. Such a concept of active discipline is not easy either
to comprehend or to apply; but certainly it contains a great educational
principle, very different from the old-time absolute and undiscussed
coercion to immobility.
A special technique is necessary to the teacher who is to lead the child
along such a path of discipline, if she is to make it possible for him to
continue in this way all his life, advancing indefinitely towards perfect
self-mastery. Since the child now learns to move rather than to sit
still, he prepares himself not for the school, but for life; for he becomes
able, through habit and through practice, to perform easily and
correctly the simple acts of social or community life. The discipline
to which the child habituates himself here is, in its character, not
limited to the school environment, but extends to society.
The liberty of the child should have as its limit the collective
interest; as its form, what we universally consider good breeding. We
must, therefore, check in the child whatever offends or annoys others,
or whatever tends toward rough or ill-bred acts. But all the rest —every


manifestation having a useful scope—whatever it he, and under what-
ever form it expresses itself, must not only he permitted, but must be
observed by the teacher.
Again, on page 95, she says:—
“ When the teachers were weary of my observations, they began to
allow the children to do -whatever they pleased. I saw children with
their feet on the tables, or with their fingers in their noses, and no
intervention was made to correct them. I saw others push their com-
panions, and I saw dawn in the faces of these an expression of violence;
and not the slightest attention on the part of the teacher. Then I had
to intervene to show with what absolute rigour it is necessary to hinder,
and little by little suppress, all those things which we must not do,
so that the child may come to discern clearly between good and evil.
“ If discipline is to be lasting, its foundations must be laid in this
way, and these first days are the most difficult for the directress. The
first idea that the child must acquire, in order to he actively disciplined,
is that of the difference between good and evil; and the task of the
educator lies in seeing that the child does not confound good with
immobility, and evil with activity, as often happens in the case of the
old-time discipline. And all this because our aim is to discipline for
activity, for work, for good; not for immobility, not for passivity, not
for obedience.
“A room in which all the children move about usefully, intelligently,
and voluntarily, without committing any rough or rude act, would
seem to me a classroom very well disciplined indeed.
Mrs. Fisher, speaking on this same matter of discipline, remarks:—
“ This constant turning to that trust in the safety of freedom, which
is perhaps the only lasting spiritual conquest of our time, is the key-
note of her system. This is the real answer to the question, “ What
is there in the Montessori method which is so different from all other
educational methods?’’ This is the vital principle often overlooked
in the fertility of invention and scientific ingenuity with which she has
applied it.
“ This reverence for the child’s personality, this supreme faith that
liberty of action is not only safe to give children, but is the pre-
requisite of their growth, is the rock on which the edifice of her system
is being raised. It is also the rock on which the barques of many
investigators are wrecked. When they realise that she really puts her
theory into execution, they cry out aghast, “ What! a school without a
rule for silence, for immobility; a school without fixed seats, where
children may sit on the floor if they like, or walk about as they please,
without stationary desks; a school where children may play all day if
they choose; may select their own occupations, where the teacher is
always silent and in the background—why, that is no school at all, it
is anarchy! ”


The Use of Didactic Montessori Material.


Children educating themselves by means of Didactic Material.
“ One seems to hear faint echoes from another generation crying out,
‘ What! a society without hereditary aristocracy, without a caste sys-
tem, where a rail-splitter may become supreme governor, where people
may decide for themselves what to believe without respect for authority,
and may choose how they wish to earn their living .... this is
no society at all! It is anarchy.’
Dr. Montessori has two answers to make to such doubters. One is
that the rule in her schools, like the rule in civilised society, is that
no act is allowed which transgresses against the common welfare, or is
in itself uncomely or offensive. That the children are free does not
mean that they may throw books at each other’s heads, nor light a
bonfire on the floor, any more than free citizens of a republic may
obstruct traffic, or run a drain into the water supply of a town. It
means simply that they are subject to no unnecessary restraint, and
above all to no meddling with their instinctive private preferences.
The second answer, even more convincing to hard-headed people than
the first, is the work done in the Casa dei Bambini, where every detail
of the Montessori theory has been more than proved, with an abundance
of confirmatory detail which astonishes even Dr. Montessori herself.
The bugbear of discipline simply does not exist for these schools. By
taking advantage of their natural instincts and tendencies, the chil-
dren are made to perform feats of self-abnegation, self-control, and
collective discipline, impossible to obtain under the most rigid applica-
tion of the old rules, and, as for the amount of information acquired
unconsciously and painlessly by those babies, it is one of the fairy
stories of modern times.
It is, I think, unnecessary to elaborate further Dr. Montessori’s method
of discipline. These passages seem to me to make it amply clear that
liberty in the Montessori meaning of the term does not mean license.


THE MONTESSORI MOVEMENT IN ENGLAND.
lii England, and in Great Britain generally, the greatest interest in
the Montessori system prevails among teachers and educationists, and
there is much earnest discussion as to the possibility of applying it to
present conditions. The questions asked by English teachers are the same
as those asked by American and Australian teachers. This system may be
all very well (say those who have not tried it) for Italian children, but
how will it act with English children? Is it workable with large classes?
Is the child never to be asked to do anything he does not like? How can
a teacher do individual work with a class of fifty children? If the child
is allowed to choose his own work, will not his education be one-sided?
Perhaps the best answer to these questions is the practical result of some
of the careful experiments carried out in different parts of England and
with children of different social grades:—
1. In Xorfoik a class of village children, whoso ages range from
3to 6, has been in operation since August of last year. It is held at
Old Hall, Bunton, the residence of Mr. Bertram Hawker. Mr. Hawker
converted a room in his house into a Montessori school, in order to
prove whether this system, so successful with Italian children, was
applicable or not to the needs of English children. I spent a day in
Mr. Hawker’s school, and no better proof of the suitability of the
system to English children could he given than this experiment
furnishes.
2. A village school in Buckinghamshire, under the control of the
County Education Committee, was started in April, of this year, under
Miss Lidbetter, a lady who had studied under Dr. Montessori in Borne.
The accounts of this school are most favourable, the results being very
similar to those at Bunton.
3. The Fielden School, Manchester.—ln this school a laboratory test
was carried out under the supervision of Professor Eindlay, and the
results, as stated by the Professor in an address given by him last
March at the College of Preceptors, are, briefly, that the Montessori
system—
(а) Accelerated the normal development of the child on many
sides of his nature.
(б) That it fostered independence and self-reliance.
(c) And that it produced unselfishness and consideration for
others.
4. An experiment with the children of the rich.—ln the autumn of
1912, Mrs. Sanderson, of Lyndhurst, started a Montessori class for her
own children and those of her neighbouring friends. The class is under
the direction of Miss Dufresne, who had previously studied the system
in Borne. The experiment is considered an undoubted success, and
proves the applicability of the system to rich as well as to poor children.


5. The Canterbury Road Council Infant School experiment is very-
similar to the experiment carried out at Blaekfriars, Sydney. The
teachers conducting the experiment had never been to Rome, and had
never seen a Montessori school at work. They carefully studied the
hook and applied the method with results very similar to those obtained
nt Blaekfriars. —
(а) The two classes at Canterbury Road in which the experiment
is being tried number respectively forty-eight and sixty children.
(б) Each class is under one teacher.
(c) The results in each case are so gratifying that the mistress,
Miss Phillips, has decided to extend it gradually through her
school. The thing that impresses Miss Phillips most strongly in
the Montessori system is the effect of freedom on the character.
6. In Sunderland, in the north of England, Miss Rate Bryers,
Lead mistress of the Barnes Infant School, is carrying out a Montessori
experiment in the babies’ class in her school. The experiment was only
begun in July, but, like all the others previously mentioned, it promises
to be highly successful.
7. The London County Council has introduced the Montessori
apparatus into one or two of its schools, and one of the leading mis-
tresses was sent to Rome at the beginning of this year to study the
method, with a view to introducing it more largely in the Council’s
•schools. This lady had returned to London, and was about to begin
operations when I left.
8. In March, 1912, a Montessori Society was started in England.
This Society numbers among its members many leaders of educational
thought, and it has for its object the introduction of the Montessori
system of education into England.
These are a few of the schools in England in which the Montessori
method has been tried and so far found successful. They do not by any
means represent all the schools that are taking it up. Indeed, before I left
England, it was scarcely possible to visit a school that was not doing some-
thing in the matter. In and around London many schools were beginning
the experiment of applying the Montessori principle of self-education
through liberty to the older pupils.
THE JEWS’ INFANT SCHOOL, BUCKLE-STREET,
WHITECHAPEL.
The Jews’ Infant School, Buckle-street, Whitechapel, London, while not
■claiming to be a Montessori school, seems to me to have many of the
excellent points found in a good Montessori school.


It has 600 children in fourteen lofty, airy, spacious rooms. These
children vary in age from 3 years np to 8 or 9. The number of children,
in class under one teacher ranges from forty to forty-five—not ideal by
any means, but hopes are entertained of considerably reducing' these
numbers very shortly.
The school is equipped with tables and chairs instead of desks. There
is group work taken, but no class work. The mistress informed me that,
owing to the noise of traffic in the street, class work was found to be
impossible, and as it was equally impossible to do group work in desks, they
asked the Council for small tables and chairs, which were granted. This
revised furniture has been in Buckle-street now for some four or five
years, and is found to work excellently. The w’ords of the head mistress
concerning it are: “We are convinced that change of furniture, provided
there is a fair amount of floor space, rather than reduction of numbers,
will bring about the freedom we all so much desire for our children.”
In the rooms in Buckle-street groups of children may be found working"
happily at different occupations. On the day of my visit I noticed in one
room the following groups with six or eight children in each—clay-
modelling, building on the floor, cutting and pasting, matching dominoes,
and drawing on wall boards. The children were talking to each other
quietly and helping each other, but there was no undue noise and certainly
no disorder. The teacher moved about quietly, helping when help was
necessary, but otherwise not interfering.
In another room I saw groups of children reading to themselves, evidently
absorbed in their work, if one can term a thing work that was so evidently
a pleasure. The teacher in this room had a small group of the more back-
ward children at the blackboard, and was endeavouring to help them over-
come some of the irregularities of the English language.
In the two large baby rooms as many as sixty or seventy children were
seen choosing their own toys, playing together in groups or in pairs, with,
occasionally, a child alone in some quiet corner intent upon some
fascinating piece of material. All were busy, and happy, and free. Xo-
where was there any sign of disorder or anarchy.
In this school, as in many of the infant schools in England and on the
Continent, the little children sleep in the afternoon after lunch for a
little while. Provision is made at Buckle-street for fifty of the youngest
children to sleep at a time in cheap, portable hammocks that fold up against
the wall when not in use and draw out like a concertina when wanted.
The children in this school look healthy, happy, and self-reliant, I was
particularly struck with their very fine physical development and keen
mental attitude.


THE MONTESSORI EXPERIMENT AT BLACKFRIARS.
More interesting to us, perhaps, than the result of the Montessori schools
in England or elsewhere, are the results of the experiment carried out at the
Practice School attached to the Teachers’ College at Blackfriars, Sydney.
The Montessori system of education was introduced into New South.
Wales last year (1912) by direction of the Minister of Education. When
Mr. Carmichael’s attention was drawn to the work of Dr. Montessori in
Borne he cabled for her book, which was not then translated into English.,
and arrangements were made for its translation here when the English
copies arrived. The experiment was begun in the Practice School, Black-
friars, in August, and several times during the progress of the experiment;
A Pleasant Morning Task.
visits were paid to the school by the Minister, the Director of Education,,
the Chief Inspector, the Principal of the Teachers’ College, and many of
the senior and other inspectors of the Department.
Miss Stevens and Miss Swan, the teachers who first began the experiment,,
and who are still carrying it through in their classes, took the work in accord-
ance with the usual routine of the school. (See chapter on Abolition of
Class Work.) They are both teachers of thought, and of wide experience-
in other methods. Both have, in common with other members of the staff,
carried through previous experiments—the rule of the school being that,
any member of the staff may be required at any time to conduct an
experiment if such experiment happens to be with the class of which she
at the time has charge. Although these two ladies carried out the actual
experiment, all other members of the staff evinced the keenest interest in
its progress and gave most valuable voluntary help in the preparation of
material.


Indeed, from the very first the principle of individual liberty, which
is the mainspring of the Montessori method, appealed alike to teachers
.and children. The experiment was carried out strictly along the lines
laid down by Dr. Montessori in her book, and the most astonishing results
followed. Children broke into writing of their own accord and without
any formal teaching. The phonic elements were mastered and applied by
most children in two weeks. One boy made over forty words with the
cardboard letters in ten days. These words were not suggested by the
teacher —they were the child’s own. After words came script sentences on
strips of cardboard. These were eagerly seized and read. One little
fellow of 5 years and 9 months took a bundle of these strips into a corner of
the room by himself and kept at them the whole day until he could read
each one. I consider this child taught himself to read in one day. Soon
there was a demand for print, and at this stage the children appeared to
he seized with an acute hunger for reading. In order to satisfy this hunger
we had sentences and paragraphs printed in large, clear type on strips and
■on stout cards. These the children eagerly seized and devoured. Everyone
was busy and happy, and the joy of achievement and delight in their work
;shone in their faces. This was true of teachers as well as of children.
In all other subjects (for in taking im Montessori we did not drop any
of the work we had been doing) the same zest and eagerness prevailed.
Mot only did the children progress far more rapidly than by any previous
method, but they did so without fatigue or mental strain of any hind. This
seems to me a very important point. If children progressed no more
rapidly by Montessori than by anything else, this method of learning with-
out mental strain is worthy of our attention. Even in the best kinder-
garten rooms everywhere there is danger of mental strain, and fatigue, and
•over-stimulation.
The Montessori classes now under Miss Stevens and Miss Swan, notwith-
standing the following drawbacks :—•
(a) Poor attendance for months owing to vaccination and smallpox
scare;
(5) Absence of Miss Stevens for ten weeks through illness conse-
quent on influenza; and
(c) My own absence in Europe during the greater part of the year,—
are now very much ahead of similar classes taught by other methods. The
■children in Miss Stevens’ class, for example, who began the formal work
of reading, writing, and number about the middle of August last year (1912),
are now reading of their own choice, and with considerable fluency, the
book they are required by standard to read when leaving the infant school
nine months hence.
The opinion of the teachers carrying out the experiment, and of the
whole staff of expert teachers of the Infants’ Practice School, all of whom
Pave carefully watched the progress of the work, is that the Montessori
of education is far in advance of anything we have previously had,


and their unanimous decision is—that they would not go back to the older
methods of teaching for any consideration whatever.
The general results of the Montessori system at Blackfriars may be
summed up as follows:
1. Children made more rapid progress.
2. There was no anarchy, no disorder, no disobedience, and no one-
sided development.
3. There was no mental strain.
4. Retarded children in the classes in each case made exceptional
progress.
5. The work was carried out in two classes with over fifty children
under one teacher in each class. If classes were smaller better results
could be obtained, but the experiment shows that the method is possible
even with large classes.
6. As far as one can judge from the experiment carried out, the
Montessori method is particularly well suited to our conditions and
should be easy of application.
ABOLITION OF CLASS WORK AND SUBSTITUTION
OF INDIVIDUAL TEACHING.
What is: In schools at present children are taught in mass and in large
•classes, and, though the teacher may be quite unconscious of the fact, the
«lever child is held back while the dull child is whipped up (metaphorically,
I hope), so that all may take the educational fence between class and class
together. Occasionally children are promoted without waiting for the
rest of the class, but such promotions are few. The ideal aimed at seems
to be an impossible class average of intelligence. The teacher is worried
to death trying to reach this false and impossible ideal, and the children,
both clever and dull, suffer. Much time and effort are wasted in most
schools in teaching children what they already know. For example, the
teacher sets out to teach a new thing—a new rule in arithmetic perhaps.
In a few minutes several children will have grasped it, and could, if per-
mitted, immediately apply it to the solution of problems. Yet these children
must wait and be taught over and over again the thing they already know,
until the class, as a whole, has grasped the principle. Or take a reading
lesson. How often have we seen the children who can read the lesson quite
fluently held back, and required to look at the page, and follow the sentences,
while the dull children stumble through them? In the Montessori schools
there is no such waste as this. No child is held back or made to regulate
his educational pace to that of another; hence in these schools we see
children at all stages of development, and each one progressing at his own
rate. Children are scattered about the room each intent on his own work,
without any outside pressure from the teacher.


The Montessori teacher does no unnecessary talking. In almost all
modern schools and Kindergartens the teacher talks too much and the-
child not enough. In nearly every lesson I have seen given in other than
Montessori schools the teacher did most of the talking and the children,
merely sat still and listened.
What might he : Each classroom might be a small school in itself, with
children at different stages of development. The small school teacher
manages a number of children, not only at different stages of development,
but of different ages and sizes. Surely it would be possible for the class;
teacher to do work with her class on similar lines. Much time and energy
are wasted now on teaching children what they already know, as in the
example quoted above. A more reasonable and saner method in all subjects
would be to show the child what to do and leave him alone to do it. But
the practical
probably say
sible not
that you may
ten or twelve
not with a
We have taken
that in large
teacher will'
it is not pos-
worka b 1 e—
do it with
children, but
large class,
it for granted
classes certain
Various Stages in the Teaching of Numbers.
things are not possible, not because we have proved them impossible, but
because we have certain fixed images in our minds about class work—traditions
that have heen handed down to us from generation to generation —and we
think children must be handled in the mass just because they have been so-
handled for generations. We imagine children cannot be trusted lo do
things for themselves, not because we have trusted them and found this so,,
but because the idea has been handed down to us that children are naturally
idle and bad and that we must keep our eye on every member of the class at
all times. If reform is to come we must get rid of that falsest of false’
notions, that the child is naturally idle.
In the classrooms of the future we may see children of the same age,
but at different stages of development, working away busily and happily,
not cramped up in desks but moving naturally and quietly about the rooms,


interested and joyous over their work. The teacher, instead of straining her
voice and wasting her energy in vain words, will be moving quietly about
the room giving help where help is needed. Lessons w 7 ill be simple and
-direct instead of being overloaded with device and deluged with verbiage,
And the whole atmosphere of the room will be that of the home rather
than the school. The emphasis will not be as now on the fact that the
teacher is teaching, but upon the much more important and valuable fact
that the child is learning.
The idea of a class of thirty or forty children, all at different stages of
-development, and each one educating himself with only occasional help
from the teacher when help is actually needed, seems the dream of a
visionary. Yet this is what one sees in Borne and in other places where
the Montessori system has had a fair trial. Class teaching must go and
-individual teaching he substituted if we are to progress with the times.
Here, of course, will come in all sorts of questions of organisation. llow
.are you going to make promotions from class to class 2 What is to become
of the standard if you have children at different stages? How is one
teacher going to pick up and carry on the work of the teacher preceding
.her? All these questions answer themselves once the principle of the
.Montessori system is thoroughly grasped.
For some years past the plan adopted in the Infants’ Department of the
Blackfriars Practice School has been to promote the teacher with the class.
That is to say, the teacher who takes the first class—the children out of
:the kindergarten room —remains the teacher of those children for a
period of two years until they leave the Infants’ School. The children
progress from class to class, but they are not handed from teacher to teacher.
This plan has been found to work excellently. No time is lost by any
teacher in getting to know her class. In two years the teacher gets to
know each member of her class intimately, and her influence on the class
as a whole is deeper and more lasting. It may be said that under this
system a class might be too long under a weak teacher. I am optimistic
•enough to believe that weak teachers in the Infants’ Schools of New South
Wales are very much in the minority. Even a weak teacher will have
more chance of becoming strong under this system than under the one
which requires her to face a class of fresh children every six months. She
will also have a wider experience and a broader outlook; and provided she
has the support and guidance of the mistress, who should be free from a
• class, will not injure the children under her care, and will, for ever after,
be a stronger teacher.
This method of sending the teacher up with the class answers the ques-
tion as to standard, promotions, &c., and makes the Montessori system easy
•of introduction and smooth in its working. It is true that the children
will probably have far outstripped the Infant School standard by the time
they leave the Infants’ Department, but I do not think that there will be
;any grumbling from the Primary Departments if this be so.


Free Choice of Work —Higher Division. (Average age, 6 years 11 months,)


RETARDATION AND ITS REMEDY.
Teachers everywhere are worried and harassed by the presence of retarded
children in their classes —late enrolments, derelicts who drift from one school
to another, retardation from ill-health, &c., &c. The curious thing about
the education of these unfortunate children at present is that the teacher
is expected by means of some magical pedagogic feat to get them through
her class in about half the time that a normal child takes to get through
it. Needless to say the expectation is rarely realised, and notwithstanding
the departmental regulation and the efforts of teachers to obey it, we still
find children in Infant Schools who are beyond Infant School age.
We have had a good deal of experience with retarded children at Black-
friars, and the results since the introduction of the Montessori system
have been agreeably surprising. One child of 9 years, who knew nothing
when she entered the school, and who was a typical derelict, reached the
highest class in the Infant School in sixty days. Another similar child
got through to the highest class in seventy days. These children were not
smart or bright in any way; they were just the usual type of retarded
child. But the point I want to emphasise about their progress is this —that
they did not receive any extra attention from the teacher beyond their
just share as members of the class. They were not “ drilled ” in any
way or detained after hours.
The following particulars of retarded children under the Montessori
method may be of interest: —
Mary, aged 9: knew names of five or six letters of the alphabet but
nothing else. Average normal child, showing no exceptional smart-
ness or ability. Reached highest class in the Infant School in sixty
days.
Annie, aged 7J: knew the names of some of the letters on entering
the school. Could count a little; appeared to be just average type
of retarded child. Kept from school through carelessness and neglect
of parents. Reached highest infant class in seventy days.
Thomas, 7 years, enrolled January this year: had been to school
before but had made no progress. Knew some of the symbols, but
could not read at all. Evidently a typical dull child, with mental
development below normal. Can now read well at sight, spells well
in composition and dictation, and is good at numbers.
Janet, 7 when entering school: retarded through illness and conse-
quent absence from school; of average intelligence, could make no
attempt at reading or writing. After three mlonths is able to read
and write fairly well and is making equally good progress' in other
subjects.


Florrie, 8 years and 3 months on entering: not extra high intelli-
gence, typical derelict; knew names of a few letters, but could not
read and had very little idea of number. Can now read fluently at
sight, spell creditably, and shows a very good grasp of numbers.
John, aged 7 on entering: did not know any letters or sounds. Since
enrolment has been away long periods through illness; attendance
very irregular because of delicate health. Idas attended school seventy-
nine days in all. Not a bright child by any means. But notwith-
standing irregularity of attendance he now makes a very good attempt
at sight-reading.
Samuel, 7 on entering in February last: did not know anything.
Had been paralysed down one side. Can now read, write, and spell,
and is quite up to Third Infants’ School Standard.
Fred, aged 7, enrolled in July of this year: impediment in speech,
used to run wild and neglected in the street; knew a few letters but
could not read at all. Now attends school regularly, works incessantly,
and is making very rapid progress in all subjects.
Harry, malformation of head, which, according to medical opinion,
borne out by actual experience, interferes with some of his powers.
Appeared to have special difficulty with writing. Feeling of sand
paper letters has helped him wonderfully. He can now write fairly
legibly, and reads and spells very well indeed.
May, aged 7 on entering. The youngest child of a family of seven-
teen. Considered mentally deficient by doctor. Ninety days in class;
showed very little progress for a considerable time, but is now interested
in several subjects, particularly in reading. She has mastered some
of the phonic elements, and is able to build and read words. She is
also able to make some attempt at writing, and has some ideas of
number.
I should like to repeat that these children have not been “ drilled ” or
%ept in, or asked to come before hours, or in any way treated as other than
•ordinary members of the class. That they have received more of the
teacher’s attention is perhaps true, since the Montessori method makes it
possible for the teacher to give most of her time to those who need it most,
but none of the ordinary means for advancing retarded children have been
used. Miss Stevens, who has had charge of the Montessori class for a
year, and from whose children these examples are taken, is emphatic in
declaring that the results obtained are entirely due to the Montessori
method and the freedom it gives to the children, and not to any special
effort or attention on her part.
From my own experience in our own schools in Italy, and other countries
of Europe, and in Great Britain, I am of opinion that the introduction of the
Montessori method would largely minimise, if it would not altogether wipe out,
this troublesome problem of retardation from any cause except that of absolute


mental defect verging on idiocy. Even in the case of mental defect verging'
on idiocy, better results appear to be obtained by the Montessori system
than by any other.
Here I would add a word of warning. The introduction of Montessori
material without the proper understanding of the Montessori principle by
the teacher who is to handle it, will not bring about Montessori results. But
given the material, and the right understanding and use of it, and the-
problem of the retarded and backward child will very largely disappear.
INTRODUCTION OF THE MONTESSORI METHOD
INTO SMALL SCHOOLS.
Though the Montessori method is generally regarded as an Infant School-
method only, it is, in my opinion, applicable to children of any age,
and it is perhaps in the small one-teacher schools of the State that it will-
find its most ready acceptance. In the one-teacher school the hardest
problem the teacher has to face is the teaching of the little children of
5 or 6 years of age just entering school. In these schools the teacher'
must distribute his or her attention over the various sections from those-
just entering the school at 5 or 6 years of age to the advanced children
of 13 or 11 or even older. The little new-comers are, under present condi-
tions, and with the teacher who knows nothing of Kindergarten or
Montessori, quite unable to help themselves, hence they must be left alone
for some portions of the day with little, if any, useful employment. The
]\lontessori system would alter all this. If rightly understood and used
the task of both teacher and children would be made much easier and
lighter, the time spent in learning to read and write w-ould be shorter,
the process rendered easier, and the children in the country would get the
same systematic sense training and the same favourable start as those-
in the city.
The small school teacher is probably more ready to accept the Montessori
principle of liberty and the Montessori method of individual teaching than:
his city brother. The city teacher has to free his or her mind from ideas of
class teaching before any great progress can be made in the new work. The
country teacher is already accustomed to individual work, and the country
children already, in the higher classes at any rate, do a good deal of work
for themselves. The Montessori method, if rightly introduced, will, I
feel sure, prove to be the salvation of the small school teacher. One set
of the material supplied to each of these schools would be sufficient and
would not cost very much—probably not more than a total of £5,000 or
so when the wholesale price is taken into consideration. In the subjects
of reading and writing alone, I have no hesitation in saying that half the-
time now given to acquiring these subjects will be saved.


While strongly recommending the introduction of the Montessori method
into all schools I would add a word of warning. Unless the teacher
thoroughly understands the principle and the method of applying it, the
material might become dead and mechanical, and a danger instead of a
help. The teacher must know when the child has outgrown the material,
and must not make the mistake of keeping the pupil at an exercise that
he has already mastered. The same remark as to danger applies alike to
all didactic material, whether Montessorian,
“The Old.”
Froebelian, or any other. No matter what
the system, “ the man behind the gun ” is
the force most to be reckoned with, but it will, I think, be admitted that
•“ the man behind the gun ” can do more with an up-to-date machine than he
can with an old-fashioned blunderbuss.
But, however up-to-date the machine, the man must know how to handle
it before effective work can be done. The introduction of Montessori
material into schools will not result in the Montessori method being adopted
unless teachers receive some instruction and guidance in the matter. Means
should, therefore, be taken to supply this instruction and guidance, or the
Montessori material may become as deadening and mechanical in its effect
as was the Froebel material before the present system of Kindergarten was
introduced into our schools in 1906.
THE TEACHING OF WRITING AND READING.
The methods of teaching writing and reading would, of themselves, stamp
the Montessori system as far in advance of anything of a similar kind yet
introduced into our schools. Notwithstanding the difficulties of our
language, I am sure the Montessori method in these two subjects alone will
bring about a wonderful change in our schools. The results obtained by
the partial introduction of the method into Blackfriars Practice School in


August of last year amply prove this. Children learnt to write with amazing-
rapidity and eagerness, and manifested a hunger for reading that was truly
surprising. Everyone knows the drudgery of teaching children to read and
write by the older systems. Sugar-coat it as we would, the drudgery was
there. To get over this as the children in the Montessori schools get over
it, sounds like a fairy tale. Owing to the difficulties of our language we
“The New.”
may not accomplish such miracles as those I saw in the schools in Rome,
where 5-year old children learnt to write and to read in the space of four
•or five weeks ; but the experiment at Blackfriars shows that the results,
if not quite so magical as those of Rome, are nevertheless sufficiently
marvellous to warrant the introduction of the Montessori method into all
schools.
REVISED FURNITURE.
As a first step towards mental and spiritual liberty, I would suggest the
remodelling of our school furniture, so that children might have more
physical freedom. Towards this the kindergarten rooms now in most of
■our State schools have paved the way, inasmuch as they have accustomed
us to movable furniture in the shape of tables and chairs. I would suggest
that every room in every Infant School be furnished with small light tables
and chairs. In rooms where it may be necessary to take some class work,
these tables could be arranged in rows for the time being so that children
•could sit facing in one direction. At other times when this is l not neces-
sary, tables could be put together for group work or arranged in any way
•desired. I would further suggest that these tables and chairs be made of
light, cheap wood, at a cost of, say, 12s. or 15s. each for the tables, and
about 4s. 6d. each for the chairs. This would mean a considerable saving
when compared with the furniture now used.


Various Stages of Montessori Writing.
The girl sitting in the centre is playing with plane geometric insets; the boy sitting is developing motor memory by filling in insets blindfolded ; the boy at the desk is tracing
metal insets preparatory to filling in design with pencil; the girl on the right is feeling sand-paper letters ; the standng girls show finished product.


The fault of our school furniture in the past has been its too great
durability and heaviness. It is made as if intended to last for all eternity,
and in five or ten years it is obsolete; but the cost was so much in the first
place that we feel we cannot afford to throw it away, and the new thing
that is to take its place is generally so expensive that we pause, and hesitate.
“One boy made forty words with
cardboard letters in the first
ten days.”
and stand wavering between the unsuitability of the old and the expense of the
new- —and meanwhile the children suffer. A lighter and cheaper furniture
such as I suggest would have many advantages. It would be easy to renew
or replace it when the necessity from any cause arises. From the educa-
tional point of view it would teach the child to handle things with care,
incidentally to control his body, and direct his movements
in such a way as not to knock it over or injure it. Its light-
ness would enable children to handle it themselves, and thus
more movement and freedom in classrooms would be possible.
With the fixed desks now in our schools, freedom is almost
impossible. I am inclined to think that the day is not far
distant when the fixed desk will be laid away with the flogging
block and the cane and other ancient instruments of torture.
From the purely hygienic point of view, such furniture, as suggested,
would be an advantage. Do what we will dirt accumulates under fixed
furniture. Let anyone unscrew one of the desks now in our school rooms,
and the truth of this will he borne out in the accumulations of dust under


the narrow strips of iron which fasten it to the floor. A room from which
all the furniture can be turned out or moved from one side of the room
to the other is a cleaner room than the one in which the charwoman must
grope her way and guide her scrubbing-brush round a forest of fixedi
benches. The hygienic benefits of movable furniture are seen in our
Kindergartens. The kindergarten room is usually the cleanest and brightest
in the school.
The abolition of the fixed desk in Infant Schools and the substitution of
small tables and chairs is, I think, a very necessary step towards reform.
SMALLER CLASSES.
Although the experiments at Iflackfriars and elsewhere show that the
Montessori principle of liberty and the Montessori method of education
can be carried out with a considerable measure of success in large classes,
I would strongly urge the reduction of numbers in infant classes to at
least thirty-five, and this for the following reasons: —
(a) If children are to grow physically and mentally they must have
room to move about the school-room, and this cannot be done with large
classes. In large classes there must be drill and mass teaching, and
the deadly uniformity that crushes individuality and life.
(b) In the best schools in Europe and the United Kingdom the
tendency is towards more liberty, more individual teaching as opposed
to class teaching—the development of the powers within rather than
the imparting of information from without —and the consequent
reduced numbers in class that make these things possible.
(c) There should be more physical freedom in our schools. Xo one
surely will say that it is right or natural for little children, or indeed
for any children, to sit still cooped up in desks for several hours a
day. If children are to move freely and naturally and do their own
mental and physical growing, the class must not be congested and
unwieldy.
(d) There can be very little doubt that the Hontessori method has
come to stay in the infant schools of the wmrld. If this be so it must
have larger rooms and more floor space for its working out.
I am aware that all this problem of smaller classes and larger class-
rooms rests on a matter of money, and it may be said that we cannot afford
it. Can we, however, afford to go on with large classes, paralysing activity
of body and mind, arresting mental, moral, and spiritual growth, and
turning our schools into huge, soulless machines, instead of making them
what they should be—centres of life and energy ? Can we afford to
asphyxiate our children physically and mentally by packing’ them into
rooms in such numbers that it is impossible for them to breathe any but
vitiated air, or to move except at stated and infrequent intervals? We
arrange breathing exercises and physical culture exercises in order to


counteract the immobility and the imperfect breathing of the school-
room, but would not an ounce of prevention in the shape of more floor-
space, more air and liberty to move about, be worth rather more than
the pound of cure now provided? I am fully alive to the importance of
breathing exercises and physical culture exercises; but if instead of packing
children into classrooms with the cubic space so accurately measured that
each child gets just so much air, neither more nor less than will save
him from being poisoned, we had smaller classes and larger classrooms,
the benefit in buoyancy of spirits, instead of depression and weariness, in
increased action of the heart and lungs, and in strengthened respiratory
movements would be considerable, and would result in a keener mental
attitude and aptitude to learn on the part of the child as well as in
strengthened physique.
LARGER CLASSROOMS.
Larger classrooms are a pressing need in the infants’ or indeed in
any department of our schools —more pressing perhaps than reduction of
numbers in class. With plenty of floor space an experienced Montessori
teacher can do a great deal of
individual work with forty or
fifty children. But it will be
useless to build larger classrooms
if the same overcrowding which
now exists in many places is
permitted. A room should be
built for so many children, and
it should be unlawful and punish-
able offence for any over that*
number to be put into it. The
head of a department should
have power to exclude all chil-
dren over the prescribed number.
Whatever be the cost, two
things seem to me to be urgently
necessary if our children are to
have that start in life which is
their right, namely, freedom to
move about and to do their own
mental and physical growing, and
space in which to do this moving
and growing. Plato, in his laws,
“ Exploding ” into Writing.
Montessori pupils are trained to trace sandpaper letters
blindfold, and later begin to write without
any directions.
says :—“ Whatever the creature —be it plant or animal, tame or wild, if its
earliest growth makes a good start, that is the most important step towards
the consummation of the excellence of which its nature is capable.”
It seems to me that the plain duty of any State is to give its children
the opportunity of making this good start.


MORE LIBERTY FOR THE TEACHER.
If freedom is to be the basis of education for the child, it should also
he the basis of education for the teacher. This is necessary if teachers
.are to keep up with the educational thought and progress of the world.
The infant teachers of New South Wales are probably freer than similar
teachers in most other places. Because of this, I believe New South Wales
to be more ready for Montessori than almost anywhere else. If, however,
the Montessori ideal is to be followed, a still larger measure of freedom
must be permitted, and because of this larger measure of freedom a
greater demand will be made on the intelligence and originality of the
individual teacher. The Montessori teacher will have to do her own
thinking; it cannot be clone for her by anyone else. In order to do her
own thinking she must have a larger measure of freedom and must work
out her own salvation from within instead of having dogmas imposed upon
her from without. The same liberty that is given to the children should
be given to the teacher, and through this liberty the teacher, like the child,
will educate herself in the science and craft of her profession.
THE MISTRESS OF A DEPARTMENT SHOULD BE
FREE FROM A CLASS.
In England, Scotland, and elsewhere, the mistress of a department does
no class work. This principle might, in my opinion, be adopted in Xew
South Wales with much advantage. The mistress w T ho is hound to a class
cannot possibly have that inspiring and consolidating influence on her
school that the head of a department should have. She should have time
for thought, time for individual talks with her teachers, time to see deeply
and sympathetically into the work of each class, and time to he alive and
•enthusiastic so that others may catch alight from 1 the fire of her thought.
MORE OPEN AIR SCHOOLS AND CLASSES.
The tendency everywhere in Europe and Great Britain is towards more
•work in the open air for children of all ages. In almost all schools visited
open air classes were in operation. In some cases these classes were held
under structures formed of rough posts, roofed with canvas or with tarred
felt, and provided with canvas or tarpaulin v T ind screens. Children are
given certain lessons during the day in the open playground under these
structures. Other open air classrooms are wooden buildings Avith plenty of
window space. Others, again, are loggia arrangements consisting of a light
roof supported on posts, with movable screening to the height of the desk.


Everywhere the movement in favour of open air education is spreading,
and the opinion of the Chief Medical Officer of the Board of Education
in England is that “ the child becomes physically strengthened and men-
tally responsive, shows a keener aptitude to learn, and is happier for the
freedom to move, to play, to search, to record, and to imagine. He has
ample opportunity of learning to abhor stuffy rooms. Indeed, it is hardly
too much to say that the introduction of the open air system is the con-
demnation of what may be called the stuffy-school-system of education.”
Much of the Montessori work could be carried out in open air class-
rooms similar to those described above, or, in the case of country schools,
under the trees.
Perhaps the day may yet come when the little children will be carried
in the morning, by special trains, from the stuffy overcrowded city schools
into suitably constructed open air schools outside the city, and brought
back to their homes in the evening, strengthened and invigorated by fresh
.air, sunshine, and space in which to move and grow.
COST OF THE MONTESSORI MATERIAL.
One set of Montessori material would be sufficient for any school, large
•or small. Each child will not be using the same piece of apparatus at the
same time, as in class work. It is probable that a larger supply'of card-
board letters than that already with the apparatus will be necessary, but
this is a matter that could be easily arranged. The cost therefore for
material, when wholesale price is considered, would probably not exceed
the sum of £6 or £7 for each school.
The mere introduction of the Montessori material will not, however, make
a Montessori school. Unless the teacher has grasped the principle under-
lying the system, the introduction of the material is not likely to be of
much use. Steps should therefore be taken to make teachers acquainted
with the Montessori principle and with the correct method of using the
material. This might be done by means of —
(a) Summer schools such as are now held in music and art.
( b ) The establishment of a Montessori Observation School or Schools
where country teachers and others might be permitted to attend for a
period of continuous observation.
(c) Lectures and demonstrations in various centres in each inspector’s
•district.
As a preparation for any of the above I would strongly urge that Dr.
Montessori’s book, “ The Montessori Method,” be supplied to all schools.
The retail price of the book is 95., but the wholesale price w T ould probably
be much less. In large departments where there are several teachers, two or
three copies might be given.


I am optimistic enough to believe that the teachers of New South Wales,
provided they are given the same freedom in this as in other things, will
not be long in grasping the Montessori idea of self-education through
liberty. Experienced mistresses and teachers would learn much from a
week or two of observation in a Montessori school. With young, inex-
perienced teachers, only a lengthened period of training could give the right
understanding and application of the method.
In no case should material be supplied to a school until the teacher has
shown his or her fitness by sympathy with the method and by attendance
at lectures, observation school, or summer school.
In the new schools constantly being erected, and in the others where
renovations are being made, I would urge the introduction of the revised
furniture mentioned in another part of this report. If this is done a
considerable saving will be effected. Take, for example, an Infant School
with seating accommodation for 200 children. The cost of furnishing such
a school with modern desks would be not less than £250. If furnished with
the tables and chairs such as I have suggested, the cost would probably
not exceed £l5O.
In the matter of equipment and material the Montessori schools will not
cost the State any more than the present schools cost it. The chief expense
will lie in the matter of larger classrooms; and here I think the increased
benefit to the children’s health arising from more air and room in which
to move and grow will more than justify the expenditure.
DEFECTS OF THE MONTESSORI SYSTEM.
The defects of the Montessori system are defects of omission only. Some
of the subjects considered important in all modern Infant Schools find m>
place in the Montessori schools in Rome. The most important of these,,
and the one around which so much discussion centres, is literature. Stories,,
nursery rhymes, and poetry are entirely omitted from the curriculum of the
Montessori schools in Rome, and no very satisfactory explanation as to the-
reason for the omission has been given by Dr. Montessori or those wiu>
seek to interpret her. The explanation probably lies in the doctor’s strong
adherence to the principle of liberty and in her belief that education should
be active, not passive. Over and over again she reiterates the statement
that “ the child who does not do does not Tcnow how to do,” and many teach-
ing devices at first used in the Montessori schools in Rome were abandoned
because they rendered the child inactive. Evidently Dr. Montessori’s strong
objection to the passive listening system of education, so prevalent still in
most schools, has led her to the other extreme and has caused her to exclude
story, nursery rhyme, and poetry from her curriculum.


An Australian Montessori Schoolroom.


I do not, however, think that this or other minor defects of the Montessori
system need concern us very greatly, since it is not likely that the Montessori
or any other system of education can be introduced in all its detail into
any school or schools. Dr. Montessori is the least dogmatic of persons.
She would be the first to deplore any blind or mechanical adoption of her
method. All she wants is a thorough mastery of her principle of liberty,
and an intelligent application of that principle to all school subjects. In
our own school at Blackfriars we still retain the story, rhyme, and poem,
but we apply the principle of liberty, and only the children who wish to hear
the story come to it. Some children remain away each time, but they
are not always the same children. Those who remain away quietly employ
themselves about the room in some work they have themselves chosen. The
children who come to hear the story listen attentively, and the teacher
is not at any time obliged to recall the wandering attention of any child.
In all the discussion on the Montessori system heard in England and else-
where, I did not once find any of the vital points of the method questioned.
Everyone appeared to agree with the principle of liberty, and everyone
acquiesced in the fact that if the child is to grow mentally, morally, and
physically, he must do his own growing on each of these planes. The
belief of most teachers and thinkers on education who have studied the
Montessori system was that all schools, large and small, would be very
much improved by the introduction of the Montessori method and material.
At the same time it was thought that the system should be introduced
systematically and by competent instructors, and that any haphazard intro-
duction of it without proper guidance from those qualified to guide could
only bring discredit to the system and probably do harm instead of good
to the schools so using it.
CONCLUDING REMARKS.
1. The system devised by Dr. Montessori is the most forward movement
in infant education since the time of Froebel.
2. All educationists have preached liberty for the child —Dr. Montessori
practises it.
3. In all schools where the method has had a fair trial, the most aston-
ishing 1 results have followed. Children of 4 and 5 learn to write and
to read in a few weeks without any mental strain whatever.
4. Not only in writing 1 and reading, but in all subjects where the Montes-
sori principle is rightly applied, the children learn without strain or
weariness. Instead of weariness there is interest, alertness, and joy in
doing.
5. In the Italian schools in the slum quarters the physical effects of this
joyousness in the work are very marked. The children have gained in


weight, and present a much more healthy appearance than formerly. Dr.
Montessori attributes this improved physical appearance and health to the
joy found in the work. Joy, according to this Italian physician and
educator, is a great health-giver.
fi. People from all parts of the earth flock to Rome to see the system in
operation, and Montessori schools are springing up everywhere.
7. Most of the great educational centres of the world sent representatives
to Rome in January of this year to study the system on the spot, with
a view to introducing it into the schools of the various countries.
8. The Montessori system makes for more independence and self-reliance
on the part of the pupil and gives scope for resource and originality.
9. One often hears that the great danger of the present day is the lack
of individual character in our young people. While we treat children in the
mass, in large classes, as puppets instead of living, self-active individuals,
The Indoor Kindergarten Circle.
this danger will remain. Enfranchise the child, treat him as an individual,
let him do his own growing, as is done in the Montessori schools, and this
danger will disappear.
10. Based as it is on liberty, the Montessori system is particularly well
suited to the educational needs of a free, democratic country like Australia,
where self-reliance, individuality, resource, originality, and freshness of
thought are qualities much to be desired in the future citizens.
11. If the Montessori system is introduced, I am firmly of opinion that
the question of retardation will very largely disappear from our schools.
12. The slow child will always be with us; but the slow child has rights
as well as the quick, and these rights the Montessori method recognises.
The slow child progresses at his own rate instead of being over-strained
and discouraged in the vain attempt to keep up with the naturally quick
children of the class. Many of the world’s greatest geniuses have been
dull and slow at school, and the history of such men proves that the
educational race is not always to the swift.


13. The clever child also progresses at his own pace. He is not held
back for his slower brethren.
14. I am fully convinced that the Montessori method, rightly applied,
will very considerably shorten the period of learning to read and to write,
and will do away with the drudgery and strain now associated with the
teaching and learning of these subjects. Under this method the normal
child will have overcome all the main difficulties of reading, writing, dicta-
tion, and elementary number work by the time he reaches 7 years of age.
15. In the one-teacher schools of the State the Montessori system will
prove to be the solution of many difficulties. By it the teacher will be able
Open Air and Sunlight.
to keep all children from the little ones just entering school to the most
advanced pupils busily and profitably employed.
16. If introduced into our schools at all, the Montessori system should
be introduced systematically. For its adequate working, the following
would, I think, be necessary:—
Revised furniture.
One set of Montessori material for each school.
Smaller classes —say an average of thirty-five.
Larger classrooms and more floor space.
The mistress of a department free from a class.
Abolition of class work, and substitution of individual teaching.
More open air schools and classes.
More liberty for every teacher.
Proper provision for the instruction of teachers in the theory and
practice by—
(a) Summer schools.
(&) Observation schools.
(c) Lectures at suitable centres in each inspector’s district.
The appointment of an Organising Officer to put the whole matter
on a proper basis.


17. The main benefits that would follow the systematic introduction of
the Montessori system are:—
(a) The saving of half the time now given to reading and writing.
(i) A sounder and more definite training of the senses.
(c) Increased independence and self-reliance.
( d ) Improved health and physique.
( e ) A considerable diminution in the number of retarded children.
18. The State of New South Wales is far ahead of most other places in
the matter of its Kindergartens, and much benefit has followed the recogni-
tion of systematic kindergarten as a part of the State education. The
Montessori system is a step still further in advance, and will, I feel sure,
he welcomed by all kindergartners, infant teachers, and small school
teachers. Introduced with a proper understanding of the principle, and by
way of evolution, not revolution, the Montessori system will bring about
results with us quite as wonderful as those of Rome and other places.
I would again urge, however, that its introduction should be systematic.
Sydney : William Applegate Gulliek, Government Printer. —1914.
