

-
//W
O LIBRARY.)|J


TTEE
TO CONSIDER AND REPORT UPON THE CONDITI
STS OF
(LISTED FOR HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICH
BT BTOS ANT) BPOTTIBWOODE.
PRINTERS TO THE KIXo'-’ i|i - ESCEIXEST MAJESTY
Anfl to be purchased, either directly or through mj Bookretior, from
WYMAN ,an SONS, to, Fetter Lass, E.C.; or
OLIVER *sro BOYD, Cocet, Eithtbcroh ; or
116. Geaetos Street, Dpkwk,
i*riee One SUlting.
1549/1907


Confidential
(G.S. 1171.3/19040.)
Admiralty, S.W.;
Sis, Bth August 1905.
With .reference to Admiralty letter of tire 19th July, C,N. ! 11713/1750.1,
1 am commanded by My Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to inform
you that they have decided to appoint a email Committee to ( • and
report upon the proposals which have been submitted to the Admiralty by
Professor J. S. Haldane, viz. ;
(«) Improvements to enable men to dive in 30 fathoms of water and to A
a normal a,mourn, of work.
(h) Certain experiments in connection with the effect of raid lied air on the
crew of a submarine boat.
The constitution of the Committee is as follows
Captain Frederick T. Hamilton, R.N., M.Y.0., HALS. “ Excellent,”
President.
Professor J. S. Haldane.
Captain Reginald H. S, Bacon, FLAT,, D.S.O. (Laval Assistant to First
Sea Lord of the Admiralty).
Captain Edgar Lees, E.N. (Inspecting Captain of Submarine Boats).
I am to request that the President of; the Committee •will communicate
with lire several members as to the time and place for meetings of the
Committee.
1 am, Sir,
Your obedient servant
Th e Go) imiuuder-m-Uhiel,
DMAS.
H.M. Ships and Vessels,
Portsmouth.
Note. — Staff-Surgeon Oswald Rees, M.D., was appointed to act as Secretary
to the Committee on, 20th October 1905.
Lieutenant (L C. C, Damanl, R.'N., and Mr, A. Y. Catto, Gunner, JELM.S.
“ Excellent,” were appointed for the experimental work of, the Committee,


Fast II,
The Dangers of Decompression, and their Prevention*
Symptoms and occurrence of divers' palsy a-ml caisson disease
.
33
Cause of the symptoms -
di
illustrative ease from Beport on the Health of the Haw
33
illustrative photographs - ■■ . . ’ .
-
34
Cases among pearl divers -
„
31
lieferenees to literature -
34
Varying susceptibility to caisson disease -
35
Methods employed lor avoiding; the symptoms - - .
35
Bates of decompression recommended and practised ■
-
87
The process of .v:or o u of the body with, nitrogen in compressed air
*
39
The process of k- during and after decompression -
40
Unsuitability of neb-- m decompression ,
-
41
Decompression by graduated stages -
-
41
for limiting the period of exposure to high pressure in deep diving
~
43
Desirability of rapid descent in deep diving - - - -
43
.Desirability of ascending quickly to a moderate depth in coming up
-
44
Precautions taken in the Committee’s deep diving experiments
-
14
Preliminary tests in the steel chamber at die Lister Institute
„
45
Provision of a re-compression chamber -
45
Testing pumps, air-pipes, eucS inlet valve of helmet
-
47
Management of diver’s ascent - - - - -
-
47
Case of diver being delayed on bottom beyond time limit - -
-
48
Dangers of repeated deep dives •
48
Conclusions'as to effectiveness of precautions taken
-
48
Inconveniences of the diving ladder -
-
49
The treatment of decompression symptoms ......
-
49
Palliative measures - - - » • - . ..
49
B (3)49084. 2500.-18/07. Wt. 8825, E. & S,
A 2
iRs I ij Rio
Summary of conclusions and recommendations
Jktrodx/ctio».
.Main difficulties in deep diving
Scope of Cornrnittee’s experiments! work
Experiments made at the Lister Institute
.Expedition so Loch Striven
P-4KT I s
'l.he Causes of and .Remedies for Laboured Breathing in Diving.
Description of the diving dross
Mechanical effects on breathing of the diver's position under water
Possible causes of oppression la deep water -
The normal regulation of breathing -
Experiments in the steel chamber - - . . ,
Fundamental law m to air-supply to a diver .
Method of sampling and analysing air from the helmet
Interpretation of the analyses -
Icdects op CO g production of adverse pressure in breathing
Distribution of sif-hnpuritio? in the helmet .
Results of analyse* of air from helmet -
Conclusions frosts, the analyses m to air-sappiv, &e.
for testing the diving pumps ' " . - .
Unreliability of ordinary method of testing -
Method of testing adopted -
Results of tests of pumps
Method of increasing air-supply to diver by connecting two or snore pumps
improved pumps supplied by makers - .
Tests of improved pumps
Heating of pumps daring use -
influence of heating on air-delivery of pumps •
Tests of purity of air 'delivered - . .. .
Mate of pumping and number of cylinders required for a diver at different depths
Experiments with measured work and varying air-supply and depth of diver
Number of men required, for pumps in deep diving ..


Re-compression ami re-compression chamber*
lie- immersion of divers
Oxygen-ivrhaiatiori
Puncture of the heart
Accidental “ blowing up sud its dangers
Causes of accidental blowing up
Danger caused by *’ crinoline ”
Modification in diving dress to prevent Wowing up
Past 111.
The Possibilities of Deep Diving.
Limitations arising from the efforts of high oxygen pressure -
Advantages end disadvantages of the Eouquayrol-Donayrouze sir reservoir
Absorption of C0 2 in the helmet ......
The FUmae diving apparatus
Dr. Hill’s proposed decompression chamber
Diving vessel provided with a caisson
U se of oxy gen to facilitate decompression
Supplement.
Precaution* recommended in Ateendinq from Different Depths and after Different
Periods of Stay m ike Bottom.
.Limits of safety in rapid decompression - ■■ - - . .
Time required for complete saturation ox the body with atmospheric nitrogen
Time required for safe decompression ..... 1 „
Precautions with very short or very long exposures, and with repeated descents
Tables snowing time-limits on the bottom, and stoppages during the ascent, for differen
Appendix I,
Notes on experiments made at the Lister Institute during 1.906 and 1907 by A. E,
Boycott, M.D., Fellow of Brasenose College, Oxford, and G-. C. C, Daraant. lieutenant
ILN., D.M.S. “ Excellent" -
Description of the large pressure chamber presented to the Lister Institute by Dr. Ludwig
Mood, F.E.S.
Choice of animals
ymptoms observed in animals
xperiments on men
Experiments showing that a certain minimum pres
that the symptoms vary with the pressure
Experiments showing that the duration of exposure
Experiments showing that the duration of decompo
sure is required to give symptoms, and
to high pressure is of great importance
tssion is of great importance -
Experiments showing that the absolute range <>f pressure through which decompression
occurs is of loss importance than the relative range of absolute pressure - .
Experiments showing the Importance of the mode and spacing of decompression •
Experiments showing the bad effects of slow compression - - - .
Causes of varying susceptibility and varying incidence of particular symptoms
Apcknofs. IL
Diary of the experiments carried out in the Kyles of Bute from H.M.B. “ Spanker «
Appendix. 111.
A suggested method for the bettor testing of diving pomps


UST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
-Diving iirem, irout view, with air-pipe and life-line attached. New pattern, with legs
iacea up, Xhe extra top, used for taking air-samples, is seen to the debt of the
front of the helmet.
2. -Div-ing dress, back view, showing attachment of air-pipe end life-line with telephone
connection. -hew pattern, with legs Deed at. to prevent diver from being cansmed
mia accidentally fcjown rtp to the mi inme* or ium g m a helpless position.
3. -Photograpli of diver who has ascended from Just under water wish the pomp stopped.
A . T Csis is «ml»psed and closely applied to the body, as is alwavg the ease in the
upright position under wader.
I' if. 4. Service diving pump, with air-pipe connected to a gas-meter io test the leakage of
tho pump at different pressures. The damp oa the air-pipe is being adiested so
as to give the required pressure as shown by the gauge.
big, o,—Photograph taken, through a window of the experimental diving tank, showing how
closely the dmng dress is applied to the diver's limbs and botlv under water. °
6. Showing method of taking a sample of air from the helmet of the diving dross. The
espmimeuUil t&uk w seen in the b&ckgroiUKL
iig. i. Photograph through the windows of the experimental diving tank. Diver takirm a
sample of air from the helmet. ' ° '
lig. tf.—-i or tabic gas analysis apparatus used in the experiments. The photograph also shows
tea memodot connecting the sampling tube with the gas-burette;' Oa shipboard,
d the vessm w not steady, the two screw clips seen ou the rubber tube connecting
ne lower end of the gag-burette with the mercury reservoir are moved close un to
the gag-burette and used in the manner described in the text. ’
Fig, Ba.~Gfas analysis apparatus.
Fig. 9,~ Bottle fitted np for rapidly taking samples of air in deep water. As the diver comes op
to surlace me excess or air In the bottle escapes through the slit seen in the rubber
tube attached to the, giags timing passing through the cork.
b ig. iO.—Micro-photograph of section of spinal cord of goat killed by sudden decompression.
A number ot air-buboles can be seen In the white matter, one being hwt at the
junction oi: white end grey matter.
Fig. IJ.—Portion of goat’s mesentery showing bubbles in blood vessels caused by »*p>’d
decompression from 100-lbs. pressure, after i| hours exposure at this iwessito
in If mutates. * " '
f!g, 12.- "Steel chamber fin- re-compressing divers who show symptoms caused bv air-bubbles in
tiie_ mood or tissues. The chamber is also available for teaching divers to mana«re
tneir ears under pressure. " b
Jwg. 13.—Diver blown to surface in ordinary diving dress. The diver cannot move bis arms,
and tae air cannot escape, as bis valve is below the water.
Fig. id,-—Diving dresses forcibly distended with air. The dress to the left has the hmu Wj
up. .1 no Oliver dress is oi: ib.e luiual pattern,
big, lo.—Diver who has purposely blown himself up la tise new pattern of dross, with the lees
iaoed up. His Heads ts upwards and his arms free. Compare Figure' id,
F;g. Iff.-—-The steel chamber at the Lister Institute, 'View from outside, showirm the back end
ot lae chamber f w-ta tlm largo door and oae inspection window* °
Pig. 17, Tise steel chamber at the Lister Instate. Front end, showing the manhole for
entermg, the small an-lock for passing food, &c. into the ehamher. an inspection
window, a pressure gauge, and several valves, &c.
Pig, 18, —Sketch showing method of measuring work done by diver.
Fig’. 19. Different forms of pistons used iu pumps.
digs. 20, 21, and 22.—Curves showing the rate of saturation of a mau’s bodv under different
circumstances.


itt:
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE DIVING COMMITTEE.
Summary of Main Conclusions.
L The respiratory distress, which, under the present conditions of diving
usually prevents divers from working at more than very moderate depths, such
as ly or 30 fathoms, is due to pressure, of carbonic acid gas in the air of helmet,
and yean be entirely obviated by increasing the supply of air in direct pro-
portion to its increase in absolute pressure. A. table has been drawn up
showing the air supply, rate of pumping, and number of men required for
pumping, with the diver at; different depths.
lhe test at present in use for proving the efficiency of diving pumps
is quite unreliable, and many pumps in actual use, although (hey pass this
rest, are so leaky as to be very inefficient for work in deep water. Efficient
pumps can, however, be supplied by the makers.
3, To obtain a sufficient air supply to enable a diver to work freely
at depths from about IS to 30 fathoms, it Is necessary to couple together
two efficient pumps of the ordinary Service pattern.
4. Practical trials have shown that with good pumps supplying the amount
ol « s y calculated to be necessary, a diver can work as comfortably at
30 fathoms, or more, as in shallow water, apart, from the hampering effects
of darkness and tide. ' "
1 5. Experiments carried out in the steel chamber at the Lister institute
nave shown that the serious dangers arising from the liberation of bubbles
of mtiogen in the olood and tissues on the ascent of a diver from deep water
can best be met by (i) limiting the time spent in deep water, and (2) ascending
oiost of the distance rapidly, and afterwards making the last; part of the ascent
m stages, -with stoppages interposed, in order to limit the time spent in
deep water, the descent, and most of the ascent, should be rapid. This new
method, which saves much time, besides being' far safer, has been practically’
tested at sea up to 35 fathoms,.toe greatest depth hitherto definitely recorded
as having been readied by clivers, and a table has been drawn up showing
tune limits on the bottom, and tbe corresponding precautions recommended
in ascending, for different depths up to 35 fathoms,"
6. of “blowing up" can be greatly diminished by lacing up
the legs of the diving dress, and by abolishing the use of the “ crinoline.”
widen Is a harmful enctimbranee.
p /.la cases of accidental “blowing up.” or too rapid ascent, the danger
ircari air Duchies in tire blood can be avoided by sending the diver down
again, even after serious symptoms have already developed, or by placing
mm m a re-compression chamber carried on the deck, and raising the am
pressure.
Recommendations.
x : f hnt it; be made a routine practice to supply divers with the amounts
( !f ~a ir w hicli the Committees investigations have shown to be required at
different depths : and that a printed table showing the rate of pumping and
the nimiher of cylinders required at different depths be supplied, with''each
diving pump.
2. I.hat arrangements be made .for regular and thorough testing of the
diving pumps belonging to each ship, together with the air pipes, pressure
gauges, ana helmet valves, and for the making good of any serious defects ;
also tout an new pumps and other diving apparatus be thoroughly tested on
delivery. ■' ' ' "
y :> ' -that all new diving dresses be provided with an arrangement for
lacing up as described m the Report, and that the issue and use
or the ' crinoline be abandoned.
4. Fliat a metal junction-piece for connecting together the air-suppiv
throe pumps be supplied with each pump.


5. That ii printed table (uoiubhxed with, that referred to in Recommenda-
tion 1) showing the precautions recommended by the Committee as regards
limits of time in deep water at different depths, and stoppages daring the
ascent, be supplied with each dining pump,
6. That a new edition of the Diving Manual be prepared, containing,
in addition to other information and instructions, a clear account of the
physios and physiology of dicing, and, describing in detail the methods of
carrying into practical effect the results of the Committee A investigations;
also that corresponding practical instructions bo given in connection with
tire diving courses for officers and men.
7, That, with a view of simplifying future investigation into this subject,
any cases of illness caused by diving may be rally reported, with a statement
a! the depth of the dive, time on the bottom, and rate of descent and ascent,
bo far as known, and the report forwarded to the Admiralty for the Medical
Director-General and embodied in the Annual Report on the Health of the
Raw.
8. That investigation oil the means of avoiding the difficulties and dangers
met with in diving be continued.
T. HAMILTON, President,
Commodore, H.M.S. “Excellent.’
BACON,
Captain, “ Dreadnought.”
[.DANE, M,T),, F,R.S,
EDGAR LEES.
Oswald Rees, M.D.. Secretary,
StaiLSurgeo:
Note.—July 1906. The Report was written and transmitted to the
Admiralty at the end of 1906. Its publication was, however, delayed
pending the completion of a further extensive series ol experiments at the
Lister Institute. These experiments, which were carried out by Dr. A. F.
Boycott and Lieutenant (L C. G. Dam ant, E.N., Lave thrown clear light on
the precautions required for safely bringing divers, and other workers in
compressed air, back to atmospheric pressure. The results, which are
summarised in Appendix L, have enabled the Committee to prepare a
Supplement (p, 57) specifying in detail the precautions required during the
ascent of divers from different depths, and after different periods spent on the
bottom. Towards the expenses of these experiments liberal contributions
were made by three Engineering Firms —Messrs, John Aird and Boris,
Messrs. S. Pearson and' Son Limited, and Messrs. Price and Beeves —and by-
Mr. Basil P.. Ellis.
A. revised edition of the Diving Manual has meanwhile been prepared in,
accordance with the Committee’s Sixth Becommondatiom
We think that additional experiments on several points arc much needed,
hut do not wish to delay further die issue of the present Report.


LORDS COMMISSIONERS OF THE ADMIRALTY
TER
BY THE DeRARTMENTAL COMMITTEE APPOINTED TO INVESTIGATE
THIS AND OTHER SUBJECTS.
IHTRODD’CTIOF.
In accordance with oar instructions to investigate the subject of Deep
Diving ia the Royal Ravy, we have the honour to present to your Lordships
the following Report: -
There are two special difficulties associated, with deep diving under
existing conditions. The first is that breathing is found to become very
laboured at depths exceeding about 15 fathoms, the movements of the diver
and his power of doing work becoming thus more and more limited, although
men of exceptional still and endurance have succeeded in working for short
periods at as much as even 30 fathoms. The second is that shortly alter the
diver’s return from deep water to the surface he may develop very serious
symptoms, resulting sometimes in death, more frequently in paralysis,
particularly of the legs and bladder A diver’s palsy ”).
In connection with both of these .main difficulties, and other subsidiary
points, a large number of experiments have been carried out under the
direction of the Committee. These were begun at; Whale Island, Portsmouth,
in an experimental diving tank, presented some years ago by Messrs. Siebe,
Dorman, & do., the first series being carried out by Dr. Haldane and.
Mr. A. Y. Catto, gunner, then chief instructor in diving at Whale Island,
During the autumn and winter many further experimental dives were made
at Spithead in depths up to 19 fathoms by Mr. Oatto and several petty officers
and men passing through courses of diving instruction ; atid numerous
samples of the air breathed by the divers were obtained, and analysed by
Staff-Surgeon Rees, who had meanwhile been appointed Secretary to the
Committee, and who superintended the work. The leakage of the pumps,
distribution of air in the helmet, and other questions, were also investigated,
at the Physiological Laboratoiy, Oxford, and Dr. .Bees tested a number of
diving pumps in use an vessels at Portsmouth, in April 1906 Lieutenant
Damant was appointed for experimental work: in connection with the Com-
mittee. Many further experiments were carried out at Spithead and in the
experimental diving tank by him, and Mr. Catto.
In view of the importance of investigating the means of avoiding- the
dangers of decompression, arrangements were made with the Director and
Governing Body of tie Lister Institute, London, by winch, during June and
July, Lieutenant Damant was enabled to co-operate with Dr. A. E. Boycott,
of the Lister Institute, Fellow of Brasenose College, Oxford, in carrying out
an extensive series of experiments on, animals and men in. a large steel
chamber which had just been presented to the Institute by Dr. j Ludwig
Mond, P.R.S., and which proved of the utmost service. The expenses of
these experiments were met by the Lister Institute. lieutenant Damant and
Mr. Oatto also subjected themselves in this chamber to pressures which were
gradually increased up to 30 fathoms of water, the maximum depth then
contemplated by the Committee.
ISOSi. |i


As sufficiently deep water was not available near Spithead, except where
strong titles cause much delay in dicing, arrangements were made to con-
tinue the work during August in or near Loch Striven, -Argyllshire, from
HALS, "Spanker,” torpedo-gunboat, commanded by Lieutenant V. Diigniore,
Precautions against dangers from decompression had been carefully thought
out beforehand, but as a further safeguard means were also provided *~oii
board, for prompt treatment of any symptoms, Tire diving wan again under-
taken by lieutenant Damant and Mr, Catto, at depths which were gradually
increased up to 35 fathoms, without oppression or ill-effects of any kind, and
with full power of moving freely on the bottom and doing work. So far as
we are aware this is the greatest depth even" definitely recorded as having
been reached by divers, and considerably exceeds that at which work lias
hitherto been deemed to be ordinarily practicable.
As a consecutive account of: ail these experiments would be lengthy
and confusing it will be more convenient to trace one by one the points
investigated and conclusions arrived at. And since it was the respiratory
distress in deep water, and consequent difficulty in working, which originally
led to the inquiry, we may deal with tills matter first.
The Causes of and Remedies foe Laboured Beea.th.iso in Divr
To understand this subject it is essential to bear in mind the arrange-
ment of the diving apparatus. The apparatus in common use in the Koval
Davy is that supplied by Messrs. Siebe, Dorman, & Co., and is fully
described in the Service “ Manna! for Divers,” issued in 1904. The essential
parts ol the dress consist of (1) a stout copper helmet provided with glass
windows, (2) a breast-plate on which the helmet is screwed and secured,
ami (3) a flexible water-proof dress, which can be connected water-tight with
the breast-plate, and covers the whole body except the hands, which project
through close-fitting elastic cuffs (Figures 1,2, and 3). The air is supplied
through a flexible rubber pipe strengthened 'with embedded steel wire and
connected 'with the .helmet through a non-return valve. The valve for escape
of air is on the right side of the helmet, about the ear-level (Figure 3), and is
provided with a weak spring and a screw adjustment for regulating the
amount of air in the dress. There is in addition a tap near the front of the
helmet as a supplementary means of letting off an excess of air. This tap
(familiarly called the “ spitcock ”) is also used by the diver for taking water
into his mouth, for the purpose of washing down the moisture condensing on
the inner surface of the glass window. An extra tap, similarly placed, was
used in our experiments for obtaining air-samples from the helmet. In order
to enable the diver to sink, front and back weights of 40 lbs. each, are
attached to the corselet, and each boot is weighted with 16 lbs. of lead on
the sole.
Air is forced down to the diver by means of a pump with two double-
acting cylinders (Figure 4), the arrangement being such that the air from
either one cylinder alone or both, cylinders together, can be supplied,
according to the depth of the diver, or pair ol divers, served by the pomp.
The internal diameter of each, cylinder is 4 Inches, and the stroke 7 : |- inches,
so that, with no leakage or other loss, each cylinder should deliver o*l cubic
foot of air per revolution ol the pump handies, the air being measured at;
atmospheric pressure. The cylinders are surrounded by a water Jacket, to
When a- diver goes under water, any air with which his dress is inflated
is driven out through the outlet valve by the pressure of the water, so that
the dress becomes closely applied to his legs, body, and anas, up to the
corselet (.Figures 3 and 6). If tie valve were kept screwed up so far that the
dress remained inflated under water he would not be able to get down.
The consequence of the collapse of the dress is that the pressure on all parts
of the. body below, the helmet is greater than in the helmet. If the valve is
freely open, the excess of pressure on any part of the body will be equal to
that of a, column of water the height of the valve-outlet above this part.


Tims the external pressure on die chest at the nipple will be about 1 foot,
of water, or 70 lbs. per square foot, above the pressure in the helmet. As
the pressure in the lungs, is that- of the helmet, the diver will have to expand
Ms lungs against this excess of ‘pressure ; and when the • experiment is tried
the exertion required is found to be very considerable, and breathing is
greatly hampered.
In order to experience the effects of varying pressures in the helmet it
is merely necessary to alter the height of the valve outlet. A nozzle was
therefor© substituted for the valve, and a rubber tube of 1 inch diameter and
2 feet long, with a valve on the end, attached to the nozzle. By varying the
height of this valve, which, was kept freely open, the effects of varying
pressure in. the helmet were observed by the diver (Dr. Haldane), II the
valve was held a few inches above the helmet the excess of pressure on the
chest and abdomen was so great that breathing was altogether impossible,
owing to the very limited power of the inspiratory muscles. The experiment
is a very unpleasant one, arid, probably not free from risk of hannorrhage
from the lungs or air-passages, or temporary stoppage of the heart. With
the valve at the top of the helmet breathing was possible, bid; was extremely
laboured. With the valve at its ordinary level (about opposite the ear),
breathing was still laboured, the adverse pressure being specially felt; during
exertion, or with, a short air-suppiy. With the valve 2or 3 inches lower,
at the level of the upper part of the breast-plate, breathing was much
easier. At this height of the valve the helmet and attached weights are Just
lifted off the shoulders, and the marked relief experienced is probably 'due
largely to the fact that the diver has no longer to inspire from what is
practically a small air-space with rigid wails. The smallness of this space
makes it impossible for him to inspire freely, except during the actual
in-blow from each, stroke of the pump. With the valve still lower the helmet
is lifted right off the shoulders, and so much air accumulates in the dress
that the diver begins to lose Ms hold on the ground.
Under ordinary conditions an experienced diver adjusts the pressure on
lbs valve in such a way as to ease his breathing as far as possible without
endangering his stability, and he may frequently have to adjust the pressure
on the valve as lie changes the position of his head. If, with the valve
comfortably adjusted for the erect position, lie stoops down for more than, a
short time, air accumulates in Ms dress, and he runs the risk of being blown
up ” (i.e. s carried to the surface)-- a dangerous accident if he is at a considerable
depth. In order to stoop or crawl on the bottom lie must unscrew his valve,
so as to let air escape freely. If his head is nearly as .low as his body, as
when he is lying or crawling on the bottom, lie can, however, breathe quite
comfort ably with the valve freely open, since the excess of pressure on the
chest and abdomen is greatly diminished. This position is the most easy one
tor a diver.
Bleeding from the nose, &c. is commonly observed with inexperienced
divers, and is apparently often due to the difference between the air-pressure
and blood-pressure in the walls of the respiratory passages being abnormally
increased owing to failure of the diver to keep his valve sufficiently closed,
particularly during exertion. An inexperienced diver will, for instance, often,
struggle up the shotted rope with his valve wide open, and has, consequently,
a heavy weight to lift with Ms arms ; whereas an experienced man will screw
up his valve sufficiently to take the weight off his arms, and slip up the rope
with practically no exertion.
What- is the cause of the oppression of breathing which affects divers the
more seriously the deeper they go, and which they universally attribute to
the increase of pressure ? The mere increased absolute pressure can, have
nothing'to do with it. .Men in caissons tip to depths of 15 fathoms can work
quite freely if the ventilation is adequate, and, in fact-, are generally believed
to work more easily than at normal, atmospheric 'pressure. No oppression of
breathing was experienced in the experimental steel chamber by men. or
animals up to 30 fathoms pressure, or could be observed through the windows
in animals up to nearly 4.0 fathoms pressure; and a careful, consideration
of the facts pointed, even at the outset of our investigation, towards the
conclusion that the cause is not increased, pressure of air or water, but
E 49084.


increased pressure of the carbonic acid gas (Co a ) present in the air of the
.helmet, ■ . ... , :
The- means by which breathing is' normally regulated has been quite
recently elucidated by Haldane, agd DriestieyT The volume of air breathed
per . minute by an average adult man in, a position, of perfect rest is about
7"5 litres -per 'minute (at 60° lb), or, roughly, of a>• mo Put,. The
amount breathed is regulated as follows. At normal, atn , i>> pressure
each, person automatically regulates his breathing in sac., <• , q that -the
C().. percentage in the alveolar air (air.present in the alveoli, or air-cells, of
tlis lungs) contains about 5.’6 per cent, of ,CC)>-t The exact percentage varies
In different individuals, but is practically constant Ipr the same individual.
If the percentage rises, even very slightly, the breathing becomes, deeper, so
as tp effect compensation ; if it fails, the breathing is diminished or suspended
until it again rises to normal. .During even very moderate muscular work
the amount of CCh given off by tire lungs is increased to three or four times
the resting normal, and the amount of air breathed is correspondingly
increased. With hard work the increase may be twice as great as this.
If the air inspired is vitiated by C.O s , the volume breathed is also increased,
and ia such proportion as, if possible, to. keep the alveolar C() s percentage
nearly normal. Thus, if the air inspired contains 3 per cent, of (X).., the
amount of air breathed will be nearly doubled, since nearly double as much
of this vitiated air needs to be inspired in order to keep the alveolar
€o* percentage normal; and even moderate muscular work, in such air will
cause great respiratory distress.
When the atmospheric pressure is abnormal the law as Just stated ceases
to hold, and it is found that what remains constant- i§ not the percentage,
but the absolute pressure exercised by the C() 8 in the alveolar air—i.m,
the percentage multiplied by the total atmospheric pressure. Thus, to quote
an experiment-by Haldane and .Priestley, it was found that in themselves
the mean, percentage of CO* in. the alveolar air was 6 ’Ol per cent, at 765
nh dime Ires (about 30 inches) barometric pressure, and 3 "53 per cent, at
1,260 milimetres, while the absolute (X) g pressures corresponding (allowing
for the aqueous vapour in the alveolar air) were 3'64 per cent, and 5*68
per cent, of one atmosphere, or almost exactly the same. Since the work of
the Committee began, this law has been verified np to a pressure of
b atmospheres (corresponding to 28 fathoms of sea-water) by iirs. Hill and.
Green wood.t who worked in an .experimental steel chamber capable of
taking, a man in the recumbent , position. The same law has also been found
by Ors. Boycott and Haldane (unpublished experiments) to hold good down
to about two-thirds of an ncm>~phere. At the latter pressure, therefore, the
alveolar air contains as much a- 5'6 -f | 8*25 per cent, of OO* and at the
former pressure as little as 5"5: 6 =v 0’92 per cent. CO*.
To judge from these facts, the effects on a diver of a given percentage of
CO,, in the air of the helmet will vary with the depth of the diver, and the
whale pi our experiments on diving have confirmed this inference. For
instance, as air containing 5 per cent, of 00* produces great panting at
atmospheric pressure, air containing O'6B per cent, will produce an
equal effect at 35 fathoms, the greatest depth rove bed by Lieutenant Damant
and Mr. Catto. As, however, itwas desirable to bays' some direct quantitative
experimental evidence on this point, the following experiment was carried out
by Lienteaant Damant on himself and Mr. Catto in the steel chamber. The
subject continued, to breathe into arid out of a large glass bottle until marked
panting was produced.. This bottle was connected' with the graphic recording
apparatus devised by Haldane and IhTctffy.pso that the exact increase in
the \ obune of sir breathed, could be n-. murednear the beginning and. end of
lia- (Xpermmup .md a sample of the air taken for analysis. The menu results
to -'wnal expr An tents wore as follows ; -
* Journal of Pligsios ociy, Voi, 32, page 225, 1906.
t lOrzGen-iM sn4 IPiklanc, Journal of Physiology, ?oL 32, page 4St>, i HO5.
1 'FrocertUftpo of ike Mopal Society, Yol. 70, page 455, 1906,
page 248.


Da mam: -
-
a|
Q
1
5-70
5-70
x 2 ’ 4
-
4
•40
3-7
1-60
5-93
x2'2
Catto
-
H
0
1
6*22
6-22
x 2•!*
1'
-
H
40
3-7
J -64
6-07
, x 2 • 3 '
(
th.e air s-
apply
)
At
9
atmospheres, or 33 1
:eet, or 5| i
lHxIiotbb a
must
be
>
V
double
r
\
increas*
3(1 t-0
j
At
3
66
11
?f
>1
t
reble.
At
4
i, ' 99
„ 16f
??
>>
4 time
At
5
„ 132
99
JJ
?s
5 „
At
6
» 165
,, 27|-
??
6 „
At
7
198
n 33
i ,,
At
8
231
38-1
J?
8 3
At
9
„ 264
44*
?>
9 „
Period daring j v , i Pressure of ;■ Ik crease in
which i A gift v :/ ., , P Poo 1« Bottle I Volume of Air
itiojeot, BreatUtog : Pounds per '“P ia PcTc<Atogc : breathei near
continued, in i Square Inch Atmospheres 7 . : of one t ' End of
Mirr.Oes, I above absoiaw. " i ,r>, { Atinogohere. i Emeninent. -
Atmosphere.
Owing to to tte limited capacity of 1 the. bottle,.and consequent shortness
of each experiment, the results are not strictly accurate; but they leave
no doubt that the effect of (JO* on. the breathing depends on its pressure, and
not merely on its percentage.
A corollary of fundamental importance in diving follows from this law."
It is that ichaiever the pressure a diver "is tender, he requires the same volume
of are. measured at that pressure. In other words, his mmimm supply
of air. measured, on the surface at ordinary atmospheric pressure, must
increase in. direct-proportion to the absolute pressure he is under. -A
direr at 210 feet, or 7*4 atmospheres absolute pressure, will, thus need 7'4
times as much air, measured either by weight., or by volume at ordinary
atmospheric immure, as he would need at surface.
.Average »tino-sphcric pressure at sea-ievel (760 millimeters, or nearly
30 inches of mourny ,> is equivalent Approximately to the pressure of 34 feet
of fresh water, or 3dfeet of sea-watet, hence the following table represents the
increased air supply needed at various depths of sea-water, by a diver, as
compared with what he would need at surface .level: —■
At 10 „ 297 „ 491- „ „ 10
It is evident also that the work expended in pumping an adequate supply
of air increases very ,rapidly with increase in depth, even if no extra leakage
from the pumps be allowed, for, since not only the resistance to pumping,
but also the quantity ol air needed,-increases in proportion to the- pressure.
From the practical standpoint this is a most: important, considers,tioa. ,
Since a diver not only inspires froiri, but expires into the air in his helmet,
he must re-breathe to a greater or less extent the 00* which he produces ;
and if lie does so to a considerable extent he will evidently need to breathe
much more deeply and freemen tly than would otherwise be the case. , Since,
in um* er, he has also t-la-itho against greater or less pressure from the
t; . already explained, h. a<9 not only be much inconvenienced, but, as
shoe,,! below, his Uih-p<mhKlmn will be increased by the great exertion of
breathing, and this will .dj la ther increase ins distress. The consequent
accumulation of CO,, in the hems i max h ad to loss of consciousness, particularly,
if the respiratory cemr-g !h' cm «».>>ly exhausted, as ,may easily happen.
Is experienced divers are >u» f iiOAxp.mn ly pulled. np in ,an unconscious state,
apparently from this cause.
In order to obtain, further mt u<nation as; to the effects off (Air-pressure in
the air of the helmet, and the adequacy or otherwise ol the air-supply; under
ordinary conditions in diving, it was. evidently necessary to obtain sanrples
of air fiom the helmet for analysis.. These were obtained through the


supplementary outlet tap (“ spitcock ”) at the side of the helmet In front, at
about tiie mouth-level.
Most of the samples were collected in receivers of stout glass (Figures 6, 7, 8)
provided, with three-way taps at each, end. Since the samples from deep water
had often to be taken in complete darkness, each receiver was marked by the
knobs of glass shown in, the ligate. Those could easily be felt and counted
by the diver. The knobs shown on the taps indicated whether the latter were
open or closed. The receivers were filled with water before use. The method
of taking the samples is shown in the figure, the receiver being held above
the level of the outlet valve, so that the air should blow out freely. In the
ease of samples taken from, very deep water the excess of pressure was relieved
when the diver was half-way up, as there was otherwise a risk of the receivers
exploding or the taps being blown out.
When samples had to be taken with as little delay as possible, as during
work experiments, ordinary bottles of abput 70 cc. (2 ounces) capacity were
used, the open bottles being simply inverted over the tap. Each, bottle was
provided with a perforated cork, through, which, passed a short piece of glass
tube, to which was attached a piece of rubber kibe closed at the end by a
glass stopper (Figure 9). Between the stopper and glass tube there was a
longitudinal slit in the rubber tubing. This acted as a non-return valve,
allowing the excess of air to escape as the diver ascended. 'When the diver
reached the surface the glass stopper was pushed, down so as to make the
closure quite secure. In a few cases ordinary bottles with greased glass
stoppers were used, the stopper being secured by an. elastic baud which,
allowed the excess of air to blow out as the diver ascended. At the surface
the stopper was made tight by turning it round and pushing it well in.
For the analyses an easily portable apparatus (.Figure 8) was specially
designed by Dr. Haldane, who described it in the Journal of 'Hygiene, Mol. 6,
page 74, 3906. It gives results accurate to within 'Ol per cent,, 10 cc. of air
being needed for each analysis. The method of transferring the air from the
glass receivers or bottles into the gas-burette Is shown, in Figure 8, and was
the same as that described by Dr. llaidane in The investigation of Mine Air,
Griffin & Co., 1905, In using the gas-analysis apparatus on board ship some
difficulty arose owing to rolling, and consequent unsteadiness of the mercury
level, in the burette. This difficulty was overcome by having two screw-clips
close to the- gas-burette on the rubber tube connecting it with tbe. mercury
reservoir. Before each reading one of these was screwed up tight, so as to
steady the mercury ; and the level was accurately adjusted by tightening or
loosening the other clip.
In interpreting the analyses it is necessary, as already explained, to bear
in mind not merely the percentages, but the pressures of the gases present in
the helmet, since their physiological effects depend upon, their pressures. As
regards the most, important gas, CO,, it was found by Haldane and Priestley®
that with a pressure of 2 per cent, of an atmosphere the amount of fresh
air taken into the air ceils of the lungs was increased about 50 per cent.;
with 3 per cent, about .100 per cent.: with 4 per cent, about 200 per cent. ;
with 5 per cent, about 300 per cent.; and with 6 per cent, about 500 per
cent. With the latter pressure panting is severe, whereas with 3 per cent,
the increased depth of breathing might easily escape notice except during
muscular work, which would cause about 100 per cent, more panting than, usual,
the effects of the CO* on the breathing being multiplied by, and not merely
added to. the effects of: the work. With more than 6 per cent, the distress is
very great, and headache Is often produced in a short time. With more than,
about 10 per cent, there is an increasing tendency to loss of consciousness,
accompanied, however, by no immediate danger to life ; and even 2o per cent,
of CO* takes a long time to produce death in animals. A mixture of about
35 or 21l per cent, of CO* with, air is reported to have been tried as an
anaesthetic before chloroform, &c., were adopted. When a diver’s breathing
is greatly hampered, and bis CO* production is increased by struggling, the
anaesthetic effects of CO* are, owing to exhaustion of his breathing powers,
probably produced, by a considerably loss pressure of UO* than during rest
with the breathing free, ■
* Loe. cif., page 241).


Deficiency of oxygen lias much more formidable and dangerous effects
than excess of 00*: but a diver using the ordinary apparatus is never in
danger from this cause. The effects, if any, of oxygen, like those of CO*
depend upon its pressure, lienee the deeper a diver goes the mare abundant
is Ms sop ply of oxygen. Even at the surface a man breathing in a confined
apace, such as a diver’s helmet, feels the effect of CO* severely before he is
in any danger from want of oxygen ; and a diver 5 fathoms under water would
certainly become unconscious from excessive pressure of CO* long before
i affected by deficiency of oxygen,. A. diver may have to fear the
effects of excess of oxygen pressure, but only at depths greater than have
hitherto been accessible, as will he shown in .Part 111, In the samples
taken, the oxygen percentages have been determined merely as a check upon
the CCk percentages.
When tire air supply to a diver is definitely known his production of C0 2
per minute can be calculated from the analyses of the helmet air, if we
assume that, as will he shown, below to lie approximately true, the com-
position of the sample is the same as that of the air leaving the helmet. This
calculation, which is a very useful one, has therefore been made in connection,
with the analyses, whenever the delivery of the pumps, allowing for leakage,
was known.
The following analyses of air from the helmet were made with a view to
determining the effects of adverse pressure in breathing on the C0 2 pro-
duction of a, diver. The samples were obtained in the experimental, diving
tank, Dr, Haldane being: the subject, Tire samples in each pair were taken
after 3 and 5 minutes of ventilation, at as nearly as possible a constant rate of
Id revolutions ol the single pump, or I*3 cubic feet of air, per minute, about
an hour being occupied for the whole series. The movable experimental
valve, described above, was attached to the helmet: —
Pressure of
Production
ct CO, in
Of bio Beet
Dec Minute.
Percentage of-CO*
AtEiiosphem
r Standing on the platform above water in the ■>
I diving dress, with air escaping freely from the | . T ,
If valve. Dress only slightly distended. Breast >■,, tj.fj-lrtS IDS
| and back weights off. Stood 3 minoteu before j ° '
I first sample taken - - - - J
1 ’Kneeling on bottom, helmet 6 feet below surface, a,, 9 , rt ,
i i Experimental valve at level of top of breast- rfi f.Tj j- 2-68 3’ 16
( plate. Valve open freely. Breathing easy. }- £ iu '
( Same as last, bat experimental valve at level of i F
3 { ordinary valve (height of earl. Breathing rtrf.l M;■ 3-63 4-36
( laboured - - - - .Ji-> oh }
f Same as last, but experimental valve »t top of t
j helmet. Caused so much distress that the two |c ± -9Q ) I
samples could not. be taken successively, and kjg -i|.y i 4’05 I 4-86
[ the CO9 bad probably not reached Its maximum 1 0 " ■' I
I percentage - - - - J
f Same as No. 2, bat pump now at six revolutions. 1
- J Caused very great distress and samples had to \ J 6'12 ) e . -vs
,J : he taken too soon, so that CO* had certainly j K 5-55 | 1 0 ’
L not reached its maximum - • - - J
■ 04.3 -f-
These results are in many ways instructive. During complete rest in.
an easy position, the C-O r prodaction of Dr. Haldane, which has been often
measured, varies from about * 010 to '0.1.2 cubic feet per minute (measured
at about 60° Ik). Yet in. the diving dress, during rest under water with
the breathing easy (Ho. 2), the CCh-production was nearly thrice as great,®
and was four times as great with the valve freely open in its ordinary
position. The strain of the unaccustomed position under water thus caused
• This was of course chiefly due to the wont of experience of Hie diver, During rest in
an easy position in the tank 'ldeatenant Dammit and Mr. Catto only produced about O’ 14 cable
feet ol GO s per minute, and often less than this. Experiments No. 2 and 3 were repeated with
Mr. Catto as subject awl m abundant air supply (2 cubic feet per minute). His CcVprodnetion
in a perfectly easy position, with the valve strewed up so as to completely ease she breathing,
was ‘OlO cable feet per minute, and with the valve freely open "014 cubic feet per minute, or
40 per cent. more.


No. ol
Expennk'.rit
Womioii-'ot Diver.'
C0« per Cent. M
Mouth Level.
C0» per (Mmf,, oh
Exhaust 'Voire Level,
un surface outside tank - • -..,
■*
1-16
1 -53
o
-
■ 1-56
I ■ 40
3
In tank, valve Just below surface -
-
1 -95 -
2-07
4
?-5 >?
-
I '4.-1
I'M
5
In tank, valve well below surface -
-
1-41
i *02
6
•ii S*
-
M2
■95
1-45
1--10
a great increase in the (XVproductioh, the latter being still farther raised
to\he extent of about 40 per cent, by the extra breathing work with the
valve open, at its ordinary level. It should, however, be borne in nund that
about half this extra work must have been due to the inadequate air-supply,
since in ho. 3 the CO* pressure had reached 4 • 36 per cent, of an atmosphere.
Failure to manage the valve properly thus produces a vicious circle of causes
of discomfort to a diver. In No, 5 the sense of pressure, and
disablement, lor-ali practical purposes, was similar to that produced in divers
in very sleep water with the ordinary inadequate air-supply.
The want of correspondence between the calculated Ch dr production during
rest, standing in the faring dress, and in an ordinary comfortable position, at
first aroused ’the suspicion 'that the samples from the side tap of the helmet
might owing to imperfect mixture of the air inside the helmet, _ contain
more CO* than 'the air escaping from the outlet valve. To test this point,
arrangements were made to take samples as nearly as possible simultaneously
from idle side, tap and the'internal opening of the outlet valve. A helmet
with two side taps was used, one of tli.es- mp- being connected by a narrow
tube inside the helmet with the opening el fa-- nitiet valve. Ibe cxpc-imeats
were made in the gas-engine cooling tank m the Physiological fr-.-m.tory,
Oxford, The results were .as follows, the ventilation being, as 1 • ■ it as
nearly as possible T 2 .revolutions of the single pump, or I*2 calm- toei, per
minute ; - . .
It will be seen that although there were sometimes differences _ i n one
direction or the other between the two samples in each pair, due m part,
probably, to their not being quite simultaneously taken, there was practically
no average difference : so that the mixture in the helmet is fairly complete,
there being no short-circuit of fresh air from the inlet to the outlet valve,
' Ips the case of the last pair of samples, the diver (Dr. Haldane)_ took special
care to get into a perfectly comfortable position in the tank, with the valve
well screwed up, so as to make the Wmthmg p-nfectly -easy. The average
■oercentawe of (Xfr in the! two sampfrs >m.- umv only I*o3, corresponding to
a production, of CO* of '*ol2 cubic fun .pm minute-r-a normal amount lor
complete rest in his case.
A. large number ox, samples have been collected, under ordinary conaitems
of diving, during both rest and work. The results are shows in the
accompanying table. In many of the earlier samples the e-mage ol the
■Dumos used was not measured at the time, and owing to the mumge varying
from dav to day, could not be accurately estimated, so that the h-pred action
of tbe diver cannot he stated. The samples are arranged m order of the
depth at which they were obtained, fax collecting them, care was token, so
far as possible, to keep the pump working at a constant speed, ana the diver
in a constant state ol rest or work, for 2 or 3 minutes previously.


—
Resting.
'022
.At rest.
•032
Work, ordinary exertloi
•065
■033
?7
*7
•018
Rest.
•0.34
Work, ordinary exertioi
•Oil
Best.
•02!)
Work, ordinary
exortios
•022
■015
Best.
•036
Work, ordinary
oxertioi
•046
77
■019
.Rest,
•079
Work, diver ex
raosted
■008
Best,
■ 048
Work, ordinary
exenio
•045
77
•018
Rest,
•017
■023
Work, ordinary
oxer tk>
■032
57
•016
.Rest,
•023
Work, ordinary
exortio
■027
77
■027
Rest,
■042
Work, ordinary
exertio
•022
Rest.
■046
3
1
1
exertioi
•042
77
??
•019
Best.
?» -X- : (C X X 0-5 'CO v 7 so 03 CO CO X i"* vO f- X O X X o -35 -*t- <?> OS x^*
1> X X X I'-* XO Ci <■£> X CO {- XCOO3CO CO Jr- -CO- r~< 35 JT- -tH «y* X
"a. ' 4444:44*4 4 4 CO 4 4 t- ?0 00 >-• CM «n> 0* O'? vo 00
2 |SCS || I M SS-II?? i M M M M M
CO ON ' ■ r-« 00 -Cl CO
O Mi o o o
CO o? O O CO
v's ;—< —•: C-'S -0 Z''i. "-< ' '—< ""i I-H --i
4 i * ?xoooc x o ?o co oa *r sa « h amcjc<o eo o <e
£ | i I xOXox X 50 CO ! — 1 CO VO XCO CO- r* «0 X- XCOXXS «S *-» XXX 3>
4 00 CO CO 4 4 GO 4 SO 4 CO 31 00 CO CO 4 CO 00 CO CO CO 03 CO 03 00 -03 Co 00 05
,~€ ~i ~i fit #1 . 7 q 03 03 03 03 03 03 OS 03
.CO j .yjs r4#s Wc>
o co r- jh* 3? oo •» k £ o oi ”tc so X <0 *- *- X *- x.;- X
o v 3 OS 03 -03 CO CC 03 03 03 03 ™< GO 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 r~t f~* r~. w r— r-f 03
!■< v, >■.. . ■ '.o’ %/*, U"' ■'**} CO C“i
••• s.; >v jjM j-..* £-Z, O O O'! v ,: i 03 CM C-< Ct! CO CO CO CO C*o fO f -0 C£J s>» .f - '*- Jt'- y 00 QD OO C 5 CO
M * i S.. I it i* it <k <m -it o* o* oi o-j 05 os i* 01 01 cm 05 05 01 «05cm01 05 cm 0-5 -m cm 01 05
* !
2 ; O y*i xd >-6 »fj !£: & Z£> '■& t£> k"~ X-* Sr* h~ *- X- t-- 00 50 00 X -X CRftCSOOO
”£> i j .
** I _
I
■§ I VS XO 000000 S* <M CM ftl 53 NC O W '--O >-C QOO CC «ft £ft
j <£\J £>.3 j £.~, 'Vyi ■*■s■■ ■**< *ej4 -■“< •«s 'H’W Kft Vft VO *i“s *-0 *■& & C£? v*U CD
( 55js S *f;iSS ? js8 f S * « s s J i « ? ? s j v «
qo. ! »
Pm ! i i j > i i i • • ' ! * 1 ’
CO *
! i J « * * * » * 5 * *
00000045444 00 0 000Ci4f™ii4^4


-
cm :v.
• C<VP"0-
Air Supply iu
C0 2 per
Deii-h :
f
.f
Cubic Feet per
Ceo.t in
uf Oiy;, »
per vVj'
V-n <> >5
V * »rc
Diver m
Cable Feet
lien'uirks.
Minute.
Bair : p]e.
in Sainpk
•Vs Hi -
oer
Minute.
•i 4-
i '2
1-03
—
1 -06
•01.2
Complete rest in easiest position In gas-engine tank at Oxford.
.2' 4
■76
•94
' <y -
•OS 7
Rest in divine tank.
i-a
1 * 75
T89 ■
1-91 '
■020
1-4
2 ■ 10
2-53
i-2*
•028
After walking- a abort way in tank.
1 • 3
2-82
3-35
3.-08
■036
1-2
3-83
3-60
4 i;
■045
At rest after walking until much exhaustion In tank.
1-2
4-36
3-4.0
Mi
■051
Whilst walking in tank.
-s
•9
3-82
3-50
•1-96
4-91
4-16
3 -si
-034
■031
Walking slowly about tank.
At rest In ts.uk • vaiye wide onen.
1' 2
2*54
—
'h"r *
■030
At rest in tank.
i-2
2-73
—
3*32
•032
4. - 2 i
■42
•4.5
•49
•015
4-21
-34
■45
■40
■013
4-56
1-62
1 -66
I -93
•072
W alking for 20rfi time round tank.
o' 72
■28
•28
•38
•013
Best in tank.
5-72
■23
•35
-41
•012
5-00
• 66
•78
•9.2
■031
VViUklug- for 20th iime round tank.
5-26
•25
• 19
•29
■OH,
Best to tank.
5-26
•16
•18
■IS
■006
4-03
3-34
1 • 39
1 -58
•054
Walking for 20th time round tank.
4-03
•85
■ 93
1-09
•033
r
2-7 (about)
-63
—
1:03
•016
R65-t. sitting on bottom.
2 ’ i »
I-30
—
2‘13
•034
Work, after lifting 56-H>. shot 3 feet 36 times in 13|- minutes
2-7 ,,
•38
•46
■ 60
■009
Rest, sitting on bottom.
2-7 „
I-14
1-24
1 -87
•029
Work, after lifting 66-lb. shot 3 fee t 28 times In 4|- minutes
2-33
' 3/
•58
•87
•on
5 1 rest kneeling oa bottom.
2-38
1-54
2-69
Walking about as in, ordinary work.
3 ' 38
1-94
2-15
3'39
■04".
2-33
•7
-82
1-22
'0 ,>
i- est.
2-38
2-63
3-31
4-60
•061
Working, ordinary exertion.
2-38
2-52
3-22
4-41
•059
■29
“
-50
Resting.
co • ' • s 'x".xxcd ' * " ' * # * ' 5
ocj o,C' q c ci phow<oo : o Ow w o cso QCj o


I I
95 a
i ®
fee« j
‘B !
M «iX 'O ~i -g *r'M oi£i; ~ M ~
i Mi 6 MiMMM I
*•5 o CO X X CD CC CO *" 00 X O 05 *-* 3D CM O
otx 2? x X £* 53 r 23 ir* & cr' 2? sr '£■ TT
O 00 CO
Si ISSN ! IS
•35 X<OX CM '3O rf* 30 O’! OO X • XXXXOX 35 N Oi rf< CM -X: O A'- O
X X O X X X O.? X X t~~ CM I'" C l X X CM X X< X X O _X *-* i-- CO *•- 00 X O 0-1 X -M< X X X ‘X O
(b X OS O X r- i— CO *•- s*s X —; O 0-s 05 *f> X cr X O j
OS vrj. 'O O.? OS CO CO i.O ><+■ ir> CO CO 00 00 10 X CO >0 <0 *0 vO »0
O'! co « 5.0 CO Ori CO CO >.O. o:s CO
-4 0-3 X 03 X
I- CO CO CM to 1— X —‘ CM CO 1— x o X
CXCOCOto 1- o | Cft »I I }jOi CO I (N-H }|OX |. | I i j
sgsss
I—l t-» ■ ' CM
CO X X CO X X 0- 035 CO CO H CM X O OiJOOi* Jf- X X X X CO 03 X X- X X X X X
O CO X o X X X <T> •*& Q$ -~ti 03 X X O'- O O X X 05 O C& X CM O X CO X JC- SO
1:1 11.. i loti i
X i'" X X X-" x X i-* x -- -~ y w x "' cm x
-X' X ‘0 X 10 X Cl O C O OO Ci CO O OO
CM CO CO 00 X CO X CC X:- X X CM 03 CM
Ci C 3 Cl Cq CM Cl t~* -vt<
iiiSSgitgSgg gggggSSgSgggSafggiggGSGS&gS
CM CM 03 X CM CM CM CM CM CM CM CO X X X to X X
X X X X CO X X CO X CO X X CO X CO 00 X X
O ! 05 Ol CM CM 03 CM CM CM CM X X CO X
CM CM X X X X
Bigs§S§Ssiis SSgggf
O O O
r- r~- i- i-~ e-~ s— *-* x- tr* ?- *■» i— t- i ~ t- x oo oo c» d
CS x
s o faJ . ‘ ‘
t 1 s
X 5
„,»{■> , ! * . O { t } ( j j
*■“< ‘W '•W W' W* i *w / W '•-«*) W* i ~ v ' /i >'■'"! w" w' f" - '•-*■'■ ■**/ C*) 'W MOW Cw‘ 'O W* 'w“ ’•«•) W> >*~i
j; 49084.


!
i »
1 .AS
gg % s
t "ig ■£ ®
S S « oft*
f M n .... S <* e
! ® ° S 8 & c
! - >. O a=
I I I : §l'l
- *p gp gc $
; bl) ®
j +3 '-3 5 S U ~ O
' c* £ S 'ts O a'-' W 5 JH W '■ «> C 5 V. »V 1£ £s »- gr 9
i «? «*•«'£ *" ♦• *• O _° <" <S> • '"''
| £5 j£ ps £: £3 & as car s£ op *£ ap &
;. £ & ■'-' &J J_ -§ 'to r-» f~! O O , , , . . . w ,i« i'* 00- O N O «> I s * >■ ’(i 1
i ® 2 <M CM CM CO ! i I ! N CC w H « w JC.
j V.O p. .9 OuS O O O O O i 1 ■ i i ! 00000 c 0-0 -o- o-o
i gjfijs « . . . : . . •■•'..••■'■••••■■•■
I MS -4-‘ 5
I S-SggA g 3 * « ® 9 ! ° -2 •«O«*N-<<C'» - 0'l i '9>o«« '-#
I f- fflGo g ® ffl X M IC ® h O X CC £•■■* o MH y— tis. ifi >/; ® ®
IPi 41 O cq M o C 0 -H CO 'H XCM CM r"* CM CM CM *0 CO
j » C 3 .
! « 9* wo ?■-■•
! -g S’o I 1 || J r “ i. 1 l r | 9- i 1 * i i i i 1 r 1 j
I «C u*> 5 w ! ! ’ : : :
I h 's 'Lb
! 3 i>
: S' ‘p O a; O >0 CD O CD mH rH GO i— 'CO -X *OQOO H<- CO-'
| « "sH ■ ■•■*£ X -AO -Ck ■M* ■ -Aft. i'- 0--CSA d> Ob O O go O. *0 CO X *-0
| 8I I ’ ‘~ «* - - ’ “ ' * ' ‘ * * ’' ~-■
I 53 %
| s>■■* +s
u g -5 AO CM CO O O , CM O Q ?-* AO i- O O O O
j a, £ % r xX 00 I • | | j £- xoococo o 0% xOO
i _o g »0 « CO ‘ . ‘ ! , «' to..® « X J <\
| < S ■ - ...
1 *3 ® fIJ
| . X £ -rj-i -rH ■*& CM f—i M M '■-?■ ->f'. O O'2 0-^
1 ® -P '
1 * k .9
| ° ..
J 3 O P-> HC) ,-fy!H .•■<.£■;
c &» so *& i- so ivo cm r- cm c<j to a o -x- o O a> oo o O'
§ -A! 9 %% n-r, f& so eo C-'i CM 0<! *-<• CM M-i J— -CM f >-3 'o's
_ =
I <g p q , fi |
; : «o >?0 X -sfc .rfi -rff -rf< xis
<( h 'C 1,1 si « ro I
___ - Q.-W j
9 I »; i Hjifo HO H<o
- j J j 2 o ..'£ i> to*, - i-~- r- i- O- i-- t> G" f-. ,s■■-. i
Mj'CCj . . w * y~< y~, r~-. r r~.
- ! fc
i I
| ?5' i "I | 5J § §? o , ij, >5 o;; o, o\ o o o o o o o- o-
| ; .-- fe
I I ;i-C r"' j*-* r\ \ r \ J ' If*; < r--[ r'\ -r-\ r * r* ’ ■■•- >••-! .-H .--s
j | w


11, *
ft*. .JS
V, j
*£i r
i
IS | i
o t> 'X; 5? £
•iI « ~ * « J
f" 5-< <»< s
a o as ® \s
suJ
"** S-K 'M"! «W *+■> -as
a 4 a 35 a g
-J4S -*B 43 -ij C?
is h %
-
s 'I o I s s i
« *£ bE eg >£ s£ «
J $«
s-§®s2 I I 1 3 ;
•X 05 rH O & O <?* *0 O- OT:- C •« CK >0 >— VO O 05 <£>
OS, i-. ■ <75 i- 05 s-0 ; —t. 05 35 20 05 00 i- X rH O CO Q. X
~t< 05 ‘O? <0 X' 0-5 o • <0 X CO CO 05 05 05 05 CO «-* *0
I S 50
Mill
H M lO ?3 « o O O H C'
'i< o '-i< X *rj X- X izs r~* X-* Q 0 CO i'-
J Qli l d d d


Attention may first be drawn to the column showing the pressure of
CO* in the air of the helmet. ' It will be noticed that this varied from
O’ld to 10*0 per cent, of an atmosphere. The sample showing the latter
very high pressure was taken under great difficulties by Instructor Watkins
just before signalling for more air, and when he was probably on the verge
of losing consciousness. As he was resting on the bottom bis distress was
entirely due to the inadequate air-supply, which was probably about I‘6 cubic
feet per minute measured at surface, or less than o’4 cubic feet, per minute
measured us it reached him. From the statements of the divers the general
inference could be drawn .that marked inconvenience and inability to continue
any considerable exertion were experienced as soon as the GCfepressure
began to exceed about 4 per cent, of an atmosphere. Tims at a depth of
23| fathoms, or 139 feet, and a GOrpressure of 4AS per cent., lieutenant
Damant was unable to continue for more than 8 minutes the heavy
exertion of pulling a rope passing through three blocks, so as to lift a
56-lb weight about 9 feet per minute. On the other hand, with, the
COrpressure well under 3 per cent., heavy exertions, such as walking smartly
in the tank, or on the bottom, could be continued for long periods. Even fit,
the extreme depth of 35 fathoms both divers were perfectly comfortable with
a COrpressure of less than 4 per cent.
The column showing the G() r prodnetion per minute is of much import-
snce, as furnishing data from which it is possible to calculate easily the supply
of air needed by a diver, taking into account also his depth. During ’rest
the average production of CO* by Lieutenant Damant was *022 cubic:; feet per
minute on tire sea-bottom, and ’ 0.14 cubic feet in the tank, where- the conditions
were more favourable from absence of tide. For Mr. Catto the figures were
'oil> on the sea-bottom, and 'Ol3 in the tank. As both divers are spare and
not tail, weighing only about 11 stone, their normal average C() s -pmd action,
during complete rest, is probably not more than ‘Ol cubic feet, so that during
rest on the sea-bottom their average GCfeproduction was about double the
true resting value, and sometimes, in. consequence of the exertion required to
keep steady with a tide running, even, three or lour times the true resting
value. Of special interest is the Otyprodoction of Lieutenant Damant at
35 fathoms, the greatest depth reached. Sitting quietly on the weight at the
and of the shot-rope, with no tide running, ills CO*-prodnciion was only
"013 cubic feet per minute, which was the same as in the tank at one fathom
or on the sea-bottom under the same conditions at 23 fathoms. The oxygen
pressure was 7'3 times tire normal, or 153 per cent, of an atmosphere so,"that
he was breatniag 7’ 3 time as much oxygen as usual, but the- oxidation
processes in his body were not increased.
During work the C0 2 -prodaction was, of course, always much higher than
during rest. The-greatest amount (*079 cubic feet-per minute) wasprodaced
by Mr. Catto, during struggles to free himself from the mud, in which he had
stuck at a depth of 7 fathoms. The air supply was rather short, and the
CCVpressrsre, when this sample was taken, was 7'42 per cent, of an atmosphere,
the diver being naturally much exhausted by his two-fold straggle with the
mud and the air. The production, of CO* was about eight times the true resting
value. Very nearly as high a (Xfeproduction ("072 cubic feet) was observed
in the case of Lieutenant Damant, while he was walking vigorously round
the tank. He had, however, an abundant air-supply, and was not distressed,
tne COrpressure in. the helmet being only .1 - 92 per cent. For ordinary fairly
hard work the amounts more commonly obtained were "04 to *O6, or about
two to three times the average amount during rest on the sea-bottom. To
take a good example of hard work Lieutenant Damant produced ’Ol3 cubic
feet per minute during rest at 23 fathoms, and *059 to 'C6I while polling
vigorously on a rope.
It is quite evident from the data obtained that in calculating the proper
air-supply lor a diver allowance must be made for what, under any conditions,
would lie regarded as fairly hard work, liven if the work he has to do would
be very moderate if done on the surface, he may have m addition to struggle
Lard with tide and mud, or when, he is foul, often, in complete darkness ; and
if an exhausting struggle for breath, in consequence of a high C0 3 -pressure in
the helmet, is added to his other troubles, he may easily be incapacitated for
Ins work ; or his life may be- endangered if his mind becomes confused, since


he might blow himself suddenly to surface by failure to manage Mg valve, or
in certain situations might fall and be fatally in.jtired by the squeeze due to
the suddenly increased pressure.
Since a diver resting on the bottom, usually produces, to judge from our
experiments, about 'Ol9 cubic feet per minute, lie would need, during rest at
atmospheric pressure, just below surface, *Ol9 x = *63 cubic feet per
minute, in. order to keep the 00 2 -pereen.tage down to 3 per cent. During
moderately hard work he produces about *045 cubic feet of OO g per minute.
Hence we may conclude that a diver at work, ought not to have less than
'045 X = I*s cubic feet per minute. .For the reasons already explained,
he should have this volume of air at whatever pressure lie may be. Hence he
will need, if the air be measured at atmospheric pressure, the following air
supply:
Cubic Feet per
Min ate.
Surface
fathoms
16* »
22
27* „
13hr
16
An, ampler air-supply .would doubtless he of much advantage during hard
work, since a pressure exceeding 3 per cent, of 00* will have, as already seen,
a very marked effect upon, the breathing, and will thus limit the power of
doing hard work. The diver will, however, at least be spared the severe
straggles for breath and dangers of losing consciousness, which are so
common under present conditions at considerable depths or under conditions
which necessitate much exertion.
It is perhaps scarcely necessary to allude to the imaginary dangers which
are popularly supposed to attend the breathing of air vitiated by respiration
to such an extent as 3 per cent, ol 00*. Any danger from the supposed
“ organic matter ”in such air is certainly non-existent. In the ease of the
Botherhithe tunnel, at present being constructed under the Thames, the
London County Council inquires that the proportion of CO* in the compressed
air in which the men work should not exceed. *OB per cent. Whatever the
reason may he lor this extremely costly requirement, it is certain that neither
CO* nor “ organic matter ” from respiration, would have any deleterious effect
unless this proportion were very largely exceeded; and although our
standard of ventilation permits of 150 times as much <! respiratory impurity * !
as is commonly alleged to be injurious, we have no misgivings whatsoever as
to the “ organic matter."
In order to attain to a given standard, ol ventilation it is evidently
necessary to keep the pump running at a certain rate; and. in view of the
probability that the oppression experienced hy divers in deep water is due
to increased pressure of CO* from, inadequate ventilation, the first thing done
was to test the pump which was- to lie employed in the early experiments in
the tank. Unfortunately, as mailers turned out. this particular pump was
new, and phenomenally good. It delivered at the time exactly the quantity of
air (*lO cubic feet, per revolution for each, cylinder) calculated from the-
diameter of the cylinders and stroke of the pistons ; and at a pressure of
140 feet of water the delivery was still, within 12 per cent, of this amount. As
a consequence, it was somewhat .rashly assumed that other pumps, if oiled
and cared for in accordance with the Service directions, would give about
equally good results. The results ol analyses ol air-samples from deep water
soon, however, aroused suspicions. Thus, to take an instance, three samples
collected by Mr. Catto daring rest at 14 fathoms, with the single pump at
27 revolutions per minute, gave respectively I' 58, I * 62, a,rub 1'54 per cent,
of 00* (corresponding to the high pressures of 5*54, 5'68, and 5*40 per cent.


of a-o .atmosphere of CrOp, whereas, to judge from samples obtained- by the
same diver while at rest in tie tank, toot more than (r 8 per cent.' CO, ought
to oave been present, it the pump was delivering about 2 - 7 cubic feet of air
per minute, as it would nave been, doing had it been. tight. Other results
were still more anomalous-- —for example, the intense distress ■■(with .a pressure
per cent, of an atmosphere ol COp caused to Instructor WatMns •at
Ii f fatiiorns by a ventilation, during rest, of 27 revolutions of the single
pump per minute. It was therefore resolved to test all. the pumps used in
these csives ; and subsequently a number of other pumps, from various vessels
at Portsmouth, were examined, ” ■
hor testing a diving pump die only process at present, in use is to attach,
a length of pipe, blank-flanged at the far end, to the pump, arid then -pump
air up to a considerable pressure into tins pipe, and watch the gauge after
stopping the pump, If the pressure only fails slowly, if at all, the pump
is supposed to be tight. It is evident, however, that since the gauge is
connected beyond the outlet valves, tins process only tests the outlet valves of
the pump, and not the pistons or inlet valves. It is therefore wholly illusory
as a test; 61 the pump itself.
’.i o test the real efficiency of a pump the following process has been used
in our experiments from the outset {gee Figure 4.5,. The -deMvery-pipe
attached. to the jump was connected at its lax end with, a short piece of
ordinary stout hose-pipe capable of being compressed readily by. a .large
screw clamp or spanner. This hose-pipe was connected in turn with the
inlet or an ordinary dry gas-meter of “ 30-lightscapacity. To test the
pump, the number ol revolutions which it required to deliver 10 or 5 cubic feet
oi air was counted, the clamp being usually at the first test freely open, at
the second, screwed up till the gauge showed a pressure ol 100 feet of water,
and at the third screwed, up to a pressure of 200 'feet. As a rule each
eyiiiideg was tested separated, use being made of the handle for connecting
each cylinder separately. ’The percentage leakage or loss at each pressure
could be calculated from the number of revolutions needed to deliver a given
quantity oh air. dims with, a single cylinder, if there was no leakage,
100 revolutions would suffice to deliver 10 cubic feet, if .150 revolutions
were needed, the leakage would evidently be 33 per cent, ; if 200, it would
he 50 per cent.; and if 300, it would be 67 per cent.*
Tlxe first tests made.with the pump used at sea, and which had caused so
much distress to Instructor Watkins, showed a leakage of 49 per cent, at
I.UO feet pressure, and 79 percent, at 200 feet, in the left cylinder, the leakage
from the right cylinder being somewhat Jess. Thus with the hi wffiinder
the diver would only receive at 100 feet.about half the air-suuoV cak-dated
from the strokes of the pump, and at 200 feet only a fifth. A» I T ,chores,
the depth at which Instructor Watkins tooks his su-upk, On- a i 3-,% apply
needed ’by. a diver would be 6*3 cubic feet per minute, uvurdinn o dm cable
set out above. With such a leakage he could only have fMvw>f I - ' cubic-
feet a in iniite from one cylinder, or 3 feet from ’ the. two.cylia'i***n >tk the
pump going at 60 revolutions per minute, about as fact as tor ua c could
drive it. At 200 feet he. would only have received I|-cubic f. i>; imm two
cylinders, instead of the 1.1’5 feet; required ’according to the table. It wh,
in ~ quite evident that any attempt to do serious work in more tbait about
1." sib-uns with a pump in thus condition could only end. in reducing' the
dwer 0... a condition of intense distress.
A, series ol careful quantitative tests made at the -Physiological ffiaborat-ory,
Oxford, showed that although there- was slight leakage at the inn- and
outlet valves ol the pumps, tins was trifling in amount with tin j>cmp
running at its usual speed. The■ great rmuhof leakage-was failure of the
leather cups of the pistons to act; ami Sms failure could only oc very
partially and temporarily remedied by die feathers in ...hand other
similar means. In pumps which, had been long in use dm- leukyim was
considerable, even with no adverse .pressure-and- in one 01. pump in use
on a vessel in Portsmouth no air at all was delivered fr-.ni one of the
cylinders at 200 i«et pressure, when the pump was working m as ordinary
* s°i anting a pninp under ordinary -Sqrv-iee coadiKons- a - st-eed ojiifidnr of fcuwa o&jKvcifj
f-cead be toed in place ot a gas-meter ; and experiments on this point arc- quoted- in kppcuilii Ilf-


Percentage Leakage of ordinary Service Diving- Pomps in use on
Ships at the Time in Portsmouth Harbour.
- .Kov <;l: F-anip.
Cylinder,
0 Feet
Pressmre per
Cent, of Leak.
400 Reef
, Pressure per ■
Cent, of Leak,
200-Feet
Pressure per
Ore ->f teak;
8452
3452
3303
1823
1826
2390
1333
2046
2101
1337
P . ' J
■ ■ ■{
i
(
■ - -i
i
“ " (
Left
Eight
- Left-
Right
Bight
Left-
Left
Bight
Left,
Bight
Left
Bight
Left
Right
Left-
Bight
Left
Bight
Left
•Eight
-
■
0
0
0
I)
8
12
40
23
0
12
0
12
0
2.5
10
12
23
20
20
10
29
38
16
26
49
35
70
31
16
23
16
26 -
24
37
33
37
56
30
60
32
87
58 '• '
43 1
36
55
78
300
46
67
36
- 33-
83
63
72
S3
66
71
59
60
22
Mean
-
11-3
34-6
57-0 ,
speed; and only per cent, of die proper -delivery 'when .the pump was
working at 4,0 revolutions per minute.
The following table shows the results obtained in the case of a number of
■pumps in use on vessels, at- .Portsmouth, and tested under the .supervision of
Dr. Rees at ordinary rates ol working:—
In view of the tarrying leakage existing from day to day in the available
pumps, it was found necessary, in continuing the experiments at Spitbead, to
test each pump before or after use, at about the corresponding pressure and
rate of revolution ; and the air-supply, as given in the table of analyses, is
based on these tests. The percentage of leakage can easily be calculated,
if required, from the air-supply as compared with the revolutions per minute
and number of cylinders used.
As, it--was evident,- also, that one double pump could not famidt-sufficient
sir-for diving in. deep water, arrangements- were made for eoimecding together
thy deliveries from: two or three double pumps. - Experiments also showed
that the greatly increased quantity of air thus delivered could still- escape
freely from the helmet with -the outlet valve well opened, and that the pipes
were of sufficient diameter to pass this air to the diver without causing any
undue resistance. The resistance caused by pipes and valves to the escape
of a given quantity of air (measured at atmospheric pressure) becomes, of
course, less and less in proportion to the depth of the diver, since this
resistance varies as the.square of the velocity, and directly as the density.
Thus with a diver at 100 feet, or 4 atmospheres of absolute pressure, the
density will be increased to four times, and the velocity ol flow reduced to a
fourth. This resistance will therefore be jR- = J of what it would be at
surface with the same afr-delivery.
The arrangement, iinally adopted for connecting the pumps was a
four-way junction-piece provided with taps and connecting junctions, so that
in ease of necessity a pump -could be easily connected or disconnected with
the diver down., and a second diver could, be sent down- from one of the
same pumps alter discofraection.
In view of the liability to leakage with the present pattern of Service
pump, particularly after use for; some time, the Committee communicated
with the makers, pointing out the .■necessity for more reliable pistons for deep
diving. As the result of a number of experiments, Messrs. Siebe, Gorman
and Co, furnished a set of pumps with greatly improved pistons, which, when


Kmnher of Pomp and Description of Pistons,
Cylinder
tested.
>1 m:j 20,
Before
After IVe'o
Nov. 1.
Deep Dicing:
.01 ving
Eiiporimente,
Exponraents.
3588, Both pistons with metal piston rings
isr
22
29
} 23
23
3398. Both pistons with leathers
i Bigrist
i Left
I8«
17 '
I 22*
26
3593. Both pistons with leathers
( Eight
1 Left
184
18
23*
IB
25
24
3604. Eight cylinder with asetaJ piston rings.
i Bight
1 Left.
26* per cent.
35
43-5
Left cylinder with leathers -,
17
24
23-7
tented, in the workshops by the method described above, gave excellent results.
Some of these pistons were fitted with leather cups, carefully fitted and
furnished with steel springs to keep the leathers closely applied to the
cylinders. The others were furnished with metal piston-rings (see Figure 19).
These pumps were used in the experiments in -very deep water fit Loch
Striven., where they were tested, almost daily with the meter, and both
patterns, with the exception of one cylinder fitted with piston rings, continued
to give uniformly excellent results, the leakage or loss being only about
21 per cent, at a pressure of 200 feet of water, and 12 per cent at 100 feet
pressure. This amount of loss might perhaps he slightly improved upon, but
it must be borne in mind that there are certain unavoidable causes of loss.
i,a the first place, a small volume of highly compressed air must be left in the
end of trie piston at the close of each, stroke, although the clearance is very
small; and secondly, the piston and cylinder are heated more or less, so that
the incoming air will be warmed and will take up some of the condensed
moisture, expansion being thus caused, and consequent diminution in the
mass of air delivered by the next stroke. The water-jacket round tin? piston
can only partially prevent the warming.
Ihe following table shows the results of tests made m the workshop,
before the pumps were seat out, of a set made at the end of the Loch
Striven experiments ; about six. weeks later, after all the pumps had been
used for some time; and of a further set made during colder, weather on
November 1 ; —■
Percentage of Lam At a Pressure at
200 Feet of Water.
'i.lie workshop tests were made with cold water slowly circidating through
the water-jackets of the pumps, while the tests made on the “Spanker”
were -without this precaution ;' and, owing to the pumps being placed on deck
over the boilers, the water standing in' the jackets*' was about 7° F. above
the air-temperature when, the tests were made. This difference might
account for the slightly greater loss in the second set of tests.
In order to ascertain the effects of heating of the water in the jackets on
the delivery of air, one oi the pumps was kept running continuously at
30 revolutions per minute and 200 feet pressure (88 lbs.), the temperature
of the water (after mixing) being taken at intervals, and the delivery of air
measured. The rise of temperature was as follows :
■Tesrperaisre j Else of
of: Jacket, i IXyupcT-atio'e.
Degrees F,
Degrees F.
At starting
After IS asinutes
'The delivery of the pumps could not be measured, simultaneously with
the temperature, but the latter could, be calculated by interpolation' The
results were as follows. Including a supplementary observation with the
jacket artificially heated :


At starting - - - ~
59
20
5
After rutin ins; It nuuutes -
74
27
5
IS
j> jj ' iX - y fy
86
80
0
After hot water poured into Jacket
154
39
0
Degrees F,
' 84 i
o-oo
87 :
0-00
0 • 00
iso :
0-30
142 :
o-oo
0-12
0
0
1*5 I
1
15
—
—
2|
16
3-2 1
I
23
1,927
2
oi
33
8-0 i
1
30
4.440
2
11
66
4-5 1
2
23
10,300
4
161
99
6-0 i
9
33
17,600
S
23 “
182
7-3
I
21
25,600
8
27%
16S
9-0
4.
27
34,000
12
63
198
10-5
6
23
4.8,000
IS
387
231
13-0
6
25
53,000
18
. 1 of
operators or | Logs g
i<!C;ket ' I Air-Miverr.
These results show that it is 'better to keep the jacket cool by chaiiging
the water, hut that the loss caused, by heating of the water is not very serious
within an hour. With water slowly circulating’ through the jacket, the same
pump, as reported by Messrs. Siebe, Gorman & Go., showed an. increase in
loss of only 2 per cent, after halt an hour’s work, as compared with an
increase of about 9 per cent, iri the above tests with, the water remaining
unchanged.
A further question investigated at the same time was whether any
formation of CCh, or even carbonic oxide (CO), occurred in the pumps in
consequence of the heating of the oil from the great air-compression at each
stroke. Any appreciable formation of CO would be a serious matter, and a
sample of the air delivered after the jacket had been artificially heated, so
that the conditions might be at their worst, was carefully tested for this
gas by the blood method. No trace could, however, he detected. As the
presence of this gas in the air delivered by compressors has often been,
suspected, it may be mentioned that no trace of it could be found by
Dr. Haldane in the air delivered by compressors on Cornish mines,* although
the temperature of the cylinders rises far higher than in those of a diving
pump. It is, of coarse, essential to have an oil of extremely low flash-point,
to prevent any risk of firing; and for deep diving, water in the jackets is
absolutely essential. Firing of a cylinder, with consequent production ol
CO s and CO, would be disastrous.
The results of the other analyses were as follows
Temperature of Increase V CO, Decrease to Oxygen
jacket. Percentage. Percentage,
From these results it appeared that there was no formation of CCh by
oxidation, but that when, the jacket was made very hot a slight absorption of
oxygen occurred. This would be of no disadvantage to a diver.
Assuming that pumps giving only about 25 per cent, ol loss at 200 feet
pressure, and a proportionally smaller loss at lower pressures, are available,
we may now proceed to calculate the rate, of pumping, and the number of
cylinders and of men needed in, order to give the amount of air already
specified as needed by a diver in doing .moderately hard work at different
depths. In the following table this is set out:
nothin Cubic mu : Stonier BeroJntlons rA ***** dumber of
of Air ’of Cylinders of Pomn w TNf Me “ ” <^ Jed 11 lgr
.Fathoms. ! Feet. Miuute. j needed. per Mlnnte.


A good direr can no doubt usually get on comfortably enough with the
quantities ol air specified, in the table, ami half as much will suffice for him
if .he is doing no work; but whenever he has to exert himself much, as when
he has to contend with tide or mud, or has got foul, lie will need more than
the specified air supply, and provision ought at least to be made to let him
have a third more when necessary. Not only the analyses of air from the
helmet, but many other observations mads in the course of the experiments,
confirm this.
For instance, at 30 fathoms Mr. Oaf to accidentally got fool of the coils of
a wire hawser which he was shackling on to a weight representing an: anchor.
Tiie two pumps supplying him with air were meanwhile, owing to the men
being tired, only going at 24 revolutions per minute, so that the air supply
was about 8 cubic feet per minute, which was not much short of 9'7, the
calculated quantity. Although he was comfortable enough with this air
supply as long as all went well, he found it quite insufficient when he was
exerting himself to get free, and was so much affected by the CO, that before
he had freed himself, after a straggle of 20 minutes with the coils of the
hawser in soft mud and pitch darkness, he had begun to feel that he was in
danger of losing consciousness unless he stopped to rest, which, however, he
was unwilling to do, as he had already much exceeded the limit of time
calculated to he safe at this depth. Next day, at the same place, lie shackled,
on the hawser in 4 minutes from the time of reaching the bottom, and
7 minutes from leaving the surface, feeling no discomfort, with about-the
same ventilation as before.
At 231 fathoms Lieutenant Damant found that with the two pumps at
24 revolutions (about the specified quantity) the air supply was not suffi-
cient to enable him to continue for more than 6 minute, a heavy exertion
in hauling a rope, 'The U0 2 'pressure in the helmet air had risen to
4'28 per cent.
To take another instance, Mr. Catto was greatly affected by CCb when
struggling out of mud at a depth of 42 feet,-the pump delivering at the time
2’ 55 cubic feet of air per minute, and the (JO. pressure' indicated by a
sample from the helmet being 7’ 42 per cent, ol an atmosphere. The
3*5 cubic leet calculated from the table would have still been insufficient,
fully a third more than this being required.
In order to have some sort of measure of the powers of a diver doing
work with varying supplies of air, the following arrangement was employed.
A spar with a block and pulley attached to the end (Figure 18) was rigged
up from, the deck of the vessel. Over the pulley a rope was passed, with, a
56Tb. weight attached at one end near surface, the other end being rove
through a second pulley attached to a 2-cwt. sinker on the bottom, so that
the diver could stand upon the sinker and, haul on the rope. An observer on
deck counted the number of times the diver could lift the 56-lb. weight, and
the height of each lift, a toggle being attached to the rope above water to
facilitate observations. -In the experiments at 231 fathoms two pulleys were
employed above water, so as to prevent the 56-lb. weight from getting foul
of the rope. Except where the contrary is stated, the diver continued to
heave the rope until he was exhausted and had to stop.
The following table shows the results of a number ol observations ;


o'; CTi
00 ' CO ' O'! 5^
C’l i—< !~"< U‘3 r~<
p/g_ ; j J \
'f'- I * f ?i |
3P~o§i f I | j %
6 *■© » 6 1 1 ! 1 !
A— I— X
00 <N CS
9 j | .j j ; x
55 , so
• i; O' —ikSSJ
! O q CO -t> '<t i >-0 ’«0 .tv> r~-t ¥0
i I'^S
$ 3 s
O SO O o lO
OD Of co CO -cH ixj
x wj t»
g i
Si s
CO SO v C-'i
-O ! -C '4l 00
gggggSSSggg S?
s I
-'SM -(!« ~4;C CilSO «;«:
CO ri C
S '*s [
■ s£
2 S


In- connection with the last two experiments it should be explained that
Mr. (ditto took his first air-sample during work after four lifts, and. Ills second
after seven more. He was not exhausted at the end, and could have con-
tinued longer. lieutenant Damaat, who was working faster, took his first
work sample after five lifts, and his second after 18 more, when he felt
exhausted and out of breath, the Gift pressure in bis helmet having reached
4'22 per cent. His air supply was also a fifth less than that of Mr. Catto.
’faking the results of these experiments as a whole, they confirm, in the
most striking manner the conclusion that the special distress from which
divers suiter in deep water, and which destroys their working powers, is due
simply and solely to increase of the CO, pressure in the helmet, and that
whatever the depth may be up to 155 fathoms, this distress cars he entirely
eliminated by supplying the quantity of. stir theoretically calculated as
necessary. With a plentiful air supply, as in the first three and the sixth
experiment, the diver could do about as much hauling on the rope as he
could do above water, the work of pulling a still and tarry rope round two or
three pulleys, so as to lilt the 56-lb. weight, being somewhat exhausting.
With a moderate supply of air, as in the last two experiments, the working
capacity was markedly reduced ; and with a distinctly insufficient air supply,
as in the other experiments, which were made under ordinary Service con-
ditions, work -was quickly brought to a standstill by accumulation of GO» in
the helmet air.
Many other observations, which it. would be superfluous to mention in
detail, led to exactly the same conclusion, which may therefore be regarded
as quite definitely established.
It has already been remarked that the work required to heave round the
pumps to the necessary extent increases with the depth much more rapidly
than the increase in, pressure. The increase in work is shown in the table on
page 25, As a matter of feet, 36 men, working very hard in alternate
5~n jhmte spells of rest and work, were scarcely able to keep up the proper air
supply to the diver at 35 fathoms ; and, 24- men working similarly failed to
supply quite enough, of air at 30 fathoms. We calculated that about
3,000 foot-pounds per minute of pumping work represented the maximum
which a man without previous training could be expected to do. Three men
were employed on. each handle of the pump, but owing to there only being
room for two men, the work was done at a disadvantage. Longer handles,
adapted for three men a side, were afterwards supplied by the makers, and
with these the men were able to heave round at the proper speed. They
were, however, near the limit of their power. Owing to the pressure at
which the divers were'working having also reached the limit of the gauge,
and other difficulties, it was evidently impracticable at the time to go much
deeper than 35 fathoms, and so further test the possibilities of manual


Part II
THE DANGERS OF DECOMPRESSION IN DEEP DIVING.
Since the early days of diving in deep water it has been a well-known
fact that divers, on their return to the surface front, deep water, may develop
very serious symptoms, consisting sometimes of an attach of breathlessness
and syncope, which may end in death within a lew minutes or hours ;
sometimes of motor or sensory paralysis, usually of the lower limbs and
bladder ; and sometimes of nothing worse than attacks of pain ia the limbs
or elsewhere. The paralytic attacks are specially common among divers in
deep water, the affection being popularly known, as divers’ palsy/ ! The
greater the depth at which divers work, the more serious does the risk on
decompression become. Even, however, when most alarming attacks of
asphyxia!, symptoms, or paralysis, have occurred, complete recovery usually
follows —often with surprising rapidity,
Tien who work in compressed air in caissons, diving bells, tunnels, or
“ tribes ” under construction in soft ground below water-level, in mine-shafts
being sunk through watery strata, &c., are subject on coming out to similar
symptoms —known as “ caisson, disease.” Work of; this kind, is usually
carried, on at a much less high air-pressure than that to which, divers
commonly go, but the duration of the exposure is far longer—usually 4
to 8 hours per day. Among these workers in. compressed air the
commonest symptoms are attacks of pain., usually in the limbs, often very
acute, and called “ beads ” and, “ screws ” by the men ; but cases of paralysis
and asphyxia! attacks also occur. These symptoms usually develop within
a few minutes to an hour after decompression. With pressures exceeding
about 20 lbs. to the square inch (about 45 feet, of water) cases begin to
occur, and at anything over 30 lbs. pressure they become very serious in
their frequency, unless great precautions are taken. Among divers, on the
other hand, decompression symptoms are seldom met with unless the diver has
been at more than. 40 lbs. pressure (15 fathoms) ; ami the comparatively
short exposure of the diver undoubtedly accounts for this difference.
The cause of these various forms of trouble was successfully elucidated
about 30 years ago by the .French physiologist, Paul Bert, 0 by experiments on
animals. When a gas is brought into contact with a liquid, the latter takes
up the gas in simple solution (apart from any chemical affinity) until a state
of saturation is reached. The amount thus taken, up depends upon the
“ co-efficient of- solubility ” of the gas in the liquid and the temperature of
the liquid, and varies directly with the pressure of the gas, in accordance
with what is known as Dalton’s Law, The blood passing through the lungs
is practically ia contact with the air breathed, and therefore takes up, when
a man or animal is in compressed air, an increased proportion, of nitrogen
and oxygen in simple solution, in. accordance with Dalton’s Law.
The increased proportion of oxygen so taken up only adds slightly to the
total oxygen in arterial blood, since far more is normally taken up in loose
chemical combination with the haemoglobin ; and in any case nearly all the
free (i.e., Tuicombined) oxygen of the blood disappears when, the latter
reaches the tissues. Carbonic add is of course also present in the long air
to the extent of about 5*6 per cent, at ordinary pressure ; but the compressed
air makes no difference as regards the solution of OCb in the blood, since, as
already explained in. Part 1., unless the air breathed is very foul, the pressure
of the GO* in. the lung- air is kept constant by the breathing, whatever the
total atmospheric pressure may be.
The increased proportion of nitrogen taken up by the blood in, compressed
air passes to the various semi-liquid tissues, which gradually also become
saturated, since nitrogen, unlike oxygen, does not disappear by entering into
chemical combination. The whole body thus gradually becomes saturated
with nitrogen at the pressure (79 per cent, of the total atmospheric
pressure) which thfe gas exerts in the compressed air. That the blood does
* La Preadm Barmmtriqm, Paris, 1878.


actually become saturated with nitrogen in this way was shown, by Paul Bert;,
whose results have been confirmed and extended by subsequent observers,®
If the excess of air-pressure is now rapidly removed, as occurs when a
diver comes quickly to the surface, or a worker in a caisson, passes rapidly
through the air-lock, it is clear that the blood and tissues will for a- time
be in a condition of super-saturation for the diminished •pressure. Incon-
sequence of this the nitrogen will tend to liberate itself within the Body in
the form of bubbles, just as (JO s is liberated in bubbles when the cork of a
bottle of soda water is removed. When, a liquid is saturated by contact with
a, gas the pressure exerted by the gas in. solution is the same as that of
the gas in contact with it. The gas in solution will tend to liberate itself
in the' form of bubbles if its pressure in the liquid exceeds the total
external pressure. Thus if the blood and tissues be saturated with, air at
4 atmospheres pressure (he., at 3 atmospheres above normal) the nitrogen
in, solution will tend to liberate itself in bubbles as soon as the external
pressure fails below 79 per cent, of 4 atmospheres, be., below 3'16
atmoßpheres.t It does not follow, however, that any actual, or at any rate
any’ rapid, formation of bubbles will occur, particularly in the cage of an
albuminous liquid like blood. In practice there seems to be no danger in
sudden decompression unless the absolute pressure is reduced' to less than
half what it was; and. the lowest pressure by rapid decompression, from
which a fatal accident has occurred in a caisson- worker, is, so far as we have
been able to ascertain, 93 lbs. per square inch, or 2°Q atmospheres of
absolute -pressure, corresponding to 53 feet of sea-water. The occurrence of
symptoms of any kind does not seem to be observed with pressures of less
than 2"3 atmospheres, or 1.9- lbs, (43 feet of sea-water).
Paul Bert proved by numerous oxperimehte on animals that sudden
decompression from considerable pressures commonly causes death with
symptoms of asphyxia, or else paralysis. The higher the pressure, and the
longer, within certain limits, the exposure to it, the more absolute the
certainty of death, becomes. On examination of the bodies-of the animals
post mortem he found the veins in various parts of the body full of -bubbles
consisting almost entirely of nitrogen; and in the cases with symptoms of
asphyxia the rigid side of the heart was lull of froth, which had completely
blocked the circulation.
The symptoms of paralysis were evidently due to partial or complete
blocking of vessels supplying the spinal cord or brain ; and In ■ animals
which had survived the, paralytic attack for a few days, softening and the
usual degenerative changes were found m the spinal, cord'st the places where
the block had occurred.
Paul. .Bert’s main conclusions hare been coafinned and greatly extended
by several subsequent, observers. By a suitable arrangement Hill -and
Macleodf were able to see through a microscope the bobbies forming- in
the capillaries of a frog's web. After keeping the animal at a pressure of
20 atmospheres for 10 minutes, during which- the circulation, went on quite as
usual, they suddenly lowered the pressure to normal, and observed, that “ for
about a minute • alter decompression the circulation continued unaltered,
“ then small dark bubbles’vvere seen, first one; and then another, and then
“ numbers scurrying through, "the ye-—mid drivin_duo m rpiiseles before
“ them. In a moment or two the vm.fas became' .-'rinu occupied with
“ columns of air-bubbles, and. the diwn. latum was u* ..u »nd' ! ' By means af
“ rapid re-coDTpression; ' t’lie gas ’ ivas again driven rum, wgipiom and Ble
“ circulation became re-established, the-animal being cnmp red.
• ;■ h- -consists of 79’0-i per cent. ■of nitrogen fi»c)u«ifn'.' wJ /•'•t <•<->!!, «.f -'-peas),
20-93 S'- <■ -t.i. of oxygen, &ud -'O3 per cent, of CO<>. ; la tto &ir of to- how sU e-Si fie ovygna
is? by about- s•s per i-wif. «n<i iho C(h m-reiuse't t'> } ,<r .*• re. u oc-i«<i>l
atmos'‘hcrH* p'-ewere ; but la compressed sir ;u the prewar!; fire,. »b- titrolw -feu--. s-'4
lass u.i earnpoptiosi froia ear- ho. TJa* VC- I -,.y- rviU take np ;o ay ) p,a .of .;; >1 nuo
of rikrogts! for each atria,Apoa« of -;o - ,oo< I'hus »■ tr-ar, of 7' ■ t',l ■; I I Soo- ’.am cf.,, -o:.
nearly fiX-l ec. of altrogeu 4'” non; <A a-’r-wo-s o>- n -.-Ur-h h>, 0 , I eo t-
an urah’i■>.'!PasUi, as shorn, jis she Saopt-'roaO; . -.- - -
■>,. „ i o-pc rt (>( eaj.hrtfT.. on.--' '(iMW-iioo m:-t bi iho-Ic for lan soeOi s-w- ~ae of (Xg u-m
O.M iSo '■'O', -oa o ,| Tbi p!n<,’ir> (ai-oW CO p. .• emc of o'O' HUno-abn'-v; 'okU ’OCf I'-
tie > ”■> po—.a;, oak la-' j > i»i - »> I «!>' it - >o!a,iio to sUin-iii" .V odb ) ten-at
]C jJt .) >,0.!. j.,f (X;. oao axyoVa.
J ' S f !fyyie‘.'\ \ -SCO, l"(>C


Tiie results of'post-mortem, examinations- of the bodies of men who have
died after decompression have, when■ conducted in a competent manner,’
confirmed Paul Bert’s experiments. Perhaps -no case has been more
completely investigated and -recorded • than the following, reported in the
**Health of the Navy” for 1960, by Fleet-Surgeon A. M, M.eKiiday, who
was assisted by Surgeons Forrester and Forest.
■Mil)., aet. 33, 15,0.,I 5 ,0., Ist class. was employed diving for a torpedo in
24| fathoms of water at Lamia sh on November 28th. He was a man of
exceptionally good physique, not -obese, and perfectly healthy. A warrant
officer was in charge of the diving party, and, owing to the great depth of
water, took particular notice of the time. He states the man took 40 minutes-
to reach, the bottom, that.he remained there 40 minutes, and took 20 minutes
to come up. This latter he did himself slowly and steadily without hurry,,
the men in the boat only taking in the slack of the rope. He climbed, up the
ladder on the beat’s side himself, and. on the face-plate of the helmet being
removed, he said he felt alright, and then, came into the boat with the ordinary
assistance to be undressed. When the helmet was taken off, he answered : a
number of questions about his work, and gave a most detailed account of the
same. He also joked with, the other men, who all say they never saw him, or
anyone else, come up in better condition, fie felt perfectly well, ail the time
he was in the water, suffered no inconvenience whatever, and only came up
because it was so dark in the depth he was in that he could find, nothing.
He was cheerful and sensible, and had absolutely no symptoms whatever ol
anything wrong till some 8 or 9 minutes bad elapsed from the time of his
leaving the water. He then suddenly complained of pain in the stomach,
and asked them to be quiet and get off his dress, as he wished to get on
board, _ In a second or two after he said, “Send for the 'doctor,* and
immediately slid down, in the boat quite limp and unconscious. .Fleet-Sargeon
McK inlay, saw him at once, and found him in a comatose state. His skim was
cyanosed and his breathing was stertorous, laboured, and difficult. Ills lips
were blowing and covered with froth. He was taken oat- of the dress and
carried to the sick hay, but death took place before he got there, via., about
1.5 minutes after reaching the surface, and 6-7 from the first symptoms of
illness. He had no vomiting, convulsions, or spasm of muscles at- any time.
A. post mortem examination was made on the next forenoon, 23 hours after
death, with, the assistance of Surgeons Forrester and Forest.
Rigor mortis was well marked. Post mortem stalking marked about
neck and lower limbs. On incising: the scalp, a quantity of very dark
coloured, almost black, Enid blood flowed from the cut vessels, principally
the temporals. On renan my da- calvarium, the veins oyer the whole surface
of the brain weimdeeply engaged w:fth the same dark fluid blood, ami on
removal ol the brain a large mcmtfty> escaped from the vessels at the base.
A careful examination wm made ol the pons, medulla, and upper inch of the
cord. There was no evidence fo any laceration or extravasation of blood.
Numerous small blood vessels were marked in the cord, &c. by the black
piuicta produced by the exuding black blood, but up to this no air was seen.
On making sections of the hemispheres, -nothing-abnormal was noticed until
the lateral vm;del. s acre opened up. These contained little or no fluid.
The Btri : --«g point wav the presence of bubbles of air in. large quantities
in the win,; >A Haffn and choroid plexus, these d a beaded appearance,
and showed prom moody against ilj« u irk background of the plexus. On
examination of the veins .of the surfuw- ..f the brain, which by this time were
emptied of their blood, they wen- found, to be in a similar condition. On
opening the thorax, the lungs were found absolutely healthy. They appeared
to contain less blood than usual, and were not. engorged. The pericardium
contained very little fluid. The heart was normal in size, but the veins on its
surface under the serous membrane were .markedly beaded 'with air. On-
lifting it up, it felt like a bladder brail full of waiter, and, on making pressure
to raise h, was heard to gargle loudly, and a quantity of. black frothy Mood
flowed from the- sinuses at; tire base ol the stall On opening' the right
ventricle air came out with a.puff, and a small quantity of black frothy fluid
blood was still found, but no trace whatever of any blood clot. The left side
of the heart was empty. All llu valrm were perfectly lie-althy.
On opening the abdomen, ;Ik small vessels of the. mesentery at the
attachment to the gut were found to be filled with air. The liver was very


dark coloured and engorged, and on section the cut; surface exuded stick a
large quantity of-froth that it gave the impression that portions of the liver
might float in water, but on trial they sank immediately. The spleen was
Mack and enlarged, of a globular shape, 3|- inches in thickness. It was
friable, and contained dark blood and air; the latter not to the same extent
as the liver.
The cellular tissue in the subcutaneous fat of the abdomen and underneath
the sternum also contained small bubbles ol air.
The autopsy disclosed that all. Ills organs were healthy ami that, the
principal abnormal condition was the presence of air iu large quantities in the
right side of the heart and. in the whole venous system.,
. ■ - On a previous afternoon a man, T.L., age 22, A. 8., went down in
almost tie same depth, viz., 23 fathoms, lie took 25 minutes to go down,
was on the bottom for 22 minutes, ami took 18 mi antes to come up ; being
only 22 minutes on the bottom to the other’s 40. lie, likewise, suffered no
inconvenience when down, and was quite well on reaching the surface, but,
unlike the other man, he remained in good health.
Figure 11 is from a photograph, showing the appearances presented by the
veins of a goat killed by rapid decompression from 100 lbs. pressure (corres-
ponding to 39 fathoms), in. the steel chamber at the Lister Institute. The
animal fell over unconscious shortly after the pressure was reduced to normal.
Figure 12. from a section prepared by Lieutenant Damant, and, kindly
photographed for m by 1.).r. Goventon, ol Oxford, shows the appearance's
presented by the spinal cord of a goat after death by sudden decompression
from a high pressure.
Unfortunately, the records ol other fatal cases which have occurred in the
Royal .Navy have been so Incomplete as to be of little service in connection
with the present Report.
The following extract from a short account by Meet-Surgeon P. W. Basset-
Smith, R.lsf.® gives a vivid account of the dangers to which pearl divers in
deep water are exposed ;
“ While on board. 1:1.M.5, * Penguin,’ employed in surveying a part of the
north-west coast ol Australia, which was then an important centre of the
pearl-oyster fishery, cases of divers’ paralysis came under my notice now and
then. The luggers contain about six men, mostly Japanese, occasionally
Europeans, and are accompanied by a schooner which acts as a store and
hospital ship. All the work is done in diving dress in. depths of from 1.0 to
25 fathoms, the period of submersion being often 4or 5 hours. Cases of
slight paralysis were common, coming on suddenly on removal of the dress, but
generally recovering completely. The following is the worst ease I saw ;
“ * Japanese, aged about 30. Had been working in 32 fathoms (by all
considered to be a dangerous depth) about three weeks ago ; immediately
‘ on removal of the dress he became paralysed, and has been so ever since.
His condition was one of great emaciation, free from pain, but very
‘ apathetic. Temperature 103°; pulse 120; tongue furred; complete
; paraplegia with, loss of control of bladder and rectum, and loss of sensation
‘to the level ol the umbilious. There was a large deep bedsore over the
* sacrum, extending from the tuber ischli on either side to the crest of the
* iiimn above, with a thick, black, extremely offensive slough; partially
1 detached.. It had eaten, through skin, fascia, and gluteus roaximue, and in
* places exposed the boned (He died three davs later).
The n rate attending on him said that he had been as bad himself with
bed-sores and paralysis for 8 months. He now walks with, a limp, but
muscular power is fair and tissues firm, kneejerks increased. He ’said’that a
very bad sign is a localised swelling of the abdomen, from which, if allowed
to get under tlie ribs, death is certain, and that they apply any pressure to
keep it down, even sit; on it -probably a paralysis of intestinal muscles and
collection of flatus. Those in charge told me that they tried to prevent men
from going down over 20 fathoms, hot as they are paid by result®, it is very
little use,”
For further details, and for a discussion of other theories which have been,
unsuccessfully put forward, to explain caisson disease, and. which still some-
times re-appear in medical literature, we must refer to Paul Beit’s book;; to a
large and most valuable treatise recently published by Heller, Mager, and.
* Lancet, 1., 1892, page 309.


von Sehrotter,® and to the papers of Dr. Leonard Hill, F.R.8., and Ins
colleagues.f Reference may also he made to Dr. Snell's hook, Cais»m
Mims, London, 1896, to Dr, Haldane’s article on, the subject at paged! of
the Text-book of Pharmacology 'and Therapeutics , edited bv Dr, Hale White,
1901, and to Dev Sauerstoif in der Prophylaxe urui Therapw der Ijivttdruck-
erkrankumgen, Berlin, 1906, by von Schrotter.
The dangers of decompression, do not seem to hare been the main actual
cause which has prevented the prosecution of: diving - in very deep water.
The great oppression, of which we have discussed the causes and prevention
in Tart .1., has probably been the chief hindrance. How very great, never-
theless, the risks of rapid decompression are, is abundantly shown by the
records of accidents to divers, as set out in the books and, papers quoted.
There is much evidence to show that in different individuals the- risk
arising from decompression at a given rate, after exposure for the same time
to the ■ same pressure, varies very considerably. This has been, observed
particularly in. the case of workers in caissons and subaqueous tunnels. In
the case ot tire Last liiver Tunnel at Lew York, for instance, new bauds are
subjected not only to medical, examination, but also to a preliminary shorter
e [ \ - -s -i to compressed air, before being engaged ; and those who experience
a*t> w cintoms in the preliminary test are excluded. In the ease also of
divers variability in. susceptibility would seem to exist, some men appearing
to be immune from symptoms under conditions where other men are affected.
In their experiments at the Lister Institute, Dr, Boycott and Lieutenant
Damant made the same observations with respect to goats, some of the
animals being relatively immune, {See Appendix I.)
For this reason, the fact that one diver has repeatedly escaped serious
decompression symptoms, tinder certain conditions, does not prove that other
men would be equally immune ; and we think that a considerable margin of
safety is desirable beyond what would seem to have proved safe in individual
cases. As, moreover, susceptibility to decompression symptoms has been
shown to increase after middle age is readied, it seems desirable that men
beyond 45 should not undertake deep diving.
The problem before the Committee with, respect to decompression was to
devise such precautions that a diver not specially immune to decompression
symptoms could both have time to do useful work at the bottom, and be able
to return with safety to surface.
There are two methods of securing safety in decompression. One is to
limit the time during which the diver is exposed to high pressure ; and the
other is to bring him up very slowly.
In very deep diving the first method is chiefly used if only for the reason
that the diver cannot stay below on account of the distress caused by the
(itb pressure. In diving for pearls and sponges at great depths, it appears
to be the practice for the diver to sink rapidly to the bottom, remain, there
lor 2 or 3 minutes, and then come rapidly to the surface. When the
destroyer u Chamois ” sank in, 32 fathoms off Patras, in the Mediterranean, in
1904, several. Greek and Swedish divers descended repeatedly in order to
examine the hull, so as to clear up the cause of the sudden, disaster.
They were able to get down for 3 or 4 minutes at a time, and to return
as rapidly, without accident, although, they did not succeed in their
object, 'They were usually about 10 minutes under "water. The depth
(about 32 fathoms) is the greatest to which we have been able to find any
record of divers penetrating safely. The other case in which tins depth
is reported to have been, reached proved fatal to the diver, as already stated
m the extract from Basset-Smith’s paper. Another diver, who is reported to
have reached. 34 fathoms, perished on returning to the surface.
A. remarkable case of inurumity from symptoms, in spite of relatively rapid
decompression, was that of the celebrated diver Alexander Lambert. .Messrs,
Siebe, Gorman & Go. (to whom we are indebted for infomiatioii about .Lambert
and others of their divers) inform us that during the salving of 70,000?. worth
of gold at a depth of 27 fathoms, he descended 33 times-—usually twice, and
* Heller, Mager, and von Sclirotter, Lv.jldn.ick Krkrankungen , Vienna, .1900 (2 volumes),
t Hill and Macieod, 14 Caisson Disease and Divers’ Palsy,” Jmrml of Stygient, 1903, page
401: also Proe. Moped Soeiely, Vol. 70, page 455, 1.903; Journal ojf Phj/tMogy, Vol, 29,
page 388, 1903; Hill and Ham, Journal of. Physiology, Vol. 33, page vi, 1905; Hill and
Greenwood, Froc. Royal Society, 8., Vcd. 77, page 442, 1.906,


sometimes- thrice per day. He stayed -20 to 25- minutes- below, ’took 2- to
3 minutes -In descending, and only 4 to 5 in ascending, in ins .last
descent lie unfortunately stayed down for 45 nhnutes, and -about hall, an hour
after ascending he became completely paralysed in the- lower part of Ins
body. From this attach he never completely recovered. His inmnmity
with, only 4 or 5 minutes spent in decompression, in spite of a stay of
20 -25 minutes on the bottom, was nevertheless very remarkable.
Another equally remarkable record is that of Erostarbe, employed by the
same firm. He succeeded in. salving a quantity of silver at the great depth,
of 29 to 30 fathoms. During this work he made about 70 dives without
injury, his time below water from the surface and back being strictly limited
to 30 minutes, end latterly to 15 minutes. He took 3 to 5 minutes to
descend, and about 3 minutes to come up, bo that he was on the- bottom
about 8 to 13 minutes. On one occasion he remained under water for
40 minutes, and about 15 minutes after returning he became very ill. suffering
great pain. His condition - seemed so serious that the Last- Sacrament was
administered to him. : The skin of his legs, arms, and shoulder became
black from extravasations of blood. He was quite well again a week later,
and, continued Ms work.
When the period of exposure to high pressure is limited to a short time,
tire blood and tissues have not time to become saturated with nitrogen at the
high pressure, and the risk of bubbles being formed on decompression is thus
obviated. ' :
Experience in caissons proves that even after an hour the tissues are not
completely saturated, since the risks on decompression, are very nroeh less
than after two -or more hours. Persons remaining under pressures up to
35 lbs. (13 fathoms of sea-water) for an hour are seldom affected seriously
on decompression, provided this is not very rapid. As tire pressure i ncreases,
however, the period of exposure has to be much reduced to secure safety by
shortness of exposure only ; and at 30 fathoms 10 minutes' exposure would
certainly be dangerous with very rapid decompression, as in that, time the
blood and part of the tissues would have time to become sufficiently saturated
to give rise to considerable risk.
The second, method, which, lias been strongly recommended by Paul Bert,
and all others who have'worked experimentally at the subject, has been for
king employed by divers doing serious work in very deep water, although
they usually also confine- their stay on the bottom, to a short period, such m
10 to 20 minutes.
One of Messrs. Biebe, Gorman & Gods divers, A. Briggs, in salving gold
coin at a depth of 27-|- fathoms, made 12 dives, during each of which he spent
about 1.2 minutes in the wreck, and occupied about 10 minutes in descending
and 12 minutes in ascending. Another diver, Bayfield, went, recently to
30 fathoms in Loch Long, taking 16 minutes to descend and 21 minutes to
ascend. At the same place, Diver W, E-, Walker went for about the same time
to 28 fathoms, and took about- 20 minutes to ascend, with stops of about
2| minutes every sor 6 fathoms. He had previously worked two shifts a day
for 3 months continuously in 21 fathoms of water in a- well in London,
spending hall an hour on the bottom at work, and taking 20 to 25 minutes in
ascending. Another diver, G-, Mayeock, during light work at 22-| fathoms
in a well in ' London, spent 20 minutes on, the bottom and came up yin.
7 minutes. In'a subsequent piece of.work at Datchet Waterworks, in 100 feet
of water, he was seized with ■“ pressure ” in the legs and arms after working
hard lor 45 minutes at the bottom, and coming up nr 5 minutes.
For caisson workers exposed for several hours to pressures' exceeding
about 22 lbs. per square inch slow decompression is essential. As to the
necessary slowness, however, there is much divergence of opinion, with
correspond! ng differences in practice. -As a result of ius experiments Paul
Bert concluded that at least 12 minutes per atmosphere (14'7 lbs. or 33 feet
or 10 meters of sea-water) should be allowed in decompression from high
pressures. Heller, Mager, and von-Schrotter recommend 20 minutes lor each
atmosphere, and Hill and Macleod make practically the same recommendation
for pressures exceeding 30 lbs. (11 fathoms). In the recent experiments of
Hill and Greenwood, the latter went in 55 minutes to a pressure of 92 lbs.,
equivalent- to 206 feet of sea-water, ami was then decompressed -in 2-J hours
at, a- rate of about- 20 minutes per atmosphere. In spite of this he haffiattacks


of pain in both arms after decompression. In other experiments Hill and
Cireenwood went to 75 lbs. pressure, and were decompressed at about 20
minutes per atmosphere of pressure, or If hours in all. On several occasions
they experienced localised pain alter decompression, and found that these
symptoms were absent when care was taken to move the joints and muscles
during decompression, and massage the skin. They were lying down in
the chamber during these experiments.
Tire engineering practice in connection with work in caissons and tunnels
baa nearly always hitherto been to decompress the men much more rapidly ;
and even when strict regulations have been laid down by the engineers for
slower decompression the regulations have frequently been disobeyed by the
men. To mention striking instances of rapid decompression, quoted by Pan!
Bert, the men were regularly decompressed in 10 seconds from the caissons
used-in building the, bridge at Scorffpin -France, the. depth reached being
50 .feet (25jr lbs. per square inch) in one caisson, and 40 feet in the other.
Tb«w wm-p only 2 deaths and 14 other serious cases, although the number
oi }M. Soi.ee of men through the airdoek was 8,04-2. Decompression in
3 1 icmwi from a pressure rising to 36 lbs. (84 feet of water) would seem
to nave been the practice in building the bridge over the Seine at Argenfceml,
and no deaths appear to have occurred. Dr. Foley, who reported on the
effect produced on the men, recommended rapid decompression. The
remarkable advice lie gave to the men passing through the airdoek was
Si ie brouiliard epais et glacial qiu ne manque pas tie se produire vous
“ penctre trop, Mtez-vousT A still more striking case was that of the bridge
over the Mississippi at St. Louis, begun in 1869, the depth when rock was
finally reached being 3.1.0 feet (4.8 lbs. per square inch). As the depth increased
the length of shift was gradually reduced Horn 4 hours to one. Out of
352 men employed. 12 were killed and,. 1.8 seriously injured—a surprisingly
small number, considering that th.e men are said to have been decompressed
in 3to 4 minutes. The doctor in charge, who was-unaware of the real cause
of caisson disease, was, himself affected, by paralysis alter' staying 2-|, hours
at a pressure of 90 feet of water, but recovered completely. There were no
more fatal cases when the length of shift was reduced to one hour, and none
among the many visitors, including ladies, who were in the caisson for .short-
periods, even at the greatest depth reached.
These facts will be mpsurprise to those/who are acquainted with practical
diving. Divers frequently come np in 3 or 4 minutes from depths of
lo xatho.ms or more without ill-effects, although accidents occasionally happen.
The comparatively short time under high pressure is greatly in ha diver’s
favour; and if this time be sufficiently reduced, a diver" can safely ascend
within one minute from even. 25 fathoms or probably much more.
-in recent tunes more care has been taken as regards decompression In the
case .of workers in caissons and tunnels, but although the risks have in this
and other ways been greatly reduced they have not been obviated. The
most extensive undertaking at present being carried out with the use of
compressed air is the- -double tunnel under the East River at- New York,
About 120 men are employed in one three-hour shift daily at a pressure of
34 lbs, (corresponding to 76 feet, or 12-| fathoms of sea-water). Through the
courtesy of Messrs. S. Pearson and Son, Ltd., Westminster, the contractors, we
have been supplied «dth information as to the number of cases of both slight
and serious affection-' an ong the men These have been carefully recorded by
Dr. P. S. Keays;medical director appointed by the firm. During the 4 months
from April Ist to ,A>gmt Ist of this-year the cases have been ns follows :
“Mild cases 'Tempo.,try pains in the limbs, &o.)
" Se vere cases "; ,
Dizziness
Abdominal pain -
Pain and prostration ~ " A
Partial paralysis
Complete paralysis (now nearly well]
Deaths - - - ~
One of the deaths was in the case- of a , lock-tender,- who, contrary to
regulations, decompressed himself rapidly through the mud-lock The time
normally allowed for wm 15 minutes.-- All serious cases -ate


treated, wherever possible, at once, and nearly always with marked success,
In a medical air-lock, the use of which was first introduced by Mr, E, W.
Moir, of Messrs. Pearson and Son, Ltd., many years ago, and is now
general. The mortality (neglecting the mud-lock ease) is at the rate of one
death per 15,000 decompressions, a great improvement on the older statistics
for work of this kind. Further efforts are, however, now being made by the
contractors to eliminate the risk to life, since they have been disappointed
ia their expectation that the precautions already introduced would fulfil
this end.
Before describing the precautions actually adopted in the deep diving
experiments carried out for the Committee by Lieutenant Damant and
Mr. Catto, it is necessary to discuss in more detail the processes occurring
in the body during exposure to compressed air and during decompression.
Absence of a careful consideration of these processes has, we think, led to
many mistakes in the practice hitherto adopted.
There is every reason to believe, although experimental evidence on the
subject is not yet complete, that the blood passing through the lungs becomes
instantly saturated or desaturated to the exact extent, of the pressure of the
nitrogen i n the air breathed. Whatever, therefore, the pressure- of nitrogen
in the air breathed may be at a given moment, the nitrogen pressure in the
arterialised blood leaving- tie lungs will, be exactly the same. Daring
compression, as a diver goes down, the blood leaving his lungs will always
be charged with dissolved nitrogen in proportion to the absolute pressure of
the air he is breathing, i.e., to the atmospheric pressure at surface ( ----■ about
14*7 pounds per square inch, or 33 feet of sea-water) plus the pressure
of the water. The same will hold for decompression as he comes up, and
since the arterial blood leaves the arteries within half a minute at most,
and, babbles scarcely seem to form within this time, there will be no risk of
bubbles actually forming in the arterial blood during decompression, except
when it is almost instantaneous. With very rapid decompression, however,
small bubbles which have passed through the capillaries of the lungs may
easily increase in size in the arteries.
II the nitrogen in only the blood had to he taken into consideration, the
problem of safe decompression would he easily solved. The weight of blood
in healthy men, which has recently been measured hy Haldane and Lorrain,
Smith,'® averages -4’9 per cent, of the body- weight, so that a man of 70 kilos,
or 11 stone, will have 3'2 litres or 5*6 pints of Mood. The time which the
blood requires to complete a round of the circulation in man is not definitely
known, and certainly varies considerably for different parte of the body,
according to the varying physiological requirements of different tissues or
organs. We can, however, form a rough idea of the average time required.
Trie average venous blood returning to the right side of the heart has -been
found in animals to have lost about 6 to 8 per cent, by volume of its oxygen,
while the air breathed Joses (in man) about 4 per cent, by volume of its oxygen.
Assuming, therefore, that not much oxygen is normally used up in the lungs
themselves, we may conclude that the volume of blood passing through the
lungs is about half the volume of air breathed. The volume of air breathed
per minute during rest by a normal average man is, however, about 7 litres
per minute (measured dry at- 0° C. and 760 mm.). Hence the blood circulating
is about 3'5 litres per minute. Roughly speaking, therefore, a quantity of
blood equivalent to the whole, blood volume will, on an average, pass round,
the circulation once a minute during rest. If, therefore, only the blood had
to be considered, as has often, been assumed, we might conclude that the
whole of it would be saturated, or nearly saturated, with nitrogen after
exposure of a minute or two to a given pressure of nitrogen in the air, and
that the danger of nitrogen bubbles forming in the Hood would cease a
minute or two alter sudden decompression.
The actual conditions are, however, far more complex, since we have to
consider not only the excess of nitrogen in the blood, but also the excess in
the tissues. Just as in the lungs the nitrogen pressure of the blood becomes
by diffusion equal to that of the- air, so in the tissues of the body a similar
* Journal of Physiology*. VoL 25. page 331,1900. The accuracy of the method employed
by llalilaae aad Lormm Slaitli lias recently been verified iu anlnmls by Douglas, Journal of
Physiology, Vol. 33, page 493, 1905, ■


equalisation process takes place, by diffusion. through, the thin walls ol the
capillaries; and the venous Wood leaving the capillary vessels of the tissues
will consequently have about the same .nitrogen pressure as the tissues
themselves. Thus in the case of a man exposed to high air-pressure the
nitrogen pressure of the venous blood will not become equal to that ol the air
until the tissues have also become saturated. Now the mass of the whole
100
body is it a = about 20 times the mass ol the blood ; and its capacity per
unit weight of taking up nitrogen in solution is probably nearly as great as
that, of the Wood, lienee it will take a very considerable time to saturate the
~f the body with nitrogen in compressed air, or desatura-te them on
>b omission. The process will also be a very lingering one, since the
bl-md will at each round of the circulation yield less and. less nitrogen to the
tissues, or vice versa, so that the point of complete saturation or de-saturation
will form an asymptotic limit.
Let us assume, for purposes of calculation, that the blood distributes itself
evenly all over the body, and that the person is at rest, and is suddenly placed,
in compressed sir. In the first round of the circulation in the first
minute) the tissues (since they have 20 times the mass of the blood) and
' ' * a
venous blood will become about • or 5 per cent., saturated with, the excess
of nitrogen which would correspond to complete saturation. The second
k bo " , . 5
minute will add x ggg, or 4 ’75 per cent.; the third will add x
4'5 percent.; the fourth will add x = 4‘3 per cent. ;
and the fifth |tL x— — 4*l per cent, Tims in 5 minutes the tissues
will have become saturated to the extent of s*o 4- 4’70 + 4*o •+■ 4‘3 +• 4*l
22 ’ 65 per cent, of the difference between saturation at atmospheric pressure
and at the pressure of the compressed air. Li the next 5 minutes the
addition will evidently be ■- 22‘65 x ~ 17'5 per cent, of the
same difference, and in the next, 22'65 x —- xTT = igg] p er
cent. Thus in a quarter of an' hour the tissues will have reached 53 ’ 7 per
cent, of the difference. Roughly speaking, we may say that in a quarter ol
an hour the process of saturation will have gone halt’ way ; in. half an. hour
three-fourths of the way, in three-quarters of an hour Jths of the way, and in.
an hour ol the way. Thus if the assumption that the blood distributes
itself evenly were correct we’ should expect to find that after an hour the
tissues and venous blood of a man placed in compressed air at 32 lbs..pressure
would he saturated to 30 lbs.
Actually, however, the rate of average saturation will not be so great.
The blood is certainly not evenly distributed throughout .the body. Some
parts, such as the grey matter of the central, nervous system, and the muscles
and glands during activity, have a far greater "blood supply than, other parts,
such as the connective tissues, fat, skin, joints, white nervous matter, &c. The
parts plentifully supplied with blood will therefore saturate up rapidly, and
cease to take more, while the parts scantily supplied, will saturate slowly, so
that in many parts of the body the tissues and venous blood will, not be more
than three-quarters saturated, or even half saturated, after an hour. On this
point our knowledge is as yet very incomplete, hot some ideas cars, be formed
from practical experience in connection with work in compressed air. It
seems perfectly clear from the experience of workers in caissons and tunnels
that, other things being equal, the probability of bends, &c. occurring is very
much less if the duration of exposure to compressed air is confined to one
hour. As to longer periods of exposure, Mr. E. W. Moir, who has had very
great experience on this subject, informs ns that he is confident from Ms
observations that a limitation of the exposure to even 3 hours distinctly
diminishes the risk of “bends,” as compared with 6 or S honin’ exposure.
The recent observations of Mr. ,(L W. M. Boycott in connection wvith the
caisson work for the new High Level Bridge at Newcastle (Pros, Iml. of


Civil Erim-men, Voi OLXV., page 831, 1906) point'in the same direction.
We raaytherefore conclude that even, alter 3 hours of work m compressed
air some parts of the body are not fully saturated with nitrogen-, and that
these parts are not. more than ball saturated alter one hour’s exposure.
Let us now consider the process of desaturation during and alter I'•com-
pression. H the pressure were lowered suddenly, and buy a - were
liberated, desaturation. of the tissues and venous blood woiilu. ocmir at
the same rate as saturation. If the blood prere evenly distriouted, about.
22 Ts-er cent, of the excess of nitrogen would disappear in 5 minutes, and
about 50 ner cent, in 15 minutes. If the pressure had been 30 lbs., or
8 atmospheres, there would be no possibility of bubbles forming or increasing
in size after 70 minutes, since -the combined- pressure of nitrogen. (Xfo and
oxygen, in the tissues and venous blood would not equal the atmosphe-ric
pressure. As, however, the blood, is not evenly distributed, it will be far
longer before this point is reached in the case of sonny of the tissues; and
■practical experience agrees with, this expectation,, since trie symptoms known
as •' bends ” and “ screws ” (pains in the joints and muscles) may appear, or
increase in intensity, several hours after decompression, if the period of
exposure to compressed air has been considerable. _ 1
" It is evident that if the air-pressure is lowered gradually and evenly, tins
nitrogen pressure in the tissues must nag xuriher and furt.li.6t behind the fail
in the pressure of the air, however slow the decompression may be. Let us
assume that the blood and tissues are saturated at 40 lbs. pressure, that
tire air-pressure is lowered at the rate of 2 lbs. per minute from. 40 lbs., and.
that the blood is evenly distributed throughout the body. At the end of
5 minutes the air-pressure will he 30 lbs,, and oaring tnese' o minutes the
average pressure will have been 35 lbs. The nitrogen pressure in the tissues
wih how*'have fallen about 82'5 per cent., or say 20 per cent, of the difference
between 35 and 40 lbs. It will therefore correspond, to saturation at a
pressure of 39 lbs. of air, or 9 lbs. above the actual pressure of the air. _ After
th.e next 5 minutes the air-oressure will, be 20 lbs., while the nitrogen
if- >
pressure in the tissues will correspond to 39
16‘2 lbs. above the actual pressor© of the air. Alter the next 5 minutes
the excess in the tissues will be 81'9 lbs.; aud when atmospheric pressure is
reached it will be 26’ 5 lbs., certainly a dangerous excess. With the actual
blond distribution in the living body this excess will of course bo much
wreater in the case of some parts of the body, and. much less in the ease of
others. For example, i n the case of tissues which required an hour to become
half saturated in the compressed air, and a correspondingly long time to reacn
full saturation, the excess would he 3b ibs. ,
We have now to consider the risks from formation ot bubbles during
decompression. Experience seems to show dourly that even with rapid
decompression there is practically no risk of symptoms from bubbles being
liberated unless the air-pressure exceeds about 20 lbs., .and that even, with
25 ibs., symptoms are not common, duough with : higher pressures the
liability very’ rapidly increases, and becomes very marked .when a pressure of
30 ibs/is exceeded,. It therefore seems fairly safe to assume that practically
no babbles at all are liberated by the blood and tissues unless the pressure
has exceeded 1.5 Bis., or one atmosphere above atmospheric pressure, Low
the rfoume of gas capable of being liberated on decompression to any giveui
pressure is the'same if the relative diminution of pressure is the same. Thus
the vnlmne of gas, if any at all were liberated, -would be the same on decom-
from 2 atmospheres of absolute pressure ,(15 lbs. pressure by
e. "or - to one atmosphere (normal pressure), as it would be on decomp res-
. roiu 4 atmospheres absolute (45 ibs.) to 2 (lo lbs./, or from
8 atmospheres absolute (103 lbs. pressure, or 38|r fathoms of sea-water) to 4
-14 lb* or 164 fathoms). It therefore seemed very probable that there will
be no appreciable liberation of bubbles with any of these preseure-dimmn-
ticias, even when sudden. A number of experiments on animals, mam 1 by
Dr. Boycott and. Lieutenant Darnant in the’ steel chamber at them wtm
Institute, have, so far, borne out this hypothesis. Sadden drops of t" * n
60 lbs. were in several eases observed to be tolerated with impunity if the
absolute pressure was not more diminished than to a- third, whereas 1 drops of


45 lbs. with the absolute pressure diminished to a fourth caused very serious
symptoms. ■
The danger of bubble-formation thus appears to depend upon the
difference in relative, and not absolute pressure, between the air and the
nitrogen dissolved in the tissues. We may therefore provisionally assume,
pending the completion of the experiments at the Lister Institute, that this
ilifference must be in the proportion of more than two to one before 'bubbles
form appreciably; and that decompression can be safely proceeded, with il
the difference is not more than in the proportion of about two to one.
The practical deductions from these conclusions are of considerable
importance, since in all -probability safe decompression can be conducted
noth considerably less expenditure of time than il it is carried out by uniform
diminution of the air-pressure, as has been hitherto usually recommended. It
has already been shown above that the absolute difference between the air-
pressure and the nitrogen pressure in the tissues necessarily goes on increasing
during uniform decompression, and is greatest at the end of the decompression,
so that uniform decompression is without the slightest doubt an unsuitable
procedure. When, however, we also take into account that it is the relative,
and not the absolute, difference in nitrogen pressure that mutters, the unsuit-
ability of uniform decompression becomes far more evident. -In the case
previously taken as an instance — uniform decompression in an a ir-lock ’during
20 minutes, of a man saturated at 40 lbs. —the relative pressures at the
end of each successive 5 minutes of decompression, even on the extremely
favourable assumption that the blood distributes itself evenly throughout the
body,-would be, assuming the atmospheric pressure to be the normal one of
•,,. a.v 39 •14-14*7 "36• 2 + l-L 731•9+14•T26 ■6+l4 • 7
11 ' lb "; ■go + mr’ worm?-. io + mr- in - • OT 1 '2u-
-1'47. 1 ‘B9, 2* 30. The relative differences of pressure would thus be in the
proportion of 20, 47, 89, and 180, or roughly 1, 2’3, 4’4, and TO. With
uniform decompxessiom the risk of bubble-formation, if any, is thus, as it
were, concentrated in an acute form at the end of decompression.
Practical results felly bear out this theoretical deduction. Such a thing
as the occurrence of symptoms during decompression is. we believe, almost
unheard ot, either among workers in caissons and tunnels or among divers.
“On ne paie qu’en sortantT as the matter was put with characteristic French
neatness by Pol and Watelle, who, 50 years ago, first gave a detailed
medical account of the symptoms.
It seems evident that with uniform, decompression a great part of the
time spent ip the process is time lost, for during the greater part .of, the
time spent in uniform decompression the difference in pressure between the
nitrogen in the tissues and that in the air is much, less than it, might safely
be made; and as a consequence the nitrogen is given off from the lungs
much more slowly than would be safely possible. If the absolute pressure
wore reduced without delay to about half, much time would apparently be.
saved without overstepping the limits of safely. For instance, at 41 'lbs.
pressure by gauge (92 feet, or lo| fathoms of sea-water, or 3*B atmospheres
absolute) the'absolute pressure is about 56 lbs., and half of this is 28 lbs.,
or 13 lbs. by gauge. 30 feet of sea-water, or 1 ’ 9 atmospheres absolute pressure.
The pressure could apparently be reduced at once in the air-lock to 13 lbs;,
or the diver be brought up to 30 feet, or 6 fathoms, without risk froiri bubble-
formation, however longfee had: 'been exposed to the pressure.' The rest of
the decompression could be carried, out slowly, and with gradually increasing
slowness as atmospheric pressure Is approached ; the rate being so calculated
that the difference in relative gas-pressure between the air and. any part of
tlxe tissues should never exceed a safe limit, such, for instance, as two to one.
Let us consider what this sale rate would- be, assuming that the whole
body was saturated with nitrogen at 41 'lbs. pressure, that the blood was
evenly distributed in the body, and that the decompression was carried
out by stages of ’ 3 atmosphere, corresponding to 10 feet for a' diver, or
4i lbs. by gauge in an sir-lock. It would be sale to reduce the pressure by
o*3 atmosphere when lire nitrogen pressure in the-tissues did not exceed that
correspoadiag:• to saturation with - air at 3, ’6 X 2 - 3’2 atmospheres ; and
this' point, calculating as has been done- above,-would be readied in about
8 minutes, so that the diver might then, come up 10 feet, or the pressure in
the air-lock be let down 4-|- lbs. Before the next stage the nitrogen pressure


in the tissues would require to fail to I‘3 X 2 = 2’6 atmospheres, which,
would occupy about 10 minutes; and before the next, or find, stage, the
nitrogen pressure fa the tissues would have to fall to Ix 2 = 2 atmospheres,
for which about 13 minutes would he needed. Thus 31 minutes in all would
be needed.. As, however, the blood is not evenly distributed, in consequence
of which some parts of the body most take at least four times as long to
desaturate as has just been assumed, the time calculated as desirable for
decompression must, he correspondingly extended, so that at .least 4 x. 31 = 124
minutes will be actually needed in order to prevent symptoms occurring, or
about 100 minutes if we assume that it is sale to ascend to surface when the
maximum nitrogen pressure in the tissues does not exceed about 2'3 atmo-
spheres, or 19 lbs, by gauge. So far as they go, the experiments on goats
have home out this calculation, since they have clearly shown that a decom-
pression rate based on the assumption that the blood distributes itself evenly
in the body is unsafe, .Practical experience in connection with caisson and
tunnel work points clearly in the same direction. The calculation shows
that even, with stage-decompression about an hour and a quarter at least
would be needed, for the safe decompression of a man whose body was
saturated at a pressure of 35 lbs. The numerous cases of caisson disease
which occur when only 15 or 30 minutes are allowed for decompression after
a shift of several hours 5 duration at this pressure are therefore just what
might he expected. In the caisson work connected with the construction of
new locks, &c., on the Danube Canal at hussdorf, a decompression rate of
1 lb. per minute was adopted, for men working at 30 to 35 lbs, pressure, in
spite of this and other precautions, there were many cases of caisson disease,
iaclnding two deaths, as recorded by Heller, Mager, and von Schrotter, in the
book already referred to.
A calculation similar to the above will show that it would take, at the
best, about 3 hours to decompress safely a man. whose body was saturated
at a pressure of 30 .fathoms, or 80 lbs. With uniform decompression the time
needed would probably be much longer. Such long periods of decompression
as an hour or more may be practicable in connection with work, in caissons,
tunnels, &c., but not. in the case of diving under ordinary conditions. It is
thus absolutely essential to limit the period of stay of a diver ou the bottom
if the depth exceeds about 10 or 11 fathoms. To give a diver at the same
time a sufficient time to carry out serious work it is also, however, necessary
to take proper precautions in decompression. Even, with caisson workers at
press ores exceeding about 30 lbs., it is desirable to combine limitation of the
period of continuous exposure with precautions in decompression.
The slow desaturation rate in some parts of the body explains what is
perhaps at first sight a puzzling phenomenon in connection with decompres-
sion symptoms. These symptoms sometimes develop, or increase in intensity
(at least in the case of tunnel or caisson workers, who have been long exposed
to pressure) several, .hours after decompression : at a time, that is to say, when
the formation of fresh babbles could not he expected to occur according to
the foregoing calculations. In such cases it is probable that what has really
occurred, is that bubbles formed on decompression, or soon afterwards, have
gradually increased in size until they have produced symptoms. A bubble
once formed in any part of the body —for instance, in or about a joint,—will
continue to increase in size so long as the gas-pressure in the surromiding
tissue exceeds the atmospheric pressure. By extending the calculation given
above it will, however, be found that the gas-pressure in Some of the tissues
may easily continue to exceed the atmospheric pressure for 3 or 4. hours
after rapid decompression, so that during ail this time symptoms may
develop or else increase in intensity. Even when symptoms occur soon after
decompression, it is probable that small bubbles formed almost at once have
taken some time to increase in size to a dangerous extent, and that this fact
goes far to explain the length of the interval between decompression and the
appearance of symptoms.
A, man. at rest, and exposed to an excess of pressure of 30 fathoms of sea-
water (SO lbs.) for 5 minutes would not, according to oar previous calcula-
tions, have his tissues saturated with nitrogen to more, on an average, than.
20 per cent, of this pressure, i e., to not more than 16 lbs. pressure —a perfectly
sale limit. But a diver exerting himself, and exposed in all probability to a


pressure of 00*, which 'by itself would greatly increase his circulation, might
easily have some parts of bis body, and particularly the grey matter ot the
central nervous system, winch is so richly supplied with blood, saturated, to a
much greater extent, so that very rapid decompression, as by blowing up,
would be risky. With every minute of further exposure the risk of rapid
decompression would increase ; and this risk would be cmeily due to oubble-
formation in parts richly supplied with blood, such as the central nervous
system, and any muscles specially used. The “ bends '* and “ screws, winch,
are such common and characteristic symptoms among caisson and tunnel
workers after decompression, and which are probably due chiefly to nitrogen
liberated comparatively harmlessly in connective tissues and. joints and nerve
trunks, seem to be rare among divers in deep water, who axe chiefly aftected
by paralysis, &c., due to bubbles in the central nervous system, or else by
asphyxia! symptoms due to massive liberation of bubbles into the venous
system,■ With consequent blocking oi the circulation. The slowly saturating
connective tissues, &c., have not had time to become saturated to any
considerable extent.
The longer the exposure to very high, pressure, the greater, up to a certain
limit, will be the time needed, lor decompression, it may, however, Jte
safely assumed that parts of the body which become rapidly saturated with
nitrogen at high pressure will desauirate themselves with corresponding
rapidity during decompression ; also, that if the exposure to high pressure
is sufticientiy curtailed the parts which saturate and desaturate slowly will
not have time to become highly saturated during the exposure.
in deep diving certain practical points are evidently of much importance.
In the first place, the diver should get down to the bottom as quickly as the-
pressure on the drums of his ears, or the pressure of his dress round him, will,
permit. While he-is descending he is taking up nitrogen all the way ; and,
roughly speaking, he will absorb during Ins descent, if it is at a un.it.orm rate,
half as much nitrogen as he would absorb during an equal time on the
bottom. Hence time spent in descending is all to the bad. Tire advice
usually given to divers to descend slowly into deep water is very unsound
I'lmless, indeed, the air-supply from the pumps is so bad. that the diver does
not know whether he can get down at; all). The present Service Manual for
Divers recommends, for instance, a rate of descent of 1.5 minutes tor 12
fathoms. At this rate a diver would take 41 minutes to get down 35 fathoms ;
and before he touched bottom lie would already be most dangerously saturated
with nitrogen. A good diver is not. troubled by his ears, s:f and if he has a
plentiful air-supply from, the moment of submersion his dress and helmet will
never press upon him, owing to compression of the air within the helmet as he
goes down, lieutenant iiamant and Mr. Oatto were easily able to reach
bottom at. 35 .fathoms in 2 minutes from starting down, though they would
certainly have had to stop owing to pressure of the dress or panting, had their
air-supply been inadequate.
Another equally important point is to get up out of the very high pressure
as quickly as is safely possible. The reasons for concluding that a diver can
come up quickly to half the absolute pressure with safety have already been
stated. At 12 fathoms the absolute pressure is half that at 30 fathoms ; and
at 12 fathoms a diver is already out of any formidable pressure. Let us
suppose that, instead of coming straight up within 3 or 4 minutes to
12 fathoms, a diver who has been, down for a few minutes at 30 fathoms
ascends at a uniform rate of 12 fathoms in 16 minutes, as has been
recommended. It will thus take him 1,5 minutes to reach 18 fathoms. This
is not merely a waste of time, but exposes him. to additional risk, about
e-qui valent- to an extra 16 minutes at 24- fathoms or 12 minutes at 30 fathoms,
during which the tissues in. at any rate most parts of Ms body will be
absorbing nitrogen. Thus, supposing he comes up and goes down at a
uniform rate, taking about. 40 minutes each, way, and spending 10 minutes
on the bottom, the total period of exposure will be about equivalent to
* If he has catarrh, sud consequent blocking of Ms Evist.acliirui tabes, he should not attempt
deep dives, or descend at all without the greatest caution. The ear-troubles ere, of course,
proportional to relative, and not absolute Increase in pressure : hence they diminish for any given
increase in depth as the direr’goes down. The &st thing a diver has to leant is- to manage bw
Eustachian tubes, and avoid, all risk of injury to bis ears.


20 minutes at 30 fathoms for going down, 10 minutes actually spent at
30 fathoms, and say, 12 minutes at 30 fathoms in coming up- 42 minutes in
all Hie will be fortunate if lie escapes an. attack of paralysis, or asphyxia, or
“ bends,” on. coming to the surface, which lie will reach, in 1,5 minutes from
12 fathoms, and 5 minutes from 4 fathoms, the rate of ascent at the end
being most dangerously fast:
In the fatal accident recorded by Jj’leet-Surgeon McKinley, and referred to
above at page 31, the diver took 40 minutes to descend t • 2 L mthoms, If
he wont down at a uniform rate, rids was equivalent to a* * v ••, 20 minutes
on the bottom, where lie actually remained 40 minutes. He took, 20 minutes
to come up, and probably not more than 5 minutes for the last 6 fathoms-
the stage where rapid decompress ion is so dangerous. The risk he was
running was thus a very great one. The second, man referred to iu the
report, and who escaped without a symptom, took 25 minutes to go down,
stayed 22 minutes at 23 fathoms, and came up in 1,8 minutes. His exposure
was only equivalent to 124 + 22 = 344 minutes at 23 fathoms, or to
32 minutes at 244 fathoms, as compared with 60 minutes in the other case.
His risk was therefore much less, though it was certainly greatly increased by
Iris slow descent and probable too rapid ascent near surface.
In the case of a diver whose stay on the bottom in deep water lias been,
very short, the reasons for hastening not merely the descent, but ail the
ascent except the last part, are specially cogent. His only tissues which will
Imre become at all highly saturated will be those which saturate and desaturate
rapidly; no part of his body will be fully saturated ; and the ports which
saturate very slowly will not have taken up sufficient nitrogen to be capable
of causing any trouble at all on. decompression. He can thus be brought
safely at a rapid rate to less Than hall the absolute pressure ; and even, the
remaining stages can. be greatly hastened. Delay at any depth beyond
8 fathoms may only increase his risk ; and delay in the first halt of Ins ascent
will certainly do so.
We may now describe the precautions adopted, in connection with the
Loch Striven experiments from BLM..S, ** Spanker/' These experiments had,
two main objects. The one already referred to in Part I. was to test the
possibilities of working’ at depths up to 30 fathoms, with, a supply of am
sufficient to keep the CO. r pressure in the helmet within, reasonable limits.
Tbe other object was to test the practicability and adequacy of the pre-
cautions previously agreed upon provisionally by the Committee as being
desirable for the prevention of dangers on decompression. These precau-
tions had been carefully thought out beforehand ; and were determined upon
partly in view- of the theoretical, considerations already discussed, partly as
a result of the experiments in the steel chamber at the Lister Institute,
by Dr. Boycott and Lieutenant Dama-nt. and the previous experiments of
Paul Bert, Leonard Hill, and others ; and partly from a careful study of the
available data as to accidents on decompression in connection with diving
and other work in compressed air. We aimed at erring well on the sate
side if we erred at all; and we were under a pledge to your Lord ships to
allow no risk to he rim by the officers engaged in the experiments, so far as
care and foresight could provide against risk.
Practical experience in both diving ami caisson work seems to show that,
provided decompression is not too rapid, a man may remain fox an hour at
a pressure of 15 fathoms of water, or 39 lbs. to the square inch, without risk
on returning to atmospheric pressure. At the end of this time parts of the
body with an average blood-supply will, as shown above, proha bb L- saturated
to about 4|tliß with, nitrogen at the pressure of the nitrogen ;m the, air, while
the parts very sparsely supplied with blood, such as the commm ve tissues,
Ac., will not be more than about half saturated, i.e., saturated u tim not at all
formidable pressure of 7|- fathoms, or 20 lbs. Calculating in the same way,
and allowing for the difference in pressure,. parts with an average blood-
supply will probably he half-saturated after a stay of 15 minutes at a pressure
of‘3o fathoms, or 80 lbs., while parts 'very sparsely supplied with blood will
only be saturated to a pressure of 5J- fathoms. Some parts, such as the
central nervous system and muscles in a state of activity, will, on the other
hand, be more highly saturated than parts with an average blood-supply.
On the whole, however, decompression from 30 fathoms after 1,5 minutes


exposure on grit to be about as sale as decompression from 15 fathoms alter
an hour’s exposure. Tire experiments on animals in the steel chamber were,
so far as they went, in accordance with this inference, although unfortunately
no satisfactory short experiments at high, pressures could be made, on account
of the length of time occupied in reaching high pressures. We therefore
fixed upon 15 minutes, including an allowance of half the time (about
2 minutes) spent m going down., and three-fourths of the time spent in, coming
up to lo fathoms, as being probably a quite safe limit of time at 30 fathoms.
Lor intermediate depths between 15 and 30 fathoms corresponding limits of
time were calculated, and are stated on the table on page. 46.
As regards decompression, the possibility had to be allowed for that
parts with a naturally active circulation, such as the central nervous system,
or muscles where the circulation, had been specially active owing to the work
cione by the divers on the bottom, might be nearly saturated with even a
short exposure on the bottom. It was, therefore, arranged not - to bring the
clivers to less than half the absolute pressure without a pause. As a. further
precaution the diver, during each stop on the wav' up, kept his arms and
legs in constant movement, so as to increase the rate of circulation, and. so
facilitate desaturation. The stops and times spent at each, stop are shown
in the table. It will be seen that for a 35-fathom dive the first step was to
come up 20 fathoms in about 4 minutes. This is a- reduction of 54 lbs.
in the pressure, which would have been a risky drop had it; been to atmo-
spheric pressure, and not to a pressure 4.0 lbs, above it. The further steps
were, graduated will!, a view to meeting the increasing risk from liberation of
bubbles; but the last step, from 10 feet, to surface, was certainly the one
attended with most risk, if risk there was.
At the first stop the air-supply was diminished to that from one double
pump, 'working at a moderate speed. Most of the men working the pumps
could thus 1)6 released, and it was considered that a small excess of CX) 2 in
the helmet air would, stimulate the diver’s circulation, and thus help him to
get rid of his extra nitrogen. For a similar reason, an excess of GO- while
the diver is on the bottom probably adds to his risks by increasing the rate
at which he takes up nitrogen**; and this is a further reason in favour of a
plentiful air-supply at great depths. An excess of OO* certainly adds also
to tus risk by hindering his work, and thus prolonging his. stay on the
bottom.
As a preliminary precaution, before the Loch Striven experiments both
divers subjected themselves in the steel chamber at the Lister Institute to
A , sures which they intended, to go to under water, remaining at each
p > vi tor the time agreed on, and, decompressing themselves ■ also in the
r agreed on. These "tests were very severe, since it took shout
45 minutes for the compressor to raise the pressure to 80 lbs. (30 fathoms
pressure), in consequence oi: which the periods of exposure in the chamber
at the highest pressures were virtually much longer than the times agreed
on,+ At the end of each decompression the subjects remained closed in the
chamber for half an hour as a precaution, with the compressor running, so
that af any moment recoinpressioir could be at once begun. This precaution
was certainly necessary, as' the risks were very considerable with so long a
virtual exposure. Lo symptoms were, however, observed. Higher pressures
than 80 lbs. were not tried m the steel chamber, since it was not originally
intended to dive beyono 41 fathoms (80 lbs.).
A further precautior w m taken in ease symptoms should, arise after the
diver left: the water, \ s.. all steel chamber specially built at; Portsmouth
Dockyard on (no deck of the 11 Spanker A "This chamber, which
is shown in Figure Id, k large enough to take two persons easily, and is
■provided with a door n id*- enough to take a diver with his dress on. It was
connecter! with the cou gummed air reservoirs (used in firing torpedoes) bv
* If. E. W. Moir hap di.m e summon to 11m effect of i adequate ventilation in diminishing
tire tend envy to caisson dree:, ■, ; «t, I this van bo well understood in cnees where the pressure
of OO* had been allowed to go tm. high. Paul Bert quotes a case where the average CO-
percentagft In a caisson was found to be 2'36—a figure so high as to be almost incredible!
however.
t With similar exposures to about 75 lbs. pressure, and similar decoißwessions. a ooceidemble
proportion ol the goats bad symptoms of « bends « j and one animal knfexpeetediy developed
severe respiratory symptoms awl (lied, as it could not be re-eompressed at the time,'


Depth
Pressure.
In Feet. |
In Fathoms.
Lbs. per
8q, In.
Atmos;:
abso
!
1 90
is
40
3-
108
18
48
1*
120
I
20
4-
1 IB2
1
22
59
<) v
144
24
64
5
166
26
69 1
5
I ' 168
28
75
■ 6
j 180
30
80
6
j '210
•DO
98-|
*?
i
The dim- to descend as fast as his ears or the
stoppage. Movements of the legs and arms to be
o o o o o
O *-* s*-f s«“* )■"* !-*
■+3
j""' ”■
I 'I
i 0
I C 3
I f
6=l IS VO Vi M 5 K 5 5« so H
g
f <t I
5; 1 V
1 I !
K 1 6:1 | -c '-C- K 5 >0 Vi 1|
! i 13
I - I
I I
5 S j j | >a o ■« «5 s g
<S 40 tc
£ < _ _ a
l *' “ ■ i i
|I!I!I * f ! ” | |
■■■■■■ ~ H I
i I 1
sIIIII i * 13 I g
A I I
4 3 I
I i I I ! i 1 i i “* ||
i | I
H 3
s g s
f- ■? M N
£i| | £,| £ S K ft s R R | I
|l«| " i U Ss 5 2 ? II
?‘ s ' s iS
J-3 j-v, co '-£> O C™ ’—!


copper tubing, so that a diver could, if necessary, be re-compressed in
it up to a pressure of 45 lbs. or more in, 2 or 3 minutes. A bag of
oxygen was also kept in readiness for the diver to breathe until he could
be re-compressed. Fortunately, however, all the experiments went as we
hoped and anticipated, neither diver having any symptom from beginning
to’ end, although even, the slightest symptoms were carefully watched for
after each dive.
Before each dive the pump, and all the air-pipes and connections up to
the point of attachment to the helmet, were carefully tested at a pressure
considerably above that to which the diver was going.
It will readily be understood that if a burst occurred in the air-pipe,
or a junction gave way, the diver would be instantly killed if the non-return
valve in the air-inlet of the helmet failed to act. If, on the other hand, it
acted satisfactorily, the burst pipe could be replaced, the diver being mean-
while brought up to a moderate depth as a measure of precaution, and if
necessary, brought on by stages to surface. The air-supply in the helmet
and dress, if lie did not waste it, would probably last for 1.5 minutes or more
during his ascent, as the effect of the increase in the 00* percentage in the
air of the helmet would be counteracted by the decrease in pressure.
In order to test the non-return inlet valve of the helmet the piece of
metal pipe containing; it was unscrewed, connected la reverse direction with
the pump, and immersed in a pail of water, so that the leakage could be
measured by collecting the escaping air in a pint measure. When tested
to a pressure of 100 feet of water it leaked to the trifling amount of one pint
in 21 seconds, or 'O6 cubic feet per minute of air measured at atmospheric
pressure; and at 200 feet pressure the leakage wag only ’O7 cubic feet.
Another inlet-valve was connected with a compressed air reservoir with a
view to testing it to destruction. It was, however, almost uninjured at a
pressure of 1,750 lbs., since when tested, afterwards with air at 200 feet
pressure it only leaked at- "12 cubic feet per minute.
Catsaras (quoted by Heller, Mager, and von Schrotter, page 259) records a
case in which the air-pipe burst while a Greek diver was at a depth of
1.7 fathoms. Although the diver was at- once brought up, he barely
escaped with his life. When he reached the surface he was bleeding from
the nose and scarcely conscious ; and his face, eyelids, &c., were swollen to
an enormous size. The valve oh his helmet must evidently have been very
leatv.
W e have never heard of a burst in an air-pipe occurring in the Royal
Na vy, but it has happened on at least one occasion that an air-pipe became
detached from the pump owing to a sudden and very violent wrench. No
ill-effects followed, however, as the non-return valve acted satisfactorily. In
case of a similar accident with, the diver at 200 feet, a leakage of, say,
• 1 cubic foot per minute of air measured at atmospheric pressure would be
of no importance, as his helmet and dress would probably contain, about
10 cubic feet of air measured at the same pressure. He would have plenty
of time to be hauled up at a fairly safe rate, or to ascend the shot rope.
The diver was always connected by telephone with the deck of the
“ Spanker.” This was a convenience in many ways, particularly when samples
were being taken, or work experiments carried out, and when one of the
divers got foul. .During Ms ascent the diver was stopped at each stage- by
signalling on the breast-rope in the ordinary way. The gauge was watched
during the ascent; and when the depth indicated by it was within about 10
or 20 feet of the proper stopping place the pumps were stopped, and the
gauge tapped until it reached the proper indication, whereupon the diver
was stopped by signal. There was never the slightest difficulty in stopping
him at the rigl.it point within a foot or two. It was necessary to stop the
pumps, as owing to the resistance in the pipes the depth shown by the gauge
was several feet beyond the actual depth. The gauges had been specially
tested, and were correctly graduated lor fresh water. Tims, with the diver
sitting on the bottom, at an actual depth of just over 35 fathoms, or 210 feet,
as carefully measured on the shot-rope with, a standard measure, the gauges
showed a depth of 216 feet with the pumps stopped, and 220 feet with them
going. A pressure of 21.6 feet-of fresh, water corresponds almost exactly to


Appendix 11, contains a short journal of the experiments at Loch Striven ;
an account of the preli mi nary experi rnenfe on. the divers at the Lister
itut© will be found in Appendix I, Tire only incident which needs
dal mention, was the mischance by which one of the °t)t fowl of a
j hawser in the mud and darkness on the-b- Wjm at ‘ m ms. As he
was kept 29 minutes before he could get free, cad as, • > • ._ to his exer-
tions and the rather inadequate air-supply, Ms iLsaes wo lu pmoably highly
saturated with nitrogen, it was decided to give him double the usual time in
coming up, the stops being all about double the usual time, and the ascent
taking an hour and a half. It was a- tedious experience lor the diver, but
better than risking the occurrence of “ bends ” or even, more serious symptom®,
and the experiments on animals at the lister Institute had shown that,
decompression by stages in the usual time after so long an exposure would
probably not have been safe. Each diver made only one dive per day. Owing
to time necessarily occupied in sounding for the required depths, shifting the
vessel’s position, testing the pumps with the meter, analysing samples, and
in other ways, more than two dives per clay -would .have been difficult,
particularly as Drs. Haldane and Rees had to sleep on shore at some distance.
But it was also important to give sufficient time for any dec;a*-prc-wien
symptoms to develop, hearing in mind that, these symptoms «•«:» u- ■<.«»» by
appear several hours after decompression, it would also have certainly
required some extra precautions as regards time on the bottom or decom-
pression, if a dive had been- repeated, .by the same diver within less than
about 2 hours. Pearl and sponge divers who go down repeatedly for very-
short periods at a time, often develop symptoms after two or three dives.
At the beginning of each successive dive their tissues are more and. more
saturated with nitrogen, and the additional saturation in the last dive may
-prove disastrous.
As no discomfort, or other trouble was experienced at 30 fathoms, it was
decided to dive to about the maximum limit which the pressure gauges on
the pumps would show, and a depth of Just over 35 fathoms Ll3-|- lbs, pressure)
was reached in the deepest dives, the time on the bottom being, however, cut
down to 6 minutes to give an extra large margin of safety. It is perhaps
instructive to compare these two dives with the experiment in which.
Dr. Greenwood exposed himself to a pressure, very nearly as great in a steel
chamber. On reaching 92 lbs, in 54 minutes, he was slowly and uniformly
decompressed at a rate of about 22 minutes per atmosphere, this process
taking 2 iiours IT minutes. After corning out. he had an attack of “ bends ”
in both arms. The divers, on the other hand, went down in 2 minutes,
and came up in 44 minutes. With so short an exposure they could probably
have come up without any serious risk of symptoms in. 20 mi notes. In
consequence of the slow compression and the very slow and uniform decom-
pression, which kept him tor a very long time under extremely high pressure,
Dr. Greenwood, who was fully an. hour at an average pressure of 77 lbs., or
29 fathoms, must have been far more highly saturated with nitrogen than the
divers, and yet at the most critical stage in trie last atmosphere his rate of
decompression was faster than that of the divers, who took 20-minutes after
reaching the last 9 lbs. of pressure, while he took only 13 minoten.
The results of the various dives daring the-Loch Striven expedition, and of
the corresponding experiments made upon, themselves in the steel chamber by
tire divers, constitute a fairly solid body of evidence that, with the precautions
set Got in the accompanying table, diving to 30 fathoms: is safe, at any-rate,
for a practised diver in perfectly good health.® Had any symptoms, however
slight, been noticed, we should have belt much more doubtful in dm a my such
a conclusion,! id. is very pro liable that a more rapid ascent, o>- a longer
* Ihe system at present adopted in the Service of .medically examining all divers before tiigy
descend, affords an important protection against accidents in diving. A men who is from mj
cause not- m perfect, health must undoubtedly be .much more liable to be seriously affected by the
formatioa of babbles m liis blood.
t The.experiment? on animals in the steeP chamber at tint Lister Institute have shown' that
with graduated decompression “beads” are far more likely-to occur iban any other'Symptom.
Paralytic symptoms have not been observed. Any signs of bends ” verb therefore most care-
fully watched lor In the divers, since their oceurrenee would Indicate the. approach towards a
danger limit.


stay on the bottom, is possible without running appreciable risk; and much
will be gained if this tarns out to be the ease, Tlie contemplated farther
experiments on animals and men in the steel chamber at the lister Institute
will afford valuable guidance in this respect, ana bring out clearly the effect
of each factor influencing the risks. The actually adopted limits of time on
the bottom are, however, sufficient to • enable a diver to do much valuable
work, particularly it he is freed from ail the usual discomforts and hindrances
arising from an excessive pressure of CO* in the helmet air. The time
allowed for coining up is doubtless a disadvantage; but the great waste of
time hitherto usual in going down was avoided, bo that a dive to a depth
beyond 20 fathoms could be completed in less time than is at present taken
if the rowramendations of the Service “ Manual for Divers'’ be adopted. A,
■d •! vy/> I? (\ 4-.r\ 4- -N -V-S'\ r\ ttti 4-"iu "I -5-VV. Iwv f h S', <' f\ SO I 1 >V f V 't «■'■»'> fT* .-V/M VS ■»"' \ for 5' ‘ XX! 1 ffi yl IfU
dive to 30 fathoms, with 12 minutes on the bottom, was completed ;within
an hour. When the further experiments at the lister Institute are completed
we propose to issue a supplement containing a detailed table showing at a
glance the precautions which we recommend during the ascent of divers from
various depths and with various times on the bottom. Such a table might
with advantage be affixed to the case of each diving pump. (This supplement
is published at the end of the Report.)
The Loch Striven experiments were conducted from the deck of a torpedo-
gunboat, about 8 feet above water-level. The diver had thus to climb some
8 or 10 feet of ladder before even his 40-Ib. breast and back weights were
removed, the total load being 155 lbs. This climb was a very exhausting
process, and possibly the great strain accompanying it might tend to launch
suddenly into the general circulation bubbles of nitrogen which had formed.
To get on board a larger vessel would be still more difficult. A. diving ladder
provided with some means of hauling up a man standing upon it would be an
improvement when diving is carried out from a vessel’s deck.
If any of the very various symptoms which may arise after decompression
have occurred, the question of treatment at once arises, fi'or mere attacks of
pain in the limbs, without any more threatening symptoms, such as shortness
of breath or motor or sensory paralysis, palliative treatment will usually
suffice, such as local friction, hot or otherwise counter-irritant applications, or
the hypodermic injection of a small dose of morphia. For the radical and
effective treatment of decompression symptoms by far the most eft cri'e plan
is, however, re-compression. This plan was tentatively recomnum ftd even
by Pol and Watelie, the earliest medical writers on: caisson disease, and
strongly urged by Paul Bert, as a result of bis experiments. It seems now
to be pretty well known among workers in compressed air in tunnels that
their pains and troubles will disappear if they go back into the compressed,
air. We are informed, for example, that during the construction in com-
pressed air of a tunnel ’under -the Clyde the men were in the habit of going
bach, and even sleeping, in the tunnel, if they felt any discomfort alter
coming out from their day’s work,. In extensive engineering work in
compressed air a “medical air-lock ” is now usually provided for re-com-
pression. This plan, combined with the precaution of keeping the men close
by for some fane after coming out from their work, was introduced by
Mr. E. W. Moir, one of the firm of S. Pearson and Son, Ltd,, who has had
charge of various large subaqueous tunnelling undertaking carried: out by
thorn. It was first used, and with the most striking success, in connection
with the first Hudson- River Tunnel; arid its'employment lias certainly saved
much suffering, disablement, and loss of life,
It is evident that re-compression, if applied before any permanent damage
has been done to the affected tissues by the cutting off of their blood-supply,
or in other ways, must be very .effective ; and experience with men, as well as
with animals, folly bears this out. in the first place the bubbles axe at once
diminished in volume proportionally. to the increase in absolute pressure. 0
This causes instant relief, of pain, and of any aspbyxial symptoms. In the
second place the bubbles begin at. onee to re-dissolve, if the air-pressure is
.high enough to make the nitrogen pressure in the bubbles exceed that in the
• For Instance, they will be diminished to a third II the pressure is raised to 3 atmosphere!
absolute (J.e 29*4 lbs,, or 11 fathoms of water).


tissues. To enable this re-solution to complete itself, or go sufficiently
far lor practical purposes, some time must be allowed, after which, decom-
pression may be slowly and cautiously carried out. Even the paralytic
symptoms disappear very quickly, as a rule, on re-compression, except in
extreme cases, but any part of the central nervous system which has been
(by blocking of the circulation) deprived of oxygen may take some time to
recover; and if it lias been for long deprived, of oxygen it will not recover
at all, although other parts may gradually take on its functions, ho that the
patient ultimately recovers more or less completely. The following case,
reported by Dr. Gould, September 17, 1906, and communicated to ns by
Messrs, Pearson and Son, illustrates well the curative action of re-compression,
in the case of a workman in one of the East River Tunnels, who had, worked
o hours in compressed air at about 34 lbs.
A.lb, aged 23. Symptoms came on about 8 p.m., while walking home.
Began with numbness of both legs. Walked back two blocks, 'when legs
were completely paralysed. Brought back to medical lock in ambulance,
Uornplete motor paralysis in both legs, and very slight sensation. Knee-
jerks present; no clonus ; no pain or nausea; pulse good. Put in medical
lock air 8.45 p.m., and pressure raised to 31 lbs, by 9.0, Could move legs
eligibly at 20 lbs.; 'walked feebly at 25 lbs. ; walked perfectly well and
sensation normal at 30 lbs. Came out at 9.42. Normal after decompression.
Sir Weetman Pearson, M.lh, chief partner in the firm, was himself on
one occasion attacked by paralysis of the legs shortly after coming out of
the Hudson River Tunnel. Tlie symptoms promptly disappeared on re-com-
pression, although they partially returned the same evening after his return
home, when lie was at a long distance from the air-lock; and lie did not
completely recover for some days.
When no radical treatment is adopted the bubbles will ultimately dis-
appear of themselves. This is due to the fact that the nitrogen pressure
in. the bubbles (about 90 per cent, of one atmosphere)®' is higher than in
the blood (about 79 per cent, of one atmosphere, corresponding to the
nitrogen pressure in the air breathed). Thus nitrogen will slowly diffuse
out ot the bubbles, and they will, ultimately disappear. The nitrogen
bubbles in the blood itself may also, perhaps, leak out bodily through the
lungs. At any rate it takes very little pressure to make air pass from the
lung alveoli into the blood. The lungs are, in fact, astouiidingiy leaky to
air ; and unless air leaks out bodily from the Wood into the lungs, it is
very difficult to understand how small the effects sometimes are of slowly
injecting enormous quantities of air into an animal’s veins.
In view of the great additional safety and sense of security afforded by a
re-compression chamber, it. was thought advisable to provide one lor use in
ease of any unforeseen accident in connection with the Loch Striven experi-
ments ; and this chamber is likely to prove of much service in future. It
can not only be used for treatment in connection with any extensive deep
diving operations, but also lor experimental purposes, and for testing the
ears of men undergoing diving instruction, and teaching them how to open
their Eustachian tubes. For the latter purpose the chamber is invaluable;
and after a. lesson inside it two of the officers of the “ Spanker,” and a boy
of 1.3 who was on board, had no difficulty in descending to the bottom in
6 fa thorns of water, though none of them had ever dived before.
Re-compression chambers are not available in connection with ordinary
diving work; but there remains the possibility of sending a diver down
again should any serious symptoms threaten, should he be accidentally
“ blown up to surface, or should he from any other cause have come up,
or been hauled up, more, quickly than is safe. There is an interval of some
minutes at least before symptoms develop in consequence of rapid decom-
pression ; and if, for instance, a man has been blown up, there is plenty of
time to haul him in, ease Ms valve, and send him down again. Even if
* The average pressure of CO* in the tissues is probably about 7 per cent, of one atmosphere,
sukl of oxygen about 3 per vent. Heae.o the bubbles, if at ateospher.le pressure, will, contain
about y 0 per cent, of nitrogen, 7 per cent, of CO*, aa»l 8 per cent, of oxygen. It is possible,
however, that owing to blockage of the circulation or other causes the CO* pressure may vise
greatly, In which ease the babbles may contain less than 79 per cent, of nitrogen, arid will not
dissolve, bo that they perhaps remain for dan?.


very, sorious symptoms have already developed, arid lie is helpless, it, is far
saxer to open his valve, give him plenty of air, and drop Mm down slowly
and steadily on the life-line till lie recovers, or the bottom, is reached. He
will probably have recovered by the time lie is down a few fathoms, and
another diver can he sent after him shortly. II he has mo symptoms he
can go down himself in the ordinary way till a sate depth is reached, as
shown in the table which we have drawn mo
In any doubtful case, where symptoms seem possible. , though not
probable, the diver, on coming to surface, might remain in the water or on
the diving ladder lor 10 minutes before coming on board and having his
helmet unscrewed. He. could thus very easily again descend if he began to
feel any symptoms. On coming on board, lie ought not to undress for
another 20 minutes.
Another form of treatment which may be of value is the inhalation of
oxygen. Benefit is to be expected in two ways from oxygen inhalation, la
the first, place, when pure oxygen is inhaled there is a very distinct increase
in the amount of oxygen carried, by the blood to the tissues. Part of this
extra oxygen is combined with the haemoglobin of the blood (which does not
become fully saturated when, ordinary air is breathed), and part is in simple
solution, in accordance with Dalton’s Law. This extra oxygen is of special
value, since the whole of it is very readily available for physiological require-
ments ; and hi cases where the symptoms are due to deficiency in the supply
oi: oxygen brought by the blood, the effects of breathing oxygen are very
marked. Since, therefore, the most serious decompression symptoms are due
to deficiency of oxygen from local or general blocking of the circulation,
these symptoms are benefited by oxygen inhalation.
Oxygen also facilitates the disappearance of nitrogen bubbles, since it.
enormously increases the difference in nitrogen pressure between the nitrogen
bubbles and the arterial blood, increasing this difference from 10 per cent, to
90 per cent, of an atmosphere. It was this consideration chiefly which led
Paul. Bert to propose oxygen, inhalation as a method, of treatment alternative
to re-compression ; and his experiments with oxygen gave favourable results.
On the “Spanker” the arrangement for inhaling oxygen was as follows: -
An ordinary close-fitting lace-piece without valves was connected by a piece
of |-mcli robber tubing and a wide tap with a bag containing about a cubic
loot of oxygen. The bag was also provided with an outlet tap and an extra
tap for running in more oxygen from a steel, cylinder. The diver could thus,
if necessary, be at once given pore oxygen to breathed 5 With this plan the
CU £ oi the air expired accumulates in the bag, which, ought therefore to be
partly emptied and then filled up again from the cylinder every few minutes.
The UO* is, however, an advantage in so far as it stimulates the respiration
and circulation, and thus facilitates the discharge of nitrogen.
There seems to be no reason why some means of giving oxygen should
not be provided for in connection, with ordinary diving. The oxygen could
be conveniently generated from “ oxylitbe ” and water, or else carried in steel
cylinders.
It has been proposed in cases of impending asphyxia from air in the
blood, to puncture the right side of the heart, and suck out the excess of air
whieii has accumulated there, an ordinary fine trocar, cannula, and aspirating
bottle being used for the purpose. This is a desperate remedy, but, to judge
trom. experiments on animals, would sometimes save life.
A source of trouble and, danger to divers in deep wafer is their liability to
the accident known as “ blowing up,” If a diver gets Iris dress too much inflated
lie is of course lifted upwards. Once he has left the bottom the air in his
dress expands more and more as the pressure diminishes, and he shoots upwards
with increasing velocity. At or near the surface lie may strike 'violently
against a ship's or boat’s bottom, and thus damage himself or his dress.
When he reaches the surface from any considerable depth his dress is
distended ; he cannot move his arms ; and he floats helplessly with his valve
below water until he is hauled in. (See Figure 13.) The dress does not burst,
as air can escape from his cuffs. Even, if he could do so, it would be most
‘ it •' >«’<i «>f ooisrse be dangerous to administer oxygen In a re-compressioa chamber with the
po a> over 30 lbs. The method sometimes adopted of giving oxygen by nUowing
it to come oat hi a fine jet near the month of the patient is both useless and ridiculous.


tuwale for him to Jet. the air out and so sink down again. He could not
check Ms descent, and might be squeezed to death if the pressure in the
helmet became temporarily less by a very few feet of water than on his body.
If he has been in deep water for any considerable time he also mas the
gauntlet of decompression symptoms occurring; but if he is hauled in
promptly, and goes down the shotted rope again -without delay after the
excess of air has been let out, through one of Mg cuffs, or by holding his head
up and opening Ms valve, there is probably not much risk, and he can be
brought up again in the usual way by stages.
Any diver can of course blow himself up voluntarily, and it may lie
convenient to him to do so if lie is in shallow water. So far as decompression
symptoms are concerned, - there can be little or no risk in blowing up from
depths tip to 7 fathoms. Accidental blowing up is only apt to occur when,
the diver is crawling on the 'bottom, with his head clown. When lie puts his
bead down the escape of air from his valve is of course checked, and air
accumulates in the back of his dress. If he allows too much to accumulate
in tills way without raising his head, the air may get into the legs of his
trousers, and he may then be capsized with his head down and be helplessly
carried upwards. It he is wearing the •** crinoline ” the tendency to blowing-
up is naturally much increased, and we must distinctly condemn this
antiquated and clumsy contrivance, although it perhaps gives a little relief
when there is too much 60s. in the helmet air. It seems to have been
originally introduced with the idea of taking off some of the great pressure
of die water at great depths. This pressure is in itself of not the slightest
importance, and it it were the crinoline would be absolutely useless as a
protection.
A number of experiments have been made by Lieutenant Damant and
Mr. Catto to try whether it would, not be preferable to have the main weights
round the waist, Instead of on the corselet. By this plan the risk of
accidental blowing up is got rid of. but the weights tend to shift unless
they are firmly fixed, cm, in which case it is difficult to get sufficient air into
the dress to enable the diver to ascend the shotted rope without much effort.
Finally the plan was adopted of lacing up the thighs and legs by means of
the arrangement shown in Figures 1 and 2, By this means air is prevented
from capsizing the diver by distending the trousers of the dress, and if too
much air gets into the dress while he has his head down the helmet is carried
up automatically, and the excess of air escapes by the valve. The tendency
to accidental blowing up is thus got rid of, and, the diver always comes
upright, even if be has been placed upside down. Figure Id shows the
diving dress distended with air, with and without lacing up of the legs.
Figure 15 shows a diver who has purposely blown himself up in the modified
dress. It will be noticed that he is in the upright position. He would
automatically assume this position before leaving the bottom.
io. view of the great risk attending blowing up in very deep water, it
seems desirable to discard altogether the “ crinoline,” and to adopt the plan
of lacing up the legs, as jast described. Failing this, die legs of the dress
should be wound round, with, cord to prevent their distention with air, the
knees being, however, left perfectly free.


THE POSSIBILITIES OF VERY DEEP DIVING-.
In Paris I. and 11. we have dealt with the main difficulties met with in
diving with the ordinary Service appliances np to depths of about SO fathoms.
It may Re -useful, however, to consider the possibilities of practically useful-
■work at greater depths, and of extending the time on the bottom at depths
exceeding 20 fathoms.
One difficulty not hitherto referred to arises from the fact that at depths
exceeding about 25 fathoms the pressure of oxygen in the air breatSied by the
diver begins to be capable of producing serious effects. Among Paul Bert’s
other discoveries was the fact that oxygen *>t high pressure acts as a poison.
He found that at an absolute pressure excoHmg about 3 atmospheres of
oxygen (corresponding to about 15 atmoaphc’i of air-pressure, since air
contains about, a fifth of its volume of oxygen) animals go into convulsions
and soon die, even a short exposure being often fatal. With an exposure of
several .hours a pressure of even 2 atmospheres of oxygen, or 10 -atmospheres
of air. was found to be dangerous.
Lorrain Smith® has shown, recently that oxygen at high pressure ants on
die lungs, producing pneumonia (inflammation of the lungs). He found that
fatal pneumonia may be produced after 4 days’ exposure to an oxygen
pressure of as little as 75 per cent, of an atmosphere (corresponding to air at
about 3|- atmospheres of absolute pressure, or at a depth of 1-4 fathoms}. At
a pressure of about 1-J atmospheres of oxygen. (6 atmospheres of air, or
28 fathoms of water) death from pneumonia was produced, in about 48 hours.
At about 1* 8 atmospheres of oxygen pressure (8-|- atmospheres of air, or
250 feet of water) marked symptoms usually occurred in about, 12 hours, and
death in 20 hours, though in one case the animal died in T hours. At about
2*B atmospheres of oxygen (13| atmospheres of air, or 70 fathoms of water)
marked symptoms were observed, in about 3 hours, and death in. 9 hours.
To judge from, these experiments, and a, subsequent:, series by Hill and
Macleod.f it would seem probable that in ail probability a man supplied
with air in the usual way might dive to about 400 feet, or say 70 fathoms,
for a short time without much, risk of ill-effects from the oxygen pressure,
and that an exposure of less than 2 or 3 hours at 300 feet would not bo
dangerous. Further experiments on this subject are, however, evidently
required g
To breathe pure oxygen for long at pressures much exceeding 2 atmos-
pheres absolute, dr 15 lbs. by gauge (33 feet of sea-water) is evidently risky,
and at a pressor? of 3 atmospheres, or 30 lbs. by gauge, is decidedly
dangerous. It, lias been, proposed to supply divers with pure oxygen, in
order to avoid the risks arising on decompression from bubbles of nitrogen.
Evidently, however, pure oxygen cannot be safely supplied for any eonsiderable
time at depths exceeding about 6 or 7 fathoms.
As has been already pointed out, the troubles arising from pressure of
C(b in the helmet air can be -overcome by increasing the air supply, pomps
driven by power being, if necessary, substituted for hand pumps. There
are, however, methods by which the amount of air required, might, be
diminished.
“ Jmrnal of Physiology, Vo!, 24, page 19, 1899,
t Journal of Hygiene. 1903, page 401,
J Since the above was written Dr. Boyawfi an! TJ< -jicuant Daman! iiavo tried on goals iise
effects of three hours’ exposure to an oxygen powoef eare- poiuiiog to 57 fathoms of -water. Out
of seven ammaJs one diet! of pneumonia in t!>>* < iumom, -tod most «f the others seemed somewhat
affected, though • they "rapidly recovered when iln j.j, ear «-■.» reduced. At m oxygen pressure
corresponding io aboat 40 fathoms, of water, JDr. llsid u- and. Lieutenant , iP»raant, goitffl .hot
detect in themselves any symptoms, either ohj<vt : >v wiy-vthe, during short, exposures.?


On tie Continent a diving dress provided with, an air-reservoir on the
llouqoayxol and Denayrouze principle is much used. The diver carries on
his back a steel air-reservoir, into which tire air is delivered from the air-pipe.
He breathes air from the reservoir through a reducing valve, drawing at each
breath only the quantity of air required, and expiring through an outlet valve.
By tins plan the 'diver obtains tolerably pur© air,* and only uses as much as
he actually requires. The air-reservoir pattern has never come into use in.
England, however ; and it appears to have certain definite disadvantages.
In the first place, it is more complicated in construction and still more so in
use. and. liable to get out of order. It lias also the disadvantage that the air-
reservoir is apt to get foul of ropes, &c. under water, and to be otherwise in
the diver’s way. Another serious defect is that the attendant on the surface
cannot see by the gauge the diver’s depth, since the gauge indicates the
pressure in the air-reservoir, and not the pressure in the diver’s helmet. The
work of pumping is also much increased, since the pressure in the reservoir
is considerably greater than in the diver’s helmet. Finally the diver cannot
readily control Inis buoyancy, and if he stoops down so that the reservoir is
above’ him, he has to breath© against pressure. There are, therefore, very
substantial objections to the air-reservoir. On the other hand, there will
be no risk with the air reservoir of the diver blowing up when he puts his
head down, since no air will escape into his dress. There will also be less
risk from falling, since it the diver falls air will escape freely from the
reservoir through the breathing tube into the helmet, and the pressure in
the latter will thus lie prevented from becoming temporarily less than in
the surrounding water, t On the whole, however, trie advantages of an air-
reservoir seem to be greatly outweighed by ns disadvantages.
Another plan by which the air-supply might be greatly reduced would be
to use an arrangement by which the CO* in the helmet air was absorbed.
With such an arrangement an air-supply of one cubic foot per minute,
measured at atmospheric, preemrre, would amply suffice at all depths, even
during hard work, so that at <lO fathoms, for instance, only about a tenth
as much air would lie necessary. Various risks and complications would,
however, he introduced "by this plan, and for this reason we have not
experimented with it.
In the Fleuss apparatus the air-pipe is dispensed with altogether, the diver
obtaining oxygen from a steel cylinder and the CO* being absorbed by caustic
soda. In comparatively shallow water this apparatus could lie used with
safety, provided sufficient precautions were taken to prevent, any deficiency of
oxygen from occurring. In deep water, however, oxygen poisoning would
certainly occur, so that it is only in exceptional circumstances that the Fleuss
apparatus would be specially useful —for instance, in cases where it is
necessary to dispense with an air-pipe, and the depth is not great, W e have,
however, already reported on our experiments with this apparatus.
The most serious difficulty in connection with deep diving is undoubtedly
that due to the dangers of decompression. In Part 11. of this Report the
means available for obviating these dangers under ordinary conditions of
diving work have been, folly discussed. 'Various further measures might,
however, be adopted in cases where much work has to be done at one
particular place in deep water, as, for instance, in salvage operations or work
in connection with foundations.
Dr. Leonard Hill has proposed the plan of lowering to the bottom a steel
chamber, into which a diver could get on the completion of his work, and
close the door. The chamber could then be hauled to the surface, the
■pressure inside being lowered very gradually by allowing the air to leak out:
at a perfectly safe rate, in this way the danger of decompression could lie
completely obviated.
» The pipe leading from the diver’s mouth to the expiratory valve is charged with very fool
air at the end of earth expiration, and lids air has to be taken in at the. next inspiration, along
wi f,h the fresh air from die reservoir, so that ho always breathes vitiated air.
1 This advantage is almost entirely neutralised if, as is customary, the air-reservoir is kept at
osilv about 5 lbs- excess ox pressure. " The reserve of air In the reservoir is then quite trilling in
amount —insufficient lor a single good breath at depths of over S fathoms, la fact the whole
arrangement becomes ridiculous.


This plan might, we think, be considerably simplified and shortened by
adopting the principle of stage decompression proposed in Part 11. The
pressure in the chamber could probably be reduced very greatly within a few
minutes, so that even if it were hauled rapidly to the surface it would not
require to withstand an excess of internal pressure of more than one or two
atmospheres.
Several advantages would be gained by the use of a submerged decom-
pression chamber in this way. In the first place, the direr would be spared
the Song and tedious ascent through the water. Daring the ascent he is
exposed to the risk of his bands becoming numbed from cold, so that he
cannot bold on to the shotted rope. If, as is often the case, the tide is
formidable, the risk of being carried away from the shotted rope is. of course,
considerable, and a diver thus carried away will probably come to surface
at once, and so be in danger of the consequences of sudden decompression,
A. second advantage of the submerged decompression chamber would be that
in the event of any symptoms occurring the diver could be re-compressed at
once. A third advantage would be that if his air pipe was attached to the
chamber he would be saved the very formidable drag caused by the tide
acting on an air pipe coming from, surface, and he could thus work as easily
at great depths as he could near surface, with a tide miming.
Another plan available- for prolonged work in deep water would, be to use
a diving vessel provided with a- caisson about 3 feet in diameter passing by
a well through the bottom to a point some 30 or 40 feet below the surface
of the water. This caisson would be open below and would end above,
inside the diving vessel, in an air-tight chamber, provided with an air lock
for passing in or out. or two air locks, one of which could be used for re-
compression if necessary. The shotted rope would be attached to the open
end of the caisson. The diver could go down to his work in the ordinary
way from the ship’s side, but on coming up could enter the caisson at its
open end, and be brought up to the chamber at the upper end. He would
thus be saved the long waits in the water during the later and longer stages
of stage -decompression , and he could be decompressed at leisure, In the air
lock, after a wait sufficiently long to make the process safe. With this
arrangement if the excess of pressure in the caisson, was one atmosphere
(33 feet of water), and if sufficient time were taken before corning out from
the caisson, it would he possible for ,a diver to work at double the absolute
pressure without increasing the risk from decompression. For instance, at
30 fathoms, the absolute pressure is double that at 12|- fathoms ; hence the
diver could return as safely to the caisson, from 30 fathoms as he could to
surface from 12£ fathoms. A vessel fitted out with a movable caisson (used
as a diving bell) was recently supplied to the Admiralty for use at Gibraltar.
An illustration of this vessel is given in Messrs, Siebe, Gorman & Co.’s
catalogue.
In order to diminish the time required for safe decompression it has been
proposed to administer oxygen to divers. When pure oxygen is breathed
the whole of the nitrogen gas dissolved in the blood and tissues of the body
is gradually got rid of by diffusion through, the lungs, so that bubbles of
nitrogen cannot form on decompression. Since any excess of oxygen is
rapidly consumed by the living tissues, bubbles of oxygen do not tend to
form on decompression unless the pressure has been*extremely high; of
if they do form they are rapidly re-absorbed. If, therefore, the excess of
nitrogen can be displaced from the body before decompression, it is possible
to decompress rapidly without danger.
It has already been pointed out that it would bo risky to administer
oxygen to a diver at depths much, exceeding 33 feet (2 atmospheres of
absolute pressure). Hence the proposal to supply pure oxygen to divers
just before their ascent from great depths must be dismissed as impracticable.
Time could, however, be saved in decompression if the administration of
oxygen were only begun at 30 or 40 feet. In stage-decompression as described
m Part 11., tine object is to keep the gas-pressure in the venous blood and
tissues about double, but not more than doable, that of the air. By giving
a diver oxygen to breathe after he has reached, 30 or 40 feet from surface
during stage-decompression thy rate ef loss of nitrogen by diffusion through


tfr nil], be about doubled. In other words, the venous blood .will lose
»’> «••• .v «**o as much, nitrogen during its passage through, the lungs. la
e r-p.mmo of this the time required for safe decompression mill be reduced
t>> ns -m Ldf in the last three or four stages.
s ha gun from a steel cylinder or oxylith generator ’could be quite
conveniently given from a bag during decompression in a decompression
chamber or air-loch. There would also be no difficulty in. supplying it to
a silver under water from a steel cylinder provided with a suitable reducing
valve and tap, connected with the air-pipe. We believe that in cases where
men are required to work under heavy pressure for any considerable time
its employment would be very useful.
With, the disappearance of the respiratory troubles which were dealt
with in Part I. of this He port, it becomes doubly important to keep the
question of safety in decompression always clearly in view. The further
experiments which it is proposed to carry out at the Lister Institute will,
we trust, throw considerable new light on this question, and go far towards
defining the limits of what can safely he attempted at different depths.
Additional experiments are also needed with regard to the best means of
avoiding the risks arising from a diver becoming badly fouled, and. the
difficulties caused by tide : also as to the supply of air by more effective means
than hand-pumping.


Precautions recommended nr ascending from different depths and
AFTER DIFFERENT PERIODS OF STAY ON THE BOTTOM,
As shown in Appendix 1., the experiments carried out at the Lister
Institute on goats during 1906 and 1907, hare famished, very clear evidence
ot tlie general correctness of the principles set forth on pages 39-44 of this
Report, and of the marked superiority of the new method of bringing a direr
up by graduated stages. They have at the same time furnished quantitative
data from which the precautions needed in. decompression after various
periods of stay on the bottom, at various depths, may be deduced. These
data were only very partially available at the time when the series of experi-
mental dives from ELM.S. “Spanker'' were undertake a; and it now appears
that the precautions taken in the deeper of these dives were somewhat in
excess. On the other hand, the rate of decompression in some of the experi-
ments made on Lieutenant Damant and Mr. Catto in the steel chamber of the
lister Institute was a good deal more rapid than we should now consider
safe for a direr alter exposures of the same virtual durations and to the
same pressures.
The Tables at the end of this supplement show in detail the precautions
which we recommend. It will be seen at once that in order to carry out
these precautions efficiently, it is necessary that the pressure-gauges on
the diving pumps should indicate the depth, of: the diver correctly, and
particularly at .lesser depths. For this, reason we wish, to draw snecial
attention to our recommendation as to the testing of these gaugm, The
following remarks will serve to explain the principles on which dm 4.idles
have been constructed.
(1) Limit# of safety in rapid Decompression.
The experiments on goats iiave dearly show n ttmt oo to the limits of
pressure investigated' it is safe to decompress rapidly to half the absolute
pressure or a little more, however long lias been the exposure to the higher
pressure.. Thus a sudden drop from an, absolute pressure of 90 lbs. to 39 lbs.
produced not the slightest symptom,-th.e fall in pressure being 51, lbs., and the
ratio of the higher to the lower pressure being 2*3 to 1. On the other hand,
a sudden drop from 66 lbs, absolute pressure to 15 lbs. (atmospheric pressure)
produced disastrous effects on the same animals-, the ratio of the two pressures
being now 4 A to 1, although the fall in pressure (61 lbs.) was exactly the
same m amount as before. The goat experiments have ■ also shown that
slight symptoms first begin to appear with sadden decompression), when the
ratio of the two pressures exceeds about- 2"3 to 1, and. the exposure to the
higher pressure has been a long one. Human experience, so far as it goes,
points in the same direction. Rapid drops from high absolute pressure to
half or a little less produced no ill effects on Lieutenant Damant or Mr. Catto ;
and. similar rapid drops to atmospheric pressure from twice atmospheric
pressure or a little more are well known to produce no bad effects in divers or
caisson-workers. A case which, may be quoted is that of the men. employed
in roeiv-drill work at the bottom of Gibraltar harbour in the diving bed!
attached to a small vessel already referred to at page 55. The-men work
four at a time in four-hom shifts (a very long exposure) at a depth of about
35 to 4.0 feet, and. take ly to 2 minutes to com©; out through - the sir-lock.
Mr. Catto, who is .at present in charge of the vessel, has made careful,
enquiries as to whether any, of the numerous.men who have been employed
during the last five years have ever shown any symptoms due to the decom-
pression. He found that no such symptoms were known to have occurred at
any time. Several of the men have been employed since 1902.
in view of this clear evidence we have assumed; in calculating the table
of precautions in ascending, that however long the stay on the bottom.,, it is


safe for a diver to ascend rapidly until the absolute pressure is reduced to ad
least halt; also that so far as risks of caisson disease is concerned, there is
no need for any delay in ascending from depths of less than 7 fathoms or
18k pounds of excess pressure.
(2) Time required for complete saturation of the body with
atmospheric nitrogen.
The experiments on goats show that the symptoms produced, by rapid
decompression increase in frequency and gravity with the duration of
exposure to high pressure up to two hours ; longer exposures cause little
or no increase in symptoms, so that maximum saturation, is, practically
speaking, reached in two hours. In man the rate of respiratory exchange and
circulation of blood per unit of body weight is nearly half that of goats.
Hence we may conclude that in man maximum, saturation is practically
reached in about 4 hours, or perhaps a little more; and this conclusion
seems to accord fairly well with the human experience referred to at page 39.
On the same page there is a calculation, according to which parts of the
human body with an average circulation would be almost completely saturated
in an hour,® This conclusion was somewhat difficult to reconcile with actual
experience; and further investigation disclosed a very material source of
error in the calculation. It was noticed by Dr. Boycott and lieutenant Damant
that in the bodies of goats which had been killed by too rapid decompression
the fat was often remarkably full of gas-bubbles, .No other tissue in the
body showed the same phenomenon; and this led to the suspicion that the
solubility of gases in fat or oil might be high. This suspicion was confirmed
by some data published in connection with a quite different investigation by
Dr. H. M. Vernon, Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford. Dr, Vernon then
kindly undertook a series of exact experiments with animal fats at the body
temperature. These experiments! disclosed the very remarkable fact that
nitrogen is about six times as soluble in fat as in an equal weight of blood at
the body temperature. As the human body usually contains about 15 or
20 pe:r cent, of fat, its capacity for holding nitrogen in solution must be nearly
twice as great as was assumed on page 45. In other words the time required
for saturation must be nearly twice as long. With this amendment the
calculation accords much better with practical experience. It also follows
that a fat mars, will, take longer to saturate with, nitrogen in compressed air,
and to desaturate during decompression. He will, therefore, probably be less
subject to caisson disease after short exposures to pressure, but more subject
after long exposures, other conditions being equal.
Time required for safe Decompression.
As already explained, decompression can be carried out without risk of
any symptom whatever, if during the process the partial pressure of nitrogen
in any part of the body is never more than twice that of the atmosphere. In
order to fulfil this condition without wasting tune unnecessarily, it is accessary
to know to what extent different parts of the body have become saturated
with nitrogen during the exposure to pressure, and how rapidly they give off
the excess of nitrogen during decompression. The general principles on
which this may be calculated have been explained on pages 38-43. The
later experiments on goats (Appendix I.) have furnished experimental
data which enable these principles to be applied in detail, and at the same
time demonstrate their general correctness. An actual example will best
illustrate the mode of applying them. Let us suppose that a diver has to go
to a depth of 28 fathoms (corresponding to an excess pressure of 75 lbs. per
square*inch, or s*l atmospheres), and that it. is decided to allow him to
remain only so long that he can come up safely within about half an hour.
We may also assume that he can reach 28 fathoms in about 2 minutes.
• Tors Schrocter (p Der Sauersinff in dvr Prophylaxis und Tkerapie der Luftdrwekcrkran-
kungenp Berlin, 1906, p, 42) coaetaded that saturation ptust he practically complete in as little
as 15-20 minutes.
Communicated to the Royal Society, May 30th ? 1907*


Tiie logarithmic carve (Figure 20) represents graphically the average rate
at which any portion, of Ills body with an average circulation of Wood, and an
average proportion of fat, daring rest, will probably become saturated with
nitrogen if he is suddenly exposed to any given excess pressure. The curve
is drawn according to the almost self-evident assumptions explained at
page 39, dome parts will, however, saturate much more rapidly, and others
more slowly. By simply altering the scale of time on the curve it is possible
to take all these parts into consideration. For instance, a part; which becomes
half saturated in 5 minutes will be seven-eighths saturated in 15 minutes,
while a part which becomes half saturated in an hour will only be about
one-sixth saturated in 15 minutes.
Figure 21 shows graphically the calculated increase in saturation of
different parts of the body of a diver who has gone to 28 fathoms in
two minutes and remained at this pressure until 16 minutes after he .left
the surface. The two minutes spent in descending are counted as equivalent
to one minute on the bottom, so that the total virtual exposure to an excess
pressure of 75 lbs. is 15 minutes, .For reasons which will be explained
below the most rapid rate of saturation which need. be. considered corresponds
to half saturation in 5 minutes, and the slowest rate to half saturation in
75 minutes. It will be seen that at the most rapid rate the saturation, after
16 minutes from surface, corresponds to an excess pressure of 66 lbs. of air,
and at the slowest rate to 10 lbs. The latter pressure is far too low to be
capable of causing any trouble on decompression, and the same remark
applies to parts which half saturate in 40 minutes, since these parts will at
the end of 16 minutes only be saturated to 17| lbs. Even with sudden
decompression, therefore, we should expect no symptoms in man from the
more slowly saturating parts of the body. As shown in Appendix 1., the
symptoms known as “bends" are due to, too rapid decompression of the
more slowly saturating parts. The occurrence of these relatively trilling
symptoms affords a roost useful warning to workers in caissons and. tunnels
at. much lower pressures, but. this warning is absent with divers going for
short periods to great depths. Any symptom occurring in the case under
consideration, would presumably be ol a more serious character; experience
in diving shows only too clearly that this is the case.
We have now to calculate how oar diver may be brought up safely by
stages in the minimum of time, II his body had been fully saturated with
nitrogen, the first step would have been to bring him to hall the absolute
to "r Id ~,, , , ,
pressure, or to —g — = 40 lbs. absolute pressure, or 30 lbs. excess pressure
• —bf’., to a depth of, say, 70 feet. Only the very rapidly saturating parts of
his body, however, are very highly saturated; and these parts, which are
probably incapable of causing any symptoms even if he suddenly blew up
to surface, rapidly give off much of their excess of nitrogen daring his ascent
to the first stage, it is therefore well within the limits of safety to let him
ascend at once to 50 feet from surface (23 lbs. pressure). In order to.
prevent all hurry and risk of overshooting the proper stop, we think it is
desirable that a diver should not as a rule ascend more rapidly than about
1 foot per second. He should be stopped when the gauge indicates about
30 feet below tbe first stop. The air-supply should also be stopped, and the
gauge tapped, while the diver slowly ascends to the first stop. It would,
therefore, take him about 3 minutes to come up to 50 feet.
75 25
During these three minutes the mean pressure will be g— =4s)lbs.,
“ £,
and the effect will be about equivalent to 3 minutes exposure at 49 lbs., so
that the more highly saturated parts ol the body will diminish, and the less
highly saturated, parts increase, in saturation. Let us follow what must
.happen in the case, of the- most ' rapidly saturating parts, represented in the
upper curve in .Figure 21, During the three minutes of ascent to 50 feet
from surface the air-pressure (49 lbs.)- is 17 lbs., below the initial saturation
pressure of the part in question. As explained on page 40, the tissues will
desaturate at the same rate as they saturate, the excess pressu re, positive or
negative, being the same, la the case tinder consideration the tissues, with
a given excess of pressure, will half saturate or halt desaturate in 5 minutes.
Hence, as shown graphically on Figure 21, they will desaturate to the extent


of one-third ia 3 miimtes. In other words, they will desatnrate to the extent
17
of 'y ~ about 6 lbs., or from 66 lbs. to 60 lbs. At 50 feet, or 224 Lbs., there
is a stop of 2 minutes, The excess of pressure in the tissues is now
60 22% = 37%, and daring two miimtes the tissues will become 24- per cent.
deßatii.rat.ecL blow 24 per cent, of 37% is about. 9, hence tho saturation in
the tissues will diminish by 9 lbs., or from 60 to 51 lbs. ; and it will now be
quite safe to come up to 40 feet. The farther stops are 6 miimtes at 4.0 feet,
5 minutes at 30 feet, 7 minutes at 20 feet, and. 10 minutes at 10 feet, as
shown in the following table. The rates of desatnration, as calculated in a
similar manner for both (.prickly and slowly saturating parts, are graphically
represented on .Figure 21. The stoppages are so calculated as to just prevent
the saturation pressure in any part of the body from becoming more than,
double the air-pressure ; the object being to prevent all risk of symptoms.
The only exception, is in the case ol the last step from 10 feet to surface;
but even in this case tire highest saturation pressure is not allowed to exceed
18 lbs., which is a safe limit, as already explained.
Daring muscular exertion 1 the rate of blood circulation in increased ; and
if a diver during his ascent did very little muscular work he might, in
consequence &i the diminished circulation, give off nitrogen at a slower rate
than according to the above calculations. To guard against this possibility
it is deal table that during the stoppages he should actively'work with Ills
arras and legs. This precaution was taken in the experimental dives of
.Lieutenant Daxnant and 'Mr, Oatto, and can easily be carried out.
Two tables have been constructed showing the stoppages required alter
dives to various depths and with various periods of stay on the bottom.. The
first table refers to ordinary limits of stay on the bottom, the limits being
such that, a diver can' always return to surface safely within about half: an
hour at most, and might return by stages much more rapidly without serious
risk.® The second table is for longer periods on the bottom. A. diver might
get foul of something on the bottom, and thus be unable to return within
the limit of time specified in the first table ; or for some other reason it
might be necessary lor him to remain for an extra long time. The table
provides for enforced stays of any duration, but as the time needed to reach,
surface without risk ol even, slight symptoms, such as “ bends,” is very long,
and the risks from exhaustion and cold during the process have to be
considered, the stoppages during the ascent after the longest exposures are
only sufficiently long to prevent- any serious symptom of caisson disease
from occurring. Both human experience and the experiments on goats show
that with long exposures to pressure a rate of decompression can be selected
which, is sufficient to prevent any serious symptom, but; not sufficient to
prevent “ bends” occurring. The precaution of exercising the limbs during
the stoppages will, however, probably reduce the risk of bends. The
experience of Drs. Hill and Greenwood (p, 37, above) points distinctly in
this direction.
If the diver cannot exercise Ms limbs, or if he is ol heavy build owing to
excess of fat in his body, the stoppages should be fully a third longer if
possible.
Figure 22 shows the calculated rate and, extent of saturation of different
■parts of a diver’s body with nitrogen when the descent to, and ascent from
28 fathoms are conducted--according to the method previously recommended
in the Diving Manual, the rate of descent and ascent being 12 fathoms in,
15 minutes, and the time on the bottom ’being 14 minutes, as in the example-
already discussed. The time spent, under water is 84 minutes, as against
4.6 by the new method with an equal time on the bottom, ; and it will be
seen at once that the risks ol death or very- serious symptoms by the old
method would be very great, as when the’diver reaches the surface some
parts (anil probably the most dangerous ones) ol his body would be still,
saturated to as niaeh as 36 lbs, pressure. It would probably be hardly less
" If, lor Ineteace, » pipe gave «y, or turtle tig else went wrong, be might come up,-or be
hauled up, with the stoppage* reduced to, half their usual length, and the first one or-two omitted.
The diminution of pieasm-e would eoniite.ract the effects of the increasing percentage
of CO s i«
the air of the helmet ural drees. The delect should -meanwhile fce remedied if possible without
delay, and the diver-sent-down again for » short distance, and brought op Oy stages.


| Diver A -
-
. ! t
i i
u
o-±
39
.22
„ B -
-
" 1
30
S7
30
51 0 ■”
-
.. !
33
38
20
„ I)
-
- |
88
37
30
» s
"
... 1
28
34
30
28.2.07.
Diver B
i
25
35
30
i « E -
-
*■ |
■SO
36
30
,, C
“ i
29
sr>
25
safe to go straight to the bottom and come straight up alter 14 minutes.
Comparison of Figures 21 and 22 shows at a glance the great advantages
gained by descending rapidly and ascending by the stage method. With
the sieve descent the diver’s body is already almost, as highly saturated when
he reaches the bottom as it is after the whole stay on the bottom 'with the
quick descent. With the uniform decompression most of the diver’s body
continues to increase in saturation during half the ascent or more; while
with stage decompression the saturation rapidly diminishes from the outset.
As illustrating the risks involved in the current method of descent and
ascent, even when the time on the bottom does not exceed 30 minutes, at a
depth of only 20 fathoms, we may relate the following recently reported
experience of five divers of BLM.S. " Diana ” daring operations for the
recovery of an anchor and three shackles of cable in about 20 fathoms of
water at Lagos. The work was carefully superintended, and the descent
and ascent were carried out in close accordance with the recommendations
of the Diving Manual. The times were noted, and were as follows: —
Going down. Coining no. On bottoms.
01 the five divers, A suffered after his second, descent from nausea and
vomiting, which, however, soon passed off, and may have been due only
to the excessive pressure of (JO, in the air of the helmet, from the inadequate
air supply. Diver I) shortly after his ascent developed symptoms (faiirtiiess,
dizziness, &c.) pointing distinctly to serious blockage of the circulation by
bubbles in the heart. Diver E developed similar symptoms after Ms second
descent. Both were on the sick list for live or six. days, but completely
recovered.
It will be noted that the symptoms, were,, not the “bends” which are so
common among workers 'in caissons, tunnels, &c./butol a far more threatening
character. In framing ih*- '.{.pended Tables we have kept clearly in view the
fact that in the case of divers with.comparatively short exposures to pressure
the symptoms to be guarded against are ranch more serious than bends.”
Fre&avtiona with very short and very long Exposures, avid with repeated
Dements.
Both human experience and experiments on animals show that rapid
decompression is practically safe, even, from pressures greatly exceeding
20 lbs., if the period of exposure is sufficiently short; for instance, there
seems to he hardly ux y risk in rapid decompression after an exposure of
half an hour at 30 lb-., or 15 minutes at 45 lbs. . Some parts of the body
(for instance, the g ! yv matter of the Medulla,, where the respiratory centre
is situated) are probably practically saturated within' a' minute; and many
other parts with a lap.o circulation must be mmo ihth balfhatarated'within
five lf womd seem, therefore. Hud rfu pwm give rise to: no’
risk in rapid decomrim don, to a fourth eff the afriTm pc -sure,or even less.
They desaturate so rapidly that therein * s lilt.-tad ft at,- fm the formation'
■* By determine.’w u in iU<» free- wtrotoe r. «, . In- urine secreted:- daring exposure to-
compressed air MU' -u d U*e.>->'i'oo.cl have f.-u \ - -wb that, this is the ease for the hataau
kidney during very ate -.vu-uon (Prm;, Ftit/iP B„ Vn' TO. IfiOT’!


of bubbles in the blood passing through them. The fact that except ■with
enormous pressures it is impossible to produce any symptoms at ail in very
small animals by rapid decompression, points distinctly in the same direction,
in general, the more slowly any part of the body de-saturates the more likely
it is to cause symptoms if the saturation lias been sufficient. Even with
decompressions to as far as a quarter of the absolute pressure it seems
superfluous to take any account of parts which become bait saturated in Jess
than, five minutes, particularly with a rate of ascent of only about 30 feet
per minute, as recommended in the Tables. With decompressions to as
far as a third, it is also superfluous to allow fox parts which half saturate in
less than ten minutes.
In the case of very long exposures to compressed air a different
consideration applies. The experiments on goats indicate that in order to
avoid ail symptoms with these animals it is necessary to allow for parts of
the body which become only half saturated in 45 minutes, and desaturate
with corresponding slowness. Allowing for the difference in the rate of
blood circa iation between goats and men we should require, in order to
avoid any symptoms in men of average build, to provide for parts of the
body which take lolly hours to become half saturated or half desaturatedA
But the only symptoms produced by the most slowly saturating and
desatnrating pans are, according to both human experience and the experi-
ments on goats, “ bends ” ; and these “ bends ” are of a very trifling character
if the decompression has been so carried out as to avoid any more serious
symptoms. Any diver would certainly sooner run a small risk of slight
bends than undergo the exhausting process of being kept hanging on the
shotted rope for a longer time (ban, would otherwise be necessary. For this
reason the stoppages in the Tables are only so calculated as to avoid the
risk; of anything more serious than “ bends ” after reaching the surface. The
ideal spacing of the stoppages is, indeed, somewhat altered in order to avoid
risk of “ bends ” under water.
The rates of .decompression are ail calculated as safe lor the corresponding
maximum pressures and maximum ■ periods of exposure. For instance, at the
greatest depths the decompression rate lor “ over 1 hoar ” is calculated as
safe for a stay of any duration, so as to meet the case of a diver being so
badly fouled that he cannot get free -until the tide turns.
A diver has often to descend twice or oftener at short intervals. It is
evident that at the beginning of the second, descent the more slowly
desatu rating parts of the body will not have had time to lose their excess
of nitrogen, and that consequentiy they will be more highly saturated at
the end of the second stay on the bottom than would otherwise have been
the ease. This will be clear from a study of .Figures 21 and 22. To meet
the increased risk in decompression owing to this circumstance it is desirable,
in calculating the proper rate of decompression, to add together the two
periods of stay on the bottom, and adopt the corresponding rate of decom-
pression. For the first hair of the stoppages this is not necessary, but for
the second half, including, of course, the longer stoppages required to meet
the case of the more slowly desatnrating parts, the rule should be carried
out, .Reference has already been made to the increasing danger experienced
by pearl divers after successive dives without any precautions in decom-
pression, This danger does not .mount up to the same extent if stage
decompression be used ; but nevertheless exists.
As the interval of time between two successives dives increases the extra
danger in. decompression diminishes. With an hour’s interval the extra
precautions in decompression might be halved, and with two hours’ interval
they might be entirely omitted.
In general, the precautions recommended in the Tables are greatly in
excess of those which have hitherto been eoin.mori.ly employed in either
diving or work in caissons, tunnels, &c. We have endeavoured to leave a
clear margin, beyond anything which either human experience or experiments
on animals, or calculation, has shown to be risky ; and fortunately it has
• For aaea of heavy build, and inclined to obesity, this allowance would be' insufficient,. and
in the case of such mea the stoppages during an ascent after a long exposure should he increased
in length by a third, as already remarked.


k r d ° hl ? ? ciear ® am S of ths time spent under water
(e-ith ordinary limns of working tame; by clivers at all depths and a great
mcxmmm working efficiency and comfort. We have to
tliat if Wese precautions for divers, and the corresponding ones for other
workers in compressed air, are carried out, the risks to life°and\oaiiSoS
caisson disease will practically disappear, ’ IXI
Table I.
Stoppages during the Ament of a Diver after ordinary Limits o
from Surface.
i Ad-
mZl'-Z 1 eiS’ Sw W es ii! at diSexent Depths,
T or o
A m isv.’
i stop! 60 50 n - mm. so Ft. iofi
; I
iwh Pressure. I A V'
-' Je P'“- lo«i«i.i<o i proxi- Stc
Pounds ,■' V ! ° , | pate
per square 0 0* rfiiac to -
i’eet.. Fathoms. ’ inch. I ' j ®rsfc - pi ,
■ =
JtfS Z 6 0-16 Ho Smut
oo- oi 6-/ 16-18* Ore? 3 .hours 1
, ( Up to 1 hoar
/-* 18*-21. 1-3 hours - 1|
I Over B hours l|
| Up to | hour
48-54 8-9 21-24 ) hH houvt - 2
| I £-3 hoar* - 2
} Over 3 hon.ra 2
f Up to 20 mins.
... I 20-45 mins. ■ 2
o:. -W! S-fO 2-1-261 < I-1J hours - 2
I li-3 .hoary ~ 2
[ Over 3 hoars 2
f Up to | hour 2 -
fiO-86 10-11 26J-29j j flf hoS I \ Z
I i-2 hoara s
( 2-8 hours - . 2
| Up to :| hour 2
80-72 11-1.2 29|-82 ii 4 kour - 2
'] i--l hoar • 2
( 1-2 hoars - 2
„. „i Op to 20 mms. 2
‘ 1 ,b I3 " 13 33-34 j,- 20-45 mins, - 2
I f-1 ; |. hours - 2
7 . v , ~ Q ., _ i Up to 20mins. 2 ~~
13-14 B4 a -37-< 20 45 rains. - 2
■ |-1| hours - 2
; Up to 10 ruins. 2
84-90 14-15 87-40 J 10-20 mins, - %
j 20—40 mins. - 2
«. 40-80 ixd.ua. - %
fUpto 10 mins. 3
90-96 15-16 40-134- j 30-30 mins, -■ 3
I - 20-B5 ;mins, ~ 2-
: 85-55 rains. - 2
96-103 10-18 42*-481 iSSf" 5 Z
( 80-40 siim. - 8
108-130 18-20 43-B3Z I Z
I 25-85 mins, - 3 .
120-183 20-22 531.51,j up to 15 mips. 3
j 15-30 mins, - 3
132-114 22-34 59-64* i Pp «> 12 miog. 3
~ I 12-25 mins. - 3
1-14-156 24-26 644-70 ’■ Dp to lOwtns. 3
’ * | 10-20 mins, - 3
156-108 26-88 70-75 I C P ** 10 wln». 3
( 10-16 .mhis, . 3
168-180 28-30 75-80* t flp to 9 mins. 8
<o2" in? !Z"® 80|-S0 tip to I*B mins.l 3
;: - ■'- O': ;*.2-84 86-91* Up to 12 mms.l B 2
Time for
Mi:o sites.
T U) 12
7 12
l5 22
~ W ■ 20 ag
3 ™ 2
~~ —• 5 7
5 *0 15
I ;> 15 22
I s 0 20 32
« 5
| 3 | 5 j ii>
1 5 : 12 : SS
1 ■— 10 i 20 i -»
. : " v : <>£
| 6 | 10 I 17
i | 50 | 20 j 03
I “ i 5 ! IS | 22
I I W I 30 I 32
~ I 9 i 5 io
i 2 S IS 2*5
3 ; 10 | IS go
I 5 I , 5 io
1 T i » *» 32
| 3 j 1.0 J 30
I '7 if 5 11
j i \ J io 23
5 j 10
{> i o
5 j 10
y: 3 3 s is
3 3 30 13 32
t 1* 0 3 l»
W ? 7 10 30
75_»M i Pp to 9 mins. 8 Z i a I 10 m
4 f a-'UmiM. - 8 __ .> S f S S Id
801-fW o|>tolB«iw S _ % :> ' 30 so
HS.4H4 jUp to Wain*. B 2 2 | ? i J| |


Table 11,
Stoppages during the Ascent of a Diver after del-ay beyond the ordinary
Limits of Time from Surface.
Ap-
Fressure. rAx! Totai
Depth, Time from Stoppage* te Mlwttea at ditfereat fleptlw. Ti in .:> j;
Founds Surface to _ jj mc
per beginning of
Square Ascent,
: ; aouare ] Ifirst ‘
Feel. FatbCTM*. I lnch- i Stop, SO Ft. 70 .Ft. 60 Ft. oO .Ft, 40 Ft.j 30 ft, 20 Ft, 10 F
..it *; 1,0-11 S6.i-29.| Over 3 hours 2 ~ l‘- ! 30
; ou Viomfg „ 2 • - 10 SO
U-U m~S2 1 Over 3 hours 2 -- SO 30
; ( boms «• 2 1 — 20 2o
72-78 12-13 32-344 1 Oi sfhhts 2 - - - - 80 30
{ 1 1-2 hours 2 •“**■ SO
78-S-i 13-14 344-37 < 2-3. hoars •• 2 . ----- J> SO 30
j Over 3 hours 2 ■— , *0 30 Bo
j 1-14 hours ~ 2 , --• ~~ c * 25
84-90 U-U 37-40 \ lf-2£ hours - 2 ~~ ~~ J> 2?
( Over 2\ hours 2 -•-- ■ — ‘-0 3e »o
j 1-1| hours! - 2 r > Jo SO
<•0-90 10-16 40-424 \ H~H hours - 2 , ~~ 10 So 35
{ Over 2§ hours 2 •-•-■ 30 rfe ho
e i 40-60 minutes 2 •*■*'
06-108 16-1,8 42J-48 i 1-2 boars s 16 2S 3o
■ Over 2- hours 2 —•— * — J - •> oe 3o 4')
( 85--60 minutes 2 ~ ,5 , 10 15 25
.108-120 16-20 48-334 < 1-2 hoists 2 W 20 30 35
I Over 2 hours 2 00 •>•.- <>a 40
( hours -3 5 10 15 20
120-1 S 3 20-22 534-59 ] j-U hoars - S S 10 20 30 30
I Over 1-e boors 3 ■ — <■-> St o;> -u 40
( 05—4.- % _u antes 3 —■ % & 10 ;i 25
132-144 22-24 59-6441 S OWii, • S 0 0’ ?!
I O.tr {Th....TB 3 - »0 M> Sa- *O, 40
j 2,1 -tea 8 - f ,5 10 1» 30
144_F”f, 24-26 644-70 i :‘'.-wnu>mie» 8 lft l:> <*’ &
*• I ... .. r I H-a~ 3 20 25 SO 35 40 40
{ ]■' nreates 3 ”7 0 ' 10 is 20
150-168 26-28 70 73 \ J-loour - .3 J W '«0 15 80 80
I Over I hour - 5 - ; > '->0 eo 4<) 40
• 14-20 Tr-hiutes 3 $ 3 '{ *0
_, 1 20-50 trbuules 3 2 2 S 10 hi 2->
168-18:2 28-50 V5-boj-\ , 3 3 3 7 10 20 SO 05
f Over 1 hour - 5 15 25 00 00 35 40 40
s 13-20 minutes 0 0 3 7 15 lo
! 20-30 ru brutes 3 - 3 3 5 10 b> -;>
m-m 30-32 801-86 't ,i 2 hc . ltr ■-{ —. 3 5 10 12 SO 30 30
I Over 1 hour - 3 5 20, 25 B 0 B 0 25 40 40
[ 12-40 Muinutet* 3 3 3 o V 10 2{)
? 20--Boriii'iutfts 3 3 3 H 5 -0 20 20
104-206 82-34 - 8 8 3' 5 10 io 20 30 35
( &rer 1W - 3 15 20' 25 30 30 35 40 40
' : - - - -


I.—Kotes on Experiments made at the lister Institute during June
and July 1906, by A. E, Boycott, M. D., Fellow of Brasenose
College, ifrford, and Lieutenant G. 0. 0, Damant, R-.'N.,
H.M.S. “ Excellent.”
Diary o.t the .Deep Diving .Experiments carried out off Rothesay,
Me of Bute, from H.M.S. “Spanker,” August 1906.
sagge»ted Method for the Better ’i'estisig' of Diving Pumps.


NOTES ON EXPERIMENTS MAI
THE LISTER INSTITUTE DURING
1906 AND 1907, BY A. E. BOYCOTT, M.D.,
FELLOW OF BRASENOSE COLLEGE, OXFORD, AND
G-. G. 0. DAM ANT, LIEUTENANT B,N, HALS.
During June and July 1906 a series of experiments on goats and men were made
in the pressure chamber at the Lister Institute, as a preliminary to the diving
experiments subsequently undertaken by Lieutenant Damant and Mr. Cat to under
similar eircamstances. The experiments on goats have since then been greatly
extended. While leaving a number of points for future elucidation they illustrate
some of the more important principles of the causation and prevention, of caisson
disease, and a brief account oil them is here given. Full details will shortly be
published in the Journal of Hygiene.
The pressure chamber, which- the lister Institute owes to the munificence of
Dr. Ludwig Monel, consists of a short segment of a boiler with curved steel plates at
eith - :id. Inside it is 8-1 feet long, and 7 feet high and wide, and has a capacity of
LG . feet (9,500 litres). It is thus large enough to hold several persons com-
f. i oiTy, together with any apparatus which may be required. There are two doors ;
one, «. manhole measuring 24. inches by io inches, is in common rise, and. is- shown,
open in Figure 17. The other is much larger (28 X2l inches), and is designed,
for the introduction of bulky apparatus ; it is shown closed in Figure 16. A small
air-lock shown in Figure 16 is provided, through which small articles may be passed
during the progress of an experiment, while there are three observation windows.
These consist of stout glass, but are also fitted with an automatic arrangement by
winch, breakage of the glass causes a solid metal plug to tail into the hole. Com-
pression or exhaustion was at first effected by a simple compressor driven by a gas-
engine, which will raise the pressure about 2 lbs. a minute. The pressure is
adjusted and regulated by a num her of valves. Besides srraugements lor varying
the inlet to the compressor, the chamber itself is fitted with lour simple and
four adjustable spring valves, several of which are seen in figure 17, By this
means, the most exact adjustment may be made both with positive and negative
pressures, either from inside or outside. The largest valve allows the pressure to be
reduced from 100 l bs, to atmospheric pressure in about one minute. The compressor
and chamber are fitted with various spring pressure gauges, together with a
barometer for negative and a mercurial manometer for low positive pressures.
Within, the chamber is fitted with benches for apparatus or rest, a telephone, aa
electric heater, and several electrical points for lighting, driving a motor, and the
like. Experiments ixave already been made on human beings at pressures varying
from B|- lbs. below to 80 lbs, above atmospheric pressure, and the apparatus lias
been found to be extremely satisfactory.
The animal experiments were throughout conducted on goats. These animals
were selected as being the largest which could conveniently be dealt with,
bearing in mind that a considerable number would be required. The questions
under consideration depend in a very fundamental way on the relation between the
rapidity and volume of the circulation and respiration and the mass of the tissues.
The degree to which the circulating blood washes the air in the lungs on the one
hand, and the tissues on the other hand, varies considerably in different animals.
In general it may be stated, that the rapidity with which the tissues of the body are
brought into relation with the air in the lungs varies inversely with the size of the
animal. We have no means of measuring directly the general activity of the
circulation, but, taking the series of warm-blooded animals as a whole, there is no
doubt that it is normally adjusted to correspond to the rapidity of the gaseous
exchange. Now the extent of this" gaseous exchange, which, may be conveniently
measured by the quantity of carbonic acid given off per unit of body weight in a
given time, is a function of the ratio between the surface and the mass of any given
animal. It is therefore larger in small animals. A mouse of 25 grammes weight,
for example, produces about 8 grammes of carbonic acid per kilogramme of body
weight per hour, a rat of 150 grammes about 4 grammes, a guinea-pig of 400
grammes about I'4 grammes, a rabbit of 2-,000 grammes about! *ogrammes, a goat;
of 19,000 grammes about 0" 8 grammes, and a man. of 70,000 grammes about 0'45
grammes. It is clear therefore that a mouse will take tip excess of air and become
saturated at any given pressure much more quickly than a man, and at the same


tone will get rid o£ this excess more quickly, so that in experiments of moderate and
long duration tire mouse will appear to bo much less susceptible .to caisson, disease
than % man. In the same wav it may be assumed that the goat takes jip and
discharges excess of air more quickly than man, roughly in proportion to the fact ImiA
bia respiratory exchange (as was ascertained by a number of: experiments made oy as
for this purpose) is one and a half to two times as great as that of man. At the
same time it must be remembered that these comparisons are good only for the
average of a series of individuals. , There are some goats which are more susceptible
to decompression symptoms than some men, and some rats wnich are more
susceptible than some rabbits.
Tire following is an experiment which illustrates the difference between different
animals. We may premise that other experiments have shown that similar
circumstances of pressure and decompression would be mevitauly fatal to goats.
Fifty-nine mice (average weight 20 grammes), 12 small rats (do grammes), lo
med'ium rats (85 grammes), 8 large rats (200 grammes), .1.0 guinea pigs (soil grammes!
am! 7 rabbits (2,000 grammes) were compressed to 72 lbs, positive in lo_ minutes,
left for one hour and then decompressed in 50 seconds. Oi: the 109 animals, the
largest rabbit (weighing 2,800 grammes) and one guinea pig died ; the others showed
no definite symptoms, and ail survived. In another series of: experiments 2i mice,
10 small, 9 medium, and 6 large rats, 10 guinea pigs, 5 rabbits and 10 goats were
exposed to 51 lbs. pressure for 3 hours and then decompressed quickly. Of the
goats 2 died, 3 were seriously ill, 3 slightly ill and 2 showed no symptoms; the
largest rabbit (weighing 2,1)00 grammes) died and the others showed no symptoms.
The escape of these small animals is due to the rapidity of their circulation and
respiration ; they are thus enabled to discharge the excess of air very quickly. If
the* - mechanism by which this discharge is effected be arrested, bubbles appear m the
bodies of small and large animals alike. Thus in one experiment a selection of
a:> j, wm taken into the chamber and after half an hour’s exposure to so low a
po - • «< as 30 lbs. a mouse, a young rat, an old rat and a guinea pig were killed
as ■ ;9: courses decompressed by tiie schedule for men. On examination. niter
reachi rig atmospheric pressure but)bios wore found m the blood of ail iour animais.
Considerations such as these therefore determined the choice of the largest
available animal for experimentation, so that the results could the more readily be
transferred to man. It was indeed clear that experiments on quite am ail animals
could only be translated into human experience by the introduction oi: a quantity
factor of almost qualitative dimensions.
Goats also presented two further advantages. They are large enough to give
plenty of symptoms on inappropriate decompression from quite low pressures {e.g.,
45 lbs. positive). Small animals such as mice, on the other hand, required to lie
exposed to pressures approximating to 100 lbs. positive to give many symptoms with
the most severe decompression. Such pressures are approaching (with long
exposures) dangerously near the point at which oxygen poisoning is liable to appear.
The occurrence of this fatality would hopelessly vitiate tae experimental examination
of mire caisson disease. Goats arc also animals in which sllgnl symptoms may be
detected with a fair amount of certainty. While they are not particularly intelligent
and on the whole definitely insensitive to pain, they are m emotional relations to
their animate and inanimate surroundings of a kind sufficiently delicate to enable
those to whom, they are familiar to diagnose with considerable accuracy any slight
abnormalities which they may present.
Most of the experiments have been made at a pressure oi: eitner /5 tbs.
(6 atmospheres absolute) as representing a deep diving pressure (28 fathoms; or
45 lbs. as representing the upper limit of work in caissons (17 fathoms). It was
also desirable to keep well within die limits of oxygen pressure at which symptoms
of oxygen poisoning might complicate the experiment. We found, for
of 7 goats exposed to 81 lbs. positive pressure in an atmosphere containing 36 ' 5 per
cc-ntmif oxygen (= 35 lbs. oxygen pressure ~ 10J atmospheres positive air pressure
= 57 fathoms) one died of pneumonia while under pressure, five of the others were
slightly ill and one showed no symptoms.
We have been able to distinguish live fairly definite and frequent symptoms
of illness in the experimental animals. The smallest effect which can be observed
finds expression in what is apparently a sensation of uneasiness m one or more
limbs. Without evincing any signs of pain, the animal .holds its leg most
commonly a lore leg off "the ground, and is clearly unwilling to rest: much weight
uDoa it. ”In our experience this is by far the commonest symptom; hi the great
majority of cases it passes off in a few hours. We have ventured^- to provisionally
identify it with the “ bends” of caisson workers. The symptom which follows next
in order of severity is a temporary paralysis, lasting fronp a few minutes to one or
two hours, and unaccompanied by any signs of general illness. It nearly always
13 49084.


affects' the hind limbs, as does also a much more serious form of paralysis, which, is
either partially or completely permanent, Respiratory distress and dyspnoea form
a fourth group. These are very serious symptoms, and are often only the prelude
to the filth group, which include fatal results. Besides these, a few eases of
indefinite severe illness have occurred, which are too various for classification. In
a general way we have grouped the symptoms under three headings: (i) slight
symptoms or “ bends ” ; (2) serious symptoms (paralysis, &c.j ; and (3) death.
The exact causation of all these symptoms is not yet fully elucidated. Respi-
ratory distress is an indication of obstruction to the heart and pulmonary circulation
by hubbies in the blood; when these become churned into a froth in the right side
of the heart the whole circulation practically comes to a standstill, and death from
asphyxia follows. Post-mortem examination of the animals which have succumbed
to this train of symptoms has borne out this interpretation. Examination of the
nervous system of paralysed animals shows that the condition is due to a local
obstruction of the circulation (presumably by bubbles) causing the well-known
*'softening *' of the nervous tissues. The anatomical condition underlying “bends”
is not at ail clear. The synovial fluid in the joints is full of fine babbles, but
this explanation will hardly account for all the various pains in the limbs which are
>v men.
The time relations to decompression of the onset of these symptoms bears out
human, experience. Any of them may ensue almost immediately. More commonly,
however, we have been able to watch the remarkable period of delay. A goat may
be decompressed, released from the chamber, run about in the yard, exhibit its
voracious appetite, and fight its companions—ail the while showing nothing
abnormal. Yet a quarter of an hour later it may be dead, with its blood vessels and
heart full of bubbles and froth.* The onset of those milder symptoms which we
have called “bends” may not be detected for half an hour, or even more, after
decompression. The significance of this period of delay is engaging our attention;
preliminary experiments show that bubbles form more slowly after decompression in
blood saturated at high pressures outside the body than in water, and it is possible
that this is the explanation of at least most of the delay.
The first series of experiments on goats were made with the slow method of
compression already mentioned. It was therefore impossible to examine accurately
the effect of the duration of exposure in short experiments. This, and our ignorance
of the results to be expected from goats, rendered the experiments somewhat barren
as far as definitive results were concerned, and no further account of them will be
given in this place. They served however to orientate the experiments which
were subsequently made upon animals, and afforded a basis on which the personal
experiments of Lieutenant Damant and Mr. Catto in the pressure chamber could be
framed. These experiments were undertaken in July 1906 as a preliminary to
actual diving, and an account of them is here given.
In the first three or four the decompression was controlled from, inside the
chamber; in the rest from outside. The subjects remained closed in the chain her
for half an hour after each experiment, the engine being also kept running so that
reccmp re salon could- be at once begun if any serious symptom developed. In
addition to the actual period of exposure to each pressure, we have noted the virtual
period of exposure calculated on the assumption that about half the time occupied
iu compression must be added (see above, page 43).
In view of the results with goats, the occurrence of decompression symptoms
seemed probable in the more severe experiments, So symptoms were, however,
observed, except considerable itching of the skin of the lore-arias where it was
uncovered. In the compressed air the weE-known alteration in the voice, and
corresponding abnormal sensations about the lips and mouth, were very marked
at pressures exceeding 60 or 70 lbs. Lieutenant Damant experienced feelings of
exhilaration or slight intoxication, but
similar.
I. July 25th. Actual exposure to 3911
Decompression in 24 minutes :
Compressed to
Waitod at
.Decom pressed to
Waited at
Decompressed to
Waited at
Decompressed to
Mr, Catto could not detect- anything
>. for 1 hour. Virtual exposure 69 miaut.es
39 lbs. in 17 minutes.
39 „ for 60 ~
9 „ in 7
9 ~ for 5 „
■X XXi, -<■
4.- „ for 9
0 „ in 2
* Compare U»e case of the diver recounted above, page 8!


36 minutes. Decompression
in 37-|- .minutes : —
Compressed to
-
60 lbs.
in 301- minutes.
Waited at
-
60 „
for 20
}?
Decompressed to
Waited at
22
in 5
;)
-
22 ”
for 3
?J
'Decompressed to
Waited at
~
17 „
in 1
5 >
17 ,.
for 4
?5
Decompressed to
Waited at
13 „
13 „
in 1-|-
for 3-|
fo
5 ?
Decompressed to
Waned at
-
9 „
in 1
-
9 „
for 4
Decompressed to
Waited at
4 „
in I i
1 »
4 „
for 8|
J >
Decompressed to
-
0 „
in 2|-
fo
V. Same- day, 3.37 p.m.
Exposure to 67 lbs. for
18 minutes. Virtual exposure
38 minutes. Decompression
in 36 minutes : —
Compressed to -
-
67 lbs. in 36 minutes.
Waited at -
-
67 „
for 18
11
Decompressed to ■■
Waited at
-
22 „
in 3
1 >
22 „
for 5
/>
Decompressed to -
17 ..
in 1
3>
Waited at
-
i7
for 4
Decompressed to -
Waited at
-
13
in 1
? t
-
13 „
for 4
>5
Decompressed to -
Waited at
..
9
9 „
in 1
for 4
Decompressed to ~
Waited at
-
4 ..
in i|
-
■ 4 „
for 8|
1 ?
Decompressed to -
-
0 „
in 3
11. July 26th.. Actual exposure to 50 lbs., 27 minutes. Virtual exposure.
39 minutes. Started at 10.37 a.m. Decompression in 34 minutes:
Compressed to
Waited at
Decompressed to
Waited at
'Decompressed to
Waited at
Decompresse-
Waited at
Decompressed to
Waited at
Decompressed to
50 lbs. in 24 minutes.
50 „ for 27 ■ ~
In in 4
17 „ lor 6 „
13 „ in 14
13 „ for S 1?
9 „ in 2
9 ~ for 3
4 „ in 2
4 ~ for 8 „
111. Same day, 3.3 p.m. Exposure to 55 its. for 19 minutes. Virtual 33 m
Decompressed in 31 minutes :■ —
Compressed to - - - 55 lbs, in 28 minutes.
Waited at - - 55 ~ for 19 „
Decompressed to - - - 17 „ in 4 „
Waited at - - 17 „ for 5 ~
its. for 19 minutes. Virtual 33 minutes.
!J )5 ™ )5 3? 4
>) ,> _ . .. 9,, ~ 5 ~
~ ~ _ - - " 4,, ~ 10 ~
Decompressed from - - - 4to 0 in 2 ~
The time taken for decompressing from 17 to 13 lbs., &c., was counted as time at
lbs.
July 27tli, 10.29 a.m. Exposure to 60 lbs, for 20 minutes. Virtual exposure
VI. July 30th, 10.57 a. to,. Actual exposure at 74 lbs., 15 minute. Virtual
exposure 35 minutes. Decompression in 42-minutes :
Compressed to.-. . . - .. .--. 74 lbs. in 39 minutes.
’Waited at. . - , - ■■ ■ - -. -74. „. for 15
Decompressed to - - - 26 „ in 4
Waited at - * . ~ - ■ .■■*. 36,ftp- 5


20
240
4-2
22
21
i
0
0
25
240
~
33
21
2
0
0
30
60
iO uniform
-
19
15
4
0
0
45
00
.
11
7
8
:i
if
60
45
15 uniform
,,
4
1
3
0
0
75
15
SI uniform
36
19
13
3
i
73
60
10 uniform
"
4
0
0
0
4
Decompressed to -
Waited at
Decompressed to -
Waited at
Decompressed to -
Waited at
.Decompressed to -
Waited at
Decompressed to -
Waited at
Decompressed to -
22 lbs, in 1 imitate.
22 „ for 4 minutes.
17 „ in U
17 for 3f
13 „ in 1
13 ~ for 4
.t> 55 xOV J ± 5,
9 „ in 1 ~
9 „ for 4 ■
4 in 1|- „
4 „ for B|-
0 in 3
WX Jody 31st, 11.0 a.m. Actual exposure to 30 lbs, for 12 minutes,
exposure, 34 minutes. Decompression in 51 minutes :
(.Viiii pressed to -
Waited at
Decompressed to -
Waited at
Decompressed to -
Waited at
Decompressed to -
Waited at
Decompressed to -
Waited at
Decompressed to -
Waited at
Decompressed to -
Waited at
Decompressed to -
Waited at
Decompressed to -
80 lbs. in M minutes.
SO ~ for 12 ~
31 ~ in 3 „
31 „ for 5
- 22 „ in. 1
- 22 „ for 4
18 „ for 4
la for 2
13 „ in 1
13 ~ for 4 ~
9 „ in 1 ~
9 „ for 9 ~
4 „ in 2
4 ~ for 8
0 „ in 3
Jn November fresh, arrangements were made to secure more rapid compression.
A series of compressed air coils were furnished by the Admiralty, which were
charged up to 70 atmospheres with a high pressure two-stage compressor; at the
same time a large steel bottle was filled at 180 atmospheres. The contents of
these reservoirs were then discharged into the tank through appropriate connections,
and in this way the pressure could he raised to 60 lbs. in. four minutes and to
75 lbs. in six minutes, or a little less, instead of 39 minutes with the old pump.
With the aid of this arrangement a farther series of experiments on goats was
undertaken. In all about 700 experiments were made on 49 goats, besides the
experiments on men, and on numerous small animals.
The following account contains a summary notice of some of these which,
illustrate various important points. In each series the effects on the goats are
classed under four headings, viz. (1) no obvious illness; (2) bends ; (3) paralysis
and other severe symptoms, and (4) death.
I. —Experiments showing that a certain Minimum Pressure is required to give
Symptoms in Goats, and that the 'Remits vary with the pressure.
Pressure Exposure , w ,
in J.bs. i in Decompression in Minnies. n/.G' a. „D._ , Bends. „D W Death,
positive, j Minutes. feoMS * m P toms - oymptcnw
These experiments show that the effects become more severe as the pressure
increases, although the duration of exposure is at the same time diminished and the
duration of decompression increased. It was necessary to arrange the experiments
in this way to prevent an inconvenient mortality among the animals.


15
10 uniform
rr
i
%
3
i
1
15
HI
86
Vi
13
3 i
]
15
oo M
~
13
9
3
0 i
0
30
31 Venires -
-
-
23
12
8
3 I
0
30
68
v.
~
3 4
14
0
0 i
0
120
81 „
-
V
9
0
7
1 I
120
02 „
“
■*
.10
15
3
1 i
0
Pressure
ju lbs.
4-
Exposure
ii) |
Minutes. |
’ !
Decom-
pression
to lbs. -h
Fall of
Pressure
ia lbs.
Relative
redaction of
absolute
Pressure,
Duration
of decom-
pression.
No. of
Goats,
So.
Symp-
toms.
Sends.
Severe
Sysop.
tours.
Death.
?r>
! 180
24
51
2-3 : 1
14
10
id
0
0
0
51
180
0
61
4-4:1
4
10
2
8
3,
2
■ -IS -
: 120
- 6
SI
6-7:1
e,
?.
0
1
!
1.
1 39
130
— S
45
6-0 ; 1
6
'4
i
0
S
' 0
45
120
' . ' 0
' ■ 45 :
4-0:1
' 1 '
'
10
■I
2
1
: it
K S
- Experiment s showing that the duration of Exposure to High Premure is of
great importance.
Pressure 75 lbs. positive, readied in six minutes.
Kxposuro in
Minutes to Decompression In Minutes.
75 lb*.
No. o i No
Goats. Symptoms.
Severe !
Symptoms, j u '
3 1
6 0
4 0
1 I 0
0 0
1 0
10 1
15 10 uniform
15 iU stages
?,«
0 0
15
0
1
1
Tiiese experiments show that goats have taken up enough air in 15 minutes
to give severe symptoms or death on uniform decompression in 10 minutes, while,
is me exposure is less than. .10 minutes, nearly ail the animals escape, even, with
sudden decompression. Note, too, that with short exposures and rapid decom-
pression such symptoms as appear are more frequently severe, and that bends are
proportionately less common than with longer exposures and slower decompressions.
Beyond lo minutes exposure the results are somewhat irregular, but on the whole
there is a progressive increase of bad symptoms up to two hours exposure. The
results after four hours exposure are about the same, so that it would appear that
goats are practically saturated in. rather more than two hours.
Pressure 45 lbs. positive.
Exposure
In tniiratv
Decompression in No. of
Minutes, Goats.
No Bends
Symptoms. alone.
Symptoms.
IS 1
60 1
120 1
SO 10 uniform -
340
480 „
These figures show that with a duration- of exposure up to about f hour, no
severe symptoms follow even sudden decompression. The series with sudden decom-
pression show that the results after two hours are much worse than after one hour.
Tina is not clear from the series with 10 minutes decompression, which, however,
shows that the results do not become distinctly worse even after eight hours
exposure.
Hi. Experiments to skowthgt the duration of Decompression is of great
importance.
Pressure 7a Ihs, positive, reached in six minutes.
Bsooww, Decompression. No, of Be Benda Severe |w t j,
1 Goats, Symptoms. alouo. Symptoms. ram..
IV. — ■Experiments to skew that the absolute range of pressure through which
Decompression occurs w of less importance than the relative range of absolute,
■pressure.


A sudden drop of about 50 lbs. from 75 lbs. + to 27 or 24 lbs. + has been
made about 20U times altogether in the course of these experiments without pro-
ducing any symptoms, and about two-thirds of the animals showed no symptoms at
the end of the stage decompression. In the present series the animals were left for
one hour at 24 lbs. and watched very carefully, and afterwards suddenly decom-
pressed to 17 lbs. and again observed for one hour. The same goats were
subsequently dropped suddenly from 51 lbs. + to atmospheric pressure with very
disastrous results, and a drop of 51 lbs. from 45 lbs. + to 6 lbs. was even
worse.
V. —Experiments showing the importance of the mode and spacing of Decompression.
Each of tire following six series of experiments was made upon the same goats,
which were exposed to 75 lbs. positive pressure for varying periods, and then decom-
pressed on the one hand by stages according to the principles which have been
e iin the Report; and on the other hand at a uniform rate, the whole time
I " •gw pml to that occupied in the stage decompression. The only exceptions tc
tl - • n :o«nd (1) in Series E in which the uniform decompression was extended
Irons. 92 to luO minutes in order to test the statement that uniform decompression at
the rate of 20 minutes an atmosphere is safe ; (2) in Series A 18 goats were each
tested twice except that two animals did not experience the second test with stage
decompression; one had died with uniform decompression and one was id from an
injury.
75 lbs. Positive .Pressure.
Ilfl I Stage -Decompression. Uniform .Decompression, j
Series. -S | No. of Goats. . ■
p*s § §*'§ No Seyere . No I Severe
q |b Symptoms Bends. ; Symp- 5 Symptoms! Bends. Symp- 'B
.3 ‘=3p.c. i toms. Ji ™p.o. : toms. J 5
A 15 31 I: 3 | 6 aniSm. f 2S: = 85 5 I 0 0 J 8 = 53 33 3 1
B 30 31 ; 6 4= 67 2 ! 0 0 Is 17 4 1 0
0 30 68 ; 14 14 = 1.00 0 : 0 0 7= 50 7 u 0
D 120 70 13 ! 9= 69 4 0 0 4= 31 7 2 O
E 130 92 19 i 15= 79 3 1* O' 10 =53 3 S 1
V 180 138 10 i 8— 80 2 0 0 6= 50 5 0 0
Total - " { lanSS } 7B=s 82 18 t 1 46 = 47 39 m 2
• 'it-mporary partial paralysis (foot-drop) of one hind leg, passing off completely in an hoar,
t Temporary paralysis in four eases; permanent paralysis in three cases; dyspnena (from air in heart) in
two oases ; and severe obscure illness In two eases.
In each one of these six series, therefore, stage decompression shows bettor
results than uniform decompression in an equal time. On the whole nearly twice
as many (82 per cent, as against 47 per cent.) goats escaped illness with, stage
decompression as with uniform decompression, * and only one animal showed
symptoms more serious than, bends with the former method as compared with
11 cases of serious illness and 2 deaths with uniform decompression.
The experiments also show that the advantage of stage decompression becomes
less marked as the duration of the exposure is increased. This is in full agreement
with the theoretical considerations. With short exposures stage decompression has
the advantage of shortening the exposure to high pressures m well as of increasing
the nitrogen extracting stress; with long exposures any additional duration of
exposure becomes relatively less important ; and stage decompression is consequently
less markedly superior to uniform decompression.
VI. Experiments showing the bad effects of Slow Compression.
Pressure 75 lbs. positive.
rnmTrpwivn lx P oßure Decompression f Ko n , Severn , ,
Minutes Minutes. in Minutes. ‘ Symptoms. ' ' Symptoms,
45 stages 10
6 - - 15 SI stages 84 29
* It must X- noted that these experiments are not designed to show that these particular stage
deoompi'essibns are'safe; with the >,iee;ptio.tt of series 0 axhi F„ all tie stage decompressions were
intentionally framed to give some symptoms. As a rule a decompression, wm used which had been
calculated 3,3 being appropriate to an exposure somewhat shorter fch&t that actually gives.


Actual exposure
in Minutes.
Decompression
in Minutes.
Goats.
No Symptoms.
Bends.
Severe
Symptoms.
Death.
1
i
6
6
0
0
0
3
1
5
■t
0
1
0
6
• I
0
0
0,
a
0
10
1
7
0
0
i
0
ir»
I
6
2
2
i
1
These experiments show that, with short exposures, the results are three times as
had when 39 minutes is occupied in raising the pressure to 75 Ids. as when this
point is reached in 6 minutes, although the animals were in the latter case
subsequently decompressed in two-thirds of the time occupied in the former series.
One of the most striking features in all the animal experiments has been the
great variability of the results. This variability is not different from that which has
always been noted among caisson-workers. The tables show that under all the
circumstances examined a proportion of the animals showed no symptoms. It is
not easy to accurately define whether the susceptibility of the different animals
to symptoms was temporary or permanent. We wore, however, able to satisfy our-
selves that certain goats were habitually relatively immune. It is a matter of the
greatest interest to determine the basis of this varying susceptibility. In our animals
it was certainly not altogether a question of age or size, for the largest, oldest and
fattest goat (“ Pa ”) was very resistant, while one of the smallest and thinnest
animals {“ Little Billy '’) was soon prostrated with paralysis by the same experiments.
It seemed, on the other hand, that many goats were distinctly more susceptible
to severe symptoms (.death) than billy goats. The females have more lax abdominal
walls and much more abdominal and subcutaneous fat than the males (see above,
p, 58j. The susceptibility to “bends’' seemed about equal in the two sexes. We
obtained some experimental evidence (not however of an altogether conclusive
character) that the goats with the greatest respiratory exchange were less susceptible.
It is also of interest to note the incidence of the different symptoms. With
moderate or long exposures both the proportion of animals showing illness and the
severity of these illnesses are in relation to the rapidity and spacing of the decom-
pression. But it appears likely that this only applies to animals which are fairly
saturated or have taken up a material excess of gas. For if sudden decompression
ensues immediately on, or very shortly after, reaching 75 lbs. pressure, the animals
show severe symptoms or none at all.
Pressure 75 lbs, positive,
impression in of to 6 minutes.
The important conclusion is that “bends" do not follow such brief exposures to
high pressures as may cause more severe symptoms, . It follows that “bends” must
be the expression of phenomena which are not necessarily identical with those which
in a more exaggerated form cause paralysis and death, and that the- occurrence of
“bends” is an indication that a fair degree of saturation has been reached. The
experiments are in agreement with the well-established feet that divers {with short
exposures to high pressures) experience severe symptoms or none .at all, while
caisson-workers (wita long exposures to lower pressures! suffer very frequently from
“ bonds ” and relatively seldom from paralysis or death. It seems Justifiable to
conclude that “bends” are the expression of the remoteness of the parts saturated
rather than of tne fact that saturation has occurred, and that, when once those remote
partsp oi tne body have taken up a material excess of air, extremely slow decom-
pression would be required to escape that symptom altogether. The practical
consequence ot this would be that bends are an indication of extreme danger if the
exposure has not been long and the rale of decompression has been rapid, but that
then* significance is macn less serious if the exposure has been long and the rate
of decompression slow.


Appendix 11.
A DIARY OF THE DEEP DIVING EXPERIMENTS CARRIED OUT OFF
ROTHESAY, ISLE OF BUTE, FROM HALS. “SPANKER,'' AUGUST 1906,
Monday, 20th. August.
HALS. ! ‘ Spanker ” arrived at Rothesay about 7 p.m., and was met by I)rs.
Haldane and Rees and Mr. Catto, Gunner 11. N. Arrangements were made to
commence experiments the following day.
Tuesday, 21st August.
All die pumps to be used in the experiments were tested up to a pressure of
200 feet, and the leakage at this pressure measured. The pressure gauges, which,
had heen specially graduated for these experiments, were tested and found to give
correct readings. The method of testing employed was to attach the free end of the
diving hose to a lead line, and lower it over the side into the sea to the required
deptn. The pumps were then hove round unfed there was a free supply of air, and
then stopped whilst the reading; of the gauge was taken,
Tlie re-compression chamber was tested on the Whitehead torpedo charging
column, and it was found that the pressure could be brought up to 40 lbs, on
the gauge in 3 inmates. There was a leak of 1 lb. per minute, or. roughly
3 cubic feet. Afterwards Drs. Haldane and Rees were compressed up to about
30 lbs. in order to further test the working of the chamber.
In the afternoon both divers made a trial dive in 16 fathoms: —
Mr, Catto.
Lieutenant Damant.
■ Time of descent
I-} mmnte*.
J. hoar.
1 7 minutes,
1 at 20 feet,
1 10 { .
on bottom -
~ of ascent
No. 5-minute stops
10 ,
Two double pumps were used for each
The divers were perfectly comfortable in
diver in these and the subsequent dives,
moving about on the bottom. It may
be mentioned that Lieutenant Daman, t had not dived previously beyond about
19 fathoms, and had no experience in diving except what he had gained in Ms
course of instruction as a gunnery officer and in experimenting at Portsmouth for
the Committee. Mr. Catto had much previous experience in diving work, but had
never dived beyond 23 fathoms.
Wednesday, 22nd August,
HALS. “ Spanker,” off Rothesay.
In the forenoon Mr, Catto descended in 23 fathoms, and in the afternoon
Lieutenant Damaut did the same :
Mr. Cairo.
Lieutenant Damant.
Time of descent -
S minutes - - -3% minutes.
on the bottom
30 „ - - 20
„ of ascent -
No. 5-iniimte stops
... 10 „ „
m 32-ir ~
4at 50. 40,805. 30 feet - 2at 80,10 feet
I„ 10 feet ’ - - 3-20,10
Thursday, 23rd August,
H.M.B. “ Spanker,” off Rothesay.
After testing the pumps each diver made a descent to 25 fathoms
Lieutenant Damant. Mr, Oatto.
j
i Time of descent -
I „ on tbe bottom
! ~ of ascent
; No. 5-minute stops
2 xrJ imtcs « -, - ' B minutes..
m * - - i m v
37.3. . - - i S9|- }S
r> nt GO, 45. 30 feet - i 3 at 50, 40, 30 feet.
„ 20, 10 Pest - - 2 „ 30, 10 feet.


—
Mr. Catto.
Lieutenant Damant.
Time of descent
3 minutes - -
H minutes.
on the bottom
Uji „
13J minutes. 1
,, of ascent
10 ...
48J- minutes, |
No. o-minute stops
4 at 7 0, 50, 40, 30 feet
4 at 66, 54-j 40. 30 feet, !
No. 10- ,, -
2 at 20, 10 feet
2 at 20, 10 feet. I
j
Friday, 24th August.
H.M.S. “Spanker” was taken through the narrows of the Kyles of Bute and
anchored oil the entrance of Loch Eiddon.
In the morning, after the usual tests had been applied to the pumps, Mr. Oatto
descended in 27 fathoms, and in the afternoon Lieutenant Damant went down in a
similar depth :
Mr. Catto.
Lieutenant Damant.
Time of descent - - 2 minutes - - - - -1 minute 20 seconds.
~ on the bottom - 16 J ~ ... - - I6| minutes.
~ of ascent - - 584 „ ..... 44}
No. 3-miflute stops - 4at 80, 50, 40, 30 feet - - . 4at 60, 50, 40,.30 feet.
10 „ „ lat 20 feet. (Direr was employed just under the ship's 2 „ 20. 10 feet..
bottom in examining a propeller which had been
slightly injured, for 18J minutes before coming up.)
Saturday, 25th August,
H.M.S. “ Spanker,” off Locii Bidden.
The “Spanker” shifted her position slightly, and, after the usual tests of the
pumps, both divers descended in 29 fathoms of water; —
Monday, 27th August,
H.M.S. “Spanker,” of Loch Eiddon.
Thirty fathoms of water were obtained. Mr. Catto was the diver in the morning.
The pumps used were Nos. 3,604 and 3,593, Sis men were told off for each pump,
in reliefs of 5 minutes. Details of the descent:—
Bemaiks.
Glass screwed up. Depth by lead line 30J fathoms.
Diver under water.
„ down 50 feet.
„ ~ 70 „
„ 110
„ „ 150 „
~ ~ 180 .. oii the bottom. 1 min. 30 secs, in descending. Revolutions averaged S 3 per
min., but fell to 24 for a short time, owing to the great exertions that were necessary to
Keep ins pumps going .at the higher speed. Diver quite comfortable while moving about on
the bottom.
Diver called up.
~ started up.
~ at ISO feet.
„ 130 ~
i! » 70 i; Ist stop. Diver employed in gymnastic exercises. One pump stopped.
„ 30 2nd stop,
„ „ 40 ~ 3rd atop.
„ ~ BO „ Ith stop.
>, >• 30 „ sth stop.
>1 -- .10 >! stop. There were no iil-effecte, Water jackets gained 20 degrees F
called up, ■
Glass off.
Afternoon. —Lieutenant Daiaant.
Screwed up glass.
Diver under water.
„ down 70 feet.
„ „ 120 „
» ~ iso
i! u 188 ~ cm the bottom,
80 per minute.
Diver called up.
1 minute 20 seconds in descending, Revolutions averaged
at 170 feet.
„ 120 „ Diver stopped If minutes.
•• 70 i, Ist stop.
K 49084.


llemarkb.
l Diver at nO feet 2nd slop,
ii.-lifti ; ... ~ 40 „ Brd ..
3.18 J .. 30 Ith
2.331 .. „ 20 sth
;s.3i-' 10 Gtii
r. .ND called up.
3.15$ Glasßoff. There •were no iii-offectn. Later in the afternoon the pumps were tested at different
temperatures of the water jacket, to see how the leakage was affected.
Tuesday, 28th August.
la Ate same locality, Lieutenant Damant made u second descent in 30 fatlioias in
order to obtain samples of the air in the helmet. The pumps used were Nos. 3,588
and 3592
Remarks.
10.18-1 Diver under water.
j0.20-$ on the bottom, J. minute 40 seconds in going down,
10.345 started up.
U ,311, Glass off. Whilst on the bottom, diver took two samples whilst at rest. There was a distinct
tide on the bottom, which affected the diver.
Analysis of Samples.
No. of Sample. G. 0.., per Cent.! O a per Cent, j GO - P ’ 0C p2 I Mirlute IlblS *** !
■O4l (.' tide.)
In the afternoon Mr. Gatto was in the dress. .Pumps Nos. 3.588 and 3,592 were
used: —
Bemarks.
Glass screwed up.
Diver down 60 feet.
„ ~ 100 ~
~ „ ISO „ oa the bottom. The diver took down with him a wore hawser to simeUe on
to a sinker.
Diver called up, but could not come up as he was foul, until
started up,
at 110 feet.
~ ~ 100 .. Ist stop.
; so and „
„ ~ 60 „ 3rd „
„ „ SO „ 4th „
„ .. 40 „ sth „
„ „ 30 6th „
„ „ 20 „ 7th „
„ 15 „ Bt,b „
„ „ 10 „ 9th
~ on the surface.
Air. Gatto attempted to shackle a. hawser on to the sinker. He found the sinker
without the slightest difficulty, and then, having tied bis distance line to it, went
back to the hawser. He found, this in bights, and he seems to have got within the
coils, and in trying to find the end of the "wire to have fooled his life line. 'When
called up he could not get away, and it was 20 minutes before he could clear
himself. In all he was down 28| minutes in 30 fathoms of water. The rate of the
pumps could not he kept up above 24 revolutions per minute, and the supply of air
was not adequate to his exertions to free himself, so that; he was almost overcome hy
the excess of OOs. On account of Ms long exposure during heavy work, great care
was taken in decompressing him, 1J- hours being allowed. There were no ill-
effects.
Thursday, 30th August.
iI.M.S. “ Spanker, off Loch Rid don.
Mr. Gatto made another descent under the same conditions, and shackled on the
hawser to the sinker in. 4 minutes after reaching the bottom. The revolutions of
the pump averaged 24 to 30 per minute. The day was very bright, with the son
shining on the water, so that the diver saw with comparative ease in the water.


In the afternoon Lieutenant Damant, at the same depth,, took three samples of the
air in the helmet, and the pumps were tested at 180 feet pressure. He suffered
from no ill-effects :
Mr. Catto.
Lieutenant Damant,
Time of descent - - ! 3 minutes - 1 min. 20 secs.
„ on the bottom - j 124 - - .13 minutes.
„ of ascent - - i 46| - - •• „
No. o-cuinute stops - j 4at 70, s(> s 40, 30 feet - 4 7U, 50, 40, SO feet.
„10 „ - | 2at SO, 10 feet ■■ - 2at 20, 10 feel;.
Analysis of Samples obtained hy Lieutenant Damant.
Firs: Sample, Second Sample. Third Sample.
Per Cent.
CO, ------ -43 ‘39 'H6
0, ■■ 20-56 30-52 2G'4T
ID nci*2Ti~y of oxygen - *4B ‘53
CO? produced in cubic feet per minute - - '035 ‘029
Friday, "Ist August.
H M.S. “ Spanker ” moved down to the entrance of Loch Striven, where 35 fathoms
of water could be obtained.
In the morning Lieutenant Damant was the diver. Pumps Nos. 2,593, 3,604,
and 3,092 were tested and used. Six hands were told off lor each pump ia reliefs of
5 minutes; —
Semaiks.
U .8 Glass screwed ip
11,8 - Diver wider water,
U. H „ dwn So feet.
n.n „ „ 120 „
11.94 „ „ 150 „
11. of „ „ 180
11. KH „ 300 „
11.10. J „ „ 210 „ on the bottom. Revolutions sept at SOper minute, sad the diver had
a good supply of air.
11.13 1 Diver took samples seated on the shot at the bottom of ihe rope.
11.15 J ~ called up.
11.13% „ started «ft.
11.17 „ at 190 feet
11.18 „ „ 110 „ Diver stopued to blew off sampling tabs.
11.20. J „ „ 90 „ Ist stop. "
11.23* „ „ 70 ~ 2nd „
11.28* „ „ 52 3'd „
H -m „ „ 42 „ 4th
11,39% „ 32 „ sth
11.44* „ „ 32 „ 6th „
11.344 „ „ H „ 7* „
12.4 J „ called ap.
There was no light on the bottom, which was of soft mud. The depth by the
shot line was 210 feet. Pressure was 93|- lbs. The gauge showed a pressure
of 216 feet of fresh water with, the pumps stopped, and 220 feet whilst they were
heaving. The actual depth, as carefully measured on the shotted rope against the
ship’s standard measure, 'was just, over 35 fathoms, 210 feet.
In the afternoon Mr. Catto made the same descent, and reached 35 fathoms.
He found that the air supply was more than ample. He walked out to the
end ol has distance line, and then took a sample of the air in Ms helmet; —
Remarks.
3 12 Screwed up glass. Same pumps as last,
2.12| Diver under water,
2.14,| *> on the bottom, Revolutions reduced to 24, as the diver found the supply too much, lie
proceeded to \ lie cod of his distance line before taking his sample.
2.20|- Diver started up.
2.27| ... a; 90 feet. Ist stop,
2.30$ „ 70 „ 2nd
2.85| „ „50 <, tint „
40| t . „40 4ih
2.451 „ „20 „ sth
2.50| ’* „20 „ 6th
3.0.1 „ „10 „ 7th
3,10| called up.


| Lieut. Damant.
Mr. Catto.
C0 2 per cent.
-! -w
-f>:i
o 2 „ „
- i 20 89
20-34
Deficiency of 0 2 per cent.
- 1 4 15
•70
oo,
- '70 „
I Mo 2
0 2 -
- 20-29
i H } ‘l &J? O
i
co 3 -
•71
| „ » No. 3.
o 3 -
- 20'23
co,
0, -
- • 18
20-73
j- lieutenant Damant. Sample Mo. 4.
CO,
- -73
i „ „ No. 5.
0 3 ■■
- 20 '12
co 3
•81
\ ISO 6
0 2
- 20 ' 36 „
/ >; ); -‘ AU - v ‘
Analysis of Samples.
Monday, 3rd September.
Experiments on rest and measured
apparatus figured in the text. This cons
under a fixed block attached to a 2004 b.
a spar projecting over the ship’s side.
work were carried oat, by means of the
fisted of a length of line which was carried
sinker, and over fixed blocks attached, to
At the sinker end a light spar formed
a handle, whilst at the other end a 564 b. sinker was attached. The diver could
stand on the shot and pull on the handle with both hands, so raising the weight;—
Remarks.
3.26 Diver, Mr. Catto, defended.
IC27| „ on bottom, 142 feet.
2.51 „ took sample sitting on tba shot. (N 0.!.)
Two puitros at SO ivToiuticaa per mimiie,
Ba's tl the weight 4 l ioxes 5 feat, at the mte el one Hit per minute.
3,36 took sv.mp-e. (tto, 2.)
Boise 1 weight 7 times 3 feet la 5i minutes.
2.42 took sample. (130.3.)
carte i up,
on surface, no ill effects.
Lieutenant Damant. started down,
down 100 feet.
on bottom, 139 feet.
took sample slit ng on 'he shot.
Two pumps at 26 revolutions.
Raised weight 5 limes in 1J minutes.
(No. 4.)
~ took sample.
Raised weight 3 feet i£ 1 lines in 6) minutes.
„ took sample. Pump 24 revolutions.
„ started up.
~ at the surface. No ill-efieois.
(No. 5.)
(So, 6.)
Analysis of Samples.
- pOT C6nt 1 Mr, Catto. Sample So, L
~ 0 i O ~ |
Tuesday. 4th September.
The" “Spanker” was anchored in 6 fathoms of wafer, and experiments were
made on the bottom by Pit Haldane, Lieutenant Damant, and Mr. Catto on tne
risks of blowing up. After being compressed in the air chamber to teach them, to
open their Eustachian tubes, Lieutenant and Commander E. V, F. il. Ihigmorc.
Lieutenant Q. N. Henson, Jack Haldane (age 13) all made descents in 6 fathoms
of water. This was the first time that these had ever dived in a (living dress, wiiich
illustrates the usefulness of the re-compression chamber in the practical teaching
of divers.
Wednesday, sth September.
Exhaustive tests were made as to the leakage of the pumps and composi-
tion of the air, with the water Jackets at various temperatures. The respite are-
embodied in the Report.. These experiments concluded the work undertaken
for the Committee.


Cylinder.
No. of Revolutions to give 10 Cubic Feet of Air,
Fo. of Revolu-
tions to give on
Prf ssure In Lbe.
as measured by ihe Dry Gas Meter,
the Diving
per Square inch.
Pressure Gauge.
Left -
105 at 7 lbs. pressure -
105
15
no ,, 22 „ -
318
30
>,
USJ 37 ,, ,, - .
116
45
Right
107 „ 7 „
118
15
no 23 - -
105
30
110 37 „ „
120
46
It is to oe observed that there was no correction for temperature or
the canaciti
of the flexible lead, and that in the case of the gas meter the leakage is measnrec
rpenctlx
A SUGGESTED METHOD FOR THE BETTER TESTING OF DIVING
Use following -method of testing the leakage in the diving pumps has been tested
in “Dreadnought,” and is suggested for use in His Majesty’s ships.
The diving pump should be connected by means of a length of flexible metal
hose to a group of air bottles, or torpedo charging columns, of known capacity. It
wiu be necessary to provide an adapter piece for this purpose. The pumps should
be tested one cylinder at a time, and the number of revolutions required to bring
tno pressure in the bottles, as indicated on the diving pump pressure gauge, up to
15 lbs., 30 lbs., 45 lbs., 60 lbs, and so on. noted. From this the percentage leakage
can be easily obtained, as the Service pump is calculated to deliver '1 cubic fool
per revolution.
On board H.M.S, “ Dreadnought ’’ a group of air bottles having a cubic capacity
of 10 feet was used, with the following results :
It is to joe observed that there was no correction for temperature or the capacity
of the flexible lead, and that in the case of the gas meter the leakage is measured
at the mean pressure. The results show a very satisfactory agreement between the
gas meter method and the method of testing with the air-bottles and gauge.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


iBliiiiPiiiigiii
4 »■*. -t . .
* t d' k G-, -<v * «'
itt . - . h 3
i *•£*>/ - i
• ■ oi||jir ■ ■
1 b Bill
„ .. '.«*':&'.><-Y:;,Y:A:;; ■■.'«■■■. frf||
!piBiSiiilsSBlj®?<a|||g|| a^^BI^iiiiiMilii^tfs*;4
i«iaiiasipas8iii»a8saa^Bi
M**w. „j*KT t *te |ff&
JBFB 1: B ,! - B^'^F-:
jB/F: •■ ‘ B. '■ . V : ■■ ■ ■" ■ -
«!
ksYfilBis8;6Fi998lSSiFit$i8^^^^^^^^^^BBlli8SlsBlS#0iS
Fig. 1. — -Diving dres*, front view, with air-pipe and life-line* attached.
Fig. 2.—Diving dress, bank view, showing attachment of air-piju* and
Xew pattern, with leg* laced up. The extra tap, used for taking' air-
life-line with telephone connection. Xew pattern, with logs laced up to
samples, is soon to the right of the front of the helmet.
prevent diver from being capsized and accidentally blown up to surface, or
hung in a helpless position.


<-< co
* £
Jh p d
© o
£ ©
f-H "5
©
'e 5
P
nd
©
.71' .—i
•S/g<
&
a 83 .
© ■£
«-£ CO 5C
© o £
nd
s
© q r, d
co c
53 03 5
CC nd
53 © 9
CO O
S
r°p.
© CO
,£ *~ bC
£ 'g
<4H t d
Or£ -
rH ©
© pP
53 r ,
rH
too .p
0
■£ • o
C co
- OJ s
CU °
1 pH
°
1 ~q
CO ” ~
. ft »
2 B s*
£h p^£


iiflllfci# b^: ; : #»• B'
mmmw
...... ......
%
.Jliiipil
S
JBiiii
i
■
8MHHI
i'
m
u
iSpH
msm
, 1
Mi t(S
«:iiiiftgiilii^^fe!l^gi^MiBWj|laB|i|d|l|ai
MB
MhlS |iii
;fIpdFiFl; „:,p .'pp.rv’fmv.v;;
Fro. 5.— Photo
graph taken through a window of the
experimental diving
Fig, 6.— Showing
method of taking a sample of air from the helmet
tank, showing how
closely the diving dress is applied to
:he diver’s limbs and
of tire diving dress.
Hie experimental tank Is seen in the background.
body under water,


S
a;
EE
i
„ «
& ~
S &
n
tXjifH
5 c
5 _2
~ 'zi
5
a- *
ii
c. 5
s 3 .a
PM 3
i &
c'S
Fig. 8. —Portable gas ana'ysis apparatus used in Ihe experiments. The photograph also shows the
method of connecting the sampling tube with the gas-burette. On ship board, if the vessel is not
sternly, the two screw clips seen on (be rubber tube connecting the lower end of the gas burette with the
mercury reservoir are moved close up to the gas burette and used in the manner described in the text.


Fi«. Ba.— Qns analysis apparatus.
lip
;c i |
„ ri
<L _0 ~
2 -
A' 5 O ~
.-i -r -a;
o _ _=:
~ j •- -
i; -5; J
■- J, C 3 t£
'S S p
~ S
“ C 3 5; ~
IS o"¥
H... S' V 2 •"
53 g-i s I
C O *
3 " ® 2 SC
o-o .2
PC - S -
1 - .. x £
JU i
c T +- S
2j^ 5c
i -i - sc®
’-' p, “■ = -
5 _ £ *"
f= £ 5


Fig. 10.
Micro, photograph of Section ot Spinal Cord of goat
killed by Sudden decompression. A number of air
bubbles can be seen in the white matter, one being just
at the junction of White and Grey Matter.
Portion of Goads mesentery showing bubbles in blood vessels
caused by rapid decompression .from IOOIbs pressure,
after 1| hours exposure at this pressure, in 1J minutes


o j be
-j-' a
is £
y;
cu
,c .p
be
'i 'f "1
0 ~ Z
1 .2 -3
;3 X o
,p> I *z ii
, “
0 S X
1 13
° X J 3 *s
§ “
£1 .&
111 i
• o
Cl X ~
r ~ i - p.i’ c
"ill
Fu;. Id.— Diver blown to surface in ordinary diving dress. The diver cannot move Ids arms,
and the air cannot escape, as his valve is below the water.


nms
i»i8f®K^arap*«pMteB
i
1,::: J: f ;f :^T|
lappiti
F Dt-yd B get : gg'’ . ” ; g gg v; Vi g g s ■'■'■^gB x : x:flSB5j&f|;
:
Fig. 14. — Diving drosses forcibly distended with air. The dress to the
left lias the legs laced up. The other dross is of the usual pattern.
Fig. 15.—Diver who has purposely blown himself up in the new pattern
of dress, with the legs laced up. His head is upwards and Ids arms free.
Compare Figure 13.


Fig. 16.— The steel
chamber at the Lisler
Fig. 17.—The steel chamber at the Lister
Institute. View from on
tside, showing the hack
Institute. Front end, showing the manhole for
end of die chamber, with
the large door and one
entering, the small air-lock for passing food, &e.
inspect ion window.
into the chamber, an inspection window, a pressure
gauge, and several valves, &e.


easured Work u


Fig
, 19. Ds
FFERENT FORMS
of Pistons
used in Pumps
J
j
|
I
i
Improved Leather Piston
Old Pattern Leather Piston
One Type of Metal Piston
j
r. _ l
Ml Hi
#s
m
■m « • } r i
& II
i J 1 ■
— o ll ®r j
4"" ~ “
l % *
.J
fil 1 II j
ills!: ■■ J g£^|Ll
XT
- />_
“I
i «)
jSf r |
JSFXillj p m i '"“‘fclj
EIE 1: 1
—
r— M
11
UL
j $\
|S Tgl ; !
S >1 * * i
" 1
1 1
J
1
& :a
I
1
m
1 1
•
ft
ip
|
||
J
it ■
1 i
1
-If
1 1
m
: ;i
1 '
ill
1 1
p:
WeiSer£ Graham, L**? L-cho lon^or


FIG. 2i.
FIG. 20.
FIG. 22
Weller&Graham,t td Lirho,London
