



6/44-
JcLTh-
[?]
W fc Wj\)feiv vJ««uH


[?]


REPORT
ON THE
Epidemick Cholera Morbus,
AS IT VISITED THE TERRITORIES
SUBJECT TO THE PRESIDENCY
OF
BENGAL,
In the Years 1817, 1818, and 1819.
BRAWN UP BT ORDER OF THE GOVERNMENT, UNDER
THE SUPERINTENDENCE
OF THE
MEDICAL BOARD.
BY
JAMES JAMESON
Assistant Surgeon and Secretary to the Board,
Calcutta:
PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT GAZETTE PRESS*
by a. g. Balfour, no. I, mission row.
1820.


Ob uAvrot rorourog yt l.oiaog, ovOs pdogd ourus
uyOguxuy obSaaov ysvsaQai. ours' yao largo}
Tjgxouy ro xgurov dsgaxsuoyrs; ayvola—ours kXXtj av6gaxzla
ri/yn obhifjjia.
- - —fsysrco fjoh obv xsgi abrou dg ixarrog yiyvdrxsi, xai
largo;, xat op). .orou el::os ,i;y yvAaSat abro, xat
rag airtag d'rrtvag voujQ.t roaaurqg azru'-o'/Sj; ly.avdg
sHi/txi dbyaf/ji’j zg ro fiirarrijrat ryjuv \yd 5s otov rs
zylyrt.ro Xsg co, %ai ap> uy uv n; ckoxuv, uxors xai auStg
ixixzroi, valuer ay syjn rt xgoulug ayvoiiy, rau-
ra hr^Axu.
QovxuSid.. guyygap' €.


[?]
CONTENTS.
TAGS
Preface . .•,,.. i
Introduction .. xxix;
Section. I. —Rise and Progress of the Dis-
ease, , .:. 1
■ , ■— ll. —Of the Symptoms of the. Dis-
ease, . 3S
—t—— lll. —Appearances after Death,.... 66
■ IV. —Proximate Cause of the Dis-
ease 74
- - , V. —Remote Cay.se of the Dis-
ease, 85
—— Vl. —Contagious Nature of the
Disease, 123;
Vll. —Predisposing and; Exciting
Causes of the Disease, 149.
— Vlll. —Mortality caused by the Dis
ease, 166
IX. —Of some Pecidiarities of the
Disease, 135
■ X. —Treatment of the Disease, ... 196
Appendix — Cases, 257
Supplement, 299


PREFACE.
GOVERNMENT being desirous that some
record should be preserved of the Epidemick,
which has recently visited Hindostan, instruc-
tions were issued to the Medical Board to draw
up a report of its history and general appear-
ances. As this could only be done, by obtain-
ing, and carefully digesting, the collective ex-
perience of a large number of individuals, con-
versant with the disease; it was resolved, to
invite all the Members of the Medical Depart-
ment, to contribute such facts as they might
deem conducive to the ends in view.
The following letter was accordingly trans-
mitted to every individual borne on the list.
The form by queries was preferred, as pointing
out, in a clear and distinct manner, the nature
of the information wanted; and thus relieving
the individual observer from the uncertainty,
into which he might be thrown, were it left en-
tirely to his own judgment, to determine, what
he should withhold, and what contribute to the
general stock.
fc


Sm,
The Medical Board being called upon by
Government to draw up for publication, a re-
port on the rise, progress, and symptoms of th 6
Epidemick, which has recently visited these
Provinces; have directed me to request, that
you will have the goodness to communicate to
them, with all practicable convenience, such
information as you may possess on the subject
of the proposed enquiry.
The main objects of the enquiry being to dis-
cover, if possible, the hidden causes, which
first originated, and afterwards gave such wide
range to the disorder; and to elucidate the
laws, by which its progress -was regulated; the
Board would wish chiefly to direct your atten-
tion to the facts bearing upon these points.
They are sufficiently aware, that the springs of
epidemical diseases, have hitherto escaped the
ingenuity and penetration of medical men ; and
that even the most patient investigation, will in
the present case, in all probability, only add
one more, to the innumerable instances of our
ignorance and shortsightedness, regarding these
abstruse operations of nature. But this at least
will be effected, by instituting a minute re-
search into the history of the disease. The ge-
neral body of the medical profession will be put
in possession of a correct narrative of the cir


cumstances, which marked the origin and pro-
gress of a malady, perhaps more destructive in
its effects, and more extensive in its influence,
than any other recorded in the annals of this
country; and in the event of the future recur-
rence of such a pestilence, our professional bre-
thren on this establishment will escape the feel-
ings of apprehension and uncertainty, which it
so generally produced on the late occasion; and
be prepared to meet it with the most approved
means of treatment*
It is by no means the intention of the Board
to discourage you from giving a detailed des-
cription of the disease ; or from transmitting to
them notes of such cases as you may have
kept with'minuteness and accuracy. But the
points, to which they would desire more
particularly to beg your attention, as in their
opinion the most essential to ascertain the
nature and history of the disorder, are the
state of the atmosphere, previous to, and du-
ring the time of its prevalence; the circum-
stances attending its rise, increase, decrease, or
disappearance, in. a tract of country, town, or
village, camp or cantonment; the classes of per-
sons, which, it seemed particularly disposed to
affect; and the peculiarities in the modes of
life, or circumstances for the time being, of those
attacked. To these may be added some rs-
b 2


marks on the best means of resisting the dis-
order; on its fatality, whether as to the morta-
lity caused by it in particular districts, or to the
proportion of deaths amongst a given number
of persons seized, &c. &c.
It appears adviseable, for the sales of distinct-
ness, to place these various subjects of investi-
gation under separate heads ; and a number of
queries is accordingly subjoined; to which it is
hoped, that you will find no difficulty in return-
ing satisfactory answers.
£hierv. 1. When did the Cholera Morbus
first appear in the tract of country, cantonment,
or camp, coming under your observation ?
2. How long did it remain in that district,
cantonment, or camp ?
S. What was the prevailing state of the wea-
ther, for some time before its appearance ; du-
ring its prevalence; and at the period of its dis-
appearance ? State the result of your observa-
tions (if you have kept any) on the barometrical
and thermometrical changes, which may have
occurred during the intervening period.
4. What direction did it seem disposed to
take, in passing through the camp or district ?


5. Did it affect all parts equally and indis-
criminately ?
6. Were the localities of the parts or villa-
ges more especially subjected to its influence,
each as general experience has shewn to be,
with re ject to the miasmata arising from pu-
trid animal and vegetable exhalations, particu-
larly obnoxious to endemical diseases?
7- Did it leave any spots untouched? and
what circumstances in them appeared to skreea
the inhabitants from its influence ?
8. After wholly leaving a division of coun-
try, camp, or village, did it ever recur? and if
so, under what peculiarities of weather, or local-
ities of situation ?
9- During its prevalence in any spot, was
any one class of persons more liable to its at-
tacks than another? and if so, by what peculi-
arities of life, as to diet, calling, habits, scite
of habitation, age, sex; or caste, was this class
distinguished from those less within its influ-
ence?
10. What might have been the average mor-
tality amongst a given number seized? Did
this vary at different seasons of the Epidemick?


and was the disease more violent in the early,
than in the latter part of its progress ?
11. Can you form any estimate, or probable
conjecture, as to the sum total of mortality pro-
duced in the tract coming under your observa-
tion?
12. What appearances were presented on
opening the bodies of those, who sunk under the
disease in its different stages ?
IS, Of those attacked, did a greater number
recover, of such as took medicine, than of those
who did not P
14. What mode of cure was most generally
Successful ?
15. Did bleeding appear to produce benefi-
cial effects ? and in what number of those whose
veins were opened, was it found possible to make
the blood flow ?
16. Did calomel given in the first instance,
and alone, appear to have any specific effect, in
allaying the irritable or spasmodic state of the
bowels ?
17* Does it come within your knowledge,
that any particular remedies were resorted to by


the Native practitioners ? and have you any in.
formation of the success, with which these were
reported to have been used ?
18. What were the usual sequelae of the dig.'
ease, as to constitutional effects, in severe cases?
19. Did any instance .of relapse, or seconda-
ry attack, come under your notice, after recove,
ry had been well established, and the bodily
strength restored ?
20. Have you any reason to suspect, that the.
disease was contagious ?
21. Were animals affected by the disorder ?
and if so, what descriptions ?
22. Did it appear to you, that the Epidemick
exerted any influence in lessening the frequen-
cy, or in modifying the symptoms, of fevers, and
other disorders common to this country ?
Although the Board have thought it necessary
thus to specify, under separate heads, those
questions, which have appeared to them most mo.
mentous to a complete illustration of the matter
under investigation ; they will gladly receive
from you such information, on points that may
have escaped their notice, as you may think pro-
per to impart to them,


mention being at the same time made, of the au-
thority, upon which it rested; and no- general
reasoning, or point of theory advanced, but
with the name of the person from whom it was
derived. It was hoped, that the share, which
each had contributed to the general performance
Would thus ‘ be manifest; and that no complaints
could be fairly made of partiality, or unjust
neglect.
But it was soon found, that the adoption of
this plan would inevitably lead to prolixity and
confusion. The facts were so numerous, that,
if each were to be stated with its-authority*
the work would be 'swelled out to a most unrea-
sonable size. They were often of a contradic-
tory and imperfect nature; so that the infer-
ence deducible from them, was to be obtained,
partly from one person, and partly from another.
The inferences to be drawn from the facts, were
often different from those made by the person
stating the facts ; or they had not at all occurred
to him; or they were such, as could only be
made, from a comparison of his factk with others,
with which he was unacquainted. Besides, that
after all the facts had been stated, each on its
proper authority, it would still have been necessa-
ry, for one individual to have combined and analy.
zed them; so as obtain from the whole some general
principles, and precise notions, as to the true na-
ture of the disease. All would have else been
c


In conclusion, the Board, without further
pressing the great importance of the subject upox
your observation, place perfect reliance on your
professional zeal; and entertain no doubt but,
that actuated by a just regard for the interest- of
humanity, and the reputation of the Department
to .which you belong, you will take the foregoing
queries into your most serious consideration; and
by the results of your deliberation, enable them
to perform the task allotted to them, with credit
to themselves, and to the service over which they
have the good fortune to preside.
I have the honor, &c.
'Medical Board Office,
the 9th October , 1818. >
The foregoing appeal was not so productive
as might have been expected. Of two hundred
and thirty-eight individuals, to whom the letter
was addressed, replies were received, from one
hundred and twenty-four only.—Of these, twenty-
four answered merely to state their inability, in a-
ny way, to assist the Board, in the proposed en-
quiry.—The remaining hundred communicated
much valuable information ; the whole of which
it has been attempted to embody in the subjoined
report.
In performing this task, it was earnestly
wished, that no fact should be stated, without


confusion and perplexity; and the body of intel-
ligence thrown together, however it might, in a
certain sense, be said, to exhibit the results of ge-
neral experience, would never have formed a plain
and unembarrassed narrative of the progress and
appearances of the Epidemick.
It was therefore determined to abandon this
method; and in its stead, to adopt the form of
a digest or compendium of all the facts
■within reach. In doing. this, the mode of des-
cribing diseases, usually adhered to by prac-
tical writers, has been followed, with as little
deviation as possible ; that is, the symptoms have
been treated of first; then the causes, prox-
imate, remote, predisposing and exciting; then,
the mortality caused by the disease ; then some
peculiarities observed by it; and lastly the method
of cure. To the whole have been prefixed an in-
troduction describing the rise and progress of the
Epidemick* ; and a sketch of the Weather in Ben-,
gal, and in the Upper Provinces, during several
years antecedent to its appearance.
In discussing the matters comprised under-
these various heads, it has been carefully endea-'
vored, to adduce the whole of the facts seemingly-
bearing upon them ; and no pains have been spa-
red, to collect from every accessible quarter, such
collateral evidence, as appeared likely to assist in
their elucidation. The object of the Essay being
* It has been since thought better to throw this into,
the body of the work.


purely practical, every bias to theory and general
speculation has been cautiously avoided. No
lengthened hypothetical reasonings have been en-
tered into; and where any thing seemingly con-
jectural has been hazarded, it has been, either in
the way of plain deduction from established facts,
or of striking analogy with similar circumstances,
the truth of which is universally admitted. The
subjoined Table contains the names, designations,
and places of experience of all the gentlemen,
who have contributed to the formation of the
work. Amongst so large a number, it cannot
but have happened that the communications must
be of very different degrees of value. All could
not have the same field of observation; some
from accident or disinclination would im-
prove their opportunities more than others.
But, it w ould be invidious to specify the quan-
tum or value of the information communicated by
different individuals; even if the step were not
rendered unnecessary, by a constant reference in
the body, of the work to the situations principal-
ly visited by the Epidemick, connected with the
specification in the annexed table of the Medical
Officers, whose experience was chiefly derived
from such situations. It may how r ever be stated
generally, that the intelligence regarding both
the habits and treatment of the disorder, impart-
ed by the Staff attached to the Left and Hansi
Divisions, the Rajpootanu Force, and above all,
the Centre Division of the Army, cannot be too
r o


highly estimated. The Surgeons of the Centre
Division have the principal merit, of clearly es-
tablishing the great utility of blood-letting, un-
der certain circumstances; which had been pre-
viously left doubtful by the uncertain results of
the practice in Calcutta, and other quarters.*
It has been a prevalent opinion throughout
the country, that the Epidemick Avas essentially
different in nature from the Cholera Morbus of
the Schools.—This is no doubt true, if by Chole-
ra is meant only, the disorder occuring sporadi-
cally during hot weather in the higher latitudes,
and usually accompanied Avith bilious vomiting.
But it should be recollected, that the Avord Cho-
lera is a generic term; comprehending many
species or varieties of disease, all more or less
differing from each other in their diagnostick
symptoms.
* Besides the information derived from the general
source, a valuable addition of facts has been obtained from
the official reports communicated to the Board, from time
to time, since the rise of the Epidemick, by Mr. Super-
intending Surgeon Dyer, and Mr. Superintending
Surgeon Reddie.—The opinions of the latter Gentle-
man, which are always entitled to much respect, are in
the present instance particularly deserving of regard,
from his having enjoyed very extensive opportunities of
witnessing the disorder in the Left Division and Raj-
pootanu Force ; and mads the best use of them.


If it were consistent with the scope of this Re-
port, it might be easily shewn, that a disease si-
milar in all its appearances to that, which rava-
ged these provinces, has been known from the re-
motest antiquity; and accurately described by
the medical writers of every age.*
• There is no detailed description of Cholera in Hip-
pocrates or Galen; but that the disease was perfectly
well known to them is evident from a frequent reference
to it in various parts of their works. It is however, de-
scribed by Aretaeus, Coelius Aurelianus, and Paulus
Aegineta. Aretaeus Lib. 11. Cap. 5, says: “ Cholera is
a most acute disorder; for in it the matter, which had
been congested in the gullet and upper part of the sto-
mach is ejected by vomiting; while all that had been
swimming in the stomach and intestines is passed down-
wards. The fluids passed by the mouth are atfirst like
*xater ; those by the anus, stercoreous, liquid, and of
foul smell; but if these are helped off' by clysters, the
motions are first like phlegm , then bilious. The disor-
der is light at first, without pain. Afterwards, howe-
ver, constriction of the and Cardia, and
violent pain of the belly, supervene. Should the dis-
ease still increase, the patient grows faint; the limbs
lose their strength ; the mind is greatly depressed;
there is abhorrence of food ; the sinews are contracted ;
the muscles of the arms and legs cramped; and the
fingers and toes twisted. Vertigo and hiccough arise;
the nails grow blue; the extremities cold; and the
whole body is shaken with rigors. When it comes to
the height, then he is covered with sweat; bile is poured
forth upwards and downwards ; the bladder is spasmo-


The disorder, as it lately visited India, wag
new in this alone, that there it, for the first time,
assumed the Epidemical form; and by the uni-
dically affected and the urine suppressed ; the voice is
lost, and the pulse is exceedingly feeble. Death at
length ensues; miserable and full of torments, from
convulsion, and empty strangulated vomiting” And
Aurelian Lib. 111. Cap. xx. The attack is fre-
quently preceded by disordered stomach, tension, anx-
iety, tossing, watchfulness, torment of the bowels;
with noise, pain of the belly, and looseness, belching,
nausea, flow of the saliva, and oppression of the pne-
cordia. At the commencement of the attack, there is
vomiting, first of corrupted food, then of humor, and yel-
low bile, then of stuff like the white of an egg, then
green and mruginous, and lastly black. Along with
these humors there are others t shite, like spittle. The
pulse becomes contracted ; the joints grow cold ; and
the countenance dark.—There is great heat, and insa-
tiable thirst ; hurried breathing : contraction of the
O *
limbs ; and tension of the sinews, and calves of the
legs and arms. The praecordia are drawn upwards,
with pain like that of the Iliac Passion. Sometimes the
ejections from the mouth are bloody. The countenance
is collapsed ; the eyes are red ; and there is hiccough to-
wards the end.” The reader must not imagine, that
with the Ancients bile had generally the contracted signi-
fication in which it is accepted by the Moderns. With
them it was connected with all the vanities of the humo-
ral pathology, and to quote an expression of Galen,
was “ of infinite variety of colours, from pale to jet black.”
With us it would sound ridiculous to speak cf transpa-
rent bile; but not so with the old writers, as will clearly


versallty of its attacks, became a much more ge-
neral and grievous scourge, than it had hitherto
appear from the following quotation from Celsus. In
his eleventh Chapter, Book fourth, on the diseases of
the Intestines, he says: “ And first we must make men-
tion of Cholera; because it seems to be a morbid affec-
tion common to both stomach and intestines.—For
there is at one and the same time a vomiting and purg-
ing, together with inflation ; the intestines arc torment-
ed ; bile flows upwards and downwards, at Jirst like
’writer, then like the washings of recent flesh ; sometimes
•white, sometimes black, or of various colour. Where-
fore, from that name hile\ the Greeks have called
the disease Cholera .” He then goes on to state the other
symptoms. In like manner Avicenna p. p. 492 and 502,
Edit. Rome, 1593, distinctlymentionsthe watery vomiting,
purging, spasms, loss of pulse, cold sweats, See. and he is
followed by several hundred Asiatic writers on physic.
"Without collecting farther authorities the reader may
be referred to Bontius, Sydenham, Riverius, Hoffman,
Clcghorn, Sauvagcs; and above all, to the excellent ac-
counts of Girdlcstone (Essays p. 51) Curtis (Diseases of
India, p. 44) and Johnson (Influenceof Tropical Climates
p. 396.) It is curious, that the disease is unknown in
Egypt, though, there is there the same prevalence of
South East winds, and great inequality of diurnal and noc-
turnal temperature, which have been in other quarters ob-
served to accompany and accelerate its progress. Vide
Prosper Alpinus, Chap. 7 and Bth. The disorder is un-
questionably the Cholera Morbus of Sydenham, the Chole-
ra Spontanea of Sauvages, the Spasmodic Cholera, Cramp,
or Mort de Chien of Curtis, and Johnson. The Malady de-
scribed by Dr. Girdlcstone, differed in this, from the pre-
sent Epidemick, that purging does not appear to have been
a constant attendant on it.


been.—-It had long existed partially in these Set-
tlements, and previously to its late appearance,
had been faithfully delineated by three Medical
Officers in His Majesty’s Service, Drs. Girdle-
stone, Curtis, and Johnson. At no time howe-
ver, as far as can be learnt from strict enquiry,
did it prevail generally over the country, previ-
ously to the autumn of 1817* * Sometimes in-
deed, it broke out with such extreme violence in
particular spots, as to raise great apprehension,
lest it should spread in the manner of a pesti-
lence. But no sooner had the peculiar circum-
stances, which gave rise to it in those quarters,
ceased to exist, than the disorder rapidly decli-
ned; and left the places in the vicinity untouch-
ed.—Some of these instances are too remarka-
ble to be passed over unnoticed, in an essay of
this sort.
The first, which we shall mention, took place
at Hurdwar about thirty-five years ago.—lt is
not unknown to our readers, that this is the spot,
in which the waters of the Ganges first issue
from the mountains into the plains. It is held
* We have examined the Native histories of Ferishtu and
Ghoolam Ilooseiu, which contain an acconnt of Indian af.
fairs from the time of the Moohummedan Conquest to the
close of Mr. Hastings’Government; hut although they ad-
vert to the occurrence of frequent famine and plagues, they
do not once mention Cholera; a strong proof, that it never
was before general.


very sacred by the Hindoos; and every year at
the full Moon of April, but more especially every
twelfth year,* an immense concourse of people
assembles near it, for the purpose of ablution
in the holy stream. It so happened, that
the year 1783 was one of the twelfth years deem-
ed peculiarly propitious ; and that the body of
pilgrims then collected was unusually great, a l *
mounting, it is believed, to between one and two
millions. : It is the custom of the pilgrims to re-
pair to the bed of the river, where they pass
the night with little, if any, shelter: many
persons being crowded together under the cover
of a single blanket thrown out as an awning.
The temperature is very variable : the days being
hot and the nights cold, with heavy dews, and
sudden chilly blasts from the clefts in the moun-
tains.
On the present occasion these causes!, were
sufficient to generate the Cholera ; which broke
out soon after the commencement of the ceremo-
nies, and raged with such fury, that, in less than
eight days, it is said to have cut off above twen-
* During April of every twelfth year, the Sun is in Aquari-
us. This Sign is by the Natives called Koombh't and the
fair of this year, the fair of the Koomb’hi '
t One manuscript in. our possession says : “ the disease
broke out on the springing up of an- Easterly or land wind
during a hot night, and carried off innumerable persons.’*
d


ty thousand victims. But so confined was its in-
fluence, that it did not reach the village of Ju-
walapore, only seven miles distant; and ceased
immediately upon the concourse breaking up>
on the last day of the festival.
The next instance, which we shall quote, oc-
curred two years before, in the Northern Cir-
cars: the narrow belt of land extending North
and South from Ganjam to Chicacole, along the
sea coast, and bounded by high hills to the West,
and by the sea to the East. A Division of Ben-
gal Troops, consisting of about five thousand
men, was proceeding, under the Command of Co-
lonel Pearse of the Artillery, in the spring of
1781, to join Sir Eyre Coote’s Army on the
Coast. It would appear, that a disease resem-
bling Cholera had been prevalent in that part of
ihe country some time before their arrival; and
that they got it at Ganjam on the of March.
It assailed them with almost inconceivable fury.
Men in perfect health dropt down by dozensj
and those even less severely affected were gene-
rally dead, or past recovery, within less than an
hour. The spasms of the extremities and trunk
were dreadful; and distressing vomiting. and
purging were present in all. Besides those who
died, above five hundred were admitted into Hos-
pital that day. On the two following days the


disease continued unabated, and more than one
half of the Army was now ill. Hitherto the Com-
manding Officer had struggled forward; hoping
to reach more healthy ground ; but it was now
found impossible to move further. Almost all
the servants and Camp followers had deserted ;
and although the greater part of the train and
magazine had been left behind, there was no
longer sufficient carriage to convey the sick.
The scene was most distressing. To use the
words of ColonerPearse, “Death raged in the
camp with horror not to be described ; and all
expected to be devoured by the pestilence. In
vain I studied to discover the cause of our mis-
fortune. I attributed it to poison; but at length
found, that there had been a pestilential disorder
raging in the parts through which our first march-
es lay, and that part of our Camp was already
drinking the air of death and destruction.”.
The road was strewed with the dead; and the
Detachment was scattered through a space of
more than thirty miles. The sick in Hospital-
now amounted to 1143. It was therefore deter-
mined to halt a few days at Itchapore ; the inha-
bitants of which gave up part of the town for the
accommodation of the Troops. The good ef-
fects of this step were immediate and stri-
king. The hopes or the sick began to re-
vive; the.deaths became, fewer; and no more;
fresh cases were admitted. By the 29th the
d 2


sick were diminished to 008; and on the first of
the folio wing month, the army was enabled to
recommence its march-:• leaving about 300 con-
O
valescents behind.. The total number of deaths
is not stated; but it is learnt from oral.communi-
cation with individuals who were present with
the Detachment, not to have fallen short of seven
hundred men. As was generally the case in the
. O , tf ...
several Divisions visited by the late Epidemick,
the disease first attacked the camp followers;
then the Sepoys; and lastly the Europeans. But
few Officers were affected; and of these only one
died. It is clear, that the disorder was totally new
to all persons in Camp. It was at first attributed
to fatigue and irregular living j then to poison.
The bodies of such as died presented strong ap-
pearances of poison.—lt was likewise discover-
ed, that the natives of those districts used Eu-
phorbium instead of Soap in washing, and that
the troops unwittingly drank the water of the
ponds impregnated with it.—But when it was
found that the disease did not decrease, upon
proper precautions being .taken in this respect;
it was with greater justice referred to the heavy
dews and great vicissitudes of the weather, con-
nected with the peculiar situation of the
They had been marching almost incessantly for
six days, through sand and salt water; and were
at length so enfeebled, as scarcely to be able to


jnove. A violent wind blew day and night along
the whole shore; and although it was not quite
so strong at night, it was then accompanied with
such a penetrating moisture, as to wet through
the thickest woollen deaths.—'The troops were
besides, in no condition to withstand the incle-
mency of the season.—They had no tents; and
few possessed even a blanket to shelter them on,
getting to their ground. They generally march-
ed in the night; and many suffered by incautious-
ly lying down, while warm from .exercise, and
falling asleep, exposed to the influence of a damp
and noxious atmosphere.—»The mode of treating
the sick is not mentioned in any of the docu-
ments to which access has been obtained. —It is
however stated in one of Colonel Pearse’s dis-
patches, that not an ounce of opium was used in
the Army; and tradition gives reason to fear, that
Emeticks . of Tartarized Antimony were too freely
used.*
. * The occurrence of the disease on this occasion is no-
ticed in a letter dated the 27th April, 1781, from the Su-
preme Government to the Court of Directors; and the
destruction which it caused in this Detachment, mention-
ed in terms of becoming regret. After adverting to its
progress in the Circars, the letter thus proceeds : .“ The
disease to which we allude, has not been confined to the
Country near Ganjam. It afterwards found its way to this
place (Calcutta); and after chiefly affecting the Native
Inhabitants, so as to occasion a great mortality during


There seems to bo something in the situation
and climate of the Northern Circars, ■which pe-
culiarly disposes to the production of Cholera ■
for we find that a second Detachment of Bengal
troops marching under Colonel Cockerell for
Seringapatam, in the spring of 1790, was affected
in a similar way with that of Colonel Pearse.
This Detachment moved from the vicinity of the
Soobanreeka River in the end of March. As it
proceeded Southward, the weather became war-'
mer. A fresh Southerly wind prevailed during
the day; increasing in strength as the Sun as-
cended to the meridian; gradually becoming
moderate as it declined; and dying away with
the close of the evening.—A calm night succeed’
cd; close and sultry in the early part; and damp
and chill, with heavy dew, and slight Easterly
wind from the Sea, towards morning. The at-
mosphere was during the day overshadowed with
the period of a fortnight, it is now generally abated, and
pursuing its course to the northward.” It would have
been interesting to have traced this disease, as it seemed
to put on the Epidemical form, but every attempt to dis-
cover its further progress has proved fruitless. Even the
few facts regarding it however, which have come to light,
had they been known sufficiently early, would have re-
quired, that the assumptions in the text, as to the previous
non-epidemic existence of the disorder, should have
been at least softened down- But access v as not had to,
theletter, until this report had gone before Government, •


thick white clouds; and loaded with va-
pours. The Cholera commenced late in
March; but was not general till the 15th of April,
■when its activity was heightened by a heavy
squall of wind and rain, which over-took th,e De-
tachment at Manikpatam, on the North side of
the Chilka Lake. From this time till the .middle
of June, when the Detachment had passed Ellore,
and the weather had become more moderate, from
frequent falls of rain, the disease proved very
fatal. As in Colonel Pearse’s Division, the
troops had no tents, and were sheltered from the
inclemency of the night only by the thin cover-
ing of a country blanket stretched across a bam-
boo ridge pole; and even this comfort was not
possessed by the camp followers. The troops
were much harassed by long marches, on a san-
dy soil frequently not affording water; and from
the difficulty of dragging the guns over very bad
roads, they sometimes did not reach their ground
until sunset. In the middle of the day the ther-
mometer rose as high as 124. The disorder was
characterised by precisely the same symptoms,
which marked the late Epidemick. It began
with violent pain and spasm of the stomach and
bowels; which were followed by purging, vomit-
ing, and all the signs of extreme debility. Lucki-
ly laudanum and cordials were resorted to for its
cure; and it did less mischief) than in the former
Detachment,


As far as has been ascertained, these are the
only instances, in which the disease could at all
be said to have assumed the epidemical form, prior
to 1817. It is indeed rumoured, that it overran the
Province ofßundlekund about forty years ago ; and
was exceedingly destructive in Bengal some time
near the end of the last century. But if it were
so, how does it happen, that no record has been
preserved of its destructive effects, and that the
oldest Inhabitants, when applied to, can give no
specific information on the subject? The truth
is, that as an Epidemick the disease is quite new.
let us hope, that like other pestilences, with
which Providence has from time to time been
pleased to afflict mankind, it will prove only of
temporary duration; and that these Provinces
will soon regain their wonted salubrity.
Medical Board Office,
Calcutta; >
Ist July, 1819, J


Names. .
Appointments.
Pbincipal Seats of
r Experience.
Sups. A. Gibb,
Meerut, - - • -
Meerut."
Do. do.I. Hamilton, -
Benares, -----
Chunar District.
Do, do. A. Ogilvie, -■
Kufnal, - - • -■ -
Brigr. Arnold’s Force,
Hansi.
Do. do. J. Dyer;
Cawnpore, - - -
Nagpore Force.
Do. do. G. Reddie, -
Rajpootana, - - -
Left Divn. and Raj.
'
pootanu Force.
Do. do. A. Dickson, -
Saugor, - -' « -
Muttra.
King’* Surgn. I. F.
■’ - -
Smet,
H. M. 8th Lt. Drags.
Meerut.
Do. do. R. Spencer,-
H. M. 21st do. do. -
River and Cawnpore.
Do. do.Thos.Jackson,
H. M. 1st Bn. 14th
Regt. of Foot, -
Meerut.
Co.’s Surgn. Thos.
Yeld, - ' -
Benares, - - - -
Benares.
Do. do. S. Durham, -
Medical Depot, Cawn-
pore, - -
Cawnpore.
Do. do.Chas. Hunter,
8 th N.I
Centre Division.
Do. do. Js. Johnston,
Furruckabad, -
Futtigurh.
Do. do. \V. L. Grant,
Moorshedabad, - •
Moorshedabad.
Do. do. J. Ridges, -
3d N. C.
Centre Division.
Do. do. J. LangstafT,
2d Bn. 25th N. I.
Centre Division and!
- - '
Oudc.
Do. do. Js. Gibb,
Stud Poosa, -
Tirhoot.
Do. do. David Todd,
Dacca, ...
Dacca.
Do. do. John Swiney,
Garrison Fort William,
Calcutta.
Do. do. Peter Breton,
Ramghur Bn. -
Surabhulpore.
Do. do. R. Williams,
8th N.C. - - -
Rawali Frontier.
Do. do. George Skip- ]
| 2lstN.I. |
March from Kishen-
ton, - - .!
' gunge to Allahabad.
Do. do. Colin Camp- i
bell, - .
| Horse Artillery, <
[ Centre nad - Left Di«
1 vision;*
Do. do. E. Impey, -
Cavalry Depot, ;
Cawnpore.
NAMES of the Medical Officers who prirT-
cipally contributed the information contained
in the following Report.


Names.
ANOINTMENTS.
S Principal Seats or
1 EXPERIENCE.
Co.’s Surgeon G.' G.
Campbell, - -
Medical Depot, Agra.
Agra.
Do. do. S. Ludlow, •
Delhi Residency,
Delhi.
Do. do. Thos. Twee-
die, ....
7th N.C. - - -
Mooltaye.
Do. do. John Mar*
shall, •
4th Rcgt. N, C. - -
Kishengunge.
Do. do. Oswald Hun*
ter, - - - -
6th K,. N. C» t
Baxar,-
Do. do. David Ben-
ton, ...
1st R. N. C. ...
Mullje.
Do. do. Thos. Crich-
ton, • - - - -
2d Bn. 3d N. I. - -
Centre Division.
King’s Acting Surgn.
Badenach, - - -
H.M. 59th R. of Foot,
Calcutta.
King’s Asst. Surgn. I.
Fawcett,
H. M.24th R. of Foot
Dinapore.
Do. do. M. Owen, -
H. M. 1st Bn. 87th
R. ofFoot -
Centre Division.
Corn’s. Asst. Surgn.
Js. Mellis. - •
Nuddea, ....
Nuddea.
Do. do. A. Hall, - -
IstBn. IstN. I.
Mahva.
Do. do. Wm. Farqu*
liar, ...
Agra,
Agra.
Do. do. P. Mathew, -
2d Bn. 21st N I, - -
Sooltanpore Oude.
Do. do. G. 0. Card-
ner, -
Backergunge, - -
Backergunge.
Do. do. J. Castle,
1st Bn. 6th N. I.
Malwa.
Do. do. Andrew
Brown,
Bullooah ....
Bullooah.
Do. do. Chs. Stuart, -
Jungle Mehauls, - -
Rajshahy.
Do. do. J. John Hogg,
Garrison Monghyr, -
Monghyr.
Do. do, J. Adams, -
Ally Ghur, ...
Co el.
Do, do. Robert Tyt-
ler -
Allahabad, -
Jessore and Allahabad.
Do. do. George Bail-
lie, ...
Resy. Court of Holkar
Malwa.
Do. do. James Grier-
Doing duty 1st Bn.
fop,
I5tb N. I. - •
Lucknow.


Names.
Appointments,
S 'Principal Seats of
1 Experience.
Co.’s Asst.Sur.GXambe, 1st Local.B, Oud$.
Do. do. Js. Ranken -
Snrgn. Poll. Agent,
Do. do. E. Macdo-
Loodiana, - - -
Jeypore.
nald, .
2d Bn. 24th N. I. -
Lehargaon,
Do. do. John Lamb, -
Malda, ... •
Malda.
Do. do. P, Halket, -
1st Bn. 27th N, L -
Rajpootasn Force,
Do. do. Wm. Hogg,
Do. do. George Law*
Hooghly, - •
Juanpore,
son,
Do. do, Edward Mus-
1st Bn. 1.
Delhi.
ton, - -
Do.do.Jaraes Thom-
Garun, «
Chupra.
son, «*- -
Do. do. John Mori-
2d Bn. 2£th N. L -
Hansi Foret,
son, -
Tirhoot,
■ Moozufferpore^
Do. do. J. J. Patterson
, 2d Bn. 3oth N. I.
Midnapore,
Do. do* R. Brown, -
Doing duty 2d Bn.
8th N, I.
Left Division.
Do. do. George G.
Spilsbury,
Do. do. Andrew Mur-
2d Bn. isth N. I.
Cawnpore.
ray, - - -
2d Bn. 1st N. I* - -
Centre Division.
Do. do. do. Harding, -
Cawnpore, - -
Cawnpore,
Do. do. Chas. Renny, *
Doing duty Artillery,
Kurnal,
Left Division.
Do. do. John Allen, .
1st Bn. 14th N. I. -
Left Division.
Do. do, John Tytler, -
Chumparun Light
Infy. Bn. - - -
Patna.
Do. do. Wna.Jachson,
2d Bn. nth N. I
Centre Division.
Do. do. Chas. Ray, -
1st Bn. 28th N. I.
Left Division.
Do. do. A. Stratton, .
1st Bn. 16th N.I
Chittagong.
Do. do. John Gray, -
Do. do. 1. M. David-
Body Guard,
O ude.
son, ....
Purnea,
Purnea.
Do. do. Wm.T.W ebb,
1st Bn, 24th N. I. *
Etayali.
Do. do. Js. Watson,
Benares,
Benares.
Do. do. J. Smifb, -
Sylhet, »
Sylhet.


Names.
Appointments.
Pkincipal Seats off
Experience.
Co.’s Ast.Sur.W.Leslie,
, Meerut, - •
■ Meerut.
Do. do. Alexr. Mac-
lean, -
Commission', Cuttack,
Calcutta.
Do. do.Clis. Hickman,
Golundauze,
Centre Division.
Do. do. Tiios. Haley,
Artillery, Agra,
ShajehanpOre.
Do. do. T. E. Baker, -
Garrison Asst. Surgn.
Buxar,
Futtigurh.
Do. do. Thos. Stod-
dart, ....
Artillery, Benares, ■
■ "Allahabad.
Do. do. Alexr. Garden,
Medl. Store keeper,
Nagpore Sub. Force,
Nagpore Force.
Do. do. C. E. Everest
Resy. KiflmanJhoo, -
Napal.
Do. do. W. Gerard,
1st Bn. 26th R. N. I.
Bundlekund.
Do.do. John Row, -
2d Bn. 29th Rcgt. -
Hansi Force.
Do. do. G. N. Cheek,
Gya, - - -
Centre Division,
Do. da. C. S. Curling,
Pioneer Corps, 2d
-
* Ceylon Vol. Bn.
Centre Division.
Do. do. C. B. Francis,
2d Bn. 9th N. I.
Mirzapore.
Do. do. John Grant,
2d Bn, 4th N. I.
Sumbhulpore.
Do. do.Octavius Wray
2d Bn. 14th R. N.I.
Berhampore.
Do. do. H. Smith, '•
1st Bn. Artillery, -
Saugor District.
Do. do. John Turner,
Burdwau.
Do.do. T. Henderson,
Juanpore,
Tipperah.
Do. do. John Adam,
Artillery, Nagpore
Sub. Force,
Chunar.
Do. do. Wm. Dyer, -
Doing duty 8th Dns.
Hansi Division,
Do. do. P. Suter,
Gardiner’s Horse, -
Khassgmige.
Do. do. Colin Mac-
lachlan, - -
3d Rohillah Horse,
Centre Division.
Do.do.M. Mendes,-
Doing duty 2d Ro-
hilla Horse, - -
Various.
Do. do. John Glas, -
Bhaugulpore, - -
Bhaugulpore,
Do. do. John MacRae,
Chittagong, - -
Chittagong. ■
Do. do. Henry Young,
24 Purgunnahs,
Calcutta.
Do. do. George Bal-
lard, -
Bauleah,
Bauleah,


INTRODUCTION.
IN’ attempting to write a description oftheEpi-
demick, which has of late so severely afflicted the
Continent of India, it may not be amiss to give
some account of the Weather, which preceded
its appearance ; in order, that it may be seen,
in what respects it differed from that usually pre-
valent during similar periods of former years ;
and how far the general insalubrity of the air,
was fairly attributable to such difference.
It must be confessed, that researches of this
nature have hitherto proved but little satisfac-
tory. Long experience has shewn, that the nox-
ious qualities of the atmosphere, giving rise to
epidemics during particular seasons, can rarely,
if ever, be traced to any irregularities in its ma-
nifest and sensible properties j and the enqui-
ries of the most sagacious observers, in matters of
so abstruse a nature, have generally terminated
in an honest confession of their ignorance, or in
a poor endeavour to conceal it under some spe-
cious, but unmeaning name.—Hence, among the
f


ancients, those wild speculations regarding the
untoward influence of the heavenly bodies; the
malignant conjunction of the planets ; and the
too near approximation of a comet to our globe;
which easily gained credit with the simplicity of
the darker ages. Hence, too, the theories of
an undue distribution of the electric and mag-
netic fluids; of a latent alteration in the bowels
of the earth ; of the distant agency of volcanic
eruptions, and earthquakes; and many others
equally visionary, with which it has been at-
tempted to appease the curiosity, and relieve
the suspense, of these more enlightened days.
But, as it is only by the accumulation of large
bodies, of facts, that we can expect to arrive
at any satisfactory conclusions in matters of
science ; and as the seasons, which we are about
to describe, were certainly diversified by very
unusual irregularities ; we should scarce be jus-
tified in passing them over, entirely unnoticed.
It will still be left to the reader to determine in
his own mind, what connection they had with
the subsequent sickness ; and what influence, if
any, they exerted upon the rise and progress
of the Epidemick. Before describing the nature
of these irregularities, it will be necessary, for
the sake of subsequent comparison, to premise
a few words on the kind of Weather usually pre-
valent throughout the year, on this side of India,


In Bengal, and in the Central and Northern Pro-
,vinces of Hindostan, the seasons, obedient to
the course of the sun, generally succeed each
other with an undeviating regularity, quite un-
known in the variable climates of the old world.
Taking their names from the quality, which pe-
culiarly characterises their march, they have,
by common acceptation, been divided into the
cold, the hot, and the rainy season*
The Cold Season commences with November,
and ends in February*—>About the middle of
October the weather begins perceptibly to
change.— The days are still oppressively
hot; but the mornings. and evenings gra-
dually become cool. The wind, which
during the preceding months had blown
generally from the South and East, now
begins to come round to the West and North ;
and to carry along with it the heavy masses of
clouds, which almost constantly float about, and
obscure the horizon, during the whole of the
Rains. The atmosphere, from being very damp
and watery, grows dry and elastic; and the hea-
vens begin to brighten a little. But these ap-
pearances are not yet uniform; the sky still at
times becomes gloomy and overcast} and
heavy showers, accompanied by thunder and
lightning, shew that the South East Monsoon
has not yet finally taken its leave.
f 2


In November, the weather become? delight-
fully fair and pleasant. A cold sharp wind now
blows steadily from the North. The air is dry,
clear, pure, and serene ; the vault of heaven is
of a beautiful deep azure, colour; and in gene-
ral not a cloud is to be seen. The nights are
clear, with heavy dews. The Thermometer* in
the shade ranges throughout the month from 66
to 86; the mean heat about 74 j medium al-
titude of the Barometer 29 - 98.
As December comes on, a considerable change
takes place. Although the middle of the day, and
the afternoon, be clear and fine ; a haze generally
towards evening collects round the horizon ; and
obscures the setting sun. As the night advan-
ces, thick fogs, sometimes general, sometimes
partial, begin to collect ; and do not disperse
until morning. As they are broken up by the in-
fluence of the sun’s rays, their vapours rise and
form grey masses of clouds ; which render the
early part of the day hot and unpleasant, and do
not disappear until it is far advanced. These
fogs do not by any means occur every night*
Sometimes, though rarely, the whole month
passes over without them; ordinarily they appear
only three or four times; sometimes during
, j * Throughout this Essay the thermometer is spoken
of only in the shade.


several nights successively. As in November, the
North and West are the prevailing wihds. They
are very sharp, but blow steadily, never rising to
a gale, nor falling to a perfect lull. The
range of the Thermometer is from 56 to 78;
the mean temperature about 70; altitude of the
Barometer 30* 01.
During January much the same weather pre-
vails. The air is serene and piercingly cold.
The wind blows steadily, alrd perhaps more for-
cibly, from the North and North-west than in
December. Fogs are still very frequent, and
sometimes so thick, that scarcely any object is visi-
ble until a late hour of the morning; and every
thing exposed to the external air becomes wet,
and covered with drops of moisture. They may
‘often be seen rolling in large dense bodies in op-
posite directions. During the clear nights, heavy
'dews fall. The range of the Thermometer is
from 47 to 75; the mean heat about 68; altitude
of the Barometer 29* 99»
The weather keeps very pleasant until the
Second week of February; when the middle of
the day grows warm; and the change of the wind
to the South and East, and the collection of
clouds in the horizon, with threatenings of thun-
der ' gusts, portend the approach of the Hot


Season. At night the air is raw and cold; and
the mornings are foggy. The Thermometer ranges
from 65 to 82 j the mean heat 76 ; altitude of
Barometer SO 3,
Sometimes, a few heavy and refreshing showers
fall about Christmas; but the whole of the Cold
Season is generally marked by the total absence
.of rain. It is remarkable how invigorating the
cold bracing wind of the North, and the pure
elastic air, and clear sky of these months prove
■to the European constitution : harassed and
broken down by the previous long continuance
of moist and oppressive w r eather. The appetite
-and strength, which had long before failed, now
return; and the -whole frame becomes light and
springy. Vegetable nature partakes of the ge-
nerally salubrious effects of the season; and
garden plants and exotieks, at all other times
killed by the excessive heats, now grow with
freshness and vigour.
The Hot Season may be considered to set in
fairly with March. The sun now becomes very
-powerful; and the days are warm and even hot.
They are, however, prevented from being oppres-
sive by the strong and steady winds uniformly
blowing from the South. Fogs are yet not
uncommon in the mornings; and as they


clear up, go to the North to form, with the thick,
dispersed, masses of clouds, that are constantly
drifted along the horizon'by the wind, materials
for the approaching storms. These storms,
which by the inhabitants are termed north wes-
ters, do not however, generally occur till to-
wards the middle and end of the month. They
are usually preceded during several days by
cloudy mornings, and strong gales. -Then for
one or two evenings comes on distant thunder,
with strong gusts of wind, but without rain.
•Towards the afternoon of the day in which the
storm is to occur, the wind, which during the
morning and forenoon had been continued and
boisterous, begins to fail, and at length settles
into a dead calm. The air becomes oppressively
sultry. The clouds gather in the North West ;
and form a deep, dense, lowering, bank. Vivid
lightning, accompanied with heavy thunder,
and gradually advancing nearer and nearer, in-
dicates the immediate approach of the storm.
At length, the calm is suddenly interrupted by a
tremendous burst of wind, and by clouds of dust,
which darken the horizon. Then follow torrents
of rain, with close and heavy thunder; and these
are soon succeeded by a serene sky, and cool air.
The appearance however, of these sudden com-
pactions is not always the same—sometimes a
shower of haiktones precedes, or comes in


the place of the heavy fall of rain ; sometimes
there is no rain, even when the fury of the wind,
and quantity of the lightning are excessive.
The general time of their coming on is about
sun-set; they rarely occur earlier than six in
the afternoon, or later than midnight. . When the
days keep clear, and the wind moderate, heavy
dews fall at night; but in blowing weather, there
js no dew: the moisture as it settles, being car-
ried off by the wind. Range of the Thermome,
ter from 78 to 86 ; mean temperature 79 j al-
titude of Barometer £9° 86: the fall in the
mercury being ascribable to the prevailing high
winds, and increasing rarefaction of the air,
April has generally blowing weather through;,
out. The prevailing wind is still the South,
The atmosphere is sometimes clear, generally
hazy, with much dust, .and thick loose clouds
continually moving to the North- The weather
is hot, but pleasant, till towards the end of the
month; when the nights become close and
sultry. The general closeness however, is from'
time to time relieved by thunder storms, and
seasonable falls of - rain. The wind usually be-
comes hot to the feel about the £oth ; and so
continues to the end of the succeeding month,
■Range of the Thermometer from ; 78 to 91 f
mean heat 84< j Barometrical altitude 29* 7 5,


May is the most disagreeable month in the
year.- In the commencement thefe is high wind
at times ; but during the greater-part of the
month the weather is exceedingly close, still, and
oppressive. The nights especially are sultry.
There is little or no wind in the morpings j
which are thick and hazy, with low, gloomy,
scattered masses, of clouds. But as the sun
rises, a breeze springs up from the South, and
keeps gradually freshening until the evening,
when it again fades away. The air is hot, but
inelastic; and as it does not carry off the per-
ipiration, leaves the body moist and clammy.
The dejection and lassitude now universally
produced by the great-heats, are however fortu-
nately removed by the frequent recurrence of
Violent North-westers, with their usual accom*
paniments of thunder and rain. There are no
fogs during April or May. The Thermometer
ranges from 81 to 93; mean heat 86 j Baromet,
tical altitude 29° 60,
in some years, but not always, nor even ge-
nerally, between the 15th and 25th of the month,
the horizon becomes overshadowed with dark
thick clouds from the South East quarter; and
much rain fade during several days; constituting
what are called the Lesser rains. But more
commonly, the close muggy weather continues
B '


with little interruption, until the end of the first,
or the beginning of the second week of June; when
the veering round of the wind towards the East;
the occurrence of thunder in the evening; and the
constant cloudy state of the atmosphere, indicate
the approach of the regular rains. These com-
mence from the 4th to the 18th of June j and
continue with frequent variations during the
four following months. At first, they set in with
thunder showers, sometimes heavy, sometimes
light, generally from the South and East. Then
follow several days of very heavy rain •, during
which the sun is completely hid from view.
Then there is a shew of fair weather, with sun-
shine, and beautiful clear nights ; but this is of
very uncertain duration ; and liable to be inter-
rupted with scarcely any previous warning. The
heavy rain rarely keeps up for more than forty
eight hours at a time; then gradually diminish-;
ing to drizzling, and at length giving way to fair
weather. There is at frequent intervals, during
the whole period of their continuance, much vi-
vid lightning; with violent thunder storms, and
strong gusts of wind. The wind frequently changes
from East, to South., and West: rarely to North,
Its return to the East, and fixing steadily in that
quarter, is usually accompanied with heavy rain.
As soon as the Rainy Season has fairly com


jncticcd, the atmosphere becomes manifestly
cooler; and the weather in general very pleasant;
the only exceptions being now and then a sultry
night; and the dead oppressive calm, which
sometimes precedes a storm. From the dust
and other particles floating about in the atmos-
.phere being carried away by the successive
'showers, the sky during the intervals becomes
beautifully, clear; the sun shines with great
splendour; and the nights are bright, with in-
numerable stars. There is very little variation
of the atmospherical temperature throughout
the season. The. Thermometer ranges from 77
to 88 or 90; the mean heat being 81, or perhaps
a degree or two higher. . The air from the con-
stant rain becomes surcharged with moisture;
and every thing exposed to it gets damp and
mouldy. There is consequently little alterna-
tion in the Barometer. The mean altitude is
about 29 45. It is higher at night than in
the morning, and lowest at midday*
In September the Barometer is observed to-
rise a little ; but there is little perceptible change
in the weather, till the middle, of October* The
rain then begins to abate. The showers are
fewer in number; and though heavy, of short
duration. The wind gets very variable* There
are still frequent shews of thunder and light;
(v O


ning ; but they generally pass off without ptodue-
irig raift. The days are yet stiltry; but the
mornings and evenings begin to grow cool; and
the increasing clearness and elasticity of the air,
with the coming on of dews at night, presage
the speedy accession of the conn season. At
length the Veering round of the wind to the
West-north-west quarter, the disappearance of
clouds arid vapours from the horizon, the sharp*
ness and dryness of the air, the rapid rise of the
Barometer, and concomitant fall of the Thermo*
meter,- towards the end of the month, evince the
entire departure of the Rains. The total quantity
of rain falling during the season varies much
in different years. In Bengal the average has
been fixed at 70 inches.
The effect produced upon the face of nature,
by the change from the destructive heats of
April and May, to the refreshening days of June,
js immediate and striking. The wlldle of tltd
vegetable kingdom, Avhich had drooped during
the previous long drought, is brought into speedy
and active life; and the ground; from being
parched and bare, is soon covered with a luxu*
riant carpet of green. The animal kingdom
shares in the favorable revolution; and all space
is filled with myriads of insects, just called into
existence. The rivers, wells, and tanks are specs


dily filled to their margins. In the lower parts of
Bengal, the fac'e of the country is soon coVered
with Water; oftefl fo such depth, that a passage
may how be made in boats between places,
which during the cold and hot season lay high
and dry.
So much hSs been already Written upOtt
the diseases endeifiial in this cliihate, that
it will be sufficient for our purpose, merely td
enumerate their names ; arid to specify tile Sea*
sons* in which their several species are most
prevalent.- The Cold Weather brings with it the
ailments usually produced by marked alternations
of heat and moisture and Cattarhs, Intermittent
Fevers, Rheumatisms, and Diarrhoeas afd tliert
i
common* The Bilious Remittent FCvCr comes
6n with the great heats of April and May, and
predominates till August and September; when
it gradually gives Way to Bilious Dysentery and
Bloody Flhx. Acute Inflammation of lh&
Liver is met with in all Seasons, but is perhapsi
most common in the early part of the Rains.
Besides many disorders common to it with other
climates, Bengal is in a particular manner noted
for the production of Enlarged Spleen, and other
distressing diseases; which however* as being of
a chronick and spdradick kind, it is hardly to out
present purpose to mention.


It will be observed, that the foregoing notices
are more applicable to Bengal and the Lower
Provinces, than to the central and upper parts of
India. In the latter, the seasons are consider-
ably modified. The Cold, Weather begins earlier,
and lasts longer; and is far more sharp, dry, and
invigorating. It is very rarely accompanied with
fogs. Throughout the Hot Months, the wind
during the day and earlier part of the night blows
strongly from the West; and is so dry and fiery,
that it parches up the whole country. The Rains
set in late, and though sometimes vehement
whilst they last, are of shorter duration.
The changes which have taken place in the
course and succession of the Seasons within the
last few years in every part of Bengal, and its
dependencies, have been so striking, as to have
not merely attracted the notice of attentive
observers, but to have become a frequent topick
of common conversation. In noting the nature
of these deviations, it will be necessary to begin
pretty far back.
In the year 1815, a rainy season, marked by
an excessive fall of rain, great inundations, and
the bursting of the Ganges, Soane, and Coossee
rivers from their beds; was succeeded by a damp,
unpleasant cold weather, with unusually fre*
quent dense fogs in December and January,


The following hot weather was remarkable,
for the late and scanty appearance of the usual
thunderstorms; and consequent great heats: and
drought. Although several North Westers oc-
curred during April and May, they were very
partial in extent; and generally unaccompanied
with rain. On the Isth of April 1816, a little
before midday, a shock of an earthquake was
felt in Calcutta. Towards the end of May, the
weather had become so oppressive, that the
Thermometer sometimes rose as high as , 98; an
unusual height in Bengal; and many individuals,
both Europeans and Natives, dropped down dead
in the streets.
Much the same kind of weather was experien-
ced in the Upper Provinces. A severe Cold Sea-
son, followed by excessive drought, gave rise to
great sickness amongst the Natives ; and by des-'
troying the spring (JRubbee) crop of grain, prepar-'
ed for the succeeding general scarcity.
In the Lower Provinces the dreadful sultry
weather continued until the 14th of June, when
the rains commenced. They kept up moderate-
ly in Calcutta and its vicinity, during the latter
part of June, and the whole of July. A second
shock of an earthquake was on the night, of the


11th July, felt slightly at the Presidency, and
more perceptibly at Moorshedabad. Towards the
latter part of August, and the beginning of Sep-
tember, the rain became exceedingly scanty, and
the days and nights oppressively hot in Calcutta ;
and in the western parts of the province of Ben-
gal, the drought was so uncommon, as to dry up
the rivers, and give rise to apprehensions for the
safety of the rice crop. Then, about the end of
the first week of September, this unwonted
drought gave way, and was succeeded by very
heavy rain, which lasted all the month, and can*
sed a greater and more general inundation than
had occurred within the recollection of the oldest
inhabitants.
. The effect of these sudden and unusual
extfigffles, was very discernible in the unwhole-
some condition nf the atmosphere then present;
and in the hind pf the prevailing complaints.
Instead of acute dysentery, and the other in-
flammatory diseases generally predominant at
thi? period, it was remarked by the medical men,
that the only cases falling under their notice
were low fevers, and -other disorders of tfe ty-
phoid type. Qf this a remarkable proof was ex-
hibited in -the ppeyrrence of infectious Malignant
Sore Throat: a disease previously known only by
name in this quarter of the globe.


In the Upper Provinces, the extraordinary
scantiness of the Rairis was yet more remarkable ;
and was attended by more deplorable results* In
the month of July a few showers fell; but they
were partial and of short continuance. More ge-
nerally, from Benares upwards,—Oude, the Dis-
tricts within the Dooab, and those west of the Jum-
na, were dried up by the long continued and un-
ceasing heats. The parching -westerly wind kept
blowing throughout August, and the first fort-
night of September. Not a shower fell; and sd
excessive was the heat, that tatties were in use at
Futtighur, Coel, and other stations, during the
whole of this period. Since 1803, the memorable
year of the commencement of Lord Lake’s cam-
paigns, nd such season had been experienced*
As in Calcutta, and about the same time, this long
period of drought was succeeded by heavy and
incessant rains for many days; and the whole
face of the country was laid undef waten.
It Was not to be expected, that So great d devi-*
ation from the common course of nature, and
such extraordinary and sudden extremes, should
prove wholesome to the human constitution*
Weaccordingly find, that the sickness, before
stated to have crept in amongst the had
how become general; and, before the end
b


of August, was raging epidemically in al-
most every town and city between Patna
and Saharunpore. It exhibited itself in
the shape of a bilious remittent fever, of a
violent inflammatory type; accompanied, like the
yellow fever of the West Indies, with suffusion of
the skin; and, unless when cut short in the com-
mencement by bleeding and other powerful auxi-
liaries, rapidly running its course ; and in spite of
every remedy, terminating fatally at the end of
two or three days.—The width of its range pre-
cluded the possibility of its being referred to any
causes purely local; and that it was not kept up
by infection alone, was proved by the indiscrimi-
nate nature of its attacks. It seized equally Eu-
ropeans and Natives; and as readily entered the
open and spacious house of the Officer and Civil
Servant, as the crowded barrack of the Soldier,
or low filthy hovel of the Native. —The mortali-
ty produced by it in Delhi, Saharunpore, Futti-
ghur, Benares, and other large Cities, was very
great. In Delhi, of two Natives Corps alone, there
were five hundred men at once sick in Hospital.
In Dinapore, and at Ramnuggur, the troops suf-
fered severely. .Of the European Flank Battalion,
64)8 strong, stationed at Allahabad, 305 men
were attacked during October; early in Novem-
ber there were at one time 180 rank and file, and
twenty women and children, on the sick list j and


in the whole, only 70 men of the seven Compa-
nies of which the Corps consisted, escaped the
disease. But Cawnpore was the principal seat of
its ravages, amongst Europeans.—Offour King’s
Corps, the 24th Regiment of Light Dragoons,
735 strong, and the 14th, 66th and 87th Regi-
ments of Foot, 852, 813 and 702 strong, then in
cantonments, there were from first to last nearly
1000 persons taken ill.—The disease here began
in August, prevailed during the three succeeding
months, and did not finally withdraw until the
Setting in of the Cold Weather in December. It
was at its height in September and October.
Eight or ten, and sometimes even fifteen men,
then died daily. The 87th and 66th Regiments
suffered dreadfully. ' From the time of their
reaching the station they lost nearly four hun-
dred men. The former corps is stated to have
had 519 in Hospital at once; to have buried 21
persons (including women and children) in one
day, and upwards of Q 0 of its number within a
month. This is a degree of mortality, far exceed-
ing any thing then on record in the medical an-
hals of Bengal.
The effects produced by so unparalleled a state
of sickness will be best understood, from the fol-
lowing description written at the moment. “ The
stations chiefly affected wore a gloom, hardly to
h 2


be conceived at the commencement of the Cold
Season. Every family was suffering in some of
its members. All social intercourse was inter-
rupted; and the only communication betweeq
separate families, consisted in visits of condolence
and consolation. Of numerous Native villages,
nearly the whole population was ill at one and
the same moment; and many of the shops were
shut for want of people to attend them. The
banks of the river were covered at all times with
the dead and the dying: such had been the ravages
of this dire distemper.—” It has been stated, that
the disease abated in December. So early as
the end of November, its attacks had become less
frequent, and its symptoms milder; but relapses
were still common; and it was very difficult to
counteract the extreme debility invariably conse-
quent on the atttack,
A similar mortality, preceded by great scarcity
of grain, prevailed about the same time in Cutch,
Sindh, and the other States bordering on the wes-
tern'side of India. By the natives it was ascribed
to the plague, and said so to have'depopulated se-
veral cities, that the living were unable to bury
the dead.—Throughout Upper Hindostan, it was
observed that horned cattle were very sickly
at this period. Their bodies could be seen strew-
ed in vast, numbers in the pastures, by passing
travellers.


If it should be thought, that the general sick-
ness characterising this period has been too long
dwelt upon, as being differentia kind, and there-
fore unconnected with that marking the following
year; it must be remembered, that all that is at-
tempted to be proved in this essay, is the existence
of a distempered state of the air, in all probability
dependent on the irregularities of the season previ-
ously to the breaking out of the great Epidemick;
and, that it is only by the patient investigation of
minute details, we can hope to discover the causes
producing the difference in the vitious constitu-
tion of the succeeding years.
The ensuing Cold Season, both in the Lower and
Upper Provinces, was raw, damp, and unpleas-
ant ; and throughout cloudy, with frequent falls of
fain.
In Calcutta November was marked by unusu-
ally frequent fogs; succeeded by warm days, and
light variable winds. During the month there
were nine foggy mornings. Two days were clou-
dy ; the remainder clear.—-The Thermometer ge-
perally ranging between 70 and 77 at 10 A. M.
In December the same kind of weather prevail-,
cd.—There occurred sixteen foggy nights; on two
occasions five nights in succession.—The days were
still warm, and clear; with moderate breezes from
the North and West—Lange of the Thermome-
ter from 66 to 71,


The early and middle parts of January were
cool and pleasant, with fewer fogs than in the
former months.—The prevailing wind was nor-
therly, with more clear than cloudy days; and the
Thermometer stood much as in December.—Qn
the 28th, light winds chiefly from the South, with
very thick fogs, and sultry days, supervened, and
so continued the rest of the month.
The singular deviations from the ordinary
course of the seasons, which marked the remain-
Jng part of the year, now began ; and February
had much more the appearance of an autumnal,
than of a cold weather month; —for it commenc-
ed raining heavily on the night of the Ist ; and so
continued every third or fourth day till the end of
the month. A reference to the annexed Tables
will shew, that it rained excessively on the Ist, 2nd,
4th, 11th, 18th, 20th, 21st and 22nd. The're-
remainder of the month was cloudy; with high
winds from the North and East. There were
two foggy mornings.—The Thermometer fluc-
tuating from 67 to 7 3.
March differed from the preceding month,-
only in the frequency of thunder storms, during
nearly its whole course. Much, and very heavy
rain, still continued to fall; and there was a con-
stant alternation of cloudy and clear weather,


with winds varying greatly in strength, and latter-
ly almost always from the South. On the 21st,
there was an exceedingly violent thunder and
hail storm, followed by torrents of rain; which
greatly injured the spring grain crop, and the
new sown Indigo lands, and destroyed the blos-
som of the Mango, and all other fruit trees then
in bloom.*—The air, though cool, was raw and
unpleasant.—Thermometer from 68 to 82.
*The same kind of weather obtained during the whole
of the season all over this side of India; and from
Loodianah to the Presidency there was scarce a district
or village in which the prospects of the (llttbhee) har-
vest were not blasted by heavy falls of rain, and long
continued humidity of the atmosphere.—The following
extracts from a meteorological journal kept during
a journey by water from Allahabad ,to Calcutta, will
shew, that theJVliddle Provinces by no means escap-
ed the general dreariness of the season.—February
4th, Jumna Ghaut, Allahabad. Morning cold and misty:
wind South East. Temp. 55 at sun-rise, 71 at 2 P. M.—
OIF Benares. 9th, little wind easterly and cloudy.—-1 1 th,
above Ghazeepore.—Wind fresh from the East; day
gloomy, cloudy, raw, and uncomfortable.—l2th, Ghazee-
pore. Morning misty, raw and cold; day close and
cloudy; little wind, chiefly from the South. —l3th,
Buxar. Very little wind, variable. Temp, becoming
higher; at sunrise 63, at SP. M. 76; slight exertion pro-
duces perspiration.— 14 th, strong wind veering from
North East to North West; much rain.—lsth, a great
deal of rain during the last evening and night, which


There wds nothing remarkable in tlie diseases
of this period.—Europeans and Natives were now
generally uncommonly healthy.—Among the for-
mer, chronic dysentery and rheumatism, tvere
the prevailing complaints: on the SOtb, however,
an European soldier belonging to His Majesty’s
59th Regiment, then in Garrison at Fort Willi-
am, was attacked by Cholera Morbus, and. in
spite of every remedy, died in thirty-six hours.
April was generally cloudy, with strong sou-
therly winds, and frequent thunder storms and
North Westers; in this resembling the regular
appearances of other seasons more than any pre-
ceding month.—On the 18th there was a heavy
were very disagreeable* Now cloudy with little wind.— ■
16th, morning foggy, cold and raw; wind N. N. East.
—lBth, Dinapore. Lightning, thunder and rain yester-
day evening; now cloudy and calm.—l9th, Patna,
llainy, stormy, raw, and cold; Temp. 61 at sun-rise,
66 at 3 P. M. ; wind E. N. E. —2oth, Violent wind and
much rain; cloudy and cold.—23d, Monghyr. Thun-
der, lightning, and rain.—2slh. Cold, raw, wind from
North East.—26th, Raj amah cl, llainy, cold, and disa-
greeable; wind South East.—March 2d. Muttabhunga.
Rained incessantly since six this morning; day very
cold, gloomy and raw; wind fresh, South East.—sd.
Rained and blew all night; cloudy and disagreeable.—
4th. Morning foggy; Temp: 66.—5th. Morning foggy
and raw.


fall of rain ; and'from that'time to the end of the
month, the air was dry, and mostly clear. The
•Weather was uncommonly cool till the 27 th: the
Thermometer not having once risen higher than
85. Qn the 27th' the heat was 91 > and it kept
up to nearly the same point during the. three fol-
lowing days. A few cases of fever occurred, es-
pecially among new comers, about the middle of
the month; but generally there was yet very-
little disease in the Settlement.
The first week of May was hot; sometimes
with little wind. -On the 3rd there was a strong
gale, with rain from the East; on the sth a North-
wester ; and on the 6th more rain.—During the
two following weeks nothing extraordinary oc-
curred; the Southerly winds kept blowing mo-
derately, with frequent showers.—On the 17tli
there was a strong gale, with rain from the South
East; followed by cloudy Weather, which brought
bn a severe Northwester in the evening of the
21th. Up to this period the air w r as cooler than
usual to the feel; although the Thermometer
generally stood at 82 at sun-rise, and 90 at S
P.M.
On the 25th of this month, at least fifteen or
twenty days earlier than ordinary, the rains set
in ; and there was almost continual rain, with
variable muds, close weather, and heavy clouds
i


till its close.—As yet there was no interruption
to the previous healthiness of the city.—Slight
fevers, and bowel complaints filled up the sick
list; and hardly an instance of hepatitis came
under notice.
From the 4th of June to the close of the month,
there was scarcely a fair day; on many days the
rain poured incessantly in torrents ; and the sea-
son now began to be reckoned a very wet one.
The rivers became high, and the tanks were al-
ready filled with water.—The mornings got cool;
and the heat of the day moderate.—'Thermome-
ter ranging from 78 to 86; steady Southerly
winds, without storms or thunder and light-
ning. Fevers still continued to prevail moderate-
ly ; with dysentery, and now and then a case of
hepatitis.
In July there was hardly a dry day.—An im-
mense quantity of rain fell; and before the end
of the month the river was quite full, and the
country nearly under water.—The sky was almost
constantly cloudy; the atmosphere generally
cool and pleasant; at times close and sultry.—
Thermometrical range from 80 to 87; medium
heat 83:33; winds variable, generally mode-
rate. —The prevailing diseases, although still of
unusually limited extent, now became more se-
vere; requiring more active treatment than.be


fore.—To fever, hepatitis, and flux, acute rheu-
matism was now added, and proved rather trou-
blesome,
From the Ist to the 10th of August excessive-
ly heavy and almost incessant rain continued to
fall; on the Bth, 9th, 10th and 11th, it poured in
torrents, and without interruption.—The wea-
ther was generally cloudy and calm, with South
Easterly winds; temperature rarely higher than
85; often as low as 81.-—The middle of the
month was hot and oppressive; and the nights
sultry, and exceedingly disagreeable.—The Ther-
mometer then fluctuated between 81 and 87; and
there was little wind, generally South West.
From the 22d it rained every day, but except on
the 31st not very heavily, till the close of the
nionth; with variable winds, mostly from the
South and East,
Amongst Europeans the only complaints yet
noticed were slight fevers, severe cases of Dysen-
tery, and hepatitis; but the Natives now for the
first time began to suffer severely from the Epi-.
ffemic Cholera.
In the early part of September, the weather
continued close, sultry, and unsettled, with fre-
quent showers; but previously to the 7th the wa-
ter in the tanks had fallen nearly a foot: a clear
i 2


proof, that the general body of rain given out by
the clouds was now beginning to diminish. There
was much rain, with variable winds throughout
the remainder of the month.—From the 16th, al-
though the days kept hot, the mornings began to
get pleasant; and the atmosphere at times to be
freed from clouds ; so that in the middle and lat-
ter part, there were several clear days, with
bright sun, and consequent great evaporation.—
The mortality had now become exceedingly,
great, amongst the Natives, and was no doubt in-
creased by this, amongst other causes.* On the
28th there was a fog. At this period there was no
remarkable variation in the atmospherical heat.
The Thermometer ranged from 82 to 89 5 at sun-
rise it generally stood at 8 k
The usual endemial diseases, fever, flux, and
hepatitis, were this month rather common. The
fevers were generally slight, seldom needing the
lancet.—The dysenteries were, as is usual in hot
climates, mostly connected with-inflammation in;
the liver; and sometimes terminated in abscess
* Onthe 15th of this month the existence of the
Epidemick in Calcutta, was first officially brought to
the,’• notice of Government, in a letter from the Chief
Magistrate; and the disorder stated to be raging with
extreme violence, especially in the low part* of the
Town and Suburbs.


of that viscus, and consequent death.. Upon the
■whole it was observed, that in Calcutta, from the
commencement of the preceding hot season, un-
til the end of August, there was less sickness, es-
pecially amongst Europeans ; and that the symp-
toms of the disorders principally attacking them,
were milder, than during similar periods of many
preceding years.* Was this ascribablg to the
low temperature then generally prevalent; and
to the humid and cloudy state of the atmosphere
proving congenial to the European constitution,
from its approximation to the cold and raw
climate of European countries ?
' Several cases of Cholera occurred amongst
Europeans on the sth September; and from that
day forward, the disease became daily more fre-
quent.' Why it reached them, at this peculiar
moment, cannot be discovered from the most
accurate scrutiny of the meteorological observa-
tions for that period. From these it appears, that
the first three days of the month were cloudy,
with showers, and moderate breezes, from the
*How little the general health of the European inha-
bitants suffered, is proved by the returns of his Majesty’s
59th Regiment. This corps averaged throughout the year
582; its deaths were 16, or 1 in 36t; an exceedingly
small proportion, speaking favorably both of the climate
and of. the interior economy of the Regiment. Of the
deaths only two,were from Cholera. From this disease
however, they suffered severely next spring.


South East; and that from the 4th to the 14th,
the weather was constantly rainy; with fresh
gales from the same quarter. And the fluctua-
tions of the Barometer and Thermometer were
during the whole time so small, as scarcely to
deserve being noted down.
The weather kept unusually close, stagnating,
and oppressive, during the whole of October.
In the early part of the month, there was little
wand, generally from the South ; with an atmos-
phere sometimes cloudy, sometimes clear; fre-
quent showers, and occasional heavy falls of
rain: . the Thermometer ranging from 82 to
88. From the 9th to the 17th there was a glimpse
of fair weather, with light variable winds, and
mostly clear sky. Then, late on the day of the
17th, the wind changed round to the North
East; and blowing hard, brought from that quar-
ter a deluge of rain; which lasted without a
moment’s cessation for twenty-seven hours; again
filled the tanks ; and laid the face of the country
under water. The reduction caused in the
atmospherical temperature by this change was
sudden and great. , The Thermometer at once
fell from 87 to 71; and during the 18th and 19th
did not again get higher than 74. On the 19th
the wind returned to its usual station in the
South; and from that day forward to the end of


the;month, there was an unusually watery,
cloudy, atmosphere; with little rain : the
Ihennometer meanwhile ranging between 78
and 86; and the weather proving sultry and
disagreeable. Excepting that Cholera had be-
come more frequent, there was no remarkable
difference between the disorders of this and the
preceding months. Perhaps acute dysentery
and Rheumatism were more frequent.
The weather should now, according to the
common course of things, have become cool,
settled, and fair; but the continuance of a clou-
dy sky, and of unwonted humidity and
warmth in the air, and the frequent recurrence
of rain throughout the month of November,
proved, that the remainder of the year was to
proceed with the same strange unseasonableness,
and insalubrity, which marked the early parts of
its course. The wind getting round to the West,
a good deal of rain fell on the 4th and sth ; at-
tended by a considerable fall in the mercury.
The days were then pleasant, with variable
winds, and sky, till the 23d; when a storm
came on from the North West, and was followed
by a heavy fall of rain. The Thermometer,
which had hitherto ranged from 71 to 81, now
sunk several degrees ; and did not again go
beyond 74, during the remainder of the month.


The last week of the month was distinguishe'd
by very cloudy weather; with North Easterly
winds, rain on the 29th, and a thick fog
on the 30th.
Bilious fever, requiring bleeding, was common
in the early part, and intermittents in the end
of this month. Fluxes prevailed throughout;
and were sometimes severe. The diminution in
the atmospherical temperature, which took place
in the early part of the month, was probably the
occasion of the returning comparative healthi-
ness of the city, noticed at this period. On the
10th we find it stated, in a publick letter from
the Medical Board to Government, that the
Epidemick was beginning to give way to the
favorable change in the season; and the official
returns shew, that the disease, from that time
until the middle of the succeeding February,
although still alive, was in a very languishing
state.
Before proceeding further in this sketchy it
will be useful to advert shortly to the state of the
weather during the foregoing period, in the
other districts of Bengal, and in Upper lndia ; in
order that we may see, whether in them the
regular procession of the seasons was equally
interrupted, as in Calcutta, and its immediate
vicinity.


In the districts of Jessore, Backergunge,
Nuddeea, and every other portion of the Gange-
tic Delta, there had been a long protraction of
very heavy rain; and nearly the whole country,
especially in the lower division of the province,
was one sheet of water before the middle of
August. In Nuddeea the whole year had been
rainy, and damp. Rain fell in eight different days
in February; and four in March. In every
week of April and May, there was a succession
of thunder storms and rain. The river began to
rise in May; much earlier than usual. The
Rainy Season was extraordinarily wet. Lakes
and tanks, which, in former seasons, remained dry
a great part of the year, soon filled; and kept so
for a long time. It was calculated, that in the
whole, 120 inches of -water fell. In the Eastern
division of Bengal, the season wore a different ap-
pearance. In the Dacca district, the rains were
confined to June, and the first ten days of July.
Hardly a drop of rain fell in August, and Sep-
tember ; usually very wet months. The inun-
dation from the river was four feet short of its
usual height. The same irregularity obtained in
Sylhet, and the other tracts washed by the tribu-
tary streams of the Burumpooter. From the end
of August not a single shower occurred till
the sth of October, when torrents poured.
k


In the Middle Provinces there was nothing
V
very peculiar in the progress of the Rains; but in
the districts of Cawnpore and of Bundlekund,
and generally throughout Upper India, they
were observed to be remarkably scanty.
We shall now return to the regular course of
our observations on the season at Calcutta.
Throughout December, it was clear, pleasant,
and cool weather; but warmer than it ought to
have been at that period of the year, Rain oc-
curred on the Ist; and fog on the 28th; and
the rest was serene. Winds generally Northerly,
and moderate Thermometer varying from 61
to 76. To the complaints of the preceding
month, were now added agues and diarrhoeas;
but they were not violent or numerous.
Of the succeeding year, January had an alter-
nation of cool and pleasant, with close and hot
weather; generally clear, with light Northerly
winds, It was foggy on the 11th, 20th and SOth;
and there was rain on the 17th and 31st. The
Thermometer ranged from 62 to 78. The dews
at night were very heavy, During the four last
days, the weather was warm; with Southerly
wind and cloudy sky—Nothing remarkable in
the complaints prevailing during the month.


The first part of February was cool and clear,
with moderate winds, chiefly from the North
and West; and frequent thick fogs. From the
19th the wind settled in the South; the Ther-
mometer rapidly rose from 70 to 80; and the
Hot Season might then be said to have set in.
On the 25th there was a North Wester ; and on
the 27th and 28th much rain. This sudden
change about the 20th of the month, is worthy
of particular notice; because it was at this very
time, that the Epidemick, after dying away in
November and December, and being nearly
extinct during January, again took head; and
amongst the Natives raged with indiscriminate
violence, until the end of the following July.
It now attacked Europeans and Natives with
equal readiness ; and as if it had gained fresh
malignancy, by lying for a time dormant, did
not so readily yield to medicine as before.
March, like its predecessor in the former year,
was marked by very uncertain and unseasonable
weather. Up to the 12th, the winds were variable.
Northerly, West and South Westerly; generally
moderate. The atmosphere partly clear; partly
cloudy and hazy; with much rain on the 4th }
sth, and night of the 6th ; and the temperature
mostly 70 at sun-rise, and 76 at noon. On the
I2th, the wind set in steadily from the South j
k 2


and at S o’clock of that day the mercury rose to
87. On the 15th there'was a thick fog; on the
17th fog; on the 18th, 19th, 20th, 21st, 22d,
23d, 26th, 27th, 28th, and 29th much rain;
with strong gales mostly from the South and
West. On the evening of the 28th, it blew a
hurricane from the same quarter. There was fog
on the mornings of the 25th, the 29th, and the
Slst; with Northerly wind during the latter day.
During this time the Thermometer fluctuated, at
sunrise between 74 and 80 ; at 3 P. M. between
80 and 88. There was much general sickness
in this period of great irregularity. Bowel
complaints were especially frequent. The Epi-
demick was now more common than ever
amongst Europeans; and fresh cases were
every hour pouring into the hospitals.
The early part of April, was cloudy, with fre-
quent strong gales from the South East; and
warm unpleasant weather.—There was a North
Wester on the 4th; the only one during
the month.—Rain fell on the 4th and 13tin
About the 15th the wind settled steadily in the
South; and blew hot from that time to the end
of the month.—The Thermometer fluctuated
between 80 and 89.—The diseases of this month
were generally mild; few fatal cases of Fever;
some of Dysentery. —The Epidemick had now
declined among Europeans.


There was a great deal of close hot weather
in May; ■ with Southerly winds and cloudy sky
throughout; and several storms, without rain
from the North West.—A shower or two fell
about the middle of the month; but these did
little to lessen the temperature of the air; and
the nights and mornings kept close and sultry,
with a foul, hazy, atmosphere.—The Thermo-
meter varying from 86 at sun-rise, to 92 at 3 P. M.
The prevailing complaints were much as in the
former month; except that acute Dysentery was
unusually frequent for the season of the year.
The rains set in early in June.—As the wea-
ther now began to get more steady and regular
in the vicinity of Calcutta; and as from this time
the seasons, after so long a period of extraor-
dinary deviation, seemed inclined to return to
their ordinary course ; and to abide by the laws
marking their natural progress and succession ;
the reader need no longer be harassed by a dry
detail of the varieties of each succeeding month.
It will be sufficient to state concisely their gene-
ral appearances; referring him for particulars
to the annexed Tables. The Rains were season-
able and pleasant.—An average quantity of rain
fell during June and July; in August and Sep-
tember the quantity was perhaps in excess.
But during the whole period, it was distributed
with much equality; so that there was neither


deluge, nor long continued drought.—Early iii
October the weather cleared up; and gradually
gave place to the Cold Season ; which was mild
in the beginning, moderate in the middle, and
unusually cold towards the conclusion. Then
came, rather suddenly, a fortnight of unexpect-
edly warm weather in February; succeeded by
a hot month of March, with frequent fogs, few
North Westers, and hardly any rain.—April was,
on the contrary, unusually cloudy; with frequent
storms, heavy rain, and strong gales from the
South East and North East; hot unpleasant
days, and cold chilly nights.—Thermometer
ranging from 76t0 86.-—The 7th, Bth, 11th, 17th,
18th, 19th, 21st, 22d, and 23d, were rainy days.
Very heavy falls on the 7th and 23d ; on the
22d constant rain. These details are entered
into, because this falling back of the weather to
its old irregularity, had an immediate effect in
reviving the Epidemick, both among Europeans
and Natives ; and led to serious apprehensions,
lest it were again about to run a new and fatal
course,, as it did after the short lull during the
Cold Weather of the preceding year.*—Many
cases, and some deaths, occurred during the first
twenty days of the month ; but the disease was
more tractable than during its former visits; and
again withdrew, as the month of May brought
round steady Southerly winds, and settled wea-
ther.
* The same unsteady weather and sudden vicissitudes


Of the preceding Rains it may be remarked,
that in every part of the Upper Provinces they
were much heavier, and generally set in earlier,
than for many years before.— In the Dooab, the
districts in the vicinity of Delhi, Jeypore and the
other Rajpootanah States, and in Nagpore and
the tracts bordering on the Nerbudda, they were
unusually violent; and continued long, with little
intermission. They at length, gave way to an
unusually severe, and healthy Cold Season; in
which the Thermometer, even as low down as
the northern extremity of Bengal, fell during
several nights to the freezing point; and for ma-
ny days in January did not rise higher than 37':
at eight in the morning: a degree of cold usually
quite unknown to that part of the Country.
This sketch of the Weather being now brought
to a conclusion, some apology may be necessa-
ry for its prolixity and minuteness of detail.—lt
might, indeed, have been wished, to make it less
pf temperature probably extended all over Bengal; aj
the Medical Returns, for this month, shew that the Epi-
demick was at this time, and during the preceding
month, on foot, in Sylhet, Mymensing, Dacca, Backer-
gunge, Cuttack, Balasore, Midnapore, Jungle •Mehauls,
Hoogly, Nuddeea, Bhaugulpore, Patna, Chunar, and
their respective neighbourhoods. At this period too, the
disease appeared at Hoshungabad, the head quarters of
the Nerbudda Field Force; and in Major Agnew’s
Camp near Ougein. ■


dry and tedious.—But it was only by entering
largely into particulars, and by minutely follow-
ing the successive variations of each period, and
thus affording the reader an opportunity of com-
paring them with the fluctuations in the healthi-
-ncss of those periods, that we could hope to trace
a connection between the generation of the pre-
vailing pestilence, and the preceding irregulari-
ties in the season. How far this has been suc-
cessfully done, must be left to the reader’s judg-
ment, when he shall have perused the account of
the rise of the Epidemick now about to be given.
—This, at least, he will not doubt, that there was
a remarkable coincidence between the extraordi-
nary irregularities manifested throughout India
in 1816 and 1817, andthe rise of the Epidemick;
and that its subsequent abatements and revivals.
Were in some measure dependent on correspond-
ing vicissitudes in the state of the Weather..


Register of the Weather in Calcutta, stating the height of the Barometer and Thermometer at 10 o'Clock A. M. •
From 1st Wa\ 1818, the observations are
1816
1817
noted at Noon.
18>8
Date
Barr.
Tlier.
| Winds, &c.
Barr.
Ther.
Winds, &c.
Barr.
Ther.
Winds, &c.
May
1
29:65
85
Mod. S. Clear, O
29:68
90
Mod. S. cloudy dry N. Wr.
Ditto ditto ditto.
2
65
85
7 i
85
Fresh,
70
87
S
71
85
Ditto ditto ditto.
■ 74
86
Strong ; cloudy : gale from E.
76
86
S. E.
4
64
85
Ditto ditto ditto.
77
82
Fresh,
77
85
Dry N. Wr.
5
62
86
Ditto ditto ditto, i
75
83
N. Wr.
70
86
O
6
64
86
Mod. S. and Clear,
78
82
Rain,.
60
87
Strong,
7
63
85
75
83
Mod. S. E.
65
87
8
65
87
Strong S*
73
84
s. a
6s
87
9
67
86
s.
70
S5
Clear.
65
88
Fresh,
10
11
64
52
85
87
s.
s. O
70
70
86
87
Light,
65
65
88
89
Light,
12
48
87
S. hazy,
69
88
Mod.
59
89
13
51
87
S. cloudy.
65
87
Fresh,
47
88
Var. >
14
58
87
Mod. S.
61
86
Strong,
50
86
Strong S. rain.
16
37
88
s.
51
87
Cloudy,
50
90
16
41
89
s.
47* 86
•
67
90
Rain,
17
47
89
s.
47
84
Fresh S. E. tain. gale from S.E.
48
89
18
SO
89
Strong S#
50
86
39
90
19
62
89
S. <[
53
83
Cloudy,
44
91
20
21
61
55
89
88
S.
S. slight rain.
57
59
S3
85
S. Clear, ,
Cloudy, •
51
50
90
90
Mod. 0
22
50
88
S. Cloudy,
69
86
Mod. var.
54
23
47
88
Mod. S.
65
86
SIB
24
55
68
S.
55
85
W, clear severe N. Wr. >
64
90
Barr, raised 0, 39
25
55
88
Light S. severe storm & rain.
54
86
Var. rain from W.
59
90
90
26
59
86
Var. Cloudy,
‘73
S3
Heavy rain.
65
27
* 60
’ 87
N. W. and rain, 9
69
86
Rain,
73
90
(f
28
54
86
Mod. S.
64
85
Cloudy,
N. Wr.
29
53
86
61
84
Much Tain,
79
69
Clear,
30
50
88
Rain.
62
82
Cloudy, Q
75
69
31
5 1
SO
57
82
Rain,
76
90
Cloudy.
Average.
29: 55
87
63 84 77
Moon <[ First quarter;
O Full; <t Last quarter; A
New.
Wob.m. ,• m r y u = C ° m l' a . r “ d « it !* the Meteorological Journals for 1784-5, published by Mr. Henry Trail in the Appendix to the 2d
\appear been h “nUw'vMrs* SoClety • alld lor ‘785-6 .published by Col. Pearse, in the 1st Volume of the same work : both of which


IS 16
1817
| 1818
Date
Barr.
Ther.
Winds, &c.
Barr.
Ther.
Winds, &c.
Barr.
I her.
Winds, &c.
June,
1
29:49
85
Light, var. cloudy,
>29:57
84
Mod. S. E. cloudy,
29: 7C
90
Mod. S. rain.
2
49
87
1 47
84
71
89
Cloudy,
5
, 50
86
N. Wr. >
53
86
Fresh,
. 67
88
Rain, .
4
48
88
55
8G
Mod. rain,
69
83
Cloudy, ®
£
41
90
S.
54
87
€5
88
Fresh, rain.
6
43
90
Fresh S. E.
44
87
Fresh,
G
67
£6
S. E.
7
43
91
33
86
N. E. much rain,
€6
86
Cloudy,
8
46
90
Strong S.
39
83
E.
73
90
Strong S*
9
39
91
Storm and rain from N. W.
47
82
80
91
Heavy rain,
10
40
89
Mod. S. cloudy Q
44
80
84
87
Cloudy,
11
58
£9
Fresh,
40
82
Mod. S. rain,
79
90
12
45
89
Strong,
38
S3
74
90
3
13
49
90
59
85
Cloudy,
72
90
Clear,
14
53
89
Var. rain from W.
39
85
Var.
69
91
Heavy rain and N. Wr.
15
55
87
Fresh S. cloudy.
56
84
Rain,
@
67
87
Fresh, cloudy.
16
49
87
Mod. var.
52
84
Much rain,
64
88
Rain N. Wr.
17
46
88
S.
28
81
70
87
Cloudy,
18
52
88
G
35
79
Fresh S.
63
87
Rain, O
19
51
87
Var. rain,
50
80
Rain,
60
86
20
45
87
Very cloudy,
60
83
59
84
Heavy rain,
21
37
87
Fresh N. E.and rain.
61 1 84
Strong, clouds,
Cl
83
22
34
85
E.
52
85
)
i ?1
83
23
30
84
50
85
64
82
24
42
80
Light,
44
86
Rain,
66
84
Cloudy,
25
51
83
Fresh S. Q
37
83
Much rain.
63
84
Clear, g
26
60
85
Strong, cloudy,
27
83
Fresh,
. 58
88
Cloudy,
27
56
85
Rain,
57
83
Rain,
64
87
Mod. rain,
28
50
84
Cloudy,
45
83
Much rain,
67
87
29
43
84
Very strong&rainfromN.W. 1
45
82
Rain,
o
51
85
30
36
84
48
84
55
86
\ Average.
...
99: 45
B6: ye
so : ■ «
83 S 63
JO t Gti
87 : OO
' '


- / . 1816
1817
1818
Date
Barr.
Tlier
Winds, &c.
Barr.
Ther.
Winds, &c.
Barr.
Ther v
Winds, &c.
July
1
29;34
84
Fresh, S. cloudy & rain, fog in
29
; 52
85
Fresh, S. cloudy,
-
29:56
86
Mod, S. cloudy,
f
41
S3
Light, ram, ’ [night.
(S. E. slight rain, ■ )
51
48
84
83
S. W.
Heavy rain,
SO
56
85
85
Rain,
Cloudy, ®
43
85
Fresh E.
43
81
Mod. var. much rain,
54
84
Fresh, S. W. heavy rainy
<;
35
84
N.E.
46
82
52
81
Strong, W.
e
41
S4
E. . -
65
84
Cloudy,
d
48
82
S. W.
7
44
85
Mod. S. E.
53
81
Fresh, S.
41
80
3
37
85
47
80
Mod. var. much rain,
£8
81
Var.
9
54
85
Light, cloudy,. Q
41
83
Light, clear,
65
83
Cloudy,
10
25
85
Fresh, N. W. much rain,
46
84
Cloudy,
50
82
Mod. much rain,
11
16
82
Strong,
49
84
Mod. S. rain,
39
82
Fresh, S. cloudy, "i
12
12
81
Mod. S. E. rain,
47
82
Much rain.
54
81
Strong, rain,
13
32
81
41
83
Rain,
67
84
Fresh,
14
40
82
Cloudy,
44
85-,
Fresh, S. E. cloudy,
O
73
81
Mod.
15
48
82
Ilain,
39
84
'
75
84
Cloudy,
16
38
83
Light, var.
34
85
Rain,
7 1
85
Fresh, clear,
17
33
83
Mod. S. £
28
85
E.
78
85
18
35
82
24
. 85
84
86
o
19
42
82
21
85
Strong, much rain,
83
87
Cloudy,
20
46
82
40
82
Fresh, rain,
75
87
Rain,
21
49
85
Light, rain,
56
85
N. E. much rain,
)
67
86
«)0
50
84*
37
. 85
CO
85
Cloudy,!
42
83
Rain,
38
85
70
85
£4
45
82,
Much rain,'.,,
31
85
S E.
ct
87
Mod.
25
44
81'
' ©
30
84
S. W.
j 6C
85
£
26
57
so;
Strong S. W.
35
84
Mod. cloudy,
*
Var. rain,
27
42
82'
S. light, rain.
35
85
Rain.
i 70
■ 87
23
45
83
Cloudy,
57
85
O
65
86
29
43
■84
Rain,
55
85
60
8 4
Cloudy,
30
46
85
Mod. heavy rain,
29
84
Cloudy,
31
52
81 ,
Fresh rain, )
39
84
Var. rain,
80
so
Average.
29:39
82 9
29
39
83 83
84


-
1816
1817
1818
Date
Barr.
Tlier.
. Winds, &c.
Barr.
Ther.
Winds, &c.
Barr.
Ther.
Winds, &c.
August. ....
r
29:51
83
Light, S. cloudy.
29:31
84
Fresh, N. cloudy, |
29 81
86
Mod. S. cloudy,
2
44
84
Fresh,
23
84
S. rain,
71
86
9
' 3
47
83
Light, S. E. slight rain,
44
85
Mod. cloudy,
65
82
Fresh, var. rain,
4
47
83
53
85
S. E. rain.
65
86
Rain, -
5
43
83
Cloudy,
52
85
<[
75
84
Mod.
6
45
84
Fresh rain.
50
84
Slight rain,
74
86
Light, cloudy,
7
36
84
E.
56
84
Cloudy,
67
87
Mod. var. rain,
: s
35
84
0
58
81
Much rain.
64
86
9
33
84
64
83
Fresh,
»
10
40
84
60
81
(Strong, S. W.
■U
46
85
Light, .
56
80
12
48
84
N.E.
55
81
Rain,
\3
So
85
E.
53
85
w. 9
,14
SO
84,.
53
84
Cloudy,
15
46
82
Fresh, S. E.. heavy rain,
S3
85
NT. W.rain,
16
46
82
3. <[
58
85
Mod. W.
0
17
SO
84
61
86
Light, clear.
IS
5.1
84
Mod. S. E.
58
87
Rain,
19
£2
84
Rain,
63
85
)
20
,49
84
Light, slight rain.
65
87
Mod. S. W. clear.
Mod. var. rain.
21
47
85
Cloudy,
61
87
Fresh, S.
SO
86
3. W.
22
45
85
57
87
Mod.
61
86
S.
23
44
87
„ , 0
55
87
3. E. rain,
68
84
4
24
39
86
rresn, fc>. W. rain,
SO
86
E.
66
86
3. W.
23
37
84
S. E.
48
86
67
85
3.
26
41
84
[Light, variable.
51
85
63
85
Cloudy, .
27
45
85
Cloudy,
S3
85
S. E. Q
58
86
Fresh rain.
28
. 52
85
vv.
37
86
3. W.
66
85
Mod. rain.
29
, . 56
. 86
ai
85
Var.
75
86
3. W.
30
54
86
S. W. >
36
85
S. E.
75
84
S. E.
31
48
87
Mod.
41
84
Much rain,
75
«S
Fresh.. O
Average. ,
.. 29:45
84:32
29:50
84:57
‘


1 1
1 i
1 L
i
; 1816
1817
1818
■' Date
Barr.
Ther.
Winds, &c.
Barr.
Ther.
| Winds, &c.
Barr.
Ther.
Winds, &c
September.
1.
29:4s
87
Light, S: Yf: clear,
29:43
84
[Mod. S. E., eloudy,
29:73
85
Mod. S. E. rain,
i 2
47
1 88
Fresh, W. Hazy,
41
■ 85
Rain,
76
86
Fresh, much tain,
i
13
: si
. 89.
Mod. cloudy,
! 27
87
Cloudy,
.
72
82
j
r
; ss
: 68
S. W.
55
86
Strong rain,
€
66
84
s.
i
3
i- 59
i 88
Heavy rain from, E.
, 37
85
66
82
\
*6
57
87
S. rain, /
■G
40
85
Fresh,
76
83
S, E.
i
7
S3
84
Fresh,
47
84
79
83
Cloudy,
>
la
57
84
E. much rain,
55
84
Much rain,'
71
85
Rain,
(9
60
84
Mod., rain.
61
' 84
83
1
!°
6 3
84
S. E.
67
85
64
i 82
Strong. B. W. much -rain,
1
ii
61
84
Var. much rain,
63
85
Rain, ’ .
72
82
Fresh, cloudy.
12
56
85
E. rain, • ‘
61
85
Much rain.
I?
53
85
62
80
: 86
84
S. rain,
14
i 50
85
Fresh, much rain,
61
83
Light, cloudy,
; so
85
f9
15
47
84
Rain,
<
59
84
78
S3
S. E. much rain,
ie
: 56
84
Heavy rpin, '
56
85
N. deaf,
86
84
[Clear,
•
17
*7
84
Cloudy,
57
86
Var. rajn, : *
88
85
Ram,
|
18
<58
84
Heavy rain,
67
86
Cloudy,
Rain, '
J
86
84 .
Mod. cloudy.
I
IS
67
84
N. E.
76
87
82
85
E. '
1
EO
72
83
Clear,
76
85
Mod. heavy rain.
J?5
85
S. rain.
El
74
84
*
74
85 :
S. E. clnudv,
87
85
Cloudy, fog.
22
: 74
; 84
79
85
S. W. dear.
84
85
c
i 68
: 85
S. E. , cloudy,
83
85
Fresh,
83
84
Heavy rain,
p4
i 63
, .82
Mod. £. constant rain,
76
84
77
84
E. rain,
PS
; 61
80,
Much rain, ' •
75
. 85
Strong, -S.E. very, heavy rain
78
84
fee
' 65
80
Freeh S. £. tain,
74
81
Fresh, S. dear, 1
to
74
. 84
Cloudy, -
27
66
62
8f
80
Var. cloudy,
73
85
; , ■
28
67
.81
;
)
7t
84
Light, clear, fog.
;7R
85
S. E.
39
30
57
62
• 81
81
Heavy rain,
Strong. S. W.
79
75
85
86
Rain,
80
84
86
84
E. rain, -
Much rain.
o
Average* -
- 29; 60 84: ig:
29: 62
84:56
i
84:06


1816
....
. 181,7.
18I8 :
Date
Barr.
Tiier.
Winds, &c.
Barr.
Ther.|
Winds, &c.
Barr. jTher.
Winds, &c.
October. ...
i
29J66
81
Light, El cloudy.
29:78
85
Mod. vaivraiu,
29J76
79
Fresh, S. W. much raia.
2
70
82
S, W. rain, fog.
81
85
76
82
S. rain,
5
7?
82
W. clear.
79
85
Fresh, S.
2
78
82
S. E. cfoudv.
> 4
76
S3
Fresh,-
76
83
S. E. much rain,
Strong, Sr clear,
5
79
85
Mod.
75
82
Mod. dear;-
80
84
Fresh, cloudy, ,
G
77
85
N. W.
o
80
84
3.
S3
S5
1
■ 77
85
VV. cloudy,
SO
86
*
7*f
86
Mod; S. W. clear; ■ )
f
7.4
as
N. W. clear.
75
86
Fresh,
81
86
<,
74
86
W.
.75
86
Bain,
10
74
8 -6
77
85
Mod. clear,
<0
,vi
76
86
Light, N,. W.
81
85
Light, vtir.
12
85
, 85
78
86
13
89
85
Fog.
7,9
86
14
93
»4|
<1
82
86
o
IS
93
85:
W. cloudy.
85
86
3. I?.-
16
88
84
s. w.
83
£6
Fresh S. cloudy; '
17
84
85
80
84
Rain,
)
fl.8
83
85
Clear, -
55
71
Hard, N. E. much rain,
19
84
’ 83
\V. cloudy.
62
74
Fresh, S'.'cloudy,
Mod. N. W. deir,
2<j
82
85;
Variable,
83
So
Mod. var.
94
85
N.
j
2t
7$
83
Mod, N. E.
• '
75
80
S. W.
91
, 85
24
82
82'
Fresh, Nj
75
81
Var. clear, •
<L
2.3
82
81
15
81
IV. W.
93
.85
1
34
83
81:
15
£2
95
83
25
87
81
C)eaf,
74
82
o
N. E. cloudy,.
26
90
79
Mod. n; w.
73
85
S. W. cloudy.
30:05
85
2:
'
79
Fresh,
80
85
03
' 86
‘ ' . .....
2f
91
78
J
. 78
86
29:97
. 86
2J. ;
- *1)
78
•
81
8-5-
S: rahr, 1 '... .
99
" 85
e
30
90
78
Mod. cloudy,
.'i
74
86
Cloudy,
95
84
Fresh,
51
92
79
7P
84
50 :oo
82
,
\ Averse.
...
39 *.*3
sa: a«
29£.7t>.
83MR


”
(
J
, \
1816 ■
r~-; .
•
;— 1817 ■"
■ ; n
• ’• !
;. f '
1815
Date
iarr."
ther.
- Wiiuls, &c.
Barr.
Ther.
Winds, Ac.
Barr,
Ther. |
Winds,. &c.
>
ovembcr.
rl
29: 90
78
Light, N. VV. clear,
29; 79
84
Modi’ S. cloudy.
29:97
83
Mod. N, E. clear, 1
■2
94
. 80'
\V: cloudy,
77
81
N. W. clear, 4
94
82
X.
13
98
79
Mod. S. W. dear,
81
82
VV. cloudy,
96
82 ,
4
95
78
; 77
: 81
Rain,
94
82 ,
Var. fog.
5
89
! 7 9
X. W. o
74
80.
90
86 I
N. clear, )
6
85
; 77
89
78
Fresh, N. clear.
90
82
7
83
78
X.
9*
78
98
81
-8
87
76
Fresh, .
30:01
77
30:-04
80
j
y
37
75
29: 96
78
N.-E.-.- •
05
80
>!
1°
92
75
Cloudy,
8f
,78
02
81
Light, cloudy.
11
38
74
Clear,
8*
79 .
Light, var- cloudy,
08
82
12
81
74
Mod. variable;
8/.
79
Mod. N.
12
82
X. E.
13
77
■ 74
N; IV. fog, night <f
85
77
Clear,
06
81
o
14
87
75
Ditto,
80
75
Fresh,
04
81
X.-
15
> 92
74
8.
75
04
80
Fresh, clear,
1G
92
74
77
J
o-.
f 79
17
91
75
S. VV. fog.
8-3
76
Mod. VV.
0(
79
Light, var. cloudy.
IS
86
78
S, thick fog.
85
76
S. W.
0.6
81
10
90
78
F°S- , •
80
77
S. E. cloudy.
10
80
N. clear.
20
92
77
7!
77
00
78
21
88
77
•
73
77
00
77
Fresh, C
23
93
77
75
7G
0(
77
2,3
98
76
S. W. fog.
74
77
Fresh var. N, VV. much rain,
03
76
24
97
75
X. vv.
81
73
N. E. clear, Q
oo
’77
25
90
74
88
71
X. VV.
29: 98
76
2(
S2
74
)
8C
70
X. E. cloudy.
30:02
75
*7
..90
73 a
Fresh, N. E,.
i 8
69
02
75
2;
87
69
1 8-'
70
■ *i-'
01
75
’
8;-
: es
X. VV.
I 80
74
Mod. rain and thick fog.
03
74
Light,
-30
so
69
VV. fog.
1 80
74
00
75
I Hazy,
Avniffe.
...
29:89
75: 3.3
29; 82 76:53
30 : l
79;
3


ISIS ;
1817
1 v _ ... ,
1818
Date
Barr.
Ther.
Winds, &c.
Barr,
Ther.
Winds, &c.
Barr.
Ther.
Winds, &e.
December.
.1
29: 90
69
Mod. W. clear, fog.
'29:87
74
Mod. S. E. rain.
50: 05
Light, N. clear,
2
88
71
Light,
88
73
N. E. cloud}',
i
06
76
Var. hazy, fog.
5
90
69
87
73
N. W. clear.
05
77
4
97
71
88
71
Fresh,
00
76
Clear, fog,
b
6
97
■ 94
71
71
Mod. N. W.
o
90
88
70
70
*29; 98
50:00
77
77
Hazy,
)
7
8
99
50: 03
70
70
Fresh, N.
90
88
70
71
Mod. var.
«
29: 98
80
Cloudy,
9
29:96
69
86
71
N.
93
78
10
92
■70
89
72
50: 05
75
Mod. N. clear.
1 1
95
69
Light, JN. W.Iightcloudsand
90
71
04
75
Fresh,
12
13
14
15
04
92
90
: 86
68
69
67
66
Mod.
Fresh, N. clear,
[fog.
91
91
90
93
70
70
70
70
Fresh,
Mod. N. E. cloudy,
}
01
05
05
08
77
75
72
Mod. cloudy,
S. cloudy,
O
16
17
80
86
66
67
Mod. variable, fog.
95
■ 95
69 ■
70 ;
Light, clear.
08
70
Fresh, N. W. clear,
18
91
67
N. W. '
95
67
Fresh, N. '
08
70
19
91
67
S. W.
•
95
65
06
70
\
20
90
68
. 95
65
21
22
23
i 96
90
as
68
68
68
w.
* 96
95
90
65
67.
68
Light,
0
02
on
07
71
71
71
Mod. Hazy,
€
24
95
69
Fog. ..... ......
88
69
08
72
Clear,
25
26
96
94
69
69
N. W.
)
86
93
70
69
15
■ 1G
71
72
Cloudy,
27
28
29
87
90
98
67
69
68
N.
87
90
90
71
73
74
N. W.
W. fog.
19
19
. 10
72
73
72
Light, clear, fog.
Cloudy,
Mod.
•
31
98
93
67
CG
Fog.
96
81
74
71
N. W,
II
OS
71
72
Clear,
\ Aterage.
68**8
99: 90
70: 09
r. — . :


* s l ,
1
18U
1319
Date
Barr.
Tlier.
Winds, &c.
Barr. ;
Ther.
Winds, &c. j
Barr.
Ther.
Winds, &c.
January, ...
j,
1
2
5
•i
5
6
n
,8
3
29: 98
93
97
95
87
92
97
95
95
68
■59
67
. 68
69
67
68
68
68
Mod. N. clear, foe.
Cloudy, *
Clear,
Fresh, S. W. cloudy,
N. W. clear, '
N. ... :
Fog. ■ •
0
■
20:96
98
30:01
00
29:95
30: 00
29:95
: 94
. 90
70
68
67
67
. 60
69
69
■ • 68
70
Mod. N". W. clear.
Fresh. N.
Light, M. W.
i
9
30:06
02
29:99
96
97
97
50:00
29:98
97
71
73 '
72
73 .
73
73
70
67
Mod. N. clear, fog.
Var.
Cloudy, thick fog.
Fog.
Fresh,. N. clear.
}
10
98
68
Cloudy, ..
(
89
'rn
72
72 ;
n
•i °
50; 03
29: 97
30; 05
02
29:99
95
67
Clear,
.. 88
70
Foggy, r
86
C
13
14
15
10
67
65
65
65
88
93
97
92
87
70
72
71
70
70
Var.
Mod. N.
Cloudv,
>
88
94
95
72.
69
68:
Mod. ,var. fog.
Fresh,
N.
i
17
92
66
Cloudy,
•
so
69
Fresh, rain.
96
65
IS
19
20
21
22
25
92
50: oil
03 1
29:95
29:99
es
66
64
67
66
Cleary ,.
Mod. cloudy,
N. W. clear,
at
90
85
, 80
84
jS7
65
66
69
69
Cleir.’, ’
Foggy.
Light,
O
98
93
96
90
65
67
69
■65
f
Mod. var. cloudy,
N. clear,
<
92
68
Fresh, S. W. fog.
,8S
68
Fresh, N. E.
95
65
2-4
88
70
90
67
V. cloudy.
97
65
25
91
69
N. cloudy,
}
91
68
N. W,
20
27
96
98
69
68
Clear, 1
Mod. > .
94
I 94
67
68
Mod. var. cloudy,
S. E. clear.
94
97
: 69
69
Mod.
2$
95
69
S. W. cloudy, i
'■ 93
70
.30* m
29
95
72
Light, var. thick; fog.
92
72
<r
02
50
97
72
Fresh, S. ■;
; . 87
72
Cloudy, foggy,
02
70
51
96
72
Mod. thick fog. ■;
76
75
Kain,
Average.
•••
29:96
67:83
i
29:90
68:24


1H IT
ISIS
1S19
Date
Burr.
Ther
Winds, &c.
Barr.
Ther.
Winds, &r.
Barr.
Ther,
Winds, &c.
February....
'2
29:93
■ 75
Mod, & fog. hearv rain at Mij.
29:93
.63
Strong, N. W. clear,
Mod. N. clear.
o
85
7 5
Clomlv. heavy rain, O
92
66 '
50:03
71
Fresh, J
5
91
75
Fresli, E.
98
66
10
71
4
98
71
Much .rain.
96
66
09
74
Mod. var.-
5
30:01-
68
N'. Cloudy,
90
68
Mod. var. fog. 0
01
•74
Fog.
c
01
67
Clear,
90
71
S. W. cloudy.
01
' 73
7
00
es
88
73
W. '
N.
8
00
69
94
70
01
7 5
Fresh,
9
01
69
Mod. var. douJr, foj. a
i 92
70
Fresh, N. dear,
04
75
lo
29; 99
71
93
69
06
71
Var. O
II
94
, 71
Rain,
87
71
06
71
12
87
75
Cloudy,
84
71
Mod. var.
05
72
Mod.
\z
96
■ 7.3
S.
87
70
S. thick fog. )
OC
74
Fog.
11
91
■ 76
•
83
69
Cloudy,
29:93
76
Cloudy,
15
89
7-1
Fresh, E.
90
71
89
77-
Clear, thick, fog.
16
91
72
M. E. . 0 ,
92
73
Clear,
86
82
Fresh,
17
89
75
80
72
Var. fog.
90
80
18
86
75
S. W. heavy rain and wind.
68
71
Cloudy,
89
78
Cloudv, ([
19
84
71
N. clotidv,
67
73
S. clear, fog.
90
79
N.
20
GO
71
Mod. var. N. W. much rain,
■ 7 1
72
99
76
Clear,
21
80
71
Fresli rain, j
1 76
78
O
30 \05
75
22
70
70
Much rain.
■ 73
78
Fresh, clomlv, fog.
00
77
23
86
67
N. cloudy,
78
SO
Strong,
05
78
24
8.7
67
Mod. dear, j
74
so
Clear,
oo
81
Mod. S. g%
2*
sr
70
Cloudy,
77
80
Cloudy, N. W.
29:90
82
Fresh, cloudy,
2 6
87
72
80
79
98
80
27
‘ 86
70
Var,- -
- 84
79-
Heavy rain,
30:07
78
N. clear.
28
88
72
N.
85
77
Fresh var. rain, ([
00
77
Av^.rag“.
••
29:89 71: 2
29:84 72: IS


1
1817 - - -
-•
1818
i
. 1819
Date
Barr.
Ther.
Winds, &c.
Barr.
Ther.
Winds, &c.
Barr.
Ther.
■ Winds, &c.
March
i
29 '.86
73
Fresh, N. £. clear,
29:84
75
Fresh var. cloudy.
29:90
80
Fresh, S. clear,
g
80
75
Var. constant heavy
rain,
88
75
N. E.
91
82
Fog.
5
80
67
Much rain,
0
85
75
96
82
4
83
68
Mod. var. clear,'
85
7,"
Rain,
93
82
Mod.
)
3
84
. 69
S. W.
79
74
N. W.
89
84
6
87
72
Fresh,
SI
73
Char,
90
83
Light fog.
hr
4
8S
73
S.
86
74
W.
O
90
84
8
86
76
Cloudy;
sb
74
.S. W.
89
83
Mod. fog.
9
88
• 75
N. W. ' ■ '
80
78
Mod. hazy.
87
S3
10
78
77
Clear, N. W.
c
'77
75
£8
82
Var.
n
80
76
Mod. var.
?3
75
90
£4
12
84
77
S. cloudy, N. W.
69
78
Fresh, S. clear,
O
IS
'87
71
W.
74
79
94
84
S. cloudy.
H
90
76
S. W.
75
82
93
83
15
93
76
Fresh, N. dry, N. W
78
81
Cloudv, thick fog.
}
95
83
Strong,
16
91
75
Mod. N. W.
80
82
C(ear,
87
84
17
88
76
Fresh, S. clear.
81
81
Mod. fog.
89
84
18
80
78
Strong rain, N. W.
o
74
81
Huiu, S. E.
92
85
19
74
76
Var. much rain,
6G
81
Cloudy, storm of rain,
N.E.
96
83
N. W.
€
20
75
74
Fresh, S. E. clear.
74
82
Strong ditto,- N. W.
88
82
Clear,
21
80
77
Var. severe storm of
rain,
80
80
N. W. much rain,
81
S4
.
22
84
75
S. clear,
85
78
Ditto ditto,
0
83
83
Cloudy,
23
78
74
Mod. N. VV.
8G
80
Rain,
1 87
81
24
78
76
Fresh, S.
86
7D
Clear,
Fresh,
25
76
78
Cloudy,
85
SO
Cloudy,
90
85
26
70
80
Clear, N. W.
)
81
81
Mod. yar. rain,
86
86
Clear,
©
«7
70
81
Rain,
84
79
N. E.
79
86
Strong, cloudy,
28
76
78
Mod. cloudy.
70
81
Var. Gale fromS.W.& r a tn,
71
86
N. W.
29
73
78
Fresh, clear.
74
80
S. rain.
([
77
84
Clear,
SO
71
SO
Cloudy,
75
80
81
85
SI
80)
82 (Severe N. W.
. 81
82
Cloudy,
S3
S6
Average. .
. 29:81
75:14
29:79
78110
... ,


1317
ISIS
1819
Date
Barr.
Tlier.
Winds, &c.
jfiarr.
Ther,
Winds, &c.
Barr.
Ther.
Wind?, &c.
April.
......
i
23:83
80
Light, S. cloud}',
29:88
82
Mod. var. cloudy.
29:80
85
Fresh, S. clear,
o
73
81
W, clear,
6
89
85
E.
86
91
)
o
78
82
N. w. cloudy. N. W.
87
85
85
87
4
84
SI
W. clear.
80
84
N. W.
80
87
Strong,
5
84
85
82
82
Rain,
e
72
87
Cloudy,
G
77
84
S. hazy.
82
31
Fresh, cloudy.
85
87
7
70
h5
Mod.
88
80
Mod. var. dear,
93
84
Var. much rain,
S
7 2
84
Fresh, clear.
(T
83
85
Cloudy,
■ 95
80
Fresh,- S. rain.
9
68
84
83
81
S.
' 90
81
Cleaig
10
75
84
Strong clouds.
76
84
p i>sh,
84
84
Cloudy,
o
11
75
82
Clear, foggy,
74
83
Clear.
"8
85
Rnin,
12
71
84
Clouds, dry, N. W,
75
84
Var. cloudy, Gale, S. W.
88
83
Mod. cloudy,
\o
68
Clear,
73
79
Rain, ditto ditto,
87
85
Fresh,
14
68
82
73
80
Cloudv,
)
72
80
Strong,
1 b
67
83
Cloudy, N. W,
67
81
71
87
'
16
67
83
©
70
81
72
87
17
68
84
Fresh, clear,
67
85
Strong, S. ■
78
87
Rain, N. W.
c
IS
71
• 84
Mod. cloudy, sev. Thunder
75
8 1
90
85
Var.
19
77
84
Var. '
[storm,
71
85
90
83
20
81
Sev. N. W.
65
86
80
80
Mod. cloudv,
21
70
82
Fresh, S. clear.
53
! 86
o
79
86
Fresh, E. rain,
22
64
83
Strong.
63
86
77
82
Constant rain,
23
67
82
Hard, S. li. cloudy.
64
86
Clear,
60
78
Var. much rain,
24
60
84
Strong, S.
y
66
87
70
79
S. cloudy,
©
25
56
84
70
87
74
79
26
56
85
Hard,
69
86
Cloudy,
75
85
27
55
85
Mod. dear,
67
87
75
56
28
58
85
Fresh, cloudy,
63
88
80
86
Mod. S. E.
23
62
85
70
83
85
87
Fresh,
30
64
85
Clear.
-
71
87
76
88
S.
1 \vt
ra^e. .
.. 20:69
83; 7
30:73
83:29
29; 80
84:23


. Slate of the Thermometer in the Hospital 0/ His Majesty s
2 4th Light Dragoons, during the Month of Septem-
ber, 1817. ,
Cdtvnpore, lit October, 1817.
c
- -
Remabks.
c
•3
K
%»
<3
=5
4-
c
c?
1
84
90
90
Wind Easterly, sultry.
~ 2
- 85
92
90 ■
Ditto ditto.
5
84
92
so
Wind Westerly, ditto,
4
84
94
92
Ditto ditto,
S
84
92
90
Wind Easterly, ditto, ■
' c
86
94
92
Ditto dilto.
. 7
85
93
92
Ditto dilto.
; 8
85
93
92
Ditto ditto,
9
85
93
92
Ditto ditto.
10
. 84
92
92
Ditto ditto.
n
84
90
85
Wind Westerly, much rain in the
13
82
86
88
Wd.Ev. Coo!, some rain, [afternoon,
13
82
86
88
Ditto cloudy,
14
82
83
89
Ditto ditto.
15
82
90
89
Ditto clear.
16
84
92
92-
Ditto sultry.
17
86
94
93
Ditto ditto,
18
86
94
. 93
Ditto ditto.
19
86
96
93
Ditto ditto.
20
84
94
92
Ditto ditto.
21
85
95
92
Ditto ditto.
22
85
93
91
Ditto ditto.
23 '
84
91
90
Ditto ditto,
24
82
90
86
Wd. variable, afternoon rain,
25
82
90
' 88
Wd, Wv. afternoon, strong wind,
26
83
91
90
Dit£o : 8ultry, ;
27
83
90
89
Wd. Ey. ditto,
28
82
90
89
Ditto ditto.
29
82
91
90
Ditto ditto, [and rain.
30
83
93
83
Wd. Wv. ditto, afternoon Ey. Wd.;


State of the Tliermometer
24th Light. Dragoom
1817.
Camp,
DOAB. 1
in the Hospital of His
, during the Month of October,
Jnvhvan, 1st November, If? 17.
c
Q
c
o
Sumelt.
Remarks.. i
t «*
i
82
68
86
Wind Easterly, clear, ■
3
82
66
85
Ditto cloudy, .
J
80
86
83 •,
Ditto do. afternoon much rain.
4
•is
88
85
Ditta ditto few drops.
5
79
88
86
Ditto ditto,-; ;
6
80
89
S3
Ditto forenoon littlft.rain.
7
80
88 :
86 .
Do. afternoon cloudy,littlerain,
S
79 .
90
83
Ditto clear and sultry.
3
9
76
89
: 83
Wind Westerly, ditto ditto,
5
10
77
90
SS
Ditto ditto.
U
76
92 -
9,0
Ditto ditto,
•H
12
76
93
90
Ditto ditto,.
13
78
94
91
Ditto ditto,.
H
78
91
90
Ditto ditto,
15
79
' 93
91
Ditto ditto.
16
•79
89
88
Ditto ditto.
*
17
78
90
88
Ditto ditto.
i
18
78
91
89
Ditto ditto, 1
19
77
! 83
86
Wind-.Easterly, strong.
20
76
89
86
Ditto sultry’.
.2
21
75
' 92
90
Wind Westerly and .hot.
22-
75
r 96
90
Ditto ditto,. i - ;
ej
23
75
' 98
96
Ditto ditto,,'
S
24
76
95
90
Ditto ditto,:
O
25
75
96
8S
Ditto ditto, ~
41
26
72
98
94
Ditto ditto.
3
27
63
98
83
Ditto ditto,-
4).
23
66,
99
89
Ditto ditto,-
29
64
99 '
89-
Ditto ditto," '
5
30
64
96
86
Ditto ditto, ' ' '
31
62
96
84
Ditto ditto.


/iuni)hkund~(lthlre' litntion'of tin Army.
>
Meteorological Table far Nmember, 1817* •
1}right of Thermometer.
■ i
!
<
i
.
Jfindt,
i
***
: ’A
I t!
■
. e
o
X
**
>
...
■~cr'
94 "
isT*
Westerl) bv N.
2
Cl
9,2
78
Ditto. ' ;
■ 3
sc
89
so ,
Ditto, ;
4
Si
S3
63
Ditto,
; 5
56
90
63
Ditto, i
6
SO
90
68
Ditto, j
. 7
4 5
90
63
Easterly, 1
, 8
47
88
63
W.byfc.,-1
9
50
87
68
Ditto, ■
JO
so
86
68
Ditto, ,. ■
. 11
so
84
68
Ditto,
i 12
Cl
84
68
Easterly, :
| 13
57
86
63
Ditto,-
! 14
SS
88
63 ■
Ditto,
i IS
56
90
63
Ditto, . , ’
i 16
68
90
68
South East,
17
66
68
GS'
W. by N. .,
18
5%
84
cs .
Ditto,
■ 19
62
84
66
Ditto, '
SO
60
84
63
Ditto, ,
. 21
52
SO
6*
Ditto,
22 .
53
84
.66
Ditto, , '
1 23
62, ■
“ SO
64
Ditto,
24
. 52
8-2
C8
D-Ittn,
15
44
82
66
DittOj
2S
52
02
62
Ditto,
27
£G
82
62
Emtcrly,
28
43
78
60
Ditto,
29
42
76
60
Ditto,
SO,
. 44
,76
60
Westerly.


| v Jiundleknnd ; Centre) Division of the' Army
' Meteorological Table for December, 1817.
Height of
Thermo-
- • — -
meter.
, ;
.... ' ’ ' i :
c
Winds, •
' Hbmabzs.
;
c
i
CO
8
CO
1 ■: - 1
R
*5
- ■ — ! --
I
46
78
SOjN. W. ;
2
46
78
52 Ditto,
3
46
78
G4!DittO,
4
46
78
62iDitto,
5
46
78
62|Westerly,
6
46
72
621 Ditto,
46 86
Gs'.Ditto,
8
46j86
60
Ditto,
Cloudy,
9
46 76
60
Ditto,
’
10
46 80
60
Ditto,
Clear.
ii
44|80.60
Ditto,
12
44
78
60
S. S. E.
13
46
82
62
Cloudy;
14
50
86
64
N. W. r
Ditto wind, high,
15
54
76
64
Ditto, .
16
48
72
58
N.
Clear, wiml'hlgh, "
17
41
70
54
N. W.
Ditto,
IB
40
72
54
Calm and serene,
19
38
73
56
Cloudy; ’
20
40
72
56
Ditto, '
31
40
74
58
Easterly, ■
Ditto, '
22
44
72
58
Slight shower in the afternoon.
23
54
70
58
Several showers din ing the night, ,
24
41
72
58
Heavy dev/ pud thick fog in the morning,
2*5
50
72
60
N. E.
Wind high, Thunder storm, (and rain,
26
58
70
68
{Showers nml wind various, evening Thunder,
27
60
74
68
N. W.
Thick fog & mild rain, evening heavy showers
28
62
64
61
Ditto ditto perfectly cloudy to near sun set.
29
47
68
54
Westerly, ;
Cloudy and wind various,. 1 I
30
44
70
62
Easterly,
Heavy dew this morning and some clouds, - }
31
46
72
58
North,
Clear. •


SECTION I.
RISE AND PROGRESS
OF THE
EPIDEMICK.
THE disease termed by Nosologists Cho-
lera Morbus, being in the higher latitudes
chiefly confined to the latter part of Summer,
and the beginning of Autumn; and manifestly
originating in the great heats peculiar to that
period of the year; it might have been expected
to occur commonly in countries placed within
the tropics—-It’ has accordingly been founds
that a disorder, possessing the principal charac-
teristics of that disease, has prevailed more or
less endemically, during the Hot and Rainy Sea-
sons of every successive year, in the Lower Pro-
vinces of Hindostan.
Previously, however, to the year 1817, when
for the first time within the memory of man, the
A


disease assumed the epidemical form; the
sphere of its influence was very limited, and its
destructive effects inconsiderable. Its attacks
were chiefly limited to the lower classes of the
inhabitants; whose constitutions had been debi.
litated by poor, ungenerous diet, and by hard
labour in the sun; and who were badly
and frequently exposed in low and foul situations
to the cold and damp air of the night.—lt rarely
appeared in the dry and equable months of the
Cold and Hot Weather; and although cases were
now and then met with during every part of the
Rains, it always shewed itself in greatest vigour
towards the autumnal solstice; when the declina-
tionofthesun was still inconsiderable; when
the air was surcharged with moisture; and when
the alternations of atmospherical temperature
were sudden and frequent. As the Gold Season
came round, and brought with it, a clear atmos,
phere, and cool, dry and steady weather; the dis-
ease became of less frequent occurrence; and at
length altogether withdrew,—The better des-
criptions of Natives, those who werp well fed and
sufficiently clad, who ventured little into the sun,
and inhabited high, dry, and freely ventilated,
dwellings, were but liptlq subject to its influence;
and so rarely did it reach the European portion
of the community, that of two gentlemen in im-
mediate charge, one for ten and the other for
five years, of the Genera} Hospital for Europeans


at the Presidency, neither had seen a single case
of the disorder, until it occurred epidemically
throughout these Provinces!
The disease, which has been thus stated to be
endemical in Bengal; and to prevail more or less
during certain parts of each year; shewed itself
sooner, and was ( perhaps more common in the
first six months oflßl7, than in former years.—
The Rains, it has been seen, set in that season at
least a month earlier than usual} and from the
reports of the medical officers on the spot, Cho-
lera would seem to have occurred in an unusual
degree in some parts of Nuddeea and other dis-
tricts .in May and June. But as its attacks were
yet restricted to particular places, and not very
commonly fatal } it does not appear to have ex-
cited much attention, until the middle of Au-
j
gust, when the rapidity of its progress, and its
general extension, began to create universal a-
larm.
On the 28th of that month it was reported to
Government, that the, disease had suddenly ap-
peared epidemically in Jessore, a populous town
situated in the centre of the Delta of the Ganges ;
that it was attacking all classes indiscriminately;
and was cutting off from twenty to thirty per-
sons daily; and that the inhabitants, astonished
and terrified at the unaccountable and very des-
A 2


tructive nature of its attacks, were flying in
crowds from the place, as the only means of es-
caping impending death.—So little was the na-
ture of the new pestilence yet understood; and
Such was the extreme consternation produced by
it, that the Civil Courts of the District were
shut; and a stop put for a time to business of
every description. Although the general emigra-
tion which took place from the city, would seem
to have had a decidedly beneficial effect on the
state of its health, by diminishing that density of
population, which has been since invariably found
to be a powerful auxiliary to the Epidemick; yet
such was the energy of the disease in this its
first onset, and so fatally destructive was it of
human life, that in this district alone, it is report-
ed to have within the space of a few weeks, cut
off more than six thousand of the inhabitants.
It is necessary to be thus particular regarding
the breaking out of the disorder at Jessore; be-
cause from the alarming nature of the circum-
stances, which attended its appearance in that
•quarter ; connected with its rapid and general
spread as an Epidemick over almost every portion
of the Lower Provinces, accompanying or imme-
•‘diately following that appearance; an idea then
•arose, and has since obtained very general belief,
that Jessore was the place, in which the disease
primarily originated, and whence, as from a fo*


cus, its pestilential virus, of whatever nature,
emanated, to the surrounding districts. What
served to give validity to this conjecture, was an
opinion then entertained, and since industriously
propagated, that the/omes, or specific poison pro-
ducing the disease, had its rise, hot in any vi-
tiated state of the atmosphere, or other cause of
general operation, but in circumstances of a
purely local nature: such as the use of rancid
fish and blighted grain.
It is nevertheless certain, that nothing could
be more erroneous than this notion of the local
origin of the Epidemick. For, not to speak of
its frequent occurrence, so early as May in some
parts of Nuddea, and other districts already ad-
verted to, it is quite clear from the statements of
the medical staff, written separately and without
interchange of knowledge or communication,
that, more than a month previously to Jessore’s
becoming affected, the disease had begun to pre-
vail epidemically in the distant Provinces of Be-
har and Dacca; and that before the expiration
of the first week in August, it had firmly esta-
blished itself in many other parts of Bengal.
Thus it is distinctly stated to have broken out in
the City of Patna on the 11th of July; to have
spread to the contiguous station ofDinapore, and
the adjacent villages early in August; and to
have remained without intermission in that neigh-


bourhood, until the end of January following**
In like manner, after having in July appeared at
Sunergong, a Town on the banks of a branch of
the great river Megna, it thence proceeded,
visiting the ghauts or publick ferries and grain
markets in its way, to Nuraingunge and Dacca,
where it arrived in the beginning of August. Du-
ring the whole of July and August eight out of
eighteen Police Departments into which zila Kish-
nagur or Nuddeea, on the east side of the Hoogly,
is divided, were also fully subject to its influence ;
and it had about the middle of the latter month
even found its way to the remote Province of
Sylhet, which is separated from the eastern parts
of Bengal Proper by the great Rivers Ganges and
Burumpooter. On the 23d of August we find
it raging at Chittagong, far round the Eastern
corner of the Bay of Bengal; at the same mo-
ment in Rajshahy, a centrical district lying East
of the Ganges; and not a week afterwards, in the
high and distant tracts of Bhaugulpore and
Monghyr. The exact date of its appearance in
* It appears from accounts received since this sketch
was drawn up, that the disease had ravaged Nuseerabad,
a town in Momensing in June; and had even largely
affected the South Eastern Division of that district, is
the early part of the month or last days of May: follow-
ing the course of the Burumpooter; and irregularly
attacking the villages ea its banks.


Calcutta has not been ascertained.—But there ,
as little doubt, that it visited some spots of the
town and suburbs as early as the beginning of
August j that it daily gained ground, and before
the end of the month had widely spread its
ravages, in a manner threatening to sweep off a
large portion of the Native population; and that
in the early part of September, even the Euro-
pean portion of the community was no longer
secure from the concentrated activity of the
poison.
These facts are more than sufficient to shew
the fallacy of every theory, which attempts to
derive the disease from any local source; or to
trace it to any one particular spot, as the centre
from which it was emitted to the surrounding
countries.—They prove, without the possibility
of dispute, that it broke out at very remote pla-
ces at one and the same time, or at the distance
pf such short intervals, as to establish the im-
possibility of the pestilential virus being, in this
stage of its progress, propagated by contagion,
or any of the other known modes of successive
production; and that its general diffusion was
therefore referable to soine cause of more uni-
versal operation.* '
* A few dates may be marked of the principal places
attacked in the early part of the progress of the Epide-
mick, according to the order of their succession.—May


Soon after the middle of September, the
disease, now strictly epidemical, extended itself
in every direction; within the short space of a
few weeks stretching from the most easterly parts
ofPoorneea, Dinagepore, and Sylhet, to the ex-
treme borders of Balasore and Cuttack; and
reaching from the mouths of the Ganges • nearly"
as high as its junction with the Jumna.
Within thearea of several thousand miles, thus
in so short a period brought under its influence,
few towns or villages of any considerable size
wholly escaped its attacks; almost every spot
being, notwithstanding the great irregularity of
its course, and waywardness of its approach,
sooner or later, and in a greater or less degree,
subjected to its dreadful visitations.—The cities
and June, One Thanna or police Division of Kishnagur;
and Mymensing generally. July. Eight Divisions of
tlie former district; Sunergong in the Dacca District;
and on the 11th Patna. August. In the first week Cal-
cutta, Dacca and Dinapore; about the middle, Nattore;
on the 17th, Sylhet; on the 19th, Jessore; and towards the
end of the month, Bhaugulpore and Monghyr, Septem-
ber 15th. Balasore, Burisaul, Burdwan; 17th, Buxar>
18th, Chupra and Ghazeepore; in the latter part
Moozufferpore. October, Baulea ; 15th, Berhampore,
and Rungpore. It is only necessary to cast' one’s eye
over the map to perceive immediately how irreconcila-
ble these dates, and the intermediate distances are with
the suspicion of local origin.


of* Dacca, and Patna, the towns of Balasore,
Bnrrisaul, Burdwan, Rungpore, . Malda, Bhau-
gulpore, Chupra, and Moozufferpore, with the
Military stations of Monghyr, Buxar, and Gha-
zeepore, all suffered severely ! and throughout
the whole extent of the Delta of the Ganges, and
more especially in the tracts bordering on the
Hoogly and the Jellinghy Rivers, so great was
the mortality; that the bulk of the whole popula-
tion was sensibly diminished by the dreadful
ravages of the distemper. It is remarkable, that
the large and populous city of Moorshedabad,'
from extent and local position apparently very
favorably circumstanced for the attacks of the
Epidemick, should have escaped with compara-
tively, little loss, whilst all around was so.severely,
scourged.
It has already been shewn, that, so long as the
Epidemick was confined to the Province of Ben-
gal, it at once raged simultaneously in various
and remote quarters, without displaying a predi-
liction for any oile tract or district more than
for another; -or any thing like regularity of
succession in the chain of its operations., As yet
too, some ofthe peculiarities subsequently deve-
loped by it, and so unerringly marking its -pro-
gress throughout the Upper Provinces, that; they
came almost .to .be considered as laws of the
disease, had either not been called into existence,
B


or were still of such feeble and uncertain opera-
tion, as to remain unobserved among the accu-
mulated horrors of its attacks. Thus, although
there was the same violence in the Oommence-
ment, and rapidity in the progress, of its visita-
tions, they were yet unmarked by that earliness
of declension, and entire subsidence, which after-
wards generally formed so consolatory a part of
their revolutions.—Nor could a town or tract of
fcpuntry, after having once fully undergone the
Scourge, yet congratulate itself on a probable
immunity from its further assaults.—For, al-
though generally milder in form, and less fatal
in the latter period of its existence, it rarely
altogether disappeared ; but seemed rather to
keep hovering in the vicinity, as if in mere ex-
pectancy of some fresh cause to recommence its.
attacks with renewed vigour.
The only spots on the Eastern side of the'
Ganges, beyond the precincts of Bengal, attacked
by the Epidemick in the Autumn of 1817, were
Moozufferpore, and Chuprah, the principal Sta-
tions of the Tirhoot and Sarun Districts; and the
cantonment of Ghazeeporeand in each of
these places its attacks were confined to the
towns themselves, or villages in their immediate
vicinity: the great bulk of the adjoining coun-
try, at this period, entirely escaping the disease.


And now the Epidemick began to shew one
of the most striking peculiarities which charac-
terised its march. It no longer pushed its in-
fluence, without distinction or apparent choice, in
all directions, and throughout every tract coming
in its way. It began to affect particular lines, and
to fix itself in particular divisions of Country ;
Wholly restricting itself for the time to the course
of those lines and divisions. Instead ,of shooting
up from Moozufferpore, Chupra, and Ghazeepore,
through the contiguous districts of Gorruckpore
and Jiounpore, to the provinces of Oude and
Eohilkund, it wholly left that part of the Coun-
try ; and for many months confined itself to the
■tracts lying west of the Ganges and Jumna.
Thus, from the beginning of November, when
it quitted Moozufierpore, until the end of March,
when it broke out in Allahabad, on the junction
of the Ganges and Jumna, it does not appear,
that any one spot of the immense, tract stretch,
•ing to the East of these rivers from the northern
•point of Saharuupore to the Southern boundary
of Tirhoot, Was visited by the disease.* It will
be afterwards seen, that from Allahabad, 1 a new
stream of the pestilential virus, now apparently
•propagated by regular succession, issued in vari-
ous directions, and made a great part of this
tract- suffer for its previous immunity.
* Lucknow may perhaps be brought forward as an
exception to this general rule. A few cases of Cholera
B 2


Although the Epidemick would seem to have
beset Zila Mirzapore, and to have slightly ap-
peared at Oonchara, and in the Camp of /His
Majesty’s 17th Regiment of Foot, and of the
2d Battalion Bth Regiment Native Infantry, at
Mongawa, near the Northern extremity of Rewa,
about the middle of November; it did no great
mischief, until in the end of the first week of
that month, it reached the Centre Division of
the Grand Army, then encamped, under the
personal command of the Marquess of Hastings,
near the banks of the Sinde in Bundlekund.
It was here that the disease put forth all its
strength, and assumed its most deadly and ap-
palling form. It is uncertain whether it made its
first approaches on the 6th, the 7th, or the Bth of
the month. After creeping about, however, in
its wonted insidious manner, for several days
among the lower classes of the Camp followers j
it, as it were in an instant, gained fresh vigour,
and at once burst forth with irresistible violence
Morbus did certainly appear there in December
January ; but these were probably merely Sporadick;
as the disease afterwards visited the City with great
violence in April and May, when it was prevailing
epidemically in the neighbouring Country. So that,
if the cases occurring in December belonged to the
Epidemick, the City must have been twice visited by
it ; a thing almost unknown during its stay in the
Upper Provinces.


in every direction. Unsubjected to the laws of
contact and proximity of situation, which had
been observed to mark, and retard the course of
other pestilences, it surpassed the plague in the
width of its range; and outstripped the most
fatal diseases, hitherto known, in the destruc-
tive rapidity of its progress. Previously to the
14th, it had overspread every part of the Camp j
sparing neither sex nor age in the undistinguish-
ing virulence of its attacks. The old and the
young, the European and the Native, fighting
men and Camp followers, were alike subject to
its visits j and all equally sunk in a few hours
under its most powerful grasp. From the 14th to
the 20th or 22d, the mortality had become so
general, as to depress the stoutest spirits. The
sick were already so numerous, and still pouring
in so quickly from every quarter, that the medical
men, although night and day at their posts, were no
longer able to administer to their necessities.
The -whole camp then put on the appearance of
a hospital. The noise and bustle almost inse-
parable from the intercourse of large bodies of
people, had nearly subsided. Nothing was to
be seen, but individuals anxiously hurrying from
one division of the Camp to another, to inquire
after the fate of their dead or dying compani-
ons ; and melancholy groups of Natives bearing
the biers of their departed relatives to the river.
At length, even this consolation was denied to


"them ; for the mortality latterly became so
great, that there was neither time nor hands to
•carry off the bodies ; which were then thrown into
the neighbouring ravines, or hastily committed to
the earth, on the spots in which they had expired,
.and even round the walls of the Officers* tents.
;AII business had given way to solicitude for the
suffering. Not a smile could be discerned, nor
,a sound heard, except the groans of the dying,
.and the wailing over the dead. Throughout
-the night especially, a gloomy silence, interrupt-
ed only by the well known dreadful sounds of
poor wretches labouring under the distinguishing
symptoms of the disease, universally prevail-
.ed.*—'The Natives thinking that their only safe-
* Many of the sick died before reaching the hospitals;
and even their comrades ■whilst bearing them from the
out posts to Medical aid, sunk themselves, suddenly
seized by the disorder.—Never was the impressive lan-
guage of Scripture more applicable than now:—“ In the
midst of life we are in death”. — All security of life was
"gone; and as 3 T outh and vigour afforded no safety, even
the healthiest man could not in the morning tell, that he
might not be a corpse before night.—Such was the
dreadful effect of the scene, that even long after its oc-
currence, it could hardly be described without shudder-
ing hy the eye-witnesses.—How fatal the sickness of this
Division, had it continued much longer, might have
.moved In, its political consequences, we have been told
from the highest authority. In delineating the rise and
progress of the late war, on his return to the Presiden-
cy* the Governor General tints Spoke of the visitation of


ty lay in flight, had now begun to desertin great
numbers; and the highways and fields for many
miles round, were strewed with the bodies of
those, who had left Camp with the disease up-
on them, and speedily sunk under its exhausting
effects. It was clear, that such a frightful state
of things could not last long; and,that .un-
less some immediate check were given to the
disorder, it must soon depopulate the Camp. It-
was, therefore, wisely determined by the Com-
mander in Chief, to move in search of a healthi-
er soil, and of purer air. The Division, accord-
ingly, on the 13th marched in a South Easterly
.direction towards Talgong, and Sileia; and after
several intermediate halts, on the 19th crossed
his Army.—“ The dreadful pestilence, which made such
havoc in the Division under my immediate command,
forced me to quit the banks of the Sinde, and to seek a
jnore favorable country (or the recovery of my numerous
sick. 1 did not find this until I was fifty miles from the
river which I quilted.—Fortunately the change of air was
rapidly beneficial; for, a very short time had passed when
I received intelligence of an invitation said to have been
given by Scindia to the Pindarries.—He was reported to
have promised them, that if they would come so near to
Gwalior, as to make his getting to them easy, he would
break his Treaty, and join them with the Force, which
he had at his capital—The Pindarries were in full
march for Gwalior, without meeting even a shew of im-
pediment from the troops of Scindia stationed in their
route; tho’ the co-operation of his Army'for the extinc-
tion of the Piudarrie* was an Article of the Treaty.—


the clear stream of the Betwah, and upon its. high
and dry banks at Erich, soon got rid of‘ the: pes-
tilence, and met .with returning health. , But
its line of march, during the whole of this pro-
gressive movement, exhibited a most deplorable
spectacle. Although every means had been.ta-
ken, by giving up the ammunition carts, and
collecting elephants and draught cattle, to pro-
cure, sufficient carriage, the sick were, found too
numerous to be moved, and were in part necessarily
leftbehind. And as many who left the carts, press-
ed by the sudden calls of the disease, were una-
Wc hurried back to the Simla; but this time we chose, a
position nearer to Gwalior, than what we had before oc-
cupied.—We were within thirty miles of the City, and
our advanced guard was sent to occupy the passes thro'
the hills which run at some distance South of Gwalior
from the Sinde to the Chumhul.—Those passes were the
only route by which communication could take place be-
tween the Pindarries and Scindia: and I was nearer to
support my advanced guard than the Maharajah .was to
attack it, could he bring his mind to so desperate a
stake.—The Pindarries finding their hopes baffled and.
the passage stopped, attempted to retire; but they had
been followed close by our Divisions, were surprised,
dispersed, and slaughtered in a number of small actions.
In short they disappeared. And thus our objects were
completed.”—A few days’ longer continuance of the
Epidcmick might, by entirely crippling this Division, •
have given a very different appearance to the face of af-
fairs, and prolonged , the struggle to an , indefinite pe-
riod.


ble to rise again; and hundreds dropt down du-
ring every subsequent day’s advance, and co-
vered the roads with dead and dying; the ground
of encampment, and line of inarch, presented
the appearance of a field of battle, and of the
track of an army retreating under every circum-
stance of discomfiture and distress. The exact
amount of mortality during these few calamitous
days could not, from the circumstances of confu-
sion and general disorder, under which it took
place, be ascertained with any degree of accura-
cy. From the Military returns however it ap-
pears, that in this fatal week, of 11,500 fighting
men of all descriptions,* 7dd foil victims to the
disorder; and of the camp followers, it was con-
jectured, that about 8,000, or one-tenth of the
whole, was cut off.
From the Division having shaken off the dis-
ease, shortly after reaching the elevated and sa-
lubrious banks of the Betwah,f it was generally
* The number of fighting men in Camp is here a
good deal overrated; for one Detachment left Camp
before the commencement of the disorder; and another
much larger as early as the 18th.—The two together
amounted to nearly three thousand.
f The disorder ceased to be Epidemick about the
22d or 23d. A few instances of mild attacks were after
that seen daily till the end of the month. After the
Bth of December not a case appeared.
c


believed, that it owed the' recovery of its health
solely to its change of ground and climate. But,
without denying the salutary effects of such
change, it may be reasonably doubted, whether
the Epidemick could have existed much longer in
Camp, even had it remained stationary oh its ori*
ginal scite. For from this time forward, it began
to evince that rapidity in its revolutions, and im
aptitude to remain long in one place, which al-
most invariably characterised its future progress;
and as will be hereafter seen, in no one of the
several camps subsequently visited by it, did it
continue in full vigour for more than ten or fifteen
days.
The Medical Staff attached to the Centre Dh
vision are quite divided in opinion, regarding
the particular source of the Epidemick in that
quarter. According to some, it commenced, so
soon as the 2d of November, at the bridge of
boats at Sheergur, over which the army crossed,
in passing from the Doab in the end of October j
and was thence communicated to the Camp at
Terayt, by the Detachment left to guard the
tetecle pont. It will afterwards be attempted to
be shewn, how far this conjecture was borne out
by facts, A second opinion was, that the Division
found the disease in the villages, on its route
from the Jumna ; and a third, supported by an
almost equal number of voices, that it sprung up
spontaneously, from some unknown cause, in the
centre of the Camp itself; and was thence impart


ed to the previously healthy towns in the vicinity.
The probability seems to be, that the peculiar vi-
tious state of the atmosphere, productive of the di-
sease, which had several months pre-existed in
Lower India, was already beginning to reach the
Upper Provinces; and that, although not yet in suf-
ficient force, to be called into activity by the com-
paratively slight causes afterwards sufficient for
its excitement, it was nevertheless capable of be-
ing roused by the numerous circumstances
favorable to its existence, presented by the im-
mense body composing this Division of the Army.
Be this as it may, it is quite certain, that after
appearing in this quarter, the Epidemick, still
avoiding the Eastern and Northern parts of the
country, now decidedly took a South Westerly
direction; and, after being propagated along the
beds of the principal rivers and great roads, to
almost every town and village of Bundelkund
and Saugor, was successively communicated to the
provinces of Berar, Malwah, and Khandeish, and
finally to almost every portion of the Deccan.
No reportshaving been received from the nor-
thern part of Bundelkund, it is impossible to trace
its progress through that division of the district.
-In the Southits route may be more easily sketch,
ed.—Having stretched from Jelalpore, on the Bet-
wah, to the town of Kytah, and overrun the
C 2


whole of the tract between the Dusawn and Cane
rivers, it reached Banda in the end of March.
•There, and in the dependent district, it is re-
ported to have destroyed 10,000 of the inhabi-
tants. We now find it proceeding in a westerly
direction, along the banks of the Cane, to Lohar-
gaon, Hutta, and Saugor; in which neighbour-
hood, it remained with great virulence from the
beginning of April till the middle of May.. But
though the inhabitants of Hutta and Saugor, and
the dependencies of Nursingha and Puthoorea,
smarted exceedingly under its inflictions, it is
curious, that the troops serving in that quarter,
and some of them living in the very centre of the
pestilence, at that time, scarcely appeared sub-
ject to its influence.
From Saugor the virus diverged in two direc-
tions. One stream took a Southerly course to-
wards Nagpore. The other went South West
•through Bhilsa, Bhopal, and Shoojawulpore to
.Ougein : doing infinite mischief in the whole of
this line ; and, as it proceeded, taking in the post
ofßurseeah, and Sir John Malcolm’s Camp at
Mow... It reached Jhanoor, three marches South
of Ougein, on the 4th of May ; was at Ougein
itself on the 9th; and at Muhedpore on the 12th.
Thence, still keeping to the course of the Chum-
bool river, it successively attacked Sonara, Major
Agnew’s detachment at Bhanpora, and the camp
of Holkar in the immediate vicinity. In June


it had got the length of Kotah; where it is
said to have cut off a hundred men a day, and
to have produced such dismay, that the inhabi-
tants were abandoning the city in distraction.
Having here, however, got into the high and
mountainous tract, which has invariably been
found inimical to its existence, it scefns now to
have-gradually died away. A proof of this is,
its never having reached the States of Oodeypoor
and Ajraeer.
To return towards Saugor, and to trace the
current, which was stated to have taken a South-
erly course ; and, which, after affecting the Left
Division of the Army, and the Nerbudda Field
Force, would appear to have extended through
the States of Nagpore and Poonah to the
'Presidencies of Bombay and Madras:—
The troops under Major General Marshall,
. during their march in a South Easterly
direction from Saugor to Mundela, fell in with
the disease, on the 9th of April, at Juhhulpore on
.the Nurbudda; and suffered severely from it
during the remainder of the month. The mor-
tality caused by it, however, amongst the regular
troops, bore no proportion with that, which had
previously occurred in the Centre Division : for
of 8,500 fighting men, only 125 were taken ill;
of whom no more than 49 died.
Following the channel of the Nerbudda, in an


Easterly direction, the disease next gained Hd-
shungabad; and, apparently crossing the river at
that place, proceeded in a Southerly course,
through the town of Mooltay, to the city of
Nagpore, where it arrived in the last week of
May. Both of these places, and many of the
villages intermediate between Hoshungabad and
Mooltay, were very severely visited by it; and
Mooltay itself, although but an inconsiderable
place, lost above five hundred of its inhabitants.
But, so singularly capricious was the disorder
in this quarter, that it was not met with between
Nagpore and Mooltay; a distance of 70 miles ;
and that Baitool, a large town in the direct road
from the river to Mooltay, was entirely exempt
from its visitations.
The Nagpore Subsidiary Force under Colonel
Adams, afforded the first striking instance of a
large body of men coming into the pestilential
medium, and from the previous enjoyment of
perfect health, falling at once into a wretched
state of sickliness. This Division had, during
the early part of May, been occupied in besieg-
ing the important Fortress of Chanda; but, al-
though it had undergone excessive fatigue, and
met with a few casualties from constant expo-
sure to the sun, it had nothing like marked dis.
ease, until, on the morning of its last march oh
the return to Nagpore, it encamped at Gaongong:
a village situated nine miles South of the city.


Here it had hardly learnt, that the Epidemick was
raging in the vicinity, when it began itself to
experience its unwelcome visits. As usual, its first
assaults were most severe. Many of those attack-
ed, whilst loitering for water in the neighbouring
rivulets, were brought in expiring; some dead.
Of 70 cases admitted during that night and the
succeeding day, about 20 died.—On the Slst
the instances of attack were equally numerous;
but in these, the exhaustion was not so sudden,,
and the subsequent symptoms were less severe-
On the Ist of June, the Division moved from Nag-
pore towards the cantonments at Hoshungabad.
The disease then gradually declined; and almost
entirely disappeared on the 17th and 18th, after
some seasonable falls of rain. The Madras Troops,
composing part of the besieging force employed
at Chandah, are reported to have suffered equally
with their comrades from this side of India.
As the Bengal returns proceed no further than
Nagpore, it must be left to the proper authorities
at the other Presidencies, to give an accurate re-
cord of the ravages of the Epidemick, as it stretch-
ed through the Deccan, and ranged along the
Malabarand Coromandel Coasts*.—lt may here,
* This has been already in part done. A Report
has been issued by the Bombay Medical Board; and is
full of valuable facts. It will soon be followed by a corre-
sponding paper from Madras, where the Epidemick has
been very generally destructive.


however, be generally mentioned, that, according
to the prevalent opinion, the disease could be
distinctly traced along the great road leading
from Nagpore to Jaulna, and thence to Aurun-
gabad and Ahmednuggur.—From this quarter;
or perhaps from Chandore, and Nassuck on the
Godavery, it was communicated to Bombay;
—The city of Poona, and many of its dependent
towns and villages, the province of Khandeish,
the camps of Generals Doveton and Smith, and
of Colonel McDowal, were visited by it in the
course of July and August; and at Punderpoor,
where it happened to shew itself during the ce-
lebration of a great fair, it is said to have laid low
upwards of three thousand victims. It certainly
penetrated to the southernmost point of the
Peninsula* ; and even passed over to the Island
of Ceylon ; but, during the latter part of its
progress, its course was singularly uncertain and
erratic, and its symptoms fortunately much mi-
tigated.
We must now trace back our steps, and follow
the Epidemick, during an almost equally long and
devious path, which it pursued, from the
junction of the Ganges and Jumna at Allaha-
bad, through the greater part of the Northern
Provinces. This point is fixed upon, because
* It swept through Mysore in the following Cold
Weather; aiid in the city of that name alone, cut off ten
thousand persons.


the disease first established itself there in tha
spring of 1818, and'could thence be distinctly
traced successively to many of the Towns situat-
ed in the Doab, and on the Western bank of the
Jumna. It broke out suddenly in the town and
district of Allahabad in the end of March; and
prevailed during several months with great ma-
lignancy: sweeping offnearly 10,000 of the inha.
bitants. The troops stationed in the Fort and
City were not affected until tile middle of July
following, although holding daily and unre-
strained intercourse with the townspeople.
Keeping close to the banks of the Ganges, the-
Epidemick entered Cawnpore on-the Bth of A- :
pril; having previously visited the- town of Nu-
jufgur, lying about 18 miles East of that City.
It equally attacked the City, the Military Canton-
ments, the Civil Station of Bethoor, and the ad-
joining villages ; and remained in full force du-
ring-fifteen or twenty days. But, the mortality
caused by it was not very great , and it appeared
little disposed to extend far in that direction;
Bareilly, Moradabad, and almost every other town
in the same line enjoying their wonted health;
The town and district of Shajehanpore form a
remarkable exception to the general healthiness
ofthe Province of Bareilly. There, the disease
appeared in July, and is reported to have killed,
upwards of five thousand of the inhabitants.
D


On the Jumna, the Epidemic spared Culpee,
and almost every intermediate village between
it and Etawah.-—The latter place it reached
late in May; and, after doing considera-
ble mischief, it would appear to have thence
at once stretched across the Doab to Fut-
tigur, visiting very few places on its route. It
appeared in the lines of Futtigur on the 10th of
June; and thence was communicated to the town.
There it shewed little virulence of symptoms;
and wholly subsided on the commencement of
the Rains early in July. It is curious, that Mut-
tra, situated considerably higher up the Jumna
than Agra, should have had the disease in the
beginning of June, whilst the latter place was
not visited until the Ist of July. In Muttra, —a
filthy and crowded City,—the disease was very vi-
rulent, and the mortality great. In Agra,—a dry
and airy town, —the symptoms were mild, and the
deaths few. The Cantonments attached to Ag-
ra remained nearly exempt; but those at Mut-
tra being low and near the banks of the river,
partook of the general unhealthiness of the town,
and lost many men. In both places, the Epide-
mick loitered for more than a month. It then, on
the 11th of July, entered the town ofCoel; which
was alone affected in the Alligur district : the
Jails, Cantonments, and the adjoining villa-
ges enjoying perfect immunity. We next find


the disease on the 20th at Delhi. Here it remained
nearly a month, and committed very considera-
ble havoc among the condensed population of
an extensive city.
Neither between Agra and Delhi, nor during
its route from the latter place to Meerut, did the
disorder halt in any of the intermediate towns and
villages. Since, of these many were placed very
low, and much exposed to masses of animal and
vegetable putrefaction, and every other source
of miasmata and contagion, their immunity from
attack could hardly be ascribed with justice to
peculiar healthiness of situation. The reason
rather seems to have been that, in this quarter,
the Epidemick, whether from the pure and elastic
air of the Northern Provinces being less favora-
ble to its existence, than the thick damp climate
of Bengal; or from its beginning to give way to
that general law r of Nature, which requires that
diseases, like all other things, should have their
decrements, as well as their rise and increase; or
from some other hidden agency altogether unsus-
pected, was now beginning to die away, and could
only be kept alive by strongly exciting causes:
such as large bodies of men crowded together
in Camps and Cities. Hence, we find,
that between Delhi and Meerut, —a distance of
thirty miles, populous and studded with consi-
derable towns and villages,—not a case of the dis-
D 2


ease occurred ;* whilst the latter City, and the
Cantonments attached to it, suffered under it
from the 28th of July to the 20th of August.
Eew were seized in the town, and fewer in the
lines; and in both the sum of mortality fell con-
siderably short of three hundred. So likewise,
between Meerut and Saharunpoor, the Epide-
mick kept dormant; whilst the latter City, which
is very low and filthy, filled with ruined buildings,
and intersected by foul channels with oozy banks,
suffered considerably. The disease shewed itself
in the town about the end of September; was in full
force about the middle of October •, and declined
from that time until the last week of the month,
when it wholly disappeared. It may be, however,
that the virus proceeded not in a centrical line
from Delhi to Saharunpore, but along the course
of the Jumna; as Tannab, a large town, only
sixteen miles from the river, and twenty. South
of Saharunpore, was attacked before the latter
place.
The Epidemick cannot be traced farther North
than Saharunpore. The high ridges of moun-
tains, which in other quarters proved hostile to
its propagation, here opposed its further pro-
* By a subsequent report it indeed appears, that the
Epidemick slightly visited the towns of Ghazeeabad and
Mooradnumrur; but in them the cases were so few as
OO ?
hardly to affect the statement in the text.


gress; and saved the inhabitants of the hilly dis-
tricts from a scourge, which, in their circumstan-
ces of poverty and nakedness, would probably
have proved exceedingly fatal to them.
On the 23d of July* a Detachment, consisting
of a troop of the Horse Artillery Brigade, the c
Rocket troop, and 5 Companies of the Ist Bat-
talion 25th Native Infantry, marched from Mee-
rut to join the force collecting at Hansi under
Brigadier Arnold, for service in the Bickaneer
and Bhatty countries.' They remained perfect-
ly healthy on their march to the Jumna, and
during several subsequent days, in which they were
encamped on its East bank. On the 29th they
crossed the River, passed through Delhi (the
disease being then at its height in the town) and
encamped outside of its walls, about a mile to
the West. On the 30th, they continued their
March in a North-westerly direction ; and on the
morning of the 31st, they were attacked by the
Epidemic!;.—lt continued unabated amongst
them, until the 6th; when they joined the ge-
neral camp at Hansi. Although one or two cases
had occurred in this Force a day or two previous-
ly to the arrival of the Meerut Detachment, it
was the unanimous belief of the Medical Staff
serving with it, that from the latter, it got the
disease in its epidemical form. What gives a co-
lour of probability to this conjecture is, that the


disorder was not met with in any of the villages
lying in the immediate line of the route of the
Detachment from Delhi to Hansi; and certain-
ly did not appear in the latter town until some
time after its prevalence in Camp, and then but
very slightly.—On the other hand, it was gene-
rally rumoured that, several intermediate places
between Delhi and Hansi, and between Delhi and
Kurnaul, particularly Paniput, had been affected
previously to Hansi being brought within the
pestilential influence. It continued with the
troops until the 12th of August; and accompanied
them in their march in a W. N. W. direction to
Futtihabad, Rhauneea and Sirseea, and in their
retrogade movement on Hissar. Of the whole
Force, only about 250 men were attacked. The
symptoms were comparatively mild; and the
deaths few. The Epidemick did not reach Loo-
deehana; and appears in this quarter to have
been limited by the river Sutledge.
From Dehli or Aligurh the disease would
seem to have spread in a South West direction
to the principality of Jeypore ; the capital of
which it reached in the latter end of August.
Here it was neither malignant, nor general: its
attacks being almost confined to the most
wretched class of the inhabitants, and the whole
mortality throughout the circumjacent country
scarcely exceeding a thousand men.—On the


12th September it began to abate in. the city j
and on the 14th it entered the camp of a detach-
ed Force commanded by Major Agnew, at
Titirya, twenty-five miles South West of Jey-
pore ; and there raged with very considerable
virulence till the 28th, when it gradually abated.
Of 9 6 Europeans, and 4100 Natives composing
thefighting part of this Force, the admissions were
292, of whom 122 died. The mortality amongst
the camp followers could not rightly be ascer-
tained. The Epidemick was no more heard of in
this direction; neither the town, nor the valley
of Ajmeer being affected; although anotherlarge
division of the llajpootana Force was encampedin
the latter, on similar ground, and under circum-
stances apparently in no wise differing, from those
pf their less fortunate comrades at Titirya.
Having now gone round the circle described
by the disease, and marked those places which
had most reason tb remember its unwelcome vi-
sits, we might bring this Sketch to a conclusion.
Previously, however, to taking leave of this part
of the subject, it will be necessary to advert
shortly, to the appearance of the disorder in some
parts of the Middle Provinces, which in point of
time, or of the source whence the virus was com-
municated to them, could not well be ranged un-
der any of the foregoing divisions.
It has been stated that, towards the end of
September, the Epidemick appeared in the town


of Chupra and Moozuffurpore; but that, at that
time, the range of its operations in this quarter
was extremely partial, and almost confinedto those
towns themselves, and the villages in their imme-
diate vicinity. It, however, re-appeared in May,
and spread with extreme virulence over the whole
district of Tirhoot; causing a mortality computed
at nearly ten thousand men, and subsiding only
with the full setting in of the Rains. It would ap-
pear to have extended through the Tiraee, and to
have affected the Military Cantonment at Mullye
v/ith considerable severity. At the same time, the
city of Benares was attacked, but with compara-
tive lightness, considering the extent and crowd-
ed, close nature of the town. Jionpore, Sultanpore
(Gude), Gorruckpore, Oude.Fyzabad, Lucknow,-
and other places situated near the Gogra and
Goomtee rivers, were successively attacked in
April and May. In Lucknow and Fyzabad it
did much havoc; and the inhabitants of Gorruck-
pore in the end of April suffered so greatly, that
they quitted the city and sought for safety in the
adjoining villages and groves.—The Troops and
camp followers in personal attendance upon the
Governor General, on his return from the Up-
per Provinces, again fell in with the Epidemick
on the 20th, or 21st, of April; but now its at-
tacks were nearly restricted to such persons as
had not been with the Centre Division of the Ar-
my in the preceding autumn.


In the foregoing pages the singular fact of the
Virus shewing an unwillingness to ascend high
and mountainous tracts of Country, has been
noticed.'—Thus it wholly avoided Kumaoon,
the Hilly Districts North of Hurdwar, and the
elevated stony belt which girds in the Rajpoota-
,na States to the North West. —But this rule was
not without exception; for, in June it passed the
lofty range of mountains guarding Napaul to the
East, and visited iChatmandoo, Patun, and
Bhatgoon in the subjacent valley; and, in Oc-
tober following, it got from Sylhet to the inde-
pendent countries of Kashar and Munnipore,
on the eastern borders of Bengal. But, even
here, it might be. seen, that high lands were not
congenial to it; for it had been raging with
very great violence in the adjoining Dis-
trict ,of Sylhet, before it was enabled to over-
come the obstacles opposed to its progress by
the intervening mountains.—The same causes
may be assigned for its partial occurrence
among the Ramgur and Sirgooja Hills ; whilst
Sonepoor and Sumbhulpore were largely affect-
ed: apparently from Cuttack, along the course
of the Mahanuddee.
Such was the course of this singularly erratic
and destructive malady.—Whether the virus,
haying put forth all its strength in its progress
through these provinces, has neatly worn itself-
out j and may now' be considered, as about wholly
E


to disappear; or is yet existent in a dormant
state, merely waiting for some favorable moment
again to spring up with renewed strength in this,
or some other country hitherto unvisited, it is
not in the power of man to tell.*—From the
* As no more favorable opportunity will hereafter oc-
cur, a few particulars may be here mentioned regarding
the times of appearance and periods of duration of the
Epidemick during its stay in Bengal.—lt has been stated
in the text, that it first broke out epidemically in Calcutta
in August .1817; and that it continued prevailing in the
city, with more or less violence, till the ensuing August.
From that time until the following April, when it recur-
red with considerable violence on occasion of some vari-
able, unseasonable weather, only a few cases came to no-
tice. Now (May) it has again subsided ; but fresh instan-
ces of the malady are sure to occur, as a consequence of
the sudden vicissitudes in the atmospherical heat and.
moisture, produced by every North Wester.—lt has
probably observed a like course in Jessore; but its
progress there cannot be exactly learnt, in conse-
quence of the absence of a Medical Officer from that
station for many months.—lt appears, however, that
since the beginning of the present year it has been
constantly in existence, and destroying many persons,
in the North and Eastern parts of the district.—ln
the Backergunge district it remained until the end of
last year, since which time it would not appear to have
done much injury.—ln Bullooah and the tracts near
the mouth of the Ganges, it began in February, and
terminated in June, 1818.—In different parts of My-
mensing it has existed since June, 1817. So likewise in
the city and District of Dacca.—ln Tipperab, after


disease, however, still continuing now and then
to visit Calcutta and many other places in Ben-
gal, although in an infinitely less degree than
wholly disappearing during the Cold Season, it returned
in March 1818; and remained till the breaking up of
the subsequent Rains, from which time it seems again to
have retired!—ln Sylhet its career has been singularly
various. After retiring in October 1817, and being for
several months dormant, it returned in the end of
March, and subsisted till the setting in of the Rains,
when it a second time nearly disappeared. But, about
the middle of October, it suddenly increased all over the
district to as great a degree, and with greater fatality,
than on its first appearance. It gradually declined in
December, and again withdrew In the end of the year.
I'inally, it made its fourth visit in the commencement
of the present Hot Weather; but not generally.—ln
Rajshahy, it prevailed most in September and October;
and disappeared about the middle of November, 1817.
It again appeared in the following Hot Weather, and
frequently proved fatal. —It commenced in August
in the city of Mooshedabad, and has continued till now;
but always ip a very mild shape,—ln Nuddeea, as we
have seen, it began generally in July and August. To-
wards the latter end of the year, it became less severe.
With the heavy rains, which set. in towards the end of
.the following February, it recurred in various parts of
the District. As in Calcutta, it declined in August fol-
lowing, was very rare in the cold months, and again got
head in the beginning of the present Hot Weather,—ln
Burdwan a few cases happened early in the Rains. In
September the mortality caused by it was alarming; and,
. from that month until the end of the following year, few
days passed without the disease appearing in some of the
E 2


formerly, it is to be feared, that the atmosphere
has not regained its natural salubrity; and, that
such a continuation Of unseasonable weather, as
villages. It was particularly violent in the commence-
ment and at the termination of the Hot Winds. Since
January 1819, no account of its progress in that quar-
ter has been received.—ln the district of Bhaugulpore it
continued its ravages, without intermission, from 'August
3817, to May 1818, when it considerably abated ; and
from that time till now only occasional cases have occur-
red.—At Monghyr it began in the latter end of August;
decreased in October and November; was hot heard of
in December; recurred partially in January and Febru-
ary ; increased much throughout the Hot Weather; and
finally altogether withdrew in September. In Behar it
began in August; nearly disappeared in the Cold Season;
recurred about the 20th cf February; and continued
active till the ensuing November; when it again nearly
ceased; to reappear in March and April. Of late the
disorder has appeared much in the South West parts of
Bengal, visiting severely Midnapore and Cuttack, which
it almost spared in the early parts of its course.—But it
must not be supposed from the foregoing statement, that
the disease now rages with that width of range, or gene-
rality of attack, which it took in the first year of its ex-
istence. In Calcutta certainly, and probably in almo'st
every other part of the Lower Provinces, it is no longer
strictly Epidemic. The case is this. A disposition to
produce the disorder still exists in the atmosphere.
This is brought into play by sudden alterations of the
weather. Then perhaps a dozen of cases, and two Or
three deaths occur ; the Settlement'is immediately
thrown into alarm; and it is generally rumoured, that the
tholcra is more prevalent than ever. The truth llevertHe-


has been seen to have preceded the first irrup-
tion of the Epidemicl:, is only required to renew
it in its pristine strength.-
less, is that more individuals probably perished from the
disease in one day in the autumn of 1817, than now do
in a quarter of a year. It should, moreover, be recollecs-
- that the disease is endemical in Bengal in the sultry
periods of the year; and that were it not for the present
scared state of the public mind, the few c ases how
occurring might, as in former years, pass nearly unnotic-
ed. As it is, all is magnified by apprehension. As is
quaintly observed by one of the Medical Staff, “ the
disease, like some foul fiend is still wandering to and fro,
hrid like the author of all mischief spreads universal
terror before it.”—The disorder having in April se-
verely attacked several detachments . of troops marching
through the Cuttack and Midnapore districts, a notion
was entertained, that there was something in the vicing
of the Soobanreeka river, which divides these tracts near
Balasore, connected with, and immediately leading to
its rise. But this was quite a mistake ; for it was learnt
upon enquiry, that the several divisions got the disordet
equally readily in different parts of Cuttack; and that
it always broke out after a fall of rain, -or other mani-
festly strong exciting cause. Besides, that the Epidemick
has been long known at Balasore, and had visited
several detachments in the Cuttack jungles so far back
as the Cold Weather, and Juggurnath lines in the
spring of the preceding year.


SECTION II.
OF THE SYMPTOMS OF THE DISEASE.
A VOMITING and purging of a pale and
watery fluid, either concurring or alternating with
each other, formed the leading symptoms of this
disorder.
The attack was generally ushered in by a feeling
of fulness and pain in the stomach, and swelling
of the abdomen ; with sickness, and a desire to
goto stool. Then came, almost immediately,
vomiting and purging of a pale, thin fluid, with-
out taste or smell; great anxiety ; oppression,
and sense of constriction about the heart and
prsecordia j thirst and internal heat. These
symptoms were accompanied, or quickly follow-
ed, by severe cramps; generally beginning in
the fingers and toes, and thence extending to
the wrists and fore arms, calves of the legs,
thighs, abdomen, and lower part of the thorax.
■ Together with these signs of general depres-
sion, the action of the heart and arteries, was
uniformly diminished. The pulse sunk rapidly
at the wrists, and temples; and at last could no
longer be felt, or was merely perceptible by a


slight and indistinct fluttering. The respiration
became laborious and hurried, with sighing, and
long and frequently broken inspirations. As the
blood forsook the extreme vessels, and withdrew
to the great cavities, the exterior surface of the
body grew pale, shrunken, and cold. The skin
became clammy, dank and disagreeable to the
feel; bedewed with large drops of cold sweat ;
and discoloured of a leaden, bluish, purple, dr
livid hue. The countenance was greatly
changed; the features were contracted, collaps-
ed, and ghastly.—The eyes sunk in their
sockets; fixed and glassy; covered with a thick
film; heavy; dull; suffused; and surrounded by
dark browni or black circles.—The lips livid, or
of a purple colour.—The finger nails blue ; the
palms of the hands white, bleached, and puc-
kered into folds.—The mouth was dry and
parched ; the tongue bluish, or white and fal-
tering ; and the voice hoarse and low.
There was sudden and great prostration of
strength.—The hands trembled; and the action
of the voluntary muscles was uncertain and
unsteady.—The patient could no longer stand
or walk ■ without assistance: He became as
feeble as a child; staggered like a drunken
man ; and unless supported, sunk down like one
in the last stage of debility from fever.


In feeble habits, and where the disease at*
tacked in extreme violence, the scene was soon
.closed.TrrThe circulation and animal heat were
never restored.—The spasms, vomiting, and
purging were frequently renewed—The thirst,
continued incessant and unquenchable; and was
no sooner gratified by draughts, of water, or other
.fluid, than dreadful retching ensued.—The
burning heat, anguish, agitation, and restless-
ness continued unabated. At length, the pati-
ent, exhausted by the depressing influence of
the malady, and the repeated large discharges,
fell into a listless state; and had no longer
strength for either full vomiting or purging. A
little fluid was now only rejected by the mouth,
as the abdominal muscles were thrown into
spasm ; -or passed off involuntarily downwards,
as the body turned round in bed.—The patient
remained deadly cold ; grew weaker and wea-
ker; and insensibly sunk into death; or was
carried off during a repetition of spasms: some-
times in one, but more frequently within four,
six, or twelve hours.
Such was the general appearance of the
disease, where it cut off the patient in its earlier
stages. —This state of collapse, sometimes how-
ever, lasted much longer before it ended in death:
which it almost certainly portended. It was often
attended by a remarkable degree of listlessness.
The patient seemed wholly unaware of his ex


treble danger; or quite careless of its conse-
quences. He wished to be left to himself; and*
the spasms'having now ceased, he lay motionless ;
being only roused at long intervals, as the
sickness recurred, or as his thirst reminded him
to call out for water; The amazing eagerness
with which he seized the vessel, and gulped
down the fluid, when he knew it would be fol-
lowed by instant vomiting, shewed how all w r as
burning within.
Much variety, however, occurred in the kind,
order, and sequence of the symptoms; accord-
ing as the virus of the disease happened to be
more or less concentrated, or the individual af-
fected of a strong or feeble constitution. Vo-
miting was the symptom of earliest and most
frequent occurrence. Next came purging; then
the cramps, and spasms. Frequently, however,
this order was reversed, and the purging and
spasms took the lead of the vomiting. Some-
times the cramp preceded both. Sometimes
there was no vomiting; sometimes no purging j
sometimes no spasm, throughout. Sometimes
all these symptoms were simultaneous ; and the
vomiting and purging took place together, as if
caused by sudden contraction of the alimentary
canal in its whole extent. In some rare instan-
ces, the virulence .of the disease was so powerful
as to prove immediately destructive of life; as
if the circulation were at once arrested, and the
F


vital powers wholly overwhelmed. In these
cases, the patient fell down, as if struck by
lightning ; and instantly expired. Others, again,
sunk after making one or two feeble efforts to
vomit, and drawing a long and anxious inspira-
tion. Some recovered from the insensibility
produced by the first shock, and afterwards
went through the regular course of the disease.
The irritability of stomach, and vomiting,
formed .a very distressing part of the disorder.
They were generally preceded by a feeling of
giddiness and inclination to faint; by fullness,
tension, uneasiness and pain, especially about
the pylorus; as if the contents of the stomach
were in vain soliciting a passage into the
duodenum. The fluid rejected was watery;
mostly tasteless; transparent; or of a whey or
ash color. Sometimes, it was sour; green; dark
like infusion of tea; starchy; mixed with mucus,
and viscid. In very rare instances, where the
vomiting was excessive or kept up for many
hours, pure bile was thrown up; but the disease
was almost universally characterised throughout
its progress, by a total absence of this secretion
from the whole course of the alimentary ca-
nal. Sometimes, the food last taken in was
thrown up before the commencement of the
watery discharges; but this was not usually the
case ; for, frequently, after death, indigested
lumps of ingesta. were found floating in the


stomach; clearly proving, that the action of that
organ, however inordinate, was not always
complete, or sufficient for its entire evacuation.
The vehement, insatiable thirst always present;
tended greatly to aggravate the irritability of
the stomach; for it was hardly possible to keep
the patient from drinking large draughts of cold
water, which were no sooner swallowed, thant
they were rejected with a quantity of phlegm
or whitish fluid like gruel, solution of starch, or
seethings of oatmeal. The vomiting proved
by far the most intractable symptom' of the
disease; generally keeping up long after the
looseness and spasms had subsided; arid, evert
in cases which terminated favorably, harrassing
the patient, and retarding his recovery, during
many days.
The dejections were mhch of the same nature
with what was passed upwards; generally watery,
colourless, white or muddy; sometimes red and
bloody; sometimes greenish and pulpy, like half
digested vegetables. To those, who have not
seen persons labouring under the disorder, it
will not he easy to convey an idea of the enor-
mous extent of these discharges. It seemed as
if the whole fluids of the body would have been
insufficient for their supply; and, that they Very
sensibly diminished the mass of the blood; was
shewn by its thickness, and unwillingness' to
flow upon a vein being opened j and by the
T 2


check uniformly given to all the secretions. The
evacuations were sometimes poured forth in a ra-,
pid and continued stream, as if from a sluice ; at
other times ejected in small volume, as if from a
syringe, by the violent action of the stomach
and rectum. In no instance, was foeculent or
bilious matter passed off in the commencement
of the attack.
The spasms usually began in the extremities,
and thence gradually crept to the trunk; some-
times, they were simultaneous in both; and
sometimes, the order of succession was reversed;
the abdomen being first affected, and then the
hands and feet. They seldom amoiinted tq
general convulsion; but seemed rather affections
of individual muscles, and of particular sets of
fibres in those muscles; causing in them quick
thrilling and quivering, and firmly stiffening and
contorting the toes and fingers. In old men, and
in persons of feeble habit, they Avere generally
slight, and hardly perceivable by the eye of a
bystander. Among Europeans, and among Natives
of robust make, they were more severe. With
them the bellies of the gastrocnemii sometimes
became as firm and stiff as aboard;* and hard
* Galen has noticed the greater violence of the spasms
in this set of muscles. In his Sth Commentary on the
Aphorisms of Hippocrates, he says, “ Convulsive con-
tractions frequently occur in those affected with Chole-
ra; more especially of the muscles of the calves of
the legs.”


knots could be felt in the fleshy parts of many
other muscles. The torture caused by these
contractions was exceedingly great. The path
ent always complained of pain across the belly;
which was generally sore to the touch, and swel-
led from the scrobiculus cordis to the pubis;
sometimes hard knotted, and drawn back to-
wards the spine.* The burning sensation of the
stomach and bowels was always present; and at
times extended along the cardia and oesophagus
to the throat and mouth. When the stomach
itself was seized by spasm, the pain w T as excruci-
ating; and the patient screamed violently, and
kept constantly tossing about. In some instan-
ces, the extreme violence of the spasm seemed
in an early stage of the attack to destroy the
nervous energy, and deprive the alimentary canal
of all feeling; so that fluids of the most acrid
and fiery nature passed down without producing
the slightest sensation. The diaphragm fre-
quently partook of the convulsive action; and
gave rise to pain in the back and loins, and to se-
vere hiccough, which shook the whole frame of
the patient, and proved exceedingly distressing.
Spasms of the intercostals and muscles of the
neck were hardly ever seen; but partial and com-
plete trismus was not of very rare occurrence.
* In some rare instances the spasms were general, and
as violent as in tetanus, so that the patient could scarcely
be secured by four or five people. In one very athlctick-
man, the bleeding fillet burst, from contraction of the
muscles of the arm.


The disturbed state of the circulation was an
early and ever present feature of the disease.
Almost immediately after the stomach be-
came affected, the blood forsook the surface
of the body; and rushed in to the heart
and great cavities. This was proved by the livi-
dity and icy coldness of the surface ; by the heat
of the praecordia; by the throbbing felt about
the heart, and great vessels ; and by the dissec-
tion of those who died of the disease. The
smaller arteries soon ceased to act; and the
heart performed its functions imperfectly, anA
with great apparent difficulty. The hurried res-
piration, tossing, anxiety, and frequent sighing
and moaning, which invariably succeeded, were
probably in part produced by the accumulation
of blood in the chest; and by the ineffectual ef-
forts of nature to restore the balance of the
circulation, by propelling it to the extremities.
The participation of the heart and arteries in
tire general derangement of the system was not,
however, in all cases immediate or uniform. Some-
times, they seemed to be but little affected; and
the pulse could be felt beating regularly, and of
good volume, long after the irritability of sto-
mach, and frequent spasms had evinced the vio-
lence of the disease. More generally, however,
the action of the heart was speedily diminished;
and within a space varying from fifteen minutes,
to two, three, or four hours, the pulse gradually


failed, until it could no longer be distinguished at
the wrists or temples, or even under the axilla.*
An almost imperceptible fluttering in the regi-
on of the heart, an attempt to retch, or a deep
groan as the spasms attacked the vital parts,
were then barely sufficient to prove, that life was
not yet wholly extinguished.—The pulse, so
long as it could be felt, was mostly very feeble
‘and tremulous, regular, soft, and not very quick,
usually ranging from 80 to 100. In a few in-
stances, it rose to 140 or 150 shortly before
death. Then it was distinct, small, feeble, and
irregular ; sometimes very rapid, then slow for
one or two beats.
Along with the suspension of the general cir-
culation, an almost entire cessation took place
in the action of the secerning vessels. The sa-
liva was dried up ; the mouth became dry and
parched; and the tongue deeply furred; white,
yellow, red, or brown. It was not easy to deter-
mine how soon the kidnies ceased to perform
* Galen in his second Chapter on the Pulse, says,
“ In patients affected with Cholera the pulse is for the
most part vermiculating; and at length scarcely distin-
guishable, like the creeping of ants.” And afterwards
“ a vermiculating pulse is when the artery has the feel
of the gentle rise of a wave, as if worms were crawling
in it; but when it falls to the lowest degree of feebleness,
and is withal exceedingly quick, it is said to be formicat-
es”


their office; because what urine the patient
made eai’ly in the disease, would be passed un-
observed, during his frequent occasions to go to
stool. But, there is reason to believe, that there
was generally partial or complete ischuria;
which, if the patient survived, frequently lasted
several days: as was proved by his making no
water, long after the purging had ceased. That
there was sometimes spasm of the kidnies along
with their state of complete inaction, was con-
cluded from the severe pain experienced in the
Iliac regions. The retention of the urine being
in some cases preceded by pain and irritation
at the neck of the bladder, and over the pubis,
it was at first imagined, that it might be cau-
sed by a mere suppression; but no fluid came
away upon the catheter being passed.
In this disease the head was less affected than
any other part of the body. In some cases in-
deed, the early appearance of giddiness, swim-
ming, blindness, pain over the eyes, redness of
the conjunctiva, and contraction of the pupil,
deafness and ringing in the ears, might have
led to a supposition, that the brain was the
primary seat of the disorder.—But these symp-
toms were by no means of general occurrence ;
and the conjecture founded upon them was con-
tradicted by the almost uniformly unclouded
state of the mind in the early parts of the at-
tack.—ln the midst of all the agony, which he


endured,’ the patient was calm, and perfectly
collected. At no time of his life probably, was he
more rational, and sensible to all that was going
on around him,—ln the latter stages of his ill-
ness, it is true, he sometimes began to wander,
or sink into a hopeless stage of insensibility*
But this is not be wondered at; for then his
sensorium was oppressed by an unusual conges-
tion of blood in the brain ; and his mental and
bodily powers were wholly exhausted by previ-
ous great suffering, and diminution of the circu-
latory fluid.
It has been stated, that where the disease
attacked in extreme violence, or seized persons
of weakly habits, the energies of the system
seemed to be at once exhausted; and death oc-
curred without any attempts at reaction. Where,
however, the strength of the patient’s constitu-
tion, or the efficacy of the curative means adminis-
tered, although inadequate wholly to subdue the
disorder, were yet sufficient to resist the vio-
lence of its onset; nature made various efforts
to rally; and held out strong, but fallacious
promises, of returning health.—ln such cases, the
heat was sometimes wholly, at other times partially
restored : the forehead, chest, and abdomen in
the latter case becoming warm ; whilst the limbs
kept deadly cold. The pulse would return,
grow moderate and even full; the cramps and
vomiting disappear; the nausea diminish; and
the stools become pitchy and foeculent.—And
G


yet, with all these favorable appearances, the
patient would suddenly relapse; chills, hiccough,
want of sleep, great anxiety and delirium would
arise; the vomiting, oppression, and insensibility
return ; and in a‘ few hours terminate in death.
In these cases the eyes were not uncommonly
fixed in their sockets some time before death.
The patient stared vacantly; and could not be
roused from the lethargy into which he had fallen.
Sometimes, again, the symptoms immediately
preceding the closing of the scene, were some,
what different. The anxiety and restlessness
were heightened; muttering delirium came on j
the breathing grew short, hurried, and ster-
torous ; and the sufferer sunk in the midst of the
greatest mental and bodily anguish—Or he would
suddenly expire as he turned in bed j when the
previous abatement of all bad symptoms, and
restoration of the circulation held out the fairest
hopes of recovery. Nor was it very uncommon
to see a patient in this state at once seized with
universal cramp, which extinguished life in a mo.
ment. Hence, many were found dead in their beds;
when no previous intimation, by groan or other
sign of distress, had been given to those lying
along side, of their approaching fate.
When the disease ran its full course, the
symptoms were variously modified, according to
variety in the type of the Epidemick or constitu-
tion of the individual affected. It will not be
supposed, that-all the appearances above des


eribed were present at all times, and in every case.
In the several periods of its revolutions, and in
the infinite variety of individuals attacked, the
disorder was of very different degrees of violence j
from simple vomiting and purging, with little or
no cramp ; to universal spasm, incessant retching,
and total depression of the vital powers.
Among Natives generally, where the attack
was exceedingly severe, the constitution sunk
with scarce an attempt to rally ; and of those
who recovered, the secondary stage was of short
duration, and unaccompanied with much reaction.
In the milder cases, the attack either was repell-
ed by theunaided powers of life itself, or readily
gave way to the simplest means of cure. The
pathognomonic symptoms of the disease speedily
abated ; the patient sunk into a profound and
quiet sleep ; and the breaking out of a warm
equable perspiration all over the body, evinced
the restoration of the vital powers, and, might be
considered an almost infallible sign of recovery.
In such cases, slight debility, and irregular action
of the intestinal canal, were the only ill conse-
quences of the attack ; and a copious discharge
of bile, or foeculent matter, either natural or
procured by the exhibition of a single dose of a
simple purgative, completed the cure.
But, in the more violent forms of the disease,
recovery was longer protracted; and the sufferings
of the patient were more severe.—After the most
G 2


distressing symptoms had been in great measure
subdued, he was still harassed by constant thirst,
irritability of stomach, pain and soreness of the
Epigastrick region, watchfulness,' and confused
dreams. The' stomach and bowels did not for
a long time regain their usual tone; and the
frequent occurrence of obstinate dysentery or
diarrhoea proved, that almost irreparable mischief
had been done to the whole of the chylopoetiq
viscera. In these cases the debility was great,
and of long duration ; and the strictest attention,
was required during many days, to prevent the
patient from sinking entirely.—Sometimes, the
debility terminated in incurable dropsy.—ln
some instances, partial loss of vision ; in others,
of hearing, ensued. In one man paralysis of
the bladder and lower extremities, occurred
early, and continued long after the cessation of
the common symptoms of the disease,
It was almost uniformly observed, that health
was soonest restored in those cases in which fe-
culent, black, and acrid motions were early
procured; and that on the other hand, their
absence was almost uniformly marked by feve,
rishness, sour eructations, flatulence, constipa-
tion, and other signs of want of tone and sluggish
action of the hepatic system.—-Fevers of the
remittent, and intermittent type were araqng
the most frequent sequel® of the disorder; but
among natives, and especially those of weakly
frame, they could not be considered to form aq


essential part of the attack. They were hardly
ever immediately superinduced upon the collap-
sed stage, and seemed rather an incidental affec-
tion, in bodies much predisposed to take on new
forms of disease by great existing debility.
When the disease ran its full course
with Europeans, and with Natives of robust
athletic make, the following appearances
generally presented themselves. What may be
termed the cold stage or state of collapse, usu-
ally lasted from twenty-four to forty-eight hours;
and was seldom of more than three complete
days duration. Throughout the first twenty-
four hours, nearly all the symptoms of deadly
oppression; the cold skin, and oozing of clammy
sweat from every pore, the feeble pulse, occa-
sional vomiting, purging, and cramps; the thirst
and anguish, continued undiminished. Then
the system shewed symptoms of revival; the
vital powers began to rally; the circulation and
heat to be restored ; and the spasms, sickness
and desire to go to stool, to be considerably les-
sened, The warmth gradually returned; the
pulse rose in strength, and fullness; and then
became sharp, and sometimes hard. The tongue
got more deeply furred; the thirst continued
with less nausea. The stools were no longer
like gruel or rice water ; they, usually between
the third and sixth day, became first brown and
watery; then dark green, black, and pitchy;
find the bowels during many days continued to


discharge immense..loads of vitiated bile ; until
with returning health, the secretions of the
liver and other viscera gradually put on a natu-
ral appearance, These discharges were gene-
rally hot, acrid, and passed with griping and
tenesmus. Sometimes they were of a bright
yellow colour; and the surcharge of bile was.
so great, as to be ejected in a pure stream from
the stomach. It was remarked that, where the
motions consisted of a chocolate coloured fluid,
with floculi swimming in it, the patient rarely
recovered.
Tire fever, which almost invariably attended
this second stage of the disease, may be consider-
ed to have been rather the result of an effort in
nature to recover herself from the rude shock,
which she had sustained, than as forming any
integrant and necessary part of the disorder
itself. It partook much pf the nature of the
common bilious attacks of these latitudes. There
was the hot dry skin ; the foul, deeply furred,
dry tongue ; parched mouth; thirst; sick sto-
mach ; depraved secretions; restlessness;
watchfulness ; and quick variable pulse ; some-
times with delirium, stupor, and other marked
affections of the brain.
Generally, when the disorder proved fatal,
after reaching this stage, the tongue, from be-
ing cream coloured, got brown, and sometimes
black, hard, and more deeply furred; the teeth


and lips were covered with sordes ; the state of
the skin varied, chills alternating with heats ;
the pulse became extremely quick, weak, and
tremulous; hiccough, catching of the breath,
great restlessness, and deep moaning succeeded ;
and the patient soon sunk, incoherent and in-
sensible, under the debilitating effects of low
nervous fever, and frequent dark, tarry, al-
vine discharges.
In other cases, this secondary period ran a
somewhat different course. As the action of the
heart and arteries was renewed, and the natural
warmth of the body returned, an unusual degree
of energy succeeded. The brain was evidently
affected; and the patient was quite insensible to
the great danger into which he had fallen. The
pulse rose as high as 120; great heat, especially
over the large cavities, was complained of.—
There was extreme agitation and distressing
thirst. The patient continually called for cold
water, to relieve the burning sensation of the
abdomen. Sometimes, a warm perspiration
broke out near the wrists and forehead, which
afforded temporary relief to his sufferings.—
To this state of excitement, that of collapse
quickly succeeded. There was then great
prostration of strength; the bowels became
quite torpid ; severe pains occurred low
down in the abdomen, near the scite of the
rectum, which were always' aggravated upon
stools being procured by medicine. The state


of the stomach now excited surprise ; its unna-
tural irritability was entirely gone, and the
most nauseating medicine could be poured into
jt without exciting vomiting.—lt rarely occurred,
that the patient survived the great sinking pro-
duced by this stage ; and even where good for-
tune and the strength of his constitution carried
him through it, he suffered long after from de-
bility and disordered bowels.
The attacks of this disease sometimes came
on at once, without previous warning; some-
times various signs betokened their approach ;
according to the existing'state-of the Epi-
demic, and of the individual affected.—ln
large cities and in camps, where the disease
existed in full force, and the virus was pe-
culiarly concentrated, persons in previous per-
fect health were frequently seized in a moment,
without any apparent cause.—Where again, the
disorder prevailed in no very malignant form,
healthy individuals were sometimes at once
brought under its influence, from marked errors
in diet, or sudden exposure to other powerful
exciting causes.—Where, however, neither of
these circumstances obtained, the attack was
usually preceded by various symptoms of de-
rangement of the alimentary canal; anorexia,
nausea, sickness of stomach, and costiveness.
To these, a looseness would perhaps succeed,
which kept on for a day or two, till the patient
was at once seized with vomiting and the other


pathognomonic signs of the disease, upon drink-
ing a draught of cold water, of incautiously
going from hot into cold air.—ln many cases
general lassitude and shivering preceded the
attack.-—ln some persons, who, Under the alarm
produced by these ailments had recourse to
purgatives, immense quantities of black bilious
matter were passed off; shewing perhaps, previ-
ous deranged state of the hepatic functions.
The general appearances of the disease being
thus described, it will be right, before proceed-
ing further, to speak shortly of the' varieties
assumed by it, in its different points of attack.
This digression will not, however, occupy much
time ; for throughout its long and destructive
track, and among the myriads whom it affected
during its progress, the Epidemick exhibited per-
haps' less variety, arid fewer discrepancies, than
any general distemper to which the human body is
subject.
To begin with Bengal. During the two years
in which it more or less harassed'Calcutta, it
appeared in every degree of mildness and seve-
rity, amongst the various castes and classes of
persons affected, iir different periods' and sea-
sons.—‘The only general remark that can, there-
fore, be made here, is that spasms, and subse-
quent reaction were more'remarkable among the
Europeans; immediate collapse and prostration
of strength among the Natives.—rlt was more
generally fatal perhaps in February 1818, than
H


in the preceding autumn j and yielded less rea*
dily to medicine.
At Jessore, Backergunge, and Momensing, it
has subsisted during an equal length of time,
sometimes in greater, sometimes in less vigour;
but decidedly with greater and more general
fatality, in the earlier months than now. In
these districts and in the vicinity of Bullooah,
near the mouth of the Ganges, at first hardly
any of those attacked recovered without medicine.
In Dacca, where it has been from July 1817,
to the present moment, without any period of
entire intermission, there seems to have been no-
thing particular in the form generally assumed
by it.
In Sylhet it was far more destructive in the
latter part of 1818, than it had been during the
former year; proving fatal in a much shorter
space of time, and resisting the powers of reme-
dies, which formerly effected a cure. If nothing
curative was attempted for an hour, the case was
then considered hopeless.
From November, 1817, to November, 1818, in
Tipperah the Epidemick exhibited considerable
variety; sometimes it was attended with no vomit-
ing; sometimes there was no pain in the bow-
els, nor general spasmodic affection.—There
was always great prostration'of strength. The


disease was milder towards the end, than in
the commencement. In the other districts of
Bengal there was nothing unusual in the ap-
pearances of the disease,
At Chuprah, at first, the violence of the
spasms chiefly attracted attention, latterly its
type was modified. The distinctive marks of
purging and vomiting still obtained j but the
spasms were not so severe or constant; and the
attack was not so sudden: being generally pre*»
ceded by a sense of indisposition, and pains
about the abdomen and neck of the bladder. In
both periods the egesta during the attack were
similar; but in the latter the voiding of worms
was a common occurrence; and in cases, in
which stools were procured by medicine,
scybala generally came away.
At Dinapore, whilst the Epidemick destroyed
numbers in its usual mode, it not unfrequently
appeared in a different and equally fatal form; in
which vomiting and purging were wholly absent,
and the body was universally affected by spasm.-
This form occurred equally among Europeans
and Natives.
In Tirhoot, spasm scarcely ever appeared.; and
the pressing symptoms were general depression,
and discharges from the bowels.—-At Mullhye
again, and other places on the Eastern frontier,
cramp of the extremities was of common oc-
currence.
H 2


Between Patna and Benares the symptoms to
he chiefly combated were the immediate depres»
sign of the vital powers, the languid circulation, and
coldness of the surface.—-At Benares, in the Hot
Weather of 1818, the Epidemick appeared in its
usual shape ; but in the ensuing Rains many per-
sons died with the following symptoms. The
individuals complained, generally after eating, of
great pain of stomach, faintness, and a sense of
sinking, as if life were quitting them; and unless
relieved by some stimulant, soon expired.—A
great scarcity of grain then existed in the city;
and the sufferers were generally of the poorer
class, and debilitated by the want of nourishing
food.
At Cawnpore, and in the Doab and the dis-,
tricts East of the Ganges, the disorder kept its
usual course ; and was generally followed by
debility and slight bowel complaints.
In the Centre Division of the Army, Europeans
were generally affected in the following manner.
They first complained of severe pain in the ab-
domen, particularly about the umbilicus, Then
violent vomiting and purging of a fluid like
rice water came on, and was followed by severe
spasms in the extremities and m usc^es Pf the
belly.—ln some instances, the patients were sud-
denly attacked with cramps, without any discharge
from the alimentary canal. —The countenance was
ghastly in the extreme, in the commencement pf


the attack.—Then succeeded the usual appear-
ances of cold, clammy, blue skin; sunken eyes ;.
shrivelled fingers; want of pulse; dry parched
mouth, and thirst.—ln some the pulse remained ;
and was then quick, and of a wiry feel.—ln
almost all, there was complete ischuria, and in
those who survived, no water was passed during
many days.—The contractions of the muscles
in the limbs were remarkably painful and dis-
tressing. Where curative means were not ap-
plied, or failed in giving relief, the patient usu-
ally perished within twenty-four haul’s. A curious
symptom was sometimes observed immediately
previous to dissolution. When fluid was admi-
nistered to the sufferer, he collected it in the
corper of his mouth, and then squirted it out
with great violence; and this at a time, when he
was so exhausted as to be incapable of the
slightest general exertion. The early symptoms
among Natives were similar in kind, but less in
degree. The spasms were feebler; and the de-
bility more striking. In many the exhaustion
was so great, that they could not articulate. The
abdominal muscles frequently remained relaxed
and flaccid. In others they were, together with the
viscera, and muscles of the upper and lower
extremities, thrown into violent spasmodic ac-
tion. —The fingers and toes were blue and con-
tracted, and their last phalanges curved inwards/
The pulse in many could not be felt in the
carotids—The buccinator muscles fell in; and
the whole face was hollow and haggard.—The


fluid ejected upwards was usually colourless;
that downwards watery and muddy ; sometimes
bilious.—Towards the last stage, a thick film
came over the ball of the eye; the tunica con*
junctiva was suffused with red blood; the coun-
tenance assumed a sharp Hippocratic appear*
ance, and some hours before death was so de-
pressed and altered, as not to be readily recog-
nised.—The corpses of such as died, looked
immediately after the breath was gone, like bodies
that had been long dead; so wan and shrunken
were they. It was not however remarked, that pu.
trefaction took place sooner than in such as die
from ordinary ailments. As the powers oflife were
more readily destroyed in the weakly frames of
the Natives, than in the European, with them death
occurred proportionably earlier. Many accordingly
died between the first and the twelfth hour of
the attack.—lt was singular, that neither with
Europeans nor Natives were those symptoms of
strong reaction, and subsequent fever, which,
among the former at least, were of almost con n
stant occurrence in the lower parts of India,
observed.—Debility ; disordered tone of the
stomach and liver; dysentery, and diarrhoea,
formed the usual sequelae. In many recovery
was remarkably rapid; and even in the severest
cases, the constitution did not appear to have
suffered any permanent injury, and the patient
generally regained his former health and strength
in one, two, or at the farthest three months.;


In the Left Division of the Army, spasms and
excruciating burning in the stomach were very
generally present, with the other diagnostic signs
of the disease.—Suffusion of bile, fever, chronic
diarrhoea, and debility, were its ordinary conse-
quences.
In the Nagpore Division, the symptoms were
extremely violent, and frequently carried off the
patient in four or five hours.—The depression
was always exceedingly great ; with dim glisten-
ing eyes; headach over the eyebrows ; gnawing
tightness of the stomach, burning and thirst.
The spasms of the trunk and limbs were not
uniformly present ; sometimes they were slight,
sometimes severe.—The vomiting and purging
occurred together or alternately; and in every
degree of violence.—The pulse was sometimes full
and steady; at other times weak and intermitting;
and occasionally even a total cessation of arterial
action took place. Strangury was not uncommon.
The skin, though generally cold and moist, was
somtimes dry and hot.—The only genera! after
effect of the attack, was extreme debility.
Among the troops of the Rajpootana Force,
the disorder was more violent in the middle, than
in the early or latter part of its visit.—ln Euro-
peans, and at first in Natives, the severity of the
spasmodic affections of the extremities was chiefly
remarkable ; the balance of the circulation was
not greatly disturbed, and the pulse did not


rapidly fail.—‘Towards the middle period of ite
stay, the cramps were hardly to be observed among
the Natives. The morbific agency was then so
powerful as immediately to arrest the circulation,
and produce entire exhaustion.—The total want of
pulse, coldness of body and extremities, prostration
of strength, and wrinkling of the skin of the hands
and feet, were then the principal marks of a state,
from which it was hardly possible to rouse the:
patient, even when the vomiting and purging
were allayed.—Latterly, the presence of the dis-
order was barely discernible in the slight evacua-
tions and feeble twitches accompanying its attacks-
Fever was a rare consequence of the disease. Ex-
treme weakness; irritable stomach } irregular
action of the bowels; and in a very few cases dy*
sentery, formed its usual sequhe.
In Jeypore the attack was always preceded by
general lassitude, frequently ending in shivering
like that of an ague fit.—Then succeeded 1 severe
pain of belly, followed by vomiting and purging.
Cramps, and the usual train of symptoms. A
looseness, lasting four or five days, sometimes
came after the attack ; but generally the sufferers
recovered surprisingly fast: in some instances in
a few hours.
In tire Hansi Division, the symptoms coincided
with those enumerated in the general description.
Vomiting was more violent in some j purging, in
others.—Excessive restlessness, burning heat in


the bowels, and spasm in the extremities, were
present in almost every case» —Of those who
recovered, many had to undergo fevers of the
remittent or intermittent type, -before they re-
gained their health.—Bowel complaints were
very rare; greater or less debility was present in
all.
At Delhi, Meerut, Coel, Agra, and Futtigur, as
the disease was generally milder, than in other
parts of the country, it ordinarily left no other ill
effects than weakness, and disordered bowels.
Having thus described the symptoms of this
tremendous disorder, let us now see what were
the effects produced by it in disorganising the
human body, and deranging its most important
functions.
J


SECTION III.
APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH.
Of those who died in Calcutta, it was believed,
perhaps rather fancifully, that the bodies sooner
underwent putrefaction than the remains of per-
sons dying under the ordinary circumstances of
mortality.— In many, a striking proof of the unna-
tural accumulation of blood in the great cavities,
was afforded by the thorax and abdomen continu-
ing preternaturally warm for many hours, when
the limbs were cold, livid, and stiff.
The bodies of such as had sunk in the earlier
stages of the malady, frequently exhibited
hardly any unhealthy appearance. This was
more especially observable among Europeans
of weak and sickly constitutions, and among Na-
tives of the poorer classes.—On laying open the
bodies of such persons, it was remarked, that the
abdomen emitted a peculiar, offensive odour, ve-
ry different from the ordinary smell of dead sub


jects.* In them there was not the slightest mark
of previous increased vascular action throughout
the whole intestinal canal; which rather appeared
paler than usual, and flabby; and was filled with an
amazing quantity of whitish or muddy fluid;
•r empty and inflated with air.—Sometimes in
the stomachthis fluid was found mixed with pieces-
of curdled matter, or lumps of indigested food.
This appearance of relaxation was not confined to
those in whom the spasmodic affections were ab-
sent. It occurred frequently where the cramps of
the abdominal muscles had been violent; and the
pain in the stomach excruciatingly severe.
Onlaying open the abdomen of such as had
lived some time after the commencement of the at-
tack, and especially of Europeans and the stouter
Natives, a different set of appearance was brought
into view.—The omentum and mass of intestines
were often found displaced, and preternaturally
vascular; with partial adherence between the
diaphragm, liver and surrounding viscera.—The
colour of the intestines varied from deep
rose, to a dark hue; according as the increased
vascular action had been arterial or venous.—ln
# In one case, that of a Gentleman who died after six
hours illness, the three Medical men who opened the bo-
dy were sensible of this peculiarity; andiall were for a day
or two affected with vomitipg, looseness and other symp-
toms of disordered bowels. In this case there was no
appearance of disease in the alimentary canal.-
I 2


some instances the outer surface of the stomach
likewise, was florid, audits veins turgid with dark
blood; but. this was not so in the generality of
cases.
This organ was, however, much contracted,
and its substance hard and frequently thicken-!
ed.—On cutting into it, it was found sometimes
empty, sometimes partially, and at others largely
filled with fluid of various colour and consistence;
thin and transparent, milky, green, dark, gru-
mous, or muddy. Sometimes, this fluid- was
black, like lamp black; sometimes it consisted,
of pufe blood; and at other times of blood mixed
with bile.—On removing this the inner surface was
frequently seen lined with coagulable lymph,
bloody gelatine, or a muddy, glary, viscid- mat-
ter ; which on being washed away, brought the
highly inflamed coats into view. Of these the
appearance was various; generally they were
crossed by streaks of a deep red, interspersed
with spots of inflammation made up of tissues of
enlarged vessels.—-Sometimes the inflammation
was florid and bright coloured; so as to give the
whole inner surface of the organ the appearance
of a minutely injected anatomical preparation.—
In some instances, ulceration had begun, and the
villous coat was partially abraded; in others in-
cipient mortification had occux-red, and the coats
were puckered into net work, or drawn into folds,
With patches of red near the pylorus. • •


- Thte intestines were sometimes largely inflated
with air; at other times flattened, thickened, and
corrugated; and sometimes partially contract-
ed.—From violent action and reversed peristaltic
motion previously to death, intus-susceptio of the
large and small guts was of no unfrequent occur-
rence.—ln some instances this happened in two
or three places j and the portion of detained in-
testine was nearly a foot in length. On cutting
into the intestines, the smaller guts were observ-
ed to be more inflamed than the larger.—The
duodenum, and more particularly its upper por-
tion,'was generally similar in morbid appearance
to the stomach; corrugated, inflamed, with flo-
rid or deep red patches and streaks.—ln cases of
several days standing, the inner coat of the small
guts was ulcerated, and they were filled with sa-
nies, having portion's of lymph floating in it.—
Then the large intestines were lined with a
dark, thick, pitchy stuff poured out from the liv-
er, as it had begun to renew its action.—ln such
as died early, the fluid was limpid, or muddy, with
cheesy matter at times floating in it.—ln general
neither bile nor foeces were seen in the intestinal
canal,- —The colon and rectum were frequently
contracted and inflamed, in their whole extent.—.
The former, more particularly near its sigmoid
flexure, was sometimes not of the thickness of a
finger.—The inner surface of the rectum mjar its
termination in the anus was in some instances
abraded j in almost all highly vascular,


The appearance of the liver was very various.—*
In most cases, and in nearly all young plethoric
subjects, it was enlarged and gorged with blood;
which flowed profusely and sometimes spouted
up, on a scalpel being plunged into any part of
it.—ln a few, it was large, soft, pappy, light co-
loured with greyish spots, and not much distend-*
ed.—ln others again, it was collapsed and flac-i
cid.—ln some rare cases suppuration was disco-
vered to have taken place; and a pint and a half
of good pus was found in one, who had been ili
only twelve hours, and who had not before com-
plained. These appearances were probably ac-
cidental.
The gall bladder was generally full of dark
green or black bile ; sometimes it was empty, or
loose, with a quantity of thin, pale, or light colour-
ed fluid.—-In many the liver and gall bladder had
no mark of diseased action.—The Hepatic Duct
was usually enlarged and relaxed; the Ductus
Communis generally contracted, and in several,
instances obstructed by gall stones.
The spleen was of softer texture than usual;
uniformly enlarged and distended with blood.—
The kidnies presented no unusual appearance.
The urinary bladder sometimes partook of the
general inflammation ; but it was usually quite
empty ami shrunk, so as to be raised with difficul-
ty from the inner surface of the pubis.


The great venous trunks in the abdomen, and
particularly the mesenteries, and vessels of the
portal circle were uniformly enlarged and dis-
tended.—The vena cava was sometimes thick and
hard like a sausage.—The lacteals were turgid
with chyle; so as frequently to have a tortuous
knotty appearance.—>ln the thorax the same
marks of great internal accumulation were pre-
sent.—The heart and great blood vessels were
stuffed with clotted blood; and the lungs were
black, collapsed and preternaturally heavy. The
inner surface of the oesophagas was sometimes in-
flamed and ulcerated.—ln other respects the tho-
racic viscera were sound.
The brain was generally of natural appearance;
especially in those who died early.—ln some
cases there were various marks of venous conges-
tion and incipient inflammation.—The Sinuses,
and vessels leading to them were turgid with
dark blood. Partial adhesions, and deposition of
lymph, were observed to have taken place
between the dura and pia mater, near the
coronal suture, and towards the occiput.—
Serous effusion likewise occurred in a grea-
ter or less : degree between the membranes, or
in the ventricles.—ln one or two rare instances
the Sinuses had given way from over distension,
and a great quantity of blood was found poured
out on the surface of the brain.—ln cases of per-
sons affected with stupor previously to death, a
quantity of fluid escaped immediately upon punc


turing the dtira ixlatef; and much serous 'effusion
had taken place throughout the cavity of ther
brain, with partial thickening and inflammation of
the meninges.
This description niay be closed with a short
recapitulation of the morbid appearances, as they,
were modified in situations in which there was a
large field for observation.—ln the Centre Divi*
sion of the Army among Europeans they were,
very contradictory.—ln many, particularly of
such as died early, the stomach and intestinal ca--
nal were found full of muddy fluid, without the
slightest mark of inflammation.—ln others the
vessels of their inner coats were turgid, sometimes
highly inflamed, ulcerated and gangrened.—The
stomach was frequently thickened and contract-
ed', and the small intestines full of hard knots
from one portion being forced into another.—
The liver was congested, inflamed, and darker
than usual.—The gall bladder overloaded • with
dark bile; the ducts distended and relaxed.-
The thoracic and cerebral viscera sound. Among
Natives the alimentary canal in its entire column
■was uniformly seen full of a muddy fluid; and
its inner surface lined with a clayey substance of
the same nature.—The quantity of this earthy
looking stuff was sometimes so large as in a man-
ner to plaster the villous coat; and to leave a
thick sediment on passing through the sheet in
which the corpse was wrapped,—-Slight traces of


inflammation were occasionally observed; but iii
most instances, no mark of increased vascular ac-
tion was perceptible.—The liver was sound; and
the gall bladder filled with viscid pitchy bile.—
Neither in Europeans, nor in Natives, was any
tinge of that secretion discovered in the intesti-
nal canal.—ln the Jubbulpore Force the stomach
and intestines were found filled with a limpid
fluid ; and in some partially inflamed.—The li-
ver exhibited various appearances ; in some it
was turgid, and easily lacerable; in others flabby
and collapsed.—The gall bladder was in some
distended with blackish, in others with dark yel-
low, inspissated bile ; and in others nearly emp-
ty. —The contents the head and chest do not
appear to have been examined.—ln the Nag-
pore Force the interference of relatives gene-
rally prevented the inspection of the bodies
of the dead.—ln the Rajpootana Division the
morbid appearances were nearly as described in
the Jubbulpore Force.—ln the Eurnaul Division,
the abdominal viscera generally appeared as if
gorged with blood: the stomach was filled, and
sometimes distended by muddy water.—ln Eu-
ropeans Some marks of inflammation were obser-
vable ; but in Natives the surfaces of the stomach
and intestines were perfectly pale.—The liver
and gall bladder were healthy j with bile of natu-
ral colour and consistence in the latter.—The
spleen was of softer texture than usual.
K


SECTION IV.
PROXIMATE CAUSE OF THE DISEASE.
THE present report being intended to serve,
rather as an useful repository of well ascertained
facts, and practical deductions, than as a vehicle
for theoretical reasonings, and hypothetical dis-
cussions ; it will not be expected, that such fea-
tures of the disease, as cannot be at all clearly
developed, or only with very great difficulty, will
here be dwelt upon at length.—Those points in
the history and essence of the Epidemick, which
have reference to its remote and proximate
causes, would seem to be of this description ; and
may, therefore, be soon dismissed, as nearly in-
comprehensible and incapable of solution. But,
as the mode of treatment, which we may chuse
to follow, in combating the disease, will in some
measure depend upon the notion we may form
regarding its proximate cause, it will be well to
ascertain, as far as possible, in what that consists.—
Nothing more, however, than a distant approxi-
mation to the truth can be here looked for.


It may then be conjectured, that the stomach
and small intestines are the primary seal of the
morbid action in this disease.—-That this is the
case, might have been supposed from the analogy
of its symptoms with those caused by violent
lesions of these parts from the introduction of
mineral and other poisons, and is proved by the
Whole history of the attack—-The stomach, al-
most without exception, is the organ first affect-
ed.—The patient complains of soreness, cons-
triction, and pain in the Epigastrium ; his belly
swells; he becomes sick ; faint; and then he
Vomits and purges.—All this is prior in time
to the sinking of the pulse, and coldness of the
extreme parts; and in most cases, to the spasmo-
dick affections. —Then, the stomach, throughout
the whole course of the illness, continues to de-
mand- attention, as the part chiefly disorder-
ed. To it the sufferer invariably refers the into-
lerable pain, anguish, and burning heat, by which
he is tormented.-r-Again, the irritability of this
organ and consequent vomiting, are by far the
most obstinate parts of the disease; and general-
ly keep up long after the spasms and other symp-
toms have been entirely subdued.—Moreover,
the great share, which the stomach and small in-
testines have in the disordered action, is shewn
by the manner in which the fluid is ejected, and
by the appearances observed after death.—For it
was frequently remarked, that the contents of
the stomach were thrown out with violence, at a
K 2


time when the abdominal muscles were in a re-
laxed state; and when, therefore, the spasmodic
contraction was clearly referable to the organ it-
self. —And after death its coats were found tur-
gid, inflamed, and eyen ulcerated, and partially
mortified: evidently from the high degree of
excitement, and inordinate action into which it
had been thrown during life.
That the small intestines shared more largely
in this action than the great guts, was proved by
the greater vascularity of their coats; the fre-
quent introsusception caused by reversed peris 7
taltick motion; the greater inflammation of their
inner surface; and their generally containing
more of the muddy fluid, which characterised
the disease.
That the depressed state of the circulatory
power, and diminished action of the heart and
arteries, were rather a consequence and symp-
tom of the severe shock, which the system had
received in one of its principal organs, than a
primary affection, was rendered probable, by
their being subsequent in appearance to the Vo-
miting and by their gradually increas-
ing with the increasing aggravation of those
symptoms; and by their total absence, in some
cases for several hours after the other signs of
the disease had reached their height.—This too,
was proved by no trace of inflammation or other


diseased appearance being discoverable in the
heart or lungs; excepting the distension of the
large trunks, which was probably merely an ef-
fect of the disturbed state of the circulation, and
consequent accumulation of blood in the cen-
tre.—-Besides, supposing the suspended state of
the circulation to have constituted the essence
of the disease, it will be found, that the cause as-
signed is -wholly insufficient to account for the
effects derived from it.—ln syncope and other
affections of the vital functions, the action of the
heart and arteries is often either wholly, or par-
tially suspended j and yet no such consequences
as those distinguishing this disease are observed
to follow.
Nor, can the disorder be with greater reason
ascribed to spasm of the extreme vessels; for in
the cold fit of agues, and other diseases of a like
description, there is the same want of arterial ac-
tion, and retirement of the blood from the sur-
face, without the burning heat and great internal
tumult of this disorder. The state of the skin
and other symptoms would seem to shew, that the
capillary vessels are in this disease rather in a
state of atony or mere inaction, than of spasm.— ■
For here there is none of that horripilation,
dry skin, and shivering, which in the cold stage
of intermittents are supposed to arise from, and
to mark the presence of spasm.—The skin on the
contrary is shrunk, clammy, and bedewed with


perspiration, as if the mouths of all the excreto-
ries were thrown wide open.—ln like manner, the
suspended state of the secretions seemed to de-
pend mainly on inaction; since the suppression
or retention' of urine, a most remarkable and al-
most constant symptom of the disorder, was not
attended by those fixed pains in the kidnies and
ureters, which so invariably accompany the at-*
tack of nephritick complaints.
It appears doubtful whether derangement in
the hepatick system had any share in the pro-
duction of cholera, either immediately, or in
sympathetick connection with the skin.—The dis-,
sections shew, that the appearance of the liver
was very various; and from this, we may con-
clude, that the general turgidity of that viscus,
as well as of the spleen, was merely owing to
that general retrogression of the blood, which
filled the large cavities, and swelled all the great
trunks., But it will be said, that the stuffing of
the gall bladder with thick green bile, evinced the
previous disordered condition of this organ.—To
this objection it may be replied, that the ap.
pearance was not by any means universal; foe
the cyst was often empty, or partially filled
with pale, or light yellow, thin, fluid; besides,
that even when present,, it might be accounted
for in several ways, without our being obliged
to suppose, that it indicated the agency of the
liver in the production of the attack.—For, it is


well known to every practitioner in India, that
the secretion of dark ropy bile is a sure attend-
ant on that gorged state of the organ, which we
here imagine to be caused by an over accumula-
tion of blood in the trunk; and is invariably in-
creased by the use of calomel; a medicine large-
ly administered in almost every case of cholera.
But, the accumulation may be explained with-
out having recourse to any theory of increased
or disordered secretion in the liver.—lt is only
necessary to suppose, that the natural quanti-
ty of fluid was denied its usual passage into
the intestines; and that this must have
have been the case, will be admitted by every
one who reflects on the violent peristaltic mo-
tion and contraction of the duodenum always
present in the disease, and the effect which they
must necessarily have produced in compressing
and shutting the mouth of the ductus choled-
ochus. Hence regurgitation, and stagnation,
and consequent thickening of the bile in the gall
bladder. To all this may be added, that no one
ever heard of affections of the liver giving rise to
such a train of symptoms as characterize cholera,
although that viscus is in these latitudes daily seen
in every condition of morbid action, by all per-
sons in extensive practice ; and that hundreds of
individuals previously in perfect health were
seized instantaneously with the disease, in all


situations in'which the virus was much, coni
centratech
There is no reason to presume, that the brain,
was in tins disorder otherwise affected than secon-
darily, from previous derangement of th eprimes vice.
and disturbance of the circulation. For generally
to the very last, the intellectual powers continued
wonderfully clear,, amidst all the other suffering ;
which would not have been the case, if the dis-
ease had held its seat in the sensoriura ; or had
originated in any sudden depression, or other dis-
turbance of the nervous energy.—The head!
was rarely attacked in the commencement of the
disorder; the headach, suffused eyes, delirium
and lethargy, and other signs of congestion, all
ordinarily came on late; and might justly be
referred to the filling of the cerebral circle, when
the heart drooped, and there was no longer free'
play in the lungs; and to the exhaustion of the
vital powers under great and unusual sufferings
This conjecture was confirmed by the state of the
contents of the skull after death.—The brain
and its membranes, in those who were early cut
off, were generally found in a healthy condition ;
or merely with some degree of congestion;
whilst the great distension of all the vessels, the
deposition of lymph, and watery effusion were
ordinarily observed in those only, who died in
the latter stage of the complaint.


Upon the supposition, that the stomach is thfe
main seat of this disease, it will not be difficult
to account for the spasmodick affections so ge-
nerally accompanying its progress;for similar
symptoms are commonly present in violent -le-
sions' of this organ, produced by other causes.
Thus, cramps in the bowels, and lumpy contract
tions of the abdominal muscles, are frequently
observed in enteritis and gastritis; and trismus
and spasms of the extremities often form part of
the train of symptoms induced by the introduc-
tion into the stomach of arsenic, sublimate,- and
nitric acid, or of large potations of bad spirituous
liquors. Besides, it is an old axiom in physic,
that “ atony begets.spasm;” and in virtue of it wfe
mayallow, that here the contractions at first
produced by irritation, are afterwards kept up
by habit, and by the universal debility so speedily
produced in this disorder!
• The preceding remarks would seem then to
warrant a conjecture, that the stomach arid
small guts, are the primary seat of lesion in
Cholera. It remains to enquire of what nature
this lesion is. By some it has been assumed to
consist in a violent affection of the nerves- distri-
buted on their inner surface,- superinducing
great general disturbance of the nervous influ-
ence, and universal depression ,of the' system.
But, if this were the case, the symptoms in Cho-
lera should be similar to those of other disorders
L


(manifestly affecting the brain and sensoriurri . by
sympathy with the nerves of the stomach.—And
.yet;how different are they from the drowsiness,
•loss of memory and of voice, stupor, and univer-
sal convulsions, which always speedily follow
.the application of narcotick substances to the
inner coats of the stomach.—The appearances
in • Cholera have much greater resemblance to
those of gastritis, ileus, and other inflammatory
■and spasmodic affections of the. alimentary canal,
:Thus in gastritis, there is the same burning pain in
the region of the stomach, with soreness, disten-
tion, severe vomiting, and occasional purging,
thirst, anxiety*, restlessness, tossing of.the body,
•great debility, watching, and quick contracted
■pulseand in the more violent degrees of the
.disease, faintings, interrupted respiration, cold
clammy sweats, hiccup, coldness of the extremi-
ties and intermitting pulsew
, ; But, then it must be admitted, that the appear-
ances after death render it doubtful how far the
primary affection in Cholera can partake of in-
•flammation.—;For, it has,been seen, above, that
,in the bodies of those who sunk at ,a very early
.stage, of the attack, there were ordinarily .none
of those marks, which are supposed to. charac-
.tense, and to be necessary to prove, the exis-
tence. .of previous inflammation , the whole
,cohpnn. of the alimentary canal being found
paler than natural. And, in old and infirm per


sons, in whom there was little or no plethora of
the circulatory system, and comparatively less
vascular congestion, scarcely any' inflaminatory
appearances were observed, even when the suf-
ferers'survived many hours’, and had the disease
in its utinost violence.—From these facts there
is reason to conclude, that the great vascularity of
the inner coats of the canal, the" thickening, of
their substance, and the introsusceptio, discovered
in the bodies of robust subjects, and generally _of
those who died late in the disease, were, perhaps,
merely the effects of the previous violent straining
and antiperistaltic motion ; and of the general
congestion produced by venous accumulation in
the trunk.
But, if the primary morbid affection of the
alimentary canal were neither vascular not ner-
vous, it will be asked, in what did it consist?
To this we can only reply, (which is in other
words a confession of ignorance:) that like the
pestilential virus, which produced it, it was Of a
peculiar and previously unknown nature; and
evinced itself by symptoms of a novel and most
alarming description.—Whether the enormous
dicharges of muddy and pale fluid, were tha
effect of a new species of secretion, or of a gene-
ral relaxation andgaping of the vessels lining the
viscera, or merely of the squeezing and empty-
ing of the lacteals caused by violent retrogadft
action in their canals, cannot perhaps be deter*
L 2


mined.—-The -contents of. the lacteals would*
however, seem to have been quite inadequate to
■their supply; and the supposition of anew
secretion is hardly consistent with the suspension
of that action, in, all its established organs
throughout the body.*
* We must, after all, agree with Celsus “ that the
disease is so divided between the stomach and intestines,
as to make it difficult to determine to which part it
*lost belongs.” B. i. Chap 11,


SECTION V.
OF THE REMOTE CAUSE OF THE EPI-
DEMICK.
WE have now arrived at a branch of our en-
quiry, in which, each step as we advance, presents
new obstacles to bur progress; and the mass of
testimony and of fact, upon which alone we
could hope to build a reasonable theory, is so
various and irreconcilably contradictory, as after
the maturest deliberation, to leave us in the
midst of doubt and perplexity. Since the stud/
of Medical Science first began, physicians have in
vain attempted rationally to account for the
origin of those general pestilences, which have'
from time to time desolated the different quarters",
of the globe. Taught, however, by the constant-
defeat'of their speculations, they would appear
to have become at length convinced of the futili-
ty of all such enquiries; and of late years to
have abandoned the subj ect, as one of those over
which nature has thrown an impenetrable veil.
It is not with the hope of proving more success-
ful than others, or of discovering the secret
causes that generated the scourge of which we
are now treating, that we venture to hazard an
opinion upon a matter, which must he admitted


to be entirely beyond the range of our under-
standing. All that is meant to be here attempt-
ed, is to shew the insufficiency of every hypo-
thesis yet advanced, to account for the pheno-
mena of the disease ; to prove rather in what it?
generation and..dissemination did not consist;
than in what they truly did; and to explain
some of the peculiar laws observed by it during
itsprogrcss throughout the country.
From its being observed, that in the higher,
latitudes, a very warm atmosphere was essential to
the .'production of sporadick cholera, and that on
the coasts of Ceylon, and in other parts of India,
ill which the disease has from time to time pre-
vailed endeinially, its attacks were manifestly
brought on by great and quick fluctuations in the
temperature of the air ; it has been supposed, that
nothing more was wanting to account for its rise,
in. these tracts as an epidemick, than the gene-
ral existence of similar vicissitudes. , According-
ly,. it 1m been held by many intelligent indivi-
duals in this country, that the recent Epidemick
was ; solely caused by the extremely variable state
of the weather, which obtained previously to and
at the time of its commencement,.—But, this sup-
position arises entirely frqm confounding the Re-
mote with the Exciting Causes of the disease.
It is no doubt very, true, that sudden changes
of temperature frequently immediately produced


Ihe'disorderin situations in which'it had notbeerr
known previously to exist; and reproducedit
'where, having previously existed, it had for some
time lain dormant. But, that all this was merely
accessory, and that something else was necessary
to the generation and continuance of the Epide-
inick is sufficiently clear from the following,
amongst many other considerations;
If changes in heat and moisture were alone re-
quisite to the production of the disorder, then it
ought always to appear, when such changes are
in operation. And yet, that this is not the case,
is proved by the whole history of this country.
For such vicissitudes are inseparable from its
climate ; and form an essential part of the revo-
lutions of its seasons. Nevertheless, till the year
1817, the disease had never been known as an
Epidemick in any considerable part of its very
extended limits.—Again, during the numerous
campaigns, which have been undertaken since the
first establishment of the British Empire in India,
our soldiers, both European and Native, have
been exposed times without number, to every
possible variety of weather, during all seasons of
the year, and at all hours of the day and night, with-*
out being subjected to the pestilence that near-
ly depopulated the camp of the Marquess of
Hastings.—To choose only a few instances of
recent occurrence. In the first year of. Lord
Lake’s campaigns, the troops took the field as


early as September; and frequently marched
during the whole day, when the heat was exces*
sive, and the temperature of the direct rays of
the sun, probably, above 150. In Colonel Mon-
son’s retreat, again, the broken remains of the
Division under his command were during many
days of excessive rain, exposed to the weather,
without food, shelter, or covering; and under
every possible circumstance of mental and bodi-
ly distress. And yet in neither case had they
the disease. In like manner, during the capture
df Java in 1811, the soldiers were frequently
exposed along the coasts to rain, heat, cold,
change of food; crowded to excess, sleeping in
the sun’by day, and in the dew by night, whilst
a chilly land wind blew from the mountains—i
Still cholera was not the consequence. During
the long period of disturbance, which preceded
the last rupture with Poona, and the overthrow
of the Mahratta Powers, theJaulna Force was
for several years almost constantly employed in
the field under canvas’ 1 ’; and yet the disease
was new to them .when communicated in the
summer of 1818, from the neighbouring city of
Nagnore.t
* So with the Force that marched under Colonel
Close upon the Nerbuddain 1810, the thermometrical
vicissitudes frequently amounted to 50: and even ■ 60 :
during twenty four hours; yet no Cholera followed.
‘ f The instances quoted in the preface, of Colonels.
Pearse and Cockerell’s detachments, are, as far as w«


But, it may be said, that the long.contin.ued
irregularities, and frequent unwholesome vicissi-
tudes of the weather, which took place during
the years immediately antecedent to the rise of
the Epidemick, had debilitated the human, Con-
stitution, and generally predisposed it to be
morbidly affected by such exterior circumstan-
ces, as in former times passed over without’ ma-
terially injuring it. But, even this conjecture
will not hold good.—For the Medical Returns
shew, that several detachments and divisions of
the Army underwent every species of exposure
and fatigue during the period under review,
without suffering from the disease; and were yet
Virulently attacked, as soon as they came within
the known sphere of its epidemical influence.
This was strongly exemplified in the case'ofthe
jShlgpore Subsidiary ' Force, which had not a
case of the disease, whilst conducting tlie siege of
Chanda; during which the troops wereexposed to
the great heats of the day under a range’ of stony
hills, and often, without shelter, to the dews of
night; and yet no sooner did they reach the con-
fines of Nagpore, than' it assailed them in the
manner of the plague.—So with the Left Divi-
sion of the Army.—The troops composing
this Division had been almost constantly moving
from the beginning of March ; and in the lat-
know, the only exceptions to this rule; and their occur-
rence is too remote to admit of our discovering all the
causes operating to produce the disease amongst them.
M


ter part of that month, and the first week of
April, had undergone great privations arid fa-
tigue, whilst conducting a heavy train of artillery,
and a numerous convoy of carts, in the cold
of the night and great heats of the day,
through a mountainous and difficult coun-
try.—Yet, they felt nothing of the Epide-
mick, until they, on the 9th and 10th of April,
reached Jubbulpore, in which tpwn it had been
raging several weeks; from which time they be-
came numerously affected by it.
Nor were rain and moisture, any more than
mere alternations of heat and cold, alone suffici-
ent to originate the disease.—For, nearly all the
corps moving on Hansi and Hissar to form Briga-
dier Arnold’s Force, must have met with rain
during their advance from various points in the
Doab.—The Ist Battalion 29th Regiment Na-
tive Infantry was, we know, exposed to exces-
sively wet weather during the whole of its march
, from Aligur.—Still, it continued'entirely exempt,
till, at Hansi, it joined those corps, which hacf
got the Epidemick on passing through Delhi.
These facts would of themselves be sufficient
to do away every hypothesis founded on the be-
lief, that the rise of the Epidemick was solely
.derivable from variations in the sensible
properties of the atmosphere; even were not
the whole history of its progress such as to


discountenance that belief.—But has it .not id;
Bengal again and again risen and fallen, and,'
reappeared, during all periods of the year, and;
under every possible variety of season, heat,,
cold, dryness, and moisture ?—ln Upper India,
again, did it notin Benares, Bundlekund, Oude,
and the Southern Districts of the Doab, rage viru-
lently during the dry months of the Hot Weather;:
whilst it appeared not in Delhi, nor in Meerut,
nor in Jeypore, and the tracts in their vicinity,
until the Rains had set in, and the air was load-,
ed with moisture ? So, of the five camps visited
by it, the Centre Division was attacked in the
Cold Season; the Nagpore and Saugor Division,
in the height of the Hot Winds; and the Raj-
pootana and Kurnaul Divisions whilst it poured
down rain.
The hypothesis of the disease owing its origin
to the use of particular sorts of food, or to the con-
sumption of blighted, and poisonous grain, may
be dismissed in a very few words, as wholly un-
tenable.-—Such a proposition appears, indeed, at
first sight to be in direct opposition to the com-
mon rules of reasoning, and the results of univer-
sal experience; by which we are taught never to
attribute very general effects to causes of partial
operation.—Of the numerous tribes and religious
castes spread over the extended surface of Hin-
dostan, it is every where known, that the com-
mon articles of diet, are almost as various as the
M 2


different 'denominations under which they them*
selves are ranged; and whatever mischief the
eating of noxious rice, of the Ouse or any other
crop, might cause amongst the Bengalese, with,
whom it formed a principal part of their food, it
could hardly be expected to produce the same
effects among the inhabitants of Upper India, who
rarely, if ever, use it.—lt has accordingly been
found, that the Epidemick has again and again
visited the sailors of European ships just entering
the river, and. previously to their having any
communication with the shore; and has often
raged extensively among Sepoys and other classes
of Natives, who had not tasted rice for months, or-
perhaps years, before they were attacked.—Final-
ly, the disease has in towns and detachments of
troops been frequently observed to arise* come to- :
a height, and die away, whilst the food general-
ly employed continued exactly the same, before*
during, and after its visit; and that food some-
times hot containing one particle, and some-
times again, chiefly composed of rice.—Besides,
that the inadequacy of this and every other cause
of partially local operation, for the production of
the disorder, has been clearly established in the
foregoing account of its rise and progress; in
which it is shewn, that it broke out simultane-
ously in many distant and unconnected spots.*
* The theory here referred to, consisted in a belief,
tliat the Epidemick-was originally generated, and after-


It thus appearing, that no theory-yet proposed-
-will stand the test of scrutiny, the question, in what
consisted the Remote Cause of the disease must 1
be abandoned as placed beyond the reach of hu-
man curiosity; or as at least inscrutable in tire-
present state of our knowledge.—This much on-
ly has been shewn in the account of the weather
-wards wholly kept up, by the use of the blighted and
noxious early Crop of Rice of 1817. The improbabi-
lity of this hypothesis might be argued, from the ex-
tremely extensive course pursued by the disorder, and
the likelihood, or certainty, of its having, during that
course visited many tracts, which the deleterious grain
had never reached; from the disease having suddenly,
that is within a few hours, largely affected the inhabi-
tants of several towns, as Agra and Futtigur, in such
manner, that its attacks were clearly refcrrible to corres-
ponding sudden changes in the sensible properties of
the atmosphere; and from other like circumstances.
But its truth would appear to be quite irreconcilable with
the following well authenticated facts ; Ist. From the
concurring and uncontradicted affirmation of many Of-
ficers, Military as well as Medical, who served with the
Nagpore Subsidiary Force, at the period of its being at-
tacked by the Epidemick, it appears that Rice, so far
from being at that time the common food of any class of
the troops, was very little used ; and that many indivi-
duals, who had not tasted a particle of it for months, or
even years, were yet carried off by the disease. 2d. From
the reports of the Officer at the head of the Commissariat
Department with the Centre Division of the Army, it is
learnt, that Rice so far from being common in camp,
could not be procured but with great difficulty, and at an


prefixed to this Report; that for several years
prior to the commencement of the Epidemick, the
seasons had in a very extraordinary manner de-
parted from their usual course; that Easterly
winds had prevailed to an uncommon degree;
exorbitant price.—The Officers alone used it; and the
Commissariat Agents, although they wrote and sent peo-
pie in every direction, failed to obtain a supply, for the
use of such Sepoys as were inhabitants of Bengal Pro-
per, who of all our Native troops, aie almost the only
portion, which prefers Rice to Wheat. So that, while the
Epidemick was raging with unheard of violence in camp,
the Officers, that is the class whom we know to have
been of all others most exempt from the disease, were
the only persons who touched Rice. With the single ex-
ception of Chuna or gram, which was sometimes got
from the neighbouring villages, all stores were here is-
sued by the Commissariat. The depot books for the
time give the following list of issues: viz. Wheat, A/a t
Dali , Chuna , Ghee, Salt, Huldee, and Tobacco; and w»
are authorised to state, that no change whatever took
place in the kinds or sorts of grain given out during the
course of the campaign.—ln like manner, the Natives,
of the Rajpootana and Hansi Force were’ supplied
throughout, by the Commissariat.—The purshases were
Wheat, Dali, &c. as above; and there was no Rice in
camp, excepting a small quantity kept in store for the,
use of the Europeans in the event of bread unexpectedly
failing them.—The Left Division of the Grand Army
alone was not regularly supplied by the Commissariat
but it is learnt from the Officer in charge of the Depar-
tment in that quarter, that the troops and followers ofal.
classes, chiefly used Ala, which was the principal article


and, that at the period of its rise, the atmosphere
all over Bengal was excessively humid, from the
previous great and long continued falls of rain.—-
But, whether this unseasonable and wet state of
the weather, itself produced and constituted the
vitiated condition of the airor, was a mere
casual accompaniment and adjutory to some
more hidden means of corruption; it is not in
our power to determine.—lt may, however, be re-
marked, that the surface of Bengal was then in a
Condition very similar to that of Lower Egypt,
of supply in the Bazars. But, without taking into consi-
deration the results of experience, a simple reference to
.the period of the first rise of the Epidemick, as contrast-
ed with that, at which the Ouse crop of Rice is reaped,
will prove, that the hypothesis under review was from the
first wholly untenable. The seed of the Ouse Rice is
sown between the Ist and 20th day of June, according
as the Rainy Season happens to commence early or late;
and the plant is cut from the middle of August to the
middle of September. Now from the first Section of
this Report, it clearly appears, that the Epidemick first
began in Nuddeea and Mymensing in May; that it
raged extensively in June; that in July it had reached
the far distant districts of Dacca and Behar; and that it
was generally prevalent throughout the whole of the
Lower Provinces in August and September.—lt is al-
mosf ’unnecessary to point out the conclusion. —That the
Ouse Rice of the season could not be the cause of a dis-
temper, which largely existed, when the plant was yet
green; nay had shewn itself, when the seed had not yet
been thrown into the ground.


during the period of its annual inundation;
and that Egypt and the neighbouring country of
Ethiopia, “ have been stigmatised in every age,
as the original source and seminary of the
plague.”
Having failed in discovering the primary agent
in the generation of the pestilential venom, we
should next enquire, by what means it would ap-
pear to have been propagated; and what cir-
cumstances seemed most readily to bring it into
action, in places in which the atmosphere was al-
ready predisposed for its reception?
Perhaps the most singular fact in the whole
history of the disease, was the predilection which
it shewed to spread in one particular direction.—
From the remote period of its first appearance in
the Eastern parts of Bengal, in the autumn of
1817> to the hour of its arrival on the Malabar
Coast, as has been seen in a preceding part of
this report, its path was almost uniformly from
East to West; and, if we may be allowed so to
express ourselves, it seemed so bent upon pursu-
ing this Westerly course, that rather than deviate
from it in an opposite direction, it would for a
while desert a tract of country, to which it after-
wards returned under circumstances more con-
genial to its disposition.—Thus, although it ap-
peared in the beginning of November,
1817, on both banks of the Jumna near iSher


gur, it (lid not then shoot Eastward across the
Doab; but, leaving all. on that side of the river
untouched, spread far and wide through Bundle-
kund, and all the districts to the West—-In
like manner, when it had reached Cawn-
pore in the following spring, it shewed a
marked aversion for Bareilly and the other tracts
east of the Ganges; but readily stretched through
the Doab to Agra, Coel, Delhi and Meerut; and
thence far to the West, by Hisgar, Jeypore, and
the detached camp of the Rajpootana Force.—
To give another instance.—Although Allahabad*,
and the whole of that District, was largely afflict-
ed in March, the infection was not thence com-
municated to Sooltanpore, Fyzabad, Oude, and
the Districts bordering on the Gogra and Goom-
tee; but from the South East quarter, by the
way of Tirhoot and Gorruckpore.—The case of
the small Cantonment of Mulhye .on the Eastern
frontier of Tirhoot, which would seem to have re-
ceived the disease from the West, and of one or
two other places, in which the range of aberratic
on was very limited, peed not invalidate a rule
deduced from an observance of a general course
extending several thousand miles.
Frpm knowing, that during the existence of
former pestilences, the diffusion of the virus could
be frequently traced to the motion of particular
currents of air, it was natural to look for an ex-
planation of this extraordinary regularity of pro-
N


gression in the prevailing course of the winds
during that period.—Accordingly, upon refer-
ence to the various reports of the rise of the dis-
order in different parts of the Country, it was
discovered, that in a vast majority of instances
the wind was blowing from the East or South
East quarter, at the time of its breaking out.-r
Tiiis may be stated to have been almost without
exception the case in Bengal; throughout which
the Epidemick arose in the Rainy Season, when
the wind blows almost invariably from the South
East.—ln Calcutta, Nuddeea, and many other
places, indeed, the influence of particular direc-
tions in the wind was so evident, as to have at
length almost justified a prediction, that the a-
batements and aggravations of the disorder would
certainly correspond with their alternations.--
Thus in Calcutta, it declined in virulence and fre-
quency as the Northerly wind set in, in Novem-
ber 1817; and again recurred with a South East
wind in the following February.—lts reappear
ance, again, in April 1818, was preceded by a
continuance of wind from the North East : an
uncommon quarter for that season of the year.-—.
So in Nuddeea, the disease declined for a few
days on the wind blowing steadily from the
North; but no sooner had it again veered tothe
East, than it recommenced its ravages.—The
same prevalence of Easterly and Southerly winds
attended its progress through Tirhoot, Sarun,


Behai 1 , and Shahabad.—At Moozufferpore, Bux-
ar, and Ghazeepore, this had been the prevailing
wind for some.time .before its appearance.—ln
the camp of the Centre Division of the Army* the.
wind, which from the 21st of the preceding
month had blown strongly from the West, sud-
denly changed round to the East quarter on the
7th November; and there are grounds for believ-
ing, that from that day the disease raged in
camp.—With the Left Division again, the wind
ranged from East to South, from the Ist to the
14th of April.-The Epidemick was with them on
the 9th, and abated hs the wind came round to
the West.--The state of the winds is unfortunate-
ly omitted in the returns from the Nagpore
Force. —With the RajpOotana Force they are stat-
ed to have been variable; but in Jeypore, Briga-
dier Arnold’s Camp, Agra, arid other stations of
Central India, they were Easterly during the pre-
valence of the disease.
It must be admitted, that to this rule there
were several striking exceptions.—Thus at Be-
nares, Juanpore, and other places visited by the
disease in April and May, the hot Westerly winds
blew during the whole period of it continuance ;
and at Futtygur it shewed itself on the morn-
ing succeeding the occurrence of a severe North
Wester: until then remaining unseen, although
an Easterly wind Lad for a considerable time be-
fore existed.—Nay, in Delhi, the Epidemick broke
N 2


out the moment the Easterly wind, which had
been Very unseasonably blowing during the pre-
vious months,, gave way to Westerly breezes j
and departed as they withdrew.
These exceptions, however, were not very nu-
merous ; and when placed in contrast with the in-
numerable instances bearing towards the opposite
point, are not of such magnitude as to overturn
the general deduction, which we now venture to
draw: that the appearance of the Epidemick in
any particular place was usually accompanied or
preceded by an Easterly wind ; and that there was
apparently some connection between the dissemi-
nation of the pestilential virus, and the prevalence
of currents from that quarter.* Of the nature of
that connection we cannot speak certainly; nor
can we tell, whether those currents, acting as a
vehicle-of the poisonous matter, carried it along
with them from one infected spot to another pre-
viously healthy; or acted merely from their su-
perior moisture, in the light of a strong exciting
cause, eliciting the disorder in places, where the
Virus had previously existed, although it were
not yet brought into action.—ln favour of the
former supposition, the progress of the Epidemick
in the tipper Provinces may be cited; where the
disease broke out in different places, at such in-
’ * The more frequent occurrence of the disease during
the prevalence of South-Easterly winds, is noticed by
Avicenna.


tervals of time, and in a manner so like regular
Succession, as almost to warrant a belief, that
it was communicated from town to town, after
the ordinary laws of consecutive propagation.-—lt
would be mere repetition again to quote the nu-
merous instances, in which the disease in this
manner travelled from place to place.—A refer-
ence to a former Section will prove to the rea-
der, that along the banks of the Jumna, and
thence Westward to Jeypore, Buridlekund, and
the Mahratta States, it seemed very constantly to
spread in this manner; and will leave him almost
satisfied, that there at least, the virus must have
Tbeen diffused and propelled by the winds.—ln
Bengal on the other hand, it is hardly possible to
conceive, that the Epidemick benefited by any
such mode of propagation. In that quarter, it got
head at nearly one and the same time, in many
distant parts of the Province; and would appear
to have been quite independent of all auxiliary
means of dissemination.—lt may be conjectured,
that as the Lower Provinces were unquestiona-
bly the primary seat and seminary of the disease;
the whole encircling mass of the atmosphere was
there in such a state of distemperature, that no-
thing beyond the common exciting causes was
required, to set the virus in action in particular
parts; while in Upper India, the air, being less
corrupt, required for the production of the Epi-
'de thick, an admixture of more vitiated currents.


which were borne along by the winds.—ln this
view of the case, the agency of the wind, setting
aside the effect of its dampness, must be held to
have been purely mechanical.*
To what cause are we to ascribe the marked
disposition of the disease to follow the course of
rivers? This tendency was observed in so many
instances, that it can by no means be considered
to have been accidental.—From the rise of the
disorder on the banks of the Ganges and Burrum-
pooter to its arrival at the mouths of tha Nerbud-
da and Taptee, it excited the surprise of the Me-
dical observer.—Thus from Sonergong in the
Dacca District, where the Epidemick broke out
in July, 1817, it crept along the banks of the
Megna to Naraingunj and Dacca; attaching
itself chiefly to the ferries and market places in
its vicinity.—ln like manner, it afterwards step
by step advanced up the Burrumpooter; affecting
during its transit the villages situated on both
its margins.— F:om the mouth of the Hooghly
to its termination in the Ganges near Moorshe-
' * In the South of India the rise and progress of the
Epidemick were thought to depend in some measure up-
on the state of the Moon ; but a careful comparison of the
tables of the weather prefixed to this Essay, with the
periods at which the disease broke out in different
parts of these provinces, has clearly shewn, that here at
least, no connection could be traced between its increase
and decrease, and those of that planet.


dabad, the same peculiarity was observable. .-The
shipping at the New Anchorage, at Diamond
Harbour, and along the whole channel as high as
Hoogly was particularly affected;* and almost
every village adjacent to its banks buried many
of its inhabitants.—ln the Bhaugulpore district
the propensity was so strong, that the virus
scarcely ever spread into the interior, whilst it
almost depopulated the low lands near the
Ganges. Again, in the autumn of 1817, Moo-
zufferpore? and the villages along the Gunduk
river in Tirhoot, and the station of Chupra on
a branch oi the Ganges in Sarun, were alone
visited ; while at a subsequent period the disease
was thence communicated along the Gogra to
numerous cities in the North East quarter of our
territories.—From Allahabad upwards, along
■, * The Epidemick attacked the Honorable Company’s
shipping at Diamond Harbour and the New Anchorage
with its usual irregularity. The first cases appeared on
board the Astell, lying at the former station, about the
20th September, The weather was moderate, with
South Easterly winds, and showers of rain. Thermome-
ter 84. Then, in the first week of October, it got on
board the Phoenix; which was moored near ‘he muddy,
slimy shore of the river. The weather had now grown
Very sultry: the Thermometer averaging 86 night and
day, and scarcely a breath of wind stirring. The first
fatal instance at the New Anchorage occurred in the War-
yen Hastings on the 7th October. The weather had been
cloudy, with variable winds, and occasional rain; the


the channel of the twin branches there' forming
a junction, until the virus was lost under the
hills, it wavered so little from the line of those
rivers, that hardly a town or village lying remote
from their course was brought within its influ-
ence. Without going further over our old
ground, let us briefly state that the same rule
held yet more unexceptionably in Rajpootana;
through the province of Bundlekund; and all
Thermometer varying front 86 to 88. The case of this
vessel is somewhat singular. A seaman was attacked oh
the morning of the 10th and died at ten o’clock- Iti the
afternoon a party went on shore on Saugur Island to
bury him. On their return to the boat, the man who
had been left in charge was found lying convulsed in its
bottom; and died at four next morning. Then the
boatswain was seized, and after lingering to the 15th,
under debility. During the ensuing five days
eight others were taken ill (whether of the burying party
or not, is not mentioned) but in a slighter degree, and
all recovered by bleeding, anodynes, and calomel.
At this time, the other vessels had only one or two cases
each; and the General Hewett remained perfectly healr
thy; which could only be accounted for, from her men
not being allowed to go on shore, and wander in the
marshy rice fields, and being otherwise carefully pro-
tected from the sun and damp. About the end of Oc-
tober the wind became Northerly, the air serene and
cool, and the ships more healthy. The South East wind
blows over a great tract of swamp and jungle, and
always renders these stations very sickly during its ■
prevalence.


along the NerbuJda to the numerous branches
of the ChumbuL
If we enquire into the causes of this apparently
extraordinary propensity, we shall find, that they
are not of such difficult solution, as they would
at first sight appear to be.—lt is to be recollected,
that in India, as in all other countries, the inha-
bitants flock to the neighbourhood of rivers for
the purposes of commerce; and that the greatest
number of towns and cities will thus be found
near navigable streams; whilst the banks of every
rivulet affording the prospect of gaining a liveli-
hood by fishing, will be crowded with villages.
It is perfectly plain, that the population being
more thickly gathered in such situations, must
always suffer more, on occasion of any general
mortality, than more thinly inhabited portions
of the country. —Thiscause alone would appear
sufficient to explain away the apparent anomaly
row under consideration. But there is yet another
reason of equal force. The vicinage of rivers,
from the action of the sun upon the great body
of water contained in their beds during the day,
and from the influence of the water on the cir-
cumambient air during the night,. must always
be peculiarly subject to those vicissitudes of tem-
perature, which are known so powerfully to in-
fluence the state of the Epidemick.—Hence
great evaporation by day, and falling of fogs and
heavy dews by night; and hence a constant -iu-
-0


terchange of hot and cold currents : all strong"
exciting causes of the disorder.—To all which-,
if we add their low, muddy, sedgy banks, and
the other numerous sources of miasma usually
found in their confines, we shall be at no loss to
‘account for the great sickliness of those residing
on their banks, without searching for any
'more hidden causes of the fact.
It has been shewn in the beginning of this Sec-
tion, that the rise of the Epidemick was in no
way derivable, from any preceding vicissitudes
in the sensible properties of the atmosphere, or
other circumstances of purely local operation-
It is nevertheless, certain, that the virus, being
once on foot, its condition and mode of action
were materially affected by such localities of si-
tuation, as were before inadequate to its produc-
tion.—Thus, there is abundant proof, that in high,
dry, and generally salubrious, spots, it was both
less frequent in its appearance, and less general
and fatal in its attacks, than in those, that were
low and manifestly unwholesome.—This, indeed,
might have been previously concluded, from- a
general observance of the different course pur-
sued by it, in the low and stagnating climate of
Bengal, where having once gained ground, it
tarried for years; and in the pure and elastic
atmosphere of the Upper Provinces, in which it
was slowly received, and quickly lost.—But, if we
trace it in its progress through different cities


*,nd tracts of country, we shall find this modificaf
tion of its agency according to difference of situ-
ation, almost invariably taking place.—Jessore,
the place in which the disorder first put on a very
malignant form, is a crowded, dirty, ill ventilated
town; surrounded at all times by a thick jungle ;
and in the Rains by an immense quantity of stag-
nant water.—Here accordingly, the disease did
unspeakable mischief; and its ravages were not
diminished, till the, inhabitants abandoned. the
city; and thus got rid of those causes, which had
a manifest effect in aggravating its virulence.—
Sunergong, Dacca, and the other places in that
neighbourhood severely visited by the disease,
are completely encircled by clumps of trees, and
heavy underwood, of various sorts. —But, in
Sylhet the influence of situation was perhaps
more remarkable than in any other quarter.—
From the uniform result of queries sent round to
the Police Qfficers.of the different departments,
into which the district is divided, it appeared,
that the villages in which it raged most exten-
sively, were considered by the Natives, as com-
paratively unhealthy, and obnoxious to fevers of
the intermittent type; being exposed to the ef-
fluvia arising from marshes and extensive lakes,
in which the Zila abounds; particularly towards
the South West Division, where the greatest
number of victims fell.—The Sepoy Lines, on
the contrary, being placed from sixty to a hun-
-02


tired feet above the genetaf level of the country
had scarcely any cases ; excepting such as oc-
curred in persons on guard at the different out-
'posts,
In Calcutta, again, the disease was, from first
.to last, most prevalent in the lower parts of the
town, and suburbs; as the Bura Bazar, Simeleia,
jDyahutta, and Suwah Bazar; and in the suburbs,
the Villages of Khidderpore, Bhuwanipore, Ma-
nicktolla, Kurrya,, Entajly, Chitpore and, .Seal/
dah.*—These dependencies are every where in*
tersectedby pools, broad ditches, and channels ;
which, beingimperfectly drained, are in the Rainy
Season always full of stagnant water, and rank
* Much of the sickness of Calcutta was no doubt ow-
ing to the general overcrowded state of its population ;
to the intermixture of Native with European habita-
tions ; to the numerous collections of stagnant water, and
filth of every sort, in many of its most centrical parts; t 6
the depth and thickness of its boundary hedge to the
North, East, and South; and to the immense quantities
of trees and underwood spread over the whole of its
scite. A knowledge of the extent of the population of
the city is yet a desideratum ; no accurate census having
hitherto been taken,—lt has been variously conjectured,
at six hundred thousand, a' million, and a million and a
half. —There arc however, strong grounds for believing,
that within the last thirty years it has been trebled ; and
even doubled within the last ten years. Several causes have
concurred to occasion this rapid augmentation. As trade
and mercantile enterprise have increased, and branched


weeds. From this plentiful source of Corrupti-
on, foul air is constantly given forth; and as all
ventilation is obstructed by large groves of trees,
and vegetation of every description, it is there
concentrated, until it becomes entirely unfit for
the purposes of respiration.—The miserable con-
dition of the generality of the inhabitants of
these villages is hardly to be imagined—Each
hamlet is made up of many mud or straw huts;
generally from six to twelve feet square, placed
so close to each other, as to leave scarcely room
out into many new channels, the concourse of European
settlers has become greater. —It may, perhaps, be assumed
to have increased in a quadruple ratio within the last ten-
years; and more especially since the Trade was thrown
open. When it is considered, that every European set-
tler of any consequence attaches to his person from ten
to fifty Natives, and gives employment perhaps to dou-
ble that number; it will be acknowledged, that from
this cause alone, a very sensible angmentation of the in-
habitants must have arisen,—Then there is the rapid
increase of Countryborn Christians, who too, have their
followers, among whom must be reckoned, not only do-
mestick servants, but person* .to whom occupation is
given out of doors.—Lastly, there is the large body of
seafaring men, variously connected with the vast quan-
tity of shipping now employed in the port; and of Na-
tive workmen engaged in the Dock-yards, Cotton
Screws, and other large establishments connected with
its Trading interests.—The whole of the above descripti-
ons, are in some measure dependent upon, and increase
in an equal ratio, with the European settlers.—But, what


to pa*s between.—ln every one of these wretched
hovels, a ; whole family, sometimes consisting of
six or eight person?, resides; and not unfrequently
cows, pigs and other domestic animals add to the
filth and foul atmosphere in which they abound,
r- I The singularity is not, that persons so situated
should be more than others subject to the influ-
ence of a prevailing Epidemick; but that they
should ever be free from maladies of this descrip-
tion.—The higher classes of Natives, and Eu-
may bo.strietly denominated the Native population of
the city, has owed its great increase to other, and per-
haps more powerful causes.—So long as the stability of
the British Empire might be deemed precarious, weal-
thy Natives felt perhaps some hesitation in placing their
families and property, in what might be deemed, an in-
secure situation.—Every scruple of this sort has now
disappeared ; our arms have triumphed over all opposi-
tion ; the Native principalities have crumbled down; and
Calcutta has grown out of their wreck, it is now the ca-
pital of India; and to it people of every class and deno-
mination repair, as to a place of perfect safety. Hence,
it may be almost taken for granted, that this part of the
population has lately gone on augmenting equally ra-
pidly with that more immediately connected with Eu-
ropeans ; and that the town, taken as a whole, now con-
tains twice as many inhabitants, as it had in the end of
the last century.* Meanwhile, its limits remain precisely
*lt is the opinion of one of the most intelligent of our Magis-
trates, that the population of the city within the Mahratta Ditch,
does not fall short of eight hundred thousand; and that during the
day it is augmented to a million, from the influx of mccliaaicks-ani
labourers of all descriptions from the suburbs.


ropeans generally, inhabiting the better raised
and more airy parts of the town, suffered propor-
tionably less than the lower, ranks.—-A striking
instance of the. good effects of airiness in afford-
ing immunity from attacks of,the disease, occur-
red in the great Native Jail of- Alypore.—Al-
though, this building contained several thousand
persons, scarcely a case appeared in it; whilst
the same.—The expedient fallen upon to avoid their ex-
tension, has been to erect five or six houses on the same
space of ground, on which one formerly stood; so that to
the evils arising from over popnlousness, have thus been
added those of over crowding.—A great mischief con-
sequent on the intermixture of European and-Native
dwellings, has been tbe accumulation of filth in every .va-
cant space.—Even the most centrical and valuable parts
of the city are not free from this nuisance.—lmmediately
to the East of the Government House, and in rear of the
Esplanade Row, and Cosiitollah, theve is a stagnant pool,
in which the whole neighbourhood deposit their filth,
and whence a stench of the most noisome and injurious
hind frequently proceeds.—The rear of Durrumtollah,
the Lai and Bow Bazar, and of Kulingah f and indeed
the whole of the Native portion of the town, abounds in
such sinks of putrefaction, and loudly calls for- improve-
ment.—The proper authorities will - best judge of the
means calculated to remedy these evils; hut it may not be
improper to mention in this place one or two cir-
cumstances, the adoption of which would undoubt-
edly improve the salubrity and beauty of the city.—
Ist, To open long and broad avenues from the Cir-
cular Road or outskirts of the town; to some
distance into .the country; and thus ; to break up


/the prisoners employed at the outposts, and la*
bouringin the sun in cleansing drains during the
day, and sleeping in mud buildings at night,
were very sickly.—So the Native Insane Hos-.
pital built in a low swampy spot, and such parts,
of the shipping as lay near the slimy banks of
the river, were likewise peculiarly subject to the
disease, whilst on the other hand, the dry Jail of
the Court of Requests, containing nearly four
hundred debtors, continued nearly exempt.
the present almost impenetrable bound hedge.—2d, Tp
form open, wide streets, with occasional squares and tanks,
in the body of the city.—3d, To break up the numer-
ous nests of huts, in the European part of the city, by
purchasing the ground on which they are now built, and
allotting new ground in its stead in the suburbs.—4th y
To fill up all the unwholesome tanks and foul puddles
and ditches.—Sth, To improve the draining,-if practica-
ble. —Gth, To disuse the present European and Mossul-
man Burying Grounds, which lie exactly to windward
of the most populous part of the city during the unheal-
thy season; and to form others to the North or North East
of the town. Lastly,—To diminish the number of trees,
and thin the jungle in the town and suburbs,—Some
measures of this sort willsoon become, imperiously ne-
cessary to prevent the city from becoming, under its dai-
ly increasing population, as proverbial for unhealthiness,;
as Batavia, or Spanish Town, Jamaica.—The communi-
ty of Calcutta is greatly indebted to that excellent and in-
defatigable Magistrate, the late Mr. Eliot, for the many
great improvements introduced by him. It was under his
superintendence that, the city, which ten years ago was a


On proceeding upwards we shall observe the
same unerring influence of situation. —ln Nud-
deea, high and dry places, and upper roomed
houses, were more free than low and marshy spots,
with luxuriant vegetation.—ln the Barracks of
the European Regiment at Bcrhamp'ore, of twen-
ty-four casualties, seventeen took place in the
four Companies inhabiting the lower range.—
This range was very damp, and had in its vici-
nity to the North East an extensive swamp, from
which an offensive stench proceeded.—The dis-
ease shewed no variety of appearance in Raj-
shahy, besause the town of Nattore, and almost
every village in the District, are equally surround-
ed by ditches, full of stagnant water, and filth of
every kind. But in Malda, only the villages ly-
ing in the flats near the Mahanuddee River were
attacked.—ln Bhaugulpore, all the lofty open
country escaped, whilst those parts most sub-
ject to fevers, suffered severely, as Calcapore,
Rajmahl, Peealapore, Tarapore, and Luchmun-
pore.—The troops and followers in the canton-
ment of Carrirtgur entirely escaped; although
two villages situated immediately on their boun--
dary ditch suffered dreadfully. But the can-
tonments were seventy two feet above the villages.
perfect swamp in the Rains, was first properly drained.—.
It is melancholy to reflect, that he fell an early victim to
the Epidemick, whilst maturing and carrying into effect
those curative measures, which saved the lives of thou-
sands.
p


When .the disease appeared first in Tirhoot, there
had been-a previous unusual inundation; and the
low villages near the river were alone affected.—*-
5o in Sarun, the disorder arose shortly after a
branch of the Ganges had rapidly fallen, and left
the town exposed to the noxious smell proceeding
from .its large oozy bank.-—The only place, ac-
cordingly, left unaffected, was the Jail; which
was clean, airy, and situated in an open space at
a distance from other buildings. The same
favorable localities nearly saved the Tirhoot
Jail.—ln the dry and well ventilated canton-
ments of Mullhye, only three instances of the
disease occurred ; while the neighbouring vil-
lages, which were remarkable for their filthy and'
close state, were so sickly, as to be deserted by
the inhabitants. So in Poorneea, the lines of
the Provincial Battalion and Jail were quite
exempt, when the disease was extensively fatal
in the town. —In the valley of Napaul, all the
villages enjoying a pure air on the slopes of the
hills remained free; whilst the towns of Khat-
mandoo, Patun, and Bhatgoon, in the vicinity
of which there was much putrid matter, and ma-
ny channels of stagnant water, were severely
visited.—ln Benares, the disease was chiefly
confined to the lower classes of Natives living in
wretched huts.—ln like manner, at Lucknow,
the cantonments, built on a dry and sandy soil,
elevated somewhat above the general surface of


the country,' enjoyed nearly entire immunity*;
when the low and crowded city was greatly
ravaged.—That nothing'in the condition of the
Sepoys themselves, was the'cause of this good
fortune, was very evident,-both here and at Mull-
hye, by their becoming affected upon proceed-
ing on guard to places within the range of the
unhealthy action,
Tim same variation of freedom and exemption,
was observable in almost all the towns on the
Jumna subjected to the Epidemick—Agrah, an :
airy, open, clean town, was comparatively free;
Muttra, a filthy place, with crowded bazars, was
severely scourged,- The cantonment of Nomilla,
adjacent to Agfa,'being high and perfectly
clean, was hardly touched.—-How different was
it with the cantonments' of Muttra.—There the
disease, after remaining in the city from the
beginning of the month, oh the 27th of June
got into the lines of the 4th Regiment of Caval-
ry.—These formed the most distant part of the
ckntOmnent, being fully two miles pff; blit were
placed on very low ground near the banks of the
river.—ln them the disorder was most severe. From
these lines it next visited those of the Ist Regi-
ment of Cavalry; then those of Captain Gillman’s
Levy, and lastly, those of the 12th Regiment of
Native Infantry: a mile nearer the town. In the
whole extent of this line, the ground gradually as-
cends from the river. Surely, no stronger proof
P 2


than this could be given, of the influence of locality
in modifying the prevalence of the disease.—ln
Alligur the Jails, cantonments, and adjoining
villages continued healthy ; whilst the virus was
cherished, and fed in the filthy, and crowded bazars
of Coel.—Thus too, the thickly populated, and
close lanes of Delhi suffered more, than the rec-
tangular and spacious streets of Jcypore; and the
low and nasty town of Saharunpore more than the
city and cantonments of Meerut. So the military
lines of Saharunpore had not a case, when the in-*
habitants of the town were very sickly.
Wc might go on enumerating many other
instances of a similar partiality, were we not
afraid of tiring the reader’s patience, without
adding farther strength to the position, which we
arc now endeavouring to maintain.—We shall,
therefore, close with the mention of the Centra
Divison of the Army, and the Kajpootana Force.
With the former, in the three grounds of en-
campment, in which the disease prevailed most,
Terayt, Talgong, and Silya, the soil was low,
aiid moist; the water foul, stagnant, and of bad,
brackish quality; and every where not more
than two or three feet from the surface of the
earth; and the vicinity abounded in animal and
vegetable putrified matter. —Whereas, at Erich,
where the Ariny regained its health, the situa-
tion was high and salubrious; and the water
clear, and pure from a running stream.


The Rajpootana Force, previously to the
appearance of the disease, was encamped on a
ridge of sandy soil, sloping for a mile or two to a
much lower tract.—Both the immediate scite of
the encampment, and the surrounding plain,
were covered with long slender grass; but this
was thicker to the left of the camp, where the
declivity was too gentle to allow the water to
flow off speedily.—On this side of the line, the
disease broke out earlier, and was throughout
more violent, than in its right division.—No
reason could be assigned for this irregularity of
action ; except that in the one part,, the tents
were pitched higher, and were consequently
drier, than in the other.*
* Some peculiarities respecting the ground of en-.
campment of this Division, which have not found a
place in the text, may be noticed here. The camp was
pitched on a plain of considerable height; with hills to.
the North and West, distant three or four miles. There,
was no river in the vicinity; but frequent small, clear
streams with sandy or gravel beds, often terminating in
ponds. The neighbouring soil was little cultivated;
a few fields of Indian corn and maize being the only
grain to be seen. The plains were overgrown with
slender, light grass, wild plum thorn, and swallow wort.
The hills were almost bare. The water was generally
found at a,distance of eight or ten feet from the furface;
ahd was brackish in many wells. There were no
marshes, or foul stagnant water near. The disease com-,
mencedonthe lith. The Rains had not ceased. On
the 17th the troops made a short movement in different


Amidst so many proofs of peculiarities'of
situation .-influencing the Epidemick, it is not'
intended to deny, that in the vast range which
it took, there were many places, in which it not
only l failed in - observing- this rule,, but even
seemed to go right in the face of it, Thus, there
Were even' whole districts, as Cawnpore and
Juanpore, in which it affected all parts alike ;
without*reference to their being high ox" low,
damp or dry:—Others ■ again, in which,'though
divisions, then halted for two days from bad weather;
and again moved on the 20th to more favorable ground.
A-stationary camp then - became necessary from the
increasing numbers of sick. Luckily; the disease left
them soon after this. The Rains continued with .little
variation to the 21st, with changeable winds. After the
£2d, the wind was chiefly from the North West with
heavy dews, and a clear atmosphere during the day :
with exception of a few showers towards the end of the
month. The mean heat of the month was 77 at sun-
rise ;86 at noon: fluctuations from 75 to 82 at sun-rise ;
and 81 to 93 at noon. Nothing remarkable could be
discovered in the condition of the troops. They had
recently been employed in the reduction of the Fort of
Madhoorajgur. Their supplies offood and water were
such as they had before generally used. Another diviv
aion of the same force commanded by Brigadier .Knox,
which was encamped on nearly similar ground in the
valley of Ajmeer, was not at all visited by the Epidemick.
Little can be said of the local peculiarities, under which
it appeared in the Left Division of the Army, since the
troops were daily changing ground, both before, during,,
and after the period ofits prevalence. Alt had been


it affected particular lines,' and villages, its liking
for those parts, -was not to be explained on the
supposition of greater general insalubrity, than
that of the spots avoided by it. ' Lastly, there
were even instances of its shewing a preference
for dry and wholesome, over damp, and aguish
situations: as in Allahabad, in which the lines
of the Native Artillery Details, lying in-the low
for a long time before on very active, harassing service.
The main body, under the command of Major General
Marshall, after moving from Seronj to Beresina, procee-
ded on the Ist of March to Kimlassa; where on the sth
they were joined by several corps commanded by Bri-
gadier General Watson. All were then healthy. The
whole Force now marched to Saugor, where they Halt-
ed from the I Oth to the 16th; then to Dhamohy, which
they besieged from the 18th to the 27th. Then they
moved southerly, towards Jubbulpore. During March,
the Thermometer ranged from 48 to 65 at Sunrise;,
and from 74 to 97 at noon, in tents. For 18 davs the
■winds were from the North and West, with clear
atmosphere; the remainder from the South and East,
With slight rain on the 26th front the West. The pre-
vailing diseases were fevers, with congestions of the liver,
and brain, and diarrhoeas from eating unripe grain.
The troops got the Epidemick at Jubbulpore on the 9th
or 10th, of April, and carried it along with them in
their march to Mundela, which they reached on the 21st.
In the end ot the month they moved back to Saugor,
where they arrived on the 24th May. The state of the
weather during April has already been described.
Nearly, the.same fatigue was undergone by the troops,
the train and stores from'Mundela fo


and stvarftpy suburbs of the city, and much ex-
posed to putrid animal and vegetable exhalati-
ons, were alone spared ; while those of the Euro-
pean Invalids* which stood high and dry, and all
around, was largely infected with the virus.
But these exceptions were, comparatively few in
number; and should not be allowed to affect the
general conclusion, founded on the large body
of affirmative evidence previously adduced : that
Saugor in May, as in the two former months; whilst
the heat had considerably increased:—The Thermome-
ter ranging from 74 to 80 at sunrise, and from 94 to 109
at noon. Early in the month, storms were frequent
from the North and West with heavy showers; from the
Sth to the 27th the wind was generally westerly, hot and
dry; then there were a few days of cloudy calm weather;
and at the close, strong gales from the North and
West, with rain. Fever, tertian and remittent, and
diarrhoea were frequent. Cholera continued in the
£Sth Regiment, but less violent; and reappeared in
the 14th, which had been some time exempt; and in a
Detachment of the 26th, which had come in from Roray
and places adjacent to Saugor. A few cases also
occurred in the Artillery, but the other corps now kept
quite free. All along, the Division had abundance of
provisions; the supply of water was from streams.
The disease attacked the Nagpore Force when
ed on high ground, in a fine dry country, with neither
jungle nor hills for many miles round—ln like' manner,
there was no jungle or marsh in the vicinity of Hansi;
and the whole country, through which the troop s mov-
ed during the prevalence of the Epidemick, was open
and elevated.


the power and range of the Epidemick, the poison
being once afloat, were always increased by such
causes, as. experience .has shewn to exercise
a marked agency in the generation and disse-
mination of Jail, Bilious, Remittent, and Inter-
mittent fevers.
Is the entire immunity of lofty and moun-
tainous situations attributable merely to their
being, from their greater altitude, less surround-
ed by those vapours, and less exposed to those
extrinsic circumstances, which subjected the
lower lands to the influence of the disease ?
Or, was the peculiar poison of the Epidemick
confined to the inferior strata of the at-
mosphere? That this was not invariably the case,
was proved, by the pestilence getting over the
high chain, which divides Nypaul from Tirhoot,
and Munnipore from Sylhet.—But the difficul-
ty, with which it appeared to ascend these heights,
and the perfect immunity of the elevated for-
tresses of Rhotass,* Adjeegur, and Kallinjur ; of
Kumaoon,! the Ohoon, and the hilly parts of
Rajpootana, while all around them was infected.
* We are assured, that whilst the villages situated near
thewoody base of Rhotas mountain were suffering dread-
fully, the only man residing near the top of the hill af-
fected, was one, who went down and caught the disease in'
the plain,
f Kumaoon has since been affected by the disease.
Q


would rather incline us to believe, that there was
something in the air of elevated situations in-
trinsically-hostile-to the existence of the poison.


SECTION VI.
OF THE CONTAGIOUS NATURE OF
THE DISEASE.
THE next point to be investigated, is, how
far the pestilential virus of the disease was com-
municable by Contagion.—lf by Contagion, is
meant, the communication of the disorder from
person to person, by means of contact, or close
conversation y then, in this strict sense of the
word, Cholera is certainly not contagious.
In the absence of all positive proof, such a con-
clusion might havebeen fairly drawn, from its being
observed, that in no quarter of India, during the
lime in which it was so sadly scourged by the dis-
order, did its infectious nature form any part of
the popular belief.—Amongst a rude and supersti-
tious people, the unexampled mortality caused by
it, was, according to the fancy of the individual,
ascribed to fatality, to the agency of malignant
spirits, or to the anger of an offended deity: but
it does not appear to have been once suspected,
that its amount was increased, or diminished, by
Q 2


the free, or restrained intercourse of men.—-It
may be said, in diminution of the weight here
attached to the popular persuasion, that the opi-
nion of the vulgar is usually founded on miscon-
. ception, or guided by caprice; and is therefore,
of little, or no value.—This is no doubt true, in res-
pect of subjects, either foreign to their interests, or
too recondite for their understandings..—But, in
matters of daily observation, and especially in
those narrowly concerning the interests and safe-
ty of all, there is perhaps no fairer criterion of
truth, than the common judgments of mankind.—
The progress of any generally fatal disorder is
exactly of this description ; and accordingly we
find, by looking into the histories of all the great
epidemical and infectious distempers, to which
the human race is subject: as the plague, small
pox, measles, and scarlet fever: that the people
were never slow to discover their true nature;
and ordinarily passed such judgments regarding
them, as corresponded, not merely with the opi-
nions of more learned observers, but with the
truth itself.—-So it is in the case of the present
Epidemick.—The whole body of the Medical
Officers in Bengal, who have had an opportunity
of seeing, and remarking on the disease, without
a dissenting voice, concur in declaring, that it is
not contagious.*
* To this unanimity of conviction there was original-
ly one. exception; but from more extended experience
that individual has since modified his opinion.


~ But, as neither the universal current of popu-
lar belief, nor the unanimous testimony of persons
;of the largest observation in the disorder, and
most in the habit of weighing medical evidence,
maybe deemed sufficiently weighty to decide
the point; let us see, how far, a belief in its con-
tagious nature, is consistent with the facts of the
case.—lt may, then, first be remarked, that the
rise and progress of the disorder, were attended
by such circumstances, as shewed it to be entire-
ly independent of contagion for its propagati-
on.—Thus we have seen, that it arose at nearly
one and the same time in many different places.;
and that in the same month, nay in the same week,
it was raging in the unconnected, and far distant
districts of Behar and Dacca.—lt will not be argu-
ed, that the virus travelled, or was conveyed, over
the many hundred miles intervening between the
cities of Patna and Dacca, within a few days; since
all experience proves, that where it really did appear
to be communicated from place to place,—as along
the course of the Jumna—its march was exceeding-
ly slow; scarcely averaging a few miles a day.*
* The distances, and successive periods of affection,
piay he marked in a few instances. —From Allahabad to
Cawnpore, a distance of perhaps 120 miles, the disease
took from the end of March to the second week of
April to travel; from Allahabad to Etawah, 180 miles,
a month; from Etawah to Futtigur, 60 miles, fourteen
days; ’from Etawah to Agrah, 70 miles, a month; from
Agra to Coel, 40 miles, ten days; from Agrah to Delhi,


But, again, the whole habitudes of the disease,
when once it had entered a town or camp, proved,
that it was not kept up by infection. Instead of
daily increasing, and being perpetuated by the
very means on which it fed; it invariably ran a
regular course of increase, maturity, decay, and
extinction.—Thus, in the Centre Division of the
Army, it began on the 7th of (he month; was at its
heightfromthe l6thtothe22nd; declined to the
end of the month; and finally disappeared about
the 2d or 3d ofDscember. So in the Left; Divi-
sion of the Array, it commenced on the 10th of
April; was at its full in the middle of the month;
declined from the 2lst; and died away before
the beginning. of May.—The case of the
Nagpore Force is somewhat different.—The
corps composing it fell at once into a medium al-
ready fully impregnated with the poison; and,
without passing through the primary stage, or
that of increase, immediately had the disorder in
its most violent form.—The only effect of tins
change of circumstances, however, was to dimi-
100 miles, 20 days; from Delhi to Meerut, 28 miles,
nine days; from Delhi to Jeypore, ISO miles, a month;
from Jeypore to the Camp of the Rajpootana Force, 25
miles, fourteen days; from Jubbulpore to Nagpore, 180
miles, forty days.—From this comparative statement, it
would appear that, admitting the successive propagation
of the disorder, it observed no regularity as to time.—
The distances are, it must be observed, marked from
conjecture.


nish the usual period of .the revolution; for the
disorder which began on the 31st of May, hud
abated previously to the sth,, and nearly disap-
peared soon after the 18th of June. In the Raj-
pootana Force, the sickly period was still shor-
ter.—The disease appeared on the 14th of Sep-
tember; and continued violent to the 20th ; after
which it gradually declined till the Ist of Octo-
ber, when it wholly disappeared. Lastly, in the
Haasi Division, it observed the same regularity
of course ; beginning on the 6th of August, in-
creasing in severity for a time, and gradually be-
coming extinct towards the end of the month.
Now, this uniformity of rise and declension, ap-
pears to be quite inexplicable, upon the supposi-
tion of Contagion.—For, if the virus were capa-
ble of reproducing itself, through the medium of
the effluvia or secretions of individuals already
infected; it must have gone on augmenting, until
it either had no longer subjects, upon whom to
exercise itself, or were counteracted by some
means more powerful than itself: as uncongenial
seasons; or segregation, and the other prophylactic
expedients, resorted to on such occasions.—Such
at least, is the course commonly pursued by those
great scourges, the small pox and the plague.—
These, when once unfortunately introduced into
a city, or tract of country, not only for a time re-
main attached to it; but, manifestly depending on
contagion, go on daily increasing, and perpetuat


ing themselves by fresh accessions of'infectious
matter, until they either have depopulated the
place ; or are checked by some of the'counteract-
ing circumstances just mentioned. Hence the
frequent necessity of seclusion, and of a strict
observance of all those salutary regulations*
which, under the name of Quarantine Laws,
have been, in times of such jeopardy, devised to
secure the general safety.—Had the form and
progress of the present Epidemick, suggested the
expediency of similar safeguards, they would no
doubt have been proposed, and generally prac-
tised, wherever it appeared.—But, excepting the
step, wisely adopted in some of the camps in which
the disease largely prevailed, of moving from the
vicinity of the dead, in quest of higher ground, and?
of a purer atmosphere—a step which could have
placed no check upon Contagion, as many of
the sick, and all the infected baggage, accompa-
nied the main body,—no means of security
whatever, seem in any case to have been thought
of. The truth is, that all men were convinced,
that they were wholly unnecessary.
The opinion of the medical observer was, in all
situations, founded upon his noticing the follow-
ing facts.—ln his attendance upon patients la-
bouring under the disease, he did not find himself,
or his assistants, more liable to be attacked by it,
than such persons, as had no communication with


the infected.*—-He could not attribute his escape
to the effect of precaution; for he took none; nor
to the limited nature of his intercourse with his pa-
tients ; for the disqrder, and the remedies employed
in it, were such, that he was obliged to be constantly
handling the body of the sufferer; and could not
with safety leave his bedside, during the height of
the attack.—-It might even be said, that in every
case the patient and he breathed upon .one
another: So that, had the effluvium exhaled
from the lungs or skin of. the patient, been
truly infectious, even in the slightest degree,
he could have had no chance of escaping.-
Next he saw, that where one member of a
family was ill, the others were not more
ble to get the disease, than an equal number
of individuals picked out from the general body
of the community.—This must be taken with
some allowance.—Sometimes two or more mem-
* This is a very striking fact. From a medical list,
consisting of between two hundred and fifty and three
hundred individuals, most of whom saw the disease
largely, only three persons were attacked, and one
death only occurred.—The fatal case took place at
Barrackporc, a station very little visited by the Epide-
mick; the two others, which were not severe, occurred
in the Centre Division of the Army. There too, one
of the Surgeons of His Majesty’s Corps was cut off ;• the
only Medical Officer belonging to the King’s service
known to have been affected.—ln Nagpore the Me-
dical Staff remained for several days, night and day in
the hospitals, and yet all escaped.
a


bers of one family were seized; but in such
cases, they were generally all taken ill together;
were living in the same unwholesome situation;
and had been previously exposed to some mani-
festly strong exciting cause; as the eating of
noxious food; sudden vicissitudes of temperature;
and the like.—ln the rare instances, in which
one fell ill at some distance of time after another,
if we do not chuse to consider the concurrence
as purely accidental, we shall be at no difficulty
to explain it, upon remembering the depressing
influence of fatigue, fear, sympathy, and grief—*
all powerful predisposing causes.*
In camps, where the general body was more
compact, and the sick more numerous, and
crowded in smaller space, there was still ampler
opportunity of confirming the truth of these ob r
servations. In no one instance were the dooley
* A very striking example of the noncommunieability
of the disease by contact was afforded in Colonel
Gardner’s Irregular Horse, which was attacked at
Khassgnnj in the Doab in August 1818. No two
men were seized in the same hut, although from twenty
to thirty troopers slept in each. A case exactly the
opposite of this occurred in Lord Hastings’ camp at
Gorruckpore. A Sepoy died of the Pestilence, Five
of' the Corps, who had shown no signs of illncsf,
were employed to carry the body to the grave. They
were all seized with the disorder during the ensuing
night; and all died: This no doubt looks very sus-
picious ; but then we know nothing of the concomitant


bearers, native compounders, or any other part of
the large hospital establishments then necessarily
kept up,—although all were often so hard worked
as to be scarcely able to stand from fatigue-
more sickly than other descriptions of followers
nor did the soldiers, who constantly flocked to
the hospitals, to see and watch over their sick
comrades, appear, by that means, to be more
susceptible than others, of the disease.—Nor
were those patients, who were ill of other disor-
ders, although always surrounded by persons in
every stage of Cholera, therefore more liable to
be attacked; unless perhaps an exception be
made in favor of convalescents: a class of per-
sons always, from debility, much predisposed to
fall into fresh disease. In the Centre Division
of the Army all this was particularly remarked ;
end during the week in which the Epidemick
raged with so much fury ; when the camp was
a sick ward, and every tent was filled, or sur-
rounded with the dead and dying; the Officers
suffered comparatively very little. From a nurii-
ber that could hardly have fallen short of three
hundred, only five or six deaths occurred. . And
■it should be remembered, that at this time
Officers of all descriptions were equally exposed
with the Medical men ;,for the sick had become
so numerous, that even the services of all were
circumstances; which as in other instances of apparently
dubious origin, might have been sufficient to do away
every suspicion of the agency of Contagion.
E 3


insufficient to tend them with proper care, and
duly administer the requisite remedies.
Let us now see, if these results deduced from
general experience of the habits of the disease
on a large scale, are strengthened by any such
body of individual facts, as contraindicate the
infectious nature of the poison. Here our only
difficulty will be to choose the strongest, amongst
a large number of instances bearing upon the
point. To begin with the different Divisions of
the Army.
From the Centre Division, a few days previ-
ously to the breaking out of the Epidemick, a
small force, consisting of 4 troops of the 7th
Regiment Native Cavalry, 3 Light Companies
of Sepoys, and the Dromedaiy Corps, was
detached on particular service in the neighbour-
hood. A short time afterwads, the remaining
squadron of the Corps of Cavalry was sent as a
reinforcement, from the great camp, in which
the disease had then got head. It carried the
virus along with it; and actually lost several
men, after its junction with the foregoing de-
tachment; which nevertheless remained perfect-
ly healthy throughout.
But, there is yet a still stronger instance of the
possibility of a diseased bodyjoining a healthy one,
without thereby communicating. the infection to
it. On the morning of the 11th of May 1818,


a detachment of 90 men of the Ist Battalion
26th Native Infantry marched from an inferior
post, to join the main body of troops then en.
camped at Saugor. After an ordinary march,
it halted in perfect health, half way; under
shelter of a few trees on the banks of a small lake;
situated in the midst of an open space, about
three miles in circuit, and surrounded by low,
woody hills. The whole remained well until the
fall of night; when Cholera broke out amongst
them. The first man was taken ill at midnight,
and died in half an hour. Several others fell
sick within the next few hours; and ,before sun-
rise, twenty out of the ninety were overtaken by
the disease. Although the Saugor camp wag
distant only five or six miles, the detachment
was too weak to move without assistance. The
sick of the Sepoys and followers were therefore
carried in, in carts and doolies sent from the
main body ; but before 11 A. M. when they got
to their ground, five were already dead, and two
others moribund. Next morning, a man of the
same party was seized in the act of scouring his
accoutrements; immediately became insensible;
and expired in a few minutes. During the three
succeeding days, several others were taken ill;
and before the end of the week, of the whole
Detachment, there was not a single man, but
w r as sent to the hospital, labouring under Cholera,
or other modifications of bowel complaints. The
men of this party mixed promiscuously with


those of the Saugor Troops; and yet of the lat-
ter not one individual goc the disease.
An instance of the same kind occurred in the
Hansi Division; except that here the party,
•which escaped, went into the infected medium,
instead of the pestilence being carried amongst
them. When the disease was at the worst with
the troops composing this Force, Casement’s
corps of Irregular Horse entered the camp, and
continued with the Division duringr the remain-
O
der of the service ; yet it did not at all suffer.
It may be supposed, that in these cases, the'
persons who escaped,, owed their immunity to
their not having been long enough exposed to
the poisonous matter; or to some incidental
peculiarity in their condition, for the time
being. But, then, we shall find, that the same
irregularity obtained, where those remaining
unaffected were for a long period surrounded by
the supposed infectious atmosphere; and in all res-
pects similarly situated with others, who suffered
severely. Of the latter, a remarkable example
was afforded in the Left Division of the Army,
whilst under the influence of the disease. Here
the yth Regiment of Cavalry, and the 2d Batta-
lion ISth Regiment of Native Infantry remain-
ed entirely exempt;* and the 2nd Battalion
* It is true, this and other instances to be cited, may
be in some measure accounted for, by the Corps having
earned exemption by previous exposure to the influ-


Ist Regiment had only three mild cases;
while the Ist Battalion 14th, and.the 2nd
Battalion 28th Regiments were greatly affected..
The same partiality of affection here took place,
among different classes and descriptions of
troops. —The Goolundaz, gun lascars, and
miners were mildly affected; while the pioneers,
drivers, &c. who had undergone the same
vicissitudes of weather, and fatigue, were not.
at all touched. —Some corps lost more than
a hundred, others only three or four men. This,
could not arise from separation, or difference
of situation and diet; for all used the same
food; and there was constant intercourse, and
daily change of ground.—The same observation
may ,be extended to the Rajpootana Force, of
which the right suffered more than the left por-,
tion,—lnFurruckabad Lines, the Jail and the Ar-
tillery Barracks, the former containing six or
seven hundred prisoners, subject to great priva-
tions, and daily worked in the sun upon the
roads, and the latter inhabited by 100 Europeans,
and 250 Natives of the 12-pounder Experimen-
tal Brigade, had not a single case; whilst the Levy
Corps suffered severely. The case of the Na-
tive Artillery Lines at Allahabad, which escaped,
although in the very centre of the pestilence,
has been already alluded to.—But at this station,
there was something yet more to our pur-
ence of the disease; whilst forming part of Colonel
Philpot’s Detachment from the Centre Division.


pose. For of 400 Supernumerary Invalids,
assembled there for examination by the annual
Invaliding Committee, not a man was affected ;
although they were living, under perfect simila-
rity of circumstances, in the Lines of the Regu-
lar Invalid Battalion, the men of which, in four-
teen days had 50, of 680 their total number,
sick of the disease.—So, while the disease
raged virulently at Banda, not a man belonging to
the 2nd Battalion Sd Native Infantry station-
ed there was affected.—At Hutta, again, a heal-
thy town on the banks of the Sonar in Bundle-
kund, the Epidemick committed such ravages,
that the inhabitants fled, and took refuge in the
neighbouring villages; and so virulent was the
poison, that three Sepoys arid seven camp fol-
lowers of the 2nd Battalion Ist Regiment were
seized, merely on that Corps marching through
the place.—And yet, the disease never appeared
amongst a Sepoys, or their followers,
then in the fort, which was divided from the town
only by a broad street.—What here served to
skreen these men from infection? Certainly
no suspension of intercourse between the town
and fort; for this always remained free; much
less superior salubrity of situation, for the fort
was small, and crowded with buildings, and the
town high, and open.— Thus too, whilst the
disease raged in Saligor, and in the lines of the
Ist Battalion 26th Native Infantry- about a
mile and a half distant; not a case occurred in


the fort in the centre of the town, which was
then garrisoned by 200 men of the 2nd Batta-
lion Ist Regiment.—ln like manner, in Kotah,
three Companies stationed in the fort escaped
entirely; whilst one hundred persons were
daily perishing in the town.—And at Muhed-
pore, when the Epidemick prevailed in the vi-
cinity, and was daily attacking a detachment
of Bengal troops, consisting of part of the Ist
Battalion 6th Regiment Native Infantry, two
Rissalus of Skinner’s Horse, and 1500 Camp
followers, it entirely spared a body of 500 of
Holkar’s Reformed Horse ; although the two
camps closely adjoined, and a man, who had
been sent in from the Bengal Division . after
getting the disease, went through every period
of it amongst the healthy Mahrattas. If the
virus were capable of being procreated by Com
tagion, surely the poisonous particles emanating
from the body of this infected person, would
have been sufficient to support and diffuse it all
around.—-For, this body, having an infected
person in the midst of it, was, except in respect
of numbers, then in the precise situation of the
larger Divisions of the Army ; in which the dis-
ease always began with one or two unconnec-
ted cases ; slowly, and gradually creeping on to
inveteracy.—-With it, all that was wanting, was
the peculiar disposition to take on, and keep up
the diseased action ; and this being absent, the
supply of vitiated matter, which, ip small pox
S


and other distemper’s, confessedly contagious,
would have sufficed for its continuance, proved
quite innoxious.
We should fall into endless repetition, if we
went on citing the great variety of evidence,
•which might be drawn in support of the doc-
trine of non-contagion, from the general progress
of the disease, through the districts and towns
successively visited by it.* Let the reader only
call to.mind, the, innumerable detached spots,
which remained free, when all around was
sickly j and remember, that in no single case, was
any restraint placed, on free intercourse between
the healthy and diseased *, and he must come to
the conclusion, that the Epidemick "was totally
independent of the common laws of Contagion.
But, as it cannot be denied, that there were
some circumstances in the manner in which the
disease arose both with the Hansi and Centre
Divisions, militating against this opinion, let us,
before leaving this part of the subject, examine
them a little more narrowly.
• One case is too remarkable to be passed over.
Of the cluster ®f islands lying near the main land, as
the Ganges discharges itself into the Bay ; of Bengal,
Sundeep, a large and populous place, remained quite
free; whilst those of Deccan Shahbazpore, Huttiab,
and Bomney were ravaged. There was nevertheless
constant and great intercourse between all.


Th 6 persuasion of all the Medical Staff pre*
sent with the Hahsi Force, regarding the mode
in which it received the infection, has been
already quoted. It consisted in the belief, that
it was communicated by the Meerut Detachment,
■who got it on passing through Delhi, at the time
of their crossing the Jumna.—The opinion of
so many intelligent persons, is no doubt entitled
to much respect; and would entirely set the ques-
tion of Contagion, in that sense of the word in
which by infection is meant the commmunication
of the disease from one large body to another
large body, at rest; were it not counterbalanced
by some circumstances of an opposite ten-
dency.—lf we believe, as stated by one gentle-
man, that before the junction of this detachment,
the disease had already found its way to several
places intermediate between Delhi and Hansf,
and Delhi and Kurnaul, we can be at no loss to
account for its rise in Camp, without resorting to
abeliefin Contagion.-—For, the Camp presented to
the Epidemick exactly that face of things, which
we know to have been always particularly affect-
ed by it; namely a large body of men collected
within a narrow space.—We are accordingly
told, that previously to the junction of the Mee-
rut Detachment, one or two cases had actually
occurred amongst the Camp followers.—Admit-
ting this to have been the case, the certain con-
sequence of the great additional stock of pesti-
-3 2


lential matter imported from Delhi, would be’ to
aggravate, and widely diffuse the disorder; and
the whole mischief might very naturally be plac-
ed to the account of the new comers, by persons
unaware of its having begun to operate, though
in a less degree, previously to their arrival.—>
However this might have been, there were no
grounds for supposing, that, even here, the disease
was communicable from person to person; and
the Medical Officers are unanimously of opinion,
that it was certainly not so.
The case of the Centre Division is encompass-r
ed with still greater difficulties. The main body
of this Division crossed the Jumna at Shergurh
on the 28th October: and after one or two days
halt, marched, in a North Westerly direction, to-?
wards Loharee, Nuddeeka-gaon, and Terayt.—■
A Detachment, composed of 5 Companies of thq
2nd Battalion loth Regiment Native Infantry,
and two Companies of Pioneers, was left behind,
in charge of the bridge of boats thrown over the
Jumna.—lt \vas here, that the Epidemick first
shewed itself. A few cases appeared, as early a?
the 2nd of November, in some troops then passing
over; but on the sth, the disease became common
in the Detachment on guard.—On the 9th, this
Detachment joined the main body of the Army at
Terayt; and it is declared by some of the Medical
Officers then on the spot, that during the two im-
mediately subsequent days, the disorder was first


observed in Camp.—ln support of the opinion,
that this Detachment brought the disease into the
previously healthy Division, it is added, that the
2nd Battalion of the- 13th Regiment was brigad-
ed to the left of the Ist Battalion 24th Regiment
Native Infantry, and the Ist Battalion of the 24th
to the left of the 2nd Battalion 11th Native In-
fantry ; and that the 24th was attacked before the
11th. Lastly, in further proof of the communi-
cativeness of the virus, it is affirmed, that the
previously healthy villages, and among other pla-
ces the town of Sumpter, got the infection from
the Division.—This is the amount of facts in
favor of the disease being capable of transmis-
sion by a large body from an infected, to a dis-
tant salubrious atmosphere ; and thus commu-
nicable by contaminated, to healthy individuals.
It must be confessed, that this evidence is very
strong, and would prove quite conclusive of the
matter, were it to remain upshaken. But, un-
fortunately for the hypothesis meant to be esta-
blished by it, there is hardly one item of it, that is
not opposed by circumstances of a contrary ten-
dency.—And, first with regard to the appear-
ance of the disease in the main body of the Di-
vision, the testimony of different individuals, is so
much at variance, as to be quite irreconcilable. —
Of twelve Medical Officers, who have given re-
plies to the queries on this point, one states the
disorder to have broken out on the 6th ; two on


the 7th ; one on the Bth ; two on the 9th; one on
the 10th; four on the 11th; and one on the
12th. This discrepancy, however great, is easi-
ly explicable, when the insidious nature of the
disease at its first onset is taken into account;
and when it is recollected, that the sphere of
each individual’s observation, would hardly go
beyond the Battalion immediately under his
charge.—But, how are we to reconcile the asser-
tion of its having appeared on the 6th, 7th, Bth,
or even the 9th, with the assumed hypothesis of
infection from the Shergurh Detachment ?*
In like manner, the fact of the Division com-
municating the virus to the villages lying on its
route from Terayt to the Betwah, is equally dis-
puted.—lt is held by some, that those villages
were not at all affected ; by others, that they had
the disease independently of any intercourse with
the Division; and by a third party, that the latter
invariably carried the infection along with it.—>
One gentleman, having several times sent his Na-
* We are assured by a gentleman, not of the medical
profession, but perfectly capable of ascertaining the fact,
that the disease was brought into Camp at Terayt on the
6th by the Raja of Sumpter’s troops, who came in lor
the purpose of being reviewed, and took post in the rear
of the 25th Regiment Native Infantry.—And it was re-
ported to the Commander in Chief, that in the town of
that name ravages had been committed by it, six weeks
before the Army crossed the Jumna.


tive assistants into the district, was uniformly told,
tliat the pestilence was not amongst them.* Ano-
ther declares, that all the neighbourhood was
sickly: the dry and clean town of Sumpter,
equally with the low and filthy village of Nuddee-
gaon. A third, that the Army having on the
13th marched from Terayt to Talgong, the inha-
bitants of the latter place got the disease the fol-
lowing morning; and a fourth, that Sileia was
first affected, on being entered by the Division
on the 19tb.
Under such extreme contrariety of testimony,
it would be vain to attempt drawing any certain
conclusion. —This much, however, may be affirm-
ed, from a review of the whole progress of the
Epidemick in this quarter, that the infectious
medium, in whatever it consisted, was confined
within a very circumscribed circle ; and was very
slowly extended to healthy parts, of the atmos-
phere.—lf, setting aside the circumstances mili-
tating against it, we take it for granted, that the
infection was truly received by the Centre
and Hansi Divisions from the Detachments
above mentioned, we must believe, that the
disorder, although not communicable by con-
* Col. Philpot’s official reports state positively, that
the thinly scattered villages on the route of his march
remained unaffected; while his Detachment was suffer-
ing very severely.


tact from person to person, was so from one large
body to another large body ; and that, wherever
the poison got head amongst a number of men,
it assumed some new quality, so as, when mixed
with the atmosphere, to become infectious.—
What constituted this additional quality, we can-
not pretend to determine; but, in support of its
existence, we may quote the predilection of the
Epidemick for cities and camps ; the infection of
the Left Division and the Nagpore, and Meerut
Troops, immediately after entering into the dis-
eased medium at Jubbulpore, Nagpore, and
Delhi; and the similar case of the troops, and
followers in attendance upon the Governor Ge-
neral, being attacked shortly after communicating
with an infected village, in the Gorruckpore
District.—To the same account may be plac-
ed, the progressive inarch of the disorder from
one part of an infected place to another ; as
in the Centre and Hansi Divisions; and more
particularly, the Rajpootana Force, in which
the virus seemed to be regularly propagated
from Corps to Corps. I ' In some instances.
* The line of this Force faced nearly North and by
East. The troops were arranged in the following or-
der, commencing from the left. The Ist Battalion 28th
Native Infantry; 6th and 7th Companies Pioneers; Goo-
lundaz and Gun Lascars; the Park in the Centre; 5
Companies Ist Battalion European Artillery; Ist Bat-
talion 27th Native Infantry; Squadron 2nd Regiment
Cavalry; 2d Local Cavalry; in the rear of the park


the suffering body would appear to have sicken-
ed immediately upon coming into the poison-
ous medium; as was the case with the Nagpore
Troops, who were affected on the very day in
which they encamped at the infected village of
Gaongong.—But, more frequently, one or two
days would seem to have been requisite to
bring the virus into action.—Thus the Meerut
Detachment entered Delhi on the 29th, and
was not affected till the 31st; thus too, the
Hansi troops had not the disease till the 6th, tho
day after the junction of that Detachment.—
Again, by those abetting the opinion of the dis-
order being communicated to the Centre Divi-
sion by the Shergur Detachment, it is stated,
that the first cases occurred on the 11th, two
days after its junction. Lastly, the followers of
the troops in personal attendance upon the
Governor General in April, first suffered on
were 415 Ordnance Drivers, with lines of Officers’ tents
intervening. The Ist Battalion 28 th and Goolundaz
were attacked on the 14th September; on the 15th a
few cases occurred amongst the Pioneers and Lascars;
but among them and the Gunner Drivers they were
not numerous till the 19th. On the 18th the squadron
of Cavalry was attacked; and on the 20th, the Local
Cavalry, and Ist Battalion 27th N. I. It must, how-
ever, be remembered, that the ground was drier on the
right, than on the left of the line.
T


t]ic 23d, three days after encamping near an
infected village.*
• The disease recently appeared in a Detachment of
the Rajpootaha Force under such circumstances, as at
first seemed to warrant a suspicion of the existence of
Contagion. A Detachment consisting of a troop of the
Sd Regiment of Cavalry, two Companies of the Ist Bat-
talion Jst Regiment, and one Company of the Ist Bat-
talion 6th Regiment Native Infantry, left Colonel
Ludlow’s Camp in March for Indore, to meet the Escort
of Chimhajce Appa. In this Escort were four Risalus
of Skinner’s Horse; which had come from General
Smith’s camp, South of the Nerbudda ; and from the
time of their leaving it, had been affected with Cholera.
On the 22d of March, the disease appeared in the De-
tachment, then at Oujein; and between that day and
the 27th, when from the judicious means of separation
and constant moving resorted to, it disappeared, forty
cases, 3? in the Ist, and 9 in the 6th Regiment, oc-
curred : of which 8 of the former, and 3 of the latter
proved fatal. There were likewise seven deaths among
the Camp followers. No case occurred in the troop of
Cavalry, Whilst this Detachment was performing
quarantine at’a distance of twelve miles, a similar force
sent to take its duly was not affected in March;
although Skinner’s Horse and the Mahrattas marching
only a few miles in their rear, were daily losing men.
It would appear, but at what precise time is not menr
tioned, that the disorder during the following month
attacked the main body of Colonel Ludlow’s Forqe
stationed at Onail, about twenty miles distant from
Oujein. The second Detachment with Chimnajee, had
apparently become affected previously to this; and like
the former had been deluded During April six


fresh cases were admitted into hospital from the 1st
Battalion 1st Regiment; of which one only was fatal;
of 20 bearers and workmen 4 died. Of tire 6th Regi-
ment, 19 Sepoys were seized, and seven died. In the
3d Cavalry the disorder was slight, and only two
grooms died. W hen the disease got into the lines at
Onail, the first person seized was a blacksmith, who died
in a few hours. The brother of this man was attacked
whilst bathing, after burying the corpse; and next
•morning a third inmate of the same tent; but not an
individual in the tent of the 1st Grenadier. company
1st Regiment, which was only six yards distant, was
seized from first to last. A case nearly similar occur-
red in the 6th Regiment. A Sepoy died of the disease,
A Naick who had been sitting up with him, was attack-
ed as they were closing his grave, and likewise, died.
But, not a single patient in hospital, nor any of the at-
tendants, who sleptclose to the sick, breathed the same
air, and were constantly lifting them up and laying
them down, and rubbing their bodies with oil, were
attacked. This is the sum total of the proof in favor of
the contagious nature of the disease in this quarter.
But in fact it amounts to nothing. Unfortunately we
have no particulars regarding the seizure of the' black-
smith's brother and companion; but is it .not more
likely that their illness was- ascribable, as in innumera-
ble other well ascertained instances, to the depressing
influence of fatigue, grief, and the other usual predisposing
causes, than to infection ? How was it with the Naick ?
His case is at first sight equally suspicious; but for-
tunately we know more of its concomitant circumstances,
Hehad attended the Sepoy his friend during his illness,
and wailed over him when dead; and after a night
of sorrow, when exhausted by fatigue, mental anxiety, and
T2


fasting, he followed his corpse to the grave, to a consi-
derable distance, in the heat of the forenoon. But this
is not all; for it appears that, when heated by several
hours exposure to the midday sun, he incautiously drank
a large quantity of cold water, and was immediately
taken ill. So that in his case, we have all that consti-
tutes the essence of the predisposing and exciting causes
of the disease. It may be said, that the benefits deriv-
ed by this Division from segregation proved the con-
tagious nature of the Epidemick; but in other quarters
change of ground and scene had invariably the same
good effects, without the aid of separation. The ap-
pearance of sickness was here preceded by exactly the
same atmospherical phenomena, as in almost every other
part of India. Easterly winds ; very hot days ; and
great variations of temperature between the day and
night. The probability is that the whole atmosphere
in that quarter soon became corrupt; for a Detachment
of the 2d Battalion sth Regiment Native Infantry and
of the Ist Corps Local Cavalry at the same time got
the disease, and lost thirteen men, when encamped ®n
the banks of the Miah River, where no mode of convey-
ance of the virus could be traced. But there too the
days were very sultry and the nights chilly ; and the
men had been indulging in eating unripe mangoes.
No case of recurrence of the disease appeared in any ol
thesa Detachments. Most benefit was derived from the
free use of Spiritus in doses of
70 and 100 drops.


SECTION VII.
OF THE PREDISPOSING AND EXCIT-
ING CAUSES OF THE EPIDEMICK.
ON these points, so much has been already
said, whilst other branches of our enquiry were
under discussion, that they cannot now be large-
ly enteredinto, without the frequent repetition of
many things previously mentioned, and yet fresh
in the reader’s memory.—But, as they are of
sufficient importance, to require being treated of
by themselves, in a Report professing to con-
tain the results of general experience, we shall
now proceed to notice them as cursorily as pos-
sible ; endeavouring to avoid the introduction of.
all unimportant facts.—ln so doing, we need not
be very anxious about the separation of the
Predisposing and Exciting Causes; for these two
classes so much run into, and take the place of
each other, under different circumstances, that
what in one case is a predisponent, in another
acts simply as an exciting cause.—Thus, expo-
sure to the heat of the sun, which was in all
cases observed to be a powerful exciting cause,
would, when long continued, or renewed du


ring many successive days, become a predispo-
sing cause, by inducing fatigue or debility.—So,
in many other instances, the two classes were
mutually convertible.
Of the causes strictly Predisposing, debility,
in whatever way induced, was by far the most
powerful, and most generally present. —To its
operation, we are chiefly to ascribe the fact so
universally observed, thatthelower classes—those
badly fed, and ill cloathed, and lodged,'—suf-
fered more than persons in better circumstances
of life. This was particularly remarkable in
the different Divisions of the Army visited by
the disease.—Thus in all of them, the Hindoo,
who lives chiefly on poor, crude, and ascescent
vegetables; and is in all respects both of diet
and cloathing sparing of expence; was more
liable to be attacked, than the Mussulman, who
eats flesh meats ; sometimes uses spirituous-
liquors; and is generally warmly dressed, and com-
fortably lodged.—For like reasons, the European
Soldier was less subject, than either class of the
Native troops; and the European Officer,
again, less so than the Soldier.—How much
this depended on the possession of grea-
ter bodily strength and power of resisting
disease, was demonstrated in the case of
the European Flank Battalion, the men of which
had been previously debilitated by attacks of the
Epidemick fever'at Allahabad, during the forego


ing year. This Battalion suffered, accordingly,
more than any other with the Centre Division.
Of 800 officers and men, it had at one time 200
in Hospital; and it buried its Surgeon and 5-fc
men.—ln like manner, convalescents,' whose
constitutions had been weakened by previous
disease, suffered proportionably more, than per-
sons of sound frame.—Many were taken ill, whilst
under the influence of mercury, used for the
cure of fever, hepatitis, and lues.—-Thus too, per-
sons of sober, regular habits, enjoyed greater
immunity, than the drunken and dissipated;
who kept irregular hours, and were frequently
exposed to the vapours and cold of the night, af-
ter a debauch.
The second great Predisposing Cause was
fatigue, accompanied with, and aggravated by ex-
posure to the sun by day, and cold by night.
Thus in Calcutta, it was remarked, that the men
working in the open Dock Yards were far more
frequently taken ill, than persons of nearly the
same descriptions employed under shelter in the
Cotton Screws. In respect of diet and mode of
life, the advantage was undoubtedly in favour of
the former, who are generally mechanics on
high wages, whilst the latter are common Coolies,
or day labourers of the poorest order'. —For the
same reason; fishermen, boatmen, husbandmen,
gardeners, travellers, bearers, washermen, and


prisoners working on the roads, suffered dread-
fully.
The ill effects of fatigue were particularly strike
ing in the case of the Left Division of the Ar-
my.—All classes of this Division, for many days
previously to the breaking out of the Epidemick,
had undergone great exertion, in the sun by day,
and in the cold of the night, whilst conducting a
heavy train, through a difficult country, to Mun-
dela; and accordingly . suffered severely.—The
2nd Battalion 28th Regiment, which lost more
men than any other corps, had been left in the
rear to conduct the store carriages, and had ne-
cessarily gone through greater fatigue and expo-
sure, than the main body.
In the Centre Division, again, more individu-
als were taken ill during the night, than in the
day; and more, previously to moving from their
ground in the morning, when the troops were
constrained to stand long in the cold heavy due,
and at the termination of a long fatiguing
march, than at any other period of the twenty-
four hours.—Thus too, persons on picquets and
night guards were almost certainly attacked; and
the succession of seizures was so quick, that it
was more than once necessary to relieve the sen-
tries three times, during the two hours, which it
is customary for them to stand guard.—This was
especially the case with tlw artillery j of which


scarcely a man on guard during the night escape
ed; and of the whole number seized, two thirds
were taken ill between sunset and sunrise.,Here
too, the different degrees of susceptibility amongst
different descriptions of persons were very re-
markable.-—The bearer, and Khulassee general-
ly ; and with the Artillery, the Drivers and men
of the Magazine Establishment; were attacked in
much larger proportion, than the regular Sol-
diers ; because they were inferior in strength
to the Sepoys, and Gdolandaz; had no tents;
received less pay; and Were worse clad and fed.
In Agra, and other Cities ,of Upper. India,
where it is the custom of the Natives of all classes
to sleep on the tops of their flat roofed houses, du-
ring the great heats of summer; the effect of ex-
posure to the cold and dew was particularly
exemplified -. for the greater number seized-were
persons so situated ; and few escaped of such, as
having heated themselves during.the day, lay-
out during the night, with little or no covering.
On the other hand, almost all the gentlemen’s
servants, who took to -wearing woollens on the
change of weather, continued in good health. -A
like circumstance was also marked in the Cen-
tre Division ; but there it was confined to the
establishments of one or two Officers. Lastly,
long fasting, by disordering the functions of the
stomach, and paving the way to indigestion,
was a frequent precursorand cause of the elisor-
U


der. Thuj in the city of Delhi, where the Epide-
mic 1 * happened to prevail during the great annual
fast of the Ramzan, in which it is unlawful for Ma-
hometans to eat, while the sun is above the horizon,
a much larger proportion of persons of that per-
suasion suffered, than of the Hindoos, who were
hot similarly restricted as to the times of their
meals.*
It was observed, that individuals daily per-
forming a moderate portion of work, especially if
under shelter, were far more exempt, than those
who were alternately idle, and fatigued by hea-
vy labour. Thus the persons employed in the
Silk Filatures in different parts of Bengal, who
are engaged from morning to evening in task*
of a light nature, suffered very little j whilst
toolees, and all classes casually bearing burdens,
or going long journeys, were frequent victims.
The reason might be,- that the bodies of the
former were kept in good condition, by a sta-
ted quantity of labour; whilst the latter were at
Ohe time exhausted by over exertion, and at
another lay indolently asleep on the cold,
damp ground.
If we \vere to look for an Epitome, of all that
composes the Exciting Causes of Cholera, we
* The greater prevalence of the disease generally, in
the month of Ramzan, is remarked by Avicenna, whose
experience in the East gave him, full opportunity of
bbsorving the fact.


need only refer to the' appearances presented in-
the Chittagong District, during the Hot Season
of every succeeding year. This district is for-
med by a narrow belt of land, extending about
two hundred miles from North to South ; boun-
ded by the sea to the West; and by lofty ranges
of mountains to the East and North East. The sur-
face of this tract is irregular, and interspersed
■with low hills, and rising grounds; covered with
brushwood, bamboos, and forest trees. The in-
tervening flats are highly cultivated; and rice
being the chief produce, are quite dry during
the Hot Season. The soil is light and sandy; and
there are no swamps or marshes throughout the
district. From the month of March, as the Sun.
ascends, strong Southerly winds begin to prevail.
The atmosphere then becomes moist and cloudy;
with great heats and occasional falls of rain du-
ring the day; and nights calm and sultry during
the early part, and cold, with a chilly air from
the East, towards morning. The effect of these
great diurnal vicissitudes upon the human body,
is very striking. The moist wind from the sea,
and the stagnating air of the evening,, produce
profuse sweats, relaxation, and great nervous ir-
ritability ; and thus render the frame, especially
during sleep, extremely sensible to external im-
pressions ; and fit it for the reception of disease.
In this state, it is acted upon by the cold wind
and dew of the morning ; a; strong check is im,
u a


mediately given to the previously violent perspi-
rations ; the blood is driven towards the centre;
and that disturbance of the circulation, which
we know to be one of the' early attendants on
Cholera, is thereby superinduced.- This disease
isaccordinglyendemial in the' district during the
Hot Weather of each year; and does not sub-’
side until the air is cooled, and the atmospheri-
cal temperature becomes more even, after the
setting'in of the regular Rains.
We shall find, that causes of the same des-'
pription, that is, great and sudden vicissitudes of
the weather, from hot to cold, and from dry to
moist, accompanied with changes in the direction
of the winds, were almost uniformly in operation,
wherever the late Epidemick shewed itself; and
were generally the immediate precursors of it?
visits. It has been already seen, that in Cal-
cutta, and other divisions of Bengal, its first
rise was preceded by a long course of unusually
humid and sultry weather; and that its subse-
quent periods of increase and decline were
always modified by changes in the weather.
Thus in February 1818, and April 1819, the
two most marked periods of its aggravation, the
days were sultry, and the nights cold and raw;
with heavy storms from the South and East.
So it was in almost every part of the Lower Pro-
vinces: in Jessore, Burrisaul, Dacca, Sylhet,
Chittagong, Nuddeea, llajshahy,' Bhaugulpore,


Monghyr: as well as in the valley of Khatman-
doo, and in many other stations. At Patna,
the weather had been very hot and dry some
time before its appearance. At Buxar no rain
had fallen for nearly a month; the days were
exceedingly oppressive; and the nights chilly,'
with heavy dews.—At Allahabad, although no
great changes occurred in the range of the
thermometer during the night and day: the mer-
cury generally fluctuating between 84 and 91: t’ie
air was very sultry to the feel.—At Cawnpore
again, the thermometer ranged from 72 to 112
during the whole of April and May, when the
disease prevailed in the town ; and in Lord
Hastings? caihp in Gorruckpore, the mercury in-
tents stood at 80 at sunrise, and at 110 at noon.
At Futtygur, the weather had been insufferably
hot,‘ and not a drop of rain had fallen for a
month; when a heavy Northwester occurred on
the afternoon of the 9th of June, and next morn-
ing the Epidemick was first seen. So, in Agra, the
morning and day of the Ist of July were ex- ,
ceedingly hot j the thermometer stood at 96 in
the shade; and not a breath of air stirred. At 6P.
M. a gale of wind from the East suddenly came
on ; the air at once grew damp and chilly ; and
next morning many persons were -carried oif by
the Epidemick. And during the whole period of
its continuance, the days were very hot, and the
nights cold and moist j with a keen penetrating


wind: the thermometer ranging’ from 84 to 94.
But as the wind came round to the West, and the
weather became steady, the disease withdrew.
In Delhi, the rains bad been very abundant,
with Easterly wind, from the 20th June; the
whole country was covered with water ; and the
atmosphere was loaded with moisture. At this
time, not a case of the disease appeared. But, as
soon as the wind veered round to the west, and
brought with it a great change of weather; sultry
days and chilly nights, with the thermometer va-
rying from 72 at sunrise to 9u at noon j the mor-
tality began; and continued unabated, until a
recurrence of Easterly wind, and an abundant fall
of rain, drove away the disease. Thus, the city
continued free so long as there was simple
moisture, with moderate, equable temperature ;
but became sickly the moment the westerly wind
produced great evaporation, and alternations
of heat and cold. At Meerut, the weather was
perfectly seasonable, with frequent heavy falls
of rain, during the three first weeks of July. But,
from the 24th until the 29th, when the disease
broke out, there was not a single shower; the
thermometer then fell four degrees below the
monthly average ; and the nights became sensibly
cooler, with heavy dews. Jeypore became affected
immediately after the cessation of heavy rains j
and Saugor, and all the towns and posts in its
vicinity, during the Hot Winds; when the days


were very ‘warm, and the nights so cold, that
quilts and blankets were used. But, without
fatiguing the reader with a vast number of in-
stances, all in proof of the same fact, we shall
now advert to the condition of the different
•divisions of the Army, with respect to climate
when severally attacked: as very strongly evinc-
ing the unvarying connection of the Epidemick
with marked vicissitudes in the atmospherical
temperature, and an unsettled state of the
weather.
With the Hansi Division, for some time before
the appearance of the Epidemick, little, if any
tain had fallen, and the heat was great: the
thermometer generally standing at 96 at noon.
The disorder, however, after having once begun,
continued with the Troops during wet and varia-
ble weather; and then it was remarked, • that
Such Corps as had brought their cloth pantaloons
with them, as the 26th Regiment, suffered less,
•than those who had not, as the 29th Regiment.
The Epidemick appeared in the Centre Divi-
sion in the beginning of November. Of October,
the first eight days had been cloudy, with Eas-
terly wind, occasional falls of rain, and the
thermometer ranging from 79 to 90. From the
Sth to the end of the month, with little varia-
tion, the wind was strong from the West, and
hot; with clear sky, and sultry weather; the


mercury towards the latter part falling as low asS
62 at sunrise, and keeping as high as 93 and 99
at noon, and from 84 to 96 at sunset. The
same extraordinary fluctuations in the range of
the thermometer were remarked during the
early and middle parts of November : the mer-
cury from the Ist to the 17th standing from 50
to 60 at 6 A. M. ; from 84 to 99 at noon ; and
from 63 to 90 at 6P. M.; the wind still keeping
Westerly. About the sth, the effects of these
sudden transitions began to be more marked than
before; the days became insupportably oppres-
sive ; and the nights extremely chilly, . with
heavy dews, and fogs in the mornings. From
the 6th to the 12th, the period within which it
is agreed by all, that the Camp was first affected
by the pestilence, the thermometer was never
higher than 51 at sunrise, nor lower than 84 at
noon. On the 6th, it was 50 and 90 j and on
the 7th, 45 and 90- These it will be remembered
were the days during which the earliest cases,
in all probability, occurred. About the mid-
dle of the month, the difference of temperature
between the day and night became less; and
the disease sensibly declined from the 17th ; and
'wholly withdrew towards the latter part; as the
variations grew more equable ; and the weather
became such as is usual during that period
of the year.*
* The reader will find Meteorological Tables for the
months of September, October, November, and Decern-


-It will be observed, that with this Division,
moisture had nothing to do with the production
of the disorder: unless, indeed, we suppose, that
the dews and’fogs here stood in the stead of
rain; abstracting the heat of the body by
primary application, and subsequent evapora-
tion. The sky was clear and serene, and
throughout, light and dry. In like manner,
the disease appeared in the Nagpore Subsidiary
Force, and in all the towns and villages
in its vicinity, when the weather was ex-
ceedingly hot and dry; the thermometer rang-
ing from 76 to 90 in the Officers, and 120 in the
Soldiers* tents; and wholly departed from the
province, as the heavy fains, which fell in the
middle of June, cooled the atmosphere. But,
with this Force, probably, no exciting cause was
necessary ; as it fell at once into a strongly im-
pregnated pestilential medium; and was over-
taken by the disease without any previous pre-
paration,
There were great vicissitudes of temperature
With the Left Division during the early and mid-
dle parts of April, with daily storms of thunder
and rain. The days were extremely hot; the
mornings and evenings foggy; and the nights
so cold, that blankets were required: the tlier-
ber, with this Division, annexed to the introductory
discourse on the Weather.
V


mometer ranging from 45 to 78 at Jay break,
to 86—103 at noon.
When the disorder broke out in the Rajpoota-
na Force, a different state of weather prevailed.
From the Ist to the 14th September, there was
only one day’s intermission of rain; and the at-
mosphere was exceedingly cold and damp.
There was continual small rain during the whole
of the 13th, the day preceding that on which
the disease broke out ; and the air w r as very raw
and chilly. On the 21st the rains began to cease}
and with them the Epidemick,
We shall only mention two other instances, in
which the pernicious effects of cold and mois-
ture Were especially remarkable. From the 9th
to the 15th August, the 2d Bn. 19th Regiment,
then encamped on low ground, under damaged
tents, in very rainy weather, at Mundessore, was
severely visited by the disorder. Of thirteen se-
poys taken ill, six died. After a few days, the
Battalion moved to a higher spot; and although
one man was taken ill during the march, not a
case occurred after it reached its new ground.
So, with the Ist Battalion Gth Regiment in Mal-
wa. This Corps, with a large body of Gamp fol-
lowers, on the 4th of May encamped on the
high banks of a dry river bed at Jhanoor, three
marches south of Ougein. The day was exces-
sively hot. At SP. M. heavy rain came on; and


the thermometer, from being at 100, fell sudden,
ly to 80. The disease, which was not then kt
the neighbourhood, attacked the detachment
next morning.
It appears then, from the foregoing examples,
that the principal exciting causes of the disease
may be enumerated in the following order, ac-
cording to their degrees of priority, and frequen-
cy of operation. Istly. Alternations of heat and
cold, combined with rain, or a very humid state
of the atmosphere. 2dly. Simple alternations of
heat and cold, without moisture. Sdly. Exces-
sive heat, without cold or moisture.
We have yet spoken of these causes, only as
they seemed to affect the health of large bodies,
or of many persons at once. • There was still a-
nother set of agents, confined in their operations
to single individuals; and the effects of which, fol-
lowing instantly upon their application, could be
immediately, and distinctly traced. Of this sort
were the drinking of large draughts of good, or
bad water, when the body was heated; gorging
after long fasting; eating food of a deleteri-
ous quality; going suddenly from a hot, into a
cold atmosphere; lying exposed to the wind
when the cuticular pores were open, and the per-
■ spiration was flowing freely. In every part of the
country, nothing was more common, than to see
a person attacked by the disease, immediately on
. y 2


drinking a large quantity of water, after a long
walk, or exposure to the sun. But in the Camp of
the Centre Division, where the water was foul,
scarce, and only procurable at considerable disv
sances; and the Sepoys and followers drank gree-
dily from every muddy puddle on their march ;
hundreds were affected in this manner. So, in
the Nagpore Force, where the heat and thirst of
the men were excessive, the most fatal cases
were brought up from the beds of the rivulets, in
■which the Sepoys had dropt, during the line of
march. The mischievous consequences of ea-
ting bad, raw, and indigestible food were equally
remarkable. It would appear, that during the
year, in which the Epidemick arose, much bad
rice had been grown in Bengal; and there seems
no reason to doubt, that grain of this noxious
description, when taken into the stomach of a
person predisposed to the disease, frequently in-
duced the attack. There was, at the same time,
great scarcity in all parts of the Upper Provinces.
All kinds of grain were very deaf; and the lower
classes of the inhabitants, being able to purchase
only the poor and unwholesome sorts, often fell
victims after swallowing an innutritions and in-
digestible meal. Thus at Futtygur, many persons
were seized immediately after eating water me-
lons ;* and at Agra the too free use of that fruit,
* The tendency of melons and almonds to induce
the disease is marked by Avicenna; and Galen says “ the
whole race of pumpkins, being of a cold and moist na-


of which the dry bed of the Jumna was then full,
is mentioned as one of the leading causes of
the disorder. Thus too, the eating of Bajru
(Holms IndiansJ, Joar (Holcus SorgumJ,
and other kinds of raw unripe grain, plucked
by the troops in -the field on their line of
march, was in the Left Division, believed to
have increased the number of the sick; and in
the Centre Division, before the true nature of
the pestilence came to be understood, was
considered as the sole cause of the mischief, and
strictly prohibited throughout camp.
ture, when taken into the body produce a vitious hu-
mour, and render it especially obnoxious to Cholera
Morbus.”


SECTION VIII.
OF THE MORTALITY CAUSED BY THE
DISEASE.
THE data in our possession, are not sufficient-
ly numerous or accurate, to enable us to form a
correct statement, or even a plausible conjecture,
of the number of persons, who have perished by the
Epidemick. Several circumstances have concur-
red to diminish the value, and to circumscribe the
extent, of the facts amassed on this point. The
vast tracts of country, over which the disease
ranged; and the scanty and scattered state of the
European settlers, who alone are capable of col-
lecting the requisite information; would, under
every circumstance, have rendered it impossible,
that complete returns should be obtained.
Many places distant from the larger stations, and
of limited population, would probably escape
observation; and, of those introduced into the
returns, the loss would be either exaggerated, or
lowered, according to the laziness, caprice, or in-
terested motives, of the Native reporters. The in-
conveniences apprehended from trusting the
requisite enquiry to the Native Police Officers,
were, indeed, so great, that, upon application


lieing made in the proper quarter, it was
thought right to discourage the attempt. The
grounds, upon which this determination was ta-
ken, were, that the power necessary to be given
to the Thannadars, and other persons of the same
class, in order to enable them to form the desired
census, could not be delegated, without their im-
mediately making a handle of it, to oppress the
Natives under their jurisdiction ; and that the re-
sults of the enquiry, as dictated by carelessness, in-
terest, or fancy, would run far wide of the truth.
Besides, that the Native population have always
shewn a rooted aversion to having their numbers
reckoned; from a painful recollection, that under
their farmer rulers, expedients of this sort were
never resorted to, without leading to the imposi-
tion of capitation taxes, and other heavy bur-
dens.
Notwithstanding these obstacles, lists of the
total number of deaths, purporting to have been
carefully made out by the police officers, under the
directions of the Magistrates, have been obtained
from several districts. But, even these come in
a very questionable shape.—They appear to have
been mostly taken at a late period of the disor-
der; when the mortality occurring during the
early part of its progress, could only have been
guessed from indistinct recollection. Another
suspicious circumstance is, that the deaths are
generally stated in round numbers, of thousands.


and tens of thousands; partly for the. sake of
producing greater effect, and partly from an in-
distinctness, and propensity to exaggeration,
common to the Natives of India with all other
Asiatic nations.—From which it may be suspect-
ed, that the aggregate was not made up from a
number of subordinate lists, but roundly put
down at random. Another source of inaccuracy
is, that, when the Epidemick was at its height, it
-was the fashion to lay every death to its account;
so that every person, who was cut off suddenly,
or in an unusual’man’ner, was said to have died
of Cholera.
Having premised these observations, we shall
proceed to lay our scanty materials before the
reader.—To commence with Calcutta.—The on-
ly accounts we have been able to obtain, of per-
sons taken ill in the city and suburbs, are those
containing”the lists of individuals attended by the
Native Physicians, at that time appointed by
Government all over the country, to administer
medicines to the sick. Even these are imperfect.
For in the city, they embrace a period of three
months and eleven days only; whereas in the su-
burbs, they extend from the 19th of September
1817, to the ,25th of July of the following year:
when the establishments were finally discharg-
ed, as being deemed no longer necessary. It ap-
pears then, that from .the 19 th September to the
51st December, of 13,930persons,-who in Calcut


in applied for aid, 9595 were discharged cured ;
.3395 remained on the convalescent list; and 930,
or rather more than one in ten, died—ln the
suburbs, again, comprehending a circuit of five or
six miles diameter round the boundary ditch of
the city, of 21,876, to whom relief was afforded
between September and August, 20,878 were sav.
ed; IS7B died, or nearly a iGth; and 259 remain-
ed convalescent at the end of the period. Amongst
these the mortality was greater at one time than
another; being from September to February as
one in 14; and from February to August as one
in 18. Of those affected, the proportion of males
to females was reckoned as four to one; proba-
hably from difference of exposure; that of Chil-
‘dren, and infants at the breast, a mere fraction.*
It must not be imagined, that these lists afford
'any thing like a fair index of the general mortali-
ty at the Presidency. Both there, and in other
quarters of the country, thousands were prevent-
ed from applying for aid, from the rapidity of the
‘attack; from distance ; from aversion to Europe-
an medicines; and from a superstitious desire to
* These tables are printed at the end of the work; and
'to them has been added another, exhibiting the number
"of deaths by the disease, reported to the’Police, from Ja-
nuary, 1815, to November, 1819, inclusive. The latter is
chiefly useful, as enabling the reader to judge of the com-
parative mortality at different periods of the Epidemick,
• According to this criterion, September,'lBl7, February,
"March, April, May, and November, 1818, and November,
w


atvait the termination of the disorder in the vicini-
ty of some sacred spot.—The mortality was un-
doubtedly very great; but it would be vain to ha-
zard a conjecture of its amount. Of every second
or third family, large and small, perhaps one, two,
or three, and in some cases,- five or six members
perished. For many months numerous parties
were constantly met carrying the biers of the
dead; and the banks of the river were crowded
with Hindoos burning the bodies of departed
relatives,
In Jessore 10,000 persons were said to have been
cut off in two months after the first appearance of
the disease; and as it has ever since been fatally
prevalent in that district, a vast addition must
sincediave been made to that number.' —In Bac-
kergunge,. of those who were attacked in the
earlier months, scarcely any recovered without
•medicine; and the mortality was accordingly
great.—The proportion of deaths was, however,
less considerable, where medical aid was duly ap-
plied,. Thus of, 82 prisoners seized, only 12 dj-
ed.—-In Mymensing, where the disease has raged
for two years, , the deaths, according to the Police
-lists> amounted to 10,714; according to the, belief
of the Medical Officer, to much more.—-In 1817»
they occurred chiefly among the lower classes;
in IS 18, neither cast, age, nor sex was spared;
‘lBlO, liave been the most unhealthy months; and Februa-
ry 1818, the most fatal of all.


and in September, October and November, the
mortality was frightful. At Bulloah, and In the
Whole of the South, West Division .of Tipperah,
few survived without medicine; and it is esti-
mated, that a tenth part of the whole population
disappeared.
Ih the Dacca district, we have some- precise
•statements to go upon. From August, 1817, to
•January, 1819, of 0351 persons reported to have
been attacked in the district, 3,7-57, or more than
one half, perished. In the city again, where as-
sistance was promptly given, of 1,081 taken ill
before the end of the first year,72'only died, and
of 1,121 in the succeeding year, only 101; :or
scarcely one in a hundred. The houses in .the
town and suburbs amount to 20,000; and as in
many, five or six individuals were affected, it is
estimated, that we should be near the truth, if
we were to allot one case to each dwellings—
The disease was most - destructive, in the com-
mencement. Males were liable in a double pro-
portion-to women; and with them, the attack
Was more certainly fatal.
In the district ofSylhei,. the deaths, according
to the 2'hannadars’ reports, came wither a few of
10,000. The return ot'the'SudrThawm (Sylhet
town,) in which the houses- were numbered, for
facilitating the assessment oflhe Choukcedaree
o
tax; and the deaths more accurately ascertain-
W 2.


ed; might be better depended upon than the
test; and was to the following purport. Houses
3316; deaths from August, 1817, to January
1818,1197* Supposing this to be correct, and al-
persons to each house, there would be
a population of 18,896, from which the mortality-
would be as one to seventeen.—Throughout the
district, the average of those attacked, is assum-
ed as one in eight; and of deaths as one in twen-
ty-nine.—The mortality was greatest in the au-
tumn of 1818. Amongst the servants of Europe-
an residents at the chief station, of 298 indivi-
duals, 50 were seized, and 5 died; and all these
were better off as to diet, lodging, and medical
aid, than the bulk of the people.—ln the Sylhet
Corps, of 450 of all ranks, 29 cases, and two ca-
sualties, occurred; and of 230 prisoners in the
Jail, 42 seizures and 13 casualties.—From a re-
gister of individuals in the town, who received
aid, of 300 cases occurring in April, May and
June,. 1818, only 25 died; whereas of 430
cases, under like circumstances, in the three last
months of the year, 84 sunk.
In the district of Nuddea, out of a population
reckoned at 13,00,000, the disease between June,
1817, and July of the following year, attacked
55,400 persons; of whom died 16,500, or more
than two thirds. At first the mortality amounted
toons half. Of 4,789 persons to whom medicine
Was administered, 1,066 died; or rather more than


one fifth. In the neighbourhood of Baulea, with-
out medicine, the proportion of deaths Was three
fourths; with it, only one fourth. In the town
of Nattore, from September to June, 640 per-
sons died, of a population between 45 and
50,000: or little more than one in a hundred.
In the district, the deaths were as one to four,
of those affected. Numbers of women, and
boys and girls, were attacked; but no child under
eight years of age.
The disease was dreadfully destructive in
Burdwan. Departing from .its ordinary course,
it was here mildest in the commencement; the
mortality during the Rains of 1817 and subse-
quent Cold Weather, being only about one in
four; rising in the Hot Winds to four fifths; and
again decreasing in the Rains to one tenth. It
is singular too, that during the period of greatest
mortality, the persons mostly affected were the
Sepoys, and well fed inhabitants of .the town ;
Whilst the convicts, and debtors in the, Civil Jail,
remained healthy till the Rains, when they alone
were attacked. According to the Thannadars’
registers, 15,571 persons perished in the Bhau-
gulpore district between August, 1817, and May;
1818. In the beginning, all castes and classes were
alike subject to its attacks; and from August lb
the end of 1817. of those seized, it is affirmed,
that not one in a hundred survived,


In Tirhoot it appeared from the doubtful
reports of the Police Establishment, that
between' 9 and 10,000 persons were carried off
:Here, it is said to have indiscriminately attack*
■ed individuals of all classes, and of every age
and sex. In the city of Patna, the total- mar*
tality was not ascertained. In the-end of 181.7
the disease was more general ; in the following
hot winds more rapidly destructive.- From the
25th of April to the 10th of July, 1539 deaths
took place amongst a population of 250,000;
and of 30 Sepoys attacked during that period, 15
died in spite of medicine. More ' males were
affected than females. In Cluipra the casual-
ties Were said to have exceeded 700. ’ The mor-
tality throughout the whole province of Behai 1 ,
including Shahabad, and the Northern parts 6f
Itamgur, Was very great.
At Churtar the casualties did hot exceed orte
tenth; at Benares one eighth, of such as took
tnedicirte. In the latter, females Were seized
equally with males. So, at Allahabad, persons
of either sex, and of every age were affected;
and the total mortality in the district is stated
at between 8 and 10,000. From this city up-
wards, as the disease was milder, and less gene-
ral irt its attacks, the casualties were comparative-
ly fewer. Thus, in Cawnpore, of 80,000 inha-
bitants, 500 only were seized; of whom ho
more than 50 died. In the adjoining canton


ftjfints.tile . mortality amounted to' one fifth of
the -diseased. In Shahjehanpore , 500. died.
No returns have been received from any part of
Gprruckpore or Oude,* if we except the 2nd
Battalion 15th Native Infantry, which during
the time it was stationed at Lucknow, had 35
cases and 11 deaths, from .a. strength of 1000
men. In Futtygur, the list of deaths was. very
email. In Coel, of 300 sick . 70. died. v ln
-Agra the deaths did not exceed , ten daily ;
although the town contained SO,OOQ_ people.
Not 500 in all died in Muttra; and about a like
number in the immense city of Delhi. In Meerut
•town, which has 35,000 inhabitants, only 400 were
seized, of whom 60, or about one seventh, died:
'giving a proportion of deaths to the whole po-
pulation of one in 120. Of 600 persons living
in the great Bazar, 200 were affected, and 50, or
one fourth died. Of these, 29, were men, 15, wo-
men, 3, young persons, and 3, children.—ln an
adjoining village, the inhabitants of which could
not be persuaded to use any remedies, every in-
dividual attacked died.—ln the whole district,
Of which only a few principal towns, as Shamled,
Dabun, &c. were visited, 1,399 deaths occurred.
* In tins province the mortality is described by eye-
witnesses to have been exceedingly great, —a reason for
which might be, that the inhabitants, living under a
Native ruler, had not the medical attendance and medi-
cines, which were so bountifully supplied to all per-
sons subject to the British government.


Of the casualties it is strange, that 1,000, mora
than two thirds, occurred in Deoghat, a small
town containing only 7,000 inhabitants, in the
-Begum Smnroo’s territories. The fact is given
on the authority of an European Gentleman,
who satisfied himself of its accuracy by minute
’enquiry; but no mention of local peculiarities
accompanies it.—ln Saharuupore, no more , than
%50 perished, of a population of 30,000.—The
mortality in the whole of the Jeypore principar
-lity is said not to have surpassed 1,200. In Ko-
tah 100 men are stated to have died daily ; but
we have no precise account of its ravages in
Ougein, Indore, Nagpore, or any others of the
great Mahratta towns.—ln Hutta, and other
•places in the vicinity of Saugur, the mortality
was undoubtedly great;.and in the district ad-
joining Banda the deaths were reckoned at
TO,ooo.— ln the town itself, the disease attacked
all descriptions indiscriminately from two to six-
ty years of age ; but as medicine was sedulously
'administered to the. sick, only Gy died of 2170
'individuals known to have been seized.
Let us next examine the amount of the loss
sustained in the different Corps of the Army.—ln
the Centre Division the mortality was, ori con-
jecture, variously calculated at five, eight, and
■ twelve thousand.—The truth is, that in all cases,
it is next to.impossible, to compute correctly, the
exact amount of the vast variety of persons, con


dtituting the ‘ class of Camp' followers, with an
Indian Army'; and amid the confusion and de-
sertion occurring in the Centre. Division during
the sickly'period, even had its original strength,
in numbers been known, the real extent of its
loss could hardly have been ascertained. The
mortality was undoubtedly greatest from the 14th
to the 19th of November ; and it was calculated,
that, at the very least, live thousand of all classes-
perished during these five days. The. armed
force consisted of 3,500 Europeans, and 8,000
Natives. Of the former, 230, and of the latter
534, died. The average loss of each Battalion was;
computed at 50 men; but this is mere conjecture,
as no accurate returns were obtained.* In soma
Corps the number attacked was very great. Thus
. * Since the account given above was written* the re T
turns of all the Corps composing this force, monthly,
Weekly and daily, for the period during which the pes-
tilence raged, have been procured from the offices
of the King’s and Company’s Adjutant Generals; but
they, are so defective and indistinct, that little use canr
be made of them*, Until the 16th November, the returns
were weekly, and contained the sick of all descriptions,
from the 16 th to the Bth of December they were daily,
and restricted to an enumeration of those affected by the
Epjdemick only; but between the 17 th and 22nd of No-?
Vember they were very irregularly given in; as during the
confusion of daily raarchiqg, amidst promiscuous attack,
it was nearly impossible to ascertain the extent of the sick-
ness and mortality in the different Corps. Another cause
operated to prevent accuracy. Towards the end of the
X


the Ist Battalion Bth Native Infantry had 350
seizures, and 40 deaths; and the 3rd Regiment
Cavalry 154, and 18 deaths. In the 2nd Bat-
talion Ist Regiment Native Infantry, 48 Sepoys,
and 25 followers died, between the 10th and 26th.
From the 2nd Battalion 11th Regiment Native
Infantry, 268 cases were admitted, of whom 43-
died.—ln the Rocket Troop, 27 Europeans, of
whom one only died; and 87 Natives, of whom
18 died. 0f2,000 of all classes, attached to the
King’s 67th Regiment of Foot, 90 died. The
mortality amongst a given number seized, va-
ried, according to the difference in the period,
and in the class of the individuals attack-
ed. From the 10th to the 15th, it did not
month, the survivors of the sick left at Sileia rejoined
their respective Corps; and, as convalescents, were admit-
ted into the Hospitals, without any proper distinction
being made in the reports, between them and the fresh
cases of disease. • Two monthly returns of a more sa-
tisfactory nature have, however, been’obtained; and sh'all
be inserted’ at the end of the work. The one contains
the casualties of the whole Army from the Epidcmick,
(excepting the 21th Regiment of Dragoons, and the 3rd
Regiment Native Cavalry, and a detachment of the 7th
Native Cavalry, then on a distinct duty with Colonel
Philpot); the other the casualties of every description in
H. Majesty’s Troops, from October to January follow-
ing. If these can be trusted, the mortality among the
troops was much smaller than it is rated at in the text.
For according to them, of 9,595 troops of all descripti-
ons, only 111, or one person in 22|, were carried off. Wc


hot exceed one in eight; and was then chiefly
confined to the bearers and other descriptions of
Camp followers; from the 15th to the 19th, it
increased to one in three and a half, and then
occurred, principally, amongst the Europeans and
Sepoys; and from the 22d, to the 30th, it decreas-
ed greatly. We have said, that the disease was
at its height on the 18th. Of the 2nd Batta-
lion 11th Native Infantry, 56 Sepoys were ad-
mitted on that day; from 20 to 80 on each
succeeding day to the 22nd, and from thence
to the end of the month only 20 in all. Of the
European Artillery, the average of deaths was
one fourth; of Golundaz, rather more than a
fifth ; of gun lascars, less than a fifth ; of drivers
a third ; and of Magazine men, a half. Of the
have no ground?, on which to estimate the total num-
ber of persons affected.—lt was likewise attempted to
make an abstract of all the casualties occurring
amongst the troops of every description (exclusive of
those forming the Centre .Division) as well Native as
European, and Irregular as Regular, serving on this es-
tablishment. The numbers appeared wonderfully small.
Erom November, 1817, to May, 1819, the total amount,
as shewn by the Superintending Surgeons’ Returns,
was, of seizures 1510, and of deaths 483 : a large
proportion, being nearly a third of the whole. This
is entirely exclusive of Camp followers. But these
returns do not exhibit a fair estimate of all the deaths ;
for . there is reason to suspect, that in the early part of
the pestilence, many., persons who died from Cholera,
were classed under the head of Bowel complaints, or of
anomalous cases.
X 2


Natives, the 1 two former classes are chiefly Moos*
subnans, the two latter Hindoos. The great
mortality amongst Europeans may be ascribed,
to their constitutions having been previously
debilitated by irregular modes of living, and
uncongenial climate; to the comparative se?
verity of the attack, and greater struggle in a
■plethoric habit and muscular frame.- Women
were equally with men obnoxious to the disease;
and died in a like proportion. Thus, of 268
females attacked, 43, or one sixth died. It was
observed, that concubines and prostitutes suffer?
ed in a larger proportion than other descriptions
qf women : probably from their dissipated habits,
and precarious mode of life.
The mortality in the Hansi Force was very
inconsiderable. Not more than-271 persons in
all were seized; of whom 51, or one in five and
a half perished. Of these a large proportion
was Sepoys; of whom 126 were attacked, and
27, or rather more than a fifth, died. The ma?
jority of deaths occurred in the .early part of the
disease ; when it was more virulent than after?
wards. Six Europeans only were attacked,; of
whom one died.
In the Rajpodtana Force, which in fighting
men and followers amounted perhaps to X5,00p»
the mortality was greater. The armed part of
the Force consisted qf 96 Europeans,.(Officers


Jiot included) and 4,100 Natives; of whom 293
were admitted, and 122, nearly, one half,, died.
The different Corps were variously affected.
Of the European Artillery, only 3 were seized :
all of whom recovered. Of the Goolundaz 240 in
number, 6 sickened, and 2 died; of 250 Gun
lascars, 21, of whom 12 died; 0f392 Ordnance
Drivers, 44, of whom 17 died; of 294 Pioneers,
jS3, of whom 23 died: Of the 2d Cavalry, 600
strong, 8, of whom 2 died; of the 2d Local
Cavalry; 720 strong, 4, of whom 2 died; of S'
Companies Ist Battalion 27th Regiment, 18,
of whom 7 died; of the Ist Battalion 28th
Regiment, 944 strong, 135, of whom 57 died;
and of 2d Battalion 19th Regiment, 887 strong,
8, of whom none died. Of 75 Camp followers
who took medicine, 15 died. Here Europeans
were slightly affected, and the lower classes
suffered most, This was not uniformly the
case ; for according to one statement, the Sepoys
suffered more than the Camp followers in the
Ist Battalion 28th Regiment. By this ac-
count, the strength of the Battalion is stated at
1,004; of whom fell ill 144, and died 60; whilst
of 513 Camp followers, 35 only were seized, and
14 died; the casualties among the Sepoys being
in double proportion to those of the followers.
The Battalion consisted of 878 and
.126 Mussulmen; of the former, three fifths were
Bramins and Rajpoots; the remainder of low
casts—s 7 Bramins were taken ill, apd 30 died .


Rajpoot's, 47, and 16 died; low casts, 21, and
9 died: or of the whole affected, a little more
than one half. Of the Mahometans, 19 were
seized, and 5, or one fourth, died. So that the
disease was more fatal to Bramins, than to
»
Rajpoots; to Rajpoots than to the lower casts;
and to Mossulmans the least so of all. It was most
destructive from the 14th to the 22nd Septem-
ber ; of 108 admitted from this Battalion in the
first week of its visit,' 51 died; after which the
average was about one fourth.
In the Left Division, of 8,500 fighting men,
125 cases occurred, of whom 49, more than a
third, died; 30 in April, 18 in May, and 1
in June. Here the disease equally attacked
Hindoos and Mussulmans of all orders : Drivers,
Lascars, Bearers, Grooms, and Grasscutters,
not being more liable than the regular troops.
Children were peculiarly exempt; females not.
The mortality was greatest from the 10th to
the 21st April.
In the Nagpore Force, from the 31st May
to the 15th June, of about 4,000 regular troops,
.13 Europeans were seized, of whom 6 died ; 211
Sepoys, of whom 29, or one seventh, died.
The mortality was greatest, perhaps tw T o thirds,
at first. The Camp followers were affected very
severely; grooms more so than any others.
—The Artillery fiiscars, drivers, and water


Carriers were most exempt. Women were af-
fected equally with men; and children at the
breast were not safe from its attacks.
From the whole of the foregoing statements,
we think it may perhaps be inferred: Ist, That'
the sum total of the mortality occasioned by the
Epidemick fell far short of the rate assigned to it,
by the voice of the public, during the season of
alarm.* 2d, That the mortality was proporti-
onately much greater, among large and dense,
than among small and dispersed bodies of men. 3d,
That in a given place, it was generally greater in
the commencement, and middle, than towards the
termination of the disorder. 4th, That, when unli-
mited’by the intervention of remedial means, it
generally amounted to one half, and sometimes to
two thirds of the seizures. sth, That where me-
dical aid was duly exhibited, it rarely amounted
to one third, and was generally as low as one
fifth of the attacked. 6th, That men were gene-
# As a proof, however, of the great extent of its
ravages in the European portion of the community, the
experience of two Offices, the Laudable and Union
Societies, for insuring lives, where the risks taken were
almost entirely upon the lives of European, gentlemen,
may be briefly staled here. The number of deaths amongst
those insured between October, 1817, and November,
1818, was so great as to reduce the value of lives to one
7 w
half of the estimate formed on the best tables, and on
the experience of former years. The register of the latter


rally more susceptible than women; and that
infants and children were nearly exempt.
Society, indeed, shews a proportion of deaths for that
period, four times as great as the average of the four
preceding years: being no Jess than 6 J per sent oa
all the lives insured;


SECTION IX.
OF SOME PECULIARITIES OF THE
DISEASE.
THE general appearances and habits of the
Epidemict, have been already so fully described
in the body of this essay, that little now remains
to be added- Before, however, proceeding to
of the curative means, a few words may
be said In illustration of one or two character-
istic features of the disorder, not yet alluded to.
Whilst the contagious nature of the disease was
under discussion, it was stated, that those lying
sick in Hospital of other ailments were not attack-
ed by it, in larger' proportion than persons in
health: with the single exception of convales-
cents* whose greater liability seeftied solely attri-
butable to their enfeebled condition. We might
hence conclude, that unlike the plague, small
pox, and others'of the Exanthemata, which, when
epidemick, have been observed to suspend the
influence of other maladies • and as it were, for a
time to convert all other kinds of disease into
their own specific mode of action j the Cholera
has no power of transmuting, and turning to
Y


itself, other forms of illness.' In further proof
of this assumption, it may be stated, that
no where did the disorder, when prevailing
epidemically, seem decidedly to take the
ascendant; so, as for the time, either wholly
to banish,' or sensibly diminish,.other species of
morbific action, Common to the seasons arid place.
It is no doubt true, that throughout the whole
of the year of its rise, fevers and bowel com-
plaints were - in Calcutta milder than usual; but
it is not known, that the cases were fewer in
number, - or that when the morbific. action of
fever or dysentery had once fairly begun in an in-
dividual, it was ever disposed to run into that of
Cholera. It is likewise true, that in the camps
of the Centre and Hansi Divisions; it was by some
believed, that the common endemials of the cli-
mate were less frequent, during the period in
which the Epidemick was among them j but then,-
this was perhaps attributable to the milder forms
of disease attracting little notice, whilst the at-
tention of all classes was strongly arrested by the
ravages of anew and formidable distemper. Be-
sides, that this persuasion was by no means ge-
neral ;at least one half of the Staff concurring
in the opinion, that it did not exert any influence
whatever, on other complaints.
Moreover, the probability 1 of the supposition
was much lessened, if not quite destroyed, by
what happened in other -quarters;' Thus, in the


Nagpore Force, bilious remittents were more
than, commonly prevalent during the existence of
the Epidemick; and the season was particularly
sickly all over the province of Berar. So, in Jub*
bulpore the usual diseases.went on at their wonted
pace; and.throughout Saugor Province the Small
Pox raged at the same time with Cholera. Alike
circumstance occurred in Cawnpore; in which the
Small Pox was extremely fatal in April and May,
1818, when the city was visited by the Epidemick;
and in Calcutta in the spring of 1819, at the very
time in which Cholera was in one of its periods
of greatest aggravation. In like manner, autum-
nal intermittents were common in the Raj poo-
tana Force during August and September;and
in the cities of Jeypore and Delhi, fevers of the
remittent, and intermittent type, diarrhoeas,
and dysenteries; continued very prevalent, until
the end of. the Gold Weather.
Many other instances to the same effect, might
be found in the Upper Provinces; but to save
needless accummulation, let us now advert.to
those situations in the lower part of the Coun-
try, in which. the disease long existed in full
force; and must necessarily have displayed this
peculiarity, if it had constituted any part of its
essence. In Chupra, fevers and other endemics
Were less common ; in; Tkboot just as usual.
Neither in Bhaugulppre, nor at Mqnghyr, did it
exert any influence. At Malda, and at Nattore,
Y2‘


other diseases were less frequent. In Burdwan,
bowel complaints were fewer.; fevers .not so.—
In Nuddeea, remittent fevers, liver and bowel
complaints were more than usually frequent a-
mongst Europeans; the Natives were more heal-
thy.—At Dacca, fevers were, during, the first
year, less frequent; in the second, more general
and obstinate.- In Sylhet, intermittent and remit-
tent fevers, running into and alternating with dy-
sentery, were more than usually common; and it
was remarked, that, so far from their shewing any
disposition to coalesce with Cholera, an. attack
of the one disease generally protected the per-
son. attacked- from- the influence -of the others
so that he whp had fever, would not afterwards
have Cholera ; and vice versa. In Tipperah/ in,
termittents, and in Backergunj, bowel complaints;
were more general than informer years. In My*
mensing, Bulloah,-and Chittagong there .was .no
perceptible difference.
From a comparison of the foregoing facts we
think it is clearly deduqible, that the Epidemick
did not exert any influence, in lessening the
frequency, or in modifying the symptoms of fe-
vers, and other disorders common to India ;'and
that, in every case, in which an apparent excep-
tion to the general truth of this propositipn oc-
curred, it probably arose from causes purely ac-
cidental.


The next observation to be made,' is, that an
individual having once undergone' the disease,
thereby became much less subject to be again at-
tacked, than a person, who had not passed
through the same previous seasoning. It is notby-
this meant to be asserted, that relapses: did not
Sometimes occur, in persons who.had not perfect-
ly recovered from the effects of the first -attack;
nor even to deny, that, in some rare instances; the
disease recurred at long distant intervals, when the
individual had entirely regained bis strength; and
was to all appearance in perfect health.; AH
that we intend to affirm is, that such cases were
exceedingly uncommon., To many of the Me-
dical Officers, who possessed large opportunities
of observation, it did not occur to observe a sin*
gle instance. Thus the 1 Centre Division of the
Army hardly affords half a dozen of instances;
not one of which happened to the Medical-Offi*
cers left in charge of the whole body off the sick;
from the beginning of Deqepiber until February
following. Previously to the retrogade move-*
riient of the Centre Division from Erich upon
Gwalior, early in December, the European and
Native Sick were removed.to Sumpter, an eleva-i
ted healthy town, on an open-plain, in which a
field hospital had been established. The- Sick
amounted to about 200 Europeans, and, 1,000
Natives. They soon got over the dysenteries
diarrhoeas, which formed the sequela?: of


the disease; and not a,case of relapse* or-secon-
dary attack came to notice.
In the Left Division and Ilajpootana Force,
according to the unanimous declaration of the
Medical Staff, no case of reseizure occurred,- af-
ter the strength had been fully, restored. In the
■Nagpore Force, two or three instances, came to no-
tice ; but all came under the strict denomination
:of relapses ; for although the individuals.had.re-
covered from the primary shock, a long enough
interval from the first attack, had not been al?
lowed, for the complete restoration of their
strength. The most decided case, was that of an
European, who having, been twice attacked,
’whilst under the influence of mercury, had so far
'recovered, as to return to his duty ; when, after
a lapse of five or six days, he got the disease, a,
third time, and died.; With the Kurnaul Divi-
sion’not .a single case offered. The same Immu-
nity-from- secondary visitation, was observed in
every quarter, in which theEpidemick prevailed;,
aud we should perhaps not be far wide of the
truth, were we to affirm, that of the many myri-
ads attacked, the returns of the whole country do
not afford .a score of well authenticated cases - of
a recurrence of the disease, after the removal, of
debility, and .every other consequence ofJther
primary attack.
Another curious circumstance in the economy,
of the disease, was, that, not only were persons,


who had Once undergone its attack, free.fromits
further assaults; but even individuals, and bodies
of men, who having come ' within its pestilential
influence, had escaped unaffected, were neverthe*
less much less obnoxious to its future .visits,-than
those, who had not before been exposed to the vi-
rus. In other words a village, which by
the Epidemick during the first year of its preval-
ence,. would, on the- disease reappearing in . that:
part of the country, be much less likely tosuffer,
than-another, village, which had not before beepi
affected; and an-individual going from the for,
mer, into the infected air of the latter, would
have a better chance of immunity, than its inha-
bitants, who had not undergone the previous
seasoning. This was the case, toagreater or,less
degree, in every part of the Provinces; in which
it was generally remarked, that the Epidemick,
on its recurrence, either did not at all revisit
the places formerly affected, or. only in a much
lighter manner, than those, to which it was yet
a stranger. In Tirhoot, particularly, in which
the Epidemick twice appeared at two distant
periods, the truth of this observation was strik-
ingly illustrated; since according to the infor-
mation of a very intelligent observer, not a
single instance occurred, of the disease revisiting
the same place, throughout the whole extent of
the district
Eut, it is in the different Divisions of the
Army, the bodies composing which long remain


under the eye of the same Medical Officers, that
we should expect to find the existence of this
law most clearly established. - It is. ’ here, accor-
dingly, that ', we .have the best examples of its:
reality. Thus iriithe JubbiilporeForCe, the 7th.
Regiment of Cavalry, and 2nd Battalion 13th:
Native Infantry, which Corps had suffered
severely dn November'with the Centre Division,
and -at the Bridge of' Boats, remained quite
exempt. Thus too, the 2nd Battalion’ 19th,
which-was violently affected by the disease in
August, had only three slight cases in Septem-
ber; when tile other corps Of the Rajpootana
force 'were SO’: roughly visited. But the best
illustrations are to be found in the Centre Divi-
sion. > When this force broke up after the termi-
nation of the campaign. His ’ Majesty’s 24th
Regiment of ! Dragoons, arid 87th Regiment of
Foot,- and dhe ’ Ist Battalion’ Bth Regiment
Native Infantry, marched to CaWnpore; where
they- were - stationed in April'and May, when
the city-arid cantonment’ were suffering from
the disease.' At this time the 24th Dragoons
remained ’ quite free ; His Majesty’s 87th had
two slight* cases, among the recruits who had not
been with the Centre Division, and no death;
and the Ist Battalion Bth Regiment N. I. had,
according to one statement, no case, according
to another, one only, and according to a third;
three or four, all slight attacks. The situation
of the latter Corps was such, as to give additi


al proof of the immunity of bodies previously ex-
posed not being* accidental. For it so happened",
that this Battalion was placed right between the
2nd Battalion 15th N.T. and Craigie’s Levies;
of which suffered severely, as not having earned
the same means of protection. Camp followers of
all descriptions were equally exempt; and’ one
person only, an European Officer, who had been
with the Centre Division, fell a victim fo the
disorder. In like manner, the 2nd Battalion
25th Regiment Native Infantry, which again
fell in with the disease in April, whilst marching
from the Tiraee for Lucknow by Gorruckpore,
then suffered comparatively little. It had indeed
25 cases and 5 deaths; but of these only one
was a case of relapse or .recurrence, and even in
it the symptoms of both attacks were very mild.
But, a still more extraordinary instance occurred
in Lord Hastings’ camp, during the march to
Gorruckpore, towards the latter part of the same
month,. The disease here first broke out among
thcfollowcrs of .a gentleman, who had just joined
the party ; and in a few days attacked between
50 and. 60, out of 400, chiefly of the class
of bearers. It next got among the servants of
several Gentlemen in the Civil Service then in
attendance upon the Governor General; and to
the period of its decline, was confined to such
persons, as had not been with the Centre Divisi-
on. This could not be explained on any dif-
ference of situation; for the party daily
Z


changed ground, and the new comers were
mixed, promiscuously with those, who had been
previously exposed to infection. Nay, it further
appears, that after attacking the first party, the
disease made a long stretch, and next shewed
itself amongst other persons, not yet seasoned,
in the opposite end of the line; leaving all
between untouched. If any other proofs were
necessary, we might cite the case of the 2rtd
Battalion 3d Regiment, the greater part of
which, having had the disease at Shergurh, were
not at all affected, although stationed at Banda,
when tfie town suffered severely. But enough,
we think, has been already said, to shew, that the
human frame, on being exposed for some time
to the pestilential virus, got habituated to it,
and in a great measure became insusceptible of
its malignant influence,
There is reasop to believe, that the lower
animals were in some measure affected by the
corrupt state of the air at this period.' For, it,
was observed in many places, that an unusual
mortality occurred amongst black cattle, sheep,
dogs, and other domestic animals. Thus in the
Backergunge District, cattle had the disorder,
and were cured by opium and the other reme-.
dies found most serviceable in the human spe-
cies. Cows when seized, shed their young. So,
in Tlpperah great numbers of horned cattle and


sheep were seized with vomiting and convulsions,
and suddenly expired. In 1815 again, half the
cattle of the lower part of Tipperah were earned
off by a disease similar to Cholera. In Delhi,
dogs died rapidly ; and more horses than usual
were carried off by the dry gripes.* In the
RajpoOtana Force, and throughout the whole of
the Jeypore apdNagpore territories, the season
Was remarkably fatal to camels; and in the
Centre Division domestic animals of all des-
criptions died in great numbers; but in the lat-
ter instance the mortality might be ascribed to
want of proper care and food. At Sumbhulpore,
an Elephant had every symptom of Cholera j
and was cured by brandy and laudanum. But
the affection of brutes was by no means general.
Thus in Dacca, Mymensing, Rajshahy, Nilddeea,
Bhaugulporc, Tirhoot, Sarun, &c. the lower
orders of animals are expressly stated to'have
enjoyed their usual health; So that the circum-
stance of their sickness in other quarters, during
the prevalence of the Epidemick, may have been
perfectly fortuitous.
- * In this city, a curious thing was, that large swarms
Of flies, which had infested the place before the break-
ing out of the Epidemick, wholly disappeared during its
prevalence; and returned as it withdrew. This might
be owing to the cold, sharp, westerly wind then blowing*
z %


SECTION X.
OF THE TREATMENT OF THE DIS-
ORDER.
IT is not easy to determine how this very im-
portant branch of our subject can be best hand-
led. For although, there was every where a
striking uniformity in the principal means re-
sorted to, in resisting the disease : there was yet,
in different quarters, a remarkable difference in
their mode of application, and a great dis-
crepancy of opinion regarding their vari-
ous degrees of efficacy.. With one individual,
bleeding was considered the remedy to be chief-
ly depended uponj with another calomel; and
with a third opium and stimulants ; just as their
opinions were modified by the results of their
single experience, varied according to the form
of the disease, and class of subjects, chiefly com-
ing under their notice. Hence, any one at-
tempting-to set-down the results of the general
experience, in the shape of a summary, would be
constantly checked in bis progress by the oppo-
sition of contrary facts; and at length, harass#!


by the impossibility of reconciling dissimilar
judgments, be forced to give up the endeavour,
as quite impracticable. The only mode, as it
appears to us, of avoiding this unpleasant dilem-
ma, is first, briefly to state the several modes of
practice followed in different parts of the coun-
try; and then, to see, whether we cannot from
the whole, deduce some general rules, applica-
ble under every circumstance of the disorder.
In adhering to this plan, it will not be necessary,
that the exact line pursued by each individual
practitioner, should be minutely described: for
this would lead to endless repetition. All that
seems requisite, is to notice, only suph facts, as
evidently tend to establish the true method of
combating the disorder; or as appear important,
from their novelty, or opposition to the general
jpn of experience,
To begin with Bengal, in which the Epidemick
originally excited attention. When the disease
first broke out in Calcutta, with such fury as to
menace destruction to every family, the public
mind was naturally impressed with feelings of
great alarm, and apprehension. A correspond-
ing degree of solicitude was excited amongst the
medical men; and on their part, every effort
Was.made, to discover an adequate remedy for
the evil. Bleeding, stimulants, sedatives, nar-
cotics,, and other descriptions of medicines were


successively tried; according as analogical rea*
soiling, or the peculiar opinions of various indi-
viduals, seemed to warrant their use. Each in
its turn failed, if not always, at least so often, as
to prove the extraordinary depressing powers of
the complaint, and the inefficacy of all curative
means, to stop its progress, where the attack was
in full violence.
These failures produced a state of perplexity
and indecision, which frequently induced the
Medical Officer, to employ in one and the same
case, and sometimes at the same moment, reme-
dies of an opposite description; rather than that
the patient should sink, without every practica-
ble means having been employed for his recove-
ry. At first, laudanum, calomel in large doses,
brandy, and the most powerful internal and ex-
ternal stimulants, were chiefly depended on; but
when these were found unavailing, and an exa-
mination of the bodies of those who died, shew-
ed great venous accumulation in the centre, and
inflammation of the stomach and intestines,. a
new practice came into use. From its being ob-
served, that the blood always withdrew from the
extreme vessels, and gorged the great trunks, it
was naturally concluded, that the cure would lie
in restoring the balance of the circulation.
Hence, venesection was resorted to; and in many
cases of Europeans carried to the greatest war


rantable extent. When the patient was of sound
habit, and seen in the early part of the disease,
the practice was to tie up his arm, and allow the
blood to flow, until from twelve to twenty or
thirty ounces were abstracted. In some instan-
ces, where the violence of the spasms, and' seve-
rity of abdominal pain seemed to indicate it,-or
where benefit had,been evidently derived, from
its use in the first instance, the bleeding was re-
peated, after an interval of some hours. We
must, upon the whole, speak unfavorably of the
results of the practice, at this early period of the
Epidemick. It was, almost in every case, found
difficult, from the sluggishness of the circulation,
to get the blood to flow, even when assisted by
frictions, and the hot bath. Frequently, it had
a thick, jet black, oily, appearance; and even
where several veins were opened, would only
trickle down in drops, so as scarcely to give a
spoonful in half an hour. Sometimes, again, it
would spout out freely for a few moments; as the
muscles of the arm were violently contracted by
spasm; and then entirely cease, as the patient
fell into the state of collapse.* The pulse, if
* In some cases the blood at first flowed freely, in a
good and continued stream; but instead of die action of
the heart and arteries being roused by the flow, the
pulse rapidly sunk; and in a minute or two the blood
began to trickle, and at length to come away in drops
only.


previously imperceptible, did not in any instance
return to the wrist; and in cases in which it
had been felt before, it decidedly grew .weaker,'
a 3 the blood flowed. No stop was put by it to
the discharge by the mouth and bowels; and
the spasms seemed to hold their course quite un-
affected by it- The blood, on coagulating,; did
not show the buffy coat; and was rather of loose
texture, with an overflow of serum. It must
be confessed, however, that the ill success of
bleeding at this time was greater in appearance,
than in reality.—For, the persons, upon whom it
was principally tried, were patients in the Ge-'
neral Hospital composed of various classes, col-
lected from the town and shipping ; and seldom
coming under treatment, until some hours after
the commencement of the attack. In His Ma-
jesty’s 59th Regiment, in which the patients were
usually seen at a very early period of the disease,'
the practice was more successful; since of 19
men admitted into hospital, between September,
1817, and March, 1818, only three, or not quite
one in'six, died; whereas of the promiscuous
cases of the General Hospital the deaths were
in the proportion of six to one recovery : al-
though in both hospitals the mode of treating
the patients was precisely the same.—Still, it
cannot be doubted, that during the first months
of the Epidemick, there weremany instances, in
which the loss of pulse, cold sweats, shrunk fea


tures; and other terrible symptoms'of depression;
were almost immediate; and where the abstrac-
tion of blood was, therefore, from the beginning;
quite impracticable. Latterly, that is in-the'se-
cond year of the disease, the symptoms were ge-
nerally milder; and venesection rarely failed to
give relief.
Blisters to the abdomen were largely employ-
ed, with a view to allay irritation and spasm.
Even where they had time to rise, they were
rarely useful in stopping vomiting ; and proba-
bly.did harm by the pain and uneasiness of a
large, exposed surface; the raw sides of which
were constantly brought into contact, by the a-
gitation of the patient’s body. In some instan-
ces, a tin plate oval vessel, shaped so as to fit the
pit of the stomach, and filled with very hot wa-
ter, or a towel dipped in water heated nearly to
the boiling point, and immediately applied to the
abdomen, was usefully substituted for blisters.
In many cases, it was thought, that setting fire
to balls of cotton dipped in oil of turpentine,
and placed on the Epigastric region, prevented
recurrence of spasm.
The warm bath, heated as high as the finger
could bear it, was administered in numerous in-
stances. It allayed the spasms; partially res-
tored the circulation; and, perhaps, diminished
the sickness; so long as the patient was kept in
A a


the water.—But these advantages were merely
temporary; for the moment he was removed*
the cramps and other deadly symptoms recurred;
and the general debility was evidently increased,
by the previous exertion. In some instances,
the patient remained immersed in the bath du-
ring several hours, with little perceptible bene-
fit.*— Friction with camphorated spirits, Arrack,
laudanum, anodyne liniments, &c.; fomentations,
and the application of dry heat in bags of sand,
or bottles of boiling water; placing stoves with
live charcoal under the bed; and wrapping
the body in blankets and flannel, were among
the most successful means of bringing back the
heat of the surface.
Meanwhile, internal remedies were not neg-
lected. Large doses of laudanum, and of calo-
mel, were in all cases exhibited; with cordials,
as soon as the patient was seen. Sixty drops- of
laudanum, with a dram of vitriolic ether, or a
desert spoonful of warm brandy, were poured
into the stomach, every ten minutes, or quarter of
an hour; until diminution of spasm, retching, and
anguish, and partial returns of heat, and circula-
* Sometimes, the patient had a great aversion to the
badi; and struggled violently, whilst being placed in
it.—Sometimes, the attempt to move him produced a
violent return of the spasms, or retching. Invariably
did it seem to increase the debility. In the latter stages
of the attack, a dread that the patient might die in the
act, generally deterred the attendants from its exhibition.


tion shewed, that the powers of life were again
beginning to act.*—The calomel was given in
doses of from ten to forty grains; and, unless
where rejected immediately upon being swallow-
ed, repeated at intervals of four or six hours.—
When the calomel was thrown up, it was re-
peated every little while : the patient being, in
the meantime, kept from ilrinking even the
smallest quantity of fluid.—This was undoubted-
ly the mode of practice most successful m Cal-
cutta.—lt may, however, be questioned, whether
the calomel was generally serviceable, until the sti-
mulants and anodynes had in some degree quiet-
ed the stomach.—.ln the General Hospital, it did
not in any one instance appear to exert any spe-
cific power in checking the vomiting or spasms;
and the majority of the medical men at the Pre-
sidency concurred in thinking, that it was only
beneficial, in so far, as it tended to emulge the
biliary ducts, and to promote the regular alvine
discharges. Others, again, no doubt believed, that
it would stay on the stomach, when every thing
else was rejected; and reckoned upon it, as their
chief means in the cure of the disorder.
The diffusible stimuli employed were very va-
rious. Volatile alkali, in combination with brandy.
* The laudanum and brandy were sometimes pushed
to such extent as to produce intoxication; but the ap-
pearance of this state was no sure sign of the patient’s
escape.
A a 2


rum, and other vinous spirits; sulphuric and
nitrous ether, beer, essential oils of cinnamon,
peppermint, anise, and. juniper, tincture of La-
vender, camphor, mulled and plain wine, and the
empirical bitter tincture named Drogue Jlmere-:
each had their advocates, and all were probably
found useful, exactly in a ratio with the extent
of their stimulating powers. Anodyne and
stimulating enemas, were likewise beneficial,
where the dejections were very numerous.
If, by the exhibition of these means, or by
the strength of his constitution, the patient were so
fortunate as to withstand the first violence of the
attack; the tone of the bowels, after the laspe
of two, three, or even four days, got. sufficiently
re-established, to allow purgative medicines to act;
and then the calomel began to shew its peculiar
power of emulging the chylopoetic viscera, by
discharging downwards, large quantities of
dark, vitiated bile. ,It was necessary to assist
this operation, by the administration of repeated
doses of compound powder of jalap, infusion of
senna, and other saline and resinous purgatives.
But, as the system, during the whole process of
throwing off these depraved secretions, was in
a state of high excitement and disturbance;
and apt to sink beyond recovery, from the
slightest error in practice; great discrimination
was required, in the mode and time of adminis-
tering the cathartic medicines. And, the utmost


care was necessary, to keep up the strength of
the patient by the use of gentle tonics; and, by
the constant exhibition of small portions of
wine, sago, arrow root, jelly, soup, and other
articles of mild nourishment, to prevent his
being exhausted, and carried off by excessive
ventral discharges. The foul, dry tongue,
parched mouth, thirst, irritation of stomach, hur-
ried pulse, hot skin, and general feverishness,
which marked this stage of reaction, sometimes
continued many days ; and were treated with
the remedies found most readily to relieve
similar symptoms in common cases of fever.
Relapes, which during the state of great debility
were not very uncommon, and proved very fatal j
required no difference of treatment.
Amongst the Native patients, the treatment
consisted in the judicious use of opium and sti-
mulants ; followed up by calomel, and other
purgatives, In such cases, as happened to come
under the immediate care of the European
practitioners, the plan usually followed, was, as
soon as the stomach and bowels had been pretty
well emptied of their immense load of watery
secretions, to give from sixty to eighty drops of
Laudanum, in strong brandy punch, or with
aromatic spirit of ammonia, and peppermint
Water ; and to repeat the dose within ten mi-
nutes, if the vomiting and purging threatened
to recur. If these means failed to check the


progress of the disease, which was rarely the
case, a bolus containing fifteen -or twenty
grains of calomel, and one grain of opium, with
the aid of frictions with hot oil, flannel, sc.
usually succeeded in quickly subduing irritability,
and changing the diseased action. And, as there
was no stage of reaction with this class of per-
sons, the cure required nothing more for its
completion, than a dose of castor oil, or other
mild laxative. Nearly the same treatment was
followed by the Native Physicians,* and others
in distant parts of the city, and suburbs; that
is, solid opium, laudanum, ether and other
stimulants were very freely used in the first in-
stance ; and subsequently unusually large doses of
calomel, upon the primary symptoms being check-
ed. The latter medicine, by men of the largest ex-
perience of the disease amongst the Native part
of the population, was deemed to have no specific
* Immediately upon the disease assuming a decidedly
epidemical form, instructions were humanely issued by
Government to the Magistrates in different quarters
of the country, to entertain Native Physicians at the
public expence; and station them, with the necessary
supply of medicines, in the places, in which their ser-
vices seemed to be most wanted. Medicines were, at
the same time, given for distribution to the Native
Police Officers and respectable land-holders, and to all
European gentlemen not in the service, residing in dis-
tant parts of the several districts. It would be i mpossi-
ble to calculate the quantity of life that was saved, by the
adoption of these truly paternal, and humane measures.


effect in allaying the distressing symptoms. The
preceding means were eminently successful in
subduing the attack; since it appears that of
35,796 persons so treated by the Native phy-
sicians at the Presidency, only 2308, a little
less than a fifteenth part of the whole, sunk
under the disease. Probably, an equal, or even
a larger number of individuals was saved by a
similar practice, in the Dock Yards, Cotton
Works, and other large establishments adjoining
the city ; the superintendents of which were
liberally supplied with the requisite means, to
be dispensed as occasion might require, among
the many thousand workmen under their
charge.
Nearly the same means were used in the jes-
sore, Backergunge, Mymensing, Chittagong,
Dacca, and Tipperah districts. Bleeding was
now and then resorted to; but with no evident
advantage, even where the blood could be got
to flow. In lieu of calomel the seeds of the
purgative nut Jumalgota (Jatropha carcas}
were sometimes beneficially substituted ; and,
after the removal of che disease, the tone of the
stomach was restored by infusions of rherytu
( gentiana cheryta) and other light bitters. In all
these quarters, it was deemed a very favorable
symptom, if drowsiness were produced by the
narcotics. After sleep, the patient generally
awoke much relieved ; with a warm equable


sweat all over his body; the, spasms and gene-
ral irritability gone, or greatly diminished ; and
with only one remaining unpleasant symptom
.extreme thirst. To relieve this, small quanti-
ties of brandy, or other spirit,, and water, or of
a watery infusion of spices, with saline efferves-
cing draughts, were, from time to time, adminis-
tered.'
In Sylhet, it was sometimes found, that where
neither solid opium, laudanum, nor cordials
would remain more than a few minutes on the
stomach, scruple doses of calomel would allay
the irritability, and produce the relief sought in
vain from other means. In general, however,
opiates, brandy, and, spirits of ammonia and laven-
der, were used as auxiliaries. The patient was
always prohibited from drinking large draughts
of any liquid; and his thirst was allayed by
spoonfuls of rice water spiced, with the addition
of a little spirits; and in some cases, the corner
of a towel dipped in water, and then slightly
squeezed, was given to him to suck. This plan
was generally successful. In May, 1818, how-
ever, a Sepoy was attacked, in whom the sickness
and retching were so violent, that nothing
would even enter the stomach.—A vein was
opened; and as the pulse was still firm, twenty
ounces of blood were taken away, until deliqui-
um ensued. The best effects were instantly
apparent.—The vomiting ceased j opium and


calomel were given, and retained ; and* after
taking one dose of castor oil, the patient ort the
fourth day returned to his duty. Subsequently
to this, venesection was, in the first' instance,
employed in every case, in which the pulse
could be felt at .the wrist; and whenever the
blood -flowed freely, the sickness, spasms, and
burning sensation at the scrobiculus cordis
were invariably relieved. But calomel, and
laudanum or opium were- always administered,
either immediately before, or after the. bleeding.
In Bajshahy, laudanum and opium, with
cqrdials and frictions, followed by mild laxatives,
were in the early period of the Epidemick, very
successful. Afterwards, opium and calomel
combined, followed by drastic purges chiefly
composed of calomel; blisters to the stomach
and extremities; cordials; frictions; and glys-
ters, were the means principally trusted to..
Then mercurial pill, and infusions of gentian
and cheryta , were employed, as alteratives and
tonics. In the neighbourhqod of Baulea, in
addition to the antispasmodics and sedatives,
sinapisms to the pit; of the stomach, and the
internal use of the expressed juice of green
ginger, proved advantageous. In Nuddeea, in
the latter periods of the Epidemick, bleeding was
successfully used in more than forty cases; and
only three instances of. failure offered. Some-
times, it was necessary to open two or three
B b


veins; before the blood would flow. No faith
: was placed in - the efficacy of calomel alone.
Opiates, cordials, and purgatives were mainly
depended upon.. Solid bpium was more fre-
quently retained,, than the same medicine in a
liquid form. Aloes, rhubarb, and jalap; calo-
mel with the purgative extracts, were given
until healthy evacuations were produced. Sti-
mulating and warm tinctures, of. myrrh, and other
gums, proved good-auxiliaries.
At Burdwan, ‘ where. the disease appears to
have been more virulent than in any other
quarter, the repeated failure of every probable
means of relief, at length, left the Medical Offi-
cer in doubt, whether, the attack were more
•frequently arrested, or mitigated by human skill,
than by a simple obedience to the wants and
.cravings of the sufferer, and dependence on the
unaided powers of mature. The disease seemed
to proceed onward to destruction, without being
checked by any power opposed to it; and sel-
dom failed to secure its victim, where the vo-
miting had been trifling, and bad early, and
spontaneously ceased. The disease was most
readily controlled amongst the convicts, and
lower orders of the Natives. In these ,case?, no
alteration could be perceived in the appearance
of the -excretions, after the first symptoms had
subsided; and large and repeated doses of
opium were eminently serviceable. The quan-
tity of laudanum given with ultimate success, not


infrequently amounted to eight -and ten drams
within the first twelve hows; and it was necessa-
ry to repeat it, in doses of forty drops every six
hours; for several days, and gradually to‘ discon-’
tinote its use; At this time, the least dose of calotf
mel increased the affection; and opening medi-
cine exhibited in very small quantities, during*
any stage of the disease; was invariably, and im-
mediately followed by relapse. With the Sepoys,'
again, and those of a higher and-- more respec-
table class, even 1 where their age and coristitu--
tion was suclty as- to lead to an expectation of,
great resistance todhe power of the disease, its-
character was of a most formidable nature; and
after the first shock had been- sustained* the only
chance of safety seemed to rest upon inducing,
free alvine evacuations.—Here, accordingly, ca-
lomel and laudanum conjoined, were more effica-
cious in relieving the vomiting and purging, than?
calomel alone. The stools-were like tar and
blood; and recovery was in no instance obtain-
ed, except where they were early and plentifully
procured ; and where their condition rapidly
changed;: As in neither form of the disease, were*’
spasms-of the trunk or extremities present,- in
any case; and as complete, exhaustion was
always a speedy attendant on the attack,, there
was no inducement to blood letting..
In ’ the Bhaugulpore District the powdfer of
B b 2.


dried Neem blossoms* ( Melia AzadiraclUa) giv-
en in repeated doses of twelve grains, seemed to
check the vomiting and purging; but, as it was
usually administered in conjunction with opium,
the'extent of ite counteracting power cannot*
without farther experience, be determined. At
Malda, Monghyr, Patna,' and. Moozuffurpore*
opium and calomel, combined with cordials and
other auxiliaries, were principally trusted to.—
In Tirhoot, large doses of Calomel, often repeat-
ed, were resorted to in the second year of the dis-
ease.' Pills'of Calomel and opium were distri-
buted amongst the Native population in the
neighbourhood : pf the indigo Factories, all oyer
the district, and used with great success.—At
Idullhye, after the failure pf the.combined plan tq
remove the agonizing thirst and burning heat,
and its appearing to - cause constipation, scruple
‘doses of calomel alone were substituted, with
manifest advantage. It was rarely found, , that
-more than two doses were required to allay the
irritability; after which, a purgative of compound
powder of jalap, , and calomel, given at an in-
terval generally of eight ,or ten hours, completed
the cure.v--^. , he discharge produced by . this, was
~usually only a Ijttle watery-fluid; mixed with mu-
vcus, apd very oflfensive.-arThe patient was allow-
*A n acrid 1 bitter largely employed by the Native
physicians; internally, in bilious and pituitous diforders,
herpes, leprosy, and foulness ofblood; extern ally, as an
application to tumours And bad sores.


eel to quench his thirst, by swallowing a little
plain rice water, or by gargling bis mouth-; fre-
quently >vith a mixture' of vinegar and water.
When the extremities were cold, and the mus-
cles cramped, fomentations, frictions, and heat in
various forms; were applied; but in no instance
were internal stimulants given to excite reaction*
as they were observed invariably to do, harm by
.disturbing the functions of the stomach* ... -
At Chuprah, the disease was af first peculiar-
ised by strong spasmodic action; and, yielded to
large and repeated doses of powerful stimulants
and opium: Counter irritation, effected by rais-
ing the skin near the scrobiculus £ordis, or oppo-
site theseat of the most violent pain, was in every
instance very and as the ordinary
vesicatory means would, from the great rapidity
of the disorder, not have had time to act, even
had the skin-been sensible to their stimulus, the
burning of a piece of real, or factitious moxa, on
a. circumscribed portion .of skin, was substituted
in. their room- It is added, that it is impossible
to speak, in too high terms of this simple expedi-
ent; as giving instantaneous relief to the patient,
and much valuable time to the medical man, for
the exhibition of other remedies. —Latterly,
when the spasms were, mild .and uncommon;
when the attack was less sudden; and the vomit-
ing and purging, withjpain of the abdomen; were
the most distressing symptoms; calomel i j large


doses, and brisk purges were very advantageous
while the former method was decidedly mischiev-
ous.—At Buxar, large and frequent doses oflau*.
dauum, combined with two parts of tincture of.
catechu, and three parts of any cordial tincture;,
or of brandy, were administered beneiicially in*
every case. Calomel was not at all employed.
In various .parts of the district of Chunar, bleed-
ing was tried without advantage ; in the severer
cases, the blood would not flow; and in those,
in'which it did, no perceptible benefit followed.
Purgatives, in the first instance, were always
prejudicial ; and opium* and stimulants could
alone be' relied upon.—ln some instances, in
which the patient had been for hours retching
and straining without bringing up any thing be-
yond a little phlegm or mucus, full vomiting
gave'immediate ease; In such cases, the-quan-
tity of' watery fluid ejected, would sometimes
exceed a quart—ln the cold stage, which for
several hours, in most cases, preceded death,
stimulants,' under every variety of form and
combination, were tried in vain; mustard poul-
tices to‘ the pit of the stomach, spine, and feet ;
injections "of camphor, ether, turpentine, and
opium; and all’ other means, provinginsufficient
to rescue the patient from impending death.
Among the Europeans in the Fort -of Chunar;
‘direct- stimulants were laid aside,, upon being
found to prove hurtful; and ■ the - lancet was


'need, with the happiest effects, in every case,
in which complete exhaustion had not taken
place.—The plan followed, Was to - take at once
twenty ounces, or more *, and if the symptoms
did not soon yield, to .repeat the bleeding,-, to
the same extent, an an hour, and half, or-two
hours.—The blood in most casesflowed easily ;
hut where the veins in the arm were.small,,
the jugular was opened in their stead. Calomel,
given by itself, appeared to increase the irrita-:
tion of the stomach. .
Amongst the Native population of Benares,
the. anodyne and stimulant plan, succeeded by
.Calomel, was generally successful,. —In addition
to the . ordinary outward stimulants, . frictions
upon the Epigastrium with powder of cantha-
rides apd oil pf .turpentine, were tried.—With
Europeans, in whom strangury was no unfre-
quentaccompaniment of the disorder, the be-
nefit of such.practice would-perhaps be proble-
matical. In four men out of six, upon whom
bleeding was practised, the circulation was too
languid to allow the blood to flow; in the re-
maining two, who •were young plethoric Sepoys,
and presented themselves at an earlier period
of the attack, the abstraction of twelve ounces
Was attended by an immediate removal-.of all
alarming symptoms and followed by a speedy
recovery..—ln the case of an European,. the
vomiting, pain, and burning heat of stomach,


were relieved by the application of leeches, to
the Epigastric region.
At Allahabad, bleeding was not used, either
with Europeans, or with Natives ; the common
inode of treatment being in all cases resorted
to. The same plan was followed by the several
Medical meh at Cawnpore with the Native part
of their patients. By none of them was calo- v
mel conceived to prove, generally useful, until
the storhach was prepared for it, by the exhi-.
bition of stimulants, and opiates.—;When the vo-
miting was allayed, calomel alone,, or com-
bined with extract of jalap, colocynth, .or other
active purgative, was administered. -The partial-
application of heat to the surface, by fomenta-
tions, hot bottles, bricks, or stones, was prefer-
red by some to the bath or pediliiviuin ; upon
its being observed, that the fatigue and distur-
bance caused by moving the sulferer, were, as
in Calcutta, more than a counterbalance to its
-good effects.—ln the mOre fatal cases, it was
not difficult to check the vomiting; but the
spasnri could not by any means be allayed; nor
•the circulation and warmth of surface
Large blisters were in many applied to the pit
of the stomach ;but the patient’s fate was gene-
rally determined ere they began to rise. Blee-
ding was rarely tried. In one case, in which it
was carried to the extent'of twenty ounces, it
'did not seem to produce any effect, in-allaying


spjisin, or relieving irritability of stomach,.
Amongst the Europeans, venesection, the frqe
use of purgatives, blisters, the warm bath, and
occasionally opiates, were administered. .Relief
was not always immediately .consequent upon the
bleeding; the patient, sometimes,, remaining ip
great danger, till stools tinged with, bile were
procured.
In His Majesty’s 21st Regiment of Dragoons,
which had occasional' cases from the month of
September, shortly before the time of its leaving
Calcutta, until the end of May, when the disease
ceased to be Epideinick at Cawnpore; the fol-
lowing was found to be the most successful
mode of treatment. The patient was placed in
a warm bath ; and a scruple of calomel in powV
der, followed by an ounce of castor oil or Epsom
Salts in peppermint water, given to him* If this
were rejected, a dram of laudanum, and of
sulphuric ether, in peppermint water, "w?is
substituted ; and the calomel afterwards frequent-
ly repeated. Blisters; frictions; fomentations ;
anodyne and foetid injections; and saline and
other purgatives, were used as auxiliaries. In
some, the calomel was combined with solid
opium. Brandy and water could seldom be
retained on the stomach. Bleeding was tried in
four cases, in which spasms were the primary
symptoms, and the very cold surface and feeble
Cc


pulse had not supervened. In two, it appeared
to produce beneficial effects j and the patients
recovered. The two others died; and from one
of them, only six ounces could be procured.
The success attending it was not such, as to
lead to a belief, that it could be safely resorted
to, in the severe or advanced stage of the com-
plaint. And yet, in those attacked in this corps,
the severity of the spasms, and other character-
istic symptoms, during life, and strong appear-
ance of abdominal inflammation after death,
were peculiarly remarkable ; and the large pro-
portion of deaths, ten out of nineteen, proved
the disease to have existed in extreme violence.
■ In the Governor General’s camp,- near Gor-
ruckpore, blood could seldom be procured in
the more aggravated cases; but where it flowed
readily, it frequently removed the great collapse
ofthe arterial system, after the most powerful
stimulants had failed in producing any effect.
Calomel in doses of SO grains, repeated if neces-
sary, soothed irritation, and immediately indu-
ced sleep.
At Futtygur, the combined use of mercury,
opiates, and stimulants was generally successful.
Friction of the extremities with hot Ghee (a na-
tive preparation of clarified butler) in which
common Salt was suspended, seemed to relieve
the spasms. Bleeding, in some early cases,


was useful; in general, it.could not be practised ;
and in one case, in which the brachial veins
would not bleed, the temporal artery was opened
and twenty ounces abstracted; yet the patient
died. In one form of the -disease, however, in
which there was violent pain of the stomach, with
nausea, vomiting, intense thirst, headach, blood
shot eyes, and quick strong pulse, without purg-
ing; venesection, followed by large doses of
calomel and purgatives, was resorted to with
the happiest effects. At Agra and Coel, there
was no departure from the common modes of
practice.
.At Muttra, in some very violent cases, sim-
ple dilution, by means of large draughts of wa-
iter, as hot as it could be borne, seemed to act
dike a charm, in checking the vomiting, and
.purging, and restoring the pulse and natural
heat. A gentle perspiration broke out; and the
cure was completed by a dose of calomel, or
castor oil. In the case of an European Artil-
lery man, .labouring under the worst symptoms
of the disorder; severe head-ach, tightness
across the chest, difficulty of breathing, thirst,
.burning sensation of stomach and bowels,
scarcely perceptible pulse, sunk eyes, ghastly
countenance, and tormenting spasms of the
•extremities: instantaneous relief was afforded
by blood letting. When about twenty. ounces
’C c 2


had-Bowed, the man called out, that he was
perfectly well; his countenance brightened;
■his eyes regained their lustre ; and his pulse
tilled, —and health was restored by one dose of
calomel and castor oil. In this case, the blood
at first came with great difficulty. The Natives
were successfully treated with laudanum, cor-
dials, and calomel.
In Delhi, bleeding was tried in every case,
in which there seemed a chance of its proving
successful; but as the vessels collapsed general-
ly within two or three hours, and sometimes
within a few minutes, it was vain to attempt it,
except in the earliest stage of the attacks. No
patient died from whom twenty-four ounces
could be got speedily. Others again, from
whom a smaller quantity was obtained, slowly,
‘and with much difficulty, did not recover.
After bleeding, large doses of calomel alone,
'or conjoined with opium and cordials where
there was much alimentary discharge, followed
up by Saline and resinous purges in infusion of
ginger, succeeded well. In many cases, mer-
•cury sat better on the stomach, when given
without stimulants. These , means, generally,
soon relieved the bowels, by bringing away
large quantities of dark, offensive matter, mixed
with mucus and bile ; but when they failed to
produce this effect, recovery, was -greatly re


tarded; and it was necessary to commence a
course of mild mercurials, and tonic purgatives,
to remove the acidity, flatulence, and sluggish
state of the viscera, which then .invariably re-
mained. In aid of other endeavours, to restore
the circulation and exterior heat, embrocations
with country cantharides ('meloe trianthemaJ
and opium in bazar spirits, were sedulously
applied to the abdomen. The good effects of
the warm bath, fomentations, and blisters were
in some measure doubted. Injections of assa-
Toetida were supposed to lessen abdominal pain
and spasm. In several cases, in which the vo-
miting and purging had spontaneously ceased,
the extremities become cold, and the pulse left
the wrist, from the advanced state of the attack,
a large dose of calomel was observed to tran-
quillise -the patient; produce diaphoresis, and
moisture of tongue; allay internal heat and
thirst; and pave the way to a recovery, previ-
ously almost hopeless.
In Meerut, little opportunity offered,
of judging of the general effects of blood-
letting ; for few plethorick 'Europeans pre-
sented themselves; and with the Natives
it was almost always found impossible to
make the blood flow.—One case, however,
■deserves notice, from the strikingly beneficial use
■of the lancet. A stout young Bramin w T as sud


denly seized, in the most violent manner, with,
the disease. He was immediately seen; and
twenty-four ounces of blood were drawn from
a. large orifice. Even after the blood had begun
flowing, the vomiting, purging, and other violent
symptoms were in full force j but as the quanti-
ty taken increased, they gradually disapppear-
ed; the pulse rose ; the countenance brighten*
cd; and the patient declared himself to be freed
from the severity of pain. A dose of laudanum,
followed up by castor oil, completed the cure ;
and next morning, all that he complained
of, was, a sense of stiffness in the limbs, and of
general soreness, as if he had been beaten, by a
stick: the usual after effects of spasm, and violent
exertion. The mode of treatment usually pur-
sued, was either immediately to commence with
large doses of laudanum (from 60 to 120 drops)
and cordials; or previously, to cleanse the sto-
mach, and. endeavour, to renew the healthy acti-
on of its vessels, and those of the skin, by the
administration of small quantities of rice water,
or slightly aromatic diluents. The dose of lau-
danum was varied according to the strength of
the patient, and violence of the spasms; and re-
peated once, twice, or even thrice, within an.
hour: suitably, to the urgency of the case.
Where obstinately rejected by the mouth, the opi-
ate was repeated in double doses by clyster.
When the extreme violence pf the symptoms


■was by these means subdued, anti the vital pow-
ers so far restored, by the exhibition of small
quantities of salop and sago, with spiced madei-
ra or brandy, as to produce an equable moisture
on the skin, a moderate dose of castor oil, or some
other laxative, was given, and repeated, with or
without calomel,' until the uneasy sensations of
heat, and fulness of the prirme vise, were remov-
ed. It was, in all cases, deemed indispensably
necessary, to support the strength, by small
quantities of light nourishment, repeated at short
intervals. The warm bath, fomentations, and
frictions with hot flannel, were, meanwhile, used
as auxiliaries. No manifest advantage accrued
from imbrocations with warm oil, spirit of tur-
pentine, or tincture of cantharides; or from the
application of hot sinapisms. The exhibition
of calomel and other cathartics, was generally
postponed, until the spasms and intestinal irrita-
bility had been allayed. Even after this period,
their operation was SQmetimes conceived to
prove hurtful, by adding to the direct debility,
previously induced by the vast visceral dis-
charges.-—ln other cases, the administration of
calomel, in scruple doses, seemed to increase
the irritability of the stomach; and the practice
was thence abandoned. Some gave large doses
of opium, with, and without calomel, and succeed-
ed equally with both plans. In sbine advanced
cases, the calomel seemed to soothe the bowels


and aid recovery ; but then it should be remem-
bered, ;that in such instances, the patient, having
outlived the most active stage of the complaint,
his fate would probably have been the same,
with or without the intervention of medidne.
It was upon the whole, concluded, that it ge-
nerally proved hurtful in the early part of the
attack; and that amongst Natives, its use might
in general be advantageously superseded, by giv*
ing, in its rpora, small doses of very mild laxa-
tives.
• Having now mentioned the principal varieties
of treatment followed at all the great stations suc-
cessively visited by the Epidemick, it would be
a mere waste of time, and of the reader’s pa-
tience, were we to persist in minutely describing
the endless diversity, which obtained, in the ex-
act mode of applying the several great means of
which they consisted., at the different outposts,
and places of scanty population.—However they
might differ in the order and time of their appli-
cation, opium and calomel, were used by all the
Medical Staff; and in almost every case fled to>
as the sole means of resisting the disease.—Let
us mow, therefore, turn to the several Divisions
of the Army, where, from the' greater width of
the field of experience, larger opportunities of-
fered, of judging of the efficacy of the different
remedies employed; and every observer was


enabled, from personal communication, to profit
by the observations, and opinions of his brethren.
In the Jubbulpore or Left Division, the modei
of treatment with all the practitioners, at first
consisted in opiates, carminatives and calomel.
Stimulants and antispasmodics were varied. Vo-
latile alkali in combination with vinous spirit,
sulphuric and nitrous ether, essential oils of
.peppermint, juniper and anise, tincture of la-
vender, brandy, and wine were severally employ-
ed. Frictions, fomentations, application of dry
heat, and blisters, were successively tried. Ca-
lomel was in all cases administered in large doses,
at short intervals; followed up, after a proper
lapse of time, by saline purgatives. In cases in.
which it was rejected, or did riot appear to pro-
duce sufficient effect, the rapid saturation of the
system by fumigation with cinnabar; inunction
on large surfaces; passing of shocks from a gal-
vanic pile through the' region of the liver; the
internal use of oil of turpentine; immersion in
warm water; and friction of the whole body with
stimulating oils and liniments, were severally re-
sorted to, amid the alarming difficulties which
surrounded the practitioner. At an early peri-
od of the attack, bleeding was generally followed-
by an alleviation of symptoms ; particularly of
anxiety and spasm.—But, the state in which the
men were generally brought to the hospitals, ren*
Dd


dered the practice in most cases hopeless. la
some, the blood would not flow ; tn others, when
the pulse was strong, and the blood came freely,
it produced no benefit; whilst in others again,
carried to the extent of sixteen ounces, and aided
by repeated doses of (40 to SO grains) calomel,
and other cathartics, it produced a favorable re-
sult. In these latter cases, opiates and stimu-
lants of all kinds were withheld; and diluents
freely used.—The blood was rather loose in tex-
ture, and shewed no bufiy coat. The pulse did
not rise immediately; but in the course of an
hour an evident mitigation of symptoms appear?
ed, and amendment was gradual. Other cases,
again, proved fatal when bleeding and purging
had alone been relied on ; so 51s to leave the mind
in doubt, whether those that had been cured,
were not originally less violent affections. Jt
being thought, that those cases, in which opiates
were exhibited, either alone or with cordials
and calomel, generally proved fatal, the use of
them was latterly entirely abandoned in several
Corps. With persons of this opinion, their
employment was superseded by the exhibition
of ether, ammonia, and other cordials calculated
to allay the irritability of the stomach, and rouse
the general system, without producing constipa-
tion ; and by jalap, and such other cathartics,
as readily brought away those dark and foetid
stools, on which the cure was supposed mainly


£o depend. Calomel Was, by some, conceived
to quiet the alimentaiy canal; by others, it was
rejected as too sluggish in its cathartic ope-
ration. In no instance, was this medicine trus-
ted to alone.
When the Epidemick first broke' out in the
Nagpore Subsidiary Force, the attacks were so
exceedingly virulent, and the irritability, spasm,
and universal depression so violent, as- to be
quite beyond the reach of art. The fate of the'
patient was so quickly decided, that of seventy
Of eighty patients brought to the hospital in the
course of the first day, more than’ ten were found
dead, or in the act of expisiiig in the Doolies.
In such terrible examples of the disease, it was
Vain to try to bleed; for there was no pulse at
the wrist, and arterial action was so completely
gone, that the heart had no power to propel the*
blood from the centre.- The internal- exhibition
of stimulants was equally useless; for in all, the '
abdominal muscles were spasmodically contrac-
ted/ v and drawn back to the spine ; and the stp--
mach instantly rejected, without distinction, every
thing that was poured into it.* When, however,
the violence of the disease had somewhat abated;
and the spasms of the belly, and general cramp
were less marked, medicine was of some avail.
At this milder laudanum, brandy, and
other stimulants, usually quieted the patient,
and induced diaphoresis, and sleep j, after which
D d 2s


nothing more, was required, than a dose of com-
pound powder of. jalap, or castor oil, to un-
load the bowels, and procure foeculent or bilious
motions. By the unanimous consent of all the
staff of the Division, calomel was reprobated as
injurious, in every case, and form. In whatever
Way given,in repeated-scruple doses, wither
without other aid, washed down with fluid, Of
dry on the tongue, whilst fluid of every sort was
denied to the sufferer; still, it was immediately
thrown up, aiid'invariably added to the irritabi-
lity Of the stomach. In many cases solid opium
Was Observed to be kept down better than lau-
danum. Magnesia, in peppermint water,' was
useful in allaying sickness, and by passing off
readily by the bowels. As auxiliaries in restoring
superficial warmth, blankets, frictions, fomenta-
tions, blisters, and occasionally the hot bath, were
found beneficial. In camps, however, the warm
bath can seldom be employed on a large scale.
It is too cumbrous in its form, and consumes too’
much hot water, to be used in situations in which,
as here and in the other Divisions of the Army,
the individuals likely to derive advantage from
it are hourly pouring in, in almost unlimited
numbers.* At Mooltye again, and Hoshun-
* Hr. Dalton, Superintending Surgeon on the ma-
dras Establishment, recently suggested a very happy
means of removing the obstacles to the general use of
baths in armies and camps. The following is a descrip-
tion of the apparatus, used by Mr. Dalton.


gaWd, where the Epidemick attacked Detach-
ments of the same body of Troops, calomel
when given alone, was conceived to allay the
irritation of stomach and urgent thirst, and even
’in fatal cases, to afford much relief. It was
generally, however, combined with - opiates and
Method of using the Medicated vapor Bath?’
- “ Take a'rattan or widely taped conch about 2J fiet
from the ground, and tight! v surround the frame with
o 7 C 5 • «
a thick . curtibly valence, or. flounce, to reach or trail on
the around 3 inches, or more: then cover die rattans
O ’
with a cumbly or blanket to reach over the sides, of the
couch a few inches, on which lay the patient, who mast
be covered lightly with a longer blanket or cumbly, as a
bed is covered with a counterpane. When this is done,
take two metallic basons and put half a pint of good
ardept spirits into each, and into each bason place a
metallic cup with as much vinegar as will quarter fill
it, to which must be added, one or two , drachms of
camphor, dissolved in a little rectified spirits of wine,
with a scruple also of opium, if necessary ; then lift up
the valence or flounce, and place the bason with the tum-
blers or cups therein, under the couch at an equal dis-
tance, and throw a small piece of lighted paper into
each bason, when the spirits will immediately take fire.
The flounce, or valence must be replaced without delay,
to prevent the escape of the.heat and vapor, which-in
2or 3 minutes will be, so, great as probably to render
the removal of one of the basons expedient or necessary,
as the heat of the Vapor Bath duly prepared, is only,
known to those, who have judiciously used, and prepar-
ed it, according to my directions.”
The employment of steam, spirit, and medicated va-


carminatives. Bleeding was uniformly iiiad-*
missible from the early depression of the vital
powers.
In the Rajpootana Force, bleeding was largely
practised, with various result; according to the'
period, and severity of the attack. If a patient
were brought in Soon after he was seized, with
a full, or even moderate, pulse, severe vomiting,
and purging, and spasms of the belly and extre-
mities ; he was generally bled, to a pound, or a
pound and a half. In all the Europeans, and
in some of the Natives, so treated, the practice
appeared to produce beneficial consequences. If
the blood flowed freely, the pain of stomach, and
harassing muscular spasm, were mitigated; and the
ventral discharges lessened; tranquility and per-
haps sleep, ensued; and-a warm critical discharge
soon broke out over the whole of the body, and
por baths is almost as old as the medical art itself; and
an apparatus somewhat similar to that used by Mr.
Dalton may be found described in the old systematic
authois: see particularly Hoffman cap.de balneorum
usu, vol. Ist. P. 465; and vol. 4 th. P. 292 and 314; but
Mr. Dalton has the merit of first applying them to the
cure of the recent Epidemick. Dr; Girdlestone, indeed,-
states that a Dutch Physician was in the habits of em-
ploying them, at the time the disease prevailed generally
on the coast in 1782 (see'Essays P. 64); but thenhe
used stoves instead of the spirit lamp.


removed the severity of the complaint. But'
with many of the Natives, the circulation was
.so languid, from the beginning of the com-
plaint, that no blood could be obtained. Thus
in the first Battalion 28th, from 144 patients in
hospital, the lancet was used in 77; of these 20
bled freely, of whom -3 died ; and from 57, little’
or no blood could be extracted, of whom 42
died. This average would speak much in favor
of the practice, if all the cases, in which it was
tried, had been of equal degrees of violence.
But this was far from being the case ; for those,
in which it succeeded, are stated to have been
slight affections, in which the circulation
was little impaired, and the general system not
greatly depressed; whilst the unsuccessful cases
were so violent, as to leave it doubtful, if the
bleeding produced any sensible effect, good or
bad. Again, of twenty cases bled in the first'
Battalion 27th Regiment, not more than three
or four ounces were obtained from five; and from
the remainder from twelve to sixteen ounces.
Nearly the whole of these men were bled soon
after the commencement of the attack; and the
opposite results of the practice, seemed to de-
pend, more upon the different degrees of depres-
sion, produced on different constitutions, by
the malady, within a given time, than upon any
difference in the length of its duration. The
blood did not shew any bufly coat; nor did the


pulse rise rapidly on its abstraction. Along with
bleeding, where its use seemed to be indicated,
opium in a solid or'fluid form, camphor,Brandy,
oil of peppermint, and various other stimulants,
external and internal, were solicitously employ-
ed with various, success. In the earlier days
of the Epidemick, when.it had not arrived at its:
greatest degree of malignity, they no doubt often
rescued the patient from death. But at a later
period, they often seemed of no avail. Then,
the disease marched on to a fatal termination,,
in spite of every human means j the stomach
indiscriminately rejected every thing that was;
offered to it; and the spasms and vomiting, and •
internal heat continued unabated by calomel and
opium, whether given separately, or adminis-
tered together. In the cases which proved
favorable, the opiates and calomel were repeat-
ed every second or third hour, until the cramp,
oppression, and other violent symptoms subsid-
ed. Where the stomach would not bear lauda-
num, solid opium was given in its place. Cold
water, and fluids of every kind in large quantity
were rigidly abstained from. Thirst was mitiga-..
ted by warm rice water in mouthfuls. Some of
the- patients fell asleep after the ■ first d,°^ c
of opium; others after a second. They
awoke with a warm moisture on the
skin 1 , and the, Spasms and irritability of
bowels, quite . gone. In some cases, the cx


hibition of the different spirits was pushed
so, as to cause slight inebriation, with
apparent advantage;; in others the patient was
thought to recover more rapidly, if the mercury
touched his mouth.—-Jo. all, the cure was ; com-
pleted by laxatives. Calomel alone, was sel-
dom used; in the few instances in which it was
Solely trusted to in the first instance, no confirm-
ed good opinion was formed of its efficacy.—
With some careful observers, large experience
both here and in the Left Division, produced a
conviction, that the primary exhibition of nar-
cotics and stimulants, was not nearly so success-
ful in allaying the morbid action of the intes-
tines, as the practice of first unloading the sto-
mach of its noxious contents, by the use of sim-
ple diluents, or infusions of anthemis and other
plants.
In the Hansi Division, venesection according
to the age and constitution of the patient was
very freely practised, with good success. A-
mongst Europeans, and the robuster class of Na-
tives, one copious bleeding, to the extent of
twenty, or twenty-four ounces, taken in a short
space of time, almost in every case produced im-
mediate relief; settling the stomach, diminish-
ing the spasms, vomiting, and restlessness, and
inducing sleep. Of eleven Europeans, in whom
this course was followed, only one died. A se-
cond bleeding was seldom requisite; but when
E e


tlie spasms happened to return, and the pulse
kept full and strong, the operation was repeated;
always with the same relief. The Natives were,
however, seldom seen, until the long continu-
ance of the disease, and languor of the circula-
tion, rendered the lancet a precarious and doubt-
ful remedy. Thus with one gentleman, it was
possible to procure blood, only from two, out of
a hundred cases.—With another, little benefit
followed its employment. Of six Sepoys, who
were bled, three died; in one the quantity desired
was gained; in two others, from six to ten ounces;
and in the remaining three fatal cases, only from
three to five ounces. On the other hand, of fif-
teen Sepoys, who were not bled, only one died.
In another Corps six persons were bled. By the
aid of warm fomentations to the arm and hand,
from ten to twelve ounces were procured,
in every instance; and all recovered, but
one.—The blood at first flowed slowly, and of a
dark purple colour; afterwards it became quite
florid. After blood letting, the practice follow-
ed was somewhat various. By some, who plac-
ed faith in the sedative powers of calomel, that
medicine was given alone, in doses of twenty
grains placed on the patient’s tongue, with a
little sugar; and laudanum was abstained from,
unless the violence of the retching required its
subsidiary aid. With others, it was usual to
precede the exhibition of the calomel, by large


draughts and clysters of rice water, to. cleanse
the stomach and bowels. The calomel was re-
peated every four, or six hours, till the urgency
of the symptoms had completely subsided.
This usually took place in twelve or fourteen
hours : sometimes not until ptyalism had ensu-
ed. After the vomiting and purging were
wholly allayed, castor oil and other mild laxa-
tives were used, during several days ; to carry
off the acrid and foetid evacuations, which in-
variably appeared at the termination of the at-
tack. When the patient was brought in, at an
advanced stage of the disease, or the severity
of the attack was such, as at an early period
greatly to depress the vital powers, and pro-
duce all the symptoms of exhaustion, the
anodyne and stimulating plan was very gene-
rally followed, —with the same partial success,
which attended it in other quarters.
We now come to the Centre Division of the
Army, where the-disease was seen on the largest
scale ; and each remedy was brought to the full
test of experience, by numerous and repeated
trials. Here, therefore, it will be necessary to be
somewhat more particular, than we have been,
while speaking of the other Corps of the Army.—
When the disorder first fell upon the Camp, in so
insidious a manner, as to lead to no suspicion of the
dreadfully Epidemick form it was soon to assume,
E e 2'


the cases coming under observation were compa-
ratively mild; and were treated successfully with
calomel, opium, and brandy, in moderate doses,
at regular periods. But, as the symptoms increa-
sed in intensity, this plan frequently failed; and it
became necessary greatly to augment the quanti-
ties of these medicines. At length, even the largest
doses of stimulants proved useless; and the mise-
rable sufferers were cut off, in spite ofevery means,
after an hour or two of illness.—The bodies
of some of the Dooly bearers, and Native details,
were then opened, and such inflammatory appear-
ances discovered, as seemed to warrant a new
mode of treatment. The lancet was according-
ly had recourse to; but as, at this period, the pa-
tients were almost all Natives, seen at an advanc-
ed stage of the disease, and in whom universal
coldness and collapse had usually taken place, it
was rarely found, that the blood would flow; and
the practice was soon abandoned in despair.—>
Then, brandy and other cordials were freely giv-
en, to raise the pulse, and remove debility ; and
large doses of laudanum, to relieve spasm; but
still almost all died.
Whilst the practice was in this unsettled state,
and the Medical Officers were in extreme sus-
pense, as to the proper means ofresisting the dis-
ease, the European portion of the Army began .to
be attacked. About 5, A. M. of the 14th of No


vember, two Europeans belonging to the Flank
Battalion were admitted into Hospital.-—They
had the disease in its most violent shape.. The
spasms especially were tremendous. A scruple of
calomel, and 100 drops of laudanum in a glass of
brandy and water, were given to each of the suf-
ferers, and repeated at intervals during the day;
but without the least relief. They continued in
horrible torture; and died before eight at night.—
During the course of the same evening, four men
■of the same Corps were admitted together. It
was resolved to try bleeding on all. From two
no blood could be obtained; but from the other
two it came freely; and as it instantly relieved
the patients, thirty ounces were taken from each.
Next morning of these men, the two latter were
out of danger; whilst of the former, one was
dead, and the other expired before noon.—Em-
boldened by the successful results of this trial, the
Medical Officers of the Flank Battalion from this
time endeavoured to bleed every one taken ill;
and with one solitary exception, no person there-
after died, from whom twenty-four ounces were
obtained. If the patients were seen within two or
three hours from the beginning of the attack, the
.practice usually succeeded; but at a later stage,
when the pulse was gone, the skin cold, and the
nails blue, no means could make the blood flow.—
Sometimes, even in the commencement of the at-
tack, the attempt was ineffectual, from the ex-
treme violence of the symptoms.


About the same time, a similar modification
of treatment was adopted in the Artillery hos-
pitals. From the ill success, that attended its
employment amongst the Native details, vene-
section was for a few days laid aside; But, as it
soon appeared, that all other means Were una-
vailing, it was shortly after again had recourse to
among the Europeans ; and from that time for-
ward, not a patient was lost, except one from
whom only a few ounces of blood could be
drawn. Whilst the blood was flowing, the pati-
ents generally expressed themselves to be much
relieved ; the spasms instantly abated in violence,
and in many cases, totally disappeared on a
second bleeding. Sound sleep frequently ensu-
ed; and after a few hours, the patient awoke
refreshed, with scarcely an unpleasant feeling
remaining. From eighteen to twenty-four oun-
ces were always taken on admission; and the
operation was repeated to the same extent, if
the spasms did not yield, after an interval of three
hours. In some instances, it was had recourse
to, even four or five times in twelve hours ; the
quantity of blood taken away beipg solely regulat-
ed by the symptoms, without attention to the state
of the pulse, which was generally weak and fre-
quent. Some.of the Europeans lostmore thanfive
pounds within twenty-four hours ; yet they did
not appear to experience a greater degree of
bility from this extent of depletion, than those,
who had not lost half the quantity.


Moderate bleeding was practised generally in
His Majesty’s 21<th Regiment of Dragoons, and
87th Regiment of Foot; and with equal success.
So, in the Rocket Troop, the practice was to take
thirty ounces from each patient. Here, in 27
cases it was successful, with exception of one
man from whom not a drop of blood could be
drawn, although the veins of both arms were
opened,
In the Artillery hospitals; at the same time
that a vein was opened, a scruple of calomel was
given and repeated every two hours, every hour,
and where it was frequently rejected from the
excessive vomiting, even every half hour, till the
irritability was moderated, or it was evident, that
no benefit was to be expected from the medicine.
It in many instances appeared to produce the
best effects; but although frequently pushed to
the extent just mentioned, and even given in
doses of forty grains every half hour, both alone
and conjoined with two to four grains of opium,
or fifty to a hundred minims of laudanum, from
the very commencement of the attack, it so often
failed, that it could not be allowed to possess
any specific power to allay the irritable, or spas-
modick state of the stomach and bowels. It
was, however, upon the whole, thought more
uniformly successful in alleviating that state,
than any other medicine. In some cases, large
doses of laudanum in saline draughts succeeded,


when calomel and solid opium had failed; 'in
others, opium gave relief, when calomel alone,
or combined with laudanum, had been tried in
vain. Wine and brandy were added with the
best effects, when great debility had supervened.,
Anodyne clysters were sometimes beneficial 5
but no good was perceived to result from ano-
dyne embrocations, or blisters to the Epigastrium.
The warm bath could not be fully employed.,
A mild purgative, given as soon , as the state of
the stomach would admit of it, was necessary to
bring away the large Watery discharges, with
which the bowels were filled. The vomiting
and irritability of stomach in numerous instances
kept up many days; and yielded, sometimes to
one remedy, sometimes to another. Diluted sul-
phuric acid was at this period largely given, with-
out effect.
In the Flank Battalion, after bleeding, calo-
mel and opium were administered, and in three
or four hours followed up by jalap or castor oil;
which produced foeculent stools, and completed
the cure. In some cases, it was long before the
patient regained his strength. In, such as would
not bleed, stools were procured with great dif-
ficulty; the dangerous state continued several
days; and recovery was very tardy. Those,
again, in whom the blood flowed freely, rapidly:
regained health ; and generally returned to their
duty in three or four days., In the Rocket 1


Troop, an emetic of ipecacuana, given after blee-
ding, so as to bring up a quantity of the dirty
fluid, and curdled matter, with which the sto-
mach was filled, was thought to do good. Blis-
ters, and effervescent draughts were found very
useful in allaying the irritability of stomach,
which harassed the patient throughout the whole
course of the disorder. In His Majesty’s 87th
Regiment, calomel given alone, either in large
or small doses, .always proved hurtful. Combin-
ed in small and repeated doses with opium, and
aided by turpentine and anodyne clysters, fomen-
tations, and frictions with warm oils and cam-
phorated liniments, it seemed to allay the irrita-
bility of the stomach and bowels, and, relax the
spasms.
The same mode of treatment was generally
followed amongst the Natives; with exception of
bleeding, which in most cases proved quite inad-
missible. Ip the early periods of the Epidemick,
the generality of the Native patients were brought
in, either moribund, or in such a state of exhausti.
on, as to render all attempts at bleeding useless.
But, even at a later period, when the Natives,
having become sensible of the great danger
pf delay, applied for assistance soon after
the commencement of the attack, venesection
was usually impracticable. Whether from the
greater violence of the disorder in this quarter,
or from the constitution of this class of persons
F f


being more readily depressed, than that of Euror
peans; the powers of life appeared to be in them
almost immediately extinguished, and universal
collapse soon took place, An entire stop seem-
ed to be put tq the circulation ; and the blood
wholly forsook the superficial veins. It is plain,
that, however large the orifice in such cases, no
blood could be expected to flow, It was, ac-
cordingly,-scarcely in one instance found possible
to obtain more than six ounces from a Native
labouring under the disorder ; and from upwards
of a hundred patients, whose veins were opened
in the Artillery Hospital, one ounce was most
commonly the extent of what could be got. In
such cases the strongest stimulants seemed ne-
cessary to revive the sinking powers; and all,
accordingly, placed their main dependence on
powerful and repeated doses of ether, brandy,
pil of peppermint, camphor, &c. with laudanum,
calomel, blisters and other topical means. That
these were often successful, it cannot be doubted;
but still they so frequently failed, as to convince
the most sensible observers that, bleeding amongst
Europeans being alone excepted, hut little con-
fidence was to be placed on any mode of treat-,
ment hitherto discovered ; and that the disease
often attacked with such awfully fatal violence,
as to baffle all human skill,
The diarrhoeas and fluxes, often consequent
pn tlie attack, ware here, and in other parts of


the country, found to yield readily to opiates,
calomel, 'ipecacuana, and such mild astringents,
as are usually serviceable in the removal of , simi-
lar complaints, arising from different causes;
Every enquiry into the practice followed by
the Natives, in resisting this most formidable
disease, has only tended to shew, that wherever
they departed from the methods Usually pursued
by European practitioners, the remedies used by
them were either of a frivolous, or of a pernici-
ous nature; In the Moohumudan cities of Upper
India, the Native Physicians adhered to the rules
laid down by the writers of the Arabian school \
and after cleansing the primae viae of their
noxious secretions, by means of salt and water,*
and mild diluents* had recourse to opium and
• This practice was tried very successfully by the
Native Doctor with Colonel Skinner’s Horse at Shapoor
in Rajpootana in the Autumn of ISIS. Every man was
as soon as taken ill* Vomited with salt and water, and
then had opiates 3 arid although the Corps was largely
affected, not a single death occurred. The practice is
thus described in a letter from the Corps. “Warm salt
and water is given till the stomach is well cleared; and
then small doses of laudanum, and peppermint, or the
essence of cardamoms* when the irritability of sto-
mach is stopt. Afterwards, violent thirst comes on,
for which boil anise, and when cooled, give it, as often as
required by the patient. Great numbers were cured by
this method. The Natives of Indore cured great numbers.
I may say the only medicine they had, was Juice of onions
Ff 2


spices: as cardamoms, and the different sorts of
pepper. Sometimes they used preparations of
lime, decoctions of the bark of the Neem tree,
and other powerful astringents. Where, again, the
judgment of the medical attendant was warped
by some absurd theory, of the malady originating
in great internal heat; he placed his chief depen-
dence, on cold drinks, and killed his patient with
deluges of rose water and lemonade. And, as if
these were not sufficiently speedy in their opera-
tion ; he often stripped the sufferer completely
naked, and having rubbed "his body over with
dust of Sandal wood, kept fanning him, until the
little heat and life remaining, was extinguished.
But, the great mass of the people expressed by
their conduct, how fully they were convinced of
the inutility of all human aid to subdue the cala-
mity ; for no sooner , did the disease appear, than
they fled for assistance to their offended dei-
ties, and allowed the sufferer to expire amidst
their unavailing prayers and incantations. Lat-
terly, however, when they saw their superstitions
fail them, men even of the highest castes, throw-
ing off all their religious prejudices, applied to
the European practitioners, and learnt to place
their faith in the only means, which have been
and Bazar arrack. It was also - practised at Mow ; and
a great number of men were cured in the camps; but
with the salt and water as above, not a single man tvas
lost in this Corps; and stopping it suddenly, with a large
dose of laudanum and calomel, was certain death. - ’


yet found, in any measure, adequate to resist the
attack.*
A deliberate review of the whole of the pre-
ceding remarks, on the modes of treatment pur-
sued by different individuals in combating the
disease, and a careful comparison of the results of
opposite lines of practice in the several Divisions
* The practice of the Ancients in this disease was
very unsettled. Galen tells us, that Asclepiades cured
it by pastils made of spikenard, hyoscyamus, aloes, and
rue with juice of roses, inspissated in astringent wine;
and that Chrisippus and his pupil Erasistratus used pur-
gatives, and wine diluted with cold water. Galen him-
self gave wine mixed with cold drinks, quinces, pome-
granates, and other austere fruits; placed the patient in
a cold bath; and largely cupped the abdomen. Ha
sometimes gave mint' and cinquefoil, in wine and hot
water; but he chiefly placed faith in Theraica, a nostrum
compounded of viper’s broth, and nearly a hundred sim-
ples, with wine, spices, and warm purgatives, (See his
treatises de usu Theraici; de compos. Pharmac. de yen.
Sect, et de Medicin. facil. parat). Celsus proceeded upon
sounder principles: he first freely used diluents, and then
wine, when the crudities were expelled. When the
cramp was severe, he administered rue, and applied
sinapisms, and cupping instruments to the stomach;
and where the extremities got cold, he used hot oils and
warm fomentations. He admits, however, that few dis-
orders so obstinately resist every means employed. Avi-
cenna, and the authors of the Arabian school, first vo-
mited the patient ; and then gave hot water, vinegar,
and oil,


of the Army, would seem to authorise the fol-
lowing conclusions.
1. The disease sometimes attacked with such
extreme violence, as from the
apparently to place the sufferer beyond the
reach of medical aid, and to render every curative
means employed equally unavailing,
•2. The difference, in the degree of mortality
amongst those, who did, and those who did not
take medicine, was such, as to leave no-doubt,
that, when administered in time, and with dis-
crimination, it frequently saved the patient from
death.'
3; The chances of a patient’s receiving benefit
from medicine, diminished in proportion with the
increased duration of the attack.
4. In Europeans generally, and in robust
Natives, bleeding could commonly be practised,
where the patient was seen within one, two, or
perhaps three hours, from the beginning of the
attack; and in all cases, in which it was resorted
to, under such favorable circumstances, it was
more successful than any other remedy, in cut-
ting short the disease: usually resolving spasm ;
allaying the irritability of the stomach and
bowels; and removing the universal depression,
under which the system laboured.


£. Amongst the generality of Natives, the de-
pressing influence of the disease was so powerful,
and rppid in its operation, as almost immediate-
ly to produce complete collapse, and nearly des-
troy arterial action; and therefore, to render
venesection, for the most part, from the begin-
ning, impracticable.
6. In such cases the cure was best attempted
by diluents, powerful anodynes, and stimulants ;
combined with calomel; and followed up by
mild laxatives, and tonics.
7. Although it cannot be affirmed, that calo-
mel possessed any specific power in checking the
disorder, it was undoubtedly frequently useful in
soothing irritability; and was perhaps, of more
certain sedative operation than any other medi-
cine.
How to apply these deductions to practice,
find to vary the different means at pur disposal,
according to variety in the form and severity of
the attacks, will be best learnt from a frequent
observance of the disease; aided by a careful
perusal of the Cases attached to the body of this
Report.
THE END,




Dates.
Days.
Attached.
Cured.
Conval-
escent.
Died.
From 1 Gib Sept.
to 1st Oct. 1817.
IS
3464
2102
984
37 8
2d Get. tp 14th
IS
2916
1994
701
221
15th do. to 28th
IS
2012
1498
449
65
28th do. to 9th
Nov
13
1515
1127
346
. 42
10th Nov. to 22d
13
1253
883
294
76
23d do. to 5th
Dec
IS
i
1054
771
,224
59
6th Dec. to 19th
Dec
IS
1001
702
240
59
19 th do. to 21st
. do.
IS
705
518
157
30
Total
104
13920
9595
3S95 1
930
List of-Persons attacked by Cholera Morbus
in the town of Calcutta, to whom Medicine
was administered, from September to Janu-
ary, 1819.
Gg


Months,
'Number of Sick
\nilacked with Cho-
lera Morbus.
Cured
Died.
£
$
ikt
c3
From the 19th to the 30th
September 1817
2190
1920
243
27
From the 1st to the 31st
October,
3275
3122
}S2
21
Frpm the 1st to the 30th
November,
1597
1554
40
3
From the 1st to the 31st
December,
1418
1368
46
4
From the 1st to the 31st
January, 1818*
691
643
!
4.(i|
2
Total
9171
8607
507
57
* The Native physicians were temporarily
disch
Tg-
ed during next three weeks*
List of Patients attacked with Cholera Morbus,
to whom the Native Doctors, in the Suburbs of
Calcutta, entertained for that purpose, afford-
ed relief, from the 19th of September, 1817, to
the Slst of January JBlB, inclusive.


Months,
A ’umber of Sick
attacked with
Cholera Morbus.
Cured.
Died.
g
d
Month of September 1817
547
489
36
22
Ditto October,
485
464
14
7
Ditto November,..
164
157
4
3
Ditto December,
162
153
6
3
Ditto January, 1818,...
65
64
1
Total
1423
1327
61
35
Report for the same period of Native Villagers,
Sec. who have applied to the Native Doctors
of the Guards at Allipore, Bhowanypdre,
Soorah, and Russapuglah, those with the My-
sore Princes, &c.
G g 2


Months.
i I
£
a
5
g c S
Cured.
Died.
Convalescent, J
From the 25th to the
28th February, 1818,
629
532
73
24
From the 1st to the 31st
■ March, ------ .
2197
1950
216
31
From the 1st to the 30th
April,
2187
1958
209
20
From the 1st to the 31 st
May,
1857
1742
97
18
From the 1st to the 30th
June, - - - - - ...
1605
1510
78
17
From the 1st to the 15th
•Toly, -
948
887
46
15
Total
94-23,
8579 719(125
List of Patients attacked with Cholera Morbus,
to whom the Native Doctors in the Suburbs of
Calcutta entertained for that purpose, afforded
relief, from the 25th of February to the 15th
of July, 1818, inclusive.


Months.
I .. — . ■■ -
Number nf sick at
tacked with Cho-
•lera Morbus.
Cured.
Died
5
. J
is
p
6
Month ofFebruary 1818
172
146
11
15
Ditto March, - - -
638
584
42
12’
Ditto April, - - - -
377
352
. 20
5
Ditto May, - - - -
263
250
10
8
Ditto June, - - - -
256
244
6
6
Ditto July, -----
153
150
2
1
Total,
1859
1726
91
42
Grand Total, -------
21876
20239]l378259
Report for the same period of Native Villagers,
&c. who have applied to the Native Doctors
of the Guards at Allipore Bhowanypore,
Soerah and Russapuglah, those with the My-
sore Princes, &c.


1815*
#
CO
1817
1818
1819
Grand
I Total.
January, - - - -
- 11
17
s|
407
73
February, ...
- 11
14
IS
1324
81
March,
- 6
12
5
1130
203
April, .....
- 0*
8
4
586
266
I
I
I
£
W-=H
- 5
0
11
490
187
June, .....
- 10
5
20
175
S7
July,
- 16
6
26
76
34
August, --- -
- 24
10
133
156
36
September, - - -
- 37
21
468
132
57
October, - - -
- 25
29
259
145
86
November, - - -
- 26
10
186
373
349
December, - - -
- 11
9
190
115
0
Total, ......
- 182141
1323
5109
1459
8214
* These two t ears shew only the number of Hindoos reported to
have died of the Cholera Morbus;
does, and Mussulinen,
the three following of both Hm
Abstract of Deaths from the Cholera Morbus,
reported to the Magistrates from the princi.
pal Burying Grounds, .and Ghauts or Ferries,
in the Town of Calcutta.


Euiopns.
N
. Suldiers{
Public Establishment.
Brigades-
CORPS,
.
i
I
2*
1
SP,®
t,
5
>3
| Drummers,
Hank and File.
4
v.
§
&
Havildars.
Je
t
s
q
Rank and File,
| Native Doctors .
Bhislies.
.d
««
a
"§
Bildars.
|9
»5
5
sj
: Carpenter .
«*
to
to
| Grass-cutters.
# 1
«4
tv
&
«0
H.M. 87th Regt.
2d Bn. 23th Regl
1st Bn. 29th do.
2d Bn, 1st do....
875
i
33
i
1 st BI. Inf.
938
si*
1
987
I
950
...
5° (
2d Ditto..
...
...
1st Battn. 8th do
938
9J7
"as!
...
]
4li
3d Ditto,
1st Bn. 24tll do.
Horse Artillery,
Rocket Artillen,
958
335
98
4
Artillery,
•
1
3
...
12
...
...
...
2‘
...
1
...
7
2
2
i
10
5
7
8
...
Foot Artillery,
Miners,
270
n
fit
130
1
1 I 1
Pioneers,.
390
8
1
3531
14
98
5
247
1
o
5
80
22
1
15
15
Grand Total
8531
113
! 257
154
RETURN of Casualties in the Centre
Division Grand Army from the disease
lately prevalent, up to November 30, 1817-
N. B.—This is exclusive of the Corps which
formed Colonel Philpot’s Detachment, viz. H. M.
24th Dragoons, 676 strong, the Sd Regt. N. C.-
716 strong; the Dromedary Corps 296 strong; the
2d Troop Horse Artillery, and the 2d Batt. 13th
Regt. N. I. 900 strong; and of the 7th Regt. N. C.
680 strong.


24th Lt. Drags.
87th Foot,
Flank Battalion,
Total. -
0
■0 0 0
Officers.
| October 1817.
0
000
Serjeants.
O M 0
Trumpeters
and
Drummers.
H-1
qc_
i—i *"
CO
>#»- Jo ■ to
RanktjFile.
)—I
CO
Total. -
o»
>-* iO tO
Officers.
November 1817*
ci 00 to
Serjeants.
I
I
0
Trumpeters
and
Drummers.
1—*
<0
OD
00 00 fcf*-
■<f «5
RankSfFile.
1—*
OD
53
45
45
Total.
0
000
Officers.
December 1817.
M
0^0
Serjeant.
0
000
Trumpeters
and
Drummers.
CO
Cl <f 0»
RanktjFile.
1—I
CO '
■ Cl CO 0*
Total.
0
0 0.0
Officers.
sS
cc
>—*
00
c
000
Serjeants.
0
000
: Trumpeters
and
Drummers.
0
to 00
Ranl'tjFile.
Cl
to i-i 00
Total.
»-* 1
00 Oi Cl Cl
-Cj 1 CO
TOTAL.
N. B.— The above are Deaths in His Majesty's Corps alone in the Grand, or Centre Division of the
Army. The Casualties in the months of November in only 3 Corps are immense, viz. 5 Officers, and 143
Hank and File, which marks the period of the Cholera.
CASUALTIES in His Majesty’s 21th Light Dragoons, 87th Foot, and Flank Battalion, from
the 25th October, 1817, to the 25th January, 1818.


APPENDIX.
CASES OF CHOLERA.
NONE of the following cases were drawn up with a
view to publication. In most of them, the symptoms
were, amid the hurry, and busy occupation of a very
sickly period, noted down ot the patient’s bedside, more
lo serve as memoranda to the medical attendant, than
for any other purpose. Hence they are not so full or
elaborate, as they might have been made under other
circumstances. It is to be regretted, that no cases
have been received from the Centre Division of the
Army, in which the disease was so extremely formi-
dable. But, there every man’s hands were so full of
business, that far from having leisure to write down the
diseased appearances of the sick, he found it impossible
even to pay the requisite attention to the numerous
calls on his humanity'. The usual journals were, accor-
dingly, for a time entirely closed. Most of the instan-
ces among Europeans, given below, occurred in the Ge-
neral Hospital of Calcutta, in the shipping in the river,
and at Cawnpore. The Native cases, with baldly any
exception, happened partly at Delhi, and partly with the
Nagpore Division of the Army. Many others might
be added; but as in all, the symptoms were nearly alike,
it is thought needless further to increase the size of a
Report, already perhaps too greatly prolonged.
CASE FIRST.
GENERAL HOSPITAL, 5TH SEPTEMBER, 1817.
Corporal Clayton, His Majesty’s 59th Regiment; ad-
mitted into Hospital about three o’clock P. M. Was
H h


taken ill at 7 in the morning, with swelling of the belly,
sickness at stomach, vomiting, purging, and cramps of
the legs, stomach, and belly. Was greatly purged—knew
no cause of his illness. On admission, his body was co-
vered with cold sweats; the vomiting incessant; cramps
very severe; pulse scarcely to be felt; countenance very
heavy and pale. Laudanum was rejected. Calomel,
opium, and every thing swallowed, came up. A Blister to
the pit of the stomach; small doses of calomel and opi-
um, frequently repeated; frictions to the surface; mulled
wine; all seemed to be of little service. The pulse sunk;
the extremities became cold; hiccup ensued; and he di-
ed at 3 next morning.
Dissection- —On opening the abdomen, the inner sur-
face of the stomach, from the cardia to the pylorus, was
found inflamed, red, covered with slimy, bloody, greenish
matter; in some parts slightly abraded. The marks of
inflammation were strongest towards the pylorus. The
duodenum was in the same state; of reddish colour, and
covered with bloody mucus ; but, little thickened. The
liver was sound, and full of blood ; the gall bladder
contained about two ounces of ropy, dark green bile.
The colon was distended with air to a great size; most
of the intestines externally had a reddish tinge.
CASE SECOND.
26TH FEBRUARY, 1818.
John Donnochan, seaman, active; good constitution.
After being much in the sun, was today suddenly seized
with giddiness, then spasm in the body, thighs and
arms; followed by looseness, vomiting, cold shivering,
and insensibility. Admitted at midnight with severe
vomitingand purging, spasms and cold skin. Pulse quick
and weak. Is exceedingly thirsty. Has pain of right


side and some tendency to delirium. V. S.ad lb. I'Hab
opii griss calomel gr. xii stat. Appl. Empl. yesicat.
magn. abdom. Adliih. Bain calid.-—27th. No relief from
the bleeding. Blood flowed easily ; constant vomiting
during the night; had several stools like pure rice water.
Very thirsty; tongue furled; no cramp; pulse very feeble
and weak. Capt. Mistur. salin sii aether vitriol gtt. xxx
Tinct. opii. gtt. L. Spir. Lavend. Comp. Jfs. duab. hor.
—3 P. M. Four stools ; perfectly pale ; vomited a little.
Thirst excessive; skin cold; pulse still feeble.* Is rathe*
lower. Hab calomel gr. xx et rep. ad vesper. Repr. Bain,
calid.—2Bth. Slept well; hadno stool; vomiting lessened;
no cramp ;pulse fuller; skin now warm; tongue foul. Hab.
Infus. Sennae ad plen. resolut. alv.—P. M. vomited once.
Five light rice water stools; skin warm ; pulse sharp and
quick; feels low; but appears better. Repr, pil e calomel,
—March Ist. Slept well. Three stools of rather a dark co-
lour; no retching or cramp; now very thirsty, with nausea,
hot skin, full, rather quick pulse; and tongue furred white.
Repr. mist. Seun. —P. M. Three light coloured motions;
vomited twice; considerable fever.—Repr. calomel.
March 2d. Many natural, watery, frothy motions; pulse
full, and more moderate; tongue less furred; skin warm •
no vomiting.—Feels great oppression at his heart;
and sickness of stomach. Is dull. Repr. mist.—P. M.
Seven or eight watery, brownish motions; pulse quic-
ker; not so full. Vomited several times. Repr. calo-
mel. —3d. Two natural motions. Still a little feverish ;
feels very low.— fo have wine and sago.—P. M.
Several dark motions; in other respects as in the morn-
ing. Repr. pil. 7— 4th. Going on well. Four or five brown
stopls. Still sick. Pulse good.—P. M. Three dark
stools; pulse sharp; feels low. Repr. calomel.-—sth.
Much purging of very dark bile.—Stomach lighter;
but still a little vomiting; pulse full and quick; skin hot;
great thirst; tongue cleaner, Repr. calom.—6th. Only
one scanty, more feculent motion. A little squeamish.
H h 2


Pulse, of less volume. Repr. calom.—No stool
since yesterday. Is low; with considerable heat,
sharpness and celerity of pulse, and sickness. Repr.
mist. Senn.—P. M. Mouth sore. Three or four,
more natural stools; feels much better.—Omr. pil
B.—Passing much dark matter ; continues lighter,—
9th, Bowels discharged freely yesterday; still a little
hot, with white tongue; appetite returning. Sum.
Decoct, cinchon. § 11 quatcr indie.—loth. Bowels free;
stools natural. Convalescent.
CASE THIRD.
MARCH 2D, 10½ A. M.
Thomas Hughes, Seaman, about 30 years of age, con-
stitution debilitated by previous disease ; was attacked a
quarter of an hour ago, with vomiting, retching, severe
purging, with frequent dark watery stools. Spasms uni-
versal ; and particularly severe in • the extremities ; the
muscles of which are incessantly quivering; the whole'
body is cold and clammy; skin discoloured of a blue
purple colour; no pulse to befelt; tongue white; brea-
thing very uneasy; eyes heavy and dull; is speechless,
and apparently in great agony ; hands shrivelled; fin-
gers twisted—V. S. statim—Tinct. opii gtt. Ixxx. Ether
Sulphur sss stat. Bain, tepid.— l P. M. Very little
blood could be got to flow ; although several veins were
opened in each arm. Has been in the bath for nearly
three hours; spasms greatly relieved, whilst he remained
in the water; but recurred, the moment it was attempted
to remove him from it, at which time the general con-
vulsions grew so violent, that it required several persons
to hold him. During the time he remained in the bath
he vomited eight or nine times; rejecting the lauda-
num, ether, and brandy which were given to him
largely at intervals, • and a little water and phlegm.


Passed several stools' in the bath. Calomel gr. viij bpii
griss stat.—s P. M. Vomited once on taking the pill.
Breast and back a little warm ; extremities cold; has
.been very restless ; but is now lying quiet, taking no
notice of any thing; no stool; pulse quite indistinguish-
able ; has been taking hot brandy and water, and
frequently using every subsidiary internal and external
means of excitement. Repr. liaust e JEther et Thick,
opii. Died a few minutes afterwards.
Dissection. —On opening the body the intestines were
discovered to be of a deep rose colour. The stomach
externally, had a natural appearance : internally, its
whole surface was covered with coaguable lymph; on
removing which, bloody gelatine was found laid on the
inner coat, in ridges or elevated streaks. The liver was
of a dark blue colour, and very much gorged with
blood. The diaphragm, and inner parietes of the
abdomen, were blue from venous distension. The vena
cava was greatly distended. Nothing else particular in
the abdomen or thorax. On taking off the skull cap, a
considerable quantity of coagulablo lymph was seen on
the surface of the brain. The ventricles were complete-
ly filled with water, which was likewise found in quan-
tity at the base of the skull, and top of the vertebral
canal. This man, during several daj's preceding the
attack, had been exposing himself much to the sun. ' On
the night before the attack, he had pain of stomach, and
was purged. The appearances in the brain were pro-
bably accidental; as he formerly had had a paralytick
stroke, from which he never perfectly recovered.
CASE FOURTH.
2D MARCH.
John Smith, Seaman, aged 22, of good constitution.


9A. M. Has had Cholera since last night. Pulse now
very small ; severe cramp, with frequent severe vomiting
artd purging; skin cold; tongue furred white ; face pale
and anxious. V. S. ad Ibj. Capt. TEther Vitr. 3s Tinct.
opii g. L. Hab. Bain, calid.—H. 91. Was bled to fain-
ting. The pain and spasms were relieved; but the pulse
did not rise. The mther and laudanum are repeated every
ten minutes. Says he was taken ill about nine o’clock last
night; first with looseness, then vomiting and univer-
sal spasm.—First vomited what he had ate; then pure
water; stools quite watery. Had severe cramp of the
chest and stomach frequently during the night, and
great thirst.—-9J. One small watery dark motion —again
cramped. Pulse very small and quick; skin still cold ;
face blue. Bath did no good; had spasm immediately
after beingin it. Repr. fEthcr. Capt. calomel, gr. ■s.x adhib.
fot.adabdom.—lo. Not so sick now. Pulse quicker, and
father less feeble ; Skin more natural.—l 2. Severe tramp
of hands and feet; pulse more natural; skin warm; colour
returning; no stool or vomiting. Repr. Tinct. Opii et
Conr. fotus.—l P. M; Vomited his medicines
with much watery fluid. Appr. Empl. yesicat. raagn, ad
region, yentri. Repr. Tinct. et jEther.—3 P, M, No fur-
ther vomiting; several stoolslike muddy water. Pulse bet-
ter, still universally cramped. Conr.—7 P. M. Easier in
every respect. Very slight spasms. Stoolspass awayin very
small’quantity, nearly involuntarily; and arequitemud-
dy ; pulse and skin quite natural. Rep. calom.—Sd March.
Slept well; no cramp ; many muddy stools ; pulse mo-
derate ; face natural; skin moist. Very thirsty,—P. M.
Passed much muddy water ; very' sick at stomach all
day ; but did not vomit; pulse and skin natural.—Repr.
Calom. Blister rose well.—4th March. Urine made with
difficulty; some straining; no high action; pulse, skin,
and bodily appearance natural;no stool; tongue very foul.
Mist. Senn ad sol. Alv.—Fot. ad pelv.—P. M. stools have
not been passed freely.—sth March. Much straineddur


ing the night; and has passed a great deal of dark thin
bilious matter. No vomiting; has a feeling of tightness
•jn his breast and abdomen; pulse and skin natural. Repr.
Infus. Senn.—Sago. Wine.—3 P. M. Stomach bad; vo-
mited once on taking the medicine; stools watery, and
- dark green; pulse good. Calomel 91 h. s.—6th March', Pass-
ed a tolerable night; several dark stools;.complains
much of constriction of chest and abdomen. Repr. Cal-
P. M. Sick all day; has ate nothing; no stool; no fever;
tongue not very foul. Repr. Calom.—7th March. Still
sick at stomach, with severe twitches in the feet—other-
wise much as yesterday; stools dark. Cap. iEther. S.
gtt. xxxv Sp. Lavend. C. 5s mist. Camphor. Bss tern,
hor.—P. M. Mouth tender. Easier. Omr. Pil-—Bth
March. Going on well; sickness gone; motions yet dark.
Conr. haust.—9th March. Mouth, face, ears, and throat
sore; stomach still feels constricted ; stools getting na-
tural—Omr. medicam—Hah. gargar. Commun.—loth
March. Only one stool; looks clear and well; and only
complains of his blister. Hab. Decoct. Cinchon. Bii
saepe. Fowl diet.— 11th March. Still has constriction of
breast; tongue clean; stomach good; bowels open. Conr.—
18th March. Complains of pain of bowels and looseness;
tongue foul. Hab. mist, cretae. saepe.—2oth March. Was
last night seized with vomiting, and purging; and is
still sick.—An abscess has formed where he was bled in
the arm. Adde singul. dos. mist, confection. Opiat gri
x, et capt. Bii quater in die.—2lst March. Looseness
stopt; no complaints. Milk.—22nd March. Still a little
purged with griping. Arm quite easy.—24th. Bowels yet
irregular with tenesmus. Cap 01. Ricin. §s. —26th. Five
or six stools with tenesmus. —27th. Bowels painful and
costive. Repr. 01.—30th. Discharged well.—April 7lh.
Returned last night with irregular action of bowels;
purging; and pain as if the guts were knotted; weak-
ness; and want of appetite. Ordered tonicks and as-
tringents.—Bth. A good deal purged last night; stools sli


my.—-9th. Oftly'one stool.—Had ci'atnp in left leg yester-
day.—loth. Was purged, with griping and numbness of
limbs. Utr. Mist. Cretac.—lsth. Bowels yet a little loose.
Complains of pain, or rather oppression, of stomach.
22d. Discharged well,—This man before being attacked
had been much exposed to the sun, whilst at work on
board ship in the river.
CASE FIFTH.
5TH MARCH.
Joseph Jerams, aged 43, a hale, powerful man. . Has
been sick at stomach, with headach, and disposition to
cramp since last night; pulse good ; tongue clean. Belly
open. Capt. calomel. 91 opii gr I.—6th March. Sweated
much in the night. Had three stools with pain of bowels
andflatulence—Habt mist. Senn—P. M. six green moti-
tions. Is qualmish with griping—Repr, pil—7th March,
griping and purging considerable.—l2th Discharged
well.—l4th. About half an hour before 9 A. M. returned,
.with cold skin, covered with clammy sweat; livid
countenance; quick, very small, feeble, fluttering, pulse;
sickness; oppression and pain across the Epigastrick
region and loins; foul furred tongue; loose bowels; la-
borious breathing; and cramp upon moving. Immer
diately took half a dram of ether and fifty drops of lau-
danum. Gave the following account of himself— Re-
mained. well till yesterday, when he was very hard
.-worked in the hold of his ship. At one this morning,
was seized with violent purging, succeeded by vomiting
of yellow fluid; and then by cramps of the legs, hands,
and trunk: all within an hour. Has since been very
frequently purged; and has vomited a dozen of times—
Motions a thin, mealy looking fluid. Ascribes his ill-
ness to drinking bad arrack; but only in moderation—


Has had one stool since became in.—Repr. iEtlier. et
Tinct. Opii. Appr. Empl. Epispast. ventricul. Hab.
Bain. Calid. —9| A. M. a little relieved by the bath ;
cramp confined to the toes and fingers, which are stif-
fened and irregularly twisted.—Stomach sore on being
touched; belly not hard; eyes glassy; features col-
lapsed; very sick and faint; with hurried respiration.
Has been in the bath twenty minutes; pulse 144 ; scarce-
ly discernible; evidently smaller since he went into the
hot water; is extremely thirsty; hot bottles are put to
his feet and hands; he is allowed to mitigate his thirst
by a mixture of sweet spirits of nitre and water.—JJ
A. M. Vomited a little once; one stool, like seethings
of oatmeal; severe spasms of the hands and feet; res-
piration caught by pain of stomach; skin keeps per-
fectly cold.—Pulse distinct, feeble and irregular; some-
times very quick, then slow for one or two beats. Repr.
Tinct. Opii. et caet. —S P. M. Confused and delirious—
Body quite cold; pulse imperceptible; breathing short
and hurried ; face much collapsed; no vomiting; several
stools as before; has had several touches of spasm. Is
ordered to take capsicum with other powerful stimu-
lants; and camphorated spirit externally.—s P.M. Is
sinking; No stool or vomiting ; keeps cold without
pulse; is sunk in the bed; breathing laborious; face
very anxious ; incapable of speaking. —6 P. M. dead.
Dissection. —The intestines here and there flushed, as
if from increased arterial action; and, together with
the stomach, filled with a fluid like that passed off by
stool. A very small number of red, mottled spots in the
stomach; more numerous in the duodenum; gall blad-
der full of thin dark bile.—All else healthy in the abdo-
men and thorax. In the brain, the sinuses, and veins
leading to them gorged with black blood,
I i


CASE SIXTH.
30TH JANUARY.
Private Emerson, His Majesty’s 59th Regiment.—A-
bout one o’clock P. M. seized with purging, vomiting,
great anxiety, and pain of stomach, and spasms in his
limbs. By mistake he was not reported till between five
and six, when he got a dose of laudanum, and was or-
dered into Hospital. On admission, the vomiting and
purging had ceased; the spasms had nearly gone off;
but the pain below the pit of the stomach, and most
distressing anxiety, continued; the countenance was
pale; the eyes heavy, red and inflamed; the pulse weak;
the arms and hands moist, and much below the natural
temperature; and the thirst dreadfully urgent—He
took a scruple of calomel; and at 10 o’clock was bled
to It ounces; more blood could not be procured.—Af-
ter bleeding the pulse was more frequent and weak; the
anxiety continued.—A little before 11, he was put into
the bath—He said he felt easier; and the pulse rose a
little.—A blister was ordered for the pained part of the
abdomen; and at 2 o’clock A. M. another scruple of
calomel was given to him. He slept a little after com-
ing out of the bath. In the morning, the symptoms
were much the same; the pain and fullness of abdomen
continued, with restlessness ; the pulse was very feeble;
and the skin cold. He took another scruple of calomel,
and had a purgative injection which operated.—The
blister had risen partially. He died at one, P. M. ex-
actly twenty-four hours from the lime of his being taken
ill.
Dissection. —On opening the abdomen, the viscera
had a general red appearance. The omentum contain-
ed little fat, but its blood vessels were distended. The
stomach was found inflamed internally ; being of a dus-
ky red colour, and covered with reddish mucus. In sojne


parts the villous coat was abraded. The inflammation
was greatest towards the pylorus. There was no thic-
kening throughout, nor even a single corrugation to bp
seen. The under part near the pylorus was of a dirty
brown colour; some of the calomel was discovered ad-
hering to the stomacli; as it were, imbedded in the mu-
cus. There was no bile in the stomach, but about a
pint of thin watery fluid ; probably what he had drank.
In the abdomen bilious matter of very pale yellow co-
lour was found.—The duodenum exhibited no marks
of disease.—The small and large intestines were of a
preternaturally red appearance. The spleen was much
enlarged, weighing upwards of two pounds. The liver
was of the natural size; colour that of brown nankeen ;
structure hard and firm, cutting like new cheese; con-
taining very little blood; surface rough and covered
with inequalities or small tubercles about the size of
peas; the lower edge of dark colour, bent in, and ap-
pearing as if it had adhered to the neighbouring
parts; the whole internal substance of the viscus of
a light pink colour.—The gall bladder shrivelled,
and containing about half an ounce of dark green bile.
CASE SEVENTH.
5TH MARCH.
Humphrey Blackburn, Seaman, aet, 26th, at eleven to
day, from being in perfect health, was suddenly seized
with trembling and weakness, followed by sickness, vo-
miting, and purging of clear watery fluid ; was purged
nine times. The cramp then ensued ; first in Ids feel,
and afterwards in his thighs;—now, at three o’clock, has
great pain in the abdomen; spasms in the extremities;
thirst; sickness; and looseness ; face blue; skin cold
and covered with clammy sweat; pulse gone at the
wrists. He is ordered to take a dram of aether and fifty
I i 2


: drops of laudanum every ten minutes. Heat to be
applied in every form to the surface.—S£. The cramp
of his thighs exceedingly severe; extreme thirst; great
anguish; whole body blue and cold.— 3A. Pulse now
returning; feels much easier.—s. One stool of muddy
'water; face very blue ; hands deadly cold ; Pulse very
feeble and rapid; anxiety subsists; spasms return on hfs
being moved.—Has taken one dose only of the medi-
cine since last report.—Appr; Empl. vesicat. magn. ab-
domen. Adhr. Bain. Calid.— 10. Still very low, with
' extremely quick, feeble pulse; great oppression and thirst;
no stool.—One slight fit of vomiting; skin cold.—t-
Bath gave temporary relief, but weakened him much';
and the spasms returned immediately upon his leaving
it. Capt. Calomel 9l st. Sum Sp. Lavend. C. 3fs -/Ether,
vitriol, gtt. xxx, in mist, camphor. Bifs duab. lior. Hot
brandy and water—Dry fomentations. —6th March.
Slept a little; had very little vomiting; two watery
stools, slightly mixed with foeces; still oppressed, with
feeble pulse and coldish skin-, tongue loaded with fur.
Hepr. Calom. et caet.—P. M. .Three muddy stools; no
vomiting, nor cramp; much hiccup; pulse nearly
natural; but feeble ; skin coldish —Repr,—7th March.
Some scanty, dark green motions; no spasms or vomi-
ting; hiccough severe; pulse and skin natural; T.
deeply furred, cream white—Conr.—P. M. Once
very sick tb-day; now easier; three dark stools.—
Repr.—Bth March. Had hiccup all night; passed
very little by stool; still sick at stomach ; pulse mo-
derate; tongue very foul—Conr.—P. M. Sick all day
without vomiting; much hiccup; no stool; pulse tole-
rably good—9th March. Slept ill from feeling cold;
had no stool, vomiting, or pain ; pulse rather feeble ;
skin warm; tongue keeps foul; much hiccup. Sum.
Mist. Senn. ad. resolut. vent.—P. M. No change since
morning; four foetid stools, black and pitchy; no


fever. March. Still sick ; at sto-
mach with chilliness; stools dark; hiccup severe; pulse
tolerably good. Hab. vin. calid. pauxill.—P. M”.
'Only one motion; no vomiting; pulse full; skin
warm; face red ; tongue dark; hiccup continues. Has
taken a little nourishment. Repr. calom. 11th March.
Still sick at stomach, and labouring under great op-
pression with constant moaning ;' tongue cleaner;
pulse and face natural; hiccup diminished; stools quite
•black. Repr. Mist. Senn.—P. M. Many pitchy stools;
Jn other respects as in the morning. Repr. Calomel.
,12th March. Passing immense quantities of dark li-
quid matter ; much oppressed, but thinks himself
rather easier ; pulse natural. Repr. Mist.—P. M. Much
.worse since morning; low, oppressed, and nearly in-
sensible ; breathing laborious, with long inspirations ;
heat natural; skin moist; pulse slow, not feeble ; tongue
.and teeth black; no stool; has not taken more
senna. Died at 5 A. M.
Dissection. —Stomach containing a light watery fluid,
and slightly streaked; gall bladder full of dark bile,
and intestines lined with it;- left ventricle of the heart
turgid—all else healthy.
CASE EIGHTH.
17TH MARCH.
John Blackney, seaman, aged 25. On the first of the
month admitted with severe symptoms of scurvy ; from
which lie progressively recovered under the usual reme-
dies, until the 14th, when he was seized with pain of
bowels and looseness, which continued till the 17th, when
he was attacked at ten P. M. with severe - spasms rand
Vomiting, cold sweats, feeble indistinct pulse, and the
other common symptoms of Cholera—At midnight he


was exceedingly low and weak ; his skin was damp and
cold; he had no pulse ; but frequent vomiting and
stools; and severe pains of knees and cramp of limbs.
fie died at day. break—Upon dissection no diseased ap-
pearance whatever could he discovered.
CASE NINTH.
20TH MARCH.
Dr, L. aged 46, of sickly spare habit, in the evening
felt himself a little unwell. At two of the following
morning he took a dose of purgative salts; they ope-
rated about six; at seven he went out to take his usual
ride; he soon returned, and was immediately seized
with vomiting and purging of clear fluid, cold extre-
mities, loss of pulse, blue countenance, oppression and
cramp of hands, and feet. Laudanum, brandy, hot
frictions, and the warm bath were severally used with-
out effect, and he died at half past two, after suffering
great pain from spasm..—He was relieved whilst in the
bath; but one of his attendants thought him weaker on
leaving it.—He was opened next morning; the stomach
especially, and the guts were found relaxed and distend-
ed from loss of tone—ln the stomach was a large quan-
tity of light coloured fluid, mixed with small pieces of
potatoe and undigested food—no redness or appearance
of inflammation through the whole extent of the alimen-
tary canal. Liver natural j gall bladder flaccid; and
containing only a little pale coloured bile.
CASE TENTH.
19TH MAY.
Private Black, His Majesty’s S9th Regiment, was
scired at four this morning with vomiting, which was


soon -followed by pain and giddiness of head,- and great
thirst. On admission into Hospital at 11 o’clock, he
complained much of hesdach and giddiness, sickness*
and . spasms in the legs. His countenance was alter?
ed ; his eyes sunkcolour of body bluish; respiration
hurried; pulse quicjc and contracted; skin covered
with sweat. Cold water was thrown oyer him; he was
rubbed dry, put to bed; and took a little w ar m rice-
water and wine. Soon after, a scruple of calomel was
.given, and the temporal artery was opened.—About
live ounces of blood were taken away. —The pulse sunk;
the extremities became cold; the breathing more
hurried; every thing swallowed was instantly rejected;
and he died at 12 P. M.
D issection. His bodv was opened about ten hours
afterwards—The omentum was loaded with fat, and.
of reddish colour; the stomach much inflamed,
thickened, and of red colour; the lower part of the
oesophagus and upper portion of the duodenum in the,
same state. The other abdominal yiscera were sound,
except that their vessels seemed to contain more b.lood
than usual. The dura mater was reddish ; and its
vessels loaded with blood; in one place there; was slight
extravasation, The lateral ventricles were fujl of
water.
CASE ELEVENTH
CALCUTTA.
21st April, 1819. Mr. R. M. Assistant Surgeon, oat
28, a stout muscular man.—Has beep for Several days
past going about Calcutta, and backwards and forward*
between Calcutta and the General Hospital, in aPalan-
queen. On the 18th and 19th was constipated
in his bowels, but general health good, and spirits high,
especially on the evening of the 19th; and it is ascertain


ed that he had committed no excess in eating or drink-
ing. On the morning of the 20th his bowels became
loose without any assistance from medicine; and he had
early several free stools. About 10 A. M. he was'again
purged, and at the same time vomited freely ; and express-
ed himself much relieved by these evacuations.—He felt
himself so easy after this, that he got into his Palan-
queen, and went from the General Hospital into town.—
On reaching Cossitollah Street he felt languid and thirs-
ty; and he there drank a glass of water.—Feeling him 5 *
Self uneasy he returned to the Hospital before 12
and he was purged very severely.—About 2 P. M. he
sent for Dr. from the Hospital, and said that he
had had about 20 stools since returning to the Hospital 1 ,
copious and watery, but passed without pain; that he
felt very weak and excessively thirsty, but he had no pain
in liisistomach or abdomen, and no spasms of any kind or
in any part of him.—He also hail vomited at several
times a quantity of liquid'matter of no bad taste, which
came away without pain or much retching; and seemed
to be brought up more by a voluntary effort than by the
throes of the stomach. He said he had taken a cup of
tea about 20 minutes before this time, which was retain-
ed.—An injection of an ounce of olive oil and two
drachms of laudanum was ordered, but he objected
to this as being troublesome.—He was then - given
a tea spoonful and a half of laudanum without a-
ny admixture; and lie was allowed to wash his
mouth with a little tea, of which he did not swallow
any. In a few minutes the laudanum was rejected,
along with some of the tea he had taken before it. A
mouthful of hot water was then given him, and he vo-
mited up a considerable quantity of liquid of a whitish
colour, or rather limpid. He then drank nearly a
tumbler of hot water, which remained quietly on hip
stomach. Till this time his pulse was perceptible, buf
very weak; and his eyes were much stink j and the whpilp


hollow of the orbits almost black; other features shrunk
and sharp; body and limbs covered with cold and ex-
cessively copious perspiration. He had another stool,
liquid, but not copious; after which he said his strength
was gone ; pulse .now sunk entirely ; and. the spasms
seized his limbs while getting into bed.—An anodyne
injection of Si 01. oliv. c. Tlnct opli. jij was then ordered;
and another medical man coming in, gave him aboutft
drachm of laudanum, which was retained. Injection
was administered and retained; but spasms became
severe and more frequent. About 4- P. M. he passed the
injection with some fluid matter; but stomach remained
easy: spasms however continued, and now extended to up-
per part of the thighs; and along the abdomen.'Pie had
the injection repeated, and a few spoonfuls of sago and
brandy as hot as it could be administered, given him, and
this last was to be repeated every half hour. In course
of next hour some other medical men came, and gave
him some compound spirit of ammonia in a little bran-
dy ; this immediately rejected, tho’ the stomach had been
perfectly quiet since taking the hot water; and had
retained the sago and brandy; of which he had taken a
little several times. He then had . a purging injection
administered, which operated immediately, and pretty
Many medical men were now on the spot;
but patient’s strength seemed entirely gone; spasms still
severe, extending from toes to the pit of the stomach ;
much tossing and restlessness ; very copious perspiration,
but now considerable heat had returned to the forehead,
on which the perspiration was warm; but that on the
body and limbs was cold and clammy. The sago and
brandy were continued at very, short intervals, and in
small quantities, and hot water in bottles applied to the
feet and stomach ; no more stools and no more vomiting
occurred ; but spasms and restlessness continued. About
half past 8 o’clock he complained that deglutition
Kk


'had become difficult; some brandy end'water was siibsti-
tuted for the ; sago and brandy ; but the patient gradu-
ally sunk; till he expired at 20 minutes before ten
o’clock. ■
On examining the body about 10 hours after death,
the extremities of the body were cold, livid, and stiff;
but a considerable degree of heat was perceptible on the
integuments of the abdomen; and internally the heat
was higher. On laying open the abdomen, the omentum
was found very thin for a man of his habit of body; and
excessively vascular, and of a pretty bright red colour.
The whole tract of small intestines was very red and
florid; and the mesenteric veins turgid, being loaded
with dark coloured blood. Large intestines perfectly
healthy, and natural in colour. The whole external sur-
face of the stomach extremely vascular, and the veins
turgid with dark blood. Liver for the greater part
natural in colour, but one point of right lobe found ad-
hering to the side so firmly, that the substance ofthe liver
was torn in attempting to bring the liver forward; and
at this point it appeared gorged with blood; but the
substance was quite soft when cut into'; lower margin
of left lobe where in contact with the stomach some-
what gorged, and colour a little darker than in other
: parts. Gall bladder moderately distended . with bile of
•usual fluidity, but of a deep olive colour. Spleen quite
hiatural; urinary bladder empty and shrunk; pericar-
dium and heart quite natural; right lung adhering very
-firmly to the sternum.
'- On opening the stomach, about one pound and a half
-of blood, mixed with a little bile, discoverable by the
.smell, was found in its cavity. The whole venous
system of internal-surface exceedingly turgid and load-
ed with black blood, except in a spot of about 4- inches
by 3 immediately below the Cardin, where the veins
were entirely empty, andci spot was discovered where


.the vein- had "given! wajy mid the' blood
: vessels had made its escape.’ The whole .tract of intes-
tines empty ; and when any : parls of alimentary or fe-
culent matter were found, they.were quite natural. In-
flammation on internal surface, of sinallintestiues not so
strongly marked as on the external.
CASE TWELFTH.
A. B. aged .40 ; healthy, and of a remarkably strong
• and robust frame of body ; after dining and eating a
quantity of vegetables and pickles, travelled to Calcutta-'a
■distance of 30 miles on the evening of the 11 th Novembejr
1819. The weather was cold, raw, and very unplea-
sant; with overcast sky, and north-westerly wind. Af-
ter again eating pickles, he went : to bed. About 20
minutes after 1 a. m. he Was roused by a severe shock of
•an earthquake, and inconsiderately exposed; himself'in
his night-dress in an open veranda to the damp night
•air; Ho then felt, that he had 1 caught cold in his
howels ; and in the course of the morning, that is, bek
tween day light and half past ten; had eight loose, watery
motions, with soreness of the abdomen, and sickness of
stomach: short,: however, of vomiting. Between 9 and
•10 a, m. the symptoms were aggravated ; he now vo-
mited once; the cold symptoms came on, with prostra-
tion of strength, diminution of arterial action, and
threatenings of spasm. Betweeen 10 and 11 he was
seized with cramp in the toes. He was now seen for
the first time by his medical attendants. All the signs
of collapse were then strong upon him ; the cold, clam-
my blue surface, shrunk features, shrivelled skin, pearly
eyes, anxiety, thirst, and small hurried pulse. The vo-
miting and purging had ceased ; and from this time for-
ward, there was no-discharge from the bowels, except-
ing a small quantity.of fluid passed off -by the amis,
K k 2


and so perfectly transparent that it did not in the
least discolour the sheet underneath. The tongue was
.foul, .but moist. The mind was firm and unclouded as
in perfect health. The spasms were yet confined to the
itoee, and lower part of the feet. Hot brandy and water
was immediately given to him, as often, and in as large
quantities, as the stomach would bear. Hot bottles
were put to his lower extremities; he was covered with
blankets, and constantly, rubbed all over. His arm
.was instantly tied up, and blood drawn by a large 'ori-
fice. This was a little before eleven. The operation was
again repeated a little after twelve. The blood at first
came quite freely;- but afterwards slackened, as the ex-
haustion and feebleness of pulse increased. Latterly,
it came with great difficulty, and only in little Jets or
drops, as it was,urged along the veins by the hands of
the assistants. In all about forty ounces were procur-
ed. . Further endeavour was then given up as entirely
useless. Shortly after the first vein was opened, he took
ten grains of calomel, and one of opiilm. Mean-
while, the symptoms were rapidly, running on. The
spasms, which for a time seemed to yield to the first
•bleeding, returned to the feet ;, and. seized the wrists
and fingers.—The pulse sunk, so as scarce to: be per-
ceptible. The thirst, anguish, . and restlessness were
intolerable. The cold sweat ran in streams from the
forehead and temples; the patient could not rest a mo-
ment in one place; and as the smallest motion produced
a renewal of the cramps, liis sufferings were cruelly
aggravated by every change of posture. The most sin-
gular feature in this case, was the regular succession
and rise of the spasms. From midday, when they had
reached the calves of the legs, they gradually ascended,
by regular attacks coming on at intervals of ten minutes
.or a quarter of an hour, first to the thighs, and hips,
then to the muscles of the belly and back, and lastly to


the diaphragm and - -prajcordio. '.As thfcyseized th«
psoae muscles, they were-distinctly seen to raise thft
pelvis and thighs. The abdomen was .now hard and
swelled. When the spasms had reached the trunk and
diaphragm, theyprodueed hiccough and excruciating
in the chest, back,and loins; w i thafcel j rig asi f a sharping
stf ument were striking through the breast. Nothing could,
be more affecting than to hear thepatient Accurately .des-
cribe their progressive rise ; exclaiming, iu thpmidstpf
torment, *> that now they had gottohis thighs, thentp
his back, then to his chest :” Last of all, that f ‘ they
had reached the heart, and all would soon .be oyer.”
This scene of agony lasted till abopt two o’clock? after-
which there was little else than a Inst expiring struggle
for life.— All pulse was noyv gone ; the motionpf the heart
scarcely to be felt; as the circulation stopt, water began
to collect in.’the air cells of the lungs, and partial suffoca-*,
tion was evinced by deep moans, and long drawn, broken
inspirations. The mind, which from the beginning bad.
been remarkably clear and composed, now became,
clouded. The patient became blind and talked inco-y
herentlv; but these symptoms might perhaps beascrih-.
ed to stupor caused by the large quantities of laudanum,
and brandy given to him in the hopes of checking the.
disease. Finally, hesunk about S P. M. exactly jive
hours from the first appearance of the decided symp-
toms of the attack. The body was not examined.
CASE THIRTEENTH.
NEW ANCHORAGE.
NOVEMBER 4TH, 1817.
; George Frith, Seaman H. C. S. Carnatic, a stout heal-
thy man, at 9 o’clock last night was attacked with severe
vomiting and purging of a fluid quite transparent, - ac-
companied with griping, and soon after followed by


spasms over the trunk and extremities, but particularly
in the muscles of the calves of the legs; the pulse was
small and intermitting.
Large draughts of tepid water were given and repeat-
ed until the vomiting ceased. To allay the spasmodic ac-
tion 40 drops of the tincture of opium were given; this
not having the desired effect, the dose was repeated with
the addition of 3i vitriolic iEthcr. This allayed them
for a short time ; but they returned. The dose was
again repeated in §iij of Hollands; but without .effect.
The patient was then taken out of his hammock, rind had
three buckets of cold water dashed over him ; he was
then dried, and put in again.' This, together With
friction over the abdomen, relieved the. spasms for a
term; but they again made their appearance; griss of
opium was now given, and repeated in ah hour ; from
this he seemed to obtain much relief, At 12 o’clock
he again became considerably worse, accompanied With
difficulty of breathing; pulse-scarcely perceptible ; lips
Of a livid colour ; 3 I of aetber with gt L of Laudanum
was given. The abdomen was well rubbed with a liniment
of Spt. of wine, camphor and laudanum. By this treat-
ment the spasms gradually subsided; grx, of calomel were
then given. ’ From this time, till 5 o’clock in the morn-
riing he continued free from the spasm's, ami slept pretty
well; when he rose to go to stool. He returned to his
hammock, and had remained there about half an hour,
when a person by accident discovered that he was dead.
After death tlie gastrochemii muscles were very much
drawn upwards, and very rigid, . From the suddenness
of his death, it ryould appear, that the spasms had re-
turned upon his’going into his hammock, and seized on
flic muscles of respiration, or perhaps the heart itself;
and produced instant death.


CASE FOURTEENTH.
In the first week of October, 1818", the poatswain’s
mate of the Phoenix fell down on deck; while at work,
with most complete and sudden prostration of strength
and loss of speech, but with ever)’ agonized expression of
great suffering, cold sweats, shrunk features, and tnbqttr
ins; the' contents of his stomach running - from. Ins
mouth as if a sluice had been opened —Two pounds of
blood w'erc taken from him immediately; he was put
into a warm hath, &c. had swallowed nearly 200 drops
oflaudanum before he began to revive. After which he
fell into a profound sleep. .This treatment was followed
up by evacuating’the bowels, and application .of mus-
tard poultices to the abdomen.—THe man ' is now,lOth
October, nearly well. •
CASE FIFTEENTH.
10th October. John Chapman; Seairtad H, C. S.■.-War-
ten Hastings, having gone on ' shore* on the Island of
Saugor for the purpose of interring the body of another
Cholera patient, was left in charge of the boat,' while
the others proceeded to a proper place for depositing
the corpse of their messmate/—bpou returning they
found tills man lying retching violently ih’.thebottom of
the boat; his extremities were cold, cramps had attack-
ed his limbs; violent spasms had seized the muscles of
the abdomen the says he was suddenly attacked with a
pain' in his stomach, violent retching, vomiting," griping,
and - purging; quickly succeeded;by cramps -in 1 his
limbs. When lie arrived bri-boaM he‘ was in tins
lowest state of depression; the disease -^ had only
attacked him 3 hours before—He left the ship -at'4
P. M. and arrived at BP. M.—R. T. ' Opii. gU.' d.
in hot brandy and water; rejected.—The Laudanum


repeated to .120 drops in the ,saxiie rfteflstruutn while
. h«; is,in the bath.. . Habt. stat. calptn. gr. xx. Retained
H, 9 P, jMt The symptpms' seem rapidly to increase
,ill,Violence, The depression seems;to warn us that-the
scene,is,.nearly finished—rCJapiat. Opii. gr. ,11. Calo-
ippl.gr. iiiomii. semihor. Hot brandy and water ad libit.
H. 10,,T* M.—Extremities livid and insensible.—No
pulsation .returning to the extremities ; heart palpitates
,a.nd in.teripits .in pulsation. 12th. .Departed this life about
A. M.
CASE SIXTEENTH.
11th October.--—Edward Powers, Boatswain Warren
Hastings, suddenly seized with depression, sickness
and pain in his stomach; tenderness and griping of the
abdomen; quickly followed by violent vomiting and
purging of a clears watery .fluid; stomach rejecting iu-
.sUnuly whafis taken in; great thirst, pulse 130 ; very
small, and almost indistinct. T. opii gtt. 80 in hot brandy
and water,; rejected. Hab. opii. solid gr. v. Hab. ca-
Jom. gr. xx. Rejected.—Repr. calomel gr.xv. Retained.
■H.'lO P.. M., Griping and purging little abated; vp-
-niiting only occasionlly, pf fluid taken into the stomach,
Capt. Opii grss calomel, gr. iv. quart, q. q. hor.
J2th. The move violent, syipptoms have in a great
measure subsided; passes thiq watery matter by stool,
almost insensibly ; muph thirst; pulse. 120; partial
perspiration; starting in his sleep —Calom gr, iji quartq,
P. hi, Complains of slight heacjach and vertigo •
-painjjp bis -back qnd loins,; ;tlqrst .very great-; tongue
pulse 120.; great heatof skip.—Qmr. 80l e ca-{
Join,,Cftpt,Camphor gr. iii pal. gr.; 11 quart; q. r hor.
JBib. depoct. herd, H. 10 P. M,. Apparently composed,
sleep, quiet and. Uninterrupted ;.genoral and profuse per-:
spiration; puke 100, more full. 13th. Towards mor


ning, skinbecarne hot and dry; delirium ensued.—Tongue
is now incrusted with a dark brown fur ; thirst very
great; pulse 120 ; very weak. Repr. pil.—H. 5’P./Sl.'
Delirium subsided;' perspires freely ; mouth’ begins to’,
get sore. Habt. Decoct. Gin chon. Ibj. vin. Rub. gij. Capt.
giv quater in die.—H. ,10 P. M.‘ Greater part of
the, medicine rejected. Purging 'continues;
recurs.—Applied Emplast. Epispast. inter scapul.—ifth.
He is very low ; delirium, low and muttering all flight.]
Tongue very foul; thirst unabated ; Pulse 130; very 1
weak and tremulous—R. Sp. iEther. sulph. 51ss Sp. La-,
vend. comp, gtt xl. Aq. Font giv. aq. Cinnam gii cap.
Bi tert. q. hor. Vin Rubr. ad libit.—H. 5 P. M. Depres-
sion rapidly increases ; pulse very quick ; 'scarcely per-
ceptible at the wrists or ankles ; delirium has almost
entirely gone ; ! complains much of the Soreness, of his
mouth.--Conr. medic. Appr. pedib. sinapism, sinap.r l —
Hiccups have ensued ; cold perspiration over his
limbs ; pulsation has forsaken the wrists and ankles;
passes his urine and focces involuntarily.—H. 3. P.
J.I. Departed this life,.
CASE SEVENTEENTH.
CAWBOIRE; CASE OF LT. M.
APRIL 28TH, 1818.
; Has been complaining 4 or 5 days of being sick at
stomach; but did his duty,-until 7 A. M. this moi-hing
on parade, suddenly obliged to quit from a watery purg-■
in'g.—At 10 A. M. informed me of the latter, and that'
he feh inclined to throw up. Sent, hint calomel g. xx, ;
and desired him,to wash itdown with laudanum, 40
drops in 2 oz of peppermint water; staid down an hour*
had some sleep, and awoke with cramps in the calves of
his legs; he neglected to inform-.me,, and that he had-
retching. —Thinks he threw up some of the calomel,
LI


At 5 p. M-. went-over and found him walking about j
retched before, me 5 pulse small; at this time had no
spasms; liyid circle round the eyes; watery purging
Continues ; gave immediately 2 oz. of, castor oil, which
staid down an hour, but on lps drinking a mouthful of
peppermint water, retching again came on; and a part of
the oil was thrown up.—7P. M. Was put into the warm
bath ; Spasms of his legs, thighs, hands and arms fre-
quent. — 8 P. M. Put a blister to the pit, of the stomach.
Ten,minutes past 8 gave him 2 oz. of castor oil; staid
down, and evidently immediately relieved the spasms, as
hg remained altogether quiet; and had been previously,
complainingand crying out much; watery purging at in-?,
torvals,— l past, 8. Repeated the calomel; washed down
as before ; no vomiting now. \ past 9, Spasms occasion-
ally of the neck and lower jaw; much oppression and
jactitation ; blister rising; feet warm; hands rather cold ;
pulse very quick, small and feeble; 2 watery stools since
the calomel,—Ten minutes to 10 P. M. Cramps of the.
legs. | past 10. Pulse more full; spasms transient; blis-.
ter rising; less oppression.—£ past .11-. ■ Removed the
blister; complaining much of it; oppression much
less ; pulse fuller, and hands warmer.—29th April,
1 A. M. Retched once, having taken, a mouthful of
warm brandy, and water; brought nothing up. —s
minutes past 1. A watery stool; no oppression; hands
warm; pulse much fuller; complains much of the blis-
ter, which had risen well.—£-past 1 A. M. Repeated the
oil, but almost immediately rejected the greater part,
with much water}’fluid; then sunk down, and slept for 1
half an hour.—At 2 A. M. some iueoherency and subsul- 1
tus tendinum ; tongue white and loaded ; but moist at
the edges,—4. A. M. has been - rather restless ; but no
complaint except from the blister ;no vomiting or stool-
since.-r^S.minutes past 4. A. M. A watery stool.—past
4. A. M, repeated the calomel g. xx; but without lau


d?mum.—2o minutes past4i A. MV Another watery stool.
J past 5. A M. Another.—£>. A. M. Tongue cleaner, but
dry.—7. A. M. Pulse not so gpod as at midnight; hand*
colder; feet natural; countenance anxious; eyes sunk>
with a livid circle round them; much annov-anc?
from the blister.—B A. M. A stool, watery, but with a
very slight tinge of green (all former ones being color-
less) —I past 9A,M, A stool; feculent matter about the
size of pins heads 1 ■to be discerned; makes no com-
plaint; says he is much-better; no pain.—2o minutes
past IQ A, M. Administered a glyster; dozes at intervals}
hands and skin nearly of natural warmth ; pulse fuller,
but still very weak and quick; tongue more moist.
to 11 A. M. Passed the injection, slightly tinged.with
foecesof dark green colour,—-Noon, a stool as at 9.—| past
noon gave him Pulv. Jalap, gr. xxx Super—Tart. Po-
tass. gr. xl. —1 P. M. complains much of heat; skin ra-
ther warm and dry; hands warm; pulse quicker, but
not weaker; countenance not so anxious; much flatu-
lence ; medicine stays down.—-30 past IP.M. A stop!
somewhat better than the last; passed urine for the first ,
time since his attach. —£ to 2 P. M. a stool, thq same,—-
3 P. M. Threw up the Jalap mixture,—4 P. M. A stool,
if any thing more consistent; passed some urine also, —10
minutes past 4 P. M. Another stool; evident green bile
mixed. —\ pasts. Another; not so good—Sunsetgave ca-
lomel. gr. xx.—£ to BP. M. Vomited a little phlegm and
Conjee, but Ido not think any calomel; sleeps at inter-
vals, but is restless, and complains of heat.—£ past 8
P.M; Vomited again; inclined to sleep.—-9 P. M. Retch-
ing much,—2s minutes past 9 P. M. A stool and passed
urine.—Midnight. A stool more copious; has slept f of
an hour, but is d-lirious; pulse small and weak; com-
plains cf difficulty of breathing; £ ofan hour after, ano-
ther stool, much the same,—3oth April, 4 A. M. Ano-
ther stool, more brownish color.—-6 A. M. Better;
pUlse and look unproved.—J past 6 A. M. Took
JL 1 2


calomel gx.—B A. M. A stool, dark green bile m'xed.—
ll ‘A. -M. : Repbated-calomel'gr. :: x; sleeps quietly at
intervals.—-£• past 2P.M. A dark ‘ green coloured
stool. 10 minutes to 4 P. M. Calomel repeated,-—Sun-
set retched slightly; but did not bring any thing up.—9
P. M. Gave him a pill.—Extr: Coloc: C. et Gum Scam--
mon.'as g. iij.—£ an hour after retched, but brought
nothing up.—lst May, 3 A. M. A dark' stool, more
copious'than any yesterday; not slept much.—J past
i All-'M; Another almost black, but more consistence.
—-6 A. M. A stool, dark green bilious matter.—J.to 7
A. M.’Another, more yellow mixed with the dark green.
—-8 A. M. Dark stool, small in quantity. 10 minutes A.'
M.‘Another, dark green, more consistency.—2o minutes
past 10 A. M. Another, not so past 10 A. M.
Took" calomel gx. —h past IP. M. Repeated the calomel.
—-4 P. M. A stool, dark green, bilicus consistency.—
Sunsefa slight one.—7 P. M. More copious dark green.
---9 P.TVI. Repeated the pill of colocynlh and scammony.
2d May,' 6 A. M. Good night; 3 stools; did not see
them; one'copious.—B A.M. A stool, better.—J past dA.
M. Gave Jalap and Cream of Tartar as before, which
sfaid'down;' his" mouth slightly affected with mercury;
his stools how being nearly of a natural color and consis-
tency. From this time I considered him as convalescent.
CASE EIGHTEENTH.
JOSEPH WIDOWS, PRIVATE 21ST DRAGOONS,
AGED 39 YEARS.
. April 28th, 9 P. M. Has bad a looseness of his bow-els
for some time; was seized this afternoon with violent
spasms of the abdomen, arms, and legs, with vomiting
and purging, which still continue.: Pulse small and fre-
quent; tongueclean; thirst intense; skin cool, —R. Calo-
mel. gptt.9l statim. Empl. Lyttte. scrob. Cord, applicetj


; and after the Calomel R. Aq. Menthas 3iss Tinct. Opii.
gtt. XL Ether'Vitriol gt. xxx. —10 P. M. No vomit-
ing, but frequent spasms and purging, R. Magnes. Vit-
riol. is solve in Aqua menthae, cui ndde iEther Vitriol,
.gtt. XL. to be taken’during the night.—29th. Has had
no vomiting during the night, but frequent spasms and
several watery; stools; countenance much dejected;
eyes dim; clamminess of..the skin; pulse small and
frequent. Semicupium ;' to have brandy and water for
common drink. Sago and Madeira.—R Calomel.pptt-
gr. V. Opii. gr. ss 3 tiis horis..' Blisters to be applied to
the calves of the.legs.—7 A. M. Was faint after" being V
few minutes in the bath; appears greatly debilitated i eyes
sunk; no vomiting or purging; R mist. Gampt. Fss
iEther Vitriol.’ g. xxx Tinct. Opii. gt xxx. Has
taken sago and a little brandy' and water.—B A. M.
A copious watery, stool.' Bept. liaust. dimid: quant:
omni bora.—l2 Hora. .Has had some sleep, and-feels
better; has taken nourishment, and brandy and wafer;
R. Calom : pptt. gr. v Opii. gr. ss 2 horis.—} past
5. Has been.dozing a great deal; no vomiting; one
watery stool without any- bilious appearance,'-which
has always been the case; no pain or spasm ; pulse bet-
ter ; skin .of natural temperature. Com. calom, & opium.
I'nunrgr. ungt. hydrag. 3k—J past 8 Contr.pil,— 30th_
Has passed a. quiet night;- slept tolerably well; no
sickness: 2 stools ; appears niuch dejected.—G A. Af.
Pulse small and weak, with coldness of the skin; has
taken his medicine and nourishment. R.. Mist, camphor
gij /Ether, Vitriol-gt. xx Tinct. .opii. gt. x 2 horis.—
9 A. M- Has been sleeping; no vomiting or purg-
ing. Habl. ok ricin. gi aq. menthce |i statim.—Vespere..
No stool since the morning., R. calom. ppt.g. xv.—
May Ist. . /Slept well, and feels better; had one.motion;
thU morning. Kept, calom. gr. x.—2d. Is much better.?
R. calom. pptt. gr. v ,opii. gr.ss. ter in die.—3d, Ap- ,
peared going on well an hour ago; but is now seized


with convulsions; pulse in,ter,mlls; countenance r arid
' i/Ethcr Vitriol gt. xxx Tinct. ppii
? gtCXL. The convulsions continued till the afternoon;
and he died at -J past 6 o’clock.
.C)n opening-the cavity of theabdomen, and examin-
ing the intestines, intro-susceptld of ■ tlie * Ileum to the
extent of 1.2 inches was found tohave taken place, where
there was considerable inflammation, and thickening
:Of the coat of the intestine.' Inter-susceptid was also
found in two other, parts’of the : lieu in; but no altera-
tion'of structure could; be'discovered; The Colon was
: ©£ks natural length, but,'contracted in various places ;
the stomach was greatly contracted; not larger in cir-
cumference than the colon, but shewed no appearance
jofipflamrnatiou.; the liver gorged with blood; the gall
.bladder; full of bile .of a dark green color; the lac-
teals distended, with chyle, : and ; having a knotted ap-
pearance; the mesentery turgid.
CASE NINETEENTH.
JOSEPH TINKER, PRIVATE 21ST DRAGOONS,
AGED 24 YEARS.
1818. April 29th'. Was' seized 'tb-day about 1 o’clock ,1
with headach aiid nausea; pulse full; skin hot. About 1
ozVpf blobd-werc subtracted ; and ten grains of calomel
given,’whjch produced two bc'lhree bilious stools: shortly,
dfterHe was'attacked with spasihsim different parts ‘pf
Hls’bioily/Chiefly fri Ins limbs ; bis extremities became
cblcfj’aiifl a clai'umV sweat covered his face, neck, and
breast, fie'immediately, got some arrack, and his belly,
atfd' st’oniach' were also rubbed with it; his bowels had
and it was ascertained, that he
had rathfer freely yesterday.— ■!> p. M. He
has b%nisi ,J 'ftie’\ , /.hrm"batlji and had a dfaught ofmther;.
aifdlaad anutii 'ad g. XL; pulse still very feeble, and ex


dremities - cold.—6 P.' M. : Emp.- iLyttae- Epignstri,
upplicet.—Hept. iEiher Vitriol gt. xx. Tinct; opii. gt.
xomni hora.—re past 8. Hasdiad no return of sickness,
but one watery stool;: pulse, smalland weak; countenance
sunk; clamminess of .the skin ;. had once a return of
Spasms of the legs;'thirst intense. R.calomel
ni.—Expired at \ past 12 o’clock.
Dissection. —On opening the cavity of the abdomen,
‘there appeared great vascularity of the omentum,
stomach, and small intestines; the liver was perfectly
sound, but of a light color; the gall bladder distended
with bile of,a dark green color; the-stomach greatly
distended; the small intestines in a state of incipient
inflammation—‘and the colon contracted so much, as
hot to be'of larger circumference, than a man’s little
finger, ’ excepting a small portion, which was of the
natural ‘size.
CASE TWENTIETH.
THOMAS LOW, PRIVATE 21ST DRAGOONS,
AGED 33 YEARS.
April SO, 1818. 6 A. M. Was seized last night at
eleven o’clock, with violent cramps in the abdomen; fol-
lowed by vomiting and purging, which have continued
all night.. He is now extremely debilitated ; pulse not to
be felt; coldness and clamminess of the skin; has cramps
of the calves of. his legs; and passes involuntary stools;
countenance shrunk; eyes sunk; has taken a. draught
of 60 drops of Tinct. opii with'3o drops of /Ether and
afterwards gij,—of brandy.—Trismus came on;' he was
placed in a warm bath, but could not remain many
minutes. He has taken since another draught of/Ether,’
Sic. as before; also 6ome ; sago and madeirn.—Habt.
Calomel Bi in Pulv. Frictions to the extremities. R~’
Emp/' Eytlaei JEgigaslri.—9 A. -M. No return- of


/vomiting or purging; skin cold; countenance almost
black; eyes glassy and dim with turgescence of the
vessels; pulse scarcely to he felt.—Haht. 01. Ricini
in aq. menthae —Expired at 10 o’clock.
Dissection. On opening the cavity of the abdomen, the
omentum, stomach, arid small intestines appeared in a
state ofincipient inflammation, and the colon considera r
bly contracted. The liver was indurated; the gall
bladder full of bile of a dark green colour.
CASE TWENTY-FIRST.
May lid, 1818. Francis Carpenter , Private 21st
Dragoons, a strong and muscular man, aged 25
years. Was relieved from guax-dyesterday evening,'
on account of a purging and inclination to vomit
which came on in the afternoon. He had no spasms
or cramp; was ordered a solution Antirn: Tart,
grij. in magnesj vitriol.,, 5i which operated freely on his
bowels; but he' has had violent cramps in the arms,
legs, thighs, and .abdomen during . the greater part of
the night, with frequent vomiting and purging. Pulse
small, weak ;and irregular;., countenance shrunk ; and
coldness of the skin.- —Be .ZEther. Vitriol, gt. xxx Tinct.
opii. gt., LX; after..which calomel Bi with Si of
jirandy—-Semjcupium. In removing ••him! from the
bath a little brandy and water was given him,- which
produced sickness; he then took Tinct. Opii. gt. XL
iEther Vitriol, gt.. xxx : Spt. Vim .Galliae si. rn. aud'
afterwards Calomel Bi cum.,Opii. grj.; frictions to the-
skin, and a blister to the abdomen. A vein in the:
arm was opened, as his pulse, appeared oppressed, and
6 oz. taken, when the. pulse .began to flutter, .and the-
ligature was removed.—lo A. M.—No sickness; one ■
Watery stool; but, the cramps unabated; pulse small
and weak; tongue furred ; Be pi. ricini sji in aq. month.


gr; cum iEther Vitriol: gl. xxx. Blisters' tb be
applied to the calves of the legs. Enem.: Anodyn:—;
1 P. M.—The injection retained about half an hour •
no vomiting or purging ; spasms still violent; pulse ra-
ther fallen. Habt. calomel: ppt. 3i. in puiv.—6 P. M.
—Seems rather better; no vomiting or purging; cramps
somewhat diminished; had at 3 o’clock 01. ricini |i.
in aq. month, cum /Ether Vitriol: gt. xxx.; Pulse
rather stronger; tongue foul. R—Calomel- ppt.gr.
x, opii. gij. statim. Vespere—R 01. ricini. §j. ut
antca. Enema Porgans.—llora 9. P. M; R Calo-
mel ppt. gt. x ; et g. v. 4 boris.— 3 A.M. 4th—Has
passed a tolerable night; 2 stools; no vomiting, but fre- •
quent retching; spasrnsstilltroublesome; pulsesmall, and
irregular; tongue furred, and dry ; complains of intense
thirst. Has taken 5 gr. of calomel since 10 o’clock.
—-Habt. Pil. opii gi.—Brandy largely diluted for com-
mon drink.—, 7 A. M. Semicupium—R of: Ricini’
gi aq. menlh. Hi iEther gt. xxx.—Bore tlie bath:
well, continued in 2,5 minutes—R calomel, gr. vet opii:
gi 4 lions.—-6 P. M. Plas thrown up the castor oil;
and' vomited frequently.—Dysuria; several watery
stools; pulse small and weak—surface cold. Habt. •
Calomel 31 01. Ricini By aq. menth : gi— -9 P. M.
The castor oil retained, but the surface more cold;,
pulse not to be felt. Plabt. calomel gx.—May Stii. Died-
at 3 o’clock A. M. , .
Dissection. On opening the thorax, the lungs appeared.
Collasped. On opening the cavity of the abdomen, the
stomach was found to be greatly contracted, not larger
than the colon, and its inner coat singularly cqrruga-.
ted or drawn up into folds, particularly near the car-,
dia, but no'appearance of inflammation.—-The colon of
its 'usual size.—lntus-susceptio of a few inches of
the Ileum without any change of structure. —The ves-
sels of the liver turgid with blood; the gall bladder
M m


distended with bile of a dark green colour; the other
viscera natural.
CASE TWENTY-SECOND
The following is a minute dissection of a Native dying
under the usual symptoms of exhaustion.
MEERUT.
The person being a stranger, and not claimed after
death, I easily succeeded in examining the body on
the following morning, which when brought to me ex-
• • .O O’ . - vP
nibited far greater tension and rigidity of the muscles of
the neck and upper extremities, than is usually the se-
quel of death in ordinary cases; but, externally, there
was no other particular appearance. On opening the tho-
rax, the heart, externally, and in all its cavities, was' per-
fectly natural; the lungs, however, were peculiarly flaccid
and collapsed, and of a singularly bluish colour; this be-
ing the only exception to a natural slate of the thoracic
viscera. On dividing theparietes of the abdomen, and ex-
posing its contents to view, my attention was first direct-
ed to the appearance of the stomach; which was unusual-
ly distended, and contained a portion of fluid, but by no
means proportioned in quantity to the great distention
of the organ. —Its external surface, that of the mesente-
ry, and the whole of the intestinal tube, exhibited con-
siderable marks of inflammation; which on further ex-
amination, was found to have affected all the peritoneal
coverings thronghout the abdomen ; including the sur-.
faces of the whole intestinal canal, from the duodenum
to the rectum. —The external appearance of the liver
was also natural; save that of its colour, which, like un-
to the lungs, was singularly and unusually purple.—On
examining its inner surface, the peritoneal covering and
cardiac margin of the left lobe were inflamed considera-
bly; as was also the gall bladder, which contained 2oz.


of bile, of a Ihick consistence, of a deep black colour.— .
Greatturgidity of blood was evinced, on cutting theparenv
chematous substance with the scalpel.—The pancreas,
spleen, and kidnies appeared natural; and had no marks
of inflammation.—A double ligature was now passed on
the extremities of the stomach, each including an inch of
the oesophagus and duodenum; when the organ, was
removed from the body for closer examination. —On.
dividing its parietes from the cardiac to the pyloric
extremity, a pinkish white coloured fluid, in quantity,
24 oz. escaped (into a glass vessel placed to receive it),
closely resembling barley water, or thin conjee. —-This
fluid quickly deposited a sediment of a light brown co-
lour, more like to the deposition from fresh made barley,
water, than to any other substanpe,—-The ductus com-
munis was pervious to a probe, and of natural appearance.
—There was no bile in the stomach, such as that con-
tained in the gall bladder; nor any other substance,
save the fluid already noticed.—The inner surface of
the stomach was generally inflated, • and in small
patches, but chiefly about the cardia and pylorus.-—Tlje
external view of the inflammation of this organ, was that
of thick spiral lines.—Similar also to that qf the intes-
tines,—The rugae of the stomach were so diminished in
size, as to be only traced with difficulty. The duodenum,
next in order, and the whole intestinal canal, were now
carefully examined, but exhibited no marks of bile, in-
flammation, or fceces in their uppcrsurfacc; tho’ a porti-
on of fluid, not unlike unhealthy pus, was more or less
diffused throughout the canal. ■ The unusual distention
O •
of the stomach was common to the whole intestines; the
bladder was found empty, and of natural appearance;
but the peritoneal coverings of the pelvis, like those in
the abdomen, had suffered from inflammation.
The appearances thus described, not seeming to me
sufficient of. themselves to account for death, I next
Mm 2


examined the contents of the cranium,-’ The skullcap,
on 'Being removed, exhibited a very considerable de-:
gree of inflammation on the external surface of the?
dura niater; and an apparent circumscribed:, effiisiona
On the cerebral surface pointed out a rupture of the-
longitudinal sinus in its occipital portion. The'durat
mater, on being carefully detached from’ before-back-'
Wards, displayed a rupture of the sinus,'and extravaaa-:
tiori to the size of a crown piece at the junction of two 1
vehiS, formed by the superficial cerebral plexus, inosen->
lating with the sinus itself. More minute dissection of
the falx demonstrated this rupture; also a high: degrees
of inflammation on the upper surface of tile brain and.
pia mater ; also evident venous congestion, and, in some-
parts of this membrane, a thickened serous effusion.-
()n examining the lateral cavities, about 2 ozs. of
fluid escaped from the left ventricle ; more* however
wax found in the remaining three. The cerebellum was
(5F a natural appearance, and free from any marks of
vascular action ; but the membranes lining the case of
the skull were’tdiiSiderably affected.
CASE TWENTY-THIRD.
DELHI.
‘ Pahar Sihg, Sepoy Light Company Ist Battalion sth
Regiment Native Infantry ; a stout young man ; admit-.
t&hJidy 2Sd,'6 P. M.— While on duty,'was seized with
purging ;' he' vomited 3 times in the course of 2 hours,
■without violent retching; lie took some sherbet to allay
£He sickness, turd'a burning sensation in his stomach.— ;
tjfidhbeihg brought into the Hospital he vomited once j
fttffefrtities cold ; countenance sunk; and pulse scarce-*
ly perceptible.---A scruple of calomel and 100 drops of
laudanum were administered,—Did not vomit after the
cal din dl .---The 6ol(l in the extremities increased, not-
withstanding the use of frictions with warm cloths,- &c.
and in less than an hour* at 7 P. M. he died.


CASE TWENTY-FOURTH.
- Khemma, ' Ordnance driver, died in a Dooly on the
Way to the Hospital. He had' had considerable' purg-
ing, with slight vomiting for 5 or 6 hours.--»Had drank
a considerable quantity of cooling and diluent liquors.—
This case is mentioned on account of the;, dissection,
as the disease followed its natural course without any
medicine having been administered.—Upon opening the.
abdomen the stomach was completely distended with a'
fluid resembling conjee wafer.—Thevessels of the stomach
and bowels turgid with blood ; and one spot on the inneri
coat of the former, about the size of the palm of tlie
hand, highly Inflamed; a general inflammation over the
bowels; the other viscera more turgid with blood than
rtatural, but not otherwise affected.—/Not the slightest,
appearance of bile in the gall bladder, ducts* stomach,
or intestines. Head not inspected.
CASE TWENTY-FIFTH.
Oinneo Opudeah, Sepoy Light Company Ist Bitf.
sth N. I. Admitted 31st July, 7 AM. Complains of
slight purging, without pain or griping; skin and pulse
nearly natural; tongue foul; purging came on about 2
A. M.---Habt calomel gr. viij. x'hei. gr. xxv. At 11
A. M. hands and arms getting cold ; pulse scarcely'
perceptible; countenance sunk as in Cholera.—
burning heat in the stomach.—Upon the most parti-
cular enquiry it is found that he has not vomited
once; and the calomel and rhubarb remained on his
stomach.---Had 6 watery stools.—Habt Calomel E)I ct
Tinct. opii Si in aq menth. Pip Bi—2 P. M. Continued
frictjons with the bands and warm cloths were used
without any effect.—Also blistered over the Epigastric
region with Tinct. Ctlntharid. -At 2- Pi M; he. died.’


He vomited one mouthful of watery fluid while in arti-
culo mortis; there was no vomiting during the whole
of the disease except this,
CASE TWENTY-SIXTH.
Doorblju Sing Sepoy, Sth Company Ist Battalion sth
Native Infantry. Admitted 30lh July at IQ A. M. A few
minutes before 10 A. M. had been seized with rather
severe vomiting and purging. Was previously in perfect
health. Extremities cold and clammy; pulse just percep-
tible at the wrist; tongue foul; burning sensation at th§
stomach ; great anxiety and restlessness.—V, S. statim
ad 3xxiv. Habt-calomel 9l etTinctopii gtt. 100—11 A.
M. heat of stomach lessened; but the vomiting continues.
Repr. calomel ct Tinct opii.—2 P. M. vomiting has
ceased; uneasiness and anxiety gone ; pulse percepti-
ble; extremities still cold; skin blistered by the Tincture
of Cantharides.—s P. M. Habt. Infus. Sennas *iv.—
S 1 st, 6. A. M. A restless night; has been purged by the
senna freely.—No bile in his stools ; no vomiting ; very
weak.—Habt. inch Spt. "Vim li. Habt. Sulph.Magnes. Si
G P. M. freely purged by the salts; mouth sore;
longue still foul; no appearance of bile in his stools,
August Ist, no complaint but weakness and sore mouth;
tongue cleaner; some mixture of bile in his stools. Habt.
Tinct. Sennae Si —August 2d. Convalescent—Cent,
Tinct. senile, —sth. Convalescent.—7th. Discharged,
CASE TWENTY-SEVENTH.
NEGPORE.
. ScwbuccusHaviJdar; probable age 38 years; admitted
evening 80th May. Symptoms: excessive vomiting;


frequent watery stools; with griping pain in the bowels;
pulse small and irregular; skin cold; spasms of the
extremities. R Tinct. opii gtt. 80 01. menth. pip. gtt. xx
aq. purae Jss ft. haustus; to be given every half hour.
9 o’clock P. M. has had the above given twice ; symp-
toms not relieved; complains of violent pain at the
pavel ; let a Blister be applied to the part. R Tinct.
opii gt. 60, 01. menth. pip. gtt. xx aq. purae sss ft. haus-
tus; to be given every half hour with lOgrains of calomel.
—3lst. May., Excessive retchings; frequently going to.
stool, but passes nothing but water; pain in the bowels
increased; pulse small; skin cold, and clammy; spasms
of the extremities; great prostration of strength.—The
Blister has risen well, but no relief produced by it.—As
the above draught has been constantly thrown up, omit
it; and let warm brandy and water be given, every half
hour, with five grains of calomel,—l9 o’clock P. M.
Symptoms not relieved; prostration of strength increas-
ed; no stool produced by the calomel. R Brandy sss
Laudan. gtt. 60 aq. bullient. gss ft. haustus; to be given
every hour with ten grains of calomel; and let the feet
be bathed in warm water every hour.—6 o’clock P. M.
No stool as yet produced by the medicine ; symptoms :
excessive retchings ; general coldness of the body; pulse
scarcely perceptible; spasms of the extremities more
frequent; constantly going to stool, but passes nothing
but water; griping pain in the bowels; genbral prostra-
tion of strength. R Brandy sss Tinct. opii gtt. 100 01.
menth. pip. gtt. xx aq. purae gss ft. H, to be given
every half hour with ten grains of calomel. This medi-
cine was given until 9 o’clock regularly; after which he
was incapable of swallowing, and remained sinking in
this wretched way, until half past three o’clock, A. M.
of the Ist of June; when he expired.


CASE TWENTY-EIGHTH.
: Sewuk Misser- Havildar, aged 43 years ; admitted -V
p’astll A. M. 31st May. Symptoms: vomiting; burning
beat of die body; total insensibility; pulse quick and'
irregular; stertorous breathing; tongue dry. R calo-'
ibel 9lj to be put on the tongue, and washed down
with two ounces of peppermint water; apply a blister to
the nape of the neck.—3 o’clock P, M. Has vomitted
twice since twelve o’clock; heat of the body increas-
ed; insensibility ; convulsions of the lower extremities ;'
pulse irregular; breathing difficult. R calomel. 91 Pulv.’
Jalapi 9l ; to be put on the tongue and washed down
with peppermint water. The blister has not risen.'
May 31st, Go’clock A. M. Burning heat of the body ;
total insensibility ; Pulse quick and intermitting; diffi-
culty of breathing; convulsions of the whole body ;
great prostration of strength; involuntary discharges of
fheccs arid urine. The Blister has hot risen ; let one be
applied to each temple.,R Tinct. opii gt. xxx 01. month,
pip, gtt. x ASthcr Nitr. gtt. xxx aq. purae si,do be given
immediatelj’.—9 o’clock P. M. burning heat of the body;
total insensibility ; pulse irregular; general convulsions
of the body ; involuntary discharges of fences and urine;
incapability of swallowing ; difficulty of breathing in-
creased. Let an Enema of Congie and Laudanum bo-
thrown up frequently.—-Hecontinued sinking through-
tlie night, anddied at 2 o’clock A. M. on the Ist of June.-
CASE TWENTY-NINTH.
Bowany Deen Dooby, . Golundauze. S Ist May, 1.
o’clock P. ; M.,complains of burning heat and acute paia
at the scrobiculus cordis, with a watery vomiting and,
purging.—Let him have 20 grains of calomel, 60 drops
of laudanum, and an ounce and a half of brandy, with
the same quantity of water.—3 P. M. Vomiting and purg-


Irrg incessant; pulse very quick and feeble; extremities
told; and his body wet with cold- clammy sweats.—-Re-
peat the calorrtel, laudanum and brandy.—s Pi M. Is
lying in a' state of perfect listlessness; countenance
CollaSped ; pulse scarcely to be felt at. the wrist; eyes
fixed in their Sockets, and of. a glassy appearance.—Let
him have two ounces of brandy in the same proportion
bf water.—Died at 8 o'clock P. M. On dissection found
the following morbid appearances.—The intestines and
*tomach highly inflamed ; the former clogged up by a
yellow fluid, sometiiing resembling the matter oif an
abscess; and the latter filled with muddy water. The
liver was natural; but little or no bile in the gall
bladder and ducts';-and that little, vitiated and foetid,,
of a dark green color, almost approaching to black.
CASE THIRTIETH.
MALWAH.
Pin-urn Sook Dooby, Sepoy, admitted 24 th April 18 19;
aged, . 24>—Symptoms—be was admitted this morning
at 4 o’clock; about fifteen minutes before he was brought
into Hospital; he was suddenly seized with vomiting and
purging of a discoloured watery fluid in small quantity.
When I was called to Visit him, I found him in the : fol-
lowing condition : he complained of great thirst; his
extremities were violently convulsed, as were the muscles
of the face; the mouth was much contorted; his eyes were
sunk; his extremities bccanie cold; the pulses were im-
perceptible; he did not complain of pain in the abdo-
ihen, which : he allowed to be pressed without shrinking;
—He took a’scruple of calomel, arid eighty drops of lau-
danum on admission,—Bibat. aq: ammon: foct. 3ij ex
pocul aq: Lord, dimitl; quaque bora; frictions with
fiahnei moistened in brandy were assiduously applied to
the abdomen,- and extremities,- He continued much in
the same state till about six o’clock, A. M. when the
N n


pulse became perceptible ; after this period he took only
one dose of the stimulating draught; his thirst was much
abated; his heat began to return: he had a pleasurable
sensation of warmth at stomach.-—The convulsions ceas-
ed after he had taken the calomel with laudanum, and
two of the draughts: his pulse increased in strength,
and about nine o’clock A. M. perspiration was apparent
on his forehead; which soon became general; and at, ten
o’clock A. M. he declared that, with the exception of
debility, fie had no other complaint, when I reported him
out of danger to the Commanding Officer.—2sth. He
slept soundly during the night, and had a natural moti-
on this morning; he has no complaint, but that of
weakness; he says he is very hungry.—26th. No com-
plaint.
CASE THIRTY-FIRST.
NAGPORE.
Hindoo Sing Sepoy,, admitted into Hospital on the
morning of the 30th May 1818 ; probable age 32 years.
Symptoms: excessive retchings ; great thirst; pulse small
and scarcely perceptible; skin cold, and clammy; spas-
modic affection ot the limbs and muscles of, the abdo-
men; constantly going to stool, but,passes nothing but"
water; griping pain in the bowels. R. Tinct. opii gtt. 60
01. menth pip.gtt. xx aquae purae Bji ft. haustus ;to be,
given with twenty grains of calomel every half hour.—,
10 o’clock A. M. has had the above given three times-
symptoms greatly aggravated; coldness of the body, and
spasms increased; complains of violent pain about the,
navel.—Let a blister be applied to the part; and repeat,
the medicines as above directed.—He continued sink-,
ing in this deplorable ,state, until 12, o’clock, .when he
expired; being two hours and a quarter , from his ad-
mission.—The medicines had not the least effect to over-,
come the disease.


SUPPLEMENT.
THE body,of the foregoing Report was com-
pleted .towards the end of June, from documents
coming down to the commencement, of that
.month.—Fromthe general tenor of those docu-
ments, there seemed some grounds for hoping,
•that the dreadful mortality, to which they relat-
ed, was on the decrease; and that we should soon
.be wholly released from a pestilence, which had
ravagedlridia during a period of more than two
•years, and spread dismay and destruction into
every portion, of its provinces.
The six months, which have since elapsed,
.have, unhappily, disappointed these expectations.
During no part of this time, can the country be
said, to have been wholly free from the disorder ;
and at several distinct periods, and in distant
r quarters, it ■ has again shewn itself in such ant
: appaling, and widely. Epidemick form, as to leave
no doubt, that the distemperature of the air, in
which it originated; yet subsists, and is ever
ready to be brought into action, by those exter-
nal agents, which have been enumerated above,
'under the head of Predisposing and Exciting
Causes. O o


Awfully violent as some of its recent attacks
have been, it cannot be said, that daring their
prevalence, the disease has developed any new
laws; or displayed itself under any new form,
different from that in which it first came
-amongst lis. Much cannot, therefore, be learnt
from a- narrative of its latter progress. But,
as the appearances of those attacks generally,
have tended materially to confirm some, - and to
overthrow others, of the inferences respecting the
•peculiar habits of the disorder, which we ven-
tured to draw on the : strength of former experi-
ence ; arid further to establish the efficacy of par-
ticular modes-of treatment j it will be necessary
•that,• at the risk of tediousness, and of further
prolonging a work already too diffuse, we should
give some account of them. In doing so, how-
ever, it shall be our endeavour, to avoid the in-
troduction of all unnecessary matter; and to
comprise what we have to say, in as short a space
as 'possible.
It will be in the reader’s recollection, that in
the spring of the present - year, the Epidemick
raged extensively in Nagpore and Malwah; and
largely affected the Nerbudda Field Force, and
the several Detachments serving under. Colonel
Ludlow in the vicinity of Neemuch, in April and
May. - On the ; Bth of the latter month, it reach-
ed the Saugor Division of the Army; became


Violent on the 18th towards the end
of the month ; and finally ceased on the 4th of
June. The Natives alone-were affected. Sixty-
four persons were admitted,; of whom 19 died;
.The Ist Battalion 26th Native Infantry, the
:jnen of which had previously suffered much from
fever and dysentery, and had impaired their con-
stitutions by remaining' long in the hospital,
were chiefly affected. It had 54 admissions, and
18 deaths, from a strength of 868. On the 21st
it buried sixmep. This corps was with the Left
Division on its being attacked during April .of
the preceding year; and had then 8 seizures,
and 2 deaths; but the 2nd Battalion 28th .Re-
giment, which on that occasion had 56 . seizures
and 29 deaths, now wholly escaped. So, the
2nd Rohilia Cavalry, which had likewise Beep
Reasoned, when with the Rajpootana Force in
September, did not lose a man, from a strength
pf 1125: although encamped closely to the
26tli Regiment. Calomel, opium, and other
usual remedies, 1 here seemed of no avail; tho*
the former was often .pushed in doses of CO
grains. The lancet couldi alone be depended
on; and when, used early, and to the extent of
.from 20 to 40 ounces, often saved the patient,'
The disease next] reappeared in the Raj pop-
tana Force. It first shewed itself mildly on the
Sth of June in the Rampoora Local Battalion;


bat diet not affect any other corps till-the SOtiij
when It became general. 'The attack was -upon
tile' whole a - mild one; Excepting one officer,’
\Vhaj unfortunately sunk from debility alid re-
lapsetinia late stage of the disorder* the -Euro-
peans remained wholly exempt; and- frotil a
'STative' force of 9738 men: (there were during
'the* month only 106 admissions, and 25 deaths'.
-Tim.mortalityfell chiefly upon the 2nd -Bat-
talion ■ 7th' Native Infantry, then affected for
the first time ; and on a detachment of-340 n>
‘ciuits having 18 admissions, and
£»:deaths -fand the latter-57 -admissions* and 8
■death’s. - The' remaining casualties were shared
hy'ithe other corps;: But the -Ist Battalion
28th Native Infantry, and 5' companies' of the
ilst;Battalion.27til Native Infantry, both of Whicff
•had:saffered severely in’the previous -'September l ,
iiow.wholly; escaped.pand only a few cases, ■ all
‘terminating :i favorably, occurred : in : the -2nd
-Battaliond Qth Native Infantry,- which lost • ma-
*ny ‘ men :at Muhdessore in - ’'August. -In * one
(division of the 27 th Native Infantry,- there Weird
:7‘- and s"deathsf; ;but all ■ these took
7place in persons who’ had ' been absentft’hm
t.hh corps during the sickly period of September.'
Some cases appeared in a detachment of the
'•hid Battaijoh liifantry on duty in
hhe ghrnsolf‘of Jarahurh; a thousand' feet above
’the-plain j while the inhabitants of the'town 'of


Ajmes?, onthe declivity ahd at the base of the!
bid, . escaped. ■ The disease; still continued tm
prevail in the Division, though with gradually*
declining violence, during the beginning and mid-t
die, of July; but entirely ceased on the 20th of that;
month. ■ Th<? number of admissions, during the*
month war JO ; and of deaths, SO. The 2nd Bat/
tplion 7th and Ist Battalion, ;19th; each lost 7-
rpen i Several Europeans were likewise affected, *
and S Officers, 3 Privates, and 1 woman cutoff/
The disorder appeared to-abate after, a long, and>
heavy/fall of rain. ; The weather previously to]
the reappearance of the disease in this
h.ad been clqudy-and sultry, with frequent thun-::
der, storms and showers, variable winds, and buti
little fluctuation of the thermometer; whichusu-,'
ally stood-at-81 at sun-rise, and 9T at noon. Int
the early stages, the treatment was nearly as, dur?>
ing the former year. The secondary symptoms
were uncommonly severe; and to counteract
them, mercury was largely employed.
v At this time, the; virus did notin this quarter
appear to spread in any particular direction ;
t|e .body of the air seeming to be generally
corrupt,, and indiscriminately to exert its malig-
nant, qualities, wherever they happened to-be
called into . action bygreat and sudden vicissi-
tudes of the weather. Thus the disease left
Neemuch in'the end of May, and appeared in


Nussurabad, nearly eighty miles > further N orth,'
on the 12th June;: but it was not till the 18th :
of the latter month, that it reached a Detach-
ment posted half way between these two stations,
just after its being exposed to remarkably in-
clement weather.—ln July, some Corps of‘the
Nerbudda Force suffered considerably. ' Thus
the Ist Battalion Bth Native Infantry had 40
cases and 9 deaths; and the Ist Battalion 15th
Native Infantry, 13 cases and 5 deaths. Both
of these Corps had been previously exposed;
but we have no particulars regarding the des-
criptions r of men now affected. From this
month downwards, the disease ceased to be epi-
demick equally in the Nerbudda, Saugor, and
Rajpootana Divisions; and gradually gave place
to fevers, and other complaints common to the'
climate and season.
We must now turn our attention to the Cen-
tral and Upper Provinces. The state of the at-
mosphere in the whole of these tracts was at this
time remarkably favorable ,to the existence of
the Epidemick. The Rains did not regularly set
in for many weeks after their customary time;
and as the Hot Winds continued to blow without
interruption during June, July, and part of Ait-
gUst, the heat had latterly become'almost intole-
rable, and the whole face of the country entirely
parched up.—Nevertheless, the epidemical dis


position of the air had certainly abated;
since from Gawnpore downwards; the disorder
can scarcely be affirmed to have prevailed ge-
nerally, subsequently to the conclusion Of the pe-
riod included in the Report.—For, although a few
cases now and then appeared at Dinapore, Mul-
hye, Chunar, and places in their vicinity, in May;
June, and July, the aggregate amount of those
was very inconsiderable; and only went to shew,
how greatly the sickness was on the decrease.—ld
Gawnpore too, it soon gave way to violent remit-
tent fever; which proved exceedingly severe and
fatal, especially amongst the European Troops:
sometimes cutting off the-patient almost instant
taneously, with every Symptom of apoplexy.
The Epidemick made its second appearance
at Agrah* on the 27 th of May; yras very, des-
tructive during the first week-.of June ; abated
about the 10th of that month,.and wholly
drew onthelsth, after several rainy days. Con-
trary to what had been observed in the preceding
/ ,* We are indebted for the account of the progress of
the disease in this quarter, almost wholly, to the valuable
communications of Mr. Gibb, Superintending! Surgeon
of the Division, and of Mr. Surgeon Jackson, H. ; M.
14th Regiment. Mr. Gibb’s views, ■ indeed, of Uietrue
nature and treatment of the malady, appeared to, th®
Medical Board so just and luminous, that nothing but
the lateness of their arrival, and the previous great length
of this Report, prevented their being published in full, ■


year, ft raged' with, great violence -and mortality:
in the -city.—lts range in Ca,ntonmepts wss coni';
paratively limited, and chiefly confined to the Ist
Battalion 7th Native Infantry* which had 3(3 Cases
and 15 deaths. The total number affected was
3 Europeans and 39 Nativesof whom,l7:
Inhere were likewise four deaths in the Jail.—Foil
Ipwipg t]ie course of the Jumna, the disease reach-,
ed Muttra in the end of-Jane; andyhere' exert?
edjts, influence in a slight degree throughout
the whole of the-succeeding month.. It could
scarcely. However, be said to be Epideipick ;
as . only .29 cases and 7 deaths occurred
in the infantry • Lines ; apd not one in the
Cavalry Corps, ,or in the town, ' Thus Agra*
which in the former year had nearly escaped,
was now;'; severely - visited ; whilst Muttra, then
dreadfully scourged, now remained wholly un-
affected. During- this period Mynpooree and
•Juttigpf were quite healthy ; and at Coel the
•disease-scarcely- appeared.- Not-a single case 1
©fibred in the- town, or jails; and although no 1
•Jess*: than fourteen Sepoys labouring; under the
disorder .were received into the Battalion Hospi-
tal from:a party which had returned from Agra/
■two cases only'occurred in' Cantonments., .anff
both of these nearly a monthsubsequently, to the.
arrival, of the infected party


Sporadick cases had - been' very frequent a-
mong the Europeans—-especially the drunkards- r
at Meerut, for several months ; but it was hot
until August, that the disease recurred inr an
epidemical shape. On the 9th of that month, it
appeared in the Bazar of His Majesty’s- 14th
Regiment of Foot, and ceased there after cann-
ing off 40 out of 50 attacked.* Moohummudans
and Hindoos suffered equally; • and among the
latter, three persons who were understood to have
had the disease in August of the former yean
This bazar is a remarkably confined and noisome*
place’in the centre of the Cantonment. On
the 12th, the pestilence reached the town, in
which, between the time of its first approach and
the end of the month when it wholly disappear-
ed, it, according to the Police reports, killed
70 out of an unknown number attacked. ■On
the 28th, it entered the bazar of His Majesty’s
oth Dragoons ; and, after destroying 14 person?
£lO Mussulmen and 4 Hindoos), withdrew on
the 17th September. Many cases, but of a milder
type, at the .same time occurred in the, bazar
of the Native Battalion; and some of these se>
condary to attacks in the preceding season. In
Sudder Bazar, which during the first vlsitas
tion had suffered more severely than any other
spot, a few cases only occurred now, and those
* The numbers attacked were-probably underrated.
p p


few generally, mild, although through neglect
more than one half proved fatal.
We nest come to its effects upon the troops ;
and'as, there was here something very remarka-
ble in the great fatality, and partial distribution
;ofits' attacks, it will be necessary to enter some-
\vhat more largely into particulars, than the con-
cise nature of these remarks may perhaps , well
ndmit. The total strength"Of the Ibrce in Can-
tonments, was 2364 Europeans, and 1342 Na-
tives. It was composed of His Majesty’s Bth
Xiiglit Dragoons, His Majesty’s 14th Regiment,
the Horse Brigade, the Ist Battalion 25th Regi-
ment Native Infantry, a Detachment of the Pro-
vincial Battalion, and the Gun Lascars of the
' Horse Brigade. Part of the Horse Brigade had
-suffered severely witli the Centre Division in
1817: and slightly in 1818. Of the other t Corps,
His Majesty’s Bth Dragoons had had 7 seizures
and 2 deaths at Meerut in August 1818 ; His
Majesty’s 14th Regiment 3 seizures and 1 death;
and the Provincial Battalion had remained free.
On the present occasion, the Bth Dragoons had
only eleven cases and two deaths; whilst the
Horse Brigade, the 25th Native Infantry, lire
Provincial Battalion, the Gun Lascars of. the
Horse Brigade, and all the Officers, entirely es-
caped; so that nearly the whole force of the dis


case was directed against the unfortunate 14th
Regiment.
During all July and the early part of August,
the weather had been very sultry and close j
with little heavy rain, frequent drizzling showers,
Jow clouds, and hazy atmospherethe heat be*
,ing almost insupportable at night, and at all
times much higher to the feelings than it appear-
ed by the Thermometer, which usually ranged
between"B3 andQOat 2P. M.with a fluctuationof
only a few degrees between morning and evening.
JThe wind wa§ throughout Easterly.-—The pre-
vailing diseases had been fever, hepatitis, gastri-
tis, and enteritis
On the ,Bth of August, the first case of Cholera
appeared in the 14th Regiment, which, including
invalids and convalescents, had then 200 sick in
Hospital from other complaints.- On the 12th
two cases occurredon the 13th and 14th about
•10 were brought in. On the 15th the morping
was more sultry than any in the rponth. Eight
hundred men of the Regiment went to Church
in the Dragoon Lines. Spine were attacked in
Church; some on the march back;. and soipe iu
the barracks after breakfasting heartily. Several
Were dead before night. Heavy rain fell in the
afternoon, and cooled the atmosphere y no fresh
cases occurred, and the symptoms of sucli-of
P p 2


those already affected l as- were'not too far'gone,
became less severe.. On the 16th, there - was
drizzling Tain; and fresh cases offered, but of a
jliilder'sdrt. arid'd 8 th,the • men
pameiaso fast that the /Hospital-got-exceedingly
prowde’d; and iibecaitie necessary to accommo-
dateth’efresh; cases jn the School room, and the
fc'onvalescents jn’ ah? empty Barrack in the Dfa-
gooi) dLihes. It rained- in the day b'Ftlie
19th,. and there•'were' few fresh admissions ; - but
’in;the night; -‘which- Was sultry, they were more
numerous-thafi pestilence-was : at,itt
height- 6hr-the SOth*, - theßay-was :; hazy,-- damp,
end- oppressive-; <and- many rnen were brought id,
past hope of recovery ; all vital energy being frorA
the commencement nearly extinguished.. Many
Iftvalids in hospital, were now seized,'and, being
touch-debilitated by previous disease, sunk al-
Inost-without an effort. On the morning of the
61 st, a stdady breeze spriing - up' from the East;
ittd brought with it clear weather; -and happily
frOiii this 'time the disorder declined'quickly, and
soon after entirely disappeared;* Two slight -cases
Occiirreddh j the succeeding night; hhd one or two
bext day. ■ Oh the SSd. 'thc Regiment moved but
Of barracks, - and encampcdon the race ground,
where it remained till the 2<Jth: the barracks, pri-
vies, : &c. • being. in die mean 1 time' ‘thoroughly
cleansed and white washed; Three or four cases
appeared in camp ; but theweatli'er"being wet.


the grass long, and the ground, tho* high, soaked
with rain, dysentery 'soon -got the' ascendancy,
ahd proved irema'rkably severe.
During the whole- period , of its present visit,
the Cholera in'this- Regiment.attacked. 221, and
cut off 41 persons, from a body, of 1,200 rank and
. file: the seizures being,as one in five -and aJialf of
the whole Corps; and the.deaths .nearly in like
.proportion to the seized. . Some relapses occurred
and terminated fatally. The disease.commenced,
in the Eastern - wing .of the. -barracks, . , and 'pro-
ceeded in a westerly direction - y but . suddenly
"stopped at the 9th Company.; theXight Infantry
escaping with one or two slight cases only. - The
Bth Dragoons were situated to the left or west;
and the Horse. Brigade to. the .right of the. 14th.
The Symptbmsin some respects 'differed from
those usually presented by the disease in other
quarters. Bilious Vomiting was very common in e-
v.ery “stage; ahdpfobably one third of those attack-
ed had greenish discharges in the first instance, 1 ,
ahd many for several Hours, r or even days. In sheh
cases the tongue was covered with a yellowish, or
.dar k brown fur; whereas in those with watery eva-
■cuations, it was Whitish, and clammy, or but Httlq
changed; from _ its natural. state.. The y stdoH
were ‘ generally bilious, and watery. 1 ' Sometimes
there was no vomiting; sometimes ho r spasms j


and sometimes'the intestines 'were torpid. ■ln the
iirst few days, all the deadly symptoms of cold and
collapse were invariably present ; but towards the
, 18th the disease was sometimes accompanied
■with ardent fever: quick, hard, small pulse;
-burning skin; flushed face; inflamed eyes; and
excessively fold and leaded tongue. These cases
were marked rather by a tingling and numbness of
the limbs, than by violent spasm; and were less
destructive, than those coming under the usual
■form of the disease, The - attack was in general
sudden, and where fatal, cut off the sufferer in a
period ranging betweeri nine and forty-eight
hours. Want of appetite, hdvtever, usually pre-
ceded ; and in many* instances slight looseness.
It seized the sober and drunken equally; but the
latter sooner fell victims to if. Two puerperal
women were attacked, and both died. The
dissections shewed nothing particular. Traces
of visceral inflammation were commonly found.
The stomach was filled with greenish, muddy
fluid., The urinary bladder was always empty.
Jn all other points, the appearances corresponded
with those described in the body of the work.
targe and repeated bleedings proved the
Only .efficacious means of opposing the disor-
der. “Inuring‘the first few days bleeding was
fibt always practicable ; and then the cure was
attempted by large doses of calomel, with lau«


daniim and stimulants. But this plan wholly
failed;.and .there seemed reason to doubt, whe-
ther calomel was not always either useless, or
hurtful. The lancet was then universally re-
sorted to,, and with great success. It would be
mere repetition to go on enumerating the variety
of means used in aid of this chief remedy. They
were such as have been found generally effica-
cious in other quarters.- Opium and laudanum
were advantageously given in very large quan-
tities. In many cases laxatives were throughout
safely dispensed with ; and when required, the
mildest proved the best. The most approved
means often failed, from the unparalleled violence
and rapidity of the attack.*
* Trismus occurred in one or two cases. The inflam-
mation in the internal cpats pf the stomach had some-
times gone on nearly to sphacelus. Sometimes it was
so slight, as to be nothing more than venous congestion,
(Sometimes it wps wholly absent j and at Kuynaul not a
trace was found in five bodies, tho’ several had been
long ill, and had used every kind of stimulant. Some
were taken ill whilst under the influence of mercury for
other complaints j. in others a salivation supervening
upon the primary attack was followed by relapse ; and
death. Calomel sometimes seemed to rerexcite the allayed
irritability of the stomach. In one division ofH. M.
gth Dragoons it was not at all employed; yet all the
patients, European and Native, recovered under the
lancet, and large doses of opium. Laudanum was usually
given in doses of 100, or even .200 drops, or tvvp drachms
at a time. A sickly Native took 600 drops in one night
acd recovered ; and a gentleman at a distance from Mecrqt


Wc shall* upbn enquiry, find that there existed
sortie .reasons why the cantonment of Meerut
should at this time have again fallen under the di-
sease ; and why .His Majesty’s 14th. Regiment
should have been so peculiarly singled out, and so
cruelly affected. The cantonment bazars were in a
very; filthy state ; the ' rbads in a broken, bad
Condition ; and the drains a . mere succession of
stinking pools.- ; No filth, carts were allowed;
and the cleaning of the streets and dunghills was
left to the beasts and birds of prey. This was
the general statc;of the Cantonment at large;
and it is ; natural to suppose, that the immense
load of foul; and corrupt matter, thus constantly
generated, must, especially-when aided'by the
great heats of ' June and July, and the moist'
weather of July and August, have /presented to
Was saved from impending death, by .swallowing.4oo
drops in two or three hours.;. It never in the largest
quantities induced-affection of the head. Fatal relapsi
was not very uncommon where bleeding was largely;
and even-repeatedly employed in the commencement.
The warm bath svas ; decidedly useful. Among the
juvantia, dilute sulphuric acid scented to be serviceable.'
Iced water was successfully employed in one case, in
which there was'incessant vomiting, and unquenchable?
thirst. In the severer cases,-every thing taken into the
stomach was rejected instantly, and generally with great
force.—lt may be here mentioned, that the Actual
Cautery, by burning with a hot iron in the Epigastric
region-, has been recently found effectual in allaying the
irritability of stomach and abdominal spastn> in another
pnrtof-the country.


any epidemical disorder, a field peculiarly fayo-
.vable for its malignant operations. The state of
that portion of the cantonment which was set a-
part for. the accommodation of His Majesty's
■l4th Regiment was yet more inviting. The
barracks, although clean and well ventilat-
ed, were originally too confined; and from
-the married and unmarried men being thrown
. together, were still more contracted and shut
•up by the latticed partitions, and large cur-
tained cots, set up by the former for the pur-
poses of separation and comfort.* The privies
yvere too few in number ; and could hardly. be
-kept clean or wholesome. The effluvia proceed-
i ing from' them was at times exceedingly. offenV
give, even to a great distance ;. and fnany ; of the
worst cases'were those of men seized; in them
with violent spasms and yomiting. - The -bazar,
too, of the Regiment, in which the disease first
broke out, was an abominably filthy,- [confined
hole. It moreover appeal's, that the men ofthe'l4th
were in the habits of sleeping in the open air -;
and of going into the sun, and constantly .resor-
ting to the Sudder Bazar “ the most noisome
of all filthy and suffocating places.”
These perhaps, were sufficient causes for this
Regiment suffering more than the others. But
they leave us unsatisfied on many material points.
* There were about 170 women, with their children
in the Barracks.
Q g


They do not tell 'us, why,' when the Epideraick
was present'd! the former year, this same Regi-
ment should have nearly, escaped ; nor why in the
•present instance, the disease, when once amidst
it, shopld have stopt short at the 9th Company;
■and after a few days, of tremendous destruction
have suddenly disappeared, without apparent
adequate cause. They do not explain, why the
: Horse Brigade on the right, and the Bth Dragoons
•on the left, * should have scarcely suffered, and the
•whole of the Native troops have entirely escaped,
although the latter were,' from their modes of life,
doubtless much exposed to the damps of the night,
•and to the heat and sun by day—nor • why ; the
•Sudder Bazar, the most crouded and filthy of all
the Bazars,- should- have enjoyed entire im-
munity. Lastly, whatever might-bethe influence
of these exciting causes, how shall we, upon the
supposition of nothing more being necessary to
•the production of the pestilence than their . exis-
tence simply, account for their lying dormant, du-
ring the burning months of June and July, and
•after a short period of action, for their again be-
■ coming inert towards, the end of August?
It was the opinion of the Surgeon of the
Corps,' that latterly the ■ disease had become
‘ * The Hospital of this’Regiment was situated near
the Hospital and Barracks of the l 4th, and subject there-
fore to the same local influences... But, then, it was a
remarkably fine and spacious building.


contagious. This opinion was ■ grounded up-
on his observing, that- the Apothecary' of
the - Corps, the Hospital Serjeant, ' and
an apprentice were successively - attacked,:-and
that several men were taken ill whilst nursing
their dying comrades. But, it should be recol-
lected, that all these persons, besides being equally
exposed to the pestilential virus with the general
body of the Corps, were in an especial manner
rendered liable to its attacks, by watchfulness,
incessant fatigue, despondency,; and grief—all
powerful debilitating, and predisposing causes.
Moreover, without going at large into the argu-
ment, it may be kated, that the total, exemption
<jf the Medical Officers, notwithstanding their be-
ing in constant attendance" upon the livings and
frequently having to handle the dead, here, as in
almost every other instance,'is’hardly reconcila-
ble with a belief in infection ; and that tire un-
accountable rise and "speedy diffusion of the dis-
ease, its rapid'increase and equally rapid de- '
clihe, the narrqw bounds of its 'influence amid
great and unrestricted intercourse, its limited
duratjon, and above all, its sudden. land entire
cessation withdut.a single precaution being taken
against its further exfehsiorj, are facts decidedly
cliaracteristick, not of contagion, but of pure
epidemical influence.; — -It was remarked,' that in
the If th, 'fever and 'dysentery were less prevalen t,'
* Q fl -


especially the latter, in August -than in July.j
and that, in proportion to the strength of the Re-
giment, fever was more severe, but less frequent
than in the other Corps.
Nearly at the same time when it broke out at
Meerut, the Epidemick displayed itself in Ku-
maooh, at Bareilly, and at Moradabad to the East,
and at Kurnaulto the West. It visited Almo-
rah on the 10th of August ; and disappeared a-
bout the middle of September, after a great fall
of rain from the East. It confined itself to the
suburbs in the South East angle of the town,
which were inhabited by persons of the lowest
casts only ; and did not fairly enter the Sepoy
Lines, or the body of the town. The disease was
comparatively mild and easily checked. Twelve
deaths only took place from 76 seizures. One
Sepoy only of the 13th Native Infantry was seiz-
ed, and even he got the disease when in the in-
fected part of the town.—Few instances occurred
of more than one of a single family being affected.
The disease appeared to proceed in a westerly
direction j coming from Dotee’on the East.bank 4
of the river Kalee to Almora, and moving thence'
towards Kassipoortothe West. It was accompani-
ed by a westerly wind; a moist atmosphere; and
a temperature from 70 to 76 —We hayenonote
of the effects produced by the disease at Bareilly.


The mortality could not, however, be great;
since the Jails in the quarter from- July to Octo-
ber gave only nine admissions and three deaths;
•At Moradabad it was more deadly. During the
» o
month the deaths in the town were from twelve!
to sixteen daily. In the Jails, out of 700 persons,
there were only four admissions, and two deaths.
The-disorder shewed itself at Kurnaul on
the 10th of August; and wholly disappeared,
in September; It attacked the 2nd Battalion
26th Native Infantry first, and most severely. It
had 10 cases and 5 deaths. Part only of this Bat-
talion was with the Hansi, Division in August of
the former year; the whole was mow present;
The 2nd Battalion sth Native Infantry, had 9
cases, and. 7 deaths; and the. 6th Regiment of Ca-
valry 2 admissions and no death.. Immediately
upon the appearance of the disease, all the Corps
w r ere ordered to wear w arm clothing.—From Kur-
naul the disease spread in the direction of Lood-
heeana, but as in the former year, 1 died away be-
fore reaching that station. Delhi, and ev6iy other
station coming within the Division, now r kept heal-
thy ; so that the only place visited was Kurnauh
which had escaped on the former occasion*
. After visiting Meerut, the disease seemed to
take a Northerly course; reappearing in Saharun-
pore, and attacking first the town and. then the


cantonment. Neither -in number, nor in vio-’
lence, however, did the cases equal those of Sep-
tember and October of the former year. There
were only 14 cases and 4 deaths in the Provincial
and Nussuree Battalions, and in the Jails only one
case, and no death.—On the 2d October it for the
first time entered the Deyra Dhoon ; and al-
though it remained only three days in the valley,
it'worked fearful desolation during its stay. Of
the deaths in the village v;e have no certain infor-
mation ; all that we learn, being that they were
very numerous; but in the Sirmoor Battalion the
seizures, out of a body of 900 men, were 113, and
the deaths 74, almost two thirds; and in the Lines;
73 women and children were cut oft‘. This al-
most unprecedented mortality is accounted for
■from the circumstance of the Medical Officer be-
ing himself early seized with the disease; and
the miserable sufferers being thence in a great
measure left to their fate. It will be observed
that the successive affection of Kumaoon and the
Dhoon, which are both situated beyond the low-
est'range of the Himmalaya, greatly weakens the
force of some preceding deductions on the inap-
titude of the disease to ascend mountainous tracts.
On the other hand, the stopping short of the vi-
rus, without seeming cause, both in this and the
former year, on the hither side of the Northerly
station of Loodeehann, might perhaps fairly give


rise to the consolatory conjecture, that the pesti-
lential virus cannot live in the higher latitudes.
During the last half year the Epidemick has cer.
taintybeen on the decline in the Lower Provinces.
The Jail Returns, which yield a pretty good
criterion by which to judge of the health of their
respective districts, }iave been generally favorable,
and in many instances perfectly clean.*. The
* Tiie 11, C, Shipping, at the pew Anchorage was a.
gain visited during the squally'lrregular weather of Sep-
tember. As on the former occasion some vessels whol-
ly escaped, and others suffered severely 1 But the case
of the Carnatic "was’peculiar.- Tin's Ship anchored fa
Madras Roads on the sth of August; clean, and with,
a healthy crew- Whilst at ancher she had six cases of
Cholera, all terminating favorably. She sailed op the
20th with fine weather and light hreezes.-HOn the night,
of the 27th, a robust man, who had recovered from an at-
tack at Madras and returned to duty, was reseized and
died at 2A.M. of the 28th, At BP.M. of the 29th,
the Joiner was seized, and died at 8 A. M. of the 30th.
At 4 A. M. of the 30th a healthy Seaman, 35.
years old, was seized, and died at midda}'. In the same
morning, of two other healthy lads taken ill, one died,
at 3, and the other at 6 P. M, Another man was
seized in the succeeding night, and died in seven hours.
At 8 A. M. of the 31st a healthy, stout, middle aged Sea- ,
man dropped down in convulsions; and died at 6 P. M,
After this there were six other cases, but all terminated
favorably. The sudden mortality in this instance appears
to have been wholly produced by the unfavorable
Stute of the atmosphere. The Ship seems in her pas-
soge'iip the Bay to have kept close in With the shore;


disorder has perhaps in no one quarter raged with
its former violence ; and wherever its attacks
have been such as to attract particular notice,
their severity could generally be attributed, to
Some sudden change, or marked irregularity .of
the weather. Thus, Calcutta continued tolerably
healthy until the end of the Rains,. which sud-
denly broke up about the middle of October,
and after two or three cold, sharp days, with
Clear sky and Northerly wind, were succeeded by
nearly a month of such damp, disagreeable wea-
ther, as to the experienced eye clearly forebod-
and during the Olh, was off Ganjam within 15 miles
6f the land, with a cold damp land wind blowing all
day. The disease had no appearance of contagion. It
Occurred only among the Seamen, although between their
Condition and that of the soldiers there was only this
difference, that they slept on the gun and the soldiers
on the orlop deck. Some were seized, who had no
Communication with the sick ; whilst others escaped
who constantly sat by their hammocks. There was no-
thing peculiar in the circumstances of the crew'. Their
diet was of fresh provisions. They were not unneces-
sarily exposed; for an awning was spread fore and aft.
The whole of the persons seized were of sober, regular
habits. They had all drunk largely of cold water pre-
viously to being taken ill. In those who recovered,
the attack was succeeded by bilious purging. Venae-
section failed in several.
The disease is now (December) prevalent In some
spots of Nuddcea, and among the Cooley establishment
employed in clearing die island of Saugor ; but, as far as
we are acquainted, in uo other pari of Bengal—that is
as an Epidemick.


cd the return of Cholera. The. air ;,was'then
haz}', raw, cold and uncomfortable to the feel.
The thermometer ranged from 74 to 83; but it felt
much colder.’ There were no sudden variations
of temperature. The appearance of the sky was
peculiar. It was cloudy; but only partially so.
The clouds were not dense, or heavy, or fleeting j
but thin and fixed, with frequent breaks through
which the blue sky appeared. They were:
generally of a dark grey colour, flat, dull, and
gloomy; and for several days formed along,
broad, fixed bank towards the West and North
West verge of the horizon; and remained wholly:
unchanged in shape or . appearance. The wind
varied from North West to North 1 East. There
was seldom regular sunshine. This state of*
things continued to the 12th, when there was
a severe shock of an earthquake, followed by
rain and variable winds for several successive
days, till the 20th, when a dry cold wind came,
round from the West, and brought with it a.
clear sky and regular weather; During the
whole •of this period of irregularity numerous
cases of the disease occurred, and proved very fatal,
in Kalinga and other Native Departments of
the,town; *• but,no sooner had the season become
* At this time the disease chiefly prevailed anong the
Mussulman population of the city; and as it was theri
the sacred month of the Moohurrum, it was at first
thought that much of its violence might be attributed
Rr


regular than the Epidemick ceased to he heard
of.
However, we may. hope that the late favorable
change is merely a precursor to'the entire restorai
tion of their long lost salubrity to these regions;
there is much cause to apprehend, that the pesti-
lence, in leaving India, is only about to transfer its
destructive influence to other climes: for we have
just learnt that it has reached the distant island of
Penang,* after ravaging theprovince of Arracan,
to the effects of watchfulness and other irregularities,
common in that season of mourning and dissipation.
It was, however, learnt upon enquiry, that persons of
sober, regular habits, and secluded women suffered
equally with others. Two persons were rgrely affected
in one house.—Some Natives placed great faith in boil-
ed water as a preventive? and one of the principal Na-
tive gentlemen in the city ascribed the singular healthi-
ness of his numerous household, during the whole pe-
riod of the Epidemick, to his having taken th e simple
precaution of allowing ho water to be drank by them
■until it had been previously boiled. Bad water no
doubt sometimes-immediately induces the disorder;
but we must not suppose it is the sole cause of it, any
more than that cold is the sole cause of fever, because
when applied in certain ways to the human body, it
sometimes produces that disease,
# The disease appeared here on the 23d of October,
and disappeared or greatly declined in the first week
of December. From a population estimated at 14,000,
the.deaths exceeded 800. For aconsiderable period they
amounted to above 30 a day. St. George’s Town suffered


and the whole of the Peninsula,
December, 1819,
imost ; and nearly one half of the fatal cases occurred
among; Natives of the Southern Peninsula, who had
jnigrated from the Coromandel Coast.
THE END.


>IKD CHIRVSOC.
ABERDEEN.
