

Pp-tu- inputs
! ■* Kruutnts CMif
BOX 3
cJI
3t*f~ r / IfSD




\r b 509
Australasian 23oartt of JWisslons.
REPORT
OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT A MEETING OF
THE BISHOPS, CLERGY, AND LAITY
OF THE
PROVINCE OE SYDNEY,
NEW SOUTH WALES,
On TUESDAY, OCTOBER 29th, 1850,
CONVENED FOR THE PURPOSE OF ESTABLISHING AN
AUSTRALASIAN BOARD OF MISSIONS.
LI
I' \ CiILLITCTIOL s*'■••
LONDON:
GEORGE BELL, 186, FLEET STREET;
HATCHARD & SON, 187, PICCADILLY.




It is known to many of our readers, that the Bishop of
Sydney, as Metropolitan of Australasia, summoned the
several Suffragan Bishops of his Province to meet him
in a Conference, or Synod, to be held at Sydney, during
the month of October, 1850. By God’s mercy, the entire
College, consisting of the Bishops of New Zealand,
Tasmania, Adelaide, Melbourne, and Newcastle, were
enabled to come up from their several Dioceses. The
proceedings of their solemn Conference on the state and
prospects of the Church in that new division of the
world, are looked for with the deepest interest in this
country. But, meanwhile, it has been thought ad-
visable to publish the following Report of a Meeting
of the Clergy and Laity, which was held at Sydney, to
organize a Board of Missions for the Propagation of
the Gospel amongst the aboriginal inhabitants of the
Australian continent, and in the islands of the Western
Pacific.
Most gratifying is it to see the Australian Church
thus early assuming her share of Missionary labour.
May her example stimulate our zeal, and lead us to
greater and more systematic efforts for the furtherance
of the Gospel of the grace of God in all the w'orld.
E. H.
April 3, 1851.


Spmfjcs iScportefc.
Bishop of Sydney 1
Bishop of Tasmania 9
Mr. Charles Kemp 17
Bishop of Adelaide 18
Mr. Charles Cowper 23
Bishop of New Zealand 24
Mr. Charles Lowe 33
Bishop of Melbourne .' 35
Mr. Metcalfe 43
.,f Mr. Kemp 44
Bishop of Newcastle 44
Mr. Robert Campbell 45


PROCEEDINGS.
[EXTRACTED FROM THE SYDNEY HERALD.]
On October 29th, 1850, pursuant to advertisement,
a public meeting of the Bishops, Clergy, and Laity of
the Church of England, was held in the Infant School
Room, in Castlereagh-street, for the purpose of establish-
ing an Australasian Board of Missions. Great interest
was excited in the meeting, not only from the import-
ance of its objects, but also from the circumstance of its
being understood that the Bishops of the Australian
Dioceses would take part in the proceedings; and long
before the hour appointed for the commencement of the
business of the meeting, every corner of the room was
crowded by as respectable and attentive an audience as
ever sanctioned by its presence the inauguration of a
great Christian enterprise. Hundreds of persons were
unable to obtain admittance.
The Lord Bishop of Sydney, in opening the proceed-
ings, read the advertisement calling the meeting, as
follows;
“ A public meeting of the Bishops, Clergy, and Laity
of the Church of England, is appointed to be held in the
Infant School Room, Castlereagh-street, near St. James’
Church, this evening, Tuesday, October 29th, at half-
past six o’clock, for the purpose of establishing an Aus-
tralasian Board of Missions, to be supported by voluntary
contributions from the six Dioceses of Sydney, New
Zealand, Tasmania, Adelaide, Melbourne, and New-


castle ; and having for its object the Propagation of the
Gospel among the heathen races, in the province of
Australasia, New Caledonia, the Loyalty Islands, the
New Hebrides, the Solomon Islands, New Hanover,
New Britain, and the other Islands in the Western Paci-
fic. The chair to be taken by the Lord Bishop of Syd-
ney, at seven o’clock precisely. A collection in aid of
the funds will be made at the close of the meeting.”
Having thus explained the object of the meeting, he
would depart on this peculiar occasion from the ordinary
course of proceeding, and previous to engaging in prayer,
he would call their attention to the concluding verses of
the 28th chapter of St. Matthew’s Gospel, beginning at
the 16th verse.
“ Then the eleven disciples went away into Galilee,
into a mountain where Jesus had appointed them.
“ And w'hen they saw him, they worshipped him : but
some doubted.
“ And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All
power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.
“ Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost:
“ Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever
I have commanded you : and, 10, I am with you alway,
even unto the end of the world. Amen.”
Prayer was then offered up, after which the Bishop
of Melbourne read Bishop Heber’s well-known and
beautiful missionary hymn, which was then sung by a
portion of the Sydney Choral Society.
The Bishop of Sydney then rose and said:—lt now
became his gratifying duty to address to them a few
congratulatory observations on the circumstances which
had called them together that evening. It might indeed
be sufficient for him to limit these observations to the
expression of his joy and gratification, that so vast an
assembly should have met together to do honour to


their Saviour by holding out the hand of Gospel-fellow-
ship to those heathen races, for whom, in common with
the whole human family, His blood had been shed. He
might stop here, but to do so would not perhaps be
satisfactory to them, nor did he believe it would be con-
sistent with his own duty, and he should therefore pro-
ceed to say a few words on the great undertaking in
which, he trusted and believed, they were all now
heartily engaged. The object they had in view was the
establishment of a Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel in the province of Australasia, and in the Islands
of the Western Pacific. With regard to the field in which
the efforts of this Society would be made, as the Bishops
of the whole of the six Dioceses were present, he should
limit his observations to the native races of this colony,
and crushed and fallen as they were, he hoped and
believed that some even of that despised and unfortunate
people might be saved and converted by the redeeming
grace of their blessed Saviour. He did not think that
he could express his views better in regard to what
he considered their Christian duties to this race, than by
reading to them a portion of the Charge which he deli-
vered to the Clergy of the colony when it was an arch-
deaconry, in the year 1829, twenty-one years ago. This
extract would at all events show them that his opinions
on this important subject were not new, but that, then
as now, he had felt most strongly how necessary it was
that something should be done by a Christian commu-
nity for the relief and recovery of that benighted race.
On the occasion to which he had alluded, he had ad-
dressed the following observations to the Clergy of this
colony:—
“ The last subject with which I shall at present detain
you, is the condition of the native or aboriginal inha-
bitants of this country. It is an awful, it is even an
appalling consideration, that after anintercourseof nearly
half a century with a Christian people, these hapless


human beings continue to this day in their original
benighted and degraded state. I may even proceed
further; so far as to express my fears that our settle-
ment in their country has even deteriorated a condition
of existence, than which, before our interference, nothing
more miserable could easily be conceived. While, as the
contagion of European intercourse has extended itself
among them, they gradually lose the better properties
of their own character, they appear in exchange to ac-
quire none but the most objectionable and degrading of
ours. The most revolting spectacle which presents itself
to a stranger newly arriving on these shores, is the sight
of their natural occupants reduced to a slate of worse
than barbarian wildness by that fondness for intoxicating
liquors which they imbibed from our example, and in
reckless addiction to which they are still encouraged by
many w r hose superiority in knowledge ought to have
been directed to some less unchristian purpose. But
can we satisfy ourselves, my brethren, that we have
fulfilled all our duty while such a spectacle is exhibited
before us? Shall we look on and see them perish,
without so much a,s an effort for their preservation?
Natural, and much more Christian equity, points out,
that, as in the occupation of their soil we are partakers
of their worldly things, so in justice should they be of
our spiritual. As through the tender mercies of our
God, the day-spring from on high has visited us, we are
solemnly engaged to impart to them the glorious beams
of Gospel truth, to guide their feet into the w'ay of peace.
I am aware of attempts having been undertaken with
this view', and of their abandonment from a sense of
existing difficulties and despair of final success. But
from the very nature of the undertaking, obstacles w ere
to be anticipated. Every advancement of the Christian
religion, from its first origin to this day, has been effected
in opposition to difficulties which, in a natural sense,
might be termed insuperable. Its excellency and its


derivation from a heavenly source have been best de-
monstrated by surmounting such opposition. It may
be considered after all a very doubtful question, whether
the erratic habits and inconsiderate disposition of the
native tribes, are in reality more adverse to the recep-
tion of Christianity than those propensities which its
earliest preachers had to encounter in the nations they
addressed; the obstinate superstition of the Jew, and
the philosophic arrogance of the Gentile. But suppose
them to be so, what shall we say? Shall we therefore
desist? Unhesitatingly I answer, No. Persevere, as
you regard the honour of God, and as you value the
souls of these your helpless and unhappy fellow-crea-
tures. The very ground which we tread upon teaches
us this lesson. What does it exhibit but the sublime
spectacle of the triumph of civilized man over the
ruggedness of the physical world ! And shall the Chris-
tian philanthropist despair of having, in God’s good time,
an equal right to rejoice in the success of his exertions
to produce a moral reform, and by spiritual cultivation
to reclaim that human wilderness which extends on
every side of us ? The feeling which I derive from dif-
ficulties in such a case, and would communicate to those
around me, is animation, not despair. God works in
every dispensation for His own glory, and in His own
fore-ordained times and seasons; and His purpose in
permitting the existence of such difficulties may be to
furnish an immediate exercise of our faith and patience,
and, in their final subjugation, a clearer manifestation
of His own Omnipotence. As a believer in the Scrip-
tures, which assure us ‘out of every nation, and kindred,
and tongue, and people,’ the worshippers of the Lamb
shall proceed, I cannot be persuaded that there is one
nation irrevocably excluded from a share of that privi-
lege; I cannot be persuaded that when the religion of
Christ is solemnly propounded as ‘the pow'er of God,
and the wisdom of God/ there is an obstacle to its


progress which Eternal Wisdom did not foresee, and
Infinite Power cannot remove; or, that when we have
a plain command to ‘preach the Gospel to every crea-
ture,’ there is an entire race of immortal and accountable
creatures, with respect to whom we may dispense with
obedience to the injunction. The duty is indeed so
manifest, that I forbear any further to insist upon it.
The best mode of proceeding may require more extended
consideration ; and our future attempts may be aided
towards a prosperous issue by observation on the causes
of former failure. I hesitate not, however, to express
my desire, that as the Church of England is endowed
with preeminent advantages here, she should justify
the distinction by leading the way as a Missionary,
and by becoming the mother of Missionaries who should
attempt the recovery of this unhappy generation. It is
with God alone to give the desired increase. In due
time w'e shall reap if we faint not; and, under Him,
I shall look to you, ray reverend brethren, when the suit-
able period arrives, as to the instruments by whose aid
this design of genuine love may be carried, we hope,
into successful operation.”
It was now (he said) 21 years since he addressed
these observations to the clergy of the then contracted
colony, and it had pleased God, in a singular and most
merciful manner, to witness in His own due time, that
those observations were founded in truth and soberness.
It was true, that since that period, the time which had
elapsed had not passed without effort in the holy cause,
but ic had passed without fruit; still, he had never de-
parted from the faith, that the time would arrive when
their exertions might meet with their reward, and that
time he now believed had arrived. It was matter of
extreme satisfaction and gratulation to him to have
lived to see the wmrds he then spoke fulfilled in so
remarkable a manner. That on the present occasion, in
his renewed advocacy of this great Christian work, he


was supported by the Bishops of the surrounding
Dioceses, all of them distinguished by zeal in the cause
of their Master, and their true and abiding faith in His
Church, and that Gospel of which they so w r ell knew
the value. It was to give that Gospel to others w r ho
knew not its abundant blessings, it was to extend
that faith where yet it existed not, that they were
associated with him on this occasion, and he looked
forward with renewed confidence to the realization of
those hopes which he had always entertained on this
subject.
It was singular that, by chance almost, there should
have been preserved a record of his sentiments on this
subject, in a sermon which was printed by desire, which
he preached twenty-eight years ago in aid of the Society
for the Propagation of the Gospel. Those who had heard
that sermon had many of them passed away from earth;
those that remained he should never, in all human pro-
bability, again behold in the flesh; but little as he then
thought he should be so closely allied as he since had
been to the Society in whose aid it had been preached,
the sentiments he then uttered were closely applicable
to the Society they now r proposed to institute, and he
should therefore, with the permission of the meeting,
read a few passages to them: —
“ And may not I avail myself of our assembling here
this day, to remind you of the strong and evident obli-
gation which lies upon all of us, to second and assist
this pious enterprise by all the energies and abilities we
possess. We are called, by the peculiar character of the
times in w'hich our lot is cast, in acknowledgment of
the mercies which, as a nation, we have received, and in
compassion to the uninstructed nations over which our
dominion extends, to become fellow-w r orkers with God,
in accomplishing the designs of His wisdom, by preaching
‘ Christ crucified unto the Gentiles.’ And great should
be the satisfaction and encouragement which we derive


from reflecting that we are able to extend the knowledge
of this great salvation in its purest form; that is, ac-
cording to the model, in doctrine and discipline, of our
own established Church. In the bosom of that Church
there exists a Society, w'hose object—that of Propaga-
ting the Gospel in Foreign Parts—must command our
entire approbation ; whose zeal in that cause which is
the cause of all mankind, whose caution in the selection
of its instruments, and judgment in the application of its
means, encourage us to hope that the Divine blessing
will attend and prosper its undertakings. If it require
a further recommendation, let me remind you that this
Society is rendered venerable by the stamp of past use-
fulness, and by its long-recorded labours in the field of
Divine truth. It has included among its members many
w r ho, in ages past, have shone like lights in the world,
and whose names are written in the book of life; men
in whose bosoms burned the purest zeal to communicate
to others like precious faith with that w'hich they had
received; but, condemned to comparative inactivity, be-
cause the time was not ripe for more extended exertion,
they could only offer up their prayers for such a con-
juncture of circumstances as we have lived to witness.
‘ I tell you, that many prophets and righteous men have
desired to see ’ that opportunity for exertion ‘ which ye
see, and have not seen it; and to hear those’ tidings of
successful ministry ‘ which ye hear, and have not heard
them.’ As an humble, but most willing advocate,
I therefore recommend to your consideration the claims
of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in
Foreign Parts ; an institution calculated, and I trust
ordained also, to turn the fierceness of man to the eternal
praise of God, through Jesus Christ. Whoever shall
witness the day, when, through the Divine blessing on
its exertions, the idolater shall turn from his vanities to
serve the living God, may contentedly close his eyes
upon the wmrld, exclaiming, in the words of aged


Simeon, ‘ Lord, now lettest Thou thy servant depart in
peace ; for mine eyes have seen thy salvation ! ’ ”
It was almost impossible that words which had been
uttered on so different an occasion, could have been
more applicable to the object they were met to carry
out that night. Surely in some respects if the words
had been written specially for this occasion, they could
not have been more appropriate. Such a conjuncture
of circumstances as that to which allusion had been
made in the passages he had read to the meeting, had
taken place, and it was matter of great satisfaction and
deep gratitude to him that he had been allowed to see
that the strengthening help of his Divine Master had
not been bestowed on him in vain, in the sentiments he
had expressed on this subject so many years ago. The
words he had read to them proceeded from his lips in
the year 1822, and he now repeated them, being, as he
believed, closely applicable to the circumstances under
which they were assembled. It was a great occasion
on which they were met, and he trusted it would not
pass by without fruit which should live in ages to come.
He hoped they had come to that meeting, not merely
out of curiosity, not to sanction with their mere
presence the object they had in view, but to combine
and resolve by combination to work out that object to a
successful consummation ; that they would not slacken
in the great and good work till they had brought the
heathen under the subjection of Christ’s empire, and
had spread the blessings of His Gospel through the
wild and through the desert, to the honour and glory of
Almighty God and Jesus Christ, their blessed Lord and
Saviour. He would now call upon the Bishop of Tas-
mania to propose the first Resolution.
The Bishop of Tasmania said : —My Lord, were I to
content myself with simply announcing to this dense
assemblage of the friends of the Church, the bare wmrds
of the Resolution which has been confided to my care,


their self-evident truth would ensure an immediate re-
ception at the hands of all. 1 hey are of such a character
that the most simple can understand them, whilst the
most eloquent (and he did not pretend to be of the
number,) could do no more than bestow a commentary
on a plain and easy text. The Resolution states, “ That
this meeting express its deep and heartfelt thankfulness
to Almighty God for the spiritual and temporal bless-
ings which He has granted to the Australasian Colonies,
and recognise the duty of endeavouring to extend those
blessings to the heathen races in their own neighbour-
hood.” But, plain as are these words, and little as in
themselves they needed any comment at his hands, it
would scarcely be consistent with the respect due to
our Christian friends to pass them by entirely without
notice. And perhaps it might be permitted to him to
express his own desire to state in brief the reasons why
he so thoroughly and heartily accorded with them. Two
declarations are before us—the first expressive of our
heartfelt thankfulness to the “ Giver of every good gift,”
for the spiritual and temporal blessings which He has
granted to the Australasian Colonies; the second, ac-
knowledging our recognition of the duty of endeavour-
ing earnestly to extend those blessings to the heathen
races in our own neighbourhood. In speaking of the
first, he desired to confine his remarks mainly to the
colony of New South Wales, though it will be readily
understood that he did most gratefully acknowledge its
truth with respect to his own diocese.
And when he went back to the past history of this
colony, retraced its earlier days, looked at its deficiency
in the means of securing temporal comforts or spiritual
blessings, and then compared that cheerless destitute
past with the bright and prosperous present, he could
not choose but say, the Lord’s hand had been with them
of a truth. To look first to the contrast between their
past and present temporal blessings, he seemed to


realize their position some sixty-two years ago, when
their first settlers landed near the very spot whereon
they now were standing, and had to struggle for almost
every inch of ground with the wild bush, or with its
wild tenant. He could picture to himself the solemn
silence of that savage scene, unbroken save by the sound
of the woodman’s axe, or the cry of men encouraging
others to their toils. He could call back in fancy their
early difficulties and privations, their want at times of
almost the bare necessaries of life, their toils, their
anxieties and misgivings, the rude log hut or narrow
tent their only residence, incessant manual labour their
only refuge from starvation. How great the contrast
now ! He surveyed their harbours. He gazed on their
beautiful bays ; and then, in every quarter was the busy
hum of active life—all things speaking of industry, of
commercial enterprise, of successful venture, ships upon
ships attesting the extent and importance of their trade.
He traversed their streets, and there he found the
church, the school, the hospital, the library, all telling
their own tale of government liberality, or of private
zeal and energy. He went from house to house, from
villa to villa, and there he saw undoubted marks of
something more than comfort, of an elegant refinement
than cannot but speak of independent means. Who can
do otherwise than acknowledge that they had indeed
abundant reason to thank God for their many temporal
blessings? But there were higher things than these.
The Resolution speaks of gratitude for spiritual blessings
too, and w r ell it may. For the first six years there was
but one clergyman of the Church of England, labouring
alone, and well nigh unsupported, amidst the thousands
of emigrants and prisoners that were continually poured
upon their shores; whilst many of their numbers pene-
trated far into the bush, and there lived on, uncared
for, it would seem, by that Church to which they
belonged, and uncaring perhaps themselves, for her


comforts or her ministrations. There were the gaols
but not the church—the parade but not the school.
How bright the contrast now ! Upwards of fifty clergy-
men were in this diocese alone, presided over by their
learned and indefatigable Bishop ; whilst five suffragans
in their respective dioceses, with perhaps more than
thrice that number of clergy, afford good evidence that
the Church w r as at wmrk in the neighbouring colonies as
w’ell. Let their lot be wdiat it may, be it rich or be it
poor, there were secured to them now, blessings of
which no man can deprive them.
These were the privileges which they possessed as
a portion of their inheritance as members of the
redeemed family of God. The Church’s watchful eye
was fixed upon them at every stage of their Christian
pilgrimage. The Church’s care preserved them from
the cradle to the grave. It met them in infancy, when
by baptism they were taken out of the great family of
the world, and brought into the household of Almighty
God. It follow'ed them to the school, w'here thev were
trained up in all things which a Christian ought to know
and believe to his soul’s health. It brought them on-
ward to confirmation, w’here openly before the Church,
they ratified and confirmed the solemn promise and vow
that their godfathers and godmothers made in their
names at their baptism. It ministered to their instruc-
tion in all holy things, to the last sigh of expiring old
age. God’s minister was ever with them, to rejoice
with them in their joy, to comfort them in their sorrow,
to soothe them in their distress, to teach them at all
times, more especially in their sickness; yea, to watch
ever over them in life as one who had charge over souls
of which hereafter he must give his strict account. And
when their earthly task was done, their mission accom-
plished, and they gotten to that better place “where
the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at
rest,” still was God’s minister at hand to speak God’s


own word of comfort to their sorrowing ones who -were
left behind, —to say with the holy man of old, “ Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord. 1 heirs then,
Christian brethren, was, in this their day, all the
Church’s teaching, all the Church’s ministrations.
Theirs was the Church, where, on the appointed day of
rest and privilege, they were gathered together as one
great Christian brotherhood. Theirs was God’s own
precious word as a light to their feet, and a lantern to
their path, the one sure unerring oracle which, whilst
it told them of the principle of faith, warned them also
of the points of duties that w ere inseparably connected
with it. Theirs were the sacraments of Christ; —the
one which gave them the first gifts of God that one
“ baptism for the remission of sins,” of which the Creed
discourses; —the other, mercifully ordained by our
heavenly Saviour, as a means whereby the daily waste
may be repaired that daily sin w ill make in their bap-
tismal graces. Theirs was that admirable Book of
Prayer w hich had been so aptly called the true daughter
of the Bible—a book that came down to them endeared
by the blood of those faithful ones who put it forth, and
who sealed, by their martyrdom, their testimony to the
truth of the principles which it contained. It was theirs
to be taught the high privilege to pray—not as the
benighted, yet polished ones of old, to an “ unknown
god,” but to Him who had revealed himself to them
as Creator, Redeemer, Sanctifier. These, Christian
brethren, were some, at least, of our every-day bless-
ings, and whilst he had thus feebly endeavoured to
remind them of them, had not many a heart amongst
them thrilled with the deep sense of thankfulness, for
those most inestimable gilts, and instinctively recog-
nised the truth of the resolution that he had put before
them ? Was it so ? Remember, (said his lordship,) that
this resolution has a second proposition—one declaratory
of our common duty to endeavour to extend those bless-


ings to the heathen races in our own neighbourhood.
Christian friends, it was but to little purpose, nay it
was rather a mockery of words, merely to say that we
were thankful —to be content with merely talking, and
prating, and making speeches about our gratitude—our
appreciation of God’s condescending mercy—our ac-
knowdedgment of our childlike duty and obedience to
Him; —words, all of them, without point or meaning,
unless the life itself becomes the language of the inner
man, —unless the enlargement of Christ's prophesied
kingdom becomes to us not a vague theory, but a
glorious reality; not a something that was to form
a topic of conversation in what is called the religious
world, but a holy work that was to be undertaken both
in the love and fear of God ; a mission that was to be
entered upon w'ith a trembling sense of our own utter
unworthiness to w ork even for a moment in God’s vine-
yard, yet with a grateful consciousness of the high
privilege of being allowed to spend and be spent in our
heavenly Master’s cause. That it was tbeir duty to do
all within their power to promote their enlargement, as
men who desired to be fellow-workmen with God, he
wanted no words to prove. He would rather turn their
attention to their own peculiar position as inhabitants
of, and settlers in, this new'-found world, this rising
empire of Australasia. Kingdoms and dynasties are
not things of human will, nor still less of what the world
calls chance. They have their origin in that continu-
ous law of God’s owm providence, by wdiich all things
have their birth, and growth, and full development.
Happy are they who so recognise this truth as to feel
it an honour and a privilege to be alkwed to play their
part, howsoever humble it may be, in bringing new
countries (wdiich may fairly be regarded as the seed of
fresh empires) under the dominion of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ. This, Christian brethren, said his lordship,
is your privilege. It is yours by your faithful advocacy of


the imperishable principles of Christian truth, by an
exhibition of your practical recognition of the great law
of Christian love, to set that example, and to give that
tone to generations yet unborn, that your remotest
children may never have cause to blush for the spirit of
the first lords of this fair and fruitful soil.
For what purposes, think you, has God in his mys-
terious providence given you as mysterious an ascend-
ancy over this newly-found division of the globe ? Is it
that wasted fortunes may be repaired—or, that those
whose sternest struggles in England would scarcely
suffice to keep them entirely free from the troubles that
beset them, might here find a refuge, a living, and a home?
Oh ! not so. Had not this mighty trust been committed
to them, in order that they should realize the awful
meaning contained in the words, “ I will be exalted
among the heathen, I will be exalted in the earth?”
Is it not that the first lords of the soil should go forth
with the message of the gospel; to evangelize the people
within their reach, and so to strive to pluck this fair land
from Satan’s ascendancy, and, with God’s blessing, to
bring it under the universal dominion of the Messiah?
The history of the past may give its light, as a warning
beacon, to the future, and tell us, as you well know, of
ancient and of modern powers which lost their high
place among the kingdoms of the earth, mainly, it would
seem, because they lived for self, and not for God; all
mindful of this world, but all regardless of the next.
And what if they refused the warning? what if they, as
niggards of their bounty, refused to gird themselves to
this mighty task and as mighty privilege ?
Is it too much to stretch our vision onward, to look
with a reverential eye upon those strange doings of fu-
turity which are destined to succeed to this our earthly
tarrying place ? When the poor savage of the Pacific is
called upon hereafter to answer at God’s judgment-seat
for all things done during his abiding in the flesh, can


we not imagine him using some such plea as this ?
—Those Christians came to my peaceful island for the
purposes of gain and traffic. They made me a partaker
of their civilization, but not of their privileges. They
taught me their bad faith, their profligacy, their drunken-
ness, their sensuality, but they taught me not their own
acknowledged creed. They spoke not to me of Jesus,
They taught me not the way, the truth, and the life.
We were consumed by the slow but the sure process of
all the contamination which our rude habits were but
too ready to receive, and we received from them no-
thing in requital; nothing but the knowledge of sin,
without its countervailing remedy. “We withered and
wasted away before the white man’s face, we lived in
our transgression, we died in our ignorance.” Is this
a parable ? Is this an allegory ? Brethren in the Lord,
you know it to be a fact. These islands in the Pacific,
though not within the white man’s dominion, are yet
placed within their influence. Woe to their souls if they
misuse that influence, or neglect to avail themselves of
that door of usefulness which God in his loving mercy
has laid open to them. But there is no time to lose;
this plague has begun. Even now the demoralising curse
of the white man’s influence has commenced its deadly
work. Even now, the coloured race is descending gra-
dually, though perceptibly, to the tomb—the heirs of
their vices though not of their privileges. Even now'
that law has begun to act, which apparently decrees
that these races should gradually pass away from before
them. There is not then one hour, one moment to lose.
It is the time to work, not to talk; to do, not to delibe-
rate. But two nights since they had been solemnly
w r amed of all these things, in language which none w ho
heard it could forget to their dying hour. They were
then told of their privileges, their duty, their responsi-
bility, in wmrds which thrilled through them, like the
solemn notes of a w arning, and it may be an accusirfg


trumpet, and bade them, at least, lift up their prayers for
the remnant that is left.
Again, then, he said, there is no time to lose. “Up,
Christian brethren, and gird yourselves as devoted sol-
diers, to the warfare of the cross; up, and be doing,
lest others step in and snatch the privilege from your
hands; up, in that faith which places so child-like a
trust in the promises of God as to believe that whilst
doing his work it can never fail of his support,—in that
hope which refuses to see difficulties in the path, and
does not look forward to impossibilities,—in that cha-
rity w hich so recognises these poor heathen as brethren
in the Lord Jesus, as to be content, for their sakes, to
bear up, and bear on against all that may seem to retard
the Gospel’s influence, or check its progress. Up, with
,the determination so to lift on high the Gospel truth,
that it may be indeed a light to lighten the Gentiles,
and be the glory of the God of Israel. Up, w-hilst yet
you may, and quit yourselves as men, who know full
well that it is written that the night cometh when
no man can work. Up, and be doing the Lord’s bid-
ding, lest you, too, be found guilty of being laggards in
the Christian race—lest your colonial prosperity should
pass away like a shadow, with one wave of the same
resistless, yet benevolent arm, which has bestowed the
privileges, whilst it claims the gratitude ; lest the awful
sentence, ‘ Thou art tried in the balance and found
wanting,’ proceed from the same lips, which stamped
for ever a missionary character on His Church, by the
first commission given to His Apostles, ‘ Go ye into all
the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature.’ ”
Mu. Charles Kemp :—Having had an opportunity of
seeing the intended order of proceedings, felt that he
should be acting more in accordance with the wishes of
the meeting, and better promote the great object they
had in view r , by simply seconding the resolution, than
by expatiating on it, although the subject w r as most


inviting. He trusted that it -would be seen, that the
vast assemblage had not been drawn together by mere
curiosity or excitement, but that there was an intention
and desire to carry out the work w'hich they were about
to undertake; and that wdien the Right Reverend Pre-
lates had departed, and a few individuals, humble in
ability and rank, were working out the details of the
proposed Society, they would receive that cooperation
and support, without which it would be impossible for
them to succeed.
The Bishop of Adelaide moved the second Resolu-
tion, “ That it is the duty of the Church in the province
of Australasia to use its unceasing endeavours, by direct
missionary agency, as well as educational institutions,
to bring the Australian natives under the teaching of
the Gospel; and that sufficient evidences of God’s bless-,
ing upon the past work have been afforded to encou-
rage us to expect more enlarged success for the future.”
It was, his lordship said, with extreme diffidence that
he drew their attention to the subject matter of this
resolution; for he could not but feel that the weight of
experience w j as against him, and that the Australian
native had almost ceased to be regarded as a being capa-
ble of being civilized and Christianised. But their Chris-
tian faith forbade them to believe that God had placed
a barrier around any of the human race to prevent them
from being brought to a knowledge of His goodness and
mercy. He believed also that there were no such insu-
perable difficulties in the way of this great work as
many had believed to exist. Another difficulty under
which he laboured w'as, that a glorious sun of missionary
enterprise was rising in the East, and before this great
luminary the lesser star of the Australian natives waxed
pale. But he would suggest to them, that through the
misty halo which surrounded the greater luminary, its
importance w r as apt to be magnified, and to appear far
greater than it would seem w hen it reached its zenith ;


while at the same time the claims of the Australian
natives were apt, from a similar cause, to be under-
valued. By the resolution which he now brought under
their notice, their Christian duty and Christian charity
were appealed to on behalf of the Australian natives,
upon the ground of there being sufficient evidences of
God's blessing upon their past exertions to justify them
in persevering.
The great Founder of their religion had assured them
that the blessings attendant upon exertions made in faith
for His glory should be as the productiveness of a grain
of mustard seed. They must join therefore in prayer
for such an increase in faith as would enable them to
persevere in their efforts until these efforts were
crowned with success. Promises of an increase of faith
were vouchsafed to those who earnestly sought this
blessing, and promises of success were held out to those
who laboured with faith in the Lord’s vineyard. He
would entreat them therefore to gird up themselves for
this work, and by giving salvation to the heathen, to
add to those bright jewels which already adorned the
crown of their Redeemer. The Australian natives had
a peculiar claim upon their sympathies. They had
possession of the lands which formerly belonged to this
race, and all the vices of civilization had been communi-
cated to this unhappy race, without any communication
of the redeeming virtues. If these people had had the
same opportunities of grace which were afforded to
their white brethren, they might long since have re-
pented in sackcloth and ashes. They were bound,
therefore, to extend to them the means of acquiring
this knowledge. In proportion as a nation or a church
realized within itself the blessings of the gospel, so was
it desirous to impart those blessings to others.
The people and the Church of Australia had, as
they had been told, been peculiarly blessed in this
way, and it was their peculiar duty, therefore, a duty


which they would doubtless most cheerfully perform,
to seek the salvation of their sable brethren. And
he would now assure them that in spite of all the
discouraging experiences of the past, and fears for the
future, there were such gleams of success as would
justify them in pressing forward the good work with a
hopeful reliance on its being ultimately attended with
the most beneficial results. In their extreme zeal to
bring these races at once from darkness to the light,
they were too apt to forget, that there must be an
adoption of means to the end which they had in view.
Without such an adoption of means it was scarcely
probable that their success could be great. They must
tame the savage—they must teach him and they must
convert him. The two first might be done, but to
ensure success in the last object required a more perfect
system than had yet been applied. Even his own
experience, how'ever, limited as it was, in the diocese
over which he presided, had shown him how much
might be done toward training the savage, and how
much therefore might be expected if zealous and well
arranged efforts were made to ensure his eternal wel-
fare. At the school in his diocese they had children
from the most distant tribes, from Lake Bonny and
Lake Rufus; and they found that in these regions, and
indeed along the whole course of the Murray within the
colony of South Australia, the traveller might pass
with perfect safety. He believed that even an unpro-
tected female might traverse these regions without risk
of injury.
Quite recently a poor shepherd had been lost in the
bush near the Murray, and having been met with by a
party of the natives, they played the part of the good
Samaritan, and conducted him to Wellington. It was
clear then that the savage might be tamed. As regarded
the capacity of these people for receiving instruction,
he was sure that up to a certain point, at least, there


Mas no want of this capacity. Between native children
and the generality of white children of the same age he
had been able to discern no difference. But when the
children who had been taught and trained in their
school, verged upon manhood and womanhood, then it
was found that the want of an adaptation of means to
the end in view seriously impeded their chances of
success. They had no means whatever of guarding
these young people against the vile and degrading in-
fluences of their own untaught and heft then brethren,
or of the abominable rites which were practised among
these people. It was some means of this kind that they
must provide before they would be warranted in speak-
ing of the Australian blacks as a race beyond the pale
of salvation, and imputing to the hand of God the con-
sequences of their own laggardness.
It had pleased God to raise up in the mind of the
present Archdeacon of Adelaide an earnest desire and
determination to enter peculiarly upon this work.
While that reverend gentleman was negotiating and
arranging with the Government, a truly pious man,
who followed the humble occupation of a splitter, wrote
a letter urging the necessity of some immediate mea-
sures for the ensuring the salvation of the aborigines,
offering to give up his farm and property in order to
enter upon this holy labour.
Here, then, was an opening which manifested the
watchfulness of Divine Providence over the welfare of
the heathen. When he left his diocese, preparations
were actively going on for the formation of an establish-
ment at Boston Island, Port Lincoln, to which the
natives who had been trained in the schools at Adelaide
might be removed, and where, by a separation of 200
miles from the presence and influence of other tribes,
they might be more readily trained in the paths of
righteousness and civilization. They had much cause
of congratulation, also, upon the success which had


attended the efforts of their Wesleyan brethren, who
had had a mission establishment for many years past in
the neighbourhood of Perth. The zealous Missionaries
at this station had succeeded in bringing many aboriginal
natives under the strong influence of Christianity, and
several of them who had died, had, he verily believed,
expired with a full confidence in the Lord’s mercy, and
wdth a full knowledge of His power. The establish-
ment at this place consisted principally of married
persons; and it was a most pleasing thing to observe
the progress which had been made by these people in the
cultivation of the earth and other arts of civilization.
He could give them, also, the testimony of one of their
own clergymen, the Rev. Mr. King, who was stationed
at Freemantle, and had a school, in which some twelve
or fifteen children of the aboriginal race were educated
and trained in the way of truth. During his stay at this
place he had himself joined four couples of this race in
the holy bands of matrimony, and he must say that he
had never seen a more complete attention to the services,
or a more perfect comprehension of its sacredness, than
was exhibited by those people. After the termination
of the marriage ceremonies, the newly-married couples
all subscribed their names to the parish register, writing
far more legibly than very many of those whose mar-
riages he had been a party to in favoured England. He
held in his hand a little tract which described the death
of an aboriginal boy trained at Port Phillip, who expired
at the age of thirteen, with the commencement of a
prayer upon his lips. An orphan girl, too, of the same
race, who resided with the family of the Archdeacon of
Adelaide, was so affected by the family devotion in which
she joined, that tears were observed to course each
other down her young cheeks. When asked the cause
of her distress, she replied that she was thinking of her
now benighted father and mother, w r ho had been left to
perish in heathen blindness in the Australian bush.


If such an effect could be produced upon the sympathies
and feelings of a child like this, might they not look
forward with confidence to the salvation of such others
of the race who should be blessed with the same means
of grace ? He trusted that, by God’s blessing, and their
own exertions, they would not only be able to save the
remnant of their people from destruction, but to rescue
them from their present degraded state, and to work
out their eternal salvation.
Mr. Charles Cowper seconded the Resolution with
great pleasure, and in doing so he should comply with
what he was sure must be the wish of the meeting, and
not trespass on the time which would be so much better
occupied by their distinguished visitors, in listening to
w hom they must derive a far larger share of gratification
and edification than he could impart. But he w r ould
say, in allusion to what had been stated by previous
speakers, as to the unfavourable chances of success in
the great work they had undertaken, of Christianising
the heathen in this colony, that it ought not to be with
them a question of success, but a question of duty.
There w r ere doubtless many and seemingly insurmount-
able obstacles in the way. Thousands and thousands
of pounds had been spent in endeavouring to Chris-
tianise and to civilize these races, but without avail.
Even in the district of Port Phillip, he believed that the
protectorate had utterly failed. It must therefore be
a great gratification to all true Churchmen to see this
Society formed, in order to see whether, under some
better organization, and under better and abler manage-
ment, some benefit could not be effected. There was
now in the colony of New South Wales no trace of any
efforts to civilize the native races, except a corps of
native mounted police, W'ho were, in effect, mere blood-
hounds to hunt down their own race, who were addicted
to the crime of cattle stealing. If by any means the
regeneration of this race could be effected, it was their


bounden duty to assist in so great a work. He trusted
they would not separate until they had resolved on some
means by which the experiment might be carried out.
No doubt the work was an arduous one, and one that
they must almost despair of accomplishing; but he
hoped this Society could effect much; they need not let
their efforts end with the mere attendance at that
meeting, or by contributing to the funds. There was
great difficulty in resolving on those w'ho could best
carry out the objects they had in view ; for those whose
hearts w'ere most earnest in the cause were already
engaged in undertakings almost beyond their strength.
He sincerely trusted that the interest which had been
manifested in this cause would not flag, and that though
the Right Reverend Prelates to whom they were so much
indebted, were soon to depart from them, that the Bishop
of New Zealand, whose heart was so deeply interested
in this cause, would, in the course of his missionary
visits, be enabled occasionally to look in among them,
and remind them of their duty.
The Bishop of New Zealand now rose to move the
third Resolution—“ That the foreign efforts of the Aus-
tralian Board of Missions be first directed to the islands
lying nearest to Australia; viz. New Caledonia and the
Loyalty Islands; in the hope that, by the blessing of
God, its missions may hereafter be extended to all the
heathen races inhabiting the islands of the Western
Pacific.” If he could have felt that his drawing their
attention to the subject matter of this resolution would,
in the slightest degree, have weakened their interest in
the eternal welfare of their own poor blacks, he wmuld
not have said a single w ord. It was to the misery of the
Australian black that New Zealand was indebted for
the present condition of its aboriginal people, and he
(the Bishop) was indebted for his own position. That
venerable and lamented Missionary, the Rev. Samuel
Marsden, was first induced to direct his attention to the


moral condition of the New Zealanders, by his observa-
tion of the misery and degradation in which the native
races of the Australian continent were plunged. But
their attention would not, he trusted, be the less forcibly
drawn to the consideration of the Australian black, be-
cause of his desire to enlist their sympathies in favour
of those benighted races who inhabited the islands of
the Western Pacific. On the contrary, the one work
would be a material assistance to the other.
He would first draw their attention to the wonderful
progress of the Gospel in New Zealand, and by marking
this progress they might derive additional encourage-
ment to persevere. The first Missionary efforts were
made in the vicinity of the Bay of Islands, but the news
that such instruction was to be had was soon spread
over the w hole of the northern island. At a district on
the southern part of that island, far distant from the
place where the Missionary resided, the tw'o sons of the
chief were so desirous of obtaining instruction, that they
left their home clandestinely, and embarked in a whaler
for the Bay of Islands, in order to bring back, if possible,
a Missionary to reside among themselves. The Mis-
sionaries were by no means certain at that time as to
the condition of the southern coasts, as to the safety of
the attempt, but Mr. (now' Archdeacon) Hadfield volun-
teered to return with these young men to the place from
whence they came. A few years after this, these young
men, who had in the interim been baptized, and became
zealous Christians, finding that their Missionary was
not able to do all the work necessary to promote the
rapid spread of Gospel truths, volunteered to go along
the coast in an open boat to convey instruction to their
less favoured brethren.
Thus it was that many who had never seen the face
of an English Missionary had become Christians and
civilized. At one place of this description, when he
asked with some feeling of diffidence whether there was


any one among them who was able to read, he was told
that there w r ere a good many who could do so, and a
class of thirteen was at once formed, who were able to
read the Scriptures as fluently as their brethren at the
Bay of Islands. Could there be any greater manifesta-
tion of Divine goodness than was afforded by this rapid
spread of Christianity and civilization over a whole
country resulting from the exertions of one man ? He
might well say that New Zealand and the New Zea-
landers owed a deep debt of gratitude to the memory of
Samuel Marsden, and of Christian sympathy to the
Australian blacks, whose misery had drawn the atten-
tion of that good man to the equally forlorn condition
of the neighbouring islanders. The Chatham Islands
are brought within the influence of the Gospel in the
same manner; and when he visited that place, he
found there no less than three hundred candidates for
baptism.
The islands of the Western Pacific lying in the closest
vicinity to the equator, such as New Britain, New
Hanover, the large island of New Guinea, might, he
hoped, in the end, become the field of Missionary enter-
prise. At present, as far as he could ascertain, there
was not a Christian among them. The Church of Rome
had made some attempts to convert these islanders, but
had been compelled to abandon these attempts in conse-
quence of the savage nature of the people. At present,
however, he proposed to direct their attention to the
islands lying in nearer proximity to the eastern coast of
Australia. His attention was first more particularly
directed to this subject during a voyage which he made
in the Dido man-of-war, touching at the Samoas, at
Tonga, at the Friendly Islands, and at Rotumah. Bearing
in mind what he had himself become acquainted with as
to the almost miraculous manner in which religious
knowledge had spread throughout New Zealand, he
came to the conclusion that it w r as the solemn duty of


all Christians, and more particularly of himself, to do as
far as practicable for these islanders, what had been
done in former times for the aboriginal natives of his
own diocese.
He remembered that mercantile men in New South
Wales had been able to induce persons belonging to
these islands to go with them, in order to obtain em-
ployment, and he did not doubt that he should be able to
procure in the same way pupils whom he might instruct
and return to their parent lands. The result shows that
he was right in this. He procured a small vessel, and in
his very first voyage he met with so much success and en-
couragement, as determined him to adopt some definite
plan upon which he might pursue the work. He saw
plainly that he could not contemplate the establishment
of Christian ministers upon the islands, and he, there-
fore, brought the young men to New Zealand, where,
after a residence of eight months, they acquired a suf-
ficient knowdedge of the English tongue, and communi-
cated to the teachers a sufficient knowledge of their own
language, to enable them to understand each other.
They were then returned to their native place, to exer-
cise upon those people such influence for good as the
knowledge which they had acquired would give them.
This plan had succeeded so well, that in every place
where there were persons who had been subjected to
this slight training, masters might land as freely, and
might reside with the natives as confidently, as in any
part of New Zealand. It was this plan which he should
propose now to follow.
The climate of these northern islands was such, that
in the months of January, February, and March, they
w r ere most unhealthy for Europeans, who were apt to
suffer so severely from fever and ague, as to paralyse
their exertions for the remainder of the year. In the
intermediate period between these unhealthy seasons,
the islands might be visited by a small vessel, and a


teacher left, from whom the people would receive some
instruction, and by whom arrangements might be made
for getting some of the younger natives to accompany
them to the place of their destination. Until a better
place could be provided, his own college at Auckland
would do very w'ell for training these young men ; and
the vessel, on her return voyage, might call at the
several stations, and take them there. At this place
they might acquire a sufficient knowledge of the English
language to be able to read the Scriptures and to impart
religious education to their own countrymen. He pre-
ferred teaching them to read the Scriptures in English,
because by this means they would avoid the delay and
difficulties of making translations into a number of
languages. In the islands of the Pacific, as among
the tribes of Australia, the languages of the people very
much varied, and at one time, while lying at Tanna, he
had heard as many as ten different languages spoken on
board the vessel. The college at Auckland would at
present accommodate some twenty or thirty pupils, or
perhaps more, at an expense of not more than per
annum each; for there was an agricultural establish-
ment, and various workshops attached to it, which aided
in its support. Experience had shown that industry
must be cultivated simultaneously with the imparting of
religious instruction, in order to ensure any permanent
success to their efforts in the latter direction. He there-
fore left these men to choose the kind of employment
best suited to their tastes and abilities ; and it was
found that they usually settled down to some particular
branch of industry, which they steadily followed. The
only missionary efforts of any consequence which had
been made in this direction was by a clergyman of the
Presbyterian Church, who had been sent from that
Church in Nova Scotia, a distance of about twenty
thousand miles, and who at present occupied a station
on one of the New Hebrides. If people so distant had


awakened to the importance of this work, surely New
South Wales, which lay within 1,000 or 1,200 miles of
these islands, could not be less interested in the eternal
w elfare of their inhabitants.
When he was last there, he was enabled to do this
good missionary a service, which would, he trusted, not
only benefit the missionary himself, but advance the
work in which he was so zealously engaged. A custom
prevailed at these, as well as other islands of the South
Seas, of strangling the wives of those who were absent
when they had been away for a sufficiently lengthened
period to induce a belief that they had died or aban-
doned the country. A number of the people of this
island were away at Tanna, and had been so long ab-
sent, that preparations were being made to carry out
this horrid custom. The Chief, naturally anxious, ap-
plied to him (the Bishop) to go with his vessel to Tanna
and fetch those men back. Upon this he told them that
thev must go to their missionary and prevail upon him
to intercede for them. Thus constrained, they w r ent to
the missionary, to whom in all probability they had
paid but little attention before, and the missionary
of course made no difficulty in complying wdth their
request. He (the Bishop) was also equally ready in
his compliance when the intercession of the missionary
had been sought by the natives. They therefore w ent
to Tanna and fetched away the men.
Their visit to Tanna was, however, a most provi-
dential one in other respects, for they were enabled to
bring aw r ay the remnant of the French mission which
had come to that place from Samoa, and had been
almost destroyed by fever and ague. The people of the
other island were so delighted at the service which they
bad obtained through the intervention of their mis-
sionary, that they held a meeting, and conferred upon
him the rank and privileges of a chief of the first class.
And this naturalization was an object of far greater


importance than at first sight appeared, for the islanders
had a practice of attributing to the evil influence of
such foreigners as resided among them, all evils of
magnitude, such as famine or pestilence, with which
they might be afflicted. A ready devotion, too, was
displayed among the converted natives, and there was
an immediate offer made to replace, at Tanna, one who
had died there while seeking the advancement of re-
ligion. The natives themselves, indeed, when they had
once become believers in the truths of Christianity,
were always anxious to make their heathen brethren
participators in their knowledge. This, then, should
encourage the civilized man to exertion. He must know
that, when once the Gospel was planted among the
heathen, all blessings would spread, as the seed upon
the sea-bird’s wing, until the neighbouring races were
made fully to participate in them.
Of New Caledonia they, like himself, had doubtless
heard many evil reports. Captain Cook, who was
generally an accurate observer, spoke well, seventy
years ago, of the people inhabiting this large island,
preferring them even to those of the group generally
known as the Friendly Islands. But no two opinions
could be more at variance than those of Captain Cook
and of the traders who had made this island a place of
resort. As far as his own observation went, he was
happy to say that it was confirmatory of the report of
Captain Cook. When he was on the beautiful lagoon
which surrounded this island, between the outer reef
and the shores of the main land, he saw a man fishing
in a canoe, and he approached this man in a little boat
which he always carried with him. He found the man
perfectly affable and friendly, and, after an interchange
of the customary marks of friendship, he had no diffi-
culty in inducing the islander to come on board the
vessel, where he remained for several days. He also
visited a beautiful district in the island, over which a


chief who had been in Sydney—and who, as was not
often the case, had been improved by his visit—was the
ruler. When he was last there, this chief had erected a
good house for him (the Bishop) upon the banks of a
river, and would be very glad doubtless if he could get
him there to occupy it. He believed, therefore, that
the inhabitants of this island were by no means so bad
as had been generally stated, although he doubted
whether Captain Cook w r as quite correct in thinking
them superior to the Friendly Islanders. At this latter
group he had witnessed one of the most interesting
sights he ever beheld. About 200 children, -w ho were
at school, dispersed at the word of the teacher, and
returning immediately afterwards, each with some little
trinket or curiosity as an offering, which they laid at
his feet. They subsequently followed him to the boat,
which was almost filled by these offerings. The Fejee
Islands were partially occupied by Wesleyan Mis-
sionaries, who had met with so much success among
this hitherto savage people, as to induce a lively con-
fidence in their continued success.
At one of the savage islands of this group, two native
women had been caught fishing, and according to the
heathen custom, were condemned to be killed and eaten;
but two ladies, Mrs. Little and Mrs. Cotterell, in the
absence of their husbands, went off in a boat to the
chief, and presented him with the ransom demanded by
custom. By this intercession the women were saved.
Missionary ardour and devotion they must see were not
only manifested by the male sex, but were felt with
equal power by their wives.
At the island of Anatam, a party of Fejeans had at-
tacked and wounded most severely the wife of a carpenter
then absent; the Europeans proposed to kill the whole
party, but only the man who actually inflicted the
wounds was shot. The rest, dreading vengeance, fled
to the woods, but one of them made his way to the


missionary’s dwelling, and lay concealed there for thirty-
six hours, until he was compelled by hunger to come out
and beg the missionary’s intercession, which was ac-
corded to him. These people then knew enough of the
missionary character to have confidence in one of that
class. Here was another reason for persevering in the
work before them.
At another island, where no great period had elapsed
since Captain Padden lost seventeen men, and within
three miles of the very spot where the massacre occurred,
there was a native mission established by the London
Society, and which had been handed over to him on ac-
count of his being so much nearer to the spot. Here he
had met three congregations; one of about 200 persons,
a second of about 150, and a third of a somewhat lesser
number. There was no single person on the island, at
the present time, with whom he could not have lived
on terras of the greatest confidence, and for whom he did
not feel a hope that they would be made wise unto
salvation.
The work of Christianising these people might then be
carried on with a good hope of success, and at the same
time they might carry on the work of civilizing and
Christianising the blacks of Australia. That they were
not destitute of capacity had already been shown, and he
had himself trained and prepared a youth of this race, who
was deemed worthy by his Metropolitan of the rite of
confirmation. The most important step was to remove
the educated blacks from beyond the influence of the
barbarous tribes, and if they founded colleges, this could
easily be done. The work of a Christian mission was
often very slow, and apparently iprofitless in the first
instance for a long period of years, and equally rapid in
the end. At New Zealand they were fourteen years
without making any progress. At the Society Islands
the time was even greater. Although the efforts to con-
vert the aborigines of Australia bad been hitherto with-


out material success, he believed from the various indi-
cations already mentioned, that the time had now come
when they would be able to do very much for these poor
people. By God’s blessing and by their own exertions,
they would also, he trusted, be able to extend over the
Western Pacific the same beneficent rays of that gospel
light which had shone so gloriously over its Eastern Is-
lands. They must earnestly pray, therefore, for strength
to carry out their great and holy work.
Mr. Charles Lowe : — ln aid of a Resolution which
was the result of the united consideration of their lord-
ships —a Resolution, too, so admirably brought under
the notice of the meeting by the right rev. prelate who
had just resumed his chair—there could be little, if any-
thing, for a lay seconder to urge. Yet, there was one
subject from which he could not refrain—an acknow-
ledgment of the debt of gratitude which was owing to
the Bishops assembled amongst them, by the lay mem-
bers of the Church. He could not sit down without an
attempt to give an expression to that gratitude. But,
in doing so, he should consider himself under the obli-
gation expressed by the preceding lay speakers, to be
as brief as possible. It was due to the laity to say, that
as a body they had witnessed, with feelings of deep
interest and delight, the important and solemn meeting
in the city of those whom God’s Providence had made
overseers of their Church ; and on their behalf he would
take it upon himself to say, there was not one ot that
vast meeting,* nor of the hundreds whom those walls
were incapable of containing, w ho was not animated by
a sincere desire to use all his influence for promoting
the plans which might be devised by their lordships for
the consolidation and extension of their Church. It was
to that feeling that he would appeal, and endeavour to
* Computed by a gentleman well able to judge at 1,300
Eds. S. M. H.


found upon it a few reasons in support of the proposi-
tion which he had read.
Deprived, as he might say he was, of all argument by
the higher intellects which had been brought to bear
upon the subject, he had indeed no other grounds of
appeal than that deep debt of gratitude to which he had
referred; and he would therefore proceed to remind his
lay brethren, how, on their lordships’ arrival in that
colony, they had accepted the charge of parishes, and
hastened to relieve the working Clergy in the discharge
of their arduous duties. He could mention visits to the
poor and sick—he could allude to time personally
allotted to the examination and preparation of candi-
dates for confirmation—he might point to the daily
ministrations of the Bishops in the holy services of the
Church, and fearlessly assert (with the assent of all),
how great and unsparing had been the devotion of their
powerful energies of mind to the spiritual instruction of
the Church. All these things, in addition to the new
and enlarged field of duty that was opened before them
in the proceedings of that evening, he repeated, had
impressed his brother laymen with a sense of respect
and. feelings of affection towards their lordships, which
they were wanting in words adequately to express.
That debt of gratitude he called upon the lay members
of the Church to repay, in the manner which would
prove the most acceptable to those who had conferred
the obligation, namely, by aiding, with all their means,
the noble project which had been nurtured, watched,
and conducted by the Bishop of New Zealand, until with
the conjoint and able aid of their metropolitan and their
lordships the suffragan Bishops, it had been matured
for adoption by the Church at large. The mention of
the assembly of Bishops, suggested another strong-
ground of appeal to the gratitude of the laymen present.
By that assembly they had the opportunity of witness-
ing a full and complete representation of the provincial


Church of Australasia; they thus saw her placed before
them in innate union and power, occupying, in the eyes
of Christendom, a position of prominence second to none
of the daughters of the mother Church of England—each
Bishop independent, yet all united—the whole in allegiance
to their Metropolitan, and to the Queen of England,
their temporal head; neither requiring nor admitting of
any universal power in man, before which the Churches
of England and Australia, nay, all the Churches of the
earth, it was falsely pretended, were to bow for their
instructions in faith and discipline. That happy meet-
ing of their lordships in this city was then commemo-
rated by raising pillars which w’ould endure as long as
the fabric of the Church itself should last; and though
those pillars would be a memorial, by the inscriptions
on them, to after generations, of the present conference,
yet the laity must not consider their debt of gratitude
was thereby paid. While they would ever cleave to,
and support, as sons of the Church of England, whatever
might sustain her in the fulness of her truth, and
strength, and influences, they must labour also to win
for the coloured races of the surrounding islands and
continents, the title of brothers in the same Church,
and to gain for them the blessings of an equal participa-
tion with themselves in the means of grace that Church
dispensed.
The Bishop of Melbourne felt compelled, at the
outset of the observations he might offer to the meeting,
to express on his own part, and he was sure also on that
of his right reverend brethren, their sense of the kind
feeling entertained towards them, which had been so
well expressed by the last speaker. He could assure
them that he and his reverend brethren all entertained
a high sense of the privilege which they had enjoyed in
the opportunity they had had of communion one with
another. Such a privilege w'as, he believed, almost
unknown in any other colony, and they ought to prize


it accordingly. It was a privilege not only for the ad-
vantages which they might individually reap from it,
but also because it afforded them some opportunity of
offering relief to the overburdened Clergy of this diocese
—for overburdened the Clergy in a country like this
must ever be, if in deep and earnest zeal they entered
upon their appointed work. Another privilege which
this intercourse afforded him was peculiarly personal to
himself, it enabled him once more to feel young again.
In his own diocese he felt old, because there he was
called on, on every occasion, to lead; here, however,
there were three Bishops besides his Metropolitan, who
were his seniors. He had listened to the speeches of
those three right reverend prelates, and of the three
laymen who had also spoken, and he felt that there was
but little left for him to add in behalf of the cause in
which they had enlisted themselves. His reverend
brother, the Bishop of Tasmania, had, in forcible and
eloquent language, brought before them the contrast
which the past and the present of this colony presented,
and had impressed upon them their duty to acknowledge
those blessings by invitation to their heathen brethren
to partake of them. The Bishop of Adelaide had ad-
dressed himself to the cause of the aboriginal natives of
this continent, and had shown not only what had already
been done, but what might be effected. The Bishop of
New Zealand had given them the result of his experience
as to the field that was open to their exertions in the
interesting islands of the Western Pacific. That right
reverend prelate had simply and forcibly expressed his
impressions of the character of the natives of those
islands, and had sketched out to them a plan by which
their conversion and regeneration might be effected.
He (the Bishop of Melbourne) could add but little to
these statements and to these arguments; but before
going into the subject-matter of the Resolution, he
would beg permission to say one or two brief words in


reference to the native blacks in his own diocese. Before
he left England, he had made all the inquiries he could
as to what had been done towards the conversion of the
natives of the colony. The answers he received to his
inquiries were very discouraging: he was told that it
w r as not knowm that one native had been converted to
the knowledge of Christ. On his arrival here he was
met with the same answer, that none knew of one
aboriginal who had died in the faith of Jesus. The only
case wdiich he had heard of wdiere there was sufficient
ground to believe that the conversion had been effectual,
was the case of a boy brought up from infancy by a
white family in Geelong. When this boy, however,
grew to be about eight years of age, through the influ-
ence of the company of European boys, he began to
turn out badly, and he shortly became so unmanageable
that it w r as impossible to bear longer wdth him, and be
was consequently sent to sea. From what he had heard
of his after life, there w r as good reason to believe that
he had been really converted, although he unfortunately
died when he was only fourteen years of age. He had
heard no more of this lad until, amongst some books
lying on the table of the Bishop of Sydney, he had found
a small volume, entitled “The History of an Australian
Boy.” He read it with much interest, for the internal
evidence it presented convinced him that the subject of
the narrative was the same with the boy to whom he
had alluded ; and he could not have any doubt that that
boy was a true member of the Church, a child of God,
and an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven.
He had also heard of two other instances, in which
there was strong ground for belief that conversion
had taken place; and these were all; but he was re-
joiced to hear from the speech which had been delivered
to them that evening by the Bishop of Adelaide, in his
diocese other examples had been found, and that the
promise of success was greater, that many of these


deluded beings might be gathered into the fold of
Christ. Some of the gentlemen who had spoken had
alluded to the failure of the protectorates which had
been established. It was true that they had failed in
the design for which they were intended, and that, in a
worldly sense, large sums of money had been squan-
dered away upon them. But he could not think that
these institutions had been altogether destitute of
benefit. If they had served for no other purpose, they
had served to give to the blacks a favourable impres-
sion of the intentions of the Europeans towards them.
Ihey had served to impress them with an idea of the
benevolence of the Government, and they had aided in
the repression of harshness between the classes—so
much so that he believed, in his own diocese, no such
thing as actual cruelty to the blacks was knoivn now.
He regretted also, that he could not give a good account
of the schools which had been established. The one in
connexion with the Church of England had entirely
tailed; while the other, established by the Wesleyan
body, and which had been in existence some years, was
totally inoperative for any beneficial end. The pro-
tectorate officers had many of them been missionaries,
but still all they had done proved insufficient to intro-
duce amongst this people the light of Gospel truth.
But had they, on this account, a right to despair of
success? No. Rather, as had been said by the right
reverend Bishop of Sydney, and his right reverend
brothers, let them pray that grace might be poured out
from the fountain on high, and that some of the seed
might fall on hearts softened by its influence, and spring-
up and bear fruit. Let them bear in mind what had
been told them by the Bishop of New Zealand, that for
fourteen years in that colony the missionaries had
laboured in vain. But they waited in patience till the
Lord sent down showers of His Holy Spirit on the
hardened hearts of the native race, and now New Zea-


land, in proportion to its population, in the number of
its worshippers and of its communicants was equal to
any part of England.
Although the consummation had in this colony been
longer delayed, they had a right to expect to see it
achieved; and, at all events, while any hope of such a
consummation remained, they ought not to slacken in
their efforts. The experiment of the conversion of the
native races had as yet never been properly made. He
perfectly agreed in the wisdom of establishing schools
for the education of the youthful blacks, and separating
them from the associations so injurious to them ; but
he could not assent to the proposition that it was hope-
less to attempt the conversion of the grown-up natives.
He must protest against any such assumption. He
could never believe that any human being was ever so
degraded as to form an exception to the general rule,
that all were capable of conversion and regeneration.
This was the solemn promise of the Saviour, made to
all men; and it was not the imperfect experience of
man that could set this promise aside. They had seen
nations sunk in the deepest degradation, in the lowest
profligacy, which had been converted; and they could
not therefore say they were without ground for hope.
There Avere, indeed, many things to encourage them in
this undertaking.
The Right Rev. Bishop of Adelaide had spoken of
one energetic and pious man, who had devoted his
energies to this cause, the Archdeacon of his oivn
diocese. He also could speak of two others, one a
minister and the other a layman, who had arrived at
Melbourne, with the intention of devoting their lives to
the evangelization of the blacks of this colony. True,
these men viere not of their otvn Church, but they
belonged to a branch of it which had been always most
friendly to it. They were of the ancient society of the
United Brethren, commonly known as the Moravian


Church—a Church always in friendly intercourse with
the Church of England, and which was recognised by
the Acts of the English Parliament. When he leit
Melbourne, these men w r ere in waiting for their mis-
sion, and he doubted not on his return he should find
that they had gone into the wilderness. He trusted
that the prayers of the Christian Churches in this
colony would not be wanting for their encouragement,
and that all assistance that might be required would
be freely rendered to those good men by the members
of the Church of England. It had long been his wish
to establish a missionary board in Melbourne; but he
had waited because he knew that the noble-hearted
Bishop of New Zealand had, with that zeal and energy
which were the distinguishing features of his character,
taken this matter in hand. He was, therefore, most
anxious, before taking any step, to meet with him and
communicate with him on the subject, and he had
now had an opportunity of so doing.
On his return to Melbourne, strengthened by the
Resolution W'hich he held in his hand, and which he
was sure would be cheerfully acquiesced in, he was
determined q.t once to establish a missionary board. In
the speeches which had been addressed to them they
had heard a great deal of what was to be done; but as
yet they had heard nothing of how' it w r as to be carried
out. The object they had in view was tw r ofold: first, to
establish domestic missions; and secondly, to establish
foreign missions. The first of these objects must be
carried out by united diocesional action, and the second
by provincial cooperation. For the first, diocesan
boai-ds must be established; while for the advancement
of the second it would be necessary that bishops should
be appointed, and that a corresponding general board
should be appointed. It w'as to carry out these view r s
that the Resolution he held in his hand had been pre-
pared, and he w r ould now r read it to them: “ That it be


agreed to constitute a general board of missions, to be
called The Australian Board of Missions; that the
Governors of the Australian Colonies be requested to
be Patrons; that the Lord Bishop of Sydney be re-
quested to accept the office of President ex officio; that
the Bishops of the Australian Dioceses be Vice-Presi-
dents ; that the Bishops of New Zealand and Newcastle
be requested to act as Missionary Bishops; that two
general Treasurers, one clerical and one lay, be ap-
pointed; that two general Secretaries, one clerical and
one lay, be appointed; that the President and Vice-
Presidents, with the general Treasurers and Secretaries,
form an Executive Committee for Foreign Missions;
that St. John’s College, New Zealand, be provisionally
recognised as a Missionary College, for the purposes of
the Board.” Of the first proposition in this Resolution,
namely, that the Governors of the colonies should be
the Patrons of this institution, it was unnecessary for him
to say anything. With regard, however, to the second,
that the Lord Bishop of Sydney be requested to accept
the office of President ex officio, he must take the oppor-
tunity of stating the deep obligations under which he
lay to the right reverend prelate. The Bishop of New
Zealand had told them that he owed the position in
which he stood to the poor Australian black. His right
reverend friend the Bishop of Newcastle and himself
owed their position to the noble mind, large-heartedness,
and liberality of the Bishop of Sydney. It was through
him, and through him alone, that the grand design of
dividing this colony into various dioceses w r as considered
and carried out. He hoped the members of the Church
would never forget the obligations which had been thus
conferred upon them by their venerable prelate, Ihree
or four years ago there w ere only four or five clergymen
in the province of South Australia, and only three in
Melbourne. Now there were at least twenty in each of
these dioceses. This was the result of the Bishop of


Sydney's liberality; and a great debt was due to him
from the members of the Church; and certain he was
that the most acceptable way in which they could
acknowledge this obligation would be by promoting the
object for which they were assembled together. Might
he live to see that object carried out throughout the
province of Australasia and all the islands of the Pacific.
The next proposition in the Resolution, that the Bishops
of the several dioceses be Vice-Presidents, also required
no comment; but again, the next proposition, appoint-
ing Missionary Bishops, did call for some notice. One of
these Missionary Bishops had already acted as such, the
Bishop of New r Zealand; and in his deeply interesting
speech that evening, he had given them the result of his
labours, and his hopes for the future. He was to be
accompanied in his future labours by his old college
friend the Bishop of Newcastle, and he fervently hoped
their pious efforts would be blessed. The other ap-
pointments which it was proposed to make, it would be
seen, united the clerical and lay branches of the Church,
and this was as it should be. It should be their en-
deavour on all occasions to unite the two parties in
the Church in cordial cooperation. All of them were
members of the Church, and as such had their especial
duties to perform ; and he must say he never heard but
with pain the expression that such or such a person
was going into the Church—meaning that he w'as about
to take orders. It ought to be the high privilege of the
laity to exercise the duties devolving on them, for
certain it w r as, that never would the Church of England
prosper thoroughly until all her branches worked
earnestly together as one united body.
He had now said all he had to say; but before he sat
down, he wmuld pause to ask what the prospects of suc-
cess were which they had before them. When he looked
around upon that room, crowded as it was with atten-
tive listeners, he w r as bound to believe a blessing would


attend the work. But they must bear in mind that it
was not sufficient that they should come to listen. It
was a remarkable thing to see six Bishops of the Church
of England in one room, and it might be that some had
attended more out of curiosity than any better feeling.
Might God bless their coming to the benefit of their
new Society. Might they go away having, as the
Apostles of old, given themselves to the Lord, in their
earnest desire to perform His work. They must strive
earnestly, and remember, whenever two or three were
gathered together, to let their prayers ascend for their
heathen brethren. They must remember that none
were too low or too sinful for redemption, and admission
into the kingdom of Christ; —that while all others were
admitted to His kingdom, favoured Israel alone w as shut
out; and if they did not do their duty to those benighted
races, they might incur the same penalty. The New
Zealander or the despised Australian might occupy that
place in the kingdom of heaven, which, had they taken
advantage of the high and glorious privileges bestowed
upon them, they might have filled in the presence of
the Lamb, and of the Almighty Father, and the Holy
Spirit.
Mr. Metcalfe seconded the motion, and in so doing
drew the attention of the meeting to the necessity of
providing the Missionary Bishops, in the first instance,
with a better and safer vessel in w'hich to follow up their
labours. If those wffio heard him were acquainted with
the vessel which had hitherto been used by the Bishop
of New Zealand, a schooner of some twenty tons or
thereabouts, in his voyages among the islands of the
Pacific, he was quite sure they w-ould never have allowed
that warm-hearted prelate to incur the risk of traversing
the seas in so small and so frail a bark. About 1,000/.
wmuld be required for the purpose, and one, a gentleman
on the platform, whose name he was forbidden to men-
tion, had agreed to give 100/. towards this purpose :


that sum he thought might be raised at once. Although
there might be none able to give so large a sum as 100/.,
there were very many who might give half, a fourth, or
even a tenth of that amount, for such a purpose, and
the sum wmuld then be soon raised.
Mr. Kemp suggested, that among so numerous and so
respectable an assemblage, there were doubtless ten
who could afford to give 50 1, each, and twenty others
Avho could afford to apply 25/. each to such a purpose.
By this means a thousand pounds would be raised
at once, and that sum, he thought, would provide
them with a vessel of about seventy tons, perfectly
suitable for the particular service for which she was
required.
The Resolution w r as then put, and passed unani-
mously.
The Bishop of Newcastle moved the fifth Resolution
—“ That it is desirable for the Bishop, Clergy, and laity
of each Diocese, to constitute Diocesan Boards in con-
nexion with the Provincial Board, of which the Governor
be requested to be Patron, the Bishop ex officio President,
the Archdeacons Vice-Presidents; and two Diocesan
Treasurers, one clerical and one lay; and two Diocesan
Secretaries, one clerical and one lay; with a Committee
of clerical and lay members. That the rules of every
Diocesan Board be framed by the Bishop, Clergy, and
laity of the Diocese; and that for the present the Secre-
taries and Treasurers elected for the Diocese of Sydney
be requested to act provisionally as general Secretaries
and Treasurers.” He was delighted to find that his
work had been already done for him, for at that late
hour he was desirous not to trespass upon their patience,
and he did not, like some of his brethren, feel himself in
the position of a stranger among them. They had had
described to them, in forcible terms, the prospects of
success to their efforts for the salvation of the islanders,
and of the Australian natives; and they were called


upon to organize a vigorous institution for directing and
supporting their efforts. To this call he doubted not
their most ready and cordial response. He trusted that
they would also respond to the suggestion which had
been cast out as to the purchase of a vessel for the
Bishop of New Zealand. At a future meeting of their
Missionary Society, he trusted that he should be enabled
to address them more at length, and to state to them
what had been done by his right reverend brother the
Bishop of New Zealand ; for in the interim he would,
he trusted, have had an opportunity of accompanying
his brother to the scene of his labours. The simple
object of the Board mentioned in the Resolution was, to
add more strength to the good work which had that
evening been so well begun.
Mr. Robert Campbell briefly seconded the Resolu-
tion, which was passed unanimously.
Mr. Charles Cowper suggested that it would be ad-
visable that lists should be at once opened to carry out
the object which had been alluded to by Mr. Metcalfe
and Mr. Kemp. The latter gentleman had promised to
give the sum of 100/. to this purpose, and he thought it
would be well to at once commence a subscription list
with that sum.
The Bishop of Sydney then rose and said, that the
business of the meeting was now at an end, and it only
remained for him, in returning thanks to Almighty God,
who had put it in the hearts of so many faithful mem-
bers of His Church to assemble for the advancement of
the true faith, to impress upon them the necessity of
carrying out the good work they had commenced, and
thus in this as in every other word and work, to strive
to adorn the doctrine of God their Saviour in all things.
They had now been permitted to lay the foundation
stone of this great undertaking; but it Mould, before
the year elapsed, be necessary to call them to another
meeting, not, he trusted, less numerously attended or


less earnest in the cause, to enable them to advance
another step towards the attainment of their high and
holy object.
The Hallelujah Chorus was then sung, and the
Bishop having pronounced a benediction, the meeting
broke up.
THE END.


LONEON I
R. CLAY, printer, bread street hill.






