





1954.
(TWENTY-FIRST PARLIAMENT.)
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
REPORT
OF THE
ROYAL COMMISSION
ON
TELEVISION.
Presented by Command, 29 th September, 1954 ; ordered to be printed, 11 th November, 1954.
[Cost of Paper: —Preparation, not given; 880 copies; approximate cost of printing and publishing, £458.]
Printed for the GOVERNMENT of the COMMONWEALTH by A. J. ARTHUR at the
Government Printing Office, Canberra,
(Wholly set up and printed In Australia.)
No. 38 [GROUP H].—F.5242 /54. —PRICE 7D. 6D.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Pack.
Letters Patent appointing the Commission .. .. .. .. .. .. •. .. • • 5
Preliminary .. .. .. .. .. •. • • • • • • • • • • • • 7
Chapter I.—lntroductory .. .. .. .. . • •. • • • • • • • • 9
Chapter ll.—The Background —I.: Developments and Legislation in Australia and Overseas .. .. .. 11
Chapter 111. —The Background —11. : Technical Matters .. .. .. • • • • • • • • 23
Chapter IV.—The Social Impact of Television .. .. .. .. .. • • • • • • 32
Chapter V. —The Establishment of Australian Television Services .. .. .. .. • • • • 44
Chapter Vl.—The Organization of the Australian Television Service .. .. .. • • • ■ • • 66
Chapter Vll.—Programme Standards and Hours of Operation .. .. .. .. • • • • • • 75
Chapter VIII. —Some Particular Programme Issues .. .. .. .. •. • • • • • • 86
Summary of Recommendations .. .. .. .. .. • • • • • • • • • • 162
Supplementary Observations .. .. .. .. ■ • • • • • • • • • • • 167
Appendix A.—Advertising Time Standards (Broadcasting) .. .. .. •. • • ■ • • • 168
Appendix B.—Sunday Advertising (Broadcasting) .. .. .. . • • • • • • • • • 169
Appendix C.—Election Broadcast* .. .. .. .. •. • • • • • • • • ..110
Appendix D. —List of Witnesses .. .. .. .. .. •• •• •• •• •• H®
Appendix E.—Bibliography .. .. .. .. •• .. •• •• •• •• •• H®
Index .. .. .. .. .. .. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 121




COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
ELIZABETH THE SECOND, by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain, Ireland and the British
Dominions beyond the Seas Queen, Defender of the Faith :
To Our Trusty and Well-beloved—
Professor George Whitecross Paton, Vice-Chancellor of the University of Melbourne ;
Robert Gumley Osborne, Esquire, Chairman of the Australian Broadcasting Control Board;
Colin Blore Bednall, Esquire, of Brisbane, in Our State of Queensland, Editor;
The Honourable Robert Christian Wilson, a Member of the Legislative Council of Our State of New South
Wales ;
Norman Smith Young, Esquire, of Adelaide, in Our State of South Australia, Public Accountant; and
Maud Foxton, of Kalgoorlie, in Our State of Western Australia, Married Woman.
Greeting :
ENOW YE THAT We do by these Our Letters Patent, issued in Our name by Our Governor-General in and over Our
Commonwealth of Australia, acting with the advice of Our Federal Executive Council, in pursuance of the Constitution of
Our said Commonwealth, the Royal Commissions Act 1902-1933, and all other powers him thereunto enabling, appoint you to be
Commissioners, to examine, inquire into and report upon the following matters :
(a) The number of national and commercial television stations which can effectively be established and operated
having regard to the financial and economic considerations involved and the availability of suitable programmes;
( b) The areas which might be served by television stations and the stages by which they should be established;
(c) The conditions which should apply to the establishment of television stations ;
(d) The standards to be observed in the programmes of national and commercial television stations to ensure the best
use of television broadcasting in the public interest;
(e) Any conditions which may be considered desirable to apply to the television broadcasting of—
(i) political and controversial matter and issues;
(ii) religious services and other religious matter; and
(iii) advertisements ; and
(/) The conditions, if any, which should be imposed with respect to periods of broadcasting of television programmes:
AND WE APPOINT YOU the said Professor George Whitecross Paton to be Chairman of the said Commissioners and
as such to have a deliberative vote, and, in the event of an equality of votes, a casting vote, in all matters considered by the
Commission :
AND WE DIRECT THAT, for the purpose of inquiring into and taking evidence upon any matter entrusted to you Our said
Commissioners, any four of you Our said Commissioners shall be sufficient to form a quorum and may proceed with the inquiry
under these Our Letters Patent:
AND WE REQUIRE YOU with as litlle delay as possible to report to Our Governor-General in and over Our said
Commonwealth the result of your inquiries into the matters entrusted to you by these Our Letters Patent.
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF WE have caused these Our Letters to be made patent and the Seal of Our said Commonwealth
to be thereunto affixed.
WITNESS Our Trusty and Well-beloved Counsellor Sir William John McKell, Knight Grand Cross of Our Most
Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief in and over
Our Commonwealth of Australia, this eleventh day of February, in the year of our Lord One thousand nine hundred
and fifty-three, and in the second year of Our Reign.
W. J. McKELL,
Governor-General.
By His Excellency’s Command,
ROBERT MENZIES,
Prime Minister.
Entered on Record by me, in Register of Patents, No. 213, page 46, this twelfth day of February, One thousand nine
hundred and fifty-three.
T. COLLINS.




COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON TELEVISION.
REPORT OF THE COMMISSIONERS.
To His Excellency, Field Marshal Sir William Joseph Slim, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Honorable
Order of the Bath, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint
George, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Companion of the
Distinguished Service Order, upon whom has been conferred the Decoration of the Military Cross,
Knight of the Venerable Order of Saint John of Jerusalem, Governor-General and Commander-in-
Chief in and over the Commonwealth of Australia.
May it Please Your Excellency:
We the Commissioners appointed by Letters Patent dated the 11th day of February, 1953, have now
the honour to submit our report.
PRELIMINARY.
The Letters Patent.
The Letters Patent directed us to examine, inquire into and report upon the following matters:
( a ) The number of national and commercial television stations which can effectively be
established and operated having regard to the financial and economic considerations
involved and the availability of suitable programmes;
(&) The areas which might be served by television stations and the stages by which they
should be established;
(c) The conditions which should apply to the establishment of television stations;
(d) The standards to be observed in the programmes of national and commercial television
stations to ensure the best use of television broadcasting in the public interest;
(e) Any conditions which may be considered desirable to apply to the television broadcasting
of—
(i) political and controversial matter and issues;
(ii) religious services and other religious matter; and
(iii) advertisements; and
(/) The conditions, if any, which should be imposed with respect to periods of broadcasting of
television programmes.
The Inquiry.
Our first meeting was held in Melbourne on 23rd February, 1953. The first of our 34 public sittings,
which were held in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth and Hobart for the purpose of taking
evidence, began in Melbourne on 11th March, 1953. In all 163 witnesses were examined. We also
received’numerous written communications from individuals and organizations interested in the subject
of our inquiry. Some of our sessions were held in camera for the purpose of hearing evidence which
was tendered in confidence, chiefly because the information to be supplied related to estimates of revenue,
expenditure or costs.
In order to give the fullest opportunity to the public to express its views on the questions referred
to us, an invitation was Issued, after our first meeting on 23rd February, 1953, to organizations and
individuals desiring to be heard. This invitation was advertised prominently in the press in every capital
city throughout Australia. All who intimated their desire to appear before us were given an opportunity
to express their views. In addition, we invited certain departments, authorities, organizations, companies
and persons to assist us by giving evidence on specific matters or aspects of our inquiry. Several witnesses
appeared before us on more than one occasion. The number of separate organizations or companies
which gave evidence was 122.
The witnesses, in general, were asked to submit a written statement of their evidence, and the
number of such statements received as exhibits was 142. The official transcript of evidence (excluding
exhibits, some very lengthy) amounted to nearly 2,000 pages. We considered whether the transcript of
evidence and the exhibits should be printed to accompany this report, but came to the conclusion t at le
expense and delay involved would not be justified.


The Chairman was absent from Australia from 11th May to 21st August, 1953, in connexion with
a series of University conferences in the United Kingdom. He took advantage of this visit to make certain
inquiries on our behalf, into matters coming within our terms of reference, from the United Kingdom
Government and the British Broadcasting Corporation. During the absence of the Chairman the sittings,
both public and private, continued, and Mr. R, G. Osborne acted as Chairman.
We requested the Australian High Commissioner to Canada and the Australian Ambassador to the
United States of America respectively to obtain for us information on a number of matters relevant to
our inquiry. In Chapter 11. of our report we describe the television services in those countries, and in
Great Britain, and in some important respects we have been able to test our conclusions against their
experience in this field.
We desire to acknowledge the help that we have received from many different sources, and our
indebtedness to the witnesses who prepared statements and appeared before us. All the information for
which we asked was supplied, to the extent to which it was, in fact, available. It will be appreciated that,
in respect of some matters (especially financial and economic) definite and precise information could not
be supplied. Where relevant in our report we refer in some detail to the evidence of particular witnesses
on various aspects of our inquiry.
We are deeply indebted to our Secretary, Mr. K. Codings, for his assistance throughout our inquiry
and in the preparation of the report, and also to Mr. J. M. Donovan, Assistant Secretary, Australian
Broadcasting Control Board, whose services were made available to the Commission, to Miss I. M. Eastwood,
Librarian, on the staff of the Board (who prepared the bibliography printed in Appendix E) and to other
officers of the Board who were of great assistance to us.
8


CHAPTER I.—INTRODUCTORY.
1. Some account of the circumstances in which we were appointed and some reference to the precise
matters referred to us for inquiry, are necessary to an understanding of the nature and scope of the
inquiry, and therefore of our report. In Chapter 11. we set out in some detail, an account of the historical
and legislative background to television in Australia, as well as in other countries. We desire in this
introductory chapter to refer to two considerations which necessarily govern the form of this report and
our recommendations.
2. In the first place, we wish to invite attention to the limited nature of our terms of reference,
which required us specifically to report on the number of national (i.e. Government owned and operated)
stations and of commercial (i.e. private) stations which could effectively be established having regard to
financial and economic considerations and the availability of suitable programmes, and also on the areas
which might be served by such stations, and the stages by which they should be established, and on certain
other specific matters, incidental to the introduction of television services.
3. In the second place, we would refer to the legislation passed by the Parliament of the
Commonwealth in March, 1953 ( Television Act 1953), which provided legislative authority for the
establishment of both national and commercial television stations. The provisions of the Television Act
1953 are discussed more fully in Chapter 11. The Postmaster-General (Honorable H. L. Anthony, M.P.),
the Minister in charge of the Bill for the Television Act, stated that the purposes of the measure were—
(a) “to provide statutory authority for the establishment of television services in the
Commonwealth ... I submit it (The Bill) for the consideration of the House in the
belief that no matter how we may differ in detail as to how it should be done, we are all
agreed that television services with their great potential benefits for education, culture and
entertainment should be made available to the Australian people.”
(b) “to endorse the general principle that we should develop television in the Commonwealth on
the same fundamental basis as has been so remarkably successful in respect of sound
broadcasting.”
Prom the evidence submitted to us it would appear that the limited nature of our terms of reference,
and the fact that legislation providing for the establishment of both national and commercial television
services in Australia had already been passed, were not generally appreciated, and we have therefore
invited attention to the precise nature and scope of our inquiry,
4. In Chapter V. we refer to the substantial body of evidence which was presented to us in favour
of the argument that, for reasons which are there fully set out (mostly economic considerations), the
introduction of television services in Australia should be deferred indefinitely or for a considerable period.
In view of the great concern expressed by many sections of the community with the prospect of the
immediate introduction of television in Australia we felt obliged to consider, with great care, whether it
would be proper for us to enter on an inquiry into this aspect of the matter; we came to the conclusion
that, while consideration of proposals for the indefinite deferment of the introduction of television was
clearly precluded by our terms of reference, we should seriously examine whether economic and financial
considerations might not justify, or even require, a recommendation by us that the establishment of national
or commercial television stations, or both, should not be proceeded with for some limited period. We deal
with this question in Chapter Y.
5. Another substantial body of evidence advanced the view that if television services were to be
provided in this country they should be operated solely by a Government authority and that commercial
services should not be permitted to operate at all: alternatively, it was submitted that commercial services
should not be permitted to operate for a period of some years after the commencement of the national
service. These views were put to us, in whole or in part, by a number of individual witnesses, and on
behalf of the following organizations, listed in the order of appearance
Arts Council of Australia (Victorian Division).
New South Wales Teachers’ Federation.
Australian Council for the World Council oi Churches.
New Education Fellowship, New South Wah;s Branch.
Australian Culture Defence Movement.
British Drama League (Australia),
National Council of Women of Australia.
United Churches Social Reform Board.
Methodist Church of Australasia—South Australian Conference.
League of Women Voters of South Australia.
National Council of Women of South Australia.
Film and Television Council of South Australia.
Women’s Service Guilds of Western Australia Incorporated.
Fellowship of Australian Writers (Western Australian Section).
New Education Fellowship, Australian Federal Council.
Archbishop of Melbourne’s Committee on Television.


Council of Churches in Victoria.
Tasmanian State School Teachers’ Federation.
National Council of Women of New South Wales.
Australian Broadcasting Commission.
Housewives’ Association, Victorian Division.
Australian Council of Trade Unions.
Postal Telecommunications Technicians’ Association (Australia).
We have, however, already indicated that our terms of reference were clearly related to the provisions of
the Television Act, and restrict our functions of inquiry and reporting, in effect, to the conditions under
which what is known in Australia as the “ dual system ” of television services (similar to that already
operating in the field of broadcasting) should be established. Although the question whether commercial
television should be permitted in Australia Is clearly a matter which has caused great concern to large
sections of the community, we have come to the conclusion that it is not included in the matters referred to
us, and we do not therefore propose to offer any observations on this issue. We do, however, in Chapter V.,
express our conclusions on the stages by which national and commercial tele\ision stations might be
established in Australia.
6. Much of the evidence on the question referred to in paragraph 5 consisted of, or was based on,
objections to the introduction of commercial television on moral, cultural and educational grounds. While,
as we have said, we do not feel that the question of the introduction of commercial television as such was
referred to us for inquiry, we were specifically directed to report on the standards to be observed in the
programmes of both national and commercial television stations in order to ensure the best use of television
in the public interest, and this question, on which we also received a large body of evidence, we discuss at
length in Chapters IV. and VII.
7. Mr. A. C. Paddison, General Manager, Transcontinental Broadcasting Co. Ltd., who appeared
before us in Sydney, asked us to consider “ to what extent is television validly within the powers of the
Commonwealth ”, urging that while this question is of necessity one ultimately within the jurisdiction of
the High Court, “ it is still essential that the Commission should satisfy itself of its competence to propose
the expenditure of public funds, if there is any doubt regarding the validity of such expenditure ”. It was
apparently conceded by the witness that, while “within clearly defined limits the Commonwealth has
authority to control the issue of licences (for television stations), the allocation of frequencies and the
assignment of power ”, the competence of the Commonwealth to establish a “ Government financed television
service ” should be determined before we recommended the expenditure of any public funds on the
establishment of national television stations. Having received this submission in the form of a written
statement from the witness, we considered whether we should examine him on this aspect of the matter.
We decided that we were not required by our terms of reference to answer any questions such as those
proposed, or to consider the issue raised as to the expenditure of public funds. No question appeared to
be raised as to the validity of our own proceedings, and while it might be that any legislative, or other
action, which might be taken by the Commonwealth Parliament and Government to give effect to our
report might be open to challenge on constitutional grounds, we felt that this was not a matter into which
we could inquire,
10


CHAPTER II.—THE BACKGROUND—I: DEVELOPMENTS AND LEGISLATION IN AUSTRALIA
AND OVERSEAS.
1. Introductory.
8. As an introduction to our report, we have thought it desirable in this chapter to survey in some
detail the history of what has happened in the past in relation to television in Australia, to summarize
briefly the situation in those countries in which television services are already being operated, and to gh e
some particulars of existing Australian legislation relating to television, and also some information relating
to the organization of broadcasting in Australia.
2. Television in Australia.
9. The question of the introduction into Australia of television services was investigated, amongst
other things, in 1941 and 1942, by the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Broadcasting (the Gibson
Committee). In its report, presented to Parliament on the 25th March, 1942, the Committee recommended
that television services should not be introduced into the Commonwealth until further investigations had
been made by the proposed Parliamentary Standing Committee on Broadcasting. the
Australian Broadcasting Act 1942 provided that no licences should be granted for ( inter aha) television
stations except on the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Broadcasting, the
establishment of which was also provided for in that Act.
10. Because of the effects of the war on world developments in television, it was not considered
appropriate to consider the matter again until near the cessation of hostilities, and it was therefore not
until November, 1944, that the Postmaster-General referred the subject to the Parliamentary Standing
Committee for investigation and report.
11. The Standing Committee, on the 17th June, 1946, presented to Parliament a report, in which the
following recommendations were made: —
(a) In order to test the cost aspect and to facilitate a decision on the standards which might be adopted,
tenders should be invited as soon as circumstances permit, and under conditions acceptable to the Post Uttice,
with a view to consideration being given to the question of arranging experimental transmissions in Sydnev
and Melbourne. . . , . , . , ~ ,
(b) A condition of tendering should include a stipulation that a limited number of receivers shall be
made available on loan for the use of selected viewers, but that none shall be sold to the public until such time
as television is eventually authorized as a stabilized service.
(c) Experimental transmissions by commercial undertakings should not be permitted at the present
time, but they should not be precluded from co-operating in the experiments undertaken by the National
Broadcasting Service. . , ,
(d) In addition to technical, financial and other considerations, an essential requirement m both
experimental and regular transmissions should be the adoption of a code of standards in programmes along
the lines of the motion picture code. _
12. The Government decided that no immediate action should be taken to give effect to the
recommendations of the Standing Committee, but appointed a Cabinet Sub-Committee to keep the question
under review. Subsequently, in June, 1948, the Postmaster-General’s Department was authorized to invite
tenders for two or, alternatively, for six stations so that the aspect of cost could be properly assessed, as
recommended by the Standing Committee.
13 The Australian Broadcasting Act 1948, which was passed by the Parliament in November, 1948,
but which was not proclaimed to commence until the 15th March, 1949, provided for the establishment of
the Australian Broadcasting Control Board and imposed upon it certain obligations with respect to the
planning, establishment and operation of television services in the Commonwealth These provisions are
set out in paragraph 63. A section (103) was also incorporated in that Act which had the effect of
preventing {inter alia) the granting of licences for commercial television stations.
14. Following a report submitted to it by the Australian Broadcasting Control Board, the
Government, on the 14th June, 1949, announced that it had been decided that television should be
introduced into the Commonwealth as soon as the necessary arrangements could be made and that the
programmes should be provided by a national television authority. It was also stated that at the outse
stations would be established in each of the six State capital cities, where they would be capable of
serving about 60 per cent, of the population, and that the service would be extended to other centres as soon
as practicable.
15. There was a change of government following the general election of 1949, and the matter was
reviewed subsequently in February, 1950, and again in June, 1950, when it was decided that arrangements
for the introduction of television services should be proceeded with, but on the basis that development would
be on a gradual scale. It was proposed that initially a national station be established in Sydney, and that
consideration be given to the extension of the national service to other capital cities and to the larger
provincial centres, as experience in the technical and programme field was obtained. It was also decided
to permit private enterprise to participate in the development of the service by the licensing of one
commercial station in Sydney and one in Melbourne, and in any other capital city where there was


satisfactory evidence that an acceptable service could be provided. In announcing the decision of the
Government, the Postmaster-General stated that, in view of the novel problems which would be encountered
and the great expense which had to be incurred, the whole question of television had to be approached
for the time being on an experimental basis.
16. These decisions necessitated, at least with respect to the commercial service* the enactment
of legislation.
17. Various steps were taken as a preliminary to the establishment of the station at Sydney, including
the appointment of a Television Advisory Committee, the inviting of tenders for the supply of the
required technical equipment, and the investigation of operational aspects of television in overseas
countries by a small committee, but early in 1952 the Government felt it necessary to reconsider the whole
question in the light of the changed economic situation.
18. On the 12th March, 1952, the Government decided that the introduction of television into the
Commonwealth should be held in abeyance for the time being. In announcing this decision, the Postmaster-
General said that the Government had felt obliged to review its policy in many matters, including television,
because of the very drastic change which had taken place in the Australian economy as a result, primarily,
of alterations in the balance of overseas payments. In this connexion, the Government, whilst recognizing
that the introduction of television could confer many benefits on the community, was obliged to pay due
regard to many projects possessing a higher priority than television, notably those relating to defence, and
also to the overall economic situation. The Government had accordingly reached the conclusion that,
although it was anxious that television services should be provided for the people of the Commonwealth
as soon as possible, the time was inopportune to embark upon the introduction of television. The Minister
emphasized that this decision was reached by the Government with considerable reluctance, and it should
not be taken as indicating that the establishment of television services in this country had been deferred
indefinitely. On the contrary, he said, the question would be kept under constant review, as it was the desire
of the Government that the services should be commenced as soon as circumstances permitted.
19. Following on a report by the Postmaster-General on investigations made by him in the United
Kingdom and the United States of America in September-November, 1952, the Government again considered
the matter, and on 16th January, 1953, decided that legislation should be introduced at an early date to
provide for the licensing of commercial television stations so as to permit the establishment of both national
and commercial services in the Commonwealth. It was also decided that a committee should be set up
under the Royal Commission Act to advise the Government on various matters arising in connexion with
the establishment both of the national and the commercial services. The Prime Minister in announcing
these decisions stated, inter alia, that television was to be introduced into the Commonwealth on a
gradual scale and that the Government desired that before final decisions were made as to the various
stages in the development of the new service and the licensing of commercial stations, full opportunity
should be afforded for the expression of responsible opinions and the formation of accurate judgments on
the subject.
20. The Government on 23rd January, 1953, approved of the terms of reference to this Commission
and it was appointed by Letters Patent on 11th February, 1953.
21. A Bill to authorize the establishment of national television stations and to provide for the
licensing of commercial television stations in accordance with the Government’s policy, was passed by
Parliament on 20th March, 1953. A summary of the provisions of this Act {Television Act 1953) is given
in paragraph 61. We have already pointed out, in Chapter 1., that the Postmaster-General, in introducing
the Bill into the House of Representatives on the 18th February, 1953, stated that the Bill was being
brought down by the Government for the purpose of asking Parliament to endorse the general principle
that television should be developed in the Commonwealth on the same fundamental basis as is followed
in respect of broadcasting, i.e., the provision of services both by a Government instrumentality and by
private enterprise.
3. Television in Great Britain.
22. Broadcasting (including television) in Great Britain is conducted exclusively by the British
Broadcasting Corporation (8.8. C.) created by Royal Charter in 1926. This exclusive privilege is enjoyed
by the Corporation because, up to the present, successive governments have decided that, the
Postmaster-General is empowered by statute to grant licences to any number of persons to operate
broadcasting stations, he should not licence any one other than the 8.8. C. (As mentioned later a
somewhat different policy in respect of television has been announced by the present Government but has
not yet been implemented.) The charter has been renewed from time to time for varying periods the last
occasion being on Ist July, 1952, when it was renewed for a period of ten years.
Pre-war Development.
:■ E y erimental te,cvision transmissions commenced in Great Britain in 1929, and in 1932 the
British Broadcasting Corporation afforded facilities to Baird Television Limited for public evperimenta
transmissions of low definition television (30 line). Other forms of television also began T iTnsed


experimentally, and in 1934 a committee was appointed u to consider the development of television and to
advise the Postmaster-General on the relative merits of the several systems and on the conditions under
which any public service for television should be provided In its report submitted in January, 1935
(Cmd. 4793) the Committee recommended that —
(а) a public television service of high definition should be established and operated by the
British Broadcasting Corporation;
(б) the Postmaster-General should appoint an Advisory Committee to plan and guide the
initiation and early development of the service;
(c) an initial station in London should, at the outset, operate on the systems of Baird and
Marconi-E.M.I. alternately;
( d ) the aim should be the establishment of a network of stations operating on a national
standardized system of transmissions; and
(e) at the start, the cost of the service should be borne out of broadcast receiving licence revenue.
24. These recommendations were accepted by the Government and a regular public service of high
definition television, the first in any country, was inaugurated by the Corporation from the Alexandra
Palace, London, in November, 1936. The Baird and Marconi-E.M.I. systems were used alternately until
February, 1937, when it was decided that the latter system (405 lines) only should be employed in future.
Initially, programmes were provided for two hours per day, one in the afternoon and one in the evening.
By the end of 1939, when the service was suspended for defence reasons, encouraging progress had been
achieved, although the number of receivers in use by the public was only 20,000. This slow expansion in
the number of viewers was attributed mainly to the high cost of receivers and the general impression that
the service was still in the experimental stage. Nevertheless, there were pressing demands for an extension
of facilities to the provinces and plans for this expansion were under consideration.
Recommencement of Service after War.
25. In September, 1943, a committee was appointed by the Government “to prepare plans for the
reinstatement and development of the television service after the war y> . In its report, presented in
December, 1944, the Committee recommended that —
{a) the Minister responsible for sound broadcasting should also be responsible for television
and the British Broadcasting Corporation should continue to operate the service;
(6) an Advisory Committee should again be appointed;
(c) the London service should be restarted on the pre-war standard of definition and this
standard should also form the basis of plans for an extension of television to the
provinces;
( d ) vigorous research should be initiated with a view to the introduction of an improved
system approaching the cinema standard of picture definition and possibly incorporating
colour and stereoscopic effects; and
(e) two types of special television licences should be introduced for domestic viewers and for
cinemas respectively.
26. These recommendations were accepted in substance by the Government and the London television
service was reopened by the Corporation on the 7th June, 1946, using the pre-war equipment and
transmitting programmes for approximately four hours per day.
The Beveridge Committee of Inquiry.
27. The United Kingdom Government, in 1949, set up a committee under the chairmanship of Lord
Beveridge “to consider the constitution, control, finance and other general aspects of the sound and
television broadcasting services of the United Kingdom and to advise on the conditions under which these
services should be conducted after the 31st December, 1951 ”. The Committee presented its report (Cmd.
8116) to Parliament in January, 1951, the most important recommendations for present purposes being—
(а) that the 8.8. C. should continue to be the authority responsible for all broadcasting in the
United Kingdom, including television;
(б) the new charter of the 8.8. C. should have no fixed time limit but the working of the
Corporation should be subject to a quinquennial review;
(c) within its own sphere the 8.8. C. should in respect of television be in the same position as
it is in respect of broadcasting, of independence subject only to defined vetoes and
specific requirements;
(d) the Government should retain greater responsibilities and powers in regard to television
than in regard to broadcasting;
(e) a television advisory committee should be appointed to advise the Government in relation to
the 8.8. C.


Station.
Power kW.
Population Served.
Alexandra Palace
17
11,500,000
Sutton Goldfields (Midlands)
50
6,900,000
Holme Moss (North of England) . . • •
50
13,400,000
Kirk o’ Shotts (Central Scotland)
50
4,000,000
Wenvoe (Wales)
50
4,500,000
Year.
No. of Licences
1946
7,467
1947
32,994
1948
92,784
1949
239,345
1950
577,854
1951
.. 1,162,359
1952
. . 1,892,832
.. 2,479,454
1953
Views of Successive British Governments.
28 The Attlee Government, which was in office when the Beveridge Committee’s report was
presented, indicated in a White Paper (dated July, 1951, Cmd. 8291) that it was in general agreement
with the principal conclusion of the Committee that the B.B.C. should continue to function on substantially
the same basis as previously, i.e. it should continue as the authority responsible for al broadcasting m the
United Kingdom, including television. The Government proposed that the charter should be renewed £o
a period of fifteen years. However, the Churchill Government, which assumed office before the current
charter expired, outlined its views in a White Paper (dated May, 1952, Cmd. 8550) as follows.
(а) the charter of the B.B.C. should be renewed for ten years;
(б) commercial television would be introduced when men and materials are released from the
rearmament programme;
(c) the B.B.C. should retain its monopoly in the broadcasting field (advertisements to continue
to be excluded) ;
( d ) before the first television licence was granted Parliament would be afforded the opportunity
of considering the terms and conditions under which commercial television would operate;
(e) to prevent the B.B.C. becoming subordinated to political ends, a body of high State officials
including the Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition and the Lord Chief Justice
would be made responsible for appointing the B.B.C. Governors (this proposal was
subsequently abandoned) ; and
(/) the Government would seek advice on technical questions generally and on the development
of the B.B.C. television service from an Advisory Committee. (A Television Advisory
Committee was accordingly appointed in October, 1952.)
The Present Service.
29. The television service is at present provided from five transmitters which serve about 80 per
cent, of the population as follows: —
In addition three temporary transmitters are in use and these extend the service to an additional 4 per
cent, of the population. The majority of programmes is relayed from Alexandra Palace to the other
stations, but progressively a greater proportion of the programmes is being originated locally, particularly
in the field of “ outside broadcasts The technical standards of the television service have not been
changed since 1937. They are different from those used in the United States of America and those
which have been adopted for Australia. Fundamentally (there are a number of other differences) the
difference lies in the picture definition. In Great Britain this is 405 lines, in United States of America
525 lines, and that to be used in Australia in 625 lines. The hours of operation vary: for the year ended
the 31st March, 1953, the average weekly hours totalled 35. The following is an average week-day
schedule: —
Afternoon —3.15 p.m. to 4.15 p.m., 5 p.m. to 5.55 p.m.
Evening—B p.m. to 10.30 p.m.
In addition, transmissions are undertaken for about two hours each morning (excluding Saturday and
Sunday), primarily to facilitate the demonstration of receivers by retailers.
30. The number of licensed viewers as at the end of July, 1953, was 2,479,454. The rate of
development may be gauged from the following list of licences in force since 1946, when an additional
fee for television receivers was imposed: —


Financial.
31. There was no special licence-fee for television receivers until the middle of 1946. In that year
the Government not only doubled the licence-fee for a sound receiver to £l, but imposed a combination
sound and television receiver licence-fee of £2, which is the current fee. The amount received by the
8.8. C. from the additional £1 charged for a combined television and sound licence in the year ended 31st
March, 1953, was £1,679,007. Capital expenditure for the year amounted to £933,432 and running costs to
£3 401,042. In all, it was necessary to provide £2,654,629 out of reserves and other income. Of the operating-
expenditure 36 per cent, was on programmes and 45 per cent, on engineering.
Proposed Developments.
32. If frequency channels can be made available for the purpose, the Corporation envisages the
expansion of the present service, in accordance with a ten-year plan, which provides for the erection of 35
additional stations, twenty of which would be used for the transmission of a second programme on a
national basis. ( See First Report of Television Advisory Committee, 1952, paragraph 31.) The
Government, on 2nd July, 1953, announced that the Corporation would proceed at once with the erection
of seven new stations (the completion of which was expected within eighteen months) which would ensure
satisfactory reception by some 90 per cent, of the population.
Commercial Television.
33. Up to the present, as we have pointed out, the provision of television services in Great Britain
has been the sole responsibility of the British Broadcasting Corporation. However, the Churchill
Government in May, 1952, in a memorandum to Parliament (Cmd. 8550), proposed in the field of television
“ to permit some element of competition when the calls on capital resources at present needed for purposes
of greater national importance make this possible”. This proposal was subsequently adopted by both
Houses after vigorous opposition by the Labour party. There was also serious opposition on a non-party
basis in the House of Lords.
34. It was proposed that, before the first station was licensed, Parliament should be given the
opportunity of considering the terms and conditions under which the commercial stations would operate,
and that the commercial stations would not be permitted to engage in political or religious broadcasting.
35. On 2nd July, 1953, the Lord Privy Seal informed the House of Commons that the Government
proposed to publish in the Autumn a further White Paper defining the terms upon which competitive
television might be permitted to operate. Some of the broad principles envisaged were stated as follows
(Hansard , vol. 517, column 595) :
(a) The number of stations under any one ownership or control would be limited.
(5) It was not likely that a large number of stations would be licensed in the first instance and
they would be of low power and limited range.
(c) A controlling body would be set up to advise the Postmaster-General on the issue of
licences and would see that programmes conform to the standards to be laid down. It
would, for example, have power to call for a script in advance of presentation, to warn a
station which offended against the letter or spirit of these standards, and to make
recommendations to the Postmaster-General that the licence of any particular station
should be suspended or withdrawn.
(d) The owner and operator of a station, whose licence would be at stake, and not the provider
of programmes or the sponsor, would be the person responsible for what was broadcast.
(e) Among other things which might be specified in the licence, or by the controlling body,
would be the maximum number of hours the station should operate, any restriction on
the advertising of certain products, and the percentage of time and the place to be
allotted to advertising matter in any programme.
36. In November, 1953, the Government presented to Parliament a further memorandum on
television policy (Cmd. 9005 ) in order to inform Parliament, in greater detail, of its proposals with respect
to competitive television. The memorandum stated that “as television has great and increasing power in
influencing men’s minds, the Government believes that its control should not remain in the hands of a
single authority, however excellent it may be. Moreover, competition should be in the best interests of
viewers, writers’ artists and technicians. There will also be an increasing and urgent demand for filmed
television programmes throughout the world, and competition at home should induce vitality and help
Britain to produce programmes for overseas markets ”. The principal proposals of the Government, as
detailed in the White Paper, may be summarized as follows:
(a) A public corporation is to be set up by statute for a suggested initial period of ten years.
It would own and operate the transmitting stations and would hire its facilities to
privately financed companies, which would provide programmes and draw revenue from
advertisements.


(b) Like the the corporation would operate under licence from the Postmaster-General,
and would be given independence in the handling of day-to-day matters, including
individual programmes.
(c) The corporation would have a flexible control over the “ programme companies it would
have the right to scrutinize programmes, to forbid the transmission of specified classes
of matter and to regulate advertisements,
( d ) In selecting the programme companies and in fixing the duration of their contracts, the
corporation would be free to give opportunities to a number of companies.
(e) As commercial television under the scheme proposed would be controlled by a public
corporation, there is a stronger case for withdrawing the ban on politics and religion
originally contemplated, either at once or after a period of practical experience. The
arrangements for allowing such transmissions, as part of the commercial programmes,
would follow those adopted for the 8.8. C.
(/) The Postmaster-General would specify maximum and minimum hours of transmission each
day.
4. Television in Canada.
37. In March, 1949, the Canadian Government, in announcing the interim policy which was to be
followed in relation to television in the Dominion, stated that the general direction of television was to
be entrusted to the Board of Governors of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (C.8.C.), which would
make the necessary arrangements for the establishment of the services both by the Corporation and by
licensed private stations, in accordance with the Broadcasting Act. The question was also included among
the matters examined by the Royal Commission on National Development in the Arts, Letters and Sciences
(the Massey Commission). In its report presented to the Governor-General in Council, in May, 1950, the
Commission recommended that “ the direction and control of television broadcasting in Canada should
continue to be vested in the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation ”, and also that—
(a) no private television stations should be licensed until the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation
has available national television programmes, and that all private stations be required to
serve as outlets for national programmes ; and
(&) the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation should exercise a strict control over all television
stations in Canada to avoid excessive commercialization and to encourage Canadian
content and the use of Canadian talent.
38. In December, 1949, the Canadian Government authorized the Corporation to proceed immediately
with the construction of stations at Montreal and Toronto, and in November, 1952, announced that
applications would be received from private interests for licences for stations in centres other than those
where the Corporation operated stations, the objective being to achieve the provision of one service,
either national or private, to as great a proportion of the Canadian people as possible before a second service
is provided in any one area.
39. On 80th March, 1953, the Minister for National Revenue in the Canadian House of Commons
stated, with reference to the Government’s policy concerning television that—
The principle of one station to an area is to apply only until an adequate national television system is
developed. At the rate that applications for stations are now being received it may not be long before there is
a sufficient degree of national coverage to justify the Government and the C.B.C. giving consideration to
permitting two or perhaps in some cases more than two stations in certain areas. It is anticipated that, in
due course, private stations will he permitted in areas covered by C.B.C. stations and the C.B.C. may establish
stations in some areas originally covered by private stations.
Existing Service.
40. The Montreal and Toronto stations were brought into operation by the Canadian Broadcasting
Corporation in September, 1952, and a third station commenced operations at Ottawa on 2nd June, 1953.
The latter station serves as an outlet for programmes originating either in Montreal or Toronto. Certain
of the programmes of these stations are available for commercial sponsorship. Initially transmissions were
made for about three hours per day, but these have since been increased to six hours per day and a
further increase is contemplated. There are about 400,000 television sets in use.
41. The programme schedules for the Montreal station have been devised to provide service in the
proportion of 35 per cent. English content to 65 per cent, in French. The programme for Toronto also
includes a proportion of French programmes. The proportion of commercial programming is understood
to be about 35 per cent, of the total programme time. When the service commenced about 40 per cent,
of the programmes transmitted consisted of film material.
42. Relay facilities are provided between Montreal-Ottawa-Toronto, whilst programmes of American
origin are available by microwave relay from Buffalo, United States of America.


Financial.
43. Up to the present the Canadian Government has made available to the Corporation loans
amounting to 12,750,000 dollars covering capital expenditure and preliminary operating expenses. It is
expected that an additional loan of 2,000,000 dollars will be required to complete the existing installations
and to enable the erection of three additional stations to proceed. It is estimated that the annual operating
costs of the Corporation network, when completed will total between 10,000,000 dollars and 15,000,000
dollars.
44. The licence-fee of 2i dollars for a sound broadcast receiver was abolished in February, 1953,
and no licence-fee has been required for television receivers. The revenue from the 15 per cent, excise
duty which is charged on radio and television receivers and on valves and components has, however, been
diverted to the Corporation to finance, in part, its broadcasting and television activities. The anticipated
revenue from this source, based on present excise duty income, is approximately 12,000,000 dollars per year.
Proposed Expansion of Service.
45. The Government has announced that additional stations, to.be operated by the Corporation, are
to be established at Vancouver, Halifax and Winnipeg. The Vancouver station is expected to commence
operations before the end of 1953.
Private Television Stations.
46. Licences for private broadcasting stations, including television stations, are granted by the
Minister of Transport in conformity with the Radio Act 1938 (as amended) but the approval of the
Governor in Council is required before any such licence is granted. Under the provisions of the Canadian
Broadcasting Act 1936, the Minister is required to refer all applications for licences for such stations to the
Corporation for any recommendation it deems fit to make thereon. Following upon recommendations of
the Corporation, licences have now been granted for fourteen private stations, two of which have recently
commenced operations. The private stations are required to transmit at least ten and a half hours of
national programme material per week, which will be supplied to them by the Corporation, No private
station will be permitted to affiliate directly with any network outside Canada and it is proposed that this
restriction should extend also to the use of kinescope recordings of network programmes.
5. Television in United States of America.
Pre-war Development.
47. The first experimental television broadcasts in the United States of America were made in 1927
from a station established in Washington. By 1929, a total of 22 experimental stations had been authorized
to broadcast, visual images. In 1931, it became evident that technical progress was impossible in the
medium frequencies which were then being employed, and the trend to the higher frequencies began ( see
Fifth Annual Report of Federal Radio Commission). By 1936, activity in the medium frequency band had
ceased and all experimental stations were operating in the very high frequency bands. In the following
year, frequency allocations were established for the first time on a basis of channels 6 Mc/s wide, and, from
then on, rapid progress to the development of a high definition service was made.
48. The Federal Communications Commission (F.C.C.), in the meantime, had appointed a Television
Committee, comprising three Commissioners, to report upon the position of television development and
several reports on the subject were issued in 1939. The attitude of the Commission at that time was that,
although a limited public trial was justified, it was not possible to provide for a regular service until the
question of technical standards had been properly resolved. In January and April, 1940, the Federal
Communications Commission held public hearings on television, and concluded that a position had not been
reached which would permit the “ issuance of any standards of engineering performance ”. Conflicting
evidence had been prasented to the Commission claiming, on one hand, that television had not reached a
stage where it could offer sufficient entertainment value to justify commercial operation and that the issue
of standards could result in the “freezing” of the science at the then level of efficiency, and, on the other
hand, that television should be proceeded with at all costs. Because the situation was one which threatened
to hold up co-ordinated television development indefinitely and to delay the inauguration of a public service,
the Federal Communications Commission, in collaboration with units of the industry, established a
National Television System Committee to explore existing television systems with a view to formulating and
developing standards which would be acceptable to the industry and expedite a national system of television
(see Sixth Annual Report of F.C.C.). Out of the work of this Committee came virtually complete
agreement on a set of 22 standards which were presented to the Commission for approval and adoption.
49. On 20th March, 1941, the Federal Communications Commission held a public hearing to consider
“ when television broadcasting shall be placed upon a commercial basis and for considering rules,
regulations and standards for such stations ”. Subsequently the Commission adopted the standards
recommended by the National Television System Committee, and issued regulations providing for the
commercial operation of television stations as from Ist July, 1941. The regulations provided, inter alia,
F.5242/54.—2


Year.
No. of Stations.
No. of Receivers
(approx.).
1941
2
1942
4
m 9
1943
9
1944
8
1945
9
1946
6
8,000
1947
17
250,000
1948
29
1,000,000
1949
51
4,000,000
1950
97
10,500,000
1951
107
15,750,000
1952
123
22,000,000
that at least fifteen hours’ programme service per week should be rendered by each station, and that no
person should be permitted to own or control more than three stations. Those stations which had conducted
experimental transmissions immediately planned to commence a commercial service, and two stations m
New York began commercial operation on Ist July, 1941. They were followed by several others in the
ensuing months.
50. On 7th December, 1941, the United States entered the war and television developments ceased.
Commercial television services continued, but the production of receivers for public sale was suspended.
The Federal Communications Commission reduced the required hours of transmission to four per week.
Post-war Developments.
51. In 1944-45, the Federal Communications Commission held public hearings as a preliminary to
preparation of plans designed to ensure as rapid and extensive development of the television service as
possible. Subsequently in December, 1945, the Commission promulgated standards for the allocation of
frequencies to, and the technical operation of, television stations. The standards provided for thirteen and
later (in 1947) for twelve channels for television purposes. It was anticipated that under this plan 400
stations could be licensed, providing service to only about 40 per cent, of the population, and it was
recognized from the outset that many rural and even some important metropolitan areas would be without
service. By October, 1948, when there were 103 stations in operation, experience had shown that the
existing standards of allocation possessed serious shortcomings, as many of the demands for television
licences could not be met. It was therefore decided to examine the position comprehensively before
authorizing the establishment of additional stations. (This was the “ freeze ”.)
52. In April, 1952, the Commission, after a lengthy study following public hearings, issued new
standards of allocation and tables of channel assignments. The assignments were based on the following
principles: —
Priority No. 1. —Providing at least one television service to all parts of the United States;
Priority No. 2. —Providing each community with at least one television station;
Priority No. 3. —Providing a choice of at least two television services to all parts of the United
States;
Priority No. 4. —Providing each community with at least two television stations; and
Priority No. s.—The allocation of remaining unassigned channels to various communities,
depending upon population, location and services available.
53. The standards provided for the use of frequencies in the bands above 300 megacycles per second
which hitherto had not been used. Provision was made for a total of 1,445 stations in these bands and for
a total of 606 stations on frequencies below 300 megacycles per second —a grand total of 2,051 stations at
various specified centres throughout the country, including 242 educational stations.
The Present Service .
54. The number of television stations in operation as at the end of October, 1953, was 311, of which
103 were operating in the ultra-high frequency band. Stations were, until recently, licensed for one year
but the Federal Communications Commission on sth November, 1953, extended the licence period to three
years.
55. It is estimated that there are approximately 25,000,000 receivers in use in about 55 per cent, of
the homes in the United States. The rapid growth of development may be gauged from the following
table: —•
56. The F.C.C. rules provide that all commercial television stations will be licensed for unlimited
time operation. Each station is required, however, to transmit regular programmes for not less than a total
of twelve hours per week during the first eighteen months of the station’s operations, and for not less than


a total of sixteen hours, twenty hours, and twenty-four hours per week for eaeh successive six months
period respectively and not less than twenty-eight hours per week thereafter. Most stations provide
programmes for periods exceeding twelve hours per day and in some cases (in New York) reach seventeen
hours per day.
57. In May, 1952, Congress authorized an investigation by a sub-committee of the Congressional
Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce (the Harris Committee) on charges that television and
radio programmes were “ corrupting the nation’s youth ” and this inquiry concluded at the end of 1952.
Some details of the Report of this Committee are given in paragraph 387.
Financial.
58. The Federal Communications Commission, in July, 1953, reported that of the 108 stations in
operation for the full twelve months of 1952, 94 reported profitable operations, while fourteen showed a loss.
Nine of the stations which showed a loss were located in the two “seven station markets” of New York
and Los Angeles. The total revenue was 324,200,000 dollars, an increase of 35 per cent, on the revenue
for 1951, while the profits were 55,500,000 dollars (before Federal income taxes) as against 41,600,000
dollars for 1951.
Colour Television.
59. The question of the adoption of standards to provide for colour television was recently the
subject of public inquiry by the Federal Communications Commission. This matter is referred to in
paragraph 116.
6. Television in Other Countries.
60. Television services have been established in a number of other countries either on a regular
or on an experimental basis. In Europe experimental transmissions are now being undertaken in
Switzerland, Holland, Belgium and Spain, while regular services are being provided in France, Italy
and Germany. We were informed that the present position in the three latter countries is as follows:
France: The service is conducted by a public instrumentality. No advertising is permitted but
a viewer’s licence-fee of 3,275 francs is imposed. Two stations have been established
and three additional stations are contemplated. Programmes are transmitted for about
34 hours per week and 50,000 receivers are in use.
Italy: Service is at present provided from five stations conducted by a public company in
which the Government is the majority shareholder. Revenue is derived from licence-fees
and the sale of advertising time. Programmes are provided for about seventeen to
twenty hours per week, and it is estimated that there are 9,000 receivers in use.
Germany: Service is provided for about eighteen hours per week from eight stations operated
by a public instrumentality. Some 10,000 receivers have been sold. A licence-fee of
60 marks is charged.
Considerable development has also taken place recently in Mexico, where there are six stations in operation,
in Cuba, where there are five stations, and in the South American countries of Brazil (three stations),
Venezuela (two stations) and Argentina (one station). We were also informed that there are three stations
in operation in Russia and two in Japan, while in a number of other countries services are in various
stages of development.
7. Legislation in Australia with respect to Television.
61. The Television Act 1953, which came into operation on the 17th April, 1953, provides for the
establishment and operation of national television stations and the grant of licences for commercial
television stations. The principal provisions of the Act are as follows: —
3. The Postmaster-General may make television stations available for the transmission of television
programmes provided by an authorized authority.
4. —(1.) The Minister may, subject to the regulations and any determination made by the Board under
section six k of the Broadcasting Act, grant to a person a licence for a commercial television station upon such
conditions, and in such form, as the Minister determines.
(2.) Before exercising the power conferred on him by this section, the Minister shall take into
consideration any recommendations that have been made by the Board as to the exercise of that power.
5. The Minister may direct an authorized authority to provide television programmes for transmission
from a television station that is made available by the Postmaster-General under section three of this Act,
and that authority shall, subject to this Act and any directions of the Minister, provide adequate and
comprehensive programmes for transmission from that station.
6. Where the Minister, under the last preceding section, directs the Commission to provide television
programmes, the Commission has such powers as are necessary or convenient for the purpose of enabling the
Commission to comply with that section and, without limiting the generality of those powers, the Commission
may—
(a) for that purpose and with the approval in writing of the Minister, acquire, dispose of or
otherwise deal with any land, buildings, easements or other property, rights or privileges;
and


( h) subject to sub-section (3.) of section twenty-eight of tbe Broadcasting Act, defray the costs,
charges and expenses incurred by the Commission in complying with the last preceding
section out of moneys standing to the credit of the account or accounts opened and maintained
by the Commission under the Broadcasting Act.
10. The Governor-General may make regulations, not inconsistent with this Act, prescribing all
matters which by this Act are required or permitted to be prescribed, or which are necessary or convenient to
be prescribed for carrying out or giving effect to this Act, and, in particular, for prescribing the fees payable
in respect of the grant of licences under this Act.
The Act defines an “ authorized authority ” as an “ authority of the Commonwealth that is empowered
to provide television programmes or the Commission ”. “ The Commission ” means the Australian
Broadcasting Commission, and “ the Board ” means the Australian Broadcasting Control Board.
62. The Postmaster-General, in introducing the measure into the Parliament, indicated that the
Television Act was intended as interim legislation to be replaced at an appropriate time by a more
comprehensive Act; the intention of the Act was to provide statutory authority for the Government to take
such action as may be desirable as a preliminary to the establishment of television services in the
Commonwealth, and to make regulations to cope with situations which may arise before the introduction
into Parliament of more comprehensive legislation, following the completion of the inquiries of the Royal
Commission.
63. Provisions relating to television are also contained in sections 6k and 103 of the Broadcasting
Act 1942-1953. Section 6k relates to the powers and functions of the Australian Broadcasting Control
Board and provides—
(l.) The functions of the Board shall be—
(a) to ensure the provision of services by broadcasting stations, television stations and facsimile
stations, and services of a like kind, in accordance with plans from time to time prepared by
the Board and approved by the Minister;
(h) to ensure that the technical equipment and operation of such stations are in accordance with
such standards and practices as the Board considers to be appropriate; and
(c) to ensure that adequate and comprehensive programmes are provided by such stations to serve
the best interests of the general public,
and shall include such other functions as are prescribed in relation to broadcasting stations, television stations
and facsimile stations. ’
(2.) In exercising its functions under paragraph (c) of the last preceding sub-section
(h) the Board shall in particular—
(v) fix the hours of service of broadcasting stations, television stations and facsimile
stations.
(4.) The Board shall have power subject to any directions of the Minister
(a) to determine the situation and operating power of any broadcasting station, television stations,
or facsimile station;
(b) to determine the frequency of each broadcasting station, television station or facsimile station
within bands ot frequencies notified to the Board for such stations.
Section 103, which precludes the Minister administering the Wireless Telegraphy Act 1905-1936 from
granting a licence under that Act for a television station, reads as follows
_ Notwithstanding anything contained in the Wireless Telegraphy Act 1905-1936 the Minister
administering that Act shall not grant a licence under that Act for any purpose for which a licence may be
granted under this Act or for a television station or a facsimile station. 7
64 The Broadcasting Act 1942-1953 contains many provisions at present relating only to
broadcasting which have been considered by us in our examination of various specific issues relating to
such matters as the conditions of establishment of television stations, and certain aspects of television
programmes. We refer where neecssary to the relevant provisions of the Broadcasting Act when
commenting on these matters.
8. The Organization of Broadcasting in Australia.
60. There is a number of matters contained in our terms of reference in respect of which considerable
whicli ob nt ea ° Ver t m d a b y IT" iD the fela ° f br ° wl tha?
the problems which will be presented by television may, from some points of view, be very different it was
evident hat we might secure much information of value from an examinatioi of the organization of
broadcasting in Australia, and of the manner in which the various provisions of the Broadcasting Ac are
administered particulariy those which relate to matters similar to those included in our terms of reference
In later chapters of this report reference is made, in detail, to the relevant aspects of broadcasting but it
is appropriate to set out here a brief general description of the system and its operation.


66. The Australian broadcasting system consists of two types of services—
(a) the national broadcasting service established and operated under Part II of the
Broadcasting Act 1942-1953; and
(b) the commercial broadcasting service operated under licences granted in accordance with
Part HI. of the Act.
67. The national broadcasting service is provided by the Australian Broadcasting Commission a
statutory corporation which, in accordance with the Act, is required to broadcast from the national
broadcasting stations adequate and comprehensive programmes” and “take, in the interests of the
community, all such measures as, in the opinion of the Commission, are conducive to the full development of
suitable broadcasting programmes ”. The cost of the national broadcasting service is met out of funds
provided by the Parliament in accordance with estimates of expenditure approved by the Treasurer. The
provision and operation of all technical services associated with the transmission of programmes provided
by the Commission are undertaken by the Postmaster-General’s Department. The situation and the
operating conditions of the national stations have been determined on a basis designed to ensure, as far as
possible, the satisfactory reception throughout the Commonwealth of the programmes provided by the
Commission. These programmes are, in general, produced on an Australian, and not a local, or regional,
except during relatively short periods devoted to items of special interest to the areas in which the
individual stations are (For a fuller description of the national and commercial services see the
Annual Reports of the Australian Broadcasting Control Board and especially the Second Annual Report
(1950).)
68. The commercial broadcasting service is provided by a number of separate stations licensed
individually (more than one licence may be held by one person or company, subject to the conditions
prescribed in section 53 of the Act), These stations rely for their income on the broadcasting of
advertisements. Licences may be granted for a period not exceeding three years and may be renewed for
a period not exceeding one year. Licensees of commercial broadcasting stations are required to provide
programmes to the satisfaction of the Australian Broadcasting Control Board, which is also required to
approve of the technical equipment and method of operation of such stations. In general the commercial
broadcasting service is intended to provide substantially a local or regional service on a commercial basis
through separate broadcasting stations serving relatively restricted areas.
69. The Broadcasting Act 1942-1953 imposes separate functions and responsibilities with respect to
the control and provision of the national and commercial broadcasting services upon the Minister (at present
the Postmaster-General), the Australian Broadcasting Control Board, the Australian Broadcasting
Commission and the Postmaster-General’s Department. The more important functions of the Minister and
the three organizations mentioned, as prescribed in the Act, are indicated in the following paragraphs.
The Minister.
70. So far as the national broadcasting service is concerned, the Minister may prohibit the Australian
Broadcasting Commission from broadcasting any specified matter (section 41). He may also direct the
Commission to broadcast any matter which he considers as being in the public interest (section 23). The
approval of the Minister is also necessary before any property may be acquired, or any agreement entered
into, which involves expenditure exceeding £5,000. In addition, no lease of property or agreement
involving a period in excess of five years, may be entered into without the Minister’s consent (sections 20
and 21).
71. With respect to the commercial broadcasting service, the Minister grants licences for stations
upon such conditions as he determines (section 44). He may also determine the period of such licences,
not exceeding three years, and renew licences for any period not exceeding one year (section 46). The
Minister may, in addition, suspend, revoke or determine any licence on the ground that the licensee has
failed to comply with any provisions of the Act or the regulations or with any condition of the licence, or if
he considers it advisable in the public interest to do so (section 49). He may also prohibit any licensee
from broadcasting any specified matter (section 60). Before exercising any of his powers with respect to
the licensing of commercial broadcasting stations, the Minister is required to take into consideration any
recommendations made by the Australian Broadcasting Control Board (section 52a).
The Australian Broadcasting Control Board.
72. The Australian Broadcasting Control Board, which was established on 15th March, 1949,
pursuant to the provisions of the Broadcasting Act 1948, consists of three members appointed by the
Governor-General. The principal functions of the Board as set out in section 6k of the Broadcasting Act
1942-1953 are as follows:
(a) to ensure the provision of services by broadcasting stations, elevision stations and facsimile
stations, and services of a like kind, in accordance with plans from time to time prepared
by the Board and approved by the Minister;


(&) to ensure that the technical equipment and operation of such stations are in accordance with
such standards and practices as the Board considers to be appropriate;
(c) to ensure that adequate and comprehensive programmes are provided by such stations to
serve the best interests of the general public.
73. In the exercise of its functions in respect of programmes, the Board is required—
(а) to consult the Australian Broadcasting Commission and representatives of licensees of
commercial broadcasting stations in relation respectively to the programmes of the
national and commercial broadcasting services, and
(б) in particular to —
(i) ensure reasonable variety of programmes;
(ii) ensure that divine worship or other matter of a religious nature is broadcast for
adequate periods and at appropriate times and that no matter which is not of
a religious nature is broadcast by a station during any period during which
divine worship or other matter of a religious nature is broadacst by that station;
(iii) ensure that facilities are provided on an equitable basis for the broadcasting of
political or controversial matter;
(iv) determine the extent to which advertisements may be broadcast in the programme
of any commercial broadcasting station;
(v) fix the hours of service of broadcasting stations, television stations and facsimile
stations.
74. The Board is empowered to make recommendations to the Minister as to the exercise by him of
any power under Division I. of Part 111. of the Act, which prescribes the conditions under which licences
are granted to commercial broadcasting stations.
75. The Board also has power, subject to the directions of the Minister—
(а) to determine the situation and operating power of any broadcasting station, television
station or facsimile station;
(б) to determine the frequency of each broadcasting station, television station or facsimile
station, within bands of frequencies notified to the Board by the Postmaster-General as
being available for such stations;
(c) after consultation with the Commission, to determine the conditions upon which a
commercial broadcasting station may broadcast a programme of the national broadcasting
service;
(d) to regulate the establishment of networks of broadcasting stations and the making of
agreements or arrangements by licensees of commercial broadcasting stations for the
provision of programmes or the broadcasting of advertisements.
The Australian Broadcasting Commission.
76. The Australian Broadcasting Commission consists of seven Commissioners, at least one of whom
must be a woman; one Commissioner must be an officer of the Department of the Treasury and one an
officer of the Postmaster-General’s Department (these last-mentioned Commissioners are referred to as
Departmental Commissioners). The Commissioners are appointed by the Governor-General for a period
of three years (except the Departmental Commissioners, who hold office during the pleasure of the
Governor-General). Section 18 (1.) of the Broadcasting Act 1942-1953 prescribes that the Commission
shall—
‘ provide and shall broadcast from the national broadcasting stations adequate and comprehensive
programmes and shall take in the interests of the community all such measures as, in the opinion of the
Commission, are conducive to the full development of suitable broadcasting programmes.”
The Commission is specifically prohibited from broadcasting advertisements (section 24 (1.)). It is
required to provide daily news and information services and to employ an adequate staff both in the
Commonwealth and in overseas countries to enable this to be done (section 25).
The Postmaster-General’s Department.
77. The Broadcasting Act (section 36) provides that the Postmaster-General shall undertake the
provision and operation of all technical services associated Avith the transmission of programmes proA'ided
by the Australian Broadcasting Commission. The Postmaster-General is also required to provide, free of
charge, relay facilities to enable simultaneous transmissions from two or more national stations and certain
other services (section 38).
78. The collection of listeners’ licence-fees is also the resnonsibilitv of the Postmaster-General
(section 96). The fee is, at present, £2, except in the ease of listeners residing more than 250 miles from
any broadcasting station, when it is 285., and in the ease of pensioners who, subject to certain conditions,
pay a fee Avhich is one-quarter of the normal fee. Free licences are granted to blind persons and to schools.


CHAPTER III.—THE BACKGROUND—II: TECHNICAL MATTERS.
1. Introductory.
79. In the course of our consideration of the question of the number of television stations to be
established in Australia and the areas to be served by them, it was necessary for us to examine, in some
detail, a number of technical matters, since it became evident that, in the final analysis, decisions on
these matters might well determine, to a large extent at least, the nature of our recommendations.
Moreover, a great deal of evidence on technical matters was presented to us. We feel that, as a background
to our observations in later chapters of this report on each of our terms of reference, it is relevant to review
this evidence, and also to set down certain fundamental technical considerations which it has been necessary
for us to keep in mind in reaching our conclusions. We have also considered it necessary to make a
number of recommendations with respect to certain technical matters and these are included in the relevant
sections of this chapter.
2. Description of Television.
80. We feel that an appreciation of the discussions in this chapter might perhaps be facilitated if,
as a preliminary, a brief general description of television as a medium of communication is given, and
this we attempt to do.
81. The Television Act 1953 defines a television station as a station for the transmission of transient
images and associated sound intended for reception by the general public. Similarly, the Federal
Communications Commission of the United States of America in its rules defines a television station as
one transmitting simultaneous visual and aural signals intended to be received by the general public.
The methods of transmission of sound by broadcasting stations are now quite well known, and the technique
of transmitting the sound component in television is not basically dissimilar. The transmission of visual
signals is, however, more complex.
82. The satisfactory reception of images is possible because of that property of the sense of sight
(known as “ persistence of vision ”) which enables the eye to retain the impression of any scene for a small
fraction of a second. During this interval of persistence of one scene, other successive scenes can be
presented to the eye in their proper positions and appear as continuous motion, as in motion pictures. A
scene which is photographed by a television camera consists of a geometrical arrangement of small areas
of light and shade. This picture may be divided into a large number of fine dots or elements, and a
television picture may consist of some 300,000 of these. The electronic system of television transmits the
elements of a picture in a manner comparable to the eye reading a printed page of a book. This process,
known as “ scanning ”, breaks the picture up into horizontal lines and successively transmits the elements
in each line, beginning normally with the top row in much the same manner as a book is read. The
detail and clarity of the picture are determined by the number of scanning lines transmitted and the
number of dots per line, which, in turn, depend upon the bandwidth of the channel on which transmissions
are undertaken. The greater the number of lines the wider must be the channel if the best possible
definition is to be secured.
83. The mechanism for the transmission and reception of visual signals by means of television has
now become practically standardized. At the transmitting end, a camera is employed to scan the picture
and convert the scene of light and shade into electrical impulses of varying intensities which are then
amplified, impressed on a carrier current, and radiated from an antenna. At the receiver, a kinescope
or cathode ray tube is employed for the conversion of the electrical impulses back into the picture elements.
This device produces on the fluorescent screen of the tube a moving dot, the brightness of which is controlled
by the strength of the electrical impulses. By scanning the whole surface of the tube in synchronism with
the transmitter the original picture is reproduced,
84. In transmitting a television programme two separate transmitters are employed, one for the
sound and the other for the pictures.
3. Technical Requirements of Television.
85. As we have explained above, the quality of a television picture depends fundamentally upon
the number of scanning lines and the bandwidth of the channel upon which the transmissions are made.
In Australia, it has already been determined that the number of lines to be employed will be 625. If
full advantage is to be derived from this standard, a channel width of approximately 7 megacycles per
second is necessary. (As explained later, the Australian standards provide for 7.5 megacycles per second.')
86 The necessity for using, for television stations, channels consisting of such a wide band of
frequencies gives rise to special problems, because of the demands which are made on the available space
in the frequency spectrum. (It was explained to us that the standards adopted for Australia will
nef > ess it a t e for each television frequency channel approximately seven times the space of the whole of
the frequency band occupied by all the broadcasting stations in the Commonwealth.) Chiefly for this
reason television stations are assigned to frequencies in the very high and ultra high frequency bands
where space is available, subject, however, to the claims of other services which use those frequencies
This matter is discussed further in paragraphs 93 and following.


87. We were also informed that the difficulties which are involved in the relaying of television
programmes between stations are brought about primarily by the need to transmit a wide band of
frequencies. It becomes impracticable, in consequence, to utilize the same relaying facilities as are used
by broadcasting stations and the installation of coaxial cables or special radio systems is required.
4. The Australian Television Standards.
88. We were not required specifically to examine the question of the technical standards which have
been determined for the Australian television service. Some witnesses, however, made suggestions
concerning them, and it became evident that the technical standards could have an important bearing on
our conclusions on some aspects of our terms of reference. We have, therefore, given some attention to
this matter. Although efforts have been made to do so, it has been found impracticable to obtain
agreement on uniform television standards for all countries of the world, but as a result of the work of
the International Radio Consultative Committee (C.C.1.R.) of the International Telecommunications
Union, four sets of standards have been adopted, the principal characteristics of which are—
Great Britain —405 lines, 25 pictures per second, 5 megacycles per second channel width.
United States of America—s2s lines, 30 pictures per second, 6 megacycles per second channel
width.
France—Bl9 lines, 25 pictures per second, 14 megacycles per second channel width.
Other AVestern European countries —625 lines, 25 pictures per second, 7 megacycles per second
channel width.
89. The standards which have been determined for Australia are substantially in accordance with
the standards shown above which were adopted for use in Europe (except France) and were recommended
by a study group of the International Consultative Radio Committee for international use. The main
difference is that a channel width of 7.5 megacycles per second is to be used in Australia as against 7
megacycles per second recommended for international adoption. Full details of the Australian standards
are published in the Second Annual Report of the Australian Broadcasting Control Board.
90. The representatives of manufacturers of electronic equipment, and other technical witnesses
who appeared before us, in general commended the standards which had been determined for the
Australian service. Mr. L. A. Hooke, representing Amalgamated Wireless (A/asia) Ltd. and the
Electronics and Allied Industries Division of the Chamber of Manufactures of New South Wales, told
us that they provide for a standard of resolution somewhat in advance of that provided by present-day
techniques in Great Britain and America, and thereby anticipate improvements in design, manufacture,
and operating techniques, which must inevitably take place in the future. Mr. K. S. Brown, representing
Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd., also informed us that, wuth some reservations, his company
agreed with the standards which had been determined, and believed that they would enable a service of
high quality at a reasonable cost to be provided. Mr. Brown expressed the opinion, however, that unless
sound reasons could be advanced for retaining the 7.5 megacycles per second channel width specified in
the Australian standards, the desirability of adopting in full the standards recommended bv the C.C.I.R.
should be reviewed. He felt that adherence to the Australian standards was likelv to have an appreciable
effect on the cost of relay and transmitting equipment, would adversely affect the establishment of an
export market to some other countries, and would prevent the direct anplication of the benefits of overseas
developments m equipment designed specifically for the C.C.I.R. 625-line standard. Sir John Butters
representing Associated Newspapers Limited, expressed somewhat similar views. On the other hand Mr
Hooke told ns that he did not regard the difference in channel width as an important factor so far as
the question of possible exports was concerned.
91. Although as we have already pointed out, the question of technical standards is not a matter
embraced snecificdly by our term of reference, we felt obliged to examine the implications of the evidence
presented to us with respect to the bandwidth of the frequency channels reserved for the Australian service,
as this might affect the number of such channels available and in consequence the number of stations
which can be established, a matter upon which we are required to report.
92. We have ascertained that, because of the disposition in the frequency spectrum of the channels
reserved for television purposes in Australia, a reduction in the channel width to 7 megacycles per second
would not result in any additional channels becoming available. If a reduction of Die channel width
would result in the provision of additional channels in that portion of the frequency spectrum which is
already reserved for television or may be reserved as a result of our recommendation in paragraph 106
there may be some force in the view that the C.C.I.R. standard of 7 megacycles per second should be adopted!
particularly as we understand that no very great inconvenience would result. We, therefore simgest that
the emdence which has been presented to us in relation to the Australian television standards should be
cons dered by the Australian Broadcasting Control Board, which, in accordance with section 6k of the
Broadcasting Act 1942-1953, is responsible for the determination of such standards.


5. The Frequency Position.
93. The number of television stations which may be established to serve any one area is dependent
primarily on the availability of frequency channels. In the reservation of channels for television, certain
fundamental factors have to be taken into consideration, of which the following are the most important for
present purposes:—
(a) the availability of bands of frequencies is restricted because of the requirements of other
classes of services (including defence);
(5) the distribution of bands of frequencies among the various classes of services is governed,
to a certain extent, by the International Telecommunications Convention (to which
Australia is a signatory) ;
(c) the relatively wide band which is required for each television channel (750 times that of
a broadcasting channel in the medium frequency band).
94. We were informed by the representative of the Postmaster-General’s Department, which is
responsible for the determination of the bands of frequencies to be used for the various classes of radio
services, that in the very high frequency (V.H.P.) band the following provision had been made for
broadcasting, including television, services: —
44-51.5 megacycles/second—Available from Ist January, 1956, for use only wuthin 50 miles of
State capital cities.
62.5- megacycles/second—Available from Ist January, 1956.
90-108 megacycles/second—Available now.
174-181.5 megacycles/second—Available now.
181.5- megacycles/second—Available now.
208.5- megacycles/second—Available now.
95. Having regard to the technical standards which have been determined for the Australian service,
the above-mentioned bands of frequencies could provide for nine separate television channels. We were,
however, informed by the Australian Broadcasting Control Board that the two channels which could be
provided in the band 90-108 megacycles per second could not be assumed to be available for television, as
this band of frequencies was specifically reserved for possible further developments in very high frequency
(frequency modulation) broadcasting. As the frequencies are allocated at present only seven V.H.P.
channels are therefore available for television purposes. In addition to the foregoing, however, provision
has been made for a total of 47 channels in the ultra high frequency (U.H.F.) band between 500 and 855
megacycles per second.
96. The above-mentioned channels are sufficient to provide for all the foreseeable requirements of
television in Australia, because the relatively limited interference range of transmission on those channels
makes it practicable for any number of separate stations to use one channel so long as they are located
about 200 miles apart. There is, however, a marked difference between the problems associated with the
use of frequencies in the two bands, and evidence was presented to us to the effect that the disadvantages
involved in using channels in the U.H.F. band were of such a serious nature, at least at the present stage
of development, that it would be preferable to confine activities to the V.H.P. band. It became evident
to us that this particular matter was of vital importance and that any decisions reached thereon could
have a significant bearing on the manner in which television would develop in the Commonwealth, because
of the limited number of V.H.P. channels which are available. In the circumstances, we felt that it was
essential to pay some attention to this particular question.
97. We were informed by a number of witnesses that it was only recently that technological
developments had advanced to the stage which would justify the use of frequencies in the U.H.F. band for
television stations, and that only in the United States of America have these frequencies yet been user!
for the purpose. In that country a stage was reached in October. 1948, when because of the phenomenal
development of television, urgent action was necessary to secure additional channels to meet the demand
for television services in areas which could not be provided for with the channels then available. In April,
1952, after some years of investigation, new standards were promulgated by the Federal Communications
Commission of the United States of America providing for the use of channels in the U.H.F. band and
these are now gradually being brought into use. The relatively brief practical experience which has been
obtained in America in the use of U.H.F. channels has, we understand, confirmed the theoretical predictions
that they are inferior to V.H.F. channels, inasmuch as smaller areas are covered by the transmissions of
stations using U.H.F. channels. The use of high power transmitters is, at present, impracticable and
receiving enuipment is more complex. Although in Canada provision has been made for the use of U.H.F.
channels, they have not yet been assigned to any operating station and present development is confined to
channels in the V.H.F. band. In Great Britain the five television stations in operation transmit on channels
in the V.H.F. band. The auestion of the availability of frequency channels in that country was the
subject of a recent inquiry by the Television Advisory Committee. In its report dated Bth May, 1953, the


Frequency Channel.
liural Service.
Urban Service.
Miles.
Miles.
Lowest Y.H.F. channel (60 megacycles/second) ..
57
27
Highest Y.H.F. channel (200 megacycles/second)
47
29
U.H.F. channel
31
20
Committee recommended to the Government that to provide for future development, the following U.H.F.
bands should be reserved for television: —
470-585 megacycles per second.
610-960 megacycles per second.
We have noted, however, from this report that the Television Advisory Committee recommended that efforts
should be made to secure the use of additional V.H.F. channels. The economic advantages of the use of
V.H.F. channels over U.H.F. channels was emphasized in the report, and we take the liberty of quoting
the following excerpt (in which Band 111. relates to V.H.F. channels and Bands IV. and V. to U.H.F.
channels) :
Transmitters operating in Band 111. can give a much greater service area coverage than is at present
possible with higher frequencies. This band is essentially suitable for a system of transmitters providing
substantially complete coverage of the whole country. In broad terms, within the limitations of present
knowledge of propagation at, and the present stage of development of valves for, the higher at
least twice as many stations would be required to give substantial coverage of the whole country using
frequencies in Bands IV. and V. as would be required if frequencies in Band 111. were used. In addition,
the circuits, valves and other components required for both transmitters and receivers operating in Bands
IV. and V. have not been developed to the point of large-scale production. The start of television transmissions
in these bands does not therefore represent quite such an easy progressive development of television broadcasting
as would the opening of Band 111. stations.
98. We obtained from the Australian Broadcasting Control Board some details concerning the areas
which might be expected to be covered by stations operating in the V.H.F. and U.H.F. bands respectively.
This information disclosed that for typical operating conditions over average terrain, with an effective
radiated power of 100 kilowatts, and a transmitting radiator having a height of 500 feet above the average
terrain, satisfactory service would be provided to the following distances; —
The greater distance possible in the case of rural services is accounted for by the lower noise level
normally prevailing in country districts.
99. Electronic equipment manufacturers, who are vitally concerned with the question of the bands
of frequencies employed for television purposes, because of its possible effect on the production and marketing
of receiving and transmitting equipment, informed us that although no insuperable difficulty would be
involved in the manufacture of receivers or transmitters suitable for the U.H.F. band, the techniques
involved are generally more difficult, and that if sufficient channels were available it would be preferable to
confine television to the V.H.F. band. As we point out in Chapter V., manufacturers also generally agreed
that although there would be little difference in the cost of a receiver manufactured to receive transmissions
in either the V.H.F. or the U.H.F. band, the cost of a set designed to receive transmissions in both bands
would be fignifisantly higher. Mr. L. A. Hooke (Amalgamated Wireless (A/asia) Ltd.) told us that
“ techniques are easier at V.H.F, than at U.H.F., and if it were not for the restriction of channels, it
would be preferable to confine television to the V.H.F. region ”. He concluded that, taking all things into
consideration, the best approach was to aim at starting television in the V.H.F. band and that, if it were
necessary to utilize U.H.F. channels from the outset in order to meet the demand for services, allocations
should be grouped on an area basis, as far as possible, so as to avoid the need for combination receivers,
which would be more expensive. Mr, K. S. Brown (Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd.) expressed
the view that, because of the cost factor, U.H.F. could be justified only after it had been demonstrated
that insufficient V.H.F. channels could be made available to give an adaquate nation-wide service. He felt
that, if it were considered that the V.H.F. channels which can be made available would be sufficient to
satisfy requirements for some years to come, it would be wise to confine activities to those channels and
consider using the U.H.F. band when the need arose. The receiver problem could be overcome by
incorporating suitable converters in existing receivers. The Hon. A. G. Warner (Electronic Industries
Limited) said that, whilst V.H.F. channels were available, he did not think there was any need to go into
U.H.F., and Mr. S. 0. Jones (Philips Electrical Industries Ltd.) stated that it would be preferable from
the point of view of the manufacturers, and cheaper for the viewer, to confine the service to the V.H.F.
band, the available channels in which would, in his opinion, be ample for a long time. (Mr. Jones, in
relation to colour transmissions, which are referred to later, raised the question of confining activities to
the U.H.F. band in order that adequate channel bandwidth might be provided.)
100. On the other hand, some witnesses, mainly those representing commercial broadcasting and
allied interests, urged that steps should be taken to reserve sufficient channels to ensure that the number
of stations to be established would not be restricted by technical considerations. The Australian Federation


of Commercial Broadcasting Stations, for example, pressed the view that “ the Australian television system
should, from its commencement, make provision for the greatest number of channels, and to this end
urged the opening up of the U.H.F. band in addition to the use of the available V.H.F. channels The
Federation’s attitude was based, it was stated, on the grounds that —
(a) most of the problems concerning the extension of television services to rural areas would be
removed;
(b) the benefits of the dual system would, otherwise, be denied to practically all country centres;
(c) there was no serious obstacle to the use of channels in the U.H.F. band; and
( d ) receivers could be designed from the outset to receive transmissions in both bands; they
would not become obsolete at a later stage nor would the expense of purchasing adaptors
for U.H.F, use be imposed upon the public.
Similar views were expressed by Sir John Butters, Chairman of Directors of Associated Newspapers Ltd.,
and Mr. J. E. Ridley, Chairman of Directors of Country Broadcasting Services Limited.
101. We also received evidence on other aspects of the frequency problem, such as the incidence of
interference, shadow effects, and aerial design and efficiency, which we do not feel it necessary to review in
this report.
102. From our consideration of the technical evidence, it is possible to summarize the main questions
involved as follows: —
(a) Only a relatively limited number of frequency channels has been reserved for television in
the V.H.F. band, but ample provision has been made in the U.H.F. band {see paragraph
95) ; .
(b) television services have been operating for many years on channels in the V.H.F. band in
overseas countries, but experience in the U.H.F. band has been confined to the United
States of America and for a very limited period;
( c ) the area throughout which a satisfactory service may be provided by a station is much
more in the V.H.F. band than in the U.H.F, band;
(d) there is no significant difference in the cost of transmitting installations for the V.H.F. or
the U.H.F. bands, but the techniques involved with the latter are more difficult and,
at the present stage of development, lower power only is practicable for U.H.F. stations;
(e) there is no great difference between the costs of a V.H.F. receiver and a U.H.F. receiver
but the cost of a combination receiver is significantly higher.
103. There is no doubt that from all points of view the use of channels in the V.H.F. band is
preferable to those in the U.H.F. band, and that the use of the latter is, at the present stage of development
at least, only justified if channels in the former band are not available. As we point out in Chapter
V., it is not practicable for us to draw up a plan to cover the ultimate development of television services
in the Commonwealth, because many factors which will have a fundamental bearing on the extent and rate
of development can be determined only as a result of practical experience. Our objective is therefore to
make recommendations which will be of practical use during the initial establishment period, and provide
the foundations upon which the service may be built and developed progressively in the light of
experience. The problem with which we are confronted is whether the number of V.H.F. channels which
have been reserved is sufficient for possible future developments as well as for the initial stages. In this
connexion, we arranged for the Australian Broadcasting Control Board to prepare for us a number of
specimen alternative assignment plans in order that we might assess the extent of the service which is
practicable with the seven available V.H.F. channels. These plans, which were prepared only as examp.es
of possible alternatives, disclosed —
(a) that if, say, three channels were reserved for capital cities and two for Newcastle (because
of its population of approximately 250,000), one channel could be reserved for every town
in the Commonwealth having a population in excess of 5,000 but, for many such towns,
provision could not be made for a second channel to ensure a choice of programmes; and
(5) that if the reservation of channels for capital cities was increased to five, a channel would
not he available for a number of country towns over 5 000 population, and fewer such
towns could, if circumstances in the future justified it, he given a choice of programmes.
We should point out that the reference to towns with a population over 5,000 has no special significance
other than to indicate in this context that, on purely technical considerations, provision could be made under
sub-paragraph (ff) for one station in all of the more important centres in the Commonwealth.
104. Having regard to the recommendations which we later make as to the basis on which television
should be introduced into Australia, it seems evident that the channels which have been reserved in the
V.H.F. band are sufficient to meet requirements for a considerable time. We have, therefore, reached the
conclusion that the television services of the Commonwealth should be planned on the basis of the use of
V.H.F. channels. There is some merit in the argument advanced by the Australian Federation of
Commercial Broadcasting Stations and other witnesses that, from the outset, planning should be on the
basis of both V.H.F. and U.H.F. channels will be used: but, apart from the fact that the coverage of


U.H.F. stations is less than that of those using V.H.F. channels, there is the important consideration that the
cost of receivers would be increased materially if this proposal were adopted, without any commensurate
gain to viewers for a long time, if at all. We have also taken into consideration the evidence of
manufacturers who indicated to us that if future requirements demanded recourse to the U.H.F. band,
receivers could be suitably equipped or modified.
105. It may be, however, that it will be unnecessary to make use of U.H.F. channels and that as the
service develops it will be found practicable to meet all requirements by making available additional facilities
in the V.H.F. band. Because of the decided advantages of developing the Australian television service
on this basis, we feel strongly that every effort should be made to provide facilities which will enable the
service to be developed and expanded without necessity for utilizing channels in the U.H.F. band.
106. We are not convinced that it would be impracticable to make some re-arrangements of frequencies
which, whilst still enabling the demands of other services to be met, would provide additional V.H.F.
channels for television, and, indeed, the Postmaster-General’s Department in its evidence did not contend
that it was impracticable to do so. We strongly recommend that the Department should thoroughly and
critically examine the frequency position, in consultation with the other departments and authorities which
are concerned, and make every effort to achieve this desirable objective either now or in the future. Electronics
is becoming increasingly important, both for civil and defence purposes, and unless there is a critical
examination of the allocation of frequencies, as we have recommended, a problem comparable to that arising
from the lack of a uniform rail gauge in Australia might present itself in later years. We emphasize that
the allocation of three or four additional channels in the V.H.F. band might obviate the additional expense
which will be involved and the disadvantages which will be incurred if the U.H.F. channels must ultimately
be used. In this examination regard should also be had to the use of the 90 to 108 megacycles per second
band, at present being reserved for frequency modulation broadcasting in the light of the policy eventually
determined with respect to the development of that service. This band could, as we stated in paragraph
95, provide two channels for television.
6. The Australian Problem.
107. The problem of providing a television service to the whole of the Commonwealth is primarily
an economic one, arising from the wide distribution of the population and the fact that the range of
transmission from a television station is, as we have already explained, relatively restricted. In Chapter V.
of this report the economic considerations involved in the provision of television services are reviewed and
m the succeeding paragraphs we propose to set doivn briefly certain technical factors which have an
important bearing on the problem.
miles ; n°tid?h e great bulk of the population of Australia is concentrated in a coastal belt some 200
miles in width extending from Cairns in Northern Queensland to Adelaide in South Australia, and in
it es in NeweaT er d if™ The P ° pulatio " is ***** the State capital
cities, m Newcastle and in other centres of smaller, though in some cases quite substantial, population
t.i the country districts between these centres, the density of population is relatively low. If every one
Jhe est iblishmen’t ofT * I ™ this "»«*«» distribution of population would necessitate
nit/ • f T , T ®' e nUmber ° f Stations ’ that about 70 per cent, of the
population of Australia is concentrated in the capital cities and in Newcastle vreatlv facilitates the
provision of a service to the majority of the people. The difficult problem, as we see’ it will bo tlm
provision of a service to the remaining 30 per cent, of the population who r side in rural Centres and it
is clear that this is primarily an economic problem. ana 11
having a' over \oOO. T ° ne [° each town . in
f W 7“' ap^° xi . maMy 80 P«* cent - of Te^opZtion^
' / . mb ~ f statl °ns to the capital cities would have the effect of reducing the number of
country towns which could be provided with a local station • i A. , oi
stations in each oanitnl wnniri , t • >tatlon ’ * or example, the establishment of five
atioms m each capital would reduce the population which could be served to about 77 per cent The
principal technical difficulty which is involved is that, with only seven V.H P channels available
reservations cannot be made to provide for the eventuality that a greater number of stations may „l«mately
3:: l z°: z p ;“ tzzz at the expe r of certain coimtry .« is n “
w the ° f —*
It is for these reasons that we have recommended tW»T T!? ™ “ time b «
m VH-p-
---officers of the Zf be


preparation of a frequency assignment plan for the ultimate development of the Australian television
services. 1 his plan would need to be formulated in the light of the results of the inquiry which we
recommend in paragraph 106 should be undertaken as to the availability of additional V.H.P. channels.
m - it we feel, relevant to refer to the action which was taken recently in the United States
of i menea with respect to the allocation of frequency channels for television services. Following
extensive public hearings the Federal Communications Commission in April, 1952, issued new standards
of allocation and tables of channel assignments. The principles upon which these assignments were
based are referred to in paragraph 52, and h is of interest to note that the Federal Communications
Commission reached the conclusion that “a table of assignments makes for the most efficient technical use
of the relatively limited number of channels available for television purposes. It protects the public
residing in smaller cities and rural areas more adequately than any other system for distribution of
service ”. The Commission in its Sixth Report dated 11th April, 1952, further stated—
., , one °/ tlie Principal reasons for an engineered Table of Assignments incorporated into our Rules is
that it permits a substantially more efficient use of the available spectrum. It is clear that,
once a fixed station separation has been agreed upon, the maximum number of stations which can be
accommodated on any given channel becomes fixed. In practice this theoretical maximum cannot be achieved
since the location of cities capable of supporting such stations will not follow any such regular pattern of
location Rut an Assignment I able drawn upon an examination of the country as a whole can confidently be
expected to more closely approximate the mathematical optimum, than would assignments of stations based
upon the fortuitous determinations of individual applicants interested solely in the coverage possibilities in
a particular community irrespective of the effect of such assignments on the possibility of making assignments
in other communities. _ We are convinced that only through an engineered Table of Assignments can areas
receiving no service or inadequate service be kept to a minimum.
In our opinion there is an equally significant reason why a Table of Assignments should be established
in our Rules. For while the record in this proceeding demonstrates that the desire for broadcasting service
from local stations, reflecting local needs and interests, is widespread, experience has shown that many of the
communities which cannot now support television stations but would eventually be able to do so will in the
absence of a fixed reservation of channels for their use, find that available frequencies have been pre-empted'
The same is true with respect to the establishment of any significant number of non-commercial educational
btations. It might, of course, be possible to achieve these results by allocating a large block of frequencies
for these smaller cities and non-commercial educational television without specifying the assignment location
of particular channels. Rut we are convinced that this could only done at the expense of
unnecessarily reducing the total number of channels available to meet other television needs.
In Canada, also, we have noted, a frequency assignment plan has recently been published. It has
as its primary objective, the establishment of a single television service to as large a proportion of the
Canadian people as is possible, in conformity with the announced policy of the Government.
112. The preparation of any assignment plan cannot be undertaken until the nature and extent of
the services, for which provision is to be made, have been determined. We can only state these in a general
way because, as we have previously indicated, the precise manner and rate of development of television
in Australia can only be determined as a result of practical experience. We believe, however, that in
drawing up such a plan for the Australian television services, first priority should be given to the provision
of a single service to as large a proportion of the population as is reasonably practicable. In view of
the accepted policy of establishing a dual service of both national and commercial stations second
priority should be given to the provision of a choice of programmes to as large a proportion of tlm
population as economic considerations will permit. The third priority should be given to the provision
of additional services in particular centres where this can be economically justified. In arriving at
the suggested priorities, we have taken into account the evidence given to us that, even with the seven
\ery high frequency channels now available, it would be possible to provide service to almost all the
population of Australia, and at the same time permit more than one station to be established in a number
of cities (see paragraph 109).
7. Relay Facilities.
113. The second problem of establishing the Australian service arises from the absence of relay
facilities, and the effect that this would have on the provision of programmes from stations located in
areas where the production of local programmes is not practicable. There are two methods by which
relay channels may be provided, namely, by microwave radio links or by coaxial cable. We were
informed by the Postmaster-General’s Department that there are no existing facilities suitable for the
relaying of television programmes, although a stage of development was being reached on certain trunk
telephone routes which would justify the provision of systems which could also provide for the requirements
of television. It was explained that, for economic reasons, relay channels would normally be associated
with telephone trunk facilities, because in this way installation and running costs would be less than if
the television relay were provided independently of other facilities. The Postmaster-General’s Department
also informed us that the provision of television relay facilities would normally be governed by the
rate of increase of telephone trunk line traffic on the respective routes. Although it was considered
that coaxial cable would be introduced progressively by the Department on a number of separate routes,
the rate at which this would be done was dependent upon such a number of indeterminate factors that


no definite estimate could be provided. On economic grounds it would seem that it would not be possible
to justify the provision of suitable relay facilities for television purposes alone. On the other hand,
the absence of such facilities will create special problems in providing satisfactory television services
in most country centres which would have to depend very largely on the use of films. However, we think
it likely that if the probable requirements of television are considered in conjunction with the normal
needs of telecommunication circuits, there may be justification for the earlier introduction of either coaxial
cable or radio facilities than would otherwise be the case. We have noted from the evidence of the
Director-General of Posts and Telegraphs that in its forward planning the Department would be giving
full consideration to the possible requirements of television. lie informed us that, from the point oi
view of telephone services “the introduction of television could conceivably act in a very favorable way
to the country people in that it could hasten the provision of microwave facilities or coaxial cables
which, in other circumstances, the Department might hesitate to install ”,
8. Colour Television.
114 Some evidence was presented to us concerning colour television, which was recently the
subject of public inquiry in the United States of America. Mr. C. Moses, General Manager of the
Australian Broadcasting Commission, told us that he had received opinions from television officials in
America that if Australia were not contemplating television within the next few years, it would be
preferable to commence with colour transmissions. Other witnesses, including the Hon. A. G. Warner
(Electronic Industries Limited) and Mr. L. A. Hooke (Amalgamated Wireless (A/asia) Ltd.), felt
that it would be unwise to attempt the introduction of colour until the Australian television industry
had become reasonably well established. Mr. W. Dunstan (Herald and Weekly Times Limited) urged
that “we should include in our recommendations one supporting compatible colour broadcasts and
opposing incompatible broadcasts ”.
115 So far as we are aware, the introduction of colour television in Great Britain is not at present
being seriously considered, although some experimental work has been done by the British Broadcasting
Corporation and electronic equipment manufacturers. The recent report of the Television Advisory
Committee, dated Bth May, 1953, recommended that any colour system which might be employed in Great
Britain in ’the future should be compatible, in the sense that the colour transmissions should be receivable
in monochrome on receivers not designed for colour reception.
116. In the United States of America, the possibilities of incorporating colour transmissions in the
television system have been the subject of public inquiry by the Federal Communications Commission m
1946-47, in 1949-50, and in 1953. Following its inquiries in 1949-50, the Commission concluded that the
addition of colour was a distinct improvement in television transmissions and, in consequence, it determined
standards to permit the introduction of a colour system. The colour system developed by the Columbia
Broadcasting System, which was approved by the Federal Communications Commission in 1951, possessed
the inherent disadvantage that it was incompatible with the existing monochrome system, i.e., receivers
already in use would net be able to receive the colour transmission in black and white without costly
adaptation. The manufacture of colour receivers was suspended in October, 1951, since when experimental
work in the development of an electronic compatible system has been undertaken by the National Television
System Committee (a radio industry body). It was recently announced that the developmental work had
been successfully completed and on 17th December, 1953, following a public inquiry, the Federal
Communications Commission adopted the colour television standards proposed by the Committee. In its
Public Notice (No. 53 —1663) containing the decision on colour television the Commission point out, inter
alia, that the standards approved would not necessitate any change in existing monochrome receivers to
enable reception of a black and white picture from colour transmissions. No practical converter which
would enable existing receivers to receive colour transmission in colour had, however, been demonstrated.
It was also emphasized that the cost of apparatus was high, the estimated cost of a colour receiver being
in the range of 800 to 1,000 dollars.
117. We were assured that the technical standards which have been determined for the Australian
service {see paragraph 89) were formulated so as to provide for the development, ultimately, of a compatible
television system.
118. It is recognized that, from some points of view, colour would undoubtedly add to the
attractiveness of television, as it has done in the case of motion pictures. As we understand the position,
however, it would always be a costly refinement, and this would be particularly so in the case of receivers.
On this aspect we have noted the evidence presented to us by Mr. S. O. Jones (Philips Electrical
Industries Ltd.), who suggested that, with the object of ensuring that colour could be introduced on a
less costly basis, the present Australian technical standards should be modified to provide for a channel
width of 10 megacycles per second, which would simplify some of the technical problems. Such a course
would necessitate the virtual abandonment of the use of V.H.F. channels in favour of IJ.H.F. channels, a
course which, for reasons we have already stated, we do not recommend.


119. Although it is now fairly certain that in the near future colour transmission on a regular basis
will commence in the United States of America, it has yet to be demonstrated whether the attractiveness
of colour transmissions will be sufficient to overcome the natural resistance of the public to the very high
cost of colour receivers. In any case, even if colour television were, at the present stage, a practical
proposition in Australia, it is evident that it would be extremely difficult to justify on the grounds of the
costs which would be involved. For the present we think that Australia should proceed to institute a
monochrome system which wdll be compatible with colour transmissions.
9. General.
120. There are some matters which were mentioned to us during the course of our inquiry which
do not come directly within our terms of reference but which, nevertheless, we feel should be referred to,
as they appear to merit consideration later by the authority responsible for the control and direction of the
Australian television service.
(a) Community Systems.
Mr. W. Dunstan, General Manager of the Herald and Weekly Times Limited, brought to our notice
the possibilities of utilizing a system developed in the United States of America for the distribution of
television programmes to community centres. He expressed the view that this system, known as
“ community television ”, might have application in some country districts in Australia which, because of
difficulties arising from “ Limited population, restricted opportunities for earning revenue and the high
cost of relay channels ”, might not normally have very bright prospects of having access to the programmes
transmitted by television stations. The procedure is that some company or business organization establishes
an antenna and efficient receiving equipment on an elevated site, which makes possible the satisfactory
reception of relatively distant stations. The received signals are then distributed to subscribers’ homes
by means of physical connexions; an installation fee and a regular subscription are paid for the service.
We were informed that there is a number of such systems in operation, serving particular areas the situation
of which makes it impossible to receive satisfactorily a television service direct.
(&) Interference.
Mr. L. A. Hooke (Amalgamated Wireless (A/asia) Ltd.) and the representatives of the Wireless
Institute of Australia, strongly urged that steps be taken to suppress all probable sources of electrical
interference to the reception of television programmes. It was pointed out to us that the reception of
television programmes could be completely marred by the effects of interference arising from electric
trams and trains, motor car ignition systems and electric motors. The opinion was expressed that this
was likely to assume such dimensions as to warrant the enactment of legislation to provide for the
compulsory installation of interference elimination devices. Mr. K. S. Brown (Standard Telephones and
Cables Pty. Ltd.), also suggested that ignition suppressors should be made a compulsory fitting on all
motor vehicles using spark ignition systems, and that action in this matter should be taken as soon as
possible in order that good quality reception should be possible from the commencement of the television
service. We understand that action along the lines suggested has already been taken in the United
Kingdom and that the cost is relatively inconsiderable. In our view, the suppression of all sources of
electrical interference to television programmes in Australia merits early attention.
(c) Sites of Television Stations.
We were told by the Australian Broadcasting Control Board that where a number of transmitters
is established to provide alternative programmes in the one area there are advantages to be derived from
locating them on a common site. Such an arrangement facilitates the use of directional receiving aerials
inasmuch as they do not need to be reorientated to receive different stations. This view was endorsed by
all technical witnesses w r ho gave evidence to us. It was put to us that, in the selection of transmitting sites
for national and commercial stations there were advantages to be derived from joint use of facilities. As
far as possible, all transmitters should be erected on a common site.
31


CHAPTER IV.—THE SOCIAL IMPACT OF TELEVISION.
1. Introductory.
121. One of the reasons that led to the appointment of the Commission was the genuine fear felt
by a large section of the Australian community that an unregulated introduction of television would have
unfortunate social effects. There is an extensive literature on the social impact of television and while
we are not required by our terms of reference to write a sociological text, many of the problems raised demand,
as a background, a general discussion of the social issues involved. It is convenient to discuss these general
problems in this chapter, before we proceed to detailed recommendations.
122. It was significant to observe the number of witnesses who were concerned only with the general
question of the effect of television on the Australian way of life. Some took such a gloomy view that they
advocated postponement of the introduction of the new medium —thus reaching the same result as those
who wished to defer it on economic grounds. Other witnesses saw in television an instrument of great
educational importance and social significance which would make the whole community more mentally
alert. It was even stated that television would cause a social change equivalent to the discovery of
printing. The Commission acted as a convenient forum for those who held these diverse views. We are
grateful for the care taken by the witnesses who prepared submissions on these important issues on which, by
their very nature, it is difficult to be precise. But this evidence revealed the basic problem round which all
the other questions revolved, which may be shortly stated as how to introduce television so as to take full
advantage of the experience of other countries and make the greatest contribution to the Australian
community.
123. It is our hope that the detailed recommendations which we make in the succeeding chapters
will go far to remove the fears felt by a sincere section of those interested in social welfare. Television,
like printing, has no moral quality in itself: it is a weapon of tremendous power which may strike a blow
for good or ill. But to refuse the use of an instrument because it may be abused is not consonant with
the qualities of character which have formed the Australian tradition. On the other hand, to refuse to
take active steps to prevent the worst abuses is to invite the condemnation of history.
2. Survey of Literature and Periods of Development.
124. A short survey of the literature concerning television illustrates how rapidly the scene has been
changing. Most of the articles which were submitted in evidence originated in the United States where
the early programmes received much criticism. There has been relatively little published criticism in
Great Britain where television has been planned systematically, both as regards quality and type of
programmes as well as coverage. The development in the United Kingdom has been more cautious
than in the United States, and in the former country the economic and social effects have been much less
striking.
125. A selective bibliography will be found in Appendix E: here it is enough to say that the
literature falls into three divisions which reflect the rapidly changing scene and the development of a keener
understanding of the real problems involved.
126. Prior to 1949. —The literature of this period regards television in terms of wonder and speculation.
The very titles of articles (l) express the fascination of the new medium, but since there is only a limited
experience on which to draw, many of the articles are speculative rather than informative. Some of the
prophecies have been fulfilled rather more rapidly than the authors imagined. (2) Another point stressed in
the early literature was the fear felt that radio, press and film would suffer from the competition of the
new medium, (3)
127. 1949-51. —This period is marked by a change from vague speculation to a demand for concerted
group effort to remove glaring defects and to improve the quality of programmes. The following titles
illustrate the mood of this era—“ Prometheus or Frankenstein?”: “What shall be do about television?”:
“ Television brings new challenge to teaching ”, (4 ) Any innovation will cause, in the initial stages, both
exaggerated enthusiasm and exaggerated suspicion. Had the world been more vocal when printing was
invented, we can imagine the elders expressing serious doubts whether the printed page might not subvert
the foundations of English life, interfere with the physical development of the people and give to the
yeoman ideas beyond his station. But, in the case of television, to the factor of novelty, there was also
added a very real concern with the quality of programmes, and a growing number of writers emphasized
that television should not be allowed to become merely a medium of mediocre entertainment. The earliest
problem to receive attention was the effect on children of excessive viewing, with the result that surveys
(l) Television: the revolution by R. E. Lee, N.Y. 1944. Television : the eyes of tomorrow by W. M. Eddy, N.Y., 1945. “ Here is television : your
window to the world ”byT. H. Hutchinson, N.Y., 1946. “ Television : boon or bane ? ” Public Opinion Quarterly, v. 10, p. 314-20, Fall. 1946. “ Television:
There ought to he a law ”byß. B. Smith, Harper’s Monthly Magazine 197 ; 34-43, 1948. (2) 0. E. Dunlap : The Future of Television, N.Y., 194 7 , p. 2.
(3) The early fears have not been altogether justified, e.g., since the second World War. radio production in U.S.A. reached 110 million sets : thus in vears
more sets were made than in the preceding 21 years. See Broadcasting Telecasting, vol. 45, p. 39, Aug. 17th, 1953. (4) “ Prometheus or Frankenstein
Jo. Edi/c. Soc. : 154-66, Nov,, 1950. “ What shall we do about television ?”, Parents' Mag.: 36. Dec., 1950. “ Television brings new challenge to teaching".
School Life, Nov., 1951. See also “ Survey of educator’s attitudes and opimons towards television ”. by E. Helnvch for degree of Doctor of Education. University
of Cincinnati, 19/12/1950. University of Miami —Television Surveys—“ Television audience in Miami ”—l2/12/1949. “Presentation of news material” —
News on Television, May, 1950. Xavier College Survey on Children’s Leisure hours and T.V., 1951. Woodbury College—Tele-census Surveys concerning
consumer reactions to television, Nov., 1949-June. 1951. National Association of Educational Broadcasters Monitoring Studies—No. 1, New York, 4th-10tl)
Jan., 1951-1952 ; No, 2, Los Angeles, 23rd-29th May, 1951; No. 3, Chicago, 30th July-sth August, 1951.


were conducted in England by the British Broadcasting Corporation and in the United States by University
Research Departments. The wide publicity given to these surveys made many parents aware of the
necessity to take active steps to prevent television interfering with the activities proper to childhood.
Educationalists in the United States also asked the Federal Communications Commission for channels so
that they could operate stations providing planned programmes that would raise the cultural standards of
all sections of the population. The industry in that country itself was affected by this publicity and took
steps to regulate standards.
128. 1952-53 Both m the United Kingdom and the United States, this was a period of great
development, as the plans formulated during 1949-51 were put into effect. Television was now accepted as
part of the pattern of life. In the United States, it played an important part in the Presidential election
of 1952, and in England the telecast of the Coronation was widely acclaimed as television’s finest hour.
In both countries, there was a spectacular increase in the number of viewers, and the need for further
experimentation in types of programmes was increasingly recognized.
129. In the United States of America the Federal Communications Commission lifted its “ freeze ”
oi dei which had provided that no additional stations would be licensed pending a complete engineering
examination, piovision was made for a total of 2,053 stations including 242 for non-commerical purposes.
A code of conduct for television programmes was promulgated by the National Association of Radio and
1 elevision Broadcasters, This Association has also stated in a publication that there has been a determined
attempt by the industry to raise quality by offering facilities to educational organizations.
130. The literature is much influenced by these developments and reflects a more realistic approach.
More attention is given to the technical problems involved, whether of electronics or finance, and when
programmes are discussed the emphasis changes from a demand for quality to an analysis of the means
by which quality can be achieved. Thus the educationalists in the United States, having secured an
option on stations, devote their energy to securing the money and discussing the technique of providing a
programme which would be educational and also attractive enough to secure a large number of viewers,
131. Factual studies of the social effect of television now begin to appear as the result of research
initiated in the period for 1949-51. The defect of many of the earlier surveys was that they concentrated
on one aspect of the problem only and did not take a broad view. Moreover, while television is a new toy,
it is difficult to reach conclusions that will have any permanent value. The child who is first exposed to
television at the age of three years will present a different problem from those who first see it in adult life.
No real evidence can be available until the experience has covered more than twenty years. Nevertheless,
the surveys, properly analysed, do embody some conclusions which are valid at least for the television of
to-day.
3. The Nature of Television.
132. Some regard television as a mere extension of broadcasting (the addition of sight to sound)
or as a mere extension of motion pictures into the home. It has been argued that it is possible to exaggerate
its social importance: the addition of sound to sight may have made the cinema more interesting but it
produced no dramatic social results. Why should the addition of the sight of television to the sound of
radio be greeted with such apprehension on the one hand or enthusiasm on the other?
133. But there are important differences between television and radio, on the one hand, and
television and motion pictures on the other. These differences fall into two categories: firstly the social
effect of the medium and secondly the technical differences which render it essential that new techniques of
presentation be exploited.
134. The social impact of television is greater than that of radio because the visual image makes a
luore dramatic appeal than the spoken word. Television is more dynamic than motion pictures, because the
immediacy of its presentation enables the viewer to identify himself with the spectacle. As Mr. R. J. F.
Boyer, Chairman of the Australian Broadcasting Commission, emphasized, the addition of sight to sound
is of greater significance than the mere invention of the “ talkie ”. He said—
There is a primitive element in sight which seems to go deeper and be more critical in its effect than
sound can ever be . . . This consideration introduces a further element inherent in a visual medium as
opposed to oral, which is engaging the attention of sociologists, namely, that sight in addition to being the
most intense of the avenues of consciousness is probably also the most primitive. Educationalists point out
that progress in thought and in most branches of culture moves from the visual to the non-visual. In early
childhood we learn almost completely by sight, and it becomes the mark of progress when the mind is able to
dispense with the greater part of these aids and think, imagine, plan and create in abstract concepts. Too
heavy concentration of attention upon things that may be seen must, they say, force into the background those
activities of conceptual thought and reasoning to which we should all advance. It is certainly true that
looking makes fewer demands on the mind and attention than hearing or reading, and it is possible to draw the
conclusion that a continuous diet of spectacles could adversely affect the reading, conversational and individual
thinking habits of a generation. Mr. Justice Frankfurter in a recent United States Supreme Court Judgment,
when speaking of television as a public medium, expressed his concern at the effect of over-emphasis on the
visual on the public’s judgment. “ Disclosure,” he says, “ conveyed by the limitations and power of the
F. 5242/54.—3


camera does not convey the same things to the mind as disclosure made by the limitations and power of pen
or voice. The range of presentation, the opportunities for distortion, the impact on reason, the effect on the
looker-on as against the reader-hearer, vary, and the differences may be vital.”
135. Professor Dallas W. Smythe (writing in the Public Opinion Quarterly, Fall, 1950) also
emphasized the importance of the visual medium
We are seeing here the innovation of a social phenomenon of major proportions . . . Here is a
technique to make imagination spin. There is hardly a phase of our civilization that could not be made more
efficient —or more rich in meaning for our generation. It could be an instrument of vast help to our
educational system in equipping all of us for complete living.
136. Mr. Boyer also stated that the New York Times, in 1951, commented that television had in five
years begun to influence the social and economic habits of the Lnited States to a degree unparalleled since
the invention of the motor car. “ Television is having its effect on the way the public passes its leisure
time —how it feels and acts about politics and government, how much it reads, how it rears its child and
how it charts its cultural future.”
137. The first social effect of television, therefore, springs from its widespread appeal, for its
immediacy and visual image make it very attractive to all ages. With children the visual appeal is most
effective but it continues through all ages: though it diminishes in adults who have high educational
qualifications, it never entirely disappears. For psychological reasons, the visual image affects the emotions
far more than the printed word or the spoken voice, and this makes television a very effective weapon for
propaganda. Television is a mass medium which will become increasingly important. W e are only at the
beginning of a long evolution.
138. When television is first introduced into a home there is at first unselected viewing what the
slang of the critics has called the compulsive period. Experience in the Lnited Kingdom suggests that for
adults of reasonable intelligence this period lasts three to six months; in other cases it may last two years.
But except in rare cases, the viewer then becomes selective. There is no precise evidence where children
are concerned, though an American survey conducted by Phillip Lewis, 10 who questioned 1,500 children,
discloses that adolescents who spent seventeen hours a week in the first month of possessing a television set
dropped to thirteen and a half hours at the end of the fourth year. Early exaggerated views of the
compulsive effect of television are now being modified, and we were informed that even children become
bored with over-exposure and select their programmes. It is impossible to interest all children in any one
programme; hence a successful children’s programme must encourage selectivity, so that each age group
obtains what is specially designed for it. Thus the British Broadcasting Corporation provides special
programmes for children from two to five years, for children from five to fifteen years, and is now planning
a special series for adolescents.
139. The early period produces both a danger and an opportunity. If the programmes are mediocre,
that may set the standard of taste, so far as viewers are concerned. If the planning is imaginative, then
the viewer will watch programmes which will create new interests. Thousands of people who have rarely
seen a play became interested in televised drama in the early period and retained that interest when the
novelty wore off. Mr. J. L. J. Wilson, of the University of Sydney, stressed strongly in his evidence the
importance of using the compulsive period to broaden the general culture of the community.
140. Television is a mass medium, with all its merits and disadvantages. The programme reaches
an extraordinary number of viewers—thus even in the United Kingdom, where the number of sets is much
less than in the United States, one telecast of a play may reach an audience equivalent to that reached by
one year’s run in a theatre. A single educational programme, provided from the San Francisco Museum,
was viewed by an audience equal to half of those who normally attended the Museum during the year. In
England there are nearly 3,000,000 sets: in the United States there are 25,000,000. But if we wish to
estimate the social effect of television we cannot assume that there is only one viewer to a set, for, especially
in the early period, each set has many viewers. The effect of the television of the Coronation may be
incapable of being expressed statistically, but it was of tremendous social significance. The immediacy of
the presentation created a feeling of psychological unity between those who were within the Abbey and
those scattered in towns and villages: no previous coronation had welded the community together in such a
vital way. A medium which in England had been rather scorned by certain intellectual groups was
suddenly shown to be of importance in intensifying the unity of the community and the importance of its
traditions. In Australia television could be used to assist in the assimilation of New Australians. The
visual image would help them to understand the written word and documentaries could acquaint them with
our national way of life.
141. As a mass medium, television is the entertainment mainly for those with lower incomes. In
1952 in England over 60 per cent, of the viewers came from households where the breadwinner earned
less than £9 a week and 85 per cent, where the earnings were less than £l3. The popularity of the
television of the Coronation may have changed these figures, though no recent survey is available, but in all
countries it remains true that those with many interests find less time for television. It is of incalculable
(5) " T.V.’s Impact on Teen-agers ”. Survey by P. Lewis, Chicago Teachers’ College, in Phi. Delta Kappan, Nov., 1951.


benefit to those who are bedridden or Jive in isolated areas. As Maurice Gorham puts it {6) : “ And for the
people who have benefited most of all by the radio—the old, the crippled, the lonely, all those to whom
places of entertainment are no more than a memory—the addition of sight to sound will be like the opening
of a new world.” The British Broadcasting Corporation is now experimenting with special programmes
for the deaf. Exchange of programmes between nations will enrich the interests of all who are physically
handicapped. Moreover, it is cheap entertainment if we cost it over a year with other forms of enjoyment.
142. But all mass media are subject to abuse. The danger of television is that because success
depends on an appeal to numbers, it is difficult to escape mediocrity or vulgar sensationalism. A laudable
attempt to please everybody may result in pleasing nobody. The difficulty of maintaining a supply of
effective programmes is increased by the tremendous cost of running a television service. This problem is
discussed in Chapter V. of this report, but is mentioned here only to make the point that since the overhead
costs are difficult to control, there is a temptation to economize by sacrificing the quality of programmes.
In America there are doubts whether advertising revenues will be sufficient to develop the full potentiality
of television.
143. The novelty of an invention frequently creates exaggerated fears. Some witnesses gave evidence
that television creates too passive an attitude of acceptance in the mind of the viewer and that it reduces
mental and physical activity. This is true of certain types of programme, especially when the viewer is still
fascinated by novelty. Other evidence stressed the danger to the art of conversation, physical exercise,
attendance at lectures, practice of music, and reading: indeed, the picture was drawn of a spineless
community, unable to develop any interests save that of sitting supinely before the television screen. It
was even suggested that, although television tends to keep the family at home, the real unity of the family
would disappear as physical proximity did not compensate for the destruction of conversation and
everything that intellectually held a family together.
144. However, an American survey showed that 46 per cent, of viewers combined their watching of
television with other activities such as sewing, knitting and even reading. It is rare for an evening’s
programme to interest every member of the family and, just as the many members of the community have
apparently developed an ability to read in spite of the radio, so they will develop an immunity from the
distractions of television. (It is a popular misconception in Australia that television demands a darkened
room and therefore that reading is impossible. With modern sets, it is better to have a fairly bright light.)
145. Mr. N. H. Rosenthal, of the Visual Aids Department of the University of Melbourne, stated that
surveys did show evidence that books were becoming less popular with viewers. Thus in New York 65 per
cent, of viewers, in Los Angeles 67 per cent, and in the United Kingdom 42 per cent, admitted to reading
less. But he also emphasized that television could be used to stimulate reading.
146. Mr. W, Dunstan, of the Herald and Weekly Times Limited, referred to a survey by the New
York Times that showed a decline in book sales to adults and suggested that the increased cost of books
would be at least a partial cause. This suggestion is supported by the fact that in the same period most
public libraries reported an upward trend in the lending of books and that children were reading more and
not less. The witness also referred to a speech by Sir Allen Lane, founder of the Penguin Publishing
Company, who emphasized that in England the right type of programme had encouraged reading rather
than the reverse. There is also evidence that children tend to borrow books that have been referred to in
television programmes. A survey by the Washington Library (United States) found that, although the
circulation of inferior types of literature had decreased, the general circulation had not been affected as
the better types of books were in greater demand. There was an increasing trend to science, exploration,
travel, information and natural history.
147. It is clear that there cannot yet be conclusive evidence on the long-term effects of television on
other forms of activity. All the evidence shows that when a family is first introduced to television, the
result is an acceptance that is rather too passive. This ultimately leads to a reaction, as certain types of
programmes pall and other interests re-assert themselves. Our experience of television Is, however, too
limited for any survey to give dogmatic results, but this at least can be stated, that there is a social duty
to ensure that the programmes will be designed to stimulate mental activity instead of depressing it.
148. The argument in the preceding paragraphs leads to the conclusion that television will have a far
greater social impact than either radio or motion pictures. There are also important technical differences
which distinguish television from either motion pictures or radio, and these show that a new art of
presentation and programme construction must be learnt in order to exploit the new medium successfully.
149. The essence of television, so far as its appeal to the viewers is concerned, is its immediacy—one
is seeing what is actually happening at the moment. Mary Adams, writing in the Journal of the Royal
Society of Arts, February, 1949, states: “ Television techniques tend to brighten the interest of real life;
film techniques have the reverse effect. The psychological effect of television is to enhance reality and at the
same time to bring about identification between the viewer and what he sees on the screen.” The fascination
of television is that it catches the unexpected—e.g. the expression of the batsman who misses the ball. If a
(6) “ Television : medium of the Future ” by M. Gorham, Lond., 1949, p. 135.


Lord Mayor’s procession is televised, the viewer sees a real crowd, and not a collection of extras. Editing
enables a film to have a smooth perfection, but it robs television of the interesting imperfections of life.
The general impression is that films not made specially for television suffer from technical defects-the
picture may be too flat, or the screen too crowded. Television must use film, but in general, to be satisfactory,
it should be specially designed to suit the new medium. Newsreels and documentaries are successful
examples of the proper use of film, and the effect of actuality may be produced by skilled editors..
150. The technique of television also differs greatly from that of radio, for most radio programmes
cannot readily be adapted for television. Thus one of the best contributions of radio has been in the field
of music, yet there is still great controversy in the United Kingdom and United states of Ameiica whether
the television of a symphony concert is as satisfactory as a sound broadcast. Even opeia, which depends
for part of its appeal on the eye, presents a difficult task for television. The talk has proved effective on
radio, but on television only a very exceptional person can hold the viewer. On the other hand television
can play a great part in raising the general level of appreciation of drama.
151. Again, radio has been generally regarded as an effective medium for the broadcasting of church
services, but how television should best be used to convey the religious message is still a matter of
experiment and controversy. There are special services or ceremonies where the general interest in the
occasion is sufficient to make the programme a success, but those who gave evidence before us and church
leaders in the United Kingdom, while recognizing the great significance of the new medium as a means
of spreading the Christian faith, freely admit that several problems must be overcome before the new
techniques can be successfully exploited. Much experimental work is now being done in this field.
152. The conclusion to be drawn from these observations is that television, while it owes much to
those who have been trained in film and radio, can be successfully initiated only it the introduction is
gradual enough to allow of serious training to those who are to engage in the production of programmes.
Professor Siepmann’s remarks on educational television are applicable to television programmes in
general: “ The condition of further effective advances in this field is caution—great deliberation, more
careful and extensive testing and, above all, concern with standards.” ( ' 1
4. The Problem of Control.
153. Much evidence was given before us relating both to the broad principle of social control and
the detailed problems that arise under each specific term of reference, e.g., the number of stations, the
hours of transmission, the quality of programmes, the rules relating to religious and political programmes.
154. Some witnesses advocated very rigid control. Thus Mr. H. Alexander, General Secretary of
the Actors and Announcers Equity Association of Australia, suggested that an independent Board of
Control should be appointed and that there should be a censor appointed by the Government to each
Station. Mr. E. V. Hale, of the New South Wales Film Council, went so far as to suggest that all
programme material, other than outside broadcasts, should be recorded on film and submitted to the
censor before being televised. Mr. Ernest Oliver also supported the creation of a censorship panel.
155. A more practicable suggestion was that of his Lordship Bishop Lyons, representing the
Catholic Church in Australia, who suggested that, so far as possible, programmes which past experience
in the theatre, cinema and radio had shown to be most likely to contain objectionable matter should be
censored before being transmitted, and that film for television should satisfy the same form of censorship
as film for the picture theatre.
156. Other witnesses emphasized that there should be regulation of quality by strict rules (in most
cases without specifying the basis on which such rules should be formulated), and that failure to observe
them should be a reason for the revocation of a licence.
157. Mr. H. E. Beaver, on behalf of the Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting
Stations, stated the thesis for a minimum of regulation—
The Federation takes the view that it is essential to the continued operation of a democracy that radio
and television broadcasting should be free to operate within the framework of the general law and to provide
news, information and entertainment to the general public, free from censorship and arbitrary control. There
should be no mandatory regulations which would control programme content, except the laws of the land
relating to such matters as libel, defamation, gaming and betting, treason, obscenity, &c.
The witness believed that the only effective control was that of public opinion. He favoured the policy of
self-regulation by the industry.
158. For reasons elaborated in Chapter VII. we reject the proposals that there should be either
continuous censorship or any attempt to regulate quality by detailed negative rules.
159. On the other hand, we do not feel that society can let the problem go by default. The crux
of the problem was significantly put by Dr. H. H. Penny, Principal of the Adelaide Teachers’ College—
To these bioad facts (the impact of sight with sound, and the pervasive and absorptive character of
television) must be added a tbiid. Televised programmes . . . are heard-viewed by hundreds of thousands
(7) “ Television and Education in the United States,” by C. A. Siepmann, Unesco, Paris, 1952, p. 115
36


and sometimes millions ot people. We have to bear in mind, then, that a medium of communication so
pervasive and so powerful is not only forming the ideas, colouring the attitudes, shaping the values and
influencing the conduct of individuals considered separately, it is doing all these things collectively.
Television is the most powerful of all the mass media so far devised. . . . We must devise the means for
the control by society of television. . . . There is nothing essentially wrong or degrading about mass
media. Indeed mass media are essential in any community to the development of those ideas, attitudes and
values which knit individuals into a social group. . . . The fact that any formative medium can reach
the mass is potentially good, but the responsibility for quality is a serious one indeed.
He went on to emphasize that any programme designed only for the average man pitches its level rather
too low and runs the danger of committing itself to a more or less consistent and continuous mediocrity.
It fails to reach the quality needed by the upper third of a population—and this is not the least important
section of any society. His thesis was that television is such an important medium that society must at
least exercise sufficient control to ensure that it is not surrendered to mediocrity.
160. Our conclusion in favour of the form of control over programmes, that we recommend in
Chapter VII., is based on acceptance of the following considerations: —
(a) Television is so effective as a medium that a wrong use of it would do tremendous harm,
especially in the early stages before any local standard of taste has been set and the
very novelty of the medium will encourage the viewer to look at anything.
(b) Television enters the home and all ages are exposed to it: where children are concerned,
the community has always been prepared to accept regulation more easily than where the
problem relates to adults only.
161. This argument for some form of control is also supported by points which are elaborated in
other parts of this report. In Chapter V. we conclude that the costs of establishing television are such
that it should be introduced only gradually: and in that chapter, where the availability of programmes
is discussed, we conclude that it would be difficult, in the initial period, to secure programmes of adequate
quality if an excessive number of stations were licensed in any one area.
162. It is often replied that regulation is absurd as the public really sets the standard and gets what
it deserves. That has never been entirely true, whether in books, art, drama or the film. There is no
doubt that radio has already played a significant part in raising the standard of musical appreciation in
Australia. This was not achieved by finding out the average level of taste and concentrating on that.
The endeavour was to pitch the programme a little higher than public taste and thus gradually create a
new standard. It is important that this should be the policy of television as the compulsive period gives
an opportunity to widen the interests of the viewer. But the argument that the public gets what it
deserves emphasizes the undoubted truth that no administrative set of regulations can succeed in raising
quality unless there is a wide public interest which will create the atmosphere necessary to success. This
point is the basis of our conclusion that the most effective method of raising standards is through the
licensing system, with provision for a public hearing where the Australian Broadcasting Control Board
does not think that it is in the public interest that a licence should be renewed. If the public puts up with
inferior television, it will only have itself to blame if it fails to take advantage of the means provided
for the expression of its dissatisfaction. What is needed is a vocal public which will offer constructive
criticism and refuse to be satisfied with inferior programmes. In the United Kingdom the public and
press are very active in expressing from week to week opinions on each particular type of programme.
In the United States, many organizations have been set up with the sole object of using public opinion
as a means of improving quality. An active policy of constructive public criticism is essential in
Australia if television is to reach the standard desired.
163. Programmes must appeal to the public, but is it untrue to say that the public cannot be made
to appreciate programmes of quality. The real solution is along the line of what Professor G. V. Portus,
in his book Happy Highways, calls “entertainment plus”. Supporting this approach, Professor F.
Alexander stated in evidence —
If effective use is to be made of the new medium of TV, those who would use it to raise instead of lower
standards will need official recognition and greater Government assistance than they have been given in the
development of broadcasting. The successful development of television in Australia will no doubt make many
demands on the technical side. One may feel confident that such technical demands will be met by the
combined skills of public and private enterprise: If the resulting service of public entertainment is to make a
really constructive contribution to Australia life, it must make equally heavy demands on the foresight of
Government and Parliament, on the imagination and courage of those who control and direct the several TV
services, and on the active co-operation as well as the constructive criticism of interested individuals and
organizations outside. It wall demand faith from all concerned —faith, above all, in the artistic potentialities
of the Australian people, in their native shrewdness and in their proved capacity for discriminating betwnen
the first grade artist or production and the second rate. These are real qualities of the rank and file Australian
on which it is possible to build and which already do much to offset the limited range and depth of his actual
cultural experience.
The witness considered that the best procedure was to raise the quality of the ordinary programme instead
of merely injecting particular sessions regarded as educational, and that much value could be gained from
a study of the success of the Army Education Service and Adult Education Boards in Australia.


164. Mr. J. L. J. Wilson argued strongly that television should not merely try to strike at the level
of average popular taste —there should be recognized a duty to lead public taste and develop new interests.
165. Mr. Rosenthal stated: “ Great as are the dangers from violence and unhealthy excitement to
be derived from the television screen, dullness and monotony and stereotyped presentations are also harmful
to the community’s mental health ”.
166. Regulation of the number of stations also raises an abstract problem of some difficulty.
Democratic freedom (it was alleged by some witnesses) demands that the only limit to the number of
licences issued should be the actual number of available channels. It was argued firstly that the limitation
of stations would create the difficult administrative problem of choosing between the different applicants:
secondly that, if the limitation was too severe, it would create a dangerous monopoly: thirdly that free
competition was the only means of raising standards, selling the desired number of sets and creating
enterprise and initiative. On the other side, it was argued just as strongly that the proliferation of many
stations must inevitably lower the quality of programmes, since Australia could not provide the talent
necessary for the number of hours of transmission that such a policy would permit. It was suggested that
the long-term interest of television demanded programmes of quality (both in the technical and the broader
sense) and that it would take a considerable time to train both technicians and artists to the requisite level
of skill. These issues are discussed in Chapter V.
167. The issue of freedom again intrudes in the problem of the regulation of political and religious
broadcasts, and this is discussed in Chapter VIII.
5. The Child,
168. Much evidence was placed before us revealing widespread community interest in the possible
effects of television on the child. The following bodies or individuals were among those who dealt with this
issue, some expressing grave disquiet while others suggested that the danger was not in the medium but in
the way in which it was used. The witnesses are listed in the order in which they appeared —
Mr. N. 11. Rosenthal, Director, Visual Aids Department, University of Melbourne.
Dr. A. Fabinyi, Publishing Manager, F. AY, Cheshire Pty. Ltd.
Rev. A. Crichton Barr I _ , , . „ TT . , .
_ _ . IPresbytenan Church of Victoria.
Rev. G. A. Beattie
Mr. W. Dunstan, The Herald and YVeekly Times Limited, Melbourne.
Mr. S. K. Farrell, State Schools Committees’ Association of Victoria.
Mis. A. J- aton l Victorian Council for Children’s Films and Television.
Mrs. B. Falk J
Mr, S. F. E. Liebert, Australian Council of School Organizations.
Mr. H, F, Heath, New South Wales Teachers’ Federation.
Rew A. Walker 1 Australian Council for the World Council of Churches.
Bishop W. G. Hilliard J
Mr. H. E. Beaver, Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations.
Dr. M. S. Brown, New Education Fellowship, New South Wales Branch.
Mr. E. W. Mac Alpine, Consolidated Press Limited.
Mrs. B. Ewart.
Miss N. M. Mills, Queensland Woman’s Christian Temperance Union.
Mrs. E. F. Byth, National Council of Women of Australia.
Rev. E. H. Woollacottl
Canon A. E. Kain lUnited Churches Social Reform Board.
Mr. S, B. Denton J
Mr, B. Davies 1 m . . . „
Mr PC W Disney f Fllm aTld relevislon Council of South Australia.
Miss M. L. Wauchope, Senior Lecturer, Teachers’ College, Adelaide.
Dr. T. L. Robertson, Director of Education, Western Australia.
Mrs. M. E. Calder, Women’s Service Guilds of Western Australia Inc,
Mr, R. H. Featherstone, State School Teachers’ Union of Western Australia Inc.
Mr. W. D. Neal, New Education Fellowship, Australian Federal Council.
Rev. W. J. H. Aikin, Australian Religious Film Society,
Mr. V. R. Long, Education Department, Tasmania.
Rev. W. J. Hobbin, Child Welfare Advisory Council of New South Wales.
Bishop P. F. Lyons, Catholic Church in Australia.
169. The main points made by those who were concerned at possible abuses of the new medium
were as follows: —
(a) There was danger of the wrong type of programme lowering the taste of children, and even
encouraging delinquency: where young children were concerned, nervous ’ disorders
might result from the viewing of programmes featuring sadism, brutality or horror.


(6) Excessive viewing was undesirable for physical reasons, as it discouraged activity and
outdoor sport and in some cases caused eyestrain.
Dr. Penny, Principal of the Adelaide Teachers’ College, gave evidence of three surveys
in America in 1952 which showed average viewing by children of 26 hours a week—
which is approaching the time spent in the classroom. Three further surveys are now
mentioned in order to illustrate the diversity of the conclusions. The last-mentioned was
not available in Australia when Dr. Penny gave his evidence. A Cambridge (Mass.)
survey gives a total of only eighteen and a half hours a week. Mr. P. Lewis, in his
survey, found that children viewed for seventeen hours in the early period and thirteen
and a half hours after possessing a set for four years. Professor P. Witty, in a survey
of 3,000 elementary and high school pupils in Chicago area, found that grade school
pupils spent in 1953 an average of 22 hours a week (an increase of one hour since the
first study in 1950), and that high school pupils had increased their viewing from
fourteen hours a week in 1950 to seventeen hours a week in 1953. There was little
correspondence between examination results and the time spent viewing. Teachers were
less worried about television as it had become part of the pattern of life instead of being
a novelty interfering with other activities.
These figures seem to conflict with those of Lewis, but they are collected on a different
basis. Lewis was concerned only with the effect of habit on viewing, and many of the
child listeners surveyed by Witty might have been new listeners who pushed the general
average up. But, however the figures are interpreted, they do show an intense pre-
occupation with television.
In England, the problem of excessive viewing by children is not so acute, because of
the limited number of hours that television is on the air. The children’s programme
normally runs from 5 to 6 p.m. and after that there is a complete break in transmission
till the adult programme begins (usually 8 p.m.). The total number of programme hours
(both for adults and children) is only 35 a week,
(r) Even where the programmes were reasonably good, viewing was a passive experience which
tendered to depress creative mental activity: it interfered with homework and with
reading.
( d ) It was difficult to maintain home discipline or to get young children to go to bed because
of the obsessive fascination of the new medium.
170. It was therefore strongly argued —
(a) that there should be programmes at a suitable hour specially designed for children with the
object of stimulating new interests;
(h) that there should be a complete break in transmission for an hour on all stations at the end
of the children’s programme so that younger children may have their meals undisturbed
and then be put to bed;
(c) that even in the adult programme care should be taken to place late in the evening items
which are likely to do active harm to children.
171. There is no doubt about the unfortunate effects upon children of the wrong kind of programme,
or even of excessive viewing of television programmes in general. In the United States of America there
are studies purporting to show that bedtime is getting later; that reading is diminishing; and that,
although there is little evidence that the school work of younger children is affected, there is loss of
efficiency at the later periods when more homework should be done. The surveys do not yet cover a wide
enough sample to be regarded as statistically conclusive. With regard to delinquency, the evidence is
conflicting. Some surveys trace much delinquency to the portrayal of crime and violence on the screen,
while others claim a fall in delinquency as children remain amused at home instead of wandering bored in
the streets.
172. Figures published in January, 1953, collected by a Parent-Teachers’ Association of Chicago do
show that certain programmes seem to be rather unbalanced. Every children’s programme in Chicago
was monitored between Christmas morning and New Year’s Eve. There were 295 violent crimes
including 93 murders, 78 shootings, 9 kidnappings, 9 robberies, 14 gun fights, 2 knifings, 33 sluggings, 2
whippings, 2 poisonings and 2 bombings. These were included in 134 children’s shows —mostly of old film.
(Unesco Courier, March, 1953.) These figures may be misleading to those who did not see the programmes
in question, but they do at least suggest that those responsible for them were rather devoid of initiative.
The analysis illustrates that the use of old film, especially in children’s sessions, needs special care. The
Commonwealth Office of Education gave evidence of many American surveys: thus in Los Angeles 55 per
cent, of the children’s programmes were drama and half of this was western drama. The National
Association of Educational Broadcasters found that, in August, 1951, the percentage of children’s


programmes in Chicago devoted to drama was 68.89 per cent., and of this 41.61 per cent, was western
drama. The National Association for Better Radio and Television classified 58 hours of children’s
programmes as follows: —8 were excellent, 11 good, 5 fair, 2 poor, 25 objectionable, 7 most objectionable.
173. As Mr. Rosenthal emphasized, we should take care not to make television a scapegoat for the
social sins of omission and commission of the communit} 7 , as we are inclined to do in the case of films and
comics. There is evidence that television used to excess may damage the child’s physical well-being and
mental alertness. But there is also evidence that poor television habits, lower intelligence quotients, lower
parental control, bad environmental conditions and poor school achievement tend to be found in the same
child. The effect of television on the child, like that of film, Avill depend largely on what he brings to it.
(See Report of Research conducted by Xavier University, 1951.) Professor Paul Witty, in two studies, (8)
concludes that it is usually the child with the lowest intelligence quotient who is most distracted by
television and that such children would probably have other distractions if television did not exist.
174. There is no clear statistical evidence to determine the effect of home viewing on school
performance. Xavier University drew 7 these conclusions—
(а) There was no significant difference in school achievement between children who viewed
at home and those who did not.
(б) Learning was not much affected by the way parents controlled their children viewing.
(c) Television can be used to excess, resulting in damage to physical well-being and mental
alertness.
On the other hand Philip Lewis (Phi Delta Kappan, November, 1951, page 118) refers to an investigation
which found that children with a scholastic standing of “ Good ” or below 7 could not afford to watch
television for as much as fifteen hours a w r eek without affecting the ratings received. But, as he points
out, generalization is difficult. In certain subjects such as current history or drama, selected television
programmes might assist the student: in higher mathematics no help w’as received from w r atching. There
is evidence that many children do their homework while watching programmes. This must either lead to
superficial work or else develop an ability to do two things at once.
175. It is essential that children’s programmes should have sparkle and arouse vivid interest. Crime
stories are not always harmful—indeed properly presented they may develop a sense of co-operation with
the police. Due allowance must be made for the fact that some books ,(e.g. Uncle Tom’s Calm) which
would be suitable to read are not appropriate for the more compelling medium of television. Children are
more easily upset by the visual image than the printed word. Even educational programmes may terrify
—e.g. the excessive magnification of a spider in a science talk; or the steady “ tracking in ”of a face.
Children’s reactions are very different from those of adults. Violence depicted on television is not
necessarily damaging. Healthy adventure stories are full of excitement. These are points w 7 hich are
soon learnt by experience, if the control of television allows sufficient scope for a competent director
of children’s programmes and sufficient money for costs.
176. In the United Kingdom, programmes that are terrifying to children but may be suitable for
adults are usually not televised till after 9 p.m. Moreover, on introducing such a programme a warning is
always given if it is likely to distress the more vulnerable section of the viewers. This seems a fair
compromise of the rights of adults and children, as it would be unreasonable to suggest that the content
of all adult programmes must be governed by the needs of children of tender years.
177 „ 0n the other ha nd, there are children’s programmes both in the United States and United
Kingdom for which there can be nothing but praise. The British Broadcasting Corporation has devoted
much thought to this problem, and interesting experimental work is being carried out. Child experts,
teachers and parents are generally very satisfied with the British Broadcasting Corporation’s programmes
tor children and, above all, the children enjoy them greatly.
rr -4 aCCept tlle conelusion of Professor Charles Siepmann, in Television and Education in the
t mted states, page 104, in discussing the psychological effect of television on children
• . bet . t , e 1 r said categorically that there is at present no solid evidence on this point For it is
cTnoTihai7L°flu™ w n o fo e r ratC ° Ut ln / Uenee of te,eVision - ' vhether 011 '■l'iMren or Lulls, from the
concomitant influence of other mass media of communication and the complex of factors in the general social
envn onment. To say this, however, is not to dismiss the subject as of no importance. It is obviously of supreme
IMsT mL T- P J me T th /‘> lf 0116 is 00kins f m scientific P roof on matter, one will not find ”!
!t is a mattei of judgment and opinion. And the absence, whether now or in the future of scientific
corroboration provides no alibi for serious thought and discussion of the problem or for responsible action
stemming from reasoned and reasonable judgment of the possibilities in the situation. P
179 There is one small point that may now 7 be regarded as established. The earlier complaints of
cycstra.l, have been almost completely removed by technical improvements in the q uali v o Tef Tnd of
transmission. ,r
t . d BO d'f " de , d at the evidenoe ’ criticall y examined, establishes that the child is more vulnerable
an the adult, that healthy stories of action and even violence do no harm, but that sadism, torture and
” d “*•* ScM »““*' ■ ><»>■ “»*. »a gift**™
40


brutality have adverse effects: that, although there is evidence that certain types of programme or
excessive viewing are harmful to children, there is no evidence that there is anything in the nature of
television per se which is injurious.
181. the argument that television depresses mental activity has already been discussed with regard
to adult programmes ( supra paragraph 143), and the same considerations apply in the case of children.
Programmes may easily be devised which will create new interests. Thus, in Seattle, a television programme
for children led to a rush to the Public Library to borrow any book by the author featured (Siepmann,
op. cit., page 103). In the United Kingdom, publishers are reprinting books which have been the subject
of children’s television serials
182. But, however good the programmes, some parental control is necessary to prevent excessive
viewing. That is not a matter which can be controlled by public regulations.
183. "We recommend that on the national stations there should be a regular children’s programme,
specially designed not only for the different age groups but also to cover a wide scope of interests, (The
British Broadcasting Corporation has in mid-afternoon a session “ Watch with Mother ”, which is designed
for those under five years, and another session beginning at 5 o’clock which is intended to interest children
from five to fifteen years. Naturally that age span is such that some parts cannot be of the same interest
to all, but care is exercised in the choice of programmes to keep a balance between the various age groups.
At present a new programme is being devised for adolescents over the age of fifteen.). Where a commercial
station is operating in an area where there is no national station, we recommend that it should be required
to transmit at a suitable time a children’s programme recorded by the Australian Broadcasting Commission.
We think that it is one of the obligations to the public of all commercial stations to provide a suitable
children’s programme, but we do not consider that this should be laid down as a legal obligation, in the
case where there is a national station operating, but should be rather a matter to be considered when the
question of the general standard of the service is examined at the time a licence needs renewal.
184. # We make no recommendation with respect to the proposal for a break in transmission at the
end of the children’s programme, but this question is adverted to in Chapter VII., Section 6.
6. Educational Programmes.
Education in the Broad Sense.
185. Television may be made a force of great educational power. Thus properly designed
programmes may directly encourage—
(a) reading—e.g. stimulating reviews or television of scenes from a classic;
(b) creative activity—e.g. painting and drawing;
(c) wider knowledge of foreign countries; thus in July, 1952, direct transmissions were made
from Paris to England and the experiment showed the potential benefits in creating
active interest in a foreign country;
(d) discussion of political issues;
(e) the teaching of techniques—e.g. amateur film production, new agricultural methods;
(/) a higher level of taste by providing good drama, as radio has raised the general level of
appreciation of music.
186. Examples of the British Broadcasting Corporation’s programmes which are educational in the
broad sense are as follows:
(a) Inventor’s Club. —This has been running for five years. By March, 1953, over 5,000
inventions had been submitted by members of the public and 391 had been selected and
shown in the programme. Ninety are already in full-scale production and others are in
various stages of development. Large manufacturing firms w T atch this programme closely
and it undoubtedly stimulates many viewers to activity.
( b ) Painter’s Progress.— This was a successful attempt to arouse interest in the technique of
drawing and painting. Another series The Eye of the Artist is designed to encourage
study of the original paintings and sculptures.
(c) Amateur Film Criticism. . —Films are chosen from those submitted: a significant part of the
film is televised and then the panel of critics (who have spent time in studying the whole
film) assess the value of the film.
(d) Television interviews of leading figures by the Press: for example, the interview of Adlai
Stevenson by four very competent journalists.
( e ) Household techniques, e.g., cooking, house decoration, home management.
187. In the United States, commercial stations are increasingly realizing the social obligation to allot
time for programmes that will raise the general level of popular taste. It is more convenient to give
illustrations of these programmes in the next section.
• See supplementary observation No. 1 by the Chairman and Mrs. Foxton.


Adult Education.
188 Adult education lias become a technical term for activities designed for those who wish to carry
further their education in one or more particular spheres, and in many countries is supported by direct
governmental grants to universities, or to bodies specially set up for that purpose.
189. In the United States (as we have already pointed out in paragraph 129 of this chapter)
provision was made, in 1952, for 242 stations for educational purposes. It is yet too early to determine
how the experiment will work. But apart from these special stations, the facilities of commercial stations
are also used, either by buying time or obtaining it free from the stations.”” At present over 6a institutions
of higher learning in the United States are engaged in providing television programmes. In Philadelphia
a group of twenty colleges combined to present a regular series of adult education programmes, covering
science, psychology, art, literature and drama. In addition to the natural desire to raise the level of the
intellectual life of the community, there is the hope of establishing good relations between the universities
and the public, and of securing greater support and goodwill. Some concentrate on practical techniques
e.g. farming or gardening. Such a programme as “ The Whole Town’s Talking ” attempts to concentrate
attention on the social and political problems of the region in question. Columbia University runs a
programme “ Seminar ” which is a discussion on American education. Ten colleges are using television as
part of classroom instruction, though the subjects presented are mainly concerned with courses on radio and
television. lowa State College, which has had 24 years’ experience in radio broadcasting before commencing
television, spent $285,000 in establishing the basic installation and incurred an annual operating expenditure
of $370,000 exclusive of special research projects. But, although the station has had grants from the 1 ord
Foundation, it still has to rely in part on sponsorship. Some interesting programmes that fall under the
head of adult education are as follows: —
“ The Johns Hopkins Science Review” (Johns Hopkins University).
“ Art in Your Life ” (San Francisco Museum of Art).
“ Science in Action” (California Academy of Science).
190. In the United Kingdom at present there is only one programme provided and it runs only for
about 35 hours a week. There is no demand for specific stations for educational institutions for two
reasons: firstly there is the financial problem which no University in England would wish to face: secondly
the general standard of the British Broadcasting Corporation’s programmes is such that both popular and
minority interests are considered.
191. In 1945, an educational division of Television Francaise was established and it broadcast a
weekly programme of one hour’s duration on such subjects as science, literature, art, and a monthly
programme on university activities. France has also experimented with university programmes of an
advanced scientific nature, e.g. Anthropology and Microscope cinematography.
192. We conclude that at least in the early period, no plans should be made for special stations in
Australia for the purpose of adult education. In this country the first and most important problem is to
ensure that the quality of the programmes of both national and commercial stations is sufficiently high.
There are only limited resources to devote to the general development of television and our educational
institutions need money for more urgent purposes than experimenting with a new medium. “ Entertainment
television ” will need to struggle to increase the number of sets and it would be unwise, at this stage, to cast
on “educational stations” the burden of securing viewers. Even in radio, 'which is well established and
much cheaper than television, Australia has not established educational stations. But the existence of the
national network renders the problem less acute than in America.
School Class Room.
193. The evidence suggests that television is not yet a suitable medium for use in the class room.
Professor G, S. Browne, who, in 1953, made a survey of television in America, states that its introduction
into the school class room would stereotype the school time-table and diminish the activity of the pupils.
On the other hand, some educators are very enthusiastic and, by 1952, 41 school districts in the United
States reported some use of television in the class room (Siepmann, op. cit., p. 77).
194. In one survey, inquiry was made of 30 school superintendents. Twenty-two preferred the film,
2 preferred television, and 6 said that the two media served different purposes and could not really be
compared (Siepmann, op. cit., p. 84). In a second survey, 15 out of 28 schools were satisfied with the use
of television, 12 were unfavorable, and 1 was doubtful. The difference of opinion concerning the efficiency
of television as a teaching aid underlines the necessity for further experiment and experience before
conclusive answers can be given.
195. Of the witnesses who appeared before us, Mr. V. R. Long, of the Education Department or
Tasmania, suggested that the Department accepted television as a teaching aid and considered that its
introduction into the class room would increase the vital content of such subjects as science and social
studies, music, arts and crafts.
(9) Education on the Air (1952, Ohio State University).


19(5. The Commonwealth Office of Education gave evidence of the Philadelphia experiment where
200 television receivers have been installed in secondary and 700 in elementary schools. The preparation
and production is handled entirely by the school authorities. In France three half-hourly school
programmes are televised each week: two consist of filmed material covering such subjects as science,
geography and history: the third is a live programme: altogether 10 secondary schools, 50 elementary
schools and 10 technical colleges have television receivers.
197. In the United Kingdom there has been a very careful and cautious approach to the problem of
using television for schools. In 1951 the School Broadcasting Council and the British Broadcasting
Corporation set up a Joint Sub-Committee to study the implications of the problem. A pilot project has
just been carried out with the co-operation of the Middlesex Education Authority, and special programmes
are being transmitted to six selected schools. The conclusions were—
(a) Although television has great potential value, it cannot take the place of the teacher, who
must effectively prepare the class and also follow up the programme. The evidence does
not suggest that television can compensate for a shortage of good teachers.
( b) Television will not be a satisfactory class room aid until more research has been carried out.
( c ) The great disadvantage of television, as contrasted with film, is that all schools must view
the telecast at the same moment. This causes great time-table difficulties.
(d) The economic cost of fitting schools with adequate receivers is considerable, as a large class
would need more than one receiver.
( e ) The children did appreciate the immediacy of the telecast, which seemed to bring them into
closer contact with the commentator than in the case of film.
198. Mr. N. Rosenthal, Director of the Visual Aids Department of the University of Melbourne,
emphasized that, while television can be valuable in the class room, it is only a supplementary aid which
can be effectively used by a good teacher. Television will not overcome the inadequacies of a bad teacher.
Its integration into the class room needs resourcefulness and skill, and in the hands of a poor teacher it
will prove a danger rather than an aid to teaching. The first priority, in his view, was the provision of good
teaching, the second was the provision of adequate premises, adequate equipment and the institution of
classes small enough to enable effective teaching to be given. Until these needs were met, he considered
that money should not be spent on providing television for the class room. On the whole, he considered
that, in the present state of development, films were superior to television as a visual aid for teachers.
199. The Commonwealth Office of Education made the following submissions:—
(a) Only certain types of school work lend themselves to treatment on television transmission.
(&) Initially television will be available only to schools near transmitting stations.
(c) Television is certainly no substitute for the good teachers.
( d ) Costs of installing television in schools would be much greater than in the ease of film.
(<?) Research and experiment will be necessary to develop suitable techniques.
(/) A high type of programme would be essential.
200. Dr. H. S. Wyndham, Director-General of Education in New South Wales, also emphasized that
there is a significant lack of adequate and reliable experimental evidence on such questions as the types of
lessons which can most usefully be televised; the ages at which children benefit most; the methods to be
used for the different age groups. The witness considered that, in view of this lack of knowledge and the
economic cost, the most effective way that the Department could proceed would be by way of pilot sessions
on an experimental basis.
201. Our conclusion is in agreement with the majority of the witnesses that television is not yet a
suitable medium for class instruction, but we urge that experimental work should be carried out which
will take advantage of the experience of other countries and adapt it to the particular needs of Australia.
43


CHAPTER V. —THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AUSTRALIAN TELEVISION SERVICES.
1. Introductory.
202. We now propose to examine in some detail the specific matters referred to us for inquiry, against
the background of the general information reviewed in the preceding chapters, and of the evidence
submitted to us. The questions to be considered, broadly, fall into two distinct groups which may be
epitomized as follows: —
( а ) The formulation of a plan to provide for the inauguration and progressive development
of the Australian national and commercial television services (terms of reference,
paragraphs ( a ) and (&)); and
(б) The administrative organization and the safeguards which are necessary to ensure the
effective operation of such services, having regard to the public interest (terms of
reference, paragraphs (c) to (/)).
In this chapter we examine the issues which have to be resolved in relation to the first question. In
Chapters VI.-VIII. we shall consider the second question.
203. We are specifically required by paragraph (a) of our terms of reference to reach a conclusion
with respect to the number of national and commercial television stations which can effectively be
established and operated, and in doing so we are required to take into account—
(a) financial and economic considerations ; and
( b ) the availability of suitable programmes.
A further qualifying factor, not referred to in our terms of reference, but obviously relevant to an adequate
consideration of this issue is the technical problem connected with the availability of frequency channels
which we have already discussed in Chapter 111. It is therefore necessai\ for us, in the first place, to
examine these particular aspects of our inquiry in the light of the evidence submitted to us.
2. Financial Considerations.
204. In order to assess the financial implications involved in establishing and developing the
Australian television service, we shall review the evidence tendered to us on capital costs, operating costs
and revenues.
Capital Costs.
(a) THE NATIONAL SERVICE.
205. The Chairman and the General Manager of the Australian Broadcasting Commission submitted
to us a proposal covering the progressive establishment of fourteen national television stations. In
presenting this proposal the Australian Broadcasting Commission expressed the view that “ whatever the
resources that can be spared from other uses, they are certainly not abundant enough to permit a great
and rapid expansion of television in Australia”. We were informed that the proposal of the Australian
Broadcasting Commission was based on the assumption that once authority was granted to proceed with
the establishment of national stations it would be possible to commence the service in accordance with the
following time schedule
(a) Sydney .. . • • • - • • • • • within 2 years.
(5) Melbourne .. .. .. • • • - • • within 2| years.
(c) Brisbane and Adelaide .. . . .. . . • • within 3 years.
( d ) Perth, Hobart and Newcastle .. . . .. . . within 3£ years.
( e ) Regional “A” and “B ” .. .. .. .. within 4 years.
(/) Regional “C” • • • • • • • • • • within 5 years.
(g) Regional “D” .. .. -• .. .. within 5i years.
(h) Reginal “E ” .. .. .. . . . . within 6 years.
( i) Regional “F” .. .. .. .. .. within years.
(j) Regional “G ” . . . . . . . . . . within 7 years.
The Australian Broadcasting Commission did not identify the locations of the seven regional television
stations, but in its evidence it indicated that these stations would be established in centres of population
designed to provide a television service to a maximum number of viewers. The capital cost of establishing
the above-mentioned national stations was estimated by the Australian Broadcasting Commission as being
to the order of £4,515,900. This figure was stated to include the cost of buildings, studios and technical
equipment amounting to £3,462,000, and, in addition, an amount of £1,053,900 to cover operating deficits
from the commencement of the service up to the 31st December, 1959. It was further stated that in
estimating operating deficits provision had been made for interest at the rate of per cent, per annum
on moneys which would have to be borrowed from the Government to finance the capital expenditure
involved. The Australian Broadcasting Commission expressed the view, on the assumption that the
establishment of national television stations proceeded in accordance with the proposal submitted, and on
the further assumption that 375,000 viewer’s licences would be issued by 1960, that, as from the Ist


Sydney
£
622,000
Melbourne
480,000
Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth and Hobart, £300,000 each . .
. . 1,200,000
Newcastle and seven regional stations, £145,000 each
. . 1,160,000
3,462,000
January, 1960, it was expected that revenue from licence-fees (if fixed at £5), and from miscellaneous
sources would meet operating costs, and would also provide an annual surplus which would be available
to expand the national service and to amortize the cost of establishment over a period of years. It was
suggested that the capital expenditure on buildings, studios and equipment should be allocated to stations
as follows: —
We were informed that the capital expenditure had been graded in the manner outlined, on the
assumption that the Sydney and Melbourne stations would be required to originate the major part of the
national studio productions and, accordingly, that economies in the provision of television facilities would
be possible in other capital cities and towns selected for the establishment of the regional stations. In its
evidence the Australian Broadcasting Commission recognized that the benefits to be derived from the
capital expenditure contemplated on national television stations would be restricted to the concentrations
of population located in the capitals and in the principal cities selected for the regional stations and that,
for this and other reasons given in evidence, there were legitimate grounds for objecting to the national
service being financed through general revenue. To meet this objection the Australian Broadcasting
Commission advocated that the national television service “ should stand on its own feet . . . and that
any advance made to the national authority for capital equipment or for working capital should be repaid
in due course from revenues received when an adequate number of television receivers had been licensed.”
We shall discuss the question of a licence-fee on television receivers in greater detail in paragraphs
241, 307 and 308.
206. Evidence on the capital cost of establishing national television stations was also tendered to
us by the Postmaster-GeneraTs Department (in relation to equipment) and by the Department of Works
(in relation to buildings). If allowance is made for the somewhat uncertain base which the several
Commonwealth authorities found it necessary to use in formulating their estimates, it may fairly be
concluded that the evidence of the Postmaster-General’s Department and the Department of Works
broadly confirmed the estimates of capital expenditure supplied by the Australian Broadcasting Commission.
\
(&) THE COMMERCIAL SERVICE.
207. Considerable evidence was submitted to us by licensees of commercial broadcasting stations
and representatives of the electronics industry with respect to the capital costs likely to be involved in
setting up a commercial television station. To a considerable extent, however, for reasons given in evidence,
estimates of capital expenditure required to establish commercial television stations were necessarily
speculative.
208. Mr. W. Dunstan (Herald and Weekly Times Limited, Melbourne) after giving particulars of
the extensive inquiries in this subject which had been made by his company overseas stated that “in a
country without experience of television there is bound to be a good deal of guessing about establishment
and running costs.” He considered that “in the broadest terms it may be suggested that the establishment
of a television station capable of serving a reasonably sized community with a radius of 40 miles would be
about £225,000 (plus cost of land, buildings and antenna tower) ”.
209. Mr. Clive Ogilvy (Macquarie Broadcasting Service Pty. Ltd.) stated that, in order to provide
a television station comparable to the 2GB broadcasting station in Sydney, ‘ the cost of providing facilities
on the same scale and of a quality comparable with its present operations ” would require an investment
of £500,000. He went on to point out that “ until decisions have been reached by the controlling authority
as to power which may be used, and the technical standards in regard to equipment are promulgated, and
further, until allocation of building needs are known, to mention only a few of the facts which will bear
upon capital expenditure, there is nothing factual upon which to base firm calculations .
210. Mr. L. A. Hooke (Amalgamated Wireless (A/asia) Limited) also experienced difficulty in
giving precise fig Tires on capital costs —he informed us that Australian estimates for capital costs of
television stations vary within wide limits depending on the facilities provided .
211. Mr. K. S, Brown (Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd.) expressed the same view when he
advised us that “ the cost of technical equipment for a television station will obviously vary greatly
with the transmitter power output, type of aerial and tower required and the extent of studio facilities
desired ”. Similar evidence was given by the Hon. A. G. Warner, M.L.C. (Electronic Industries Limited),
and by Mr. S. O. Jones (Philips Electrical Industries Pty. Ltd.).


212. It became apparent to us that any judgment on the capital cost of establishing a commercial
television station would necessarily have to be on very broad lines. The estimates supplied by witnesses
ranged from as low as £lOO,OOO to as high as £500,000, with a fairly general acceptance of the proposition
that in actual experience it was likely that in order to provide minimum facilities for a moderate sized
station in a capital city at least £250,000 would be needed.
213. Broadly speaking, the witnesses who gave evidence on the question of commercial participation
in the development of the Australian television service took the stand that the amount of capital expenditure
which was likely to be involved in the establishment of commercial television stations was not a factor
which should be taken into account in determining the number of commercial television licences which should
be issued. We were informed that there was or would be adequate capital available to finance a number of
commercial television stations, and that, subject to technical limitations, there should be no restriction on
the issuing of licences where the applicants could demonstrate their financial ability to establish and operate
a television service.
214. Mr. H. B. Beaver, President, Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations,
expressed a view on this issue which was representative of the evidence from licensees of commercial
broadcasting stations when he said that —
On financial and economic grounds, licences for commercial television stations should be made available
to existing licensees of commercial stations who may be prepared to undertake the responsibility
of inaugurating and pioneering television services.
215. Mr. Clive Ogilvy (Macquarie Broadcasting Service Pty. Ltd.) expanded this argument when he
stated that —
It would be wrong for the Commission to accept the responsibility of determining whether television
licences should be granted or not on the grounds of financial risk ... It would be wrong, in principle,
1 believe, for any particular authority to assume the responsibility of safeguarding any or every person who
elected to go into television or, for that matter, in any other form of business merely because of the fact that
he may suffer financial loss.
216. Mr. A. E. Evans (TEX Pty. Ltd., Launceston) endorsed Mr. Beaver’s contention and said
that —
We feel, therefore, that apart from those that might be justified on purely technical grounds, no
limitation should be placed on the number of stations to be established in Austialia.
217. The opinion of Sir John Butters, Chairman of Directors of Associated Newspapers Limited and
Radio 2UE (Sydney) Pty. Ltd. was to the same effect—
I have already indicated our very strong view that the number of television stations to be licensed
should be as great as possible so as to provide the greatest possible choice of programmes _. . . We do not
think it wise or possible for the Government to impose any limit other than on technical grounds. The
substantial initial investment required to < establish a television station and carry it through to the
profit-earning stage will, by itself, impose a limit.
218. Mr. W. Dunstan also argued for immunity from Government restriction on the issue of
commercial licences. An extract from his evidence is as follows:
We submit, with respect, that this Commission should recommend that in issuing licences the statutory
television authority should have proper regard to the creative, technical and financial resources of the
applicant. It would be entirely wrong, we suggest, for any authority to decide that a particular station should
be national rather than commercial simply because of the risk that private interests electing to enter the field
might lose money. We believe financial risk is a matter entirely for the people or companies investing their
money and applying their skill to establishing T.Y. stations.
219. In the course of our hearings, however, it became clear that a number of the witnesses who
appeared in support of commercial television, and who endorsed the argument for a minimum of
Government interference or regulation in the establishment and operation of the commercial service,
recognized that it was impossible to divorce financial considerations from the question of determining the
number of commercial television stations which could be effectively established and operated in Australia,
and, accordingly, that it might be necessary for contending applicants for licences to join forces in setting
up the commercial services in the capital cities in the establishment period. It is perhaps fair to say that
this concession was based on the belief that the interplay of the forces of free competition would
automatically determine the amount of capital that would be committed in this new field of investment, and,
accordingly, that the availability of capital would impose its own limitation on the number of commercial
stations which would be established, and that this procedure was to be preferred to the number of commercial
stations being fixed by the arbitrary prescription of a Government authority.
220. Mr. Clive Ogilvy, for example, acknowledged that there was, at present, a limit imposed by
financial considerations on the number of commercial broadcasting stations which could effectively operate
in Sydney. He expressed the opinion that existing revenues in this field would not support an additional
station. Mr. Ogilvy further expressed the opinion that there would be room for at least four commercial
television stations in Sydney and that ultimately he would expect them to operate successfully.
46


221. Mr. H. E. Beaver agreed that if the number of channels available in capital cities were limited
on financial or economic grounds he would favour some sort of amalgamation of existing radio stations to
run television.
222. Mr. S. 0. Jones stated that after careful examination he had reached the conclusion “that in
five years from the commencement, Australia will not be able to support more than five or six commercial
television stations ”.
223. Mr. L. A. Hooke agreed that under the most favorable circumstances there would be some limit
on the number of commercial television stations which could effectively operate in Melbourne and Sydney.
Acknowledging the difficulty of fixing an upper limit, Mr. Hooke expressed the opinion that on present
information it would appear that two or three commercial television stations in Melbourne and Sydney
might be justified. Mr. Hooke also stated that if the number of commercial licences were restricted and
there were more applicants for licences than the number available, his company would try to make a
voluntary combination with the other applicants.
224. Sir John Chandler, of Brisbane, informed us that he had a “ grave doubt as to whether there
was justification for issuing television licences to every present broadcasting station ”, and he suggested
that the problem of establishing the commercial television service “ could be tackled ... by issuing
one or two licences first and then expanding them as found desirable”. Sir John Chandler also told
us that he did not believe that Brisbane could support any more broadcasting stations than those already
in existence if such stations were to operate effectively.
225. Mr. K. A. McDonald, Manager of the Advertiser Broadcasting Network, considered that it
would be unlikely that more than one commercial television station would be set up in Adelaide. Mr. S. B.
Denton, a Director of SKA Broadcasting Co. Ltd., Adelaide, expressed the view that even a single
commercial television station operating in Adelaide could not be run at a profit. Mr. J. S. Larkin,
Manager of SDN Broadcasting Station, Adelaide, was of the opinion that ultimately Adelaide could safely
have one national and two commercial television stations.
Belay Facilities.
226. In the United States of America and in Great Britain the rapid extension of the television
services has been made possible to a considerable extent by the provision of relay facilities which have
enabled studio productions in a central location to be viewed over an area very considerably greater than
that served by the transmitter of the originating studio. It is obvious, however, on financial grounds, that
similar facilities cannot be contemplated, at this stage, as part of the plan for the development of the
Australian television services. The long distances between our main centres of population would make the
cost prohibitive. It is estimated that the capital cost of providing an effective television link between all
the capital cities of the Australian mainland and the larger cities and towns would be much greater than
the capital cost of establishing national and commercial stations in those localities.
227. The methods by which programmes can be relayed from one location to another, namely, by
coaxial cable and by micro-wave radio links, have been referred to in Chapter 111. Estimates of the cost
of providing these relay links were received from a number of sources. The actual cost of a relay link
depends upon the terrain to be traversed and can be accurately calculated only when the actual route is
known, and any special requirements of the service and the relation to other communication services have
been ascertained. We were informed by witnesses representing Amalgamated Wireless (A/asia) Limited,
Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd. and the Postmaster-General’s Department, that the cost of a
micro-wave link would range from £1,500 per mile to £3,500 per mile for dual equipment with automatic
change-over facilities, stand-by engine driven power supply at all repeater stations and terminals, repeater
buildings, aerial towers, roads, water and power supplies, installation costs and purchase price of sites.
The cost of coaxial cable would be approximately the same, although in this case there are advantages to
be gained where the television link can be combined with the provision of trunk line telephone or
telegraph channels.
228. On the other hand, some witnesses submitted that it would be possible to install a radio relay,
based on the minimum requirements of a one-way service, at a cost of approximately £4OO per mile. Such
an installation would not provide any automatic changeover facilities or emergency equipment to minimize
circuit interruptions. Evidence was given to us, however, that this type of installation probably would not
provide a satisfactory standard of service.
Cost of Receivers.
229. We directed a series of questions to the manufacturers of electronic equipment to ascertain
the estimated cost to the public of a television receiver. The questions related to the comparative costs of
receivers built to receive signals in the very high frequency band only, and those built to receive
transmissions in both the very high frequency and the ultra high frequency bands.


£
Sydney
302,500
Melbourne
185,000
Brisbane
102,000
i\.delaide, Perth and Hobart, £102,000 each
306,000
Newcastle
20,000
Kegional “ A ”
20,000
935,500
230. The estimates supplied to us differed within fairly wide margins but a reasonable inference
from the evidence is that the price in the hands of the public of a receiver manufactured in Australia is
unlikely to be less than £l5O (inclusive of sales tax). This price would be for a receiver capable of receiving
transmissions in the very high frequency band only, and would not mcorpoiate anj elaboiate features.
231. It was generally agreed that, whilst there would be little difference in the cost of a receiver
manufactured to receive transmission solely in either the very high frequency or the ultra high
frequency band, the cost of one designed to receive transmission in both bands would be significantly higher.
Estimates of the additional cost varied from £lO to £4O (exclusive of sales tax). It would appear that
there would be no substantial difference in costs whether the receiver was designed, at the outset, to receive
signals transmitted in both bands, or whether a converter was subsequently added to a receiver designed
initially to receive signals in one band only.
232. It may, of course, be assumed that, progressively with increased demand for receivers, the cost
of production will fall. It is, however, impossible to estimate, with any certainty, what this demand is
likely to be, as this will necessarily depend upon a number of assumptions, such as the number of stations
established, the number of homes served, the general economic conditions prevailing, and the quality and
quantity of the service provided. We refer to the estimates of prospective sales of receivers in paragraph
241.
233. We were advised by manufacturers that the estimated selling price of receivers was based
upon a substantial sales volume, and it was generally agreed that each manufacturer would need to sell
about 10,000 receivers per year to achieve economic production.
Operating Costs.
{a) THE NATIONAL SERVICE.
234. In order to obtain information with respect to the probable level of costs likely to be incurred
in operating the national television service, we invited the Australian Broadcasting Commission to supply
estimates of such costs, based upon transmissions of 24 hours per week and 30 hours per week respectively
from a Sydney station. Information was also sought from the Australian Broadcasting Commission on
estimated operating costs in smaller capital cities and towns where regional stations might be established.
This difficult assignment was carried out by the Australian Broadcasting Commission with commendable
care and ability, and whilst the data supplied does not justify any positive conclusions, it has enabled us to
form a broad judgment on the minimum costs which are likely to be incurred in operating the national
service on an extremely modest basis. In paragraph 205 we referred to the proposal submitted by the
Australian Broadcasting Commission for the progressive establishment of fourteen national television
stations, all of which, it was claimed, could be in operation within seven years from the date upon which
authority was given to commence construction. The Australian Broadcasting Commission’s proposal
envisaged that by 1958 (assuming authority to commence construction was given early in 1954) national
stations would be operating in six capital cities, in Newcastle and in one regional centre —in all eight
stations. On the basis of a weekly transmission of 32£ hours, and on the assumption that programmes
would be provided on a relatively modest scale, the Australian Broadcasting Commission estimated that the
total annual operating costs of these eight stations would be to the order of £935,500, made up as follows:
This estimate does not include the annual provision for interest on and repayment of the amount borrowed
to establish the national services (estimated at approximately £4,500,000 for fourteen stations). The
Australian Broadcasting Commission stated that this amount would be £345,942 per annum if repayment
were effected over 20 years, and £227,710 per annum if repayment were effected over 50 years, assuming
interest at the rate of per cent. We were informed that the figure of £935,500 included provision for
technical services as well as programming and administrative costs. The General Manager of the
Australian Broadcasting Commission, in evidence, qualified the estimate, however, by stating that it
covered “ the simplest forms of production of an undeveloped service, but that if funds were available to
enable the Australian Broadcasting Commission to make use of more live studio productions, the costs would
rise sharply If the estimated operating cost of the Sydney station (excluding interest on and amortization
of capital costs) is taken as a guide it may be deduced that the Australian Broadcasting Commission
48


expects to conduct this station on the footing that the overall cost of transmission will be to the order of
£lBO per hour. This figure should be compared with the hourly costs of television transmission in Great
Britain and Canada, which the General Manager of the Australian Broadcasting Commission stated in
evidence were approximately £1,350 per hour in Great Britain and £BOO per hour in Canada. We have
formed the opinion that the estimate of operating costs submitted by the Australian Broadcasting
Commission is extremely conservative, and that in actual experience, the operating costs of the proposed
national service will be substantially greater if a service acceptable to the public is to be maintained over
a period of years. This opinion is supported by information which we have received from sources in Great
Britain and Canada. The General Manager of the Australian Broadcasting Commission admitted that
it would be essential to develop from the modest beginning which he had contemplated in preparing the
programmes upon which his estimate of operating costs was based. He stated that while the Australian
Broadcasting Commission “ would not be anxious to rush into extravagant competition with commercial
stations ” the national service would be compelled to extend the range and variety, and, therefore, the cost
of its programmes if the commercial stations “ are able to put on more and more live programmes of a
complex and expensive nature ”. In such circumstances he considered that “ the national service could
not lag behind
(6) THE COMMERCIAL SERVICE.
235. We invited witnesses who represented commercial interests to supply estimates of operating
costs of commercial television stations, but the inherent difficulties associated with this task proved to be
insurmountable and most witnesses confessed their inability to provide any reliable information on this
question. There was, however, general agreement that the cost of operating a commercial television
station would be considerably higher than the cost of operating a commercial broadcasting station, and
there was further agreement that commercial operators would have to be prepared to face initial losses.
Some witnesses expressed concern at the probable impact of commercial television on the advertising
revenues of existing broadcasting stations.
236. Sir John Chandler stated “ that any one who anticipates making a profit out of television for
quite a while is an incurable optimist ”.
237. Mr. J. S. Larkin (Broadcasting Station SDN, Adelaide) expressed the same thought when
he advised us that “ commercial operators recognize that initial heavy losses in the operation of a television
service are unavoidable ”.
238. Mr. S. P. P. Lamb (Newcastle Broadcasting Co. Pty. Ltd.) agreed that initial losses would be
faced but said that “ at this stage it is impossible to estimate, with any degree of accuracy, the probable
loss in operation for a year or the number of years of operation before commercial television in any area
would be economically profitable. It is certain, however, that in the early stages, with few television
sets in homes, losses would be involved ”.
239. Mr. S. 0. Jones (Philips Electrical Industries Pty. Ltd.) also agreed that operating losses were
inevitable and informed us that in his opinion “ it is going to take five years from the commencement for
a commercial television industry to make a profit ... In the intervening five years I think both
commercial and national interests will lose a lot of money ”.
240. Mr. S. B. Denton (Broadcasting Station SKA, Adelaide) expressed concern, with the prospect
of television competition, on the revenue of existing broadcasting stations and advised us that without
making any profit the present radio stations in South Australia require annual adveitismg icvenue of
£310,000 to £330,000, and if any new station or television station would reduce such revenue below these
figures, it would mean ruin to some station or stations ”.
Revenue.
(a) THE NATIONAL SERVICE.
241. In paragraph 205 we described the basic features of the proposal presented to us by the
Australian Broadcasting Commission for developing and financing the national television service. It will
have been observed that this plan incorporates the principle that the national seivice should stand on
its own feet ’’ financially and should not become a burden on the taxpayer, because the benefits of national
television, for some years at least, will be restricted to persons living in the main centres of population.
The Australian Broadcasting Commission proposed that the revenue required to meet operating costs, and
to service advances for capital expenditure and establishment, he obtained by a licence-fee on viewer s sets
of £5 per annum. This fee would be additional to the existing licence-fee on radio receivers. In order to
assess the amount of revenue which the Australian Broadcasting Commission would be likely to derive from
licence-fees on the basis of an annual charge of £5 (assuming this policy is adopted by the Government),
it is appropriate that we set out certain estimates submitted to us in this respect, assuming the progressive
establishment of a number of national and commercial transmitters in the main centres of population
during the same period.
F.5242/54- —4


Estimates of
Australian Broadcasting Commission.
Estimates of
Electronics and Allied Industries Division,
Chamber of Manufactures (N.S.W.).
No. of years from commencement
of service.
.
Estimated Sale of Receivers.
Estimated Sale of Receivers.
Annual.
Progressive.
Revenue (£5
Licence Pee).
Annual.
Progressive.
Revenue (£5
Licence Fee).
£
£
1st
40,000
40,000
200,000
9,500
9,500
47,500
2nd
50,500
90,500
452,500
25,500
35,000
175,000
3rd
64,500
155,000
775,000
78.000
113,000
565,000
4th
97,000
252,000
1,260,000
115,000
335,000
1,675,000
(&) THE COMMERCIAL SERVICE.
242. The revenue required to enable commercial television stations to operate effectively, in the
financial sense, must necessarily be obtained from advertising. We accordingly sought information from a
number of witnesses on the volume of advertising revenue which was likely to be available for commercial
television generally and the amount of revenue which, it was considered, would be needed to enable an
individual commercial station to operate at a profit, and at the same time to maintain a reasonable
programme standard, both quantitatively and qualitatively. No conclusive evidence on these matters
was tendered to us, nor, having regard to the existence of so many unknown factors, could any conclusive
evidence be expected, Mr. N. V. Nixon, President of the Australian Association of Advertising Agencies,
stated that it was impossible for him to attempt to give us any idea of the advertising income of television
in the early period, but he was of the opinion that once an adequate number of receivers was in the hands of
the public, television would receive considerable support from advertisers “as the existing advertising
media to-day are overburdened with advertising ”, Mr. Nixon expressed the further general opinion that
once commercial television became firmly established all existing advertising media would be faced with
a simultaneous risk of losing revenue to television, but that in the main television would claim the major
part of the additional advertising appropriations which are progressively made available in an expanding
economy. Mr. W. J. Cudlipp, President of the Australian Association of National Advertisers expressed
similar views to those of Mr. Nixon. The Hon. A. G. Warner (Electronic Industries Limited) did not
agree that there was any substantial amount of advertising expenditure in Australia which could not, at
present, find a satisfactory outlet and he considered that advertising revenue for television would be at
the expense of existing media. Mr. W. Dunstan (Herald and Weekly Times Limited) agreed that in the
early stages of television it would, like any new advertising medium entering the field, “ dip into the pool
of funds available for advertising ” and that it must be accepted that this influence would be felt in the
field of broadcasting as well as in other media. Mr. Clive Ogilvy (Macquarie Broadcasting Service Pty.
Ltd.) informed us that his organization had already been approached by a number of national advertisers
who require time and programmes on television. He further informed us that these advertisers had
indicated their willingness to spend money on television advertising “ even though, in the early stages,
the initial circulation would not justify the expenditure ”.
243. The broad effect of the evidence is that the inauguration of a commercial television service in
Australia will attract, immediately, a certain, but at present, unknown volume, of advertising revenue,
regardless of the number of receivers in use at that time, and that, if the commercial service is effectively
developed advertising revenue can be expected to grow.
Preliminary Conclusions on Costs and Revenues.
244. It is convenient at this point, that we should set out our broad conclusions on the evidence
reviewed in the preceding paragraphs touching on the financial implications of establishing and operating
the contemplated national and commercial television services. We shall reserve a more detailed
consideration of this issue for discussion in the concluding sections of this chapter. Despite the difficulties
involved in supplying financial data with respect to a project on which there has been no previous
practical operating experience in this country, witnesses went to considerable trouble and care and no
small cost, to assist us with this problem. Information obtained from television operators and from other
sources in the United States of America and Great Britain was tendered in evidence, although it was
generally conceded that it would be unwise to place too great a reliance on overseas financial experience
in assessing the cost factors of an Australian television service which will necessarily function under a
different set of conditions.
(a) THE NATIONAL SERVICE.
245. It will be recalled that the estimated capital cost of establishing fourteen national stations
has been put down at £4,515,900, of which £3,462,000 was assigned to the cost of buildings, studios and
technical equipment and the balance of £1,053,900 to operating deficits up to the 31st December 1959
from which date it was considered revenue from licence-fees would be sufficient to meet operating charges.
50


On the information before us we have formed the opinion that the estimated expenditure of £3,462,000 on
the provision of the physical resources for the national service has been fairly calculated. We consider,
however, that operating deficits during the establishment period, and operating costs subsequently (see
paragraph 234) are likely to be considerably in excess of the forecasts of the Australian Broadcasting
Commission. W e feel further that the Australian Broadcasting Commission has made insufficient allowance
in its calculations of operating costs for the unrelenting pressure which will be exerted on an expanding
television service for novelty and variety in programme material, and therefore, for the increase in costs
which will have to be met if programmes acceptable to a progressively more critical audience are to be
provided. r lhis has been the experience in other countries which have established television services. In
fairness to the Australian Broadcasting Commission, it must be said that the existence and significance of
this cost problem was recognized in its evidence, as was the difficulty of translating it into effective
financial terms. We emphasize this factor at this point merely as a warning that, in budgeting for the
operating costs of a national service to the order of that envisaged in the proposals of the Australian
Broadcasting Commission, it would be imprudent to assume that such costs could be contained within the
financial estimates supplied to us. In our opinion provision would have to be made on a much more
generous scale but to what extent only experience will show.
(6) THE COMMERCIAL SERVICE.
246. After carefully considering the evidence tendered to us by witnesses representing the commercial
broadcasting and electronics industries, we are compelled to reject the submission that financial considerations
should be disregarded in fixing the number of commercial stations which should be licensed. We have
reached this conclusion, not because we consider it is the duty of Parliament to protect private capital from
investment risks, but for the reason that in our view a commercial television service should be required
to conform strictly to the public interest by maintaining programmes of an acceptable standard of quality.
Whilst we concede that initiative and originality will be required if attractive programmes are to be supplied,
and that competition is likely to foster these qualities in television operators, we are nevertheless unable
to escape the fear that during the inaugural period of commercial television in this country the pressure
to obtain an economic return on capital invested would lead to a lowering of programme standards which
would be extremely difficult to prevent if a number of licensees were competing for what is at present
an unknown quantum of advertising revenue. We wish to make it clear, however, that whilst in the early
stages we believe that a limit on the number of commercial stations is justified and necessary on financial
grounds, we are equally conscious of the dangers of a monopoly in this field. In our opinion, the
requirements of Australia as a whole in respect of commercial television services should be kept under
continuous observation by the Australian Broadcasting Control Board, with a view to recommending to
the Minister the extension of the number of commercial licences as soon as financial and other considerations
permit.
3. Economic Considerations.
247. We have already referred, in Chapter 1., to the fact that a considerable body of evidence was
presented to ns in support of the argument that, on economic grounds, the introduction of television
services in Australia should be deferred indefinitely or for a considerable period. If allowance is made
for minor points of difference in emphasis, the argument for postponement, on economic grounds, may
be summarized with reasonable accuracy as a contention that the present is not an appropriate time for
the introduction of television services, and that they should be deferred until at least our developmental
needs and the major deficiencies in our public services have been satisfied. Our attention was drawn to
the capital expenditure required on public works essential to the development of Australia (in particular
rural development), the great deficiencies in some, if not all, essential public services (again with particular
reference to rural areas) which are mainly due to lack of funds, and the possible impact of television on
the availability of man-power generally for essential purposes, and in particular, on the supply of rural
labour. Some witnesses stated, however, that their objections to the introduction of television on these
grounds applied only to the expenditure of public funds and they raised no objection to the expenditure
of private funds by commercial interests. These considerations clearly gave rise to great concern among
many sections of the community and in the following paragraphs we set out what we regard as a reasonably
representative selection of the views submitted to us.
248. Professor S. M. Wadham, Dean of the Faculty of Agriculture of the University of Melbourne,
strongly urged that television should not be developed in Australia at the present time on the grounds that
we could not afford the expenditure of the capital involved, that it would “ add one more frippery in the
way of embellishing the entertainment side of life ” while basic developmental works such as roads, water
conservation schemes and electricity undertakings, and public services such as schools, hospitals and
telephones were still far from satisfactory. He further stated that any money available would be more
profitably spent if devoted to the development of the productive resources of our rural areas, and that, as
its high cost would make it impossible to provide television services to more than a very small percentage
of the country population, it would act differentially against rural industries in their capacity to hold
a satisfactory population of young and virile minds.


249. Sir John Medley, formerly Vice-Chancellor of the Univerversity of Melbourne, and a member
of the Australian Broadcasting Commission, advocated the postponement of television for some years,
firstly, for the reason that in the expenditure of public funds (which, in his view should be used when
television is introduced) television should not take precedence over expenditure on housing, school buildings,
urgent developmental works and universities; and secondly, that the considerable man-power involved
should not be used for this purpose either by public or private television at the present stage of our
development.
250. Sir John Butters, Chairman of Directors of Associated Newspapers Limited and Radio 2IIE
(Sydney) Pty. Ltd., made the following comments: —
I do not feel that I can say that my opinion or that of my companies would place television, with all
its desirability and advantages, as meriting a higher priority than the provisions of a plentiful supply of
power, the development of our food production, the modernization of our traffic facilities and the provision
of adequate housing, water, sewerage, hospitals and schools, to say nothing of the first essential, defence. If,
after having provided for these essentials to the extent of our financial supply and labour capacity we can
proceed with television—then well and good.
251. Mr. J. L. J. Wilson, Director of Tutorial Classes of the University of Sydney, expressed the
opinion that, from a national point of view, the diversion of either private or public investment funds to
television at this stage of our development appeared hard to justify on purely economic grounds, but with
under-developed natural resources crying out for capital to develop them, with a critical shortage of funds
for housing, schools and other necessary public works, there appeared to be far more urgent priorities for
public or private investment than in the provision of yet another entertainment industry. Mr. Wilson
informed us that he was strongly supported in these views by Professor S. J. Butlin, Dean of the Faculty of
Economics, and Professor C. R. Mcßae, Professor of Education in the University of Sydney.
252. The Hon. A. C. Cameron, M.P., expressed the view of the Victoria District Committee of the
Liberal and Country League of South Australia that television would not aid development or defence,
that its cost would be too high in relation to its benefits, and that we could not afford to devote man-power
and money to its establishment and development whilst there existed a large unsatisfied demand, especially
amongst new settlers, for telephones, roads, schools, water supplies and hospitals.
253. Mrs. Barbara Cullen, speaking on behalf of the Country Women’s Association of Australia,
said that her Association would be opposed to the expenditure of large sums of the taxpayers’ money on
television services in cities to the detriment of the development of water conservation, rural electrification,
telephone facilities, better transport and like services in country areas, but would not object to the
expenditure of private funds on commercial television.
254. Archdeacon J. A. Seholfield placed before us the opinion of the Archbishop of Melbourne’s
Committee on Television that, from the point of view of the Christian Church, there was nothing particular
to recommend the early introduction of television, as it was a costly luxury that would, for a long time,
succeed only in further accentuating the difference between life in the cities and in country areas.
255. Mr. R. Broadby, General Secretary of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, submitted that
the economy could not afford television at present and its introduction should therefore be postponed until
at least the arrears of housing, education facilities and other national essentials had been overcome, and
until it was possible to institute a system that would be available to all taxpayers throughout Australia
at a cost the average worker could afford.
256. These views were supported, either in whole or in part, by the Victorian Wheat and Wool
Growers’ Association, the Farmers’ Union of Western Australia, the Victorian Division of the Housewives’
Association, the Women’s Service Guilds of Western Australia, Broadcasting Stations SKA, SAU, SRM of
youth Australia, the Australian Federal Council of the New Education Fellowship, the State School
Teachers’ Union of Western Australia, the Film and Television Council of South Australia, and the
Methodist Church in South Australia, and by many primary producers’ organizations which wrote to
the Commission but did not appear before us to tender formal evidence.
257. A slightly different emphasis was given by His Lordship Bishop P. F. Lyons, speaking on
behalf of the Catholic Church in Australia, who submitted that in view of our present economic position
and the unsatisfactory state oi our developmental works and public services, priority of investment,
man-power and materials should be given to agriculture and the primary industries, and we should,
therefore, proceed cautiously with the introduction of television which he suggested, by most standards, was
a luxury.
268. The National Farmers’ Union of Australia represented by Mr. B. Foley, speaking on behalf
of the following affiliated primary producers’ organizations:—
Australian Cane Growers’ Council,
Australian Wheat Growers’ Federation,
Australian Wool and Wheat Producers’ Federation,
Australian Dairy Farmers’ Federation,


Australian Vegetable Growers’ Federation,
Federal Flax Growers’ Federation,
Graziers’ Federal Council of Australia,
South Australian Chamber of Rural Industries,
Queensland Council of Farmers and Graziers,
Primary Producers Council of New South Wales, and
Victorian Chamber of Agriculture,
expressed the opinion “ that Australia has now largely overcome the basic economic problems associated
with the post-war period and there does not appear to be any major justification, from the national point
of view, for delaying television plans until a more propitious stage is reached Whilst agreeing that the
national service should commence on a limited scale so as not to divert resources from the Postmaster-
General’s programme for the installation of country telephone services, Mr. Foley submitted that television
had great importance ‘‘as a medium, by scientific rural extension work, of increasing production in primary
industries ”: that the “ early metropolitan establishment of television should be regarded as an immediate
step to rapid rural development ”: and that every encouragement should be given to the establishment
of commercial stations.
259. In view of the general nature of the evidence which has been summarized in the preceding
paragraphs, and of the specific direction in our terms of reference that we should have regard, in reporting
on the number of stations to be established, to economic and financial considerations, we asked certain
Commonwealth departments, the Commonwealth Bank, and two economists (Professor W. Prest, of the
University of Melbourne, and Mr. G. R. Mountain, Chief Inspector and Senior Economist of the National
Bank of Australasia Ltd.) to assist us on the economic and financial aspects of our inquiry, with
particular reference to the demands that television services might be expected to make on man-power,
resources and development. For this purpose we suggested to the witnesses that they proceed on certain
assumptions, namely, that the national service would be introduced along the lines proposed by the
Australian Broadcasting Commission in the plan that it had submitted to us (details of which -were
supplied to witnesses), that it might be expected that the capital and operating costs of commercial
television stations would be of a slightly lower order than that of the national stations, that the sales of
receiver sets would be to the order envisaged by the Australian Broadcasting Commission and that the
purchase price of a set would be approximately £l5O.
260. The Division of Industrial Development of the Department of National Development provided
us with a valuable survey which considered in some detail the prospective demand for television receivers
in Australia in the early years of the establishment of the service, the probable cost of receivers, and the
availability of materials and man-power likely to be required by manufacturers. The conclusions of the
Department were, broadly, that the call on resources in the first four years of television services was not
likely to be of major significance, or seriously affect the economy, nor could it be stated positively that
the investment involved in establishing television would seriously affect more fundamental industries; the
capital requirements, the demands for materials, and labour requirements could, it was thought, be supplied
without serious difficulty or disruption of other activities.
261. The Secretary to the Commonwealth Treasury (Dr. R, Wilson) referred to the. difficulties of
making any forecasts in this field in the absence of really concrete proposals and the consequent
impossibility of doing more than speculate on the impact of television on the economy. With these
reservations, and while not expressing any views on issues of Government policy, Dr. Wilson assisted us
with some general guidance on the effect on the economy likely to arise from a decision to establish television
in Australia. He referred to the great pressures during post-war years to extend both public facilities and
private investment, and suggested that these pressures were likely to continue. Excessive demands on
physical resources and finance, he pointed out, arise to a large extent from the aggregation of a great
number of new and varied investment proposals which, individually, may require a comparatively small
amount of capital. Usually all cannot be carried out at the same time; and so a choice has to be made. A
decision on the subject of television became, therefore, in his view, a matter of choice, which rested partly
with Governments and partly with private enterprise. It appeared to him that in the present, and likely
future circumstances, a decision by the Government to proceed with television would probably mean that
some other branch of development, or some other expansion of services and facilities, could not proceed
as fast as it might otherwise have done and perhaps could not proceed at all. Essentially it was the
same sort of choice for private enterprise.
262. The Governor of the Commonwealth Bank of Australia (Dr. H. C. Coombs) stated that, from the
estimates given in the material provided by the Commission, it appeared that the annual amount of funds
and resources involved in the establishment of television facilities would not exceed a relatively minor
proportion of the total annual investment and consumption expenditure in Australia, although it was
observed that the estimates were regarded as uncertain. In these circumstances, Dr. Coombs stated that
the bank did not think that there would be any substantial difficulty in meeting the extra demands for
resources and materials which would be imposed by the establishment of television facilities. Similarly,
53


the bank did not at present foresee any difficulties in obtaining whatever finance, of a normal commercial
kind, would be required for a programme on the scale indicated by the material supplied by the Commission,
provided, of course, that investors were satisfied with the propositions made to them. Should present
conditions change and, in particular, should strong inflationary pressure re-emerge, these comments
might require some qualification.
263 Professor Prest examined the economic effects of television on investment, consumption, and
production, using as his basis the general information which we supplied. He concluded that the capital
outlay was relatively small, not only in relation to investment as a whole, but also in relation to particular
forms such as Government works, industrial building and new equipment for the engineering and technical
industries, and would not have any significant effect either on the capital market or on taxation. The
impact on consumption and production would be in the nature of a transfer from other channels and could
not validly be regarded as likely to cause any damage to the economy. He agreed with Dr. Wilson that
whether there were more worthy projects to which finance could be devoted was essentially a matter for
political and moral judgment rather than of economics.
264. Mr. G. R. Mountain said that, short of totalitarian controls, the funds available for commercial
television would not be devoted to the provision of basic developmental works and public services, but
would, in all probability, be left idle until permission to establish television was granted, that the public
investment involved would be a very small portion of the Commonwealth Government’s Budget and the
diversion of labour and materials would be of small dimensions. He concluded that the establishment of
television would place no strain on the economy and would not cause any disruption or other essential
services.
265. We were informed by the Department of National Development that, in its opinion, little
difficulty would be experienced in obtaining the labour required for the introduction and development of
television, except for some skilled tradesmen. In this latter respect we were advised by the Departments
of Civil Aviation and Supply that, whilst they were anxious to see the electronics industry established in
Australia on a sound basis, in view of the importance of the technical resources of the industry for
defence purposes, the immediate effect of the introduction of television would be to place a strain on the
already inadequate supply of trained personnel and technical staff. It was the emphatic opinion of these
Departments that steps should be taken without delay to provide adequate training facilities to prevent
such shortages and thus avoid the disruption that might otherwise occur to their work.
266. A further economic factor which we felt obliged to consider was the likely effect of the
introduction of television on our overseas reserves. On this question the evidence we received was to the
effect that the average imported content of a television receiver was not likely to exceed £5, and that the
maximum amount of imported equipment required for any television station was unlikely to exceed
£250,000. It is evident, therefore, that the effect on overseas reserves will not be very great. It is difficult
to assess the amount of dollar exchange that will be entailed, but as the components of the receivers and
transmitters are all available from sterling sources, it would be possible to commence television services in
Australia without any drain whatever on our dollar reserves other than perhaps some relatively small
expenditure on programmes. If, however, the Government decided to permit the importation of television
receivers from sterling areas, the impact on our sterling reserves would be correspondingly heavier.
267. It will be observed from the evidence summarized in paragraphs 247-258 that particular
importance was attached by a number of witnesses to the possible adverse effect of the establishment of
television services on the provision of telephone facilities, especially in rural areas. On this subject we
sought the opinion of the Director-General of Posts and Telegraphs (Mr. G. T. Chippindall), who advised
us that it was not expected that the advent of television would have any detrimental effect on the provision
of telephones or any of the other essential services controlled by the Postmaster-General’s Department.
Indeed, the establishment of a number of television stations throughout Australia might well provide an
impetus to the provision of coaxial cable or micro-wave links that would facilitate the installation of
additional telephone facilities. Mr. Chippendall summarized his evidence by saying that if the authorities
decided on television the relatively small amount of money involved (which was not even a large sum
compared wuth. the departmental vote) having regard to the whole national spending in a budget of
£1,000,000,000 could not, in his opinion, have a marked effect upon the telephone programme of erecting
trunk lines and in providing subscribers’ services. It was unlikely that there would be any difficulty
from the materials stand-point, and the labour involved was relatively small.
Conclusions on Argument for Deferment.
268. In Chapter I. we have stated that we do not think that it would be proper for us, having regard
to our terms of reference, to recommend the indefinite deferment of the introduction of television. We
wish to make R quite clear that if we had been persuaded that the recommendations which we subsequently
make on the number of television stations which should be established would be likely to have disastrous,
or even very marked effects, on the economy resulting from the consequent drain on resources, we would
not hesitate to say so. We have, on the evidence which we have already summarized, come to the conclusion


that, if television is introduced on the basis which we later recommend, the capital outlay will be relatively
small and the impact on the economy resulting from its introduction will not, from the point of view
of man-power and materials, be significant. We therefore do not feel that there is any justification for
recommending that some definite period should elapse before any national or commercial stations should
be established. It will, however, be appreciated that our subsequent recommendations are made in the
knowledge that, so far as expenditure by the Commonwealth Government is involved, the decisions
relating to such expenditure must be made in the light of the overall demands on the national finances
and the general financial policy of the Government, and that, so far as private expenditure is involved, it
may be that issues of general economic policy or changes in economic conditions may arise which may
render some of our recommendations inapplicable.
269. We feel we should make one or two further comments on the arguments for deferment. They
are arguments that could have been raised, at any time in our history, against the introduction of almost
any new development. They are not arguments that have commended themselves to the very large number
of countries (some of which suffered severely from devastation in the recent war), which now have television
services (see Chapter IT.). On the question of deficiencies in public works and services, we feel obliged
to point out that it will always be impossible to find a period when all works and services of an “ essential
nature” (assuming this expression can be defined with reasonable accuracy at all) will have been
completed. Witnesses were asked, wfithout any very satisfactory results, to define a state of affairs which
could be recognized in the future as marking a completion of Australia’s essential developmental works, or
conditions which would be more suited to the introduction of television. On the other hand, it is relevant
to point out that a number of witnesses told us that the introduction of television would greatly strengthen
the industrial and manufacturing potential of the Commonwealth and would be of considerable significance
in the training of technicians in the electronic industries (particularly in techniques connected with the
use of the very high radio frequencies) who would greatly strengthen resources required for our defence.
Sir Frederick Shedden, Secretary of the Department of Defence, informed us that although a decision
whether to introduce television into Australia should be made on wider grounds than defence, its
introduction would, on defence grounds, have some advantages, although these might be limited.
4. Availability of Suitable Programmes.
270. Evidence was received from a number of witnesses whose experience in the production of films
or the provision of broadcasting programmes might be expected to have enabled them to form judgments
on the extent to which material suitable for Australian television programmes would be available.
Representatives of Churches and of writers’, actors’, artists’ and announcers’ associations also gave evidence
on this subject. We also heard some evidence on the extent to which programmes produced in overseas
countries would be available for Australian television stations, and we received a great deal of evidence
which was specially directed to the capacity of Australian artists and writers to provide suitable programmes.
Availability of Programmes Generally.
271. As was to be expected, very few witnesses were able to give conclusive evidence on the detailed
programme requirements of television stations and the manner in which these might be met. In the main
the evidence was directed towards particular fields in which the witnesses possessed specialized knowledge.
However, the General Manager of the Australian Hroadcasting Commission informed us that, in his
opinion, it would be difficult to maintain a service for more than 24 hours per week if the number of
stations operating in a centre such as Sydney exceeded two- al least in the first year unless the
programmes were composed of a great deal of imported film material.
272. The Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations expressed the view that the
availability of programmes (as well as of advertising) would depend largely on the number of viewers,
and that these were matters which could not at this stage be the subject of factual evidence noi even of
reasonable estimates. The Federation felt that television should be started with the lowest possible
operating and capital costs and that as the number of receiving sets grew and the demand for services
increased, programme expansion and development would follow automatically.
273. The Managing Director of Macquarie Broadcasting Service Pty. Ltd. stated that he felt there
was no need for any apprehension with respect to the availability of programme material. He estimated
that his companv could provide, from its own pool of artists, producers and scripts, sufficient programme
material for four stations in Sydney. On the other hand, he told us that some limitation would be
necessary in the early stage to maintain quality, and he would anticipate operations of about 28 hours
per week if his company Avere granted a licence.
274 A number of other witnesses assisted us by expressing opinions on this subject. It is worthy
of note that in every ease it was estimated that the potential Australian programme resources would not
be able to provide the whole of the material required, even if the number of stations in any one area were
limited and restricted hours of operation observed.


Sources of Programme Material.
275. The principal sources of programme material for television services, classified according to the
method of presentation, are —
(a) live studio production;
(5) outside broadcasts of actuality events;
(c) feature films and films specially produced for television; and
(d) newsreels and documentary films.
We heard evidence from a number of witnesses covering these various aspects, but, as will be apparent
from the following summaries, which represent a reasonable cross-section of the views expressed, most of
the information presented to us was of a general character and, in many directions, can only be regarded
as expression of opinion.
( a ) LIVE STUDIO PRODUCTIONS.
276. The types of live studio productions will be determined, to a considerable extent, by the manner
in which the television services in this country are developed. During the establishment period, when
television will possess the attractiveness of novelty, and when operators will be compelled to keep operating
costs at a minimum, the simpler forms of live studio productions should provide satisfactory
programme material for a limited period. As the number of receivers in the hands of the public
increases, and as additional experience is gained by producers and artists, it can reasonably be expected
that live studio productions of a more elaborate nature will become features of the television programmes.
277. The General Manager of the Australian Broadcasting Commission stated that studio productions
which could be televised after the production staff and artists had been given an opportunity to gain some
experience, would range from the simpler types of programmes (talks and demonstrations) to the more
complex types (drama, ballet, &c.). Talent for this whole range of programmes, it was felt, could be
found in Sydney, and to a lesser extent in Melbourne. The limiting factor with regard to the more complex
programmes, following the initial period of training, would be the cost involved.
278. The types of programmes which the Australian Broadcasting Commission contemplated could
be produced within a reasonable period of the commencement of a television service comprised drama,
ballet, variety, dance-band shows, discussions, quizzes, interviews, illustrated talks, demonstrations and
displays (including rural activities), music, children’s sessions (including “ Kindergarten of the Air”),
and school broadcasts.
279. In the field of drama the Australian Broadcasting Commission expressed the view that little
suitable professional dramatic talent is located outside Sydney or Melbourne and even artists available in
these cities would need a considerable amount of training in the new medium. It was estimated that
because of the high cost of major dramatic productions and the need for experience to be secured, the
emphasis would necessarily be on relatively simple plays initially. On the other hand, we were informed
that there was a substantial reservoir of amateur talent which would be available for dramatic productions.
280. The Australian Broadcasting Commission also considered that, although most of the material
would require different treatment for television, there is an “ important residue of sound broadcasting
material which can be televised effectively without adversely affecting its programme value for sound
alone ”. Included in this category were orchestral and other types of serious music, also opera and
musical comedy, dance-band sessions and certain variety programmes, discussions, interviews, quizzes,
brains trusts, and some children’s programmes. A number of the components of the Australian
Broadcasting Commission’s existing sessions for children was, it was stated, devised with a view to being
televised successfully without change.
281. The types of programmes suitable as studio productions, described to us by the Australian
Broadcasting Commission, were also referred to by other witnesses. The representatives of commercial
broadcasting stations in their evidence stressed particularly the suitability for television purposes of much
of the material that at present comprises the programmes of broadcasting stations. It was also claimed
that the use of this material would result in a considerable saving in costs. The Australian Federation of
Commercial Broadcasting Stations, Mr. A. B. R. Fox (Amalgamated Wireless (A/asia) Limited), Mr.
Clive Ogilvy (Macquarie Broadcasting Service Pty. Ltd.), Mr. D. Worrall (Broadcasting Station 3DB
Melbourne), and Mr. R. E. Lane all laid particular emphasis on this point.
282. In addition to these programmes, we were told that there were many programmes such as
cooking demonstrations, weather forecasts, fashion parades, interviews, commentaries and actuality
programmes of a simple type, some of which were regularly used for broadcasting, which could provide
television programmes at very little extra cost.
(6) OUTSIDE BROADCASTS.
283. The Australian Broadcasting Commission told ns, as did representatives of commercial
broadcasting interests, that outside broadcasts of actuality events would provide an extensive source and


wide variety of programme material. Suck programmes would, it was contemplated, comprise afternoon
evening sporting items, major public events such as processions, ceremonies, carnivals, &c., and
demonstrations of farming techniques.
284. The Australian Broadcasting Commission warned us that there might be difficulties in
obtaining rights to televise certain sporting events (in particular the major sports), although some
sporting bodies had already offered to have their events televised without fee. In regard to the difficulties
which might be expected with major sporting bodies controlling horse racing, football, tennis, and cricket,
the Australian Broadcasting Commission felt that these might be overcome by an agreement between
promoters and stations to televise only part of the spectacle on mutually agreed conditions. Should such
a course be found impossible, a tribunal might be set up to determine disputes. On this particular matter
the representative of the principal racing clubs of Australia, Mr. A. G. Potter, said that, although it was
believed that radio had adversely affected attendances at race meetings, the clubs did not feel that it would
be right to prevent races being shown on television. They considered that minor races should not be
televised, but they would not object to the presentation of any race of great popular appeal such as the
Melbourne Cup. Mr. Potter also informed us that the regular televising of race meetings would be accepted
if the clubs were paid adequate compensation. Mr. Potter said that the objective of the racing clubs was
to ensure, by means of legislation, or appropriate regulations dealing with licences, that no horse race
could be televised without the consent of the racing club responsible for the meeting. If the clubs were
granted this protection and if reasonable financial arrangements were made, it would not be their policy
to prevent the televising of horse races.
285. Similar views were expressed by Mr. J. L. Mulrooney for the Australian National h ootball
Council on behalf of the affiliated bodies which control Australian Rules Football in the various States
of the Commonwealth. Mr. Mulrooney urged that legislative provision should be made for copyright in
snorting events and adequate compensation should be paid for loss of revenue as a result of any falling off
in attendances due to television. The Australian National Football Council considered that sporting events
of all kinds would be televised as television developed, and it was anxious to ensure that such transmissions
could be made only after agreement with sporting bodies and subject to payment of a reasonable fee.
286. The importance of outside broadcasts of the kind we have been describing will be evident,
particularly in a country like Australia where sport of all kinds plays such a prominent part in the
national life. We share the views of witnesses who expressed the belief that the differences which are
likely to arise between the operators of television stations on the one side, and the representatives of
sporting bodies on the other, should be settled by agreement on terms that will be fair and reasonab e o
both parties In the event of the parties being unable to resolve their differences by negotiations, we
would suggest that a solution be sought by means of arbitration. The copyright question which was
raised by some witnesses clearly falls outside our terms of reference.
( C ) FEATURE FILMS AND FILMS SPECIALLY PRODUCED FOR TELEVISION.
287 No evidence was tendered to us by representatives of the motion picture industry despite the
wide publicity given to the proceedings of the Commission. We did, however, receive evidence from
some other witnesses on the availability of films for teleiision.
288 The Australian Broadcasting Commission informed us that exhaustive inquiries had been
made o£ film sources in Australia controlling local and overseas productions. Their inquiries had revealed
that none of the large film companies would permit any films under their control to be used for televj
It would be possible, however, to secure an abundance of old feature film from.
some of which would be of suitable quality and could be obtained if dollars were available. A limited,
and continuum- supply of films would also be available from British and Continental sources. These
would be filmf which had been produced for ordinary cinema exhibition The Breasting
Commission also advised us that tentative arrangements had been made with a European group or
the supply of films made specially for television. Of the films available from
suitable for children’s programmes. In addition, there was a number o. compare .ta.es
of America making films for television, and if dollars were available, some of those could be bought.
289 A number of film transciptions of television programmes would also be available from the
British Breasting Corporation and the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, but the use of this material
would be subject to further negotiations.
290 The Managing Director of Macquarie Broadcasting Service Pty. Ltd. stated that in the early
stages TmiMit he neeessarv for television stations to make use of material from overseas and his company
.ta es it mi B h„ be nece { films whioh fef>t ured educational material, comedy, sport, drama,
had already been offere ’ , others. We were further informed by this witness
animated cartoons, action features, westerns and . '' ~ , available soon and which could
that there was also a considerable amount of other material which would he available soon and
be bought at fairly reasonable prices.


091 The Manager. Broadcasting and Recording Depart*-. «*• An*igan a A Ltd.,
we evidence to the effect that syndicated television films from the Lmted State* Oreat Br.tatn and other
Snipes were circulated to au international audience. Much of thts film was produced m the movte
studios of Hollywood and London. # i
292 Mr IV Dnnstan (Herald and Weekly Times Limited, Melbourne) said that -.tn four or five
station: in anv one city each operating 20-25 hours per week, there would be no pro: .. o gettmg sm^ahle
programmes. ' His eompanv had negotiated with firms in the 1 mted Kingdom and the nl • ®*
KTJor programme Applies and had to them that overseas tel™ programmes nnght
bo purchased on the same basis as syndicated newspaper articles.
->»3 The Rev. Hamilton Aikin. Director of the Australian Religions Filai ><• supplied ns
with details of film material suitable for television which his society had avaijt oe n ns library, and
Worn.! ns that from thts source there was snffieicnt material ava.lable to s-.pjfr . r-r:gramme of 30
minutes per week for three to four year-. This Society is representatrye of tae Chur-m of the
1 1 0 „| Chnn-h-’S the Salvanm Armv and the Church of
Presbyterian. Methodist. Congregational and Kapti>. * •"
Christ. ,
294. His Lordship Bishop P. F. Lyons, representing the Catholic Church in A stra ja. gave ev denee
to the effect that his Church "had given a lot of thought to the provision of progenies if andj hen
television started in this country-. He said that his Church "had been m with a number of
authorities of the Catholic Church in other countries, particularly ir the I mted Km., m. -be I mted
States and in Europe. In those places there was rather a good supply of suitable P-* which,
technically, and in regard to subject-matter, would be very suitable here . |
295. Evidence was also given to ns by other religions bodies, including the World Council of
Churches and the Seventh Day Adventists, with resp-t to the availability of fK* on religion subjects
which would he suitable for television, although certain aspects of the 51m rurtts apparently ad no been
determined.
d'l NEWSKKELS ANT* DOCOTENTaBT m.« -
296. The Australian Broadcasting Commission informed us that a large pool of documentaries and
film*; produced bv large commercial undertakings for public relation purposes, many of which are suitable
for television, would be available for national television programmes. The Commission also expected to
obtain newsreel material from the British Broadcasting Corporation, the anadiao Broadcasting
Corporation. Radio Diffusion Franeaise. and Xord West Dents her Rundfunk.
Thf Australian Film Industry.
297. In connexion with the question of the availability of programme material we fell we should
give some attention to the capacity of the Australian Sim industry to meet, at >ast to some extent, the
demands which television services will make on all potential sources of supply.
293 Hr S Hawes, Producer-in-Chief of the Film Division of the Department of the Interior,
told ns that the present output of film production units in Australia including units from Government
department? and from commercial undertakings' was approximately 100 hours per year. The Department
of the Interior produced approximately 9-10 hours of rim with a staff of 45 and au annual budget of
about *90.000. Besides Government film divisions attached to the Postmaster-General ? Department.
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, >tate Education Departments and
Department of the Interior % and newsreel companies, here were three or f our moderate sired film-producing
studios in Australia which were not fully employed. Mr. Rawes end red, however, that although the
Australian film resources were not being used to caps ity. the complete exp': itation of available equipment
and personnel would not alter the situation greatly. It migV he pssihle. he safii to double or treble the
output, but unless development of the industry was unrestrained ami unless attention was given in good
time to providing adequate production resources, it was rot likely -hat Austrian produced film
programmes could make a significant contribution to -Revision ~mv
General.
099. Several witnesses referred to the -difiterlties and primus ssscc tted w*h prxir :ng regular
television programmes, including high cost of production. shorts g of suits Me 5 rs. and demands for
high technical standards, as programmes were bound to be judged hy comparison with motion pictures.
Emphasis was also placed on the shortage of directors and products ir this country experienced in the
visuai medium, and of qualified camera men Mr 9 Hawes prints ' or* mat -he initial problem of
television was one of training personnel for the production of programmes, To avoid s repetition of the
situation in the cinema, in which Australian screens were occupied almost exclusively with film produced
overseas, he advocated positive measures to develop prw'.nrior resntries Be s'mgosted tha* from funds
mate svsilabl? for building and eqrtpring television >*s: ns. a reasonable amount should be set aside for
-v e training of production staff and the estab'ishmer.t of effective production teams Existing technicians
could he augmented hy overseas experts, and used to train and develop film, stage and radio artists, and
58


at the same time they could be preparing a stockpile of suitable programmes which would then be available
in the difficult inaugural period. Mr. Hawes indeed predicted that “even if every film, stage and radio
technician at present in the country were to prove fully efficient in television, which is unlikely, there
would still not be enough to supply any considerable quantity of television programmes ”.
300. We received a considerable body of evidence on the importance, from the point of view of
programme production and distribution, of the development of networks of television stations. Mr.
S. R. I. Clark (Manager of Radio Station 4BK, Brisbane) pointed out that “commercial television will
face mediocrity and possible economic failure if there are not sufficient outlets to share the costs of expensive
programmes ”, Some high cost productions would be essential to complete the range of material suitable
for the success of the medium. Advertisers would pay for such productions only if they had wide
distribution. Television operators would not be able to meet this type of cost without joint underwriting,
and television production companies would also require a number of outlets to recover their costs. Messrs.
J. S. Larkin (Station SDN Adelaide), S. P. P. Lamb (Newcastle Broadcasting Co. Pty. Ltd.) and J. E.
Ridley (Country Broadcasting Services Limited) also pointed out the benefits to be derived from network
operation. Mr. Ridley maintained that networks would contribute greatly to television programme
production, as they had in radio and that for country stations, networks would be invaluable as a means
of ensuring programme supplies at reasonable cost.
301. Evidence was submitted to us on the question of the types of television programmes which
would be of special interest to viewers in rural areas. Mr. John Douglass, Director of Rural Broadcasts
of the Australian Broadcasting Commission, stated that television -was likely to be a most powerful medium
for agricultural extension work. In his opinion, the agricultural, pastoral and allied industries of
Australia would provide material for programmes that would appeal to rural and urban dwellers alike.
These programmes would cover such subjects as soil conservation, irrigation, and disease and parasite
control, and would include a wide range of field demonstrations. Films of overseas practices and
developments in primary production would also be used. Mr. Everett G. Mitchell, Director of Agriculture
of the National Broadcasting Company, Chicago, told us that the agricultural programmes that were
broadcast in the United States of America had brought about a better understanding between rural and
urban dwellers, and that primary producers in his country were obtaining direct benefits from television
through such features as market reports and demonstrations of new and improved methods of production.
302. We have carefully considered the evidence referred to in the preceding paragraphs, and have
reached the broad conclusion that sufficient programme material of a satisfactory quality will be available
to meet the requirements of an Australian television service, provided this service is commenced on the basis
which we subsequently recommend. It is clear that it will be some considerable time before the
programme production resources in this country can be built up to the point of making an effectively
sustained contribution to the almost insatiable demand which an expanding television service will create
for originality and variety in programmes, although we agree that Australian producers, writers and
artists should be given every encouragement and opportunity to develop and use their talents in this new
field. Furthermore, whilst accepting the submission that it will be possible to import programmes from
overseas sources, and that it will be necessary to do so, we are not satisfied on the evidence of the precise
quantum of overseas programmes of a satisfactory quality that will be available. It is noteworthy that, in
Great Britain and in Canada, in order to avoid overtaxing programme resourcas, apparently it has been
found desirable to limit the number of stations and the hours of transmission, at least during the inaugural
period of the television service.
5. Technical Limitations.
303. In Chapter 111. we have discussed the limitations on technical grounds, particularly in respect
of the availability of channels, which must be taken into account in connexion with any consideration of
the number of television stations which might be established. It will be sufficient to state here that the
recommendations which we subsequently make on this aspect of our inquiry do not involve any difficulties
on this score.
6. Areas to be Served by Television Stations.
304. It will be observed that we are required, by our terms of reference (paragraph (&)), to report
on the areas that might be served by television stations and the stages by which they should be established.
In Chapter 111. we have indicated some of the major problems which arise in planning television services
for a continent the size of Australia, with the very special population distribution which is a feature of
the present stage of onr development. Technical considerations alone place considerable limitations on the
development of television services outside the more closely settled areas and we have referred to these
considerations in that chapter. We have also referred, in the earlier sections of this chapter, to the
limitations which financial considerations and the availability of suitable programme material are likely
to impose on the number of national and commercial television stations which can be effectively established
and operated. It is clear, therefore, that technical and financial considerations and the availability of
suitable programme material must necessarily determine the areas which can be served by television, both
initially and ultimately.


7. General Conclusions.
305. It is now possible for us to set down our general conclusions with respect to our first two terms
of reference, it soon became obvious that it would not be practicable for us to draw up a plan to cover
the ultimate development of television services in the Commonwealth because, as will be evident, many
factors which will have a fundamental bearing on the extent and rate of development of these sendees
can only be determined as a result of practical experience in the new field. We have, therefore, taken as
our objective the making of recommendations which would be of practical use during the initial
establishment period, and which would, at the same time, provide the foundations upon which the
service may be built and developed progressively in the light of experience. This Is a sufficiently difficult
problem, and although a considerable body of evidence was submitted to us on the specific issues of our
inquiry, namely the financial and economic considerations involved, and the availability of programmes,
the material available to us was sufficient to justify only the broadest judgments on the issues. We have
also considered the experience of other countries (including the United Kingdom, the United States of
America and Canada—fee Chapter II.) where television services (including in the ease of the United
States of America commercial television services) have been operating for some time. We have come to the
conclusion, however, that although there is a great deal to be learned from the experience of those
countries, the very precise manner in which our terms of reference are expressed, and the direction to
ns to consider Ihe method of establishment of both national and commercial services, require us to work
out proposals which must, in our view, be conditioned by the practical circumstances and needs of the
Australian community.
•<)(», \\ .• ha\c ali cady pointed out that wo were directed to recommend the number of both national
and commeicidl stations which can efjectivciy be established and operated having regard to the financial
and economic considerations involved and the availability of suitable programmes. It was essential,
therefore, for us to pay particular attention to the concept of “ effective operation ” which, in the broadest
sense, wo interpret as the provision of programmes of a standard sufficiently high to satisfy the needs of all
sections of the community. In relation to the national service it is apparent, therefore, that effective
operation can only he achieved if the Government is prepared to make adequate public revenues (including
revenue from lieeuee feas) available from time to time for this purpose. In relation to the commercial
service effective operation would appear to imply operation by a commercial station on such a basis
that, alter the initial period ot establishment, the licensee will obtain an economic return on the capital
invested while, at the same time, providing a reasonable standard of programmes both in quality and
quantity.
307. These considerations would suggest that the number of stations to be established, whether
national or commercial, must be limited. In the ease of national stations, apart from any other
consideration, the inevitability of such limitation will arise, as we have already stated, primarily from the
exigencies of public finance. It is necessary to consider not only the capital cost of establishing national
stations, and the cost of operation, but also the revenue likely to be available from lieence-fJs, if any,
ami sources similarly related more or less closely to the provision of television services. The precise
method by which a national television service should be financed is one which cannot be determined
satisfactorily in the abstract. It must be determined as part of the general financial policy of the
Government for the time being and in the light of the overall budget requirements of the Government.
It will be recalled that the Australian Broadcasting Commission expressed the view that the national
television service should, at least within a reasonable period, be self-supporting from licence-fees and other
revenues, and that it would not be right to require the general body of taxpayers to contribute to the
cast ot a service which would be likely to be available at the outset to a relatively restricted section of
the population (see paragraph 205), This principle was also strongly advocated by a number of witnesses
mainly, but not solely, representating rural interests.
SOS. In the field of broadcasting it has Wen accepted as a fundamental principle that the national
broadcasting service should provide at least one programme to listeners throughout the Common wealth '»
Tins, m effect, means that the sparsely populated areas are provided with a broadcasting service in part,
at least, at the expense of the general body of taxpayers: indeed, if the national broadcasting service were
only provided in areas in which the population would make it self-supporting on the basis'of licence-fee
revenue, large areas of Australia wotdd not receive a service at all. In the field of television the-e t-e
considerable difficulties in applying sneh a principle, however desirable it mav be. Bv comparison with
broadcasting, the range of a television station is limited and the operating costs are hWh These factors
seem to make it inevitable that for a very long time, failing some revolutionary technological developments
television services must be restricted to a proportion of the population, even though the proportion may
W relatively Urge, there would seem to be much force, therefore, in the proposition that'the se-vice
should be paid for by those who receive it. If, however, the proposition was applied literally it wotdd
almost certainly produce the result that the national television service would never be extended outside
me major centres o.t population While we acknowledge the force of the view which was put to as that
° "* < ****** *** ° fShe Aw^il,t Coateo 1 Board, WtoJft* the Third «MM>»»t »V W nh #Ma s>‘fc^T


the people who receive the benefits of the national television service should meet the cost of providing it,
we think that there should be some measure of flexibility in its application, and that it is undesirable to
lay down, at the outset, restrictive conditions which would prevent or hamper the development of the
national service in the future, under conditions which cannot, of course, now be foreseen. While we do
not wish, therefore, to be understood to be accepting the view that it would in no circumstances be proper
for the general revenue to contribute to the cost of a national television service (and it may be that if the
question were argued as an abstract problem of public finance many other considerations would have
to be taken into account), we feel that the national television service should be planned on the basis
that within a reasonable period at least the major part of this expenditure would be covered by revenue
which can be reasonably attributed to the provision of the service.
309. As we have pointed out, the availability of public funds will inevitably be the determining
factor in the erection of national stations and the financial policy of the Commonwealth Government will
regulate the progressive development of the national service. (We were told that it is largely due to
the shortage of funds that the Australian National Broadcasting Service has not yet been able to provide
the standard of service to the remote country areas that it would wish to do.) In the light of these
considerations we consider that the proposal of the Australian Broadcasting Commission for the
establishment, within a period of seven years, of fourteen national television stations is unduly optimistic,
and in our opinion it will be many years before national stations are effectively established and operating
in all capital cities and in all major towns. It seems inevitable that the national service must be inaugurated
in the centres of the greatest population densities, as it is only in those centres that a substantial growth
in the number of viewers can be expected. It is in those centres, also, that the resources necessary to
provide programmes are located. We have been assured from many sources that Sydney and Melbourne are
the only cities in Australia capable of providing, in sufficient numbers, the artists of all kinds required
to produce the quantity and quality of programmes essential for the success of television in Australia. It
is therefore apparent, on those grounds, that the first national stations will necessarily have to be erected in
these two cities.
310. It is clear that, in planning the development of the national television service, consideration
must be given to the demands which will be made on resources and technical man-power. In this connexion
we have been informed that considerable difficulties have been experienced in providing the buildings and
equipment (including relay lines) required to give effect to the approved plan for the extension of national
broadcasting services to rural areas. The forecast of the Australian Broadcasting Commission that fourteen
national stations can be established and in operation within seven years from the date on which authority
is given to commence construction appears to ignore these considerations, and in our view the time schedule
of the Australian Broadcasting Commission is unrealistic.
311. We have come to the conclusion, therefore, that so far as the national service is concerned,
the first station should be erected in Sydney and the second in Melbourne, as it is in these centres that
the facilities and resources for the production of programmes are located and where the population is
sufficient to support a station in the initial period. As finances become available further expansion should
be made to the other State capital cities and to other centres of population, with the object of providing a
service to the widest population as soon as practicable.
312. In the case of commercial stations, the problem is quite different. As we have already stated,
a considerable amount of evidence was submitted to us, particularly by representatives of advertising and
broadcasting interests, that within the basic limitations set by technical operating conditions and the
availability of channels, there should be no restrictions of a legislative or an administrative nature on the
number of commercial stations which should be permitted to be established. It was, therefore, claimed that to
the extent to which channels are available, licences for commercial television stations should be issued to all
applicants able to satisfy the licensing authority that they had sufficient financial resources to enable them
to establish stations and to operate them in a satisfactory manner. We are unable to accept this contention.
We feel that it is essential, if proper technical and programme standards are to be established from the
outset that commercial television should be launched on a gradual basis, with the object, in the establishment
period, of finding out by experience the number of stations which can be effectively operated. We received,
as we have already indicated, no precise evidence on the question of the probable amount of advertising
revenue which would be available for commercial television stations, and it would seem to us that the
only feasible method of discovering this would be to make a start on a modest scale and with a strictly
limited number of stations.. It must be remembered that we are required to make our recommendations
in this respect with regard not only to financial considerations, but also to the availability of programmes.
On a consideration of the evidence on this subject, we are satisfied that, in order to secure, from the outset,
that there will be programmes of an adequate standard on commrcial television stations, the number of
such stations during the establishment period must be limited in the manner which we later recommend.
It seems certain that unrestricted competition from the outset, supposing this would be otherwise
practicable, would have a disastrous effect on the quality of programmes. Most of the evidence which was
presented to us supporting the view that no restriction should be placed on the number of stations to be


established appears to us to overlook what is, in our view, the primary consideration, namely, that if the
new medium is to be used to its best advantage as a means of broadening and enriching Australian life,
it is essential that the programmes provided should be of the highest possible standard from the
commencement. This is not only of paramount importance in the public interest, a matter we discuss
further elsewhere {see Chapter VII.), but of great significance in the development of television itself. It
is, in our view, essential that a commencement should be made on a sound financial basis which -will enable
all commercial stations to operate effectively as business enterprises and to provide programmes which will
justify the grant of licences.
313. The contention to which w r e referred in the preceding paragraph also appeared to overlook
another matter which is perhaps not readily apparent but which we feel is of considerable importance,
namely, that those members of the general public who will be making a substantial investment by
purchasing television receivers are entitled to some assurance that their investment will not be wasted as a
result of the inability of commercial stations to maintain programmes of a satisfactory standard.
314. Some evidence in support of the contention we have just mentioned was based on the experience
and results of the operation of commercial stations in the United States of America. Although we
recognize that in relation to some aspects of our inquiry we may profit from the experience of television
in overseas countries, our analysis has indicated that, in the main, the establishment and development of
television services in Australia must be planned to suit best our particular requirements, which, from
many points of view, are quite different from those existing elsewhere.
315. On the other hand, the proposal which was put before us by several witnesses that commercial
interests should be encouraged to commence operations in as many different areas as possible on the
grounds that advertisers, for financial reasons, would need to be able to distribute their programmes over
the widest possible number of viewers, is one that we feel has considerable merit. Since the availability of
viewers will determine the amount of advertising appropriations, and this in turn will have a major influence
on the standard of programmes produced, there appears to be good reason for suggesting that commercial
interests should be encouraged to commence operations in as many separate areas as possible. This is,
we think, a different matter from the submission that there should be practically an unlimited number of
licences issued for any one area.
316. As we see the future of commercial television, it is likely to develop in three distinct, but
connected, stages. Firstly, there will be the period of establishment, during which transmitters will be
erected and studios obtained and equipped, plans laid for programme production or procurement, and
technical and other staff engaged and trained prior to the commencement of the service. In this period
clearly the commercial television operator will derive no income. Secondly, there will be the period of
development, namely, the first few years after transmission commences when trading losses will probably
be inescapable. It is during this period that the number of receivers in the hands of the public can
be expected progressively to increase. It is impossible to determine how long it will be before advertising
revenues, depending on the purchase of receivers, will reach the level of meeting costs and showing profit.
Thirdly, and after some years, a point of stability might reasonably be expected when it will be possible
for commercial operators to measure more accurately the economics of commercial television. It is during
this stage that a wider extension of the commercial service in the cities and in country areas should be
possible.
317. The conclusion which we have reached in favour of limiting, in the establishment period, the
number of commercial stations to be licensed, raises some particular problems that need careful
consideration. It may be contended that if the number of commercial stations in any one city is limited
to one, particularly in Sydney and Melbourne, where the main sources of talent and facilities for the
production of programmes are to be found, the licensee who is granted permission to operate this station
will, in fact, be granted a monopoly which will afford him an opportunity of entering into long-term
contracts for programme material from all sources and also with licensees of television stations in other
centres for the sale of programmes, and that any formula for the establishment period that resulted in
only one commercial operator in a major city might prejudice the interests of operators licensed for the
smaller capitals or provincial centres, who would be dependent upon the metropolitan operator for
programmes expressly designed for commercial purposes. On the other hand it may be argued that the
initial licensee will carry the burden of pioneering the television field, and that subsequent licensees will
inherit the benefits of the pioneering work, and on the face of it should have less difficulty and certainly
less risks in reaching a profitable level of operation.
318. If the first view, outlined in the previous paragraph, is accepted, it would appear to be
essential from the outset for at least two commercial operators to be licensed in Sydney and Melbourne
on the grounds that nothing less will provide the metropolitan complex required for the development
of television in the other capitals and in provincial centres, and that a minimum of two commercial operators
in those cities is required to ensure a place for varied interests and make possible a sensible and
responsible choice from the many and highly competitive interests that will desire to enter this field.
62


319. We have considered some confidential figures supplied to us by the Australian Broadcasting
Control Board which included (in totals) the revenues earned by the commercial broadcasting stations in
the {State capital cities, and these, together with the relevant population figures, we have taken into
account in arriving at the conclusions set out in the following paragraphs.
320. In the light of the foregoing discussion we have reached the conclusion that, initially,
commercial television licences should be issued in Sydney and Melbourne, and that two licences should
be made available in each city. r lhe subsequent expansion of the commercial service in Sydney and
Melbourne (within the limits of channels available for those cities), and its extension to the remaining
capital cities and other centres of population (including the larger country towns) should be effected as
rapidly as circumstances permit, subject to the Minister being satisfied, after receiving a report from the
Australian Broadcasting Control Board that applicants for licences for those centres are capable of
supplying a satisfactory service. Having regard to considerations of finance and the availability of suitable
programme material and the great need to obtain practical experience in Australia in the field of
commercial television, we are strongly in favour of the commercial service being introduced on a gradual
basis. By this means the programme productive capacity in Australia will be progressively built up,
the pattern of the economics of commercial television will gradually become clearer, and the opportunity
will be available to create a commercial service which might fairly be expected to serve the public interest,
in Chapter VII. we recommend that commercial television licences should be issued only after a public
hearing of applications for licences. We should add that we consider the subsequent expansion of the
commercial service in Sydney and Melbourne will not be reached inside two years, nor, in our opinion, will
licences for other centres be contemplated for at least twelve months after the issue of the first licences in
Sydney and Melbourne.
B.* The Extension of Television to Country Areas.
321. A number of witnesses gave evidence to the effect that television would be of great importance
to country interests in that it would bring to country people a variety of entertainment and cultural
expression such as a city enjoys. It was put to us that television would help to shape a better country life
and become a most valuable means of developing country areas. While the force of these views is fully
appreciated, it is clear that, failing further technical developments, the areas that can be served by
television will be determined largely by financial and technical considerations. It is apparent that the
costs will in the first instance be so high that no small communities anywhere in Australia, except those
close to large centres of population, can expect to receive a television service.
322. On the evidence, it would appear to be clear that, for some considerable time, the benefits of
television will be enjoyed chiefly by viewers resident in, or adjacent to, the capital cities and other large
centres of population. This conclusion is as inescapable as it is socially unfortunate. Television, whilst
it remains an exclusive city amenity, may adversely affect our national development policy, especially
in relation to our primary production, as it will further accentuate the appeal of the city, particularly
to the younger generation, and thus render more difficult the task of keeping an adequate share of the
country’s labour force in rural areas. For this reason, despite the practical difficulties to be overcome,
we regard the early extension of television services to country areas as a matter of prime importance.
We consider it fundamental that when the Australian Broadcasting Control Board formulates a plan for
the allocation of frequency channels, adequate reservations should be made to ensure the widest possible
coverage to country areas when financial and other considerations make this possible. We are indebted to
Mr. J. E. Ridley, Chairman of Directors of Country Broadcasting Services Limited, for the evidence which
he gave us on this question and for the practical suggestions which he submitted as to how this might be
achieved.
323. We have already stated our reasons for suggesting that the national television service should
begin in Sydney and be progressively extended to other capital cities and major towns. It seems probable
that it will be many years before a national television service can be provided to all the principal centres
of population, and very much longer before it will reach country areas. The public interest would appear,
therefore, to require two safeguards in connexion with the expenditure of public funds on the national
television service. Firstly there should be an acceptance in principle of the proposal submitted by the
Australian Broadcasting Commission that taxpayers living in areas which are not served by television
should not be expected or required to contribute to the cost of supplying a service which for many years
may be described as a “ metropolitan luxury”. Secondly if, as we recommend later, the Australian
Broadcasting Commission is entrusted with the responsibility oi operating the national television sei vice,
special precautions should be taken to ensure that the continued development of the national sound
broadcasting service (which is of particular importance and value to country areas) is not prejudiced by
the demands of the national television service. We refer to this matter in Chapter VII.
324. We received evidence from a number of licensees of metropolitan commercial broadcasting
stations to the effect that they would gladly accept the responsibility of operating country stations in
conjunction with city stations. "We are of the opinion that every encouragement should be given to the
♦ See supplementary observation No. 4 by Mr. R. C. W ilson.


early extension of commercial television in country areas, and that licences should be issued for commercial
television stations in country centres, as early as possible. In this connexion we have been informed that,
by adoption of the network principle which operated successfully in commercial broadcasting, and the
extensive use of film pending the installation of relay links, it should be possible for country television
stations to operate on a much less expensive basis than city stations.
9. Control of Television Transmitters and Proposal for Joint National-Commercial Stations.
325. During our inquiry several witnesses discussed the question of the ownership and use of
television transmitters.
326. The Chairman of the Australian Broadcasting Commission expressed the opinion that “ there
should be no alienation of any channel for the exclusive use of any commercial body at this stage In
his view “ the available frequencies should remain a public domain” and, accordingly, the Post Office
should erect and control the transmitters both for the national and commercial services. Transmitters
which were available for sponsored programmes should be rented to such commercial organizations as
wished to make use of them. It was suggested that this proposal would ensure that “ the many applicants
both commercial, cultural and religious, who may now or in the future desire participation on a commercial
basis in television would not have their rights prejudiced by the present alienation of any frequencies to
any one or more particular interest ”, This proposal has some similarities to the procedure which is
proposed in Great Britain in relation to the provision of facilities for commercial television (see paragraph
36).
327. Sir Ernest Fisk also advocated the principle of public ownership of all television transmitters.
He considered “ that no programme party, whether it be government or non-government, should be allocated
a channel for its own use ”, and that the transmitters and their operation should be under the control of
a government authority. This witness envisaged national and commercial interests setting up their own
studios and concentrating purely on producing programmes which would be transmitted by the public
authority which owned and controlled the transmitters.
328. Mr. S. 0. Jones (Philips Electrical Industries Limited) without dealing specifically with the
ownership and control of the transmitters suggested “ that immediately there should be provided one only
television broadcasting station in each capital city and that the transmission time available should be shared
between the national broadcasting service and the commercial broadcasting interests ”. In his opinion “ such
a method of introducing the service would serve the best interests of the public, as it would enable each
of the stations to provide a variety of programmes, it would permit of a greater number of transmission
hours per week, and it would provide sufficient revenue to cover the cost of programme material of a
much higher quality than would otherwise be possible ”.
329. While we feel that there are certain virtues in the proposition that all television transmitters
should be under the control and ownership of a public authority, we have come to the conclusion that in
Australia practical considerations will require that those responsible for the operation of commercial
television stations should have control over and responsibility for the transmission as well as the production
of programmes, as in the field of broadcasting.
330. We now turn to the proposal that the Australian television service should be established and
operated on a basis which would provide for joint participation by a national authority and private
enterprise. It was claimed that, while this proposal involved a radical departure from the conventional
approach that there should be both national and commercial stations operating as separate units, it still
retained the elements of the “ dual ” system of national and commercial stations. The proposal is, so far
as we are aware, a novel one in the field of broadcasting and television, although we were informed that
in Holland a number of independent organizations have provided experimental programmes on a rotational
basis from the only station in that country. We understand, however, that the procedure has been adopted
as an expedient and for experimental purposes only, under circumstances entirely different from those
with which we are concerned.
331. Our examination of the proposal has indicated that, from some points of view, it has some
attractions. It would, for example, possess the advantage that no organization, now or in the future, would
be placed in the position of being denied the opportunity of participation in the provision of television
programmes because of the limitation on the facilities available. On the other hand, we feel that the
adoption of the proposal would present very real administrative difficulties, that it would prove
unacceptable to those who are in the best position to provide programmes of an acceptable standard and
that, in the long run, it would result in the presentation of unbalanced programmes. Furthermore, it
seems to us that the developments which have taken place in the ultra high frequency band (referred
to in Chapter III.) make it improbable that technical requirements will, in the future, be the limiting
factor.
* See supplementary observation No. 2 by Mr. R. G, Osborne.


332. The Chairman of the Australian Broadcasting Commission told us that although he thought
the joint use of facilities would be possible, he had grave doubts as to its practicability. He also expressed
the view that it was in the public interest to keep the operation of national and commercial services as
separate as possible. The President of the Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations informed us
that, in his opinion, the sharing of facilities would not be practicable. lie said: “ I don’t think it would
work. The ideas would be so different that I just cannot see how they could fit in together ”.
333. There are undoubtedly considerable practical advantages in the proposal outlined in the
preceding paragraphs, especially in those centres where there is only one television station, but we find
ourselves in agreement with the Chairman of the Australian Broadcasting Commission and the President
of the Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations that the principle of the “ dual ”
system of operation of broadcasting and television services, which is basic to our terms of reference,
necessitates provision for the establishment of separate national and commercial stations.
National and Commercial Services to he Complementary.
334. We were urged by some witnesses that in the interests of programme standards, no commercial
station should be permitted to be established before a national station had commenced operation in any
one area, and that it would be inconsistent with the “ dual ” system for commercial operators to open a
station unless there was also a national station to provide those public service programmes that private
enterprise finds unattractive from a financial viewpoint. It will, of course, not be possible for national
and commercial stations to commence operating side by side in every area to be served by television
stations, and the provision of alternative services in such areas is a long-term project, even where it is
practicable. We consider it more important that provision should be made for an effective overall pattern
of national and commercial stations, which will be truly complementary in providing a television service of
high quality. We feel it is essential, therefore, that there should be the utmost co-operation between
national and commercial operators and that such co-operation might reasonably be required of commercial
operators, e.g., in the conditions of licences. It would seem to follow as a corollary of this view that
where there is a commercial station only in any area, some national programme material should be made
available to it. As it is anticipated that licence-fees would be received from the owners of sets served
only by the commercial station, they might very properly expect to have access to at least some proportion
of the national programmes. We consider that in this respect there should be a statutory obligation on
the part of the national authority to make available certain of its public service programmes to the
commercial operator, perhaps on the basis of payment for time taken on his station, and there should be
a similar statutory obligation on the part of the commercial operator to take and broadcast those
programmes of the national authority.
* See supplementary observation No. 2 by Mr. Osborne.
F.5242/54.—5


CHAPTER VI—THE ORGANIZATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN TELEVISION SERVICE.
1. Introductory.
335. In tins chapter and Chapter YII. we propose to discuss some of the general issues which arise
under paragraphs (c), (cl), (e) and (/) of our terms of reference, which, in brief, require us to report on
the administrative organization of the Australian television service, and the conditions which should apply
to the operation of that service, and the safeguards which are necessary to ensure that television programmes
are maintained at a proper standard. As in other aspects of our inquiry, it is evident that quite different
considerations apply to the national and the commercial services, and we discuss them separately. In this
chapter we shall discuss the administrative organization of the Australian television services, and in the
following chapter the question of the safeguards which are necessary to ensure that programmes are
maintained at a high standard. Certain specific questions relating to programmes are discussed in
Chapter VIII.
2. The National Television Service.
336. While we were not expressly required by our terms of reference to consider or make
recommendations upon the method of constitution of the authority to operate national television stations,
some discussion of this question, in the light of the existing administrative arrangements for the operation
of the national broadcasting service, appears to be essential, and to be relevant to paragraph (c) of the
terms of reference. It is also relevant to recall here that under the Television Act 1953 {see paragraph 61)
the programmes on the national television stations are to be provided by an “ authorized authority ”, which
may be either the Australian Broadcasting Commission or some other authority of the Commonwealth
empowered to provide such programmes. We understand that this provision was intended to make it
clear that no decision had been made by the Government at the time of the passing of the Act as to the
actual administration of the national television service.
337. In Chapter 11., paragraphs 67, 70 and 76, we describe briefly the legislative provisions relating
to the national broadcasting service in Australia an 1 also the provisions relating to the constitution and
operations of the Australian Broadcasting Commission. Although there are some significant differences
in organization and functions, especially in respect of the technical services, this Commission is broadly
similar in its constitution to the British Broadcasting Corporation, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation
and the South African Broadcasting Corporation. This means, in effect, that the Australian Broadcasting
Commission is constituted and operates in accordance with the generally accepted principles which, in the
English-speaking democracies, apply to public corporation. In the British Commonwealth these
principles, particularly so far as they relate to the necessity for securing the independence of such bodies
from direct political control, have perhaps had a special application in the field of broadcasting. We do
net feel that we should here make any attempt to restate or re-examine those principles, which would, if
undertaken, involve a lengthy digression, and would cover much of the ground traversed in some detail
by the Beveridge Committee in the United Kingdom and the Massey Commission in Canada. We may
say further, indeed, that, except for the Chairman of the Australian Broadcasting Commission, who
referred in a general way to the necessity of applying to the national television authority the same
general principles as have applied to that Commission, we were not invited by any witness to discuss or
reconsider these principles, and, indeed, it appeared to be assumed by all witnesses who discussed this
question that we would naturally proceed to apply them in any consideration of the method of organzation
of the body which would operate national television stations. There are other reasons which we mention
in paragraphs 338 to 340, which suggest the conclusion that the Australian Broadcasting Commission
should assume the same responsibilities in the field of television as it already discharges in the field of
broadcasting. We should add, however, that we received a substantial body of evidence on the subject
of a national television authority which, in general, may he said to have been unanimously in favour of
the view that national television stations should be controlled and operated by an independent statutory
body, although there was considerable variation in the methods proposed for constituting such a body and
considerable evidence, of a general nature, in favour of a body which should be representative of various
interests (often including the interests represented by the witnesses). The witnesses who discussed this
aspect of our inquiry (listed in order of appearance) included—
Mr. E. L. A. Turner, Public Affairs and Parliamentary Reform Movement.
Mr. S. F. E. Liebert, Australian Council of School Organizations.
Mr. 11. F. Heath, New South Wales Teachers’ Federation.
Mr. J. L. J. Wilson, Director of Tutorial Classes, Sydney University.
Mrs. E. F. Byth, National Council of Women of Australia.
Rev. E. H. Woollacott'l
Canon A. E. Kain lUnited Churches Social Reform Board.
Mr. S. B. Denton
Dr. C. M. Davey, League of Women Voters of South Australia.


Miss M, Mills 'I
Mrs D A chettle 1 atl ° ounci * omen °f South Australia.
Mr. B. Davies 1
Professor J. Bishop i-Film and Television Council of South Australia.
Mr. P. C. W. Disney J
Rev. W. Kick 1 . .
~ , Federation of Women Voters.
Miss E. Casely J
Dr. H. H. Penny, Principal, Adelaide Teachers’ College.
Mrs. M. E. Calder I , 0 M
Mrs I E Swift f vv 01116118 Service Guilds of Western Australia, Inc.
Archdeacon J. A. Schofield j . .... ._ r ~ ,
Rev T W Thomas j Archbishop of M elbourne s Committee on Television.
Dr. M. Poulter, Tasmanian State School Teachers’ Federation.
Mrs. T. C. Metcalfe, National Council of Women of New South Wales.
It should be pointed out, however, that much of this evidence was directed to the question which we have
mentioned in Chapter 1., namely, whether television services in Australia should be operated solely by a
Government authority in the form of an independent statutory body of some kind. This, as we have
already explained, was a matter outside our terms of reference. We have, however, considered the proposal
referred to above that the national television authority should be constituted in some way so as to be
representative of particular interests, and have come to the conclusion that this would have, to say the
least, unfortunate results, even if it were possible to determine satisfactorily the interests to be represented.
338. In view of the great importance of the issues of principle involved we think that, although we
have not found it necessary to discuss the matter fully, we should leave no doubt as to our general attitude.
We are firmly of the opinion that the national television authority should operate with the same degree of
independence of political control as the national broadcasting authority has operated. We are aware that,
in some respects, the provisions of the Broadcasting Act 1942-1953 may not appear to secure precisely this
result, and our attention was invited to this, in a very general way, by the Chairman of the Australian
Broadcasting Commission. What we have in mind is, however, rather the generally accepted political
convention (described in paragraphs 27 to 33 of the Report of the Beveridge Committee) which, in practice,
effectively secures the political independence of the British Broadcasting Corporation. The maintenance
of this principle in Australia is, we think, vital in the establishment and operation of the national television
service.
339. We have noted ( see Chapter II.) that in all countries where publicly owned television services
have commenced it has been the invariable practice to vest in the existing broadcasting authority the
additional functions and responsibilities of providing television services. We heard some evidence on the
advantages to be derived from such a course from the Chairman and the General Manager of the
Australian Broadcasting Commission, but it was not discussed by other witnesses. This matter was
examined at some length by the Beveridge Committee in Great Britain and we have examined the discussion
of the issues contained in its Report. After reviewing the contrasting opinions expressed to it as to the
desirability of television and broadcasting being operated by a single authority the Committee stated
(paragraph 318) —
We find ourselves partly in agreement and partly in disagreement with those on each side of this
argument. We accept the main thesis of the 8.8. C. that sound broadcasting and television should remain
under the same authority. Broadcasting—communication to the public in their homes —is the same
kind of service and should have similar aims whether it uses the medium of sound only or combines vision with
sound. All the general arguments about competition, diversity, controversy, educational and social purpose,
various kinds of entertainment and so forth apply equally to sound broadcasting and to television
340. In Canada the Government announced, in March, 1949, that the provision of the national
television services would be the responsibility of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (the authority
conducting the national broadcasting service), a decision subsequently endorsed by the Massey Commission.
341. We think the same principle should be adopted in Australia. There are obviously very strong
reasons why the provision of the programmes on the national television stations should become the
responsibility of the Australian Broadcasting Commission. Any other decision would involve the
establishment of a separate body (presumably a public corporation of the kind referred to above) foi this
purpose and we can see no real justification for such a development.
342. We have not overlooked the fact that there is, and will be, a continuing obligation on the
Australian Broadcasting Commission to maintain the highest possible standaids in the national bioadcastmg
service. This task has, we appreciate, been sufficiently onerous and difficult in the past, and it must be
recognized clearly that it will become even more difficult as a result of the additional functions which the
responsibility for television services will impose. On the one hand, it is essential, if the national television
service is to be successful and it would be calamitous if it were to fail—that the problems it will inevitably
bring and the tasks it will impose must be tackled with vigour and enthusiasm. On the other hand, it is


equally essential that there must be no deviation of the Commission’s attention from the requirements of the
broadcasting service, and that the Commission should develop its policies and direct its administrative and
other officers accordingly.
343. We were told of the plans which have been prepared for the expansion and improvement of the
national broadcasting service and in particular we have noted the very persistent requests which the
Australian Broadcasting Commission has made for technical facilities to be made available to enable it to
present a third national programme. All of these developments would add considerably to its work and
responsibilities. We were, indeed, gravely concerned at the possibility that the fundamental obligations of
the Commission to provide an adequate broadcasting service throughout the Commonwealth, and to make
those improvements which it has indicated it feels are necessary, might be adversely affected because of the
demands which television will make on its resources. We have, however, come to the conclusion that it
should be possible for suitable arrangements to be made —chiefly of an administrative character—which
will not only remove the cause for the anxiety to which we have referred, but which will have the effect of
ensuring that the development of both the broadcasting service and the television service will not be
hampered by over-great concentration on any one aspect of the Commission’s activities.
344. The Beveridge Committee gave a great deal of thought to this matter and the following
conclusions which were reached on the question of the relationship between broadcasting and television are
of interest in the present discussion: —
In so far as television broadcasts are directed to the home, they should be controlled by the same
authority as sound broadcasting. Competition between sound broadcasting and television should be
competition in service, subject to maintenance of standards and social purpose. On this point we accept the
main contention of the 8.8. C. But sound broadcasting and television, even as directed to the home, are
different media of communication: not fitting indifferently or equally all types of programmes; not using
always the same kinds of staff or performers; not having the same effects on the audience. Under the single
authority maintaining in relation to each medium a like social purpose there should be administrative
distinction between them greater than that between other parts of the broadcasting organization. The
principle of integration which has dominated development of the 8.8. C. in the past needs to be applied with
more flexibility than in the past, now that television on a large scale is at hand. It would be wrong to develop
television as an off-shoot of sound broadcasting, by people who had learned to think of programmes of all kinds
first in terms of sound. It would be equally wrong if, as television grew in importance, it came to dominate
sound, so that all programmes came to be considered primarily from the point of view of suitability for viewing.
This is a main reason for proposing a revision of the plan put to us by the 8.8. C. of financing the development
of television by subsidy from sound broadcasting. (Eeport, paragraph 346.)
Following the report of the Beveridge Committee, the Government indicated in the White Paper of July,
1951 (Cmd. 8291) that it agreed with the Committee that “in the field of television the 8.8. C. should
adopt a policy of effective administrative devolution and that the Director of Television should have the
fullest possible authority; they (the Government) have learned with approval that the 8.8. C. is proceeding
to develop the television service in accordance with these principles ”. (Paragraph 444 of White Paper.)
345. We have referred to the discussions of the problem in Great Britain in order to emphasize our
view of the fundamental importance of the question of the organization to be established within the
framework of the Australian Broadcasting Commission to provide for the discharge of its new responsibilties
in respect of television, and at the same time to enable its broadcasting functions to be carried on
without loss of efficiency. We may add that the Chairman of the Australian Broadcasting Commission
suggested to us in his evidence that there was a strong case for increasing the number of members of the
Commission from seven to nine, and that this would afford an opportunity for widening and strengthening
the constitution of the Commission. We are much impressed with this suggestion and recommend that it
should be adopted. There are other ways in which the Commission might be strengthened or, indeed,
completely reorganized, but on this we received no evidence, and a detailed examination would take us too
far afield from our specific terms of reference.
346. There is another matter which will need to be considered seriously in establishing the
organization for the provision of the national television service. In the field of broadcasting, the
Broadcasting Act specifies that the Postmaster-General shall undertake the provision and operation of
all technical services associated with the transmission of programmes provided by the Australian
Broadcasting Commission. It was, however, put to us by the Commission that in the field of television
“the relationship of technical operation to the television programme is so close and intimate that all
studio technical services involved in the production of the television programmes should be under control
of the programme authority. It would be understood that the Postmaster-General’s Department would
continue to erect, maintain and operate all transmitters and assume responsibility for the transmission
from the point of output from the studios ”.
347. It is evident that television demands a much closer degree of collaboration between technical
and programme services than does broadcasting and that certain categories of operating personnel are
required to perform functions that are partly technical and partly programme in character. We are not
in a position to determine whether the extension to the field of television of the present arrangements with


respect to broadcasting (under which the whole of the technical services is provided by the Postmaster-
General’s Department) would fail to provide the degree of collaboration which is required, but it is evident
that the Australian Broadcasting Commission holds considerable doubts in the matter, at least so far as
relates to operations in the studios. The problem which arises in this connexion has, so far as we know, no
counterpart in overseas countries. In both Great Britain and Canada, where national television services
are in operation, technical and programme functions are the responsibility of the one authority, and the
only objection that was suggested to the adoption of a similar course in Australia was that the Australian
Broadcasting Commission would be required to recruit technical staff—a task which may be difficult but
not insuperable. We have not been in a position to make a detailed examination of this particular matter
but, in the light of the information available to us, we are inclined to the view that the operation of all
technical services directly associated with the production of programmes in the studios, should be included
in the responsibilities of the Australian Broadcasting Commission.
3. The Commercial Television Service.
The Licensing System.
348. As in the case of the national television service, we find it necessary to discuss the question of
the authority to be charged with the administration of the commercial television service, although no
express reference was made to this matter in our terms of reference. We have set out in Chapter 11. the
relevant provisions of the legislation (including both the Broadcasting Act 1942-1953 and the Television
Act 1953) on this subject, and also the relevant provisions relating to the allied question of the
administration of the commercial broadcasting service. Broadly, the system of administration of the
commercial broadcasting service under the Broadcasting Act is based on the grant of licences for individual
stations. Licences are granted by the Minister (at present the Postmaster-General), for specified but
limited periods, and subject to various conditions some of which are referred to in later paragraphs of this
chapter. It is provided that the Minister may renew and may also revoke or suspend licences in certain
specified cases. The Minister is required "to take into consideration, before exercising any of these powers,
any recommendations which have been made by the Australian Broadcasting Control Board as to the
exercise of that power. The Television Act applies substantially the same principles and procedure to
the licensing of commercial television stations, although, as we have pointed out (see paragraph 62), the
Act was, we understand, intended only to be an interim measure which would be replaced by more
comprehensive legislation. The provisions of the Broadcasting Act relating to the technical operation of
both broadcasting stations and television stations (which are also in effect incorporated in the Television
Act) must also be considered in this connexion, since the basis of both broadcasting and television services
is the use, subject to prescribed technical conditions, of a specific frequency or channel at a specific
location. Under both Acts the Australian Broadcasting Control Board is empowered, subject to any
directions of the Minister, to determine the frequency, operating power and location of all broadcasting
and television stations, and is required to ensure that their technical equipment and operation is in
accordance with appropriate standards. This body has also, under the Broadcasting Act, wide powers
in relation to the programmes of broadcasting stations. While it is perhaps more convenient to consider
these provisions later under the standards to be observed in the programmes of television stations (see
paragraph 390), this question is, of course, closely related to the question of the administration of the
commercial television service with which we are concerned in this chapter.
349. It is natural to assume that there must be a system for the licensing of commercial television
stations, and, indeed, no other administrative device appears to be applicable. It appeared to be assumed
by most witnesses representing commercial broadcasting or similar interests that substantially the same
administrative system as now applies to the commercial broadcasting service vould apply to the commercial
television service, although some submissions, in very general terms, were made on the necessity for greater
security of tenure for holders of licences or .(by some witnesses) for a right of appeal against decisions of
the Minister in certain cases: to these questions we refer in later paiagiaphs. In particular, it appears
to have been assumed by most witnesses representing commercial broadcasting or similar interests (with
the reservations just referred to) that licences for commercial television stations should be granted by the
Minister after considering recommendations made by the Australian Broadcasting Control Board. e
were, however, invited by some witnesses to consider a major question of principle, namely, whether the
licensing authority for the commercial television service should be, instead of the Minister, as at present,
an independent statutory body which would be free of political control. This view was put ' to 118 Jw f e
Chairman of the Australian Broadcasting Commission and by Mr. L. C. Webb, Reader in Political Science
in the Australian National University. Both these witnesses, in effect, urged that the licensing authority
in Australia should be, as in the United States of America, an independent statutory authority, similar
in powers and functions, so far as broadcasting and television are concerned, to the Federal Communications
Commission. These witnesses expressed the view that this result should be achieved by vesting in t e
Australian Broadcasting Control Board the existing powers of the Minister in respect of the grant renewal
and revocation of licences, and ensuring that that Board should have the same degree of independence o


political control as the Australian Broadcasting Commission, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation and
the Federal Communications Commission. Mr. C. Ogilvy (Macquarie Broadcasting Service Pty. Ltd.) and
some other witnesses urged that the Australian Broadcasting Control Board should be enabled to function
“ free of political influence ”, but these witnesses did not avert precisely to the question whether the
Minister or the Board should be the licensing authority,
350. The question to which we have referred in the preceding paragraph is, of course, of great
importance and difficulty, and raises issues which may very well go far beyond our terms of reference.
Although we are indebted to those witnesses to whom we have referred in the preceding paragraph for
their discussion of the question, we must say that, in general, it did not appear to be a matter to which
many witnesses whom we questioned had given any close attention. Our very firm impression of the
evidence as a whole is one, generally speaking, of acceptance of the existing administrative structure for
the licensing of commercial broadcasting stations, and its applicability to television stations.
351. There are, it seems, at least the following alternatives to be considered, if the whole matter of
the nature of the licensing authority for commercial television stations is to be reviewed in principle, and
in the. light of existing practices in Australia and overseas:—
(a) The existing law may be adopted without alteration, under which the licensing authority
would be the Minister, who would be required to take into consideration recommendations
of the Australian Broadcasting Control Board, a statutory body with certain regulatory
and administrative functions in respect of which it is subject to Ministerial direction;
(5) The licensing authority might continue to be the Minister who would be required to take
into consideration recommendations of the Board (or other similar body) but provision
would be made to secure that that body would, in respect of all its regulatory and
administrative functions, be “ free from political control ”, i.e. not subject to direction
by the Minister;
(c) the licensing authority might be the Board (or other similar body) which might be subject
to Ministerial direction in respect of some or all of its functions;
( d ) the licensing authority might be the Board (or other similar body) which would be “free
from political control ”, i.e. not subject to direction by the Minister in respect of any of
its functions, although ultimately responsible to the Parliament by which the legislation
for its establishment is passed and funds for its operation are provided.
There are, no doubt, other possible combinations. Of those we have mentioned, we find it relatively easy
to reject (c), for which no support in the evidence or in principle appears to be forthcoming. The
alternative set out in ( d ) is in effect the system operating successfully in the United States of America: it
may be relevant, although not of course conclusive, to mention that in the United States of America this
system appears to be accepted as the natural (if not inevitable) one for a regulatory commission, mainly,
of course, because of the Presidential (as opposed to the Parliamentary) system of Government, which does
not envisage any system similar to those described in (a) and (6). There are, indeed, powerful arguments
in favour of adopting alternative (d), although we have not, as we have said, found them accepted by
witnesses representing interests which might be expected to give them strong support. We feel, on the
other hand, that there is much to be said for retaining the principle of Ministerial responsibility in a field
such as this, in which very grave issues may have to be determined with serious social implications. It
seems clear, however, that an administrative structure (as in (a) above) under which the Minister is by law
required to take into consideration recommendations of an authority, to which he is by the same law
empowered to give directions, is somewhat anomalous. On the whole, therefore, we have come down in
favour of alternative (6) : we think that, subject to certain other recommendations which we subsequently
make ( see paragraphs 354-7 and 361), the licensing authority for commercial television stations should be
the Minister, as at present. He would, therefore, in our view, continue to exercise the functions of granting,
renewing and revoking licences, and in doing so should be required to take into consideration
recommendations made by a statutory authority. The statutory authority would also be responsible for
carrying out certain regulatory and administrative (including technical) functions, as under the present
Broadcasting Act. We have come to the conclusion, however, that in respect of the exercise of these
functions the statutory authority should not be subject to direction by the Minister.
352. In this difficult field we are glad to find support for our conclusion in the law and practice in
Canada, where licences for both commercial broadcasting and commercial television stations are granted by
a Minister (in this case the Minister for Transport), who is required to take into consideration
recommendations made by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, which is a body answering the
description (in Australian terminology) “not subject to Ministerial control”. The analogy is not, of
course, complete, mainly for historical reasons, but, on the whole, we are persuaded that, if the necessary
modifications are made to secure that the statutory authority in Australia responsible for making
recommendations in respect of licences is placed on a basis similar to that of the Canadian Broadcasting
Corporation, the combination of Ministerial responsibility (which will secure the effectiveness of


Parliamentary control in the long run) with the administrative and technical skill and experience of the
permanent statutory body, should produce an efficient administrative structure which will adequately serve
the public interest.
353. We recommend that the statutory authority to which we have referred in the preceding
paragraph should be the Australian Broadcasting Control Board. The evidence was unanimously in
favour of this conclusion, and it is in accord with the recommendation we have already made on the subject
of the national television authority, namely, that the powers and functions of the appropriate existing
broadcasting authority should be extended to the field of television. (In the case of the Board the position
is, as we have explained, that the existing legislation already confers important powers on that body in
respect of various aspects of television.) In the next chapter we consider the functions and responsibilities
of the Board in relation to television programmes, and make some recommendations for the appointment to
the Board of two additional part-time members: the adoption of this recommendation would also strengthen
the Board in the discharge of its functions in relation to the administration of the licensing of commercial
television stations.
354. The decisions which will have to be made in relation to all aspects of the licensing of
commercial television stations will be of great importance, affecting not only the development of commercial
television and the standard of its service, but also the investments and businesses of large commercial
undertakings. While the ultimate decisions will, if our recommendations are adopted, be made by the
responsible Minister, the function of the Board in making recommendations as to the exercise of the
Minister’s powers are of great significance, and it is important that these recommendations should be made
after proper inquiry. In our opinion it is essential that the recommendations of the Board in respect of
certain aspects of the licensing of commercial television stations, which we specify in the following
paragraphs, should be made to the Minister only after a public hearing at which parties with an interest
in the proceedings should have a right to be represented.
355. In the case of the original grant by the Minister of a commercial television licence for any
locality, we think there should, in all cases, be a public hearing by the Board of the applications received
for licences in that locality. The decisions on the grant of licences (that is, the selection of the licensees)
at the commencement of the commercial service will clearly be vital and we feel that the public interest
demands that the claims of all applicants should be the subject of investigation at hearings to which the
public and press are admitted. It may be necessary or desirable for parties other than applicants to be
represented at such hearings, but we are strongly of opinion that, in determining the procedure, care should
be taken that only bona fide applicants and other parties with a genuine interest are permitted to be
heard; otherwise the proceedings may be unnecessarily prolonged. We do not think it Is necessary for us
at this stage to attempt to work out the details of the procedure to be adopted. What we have suggested
is consistent with the practice in Canada and the United States of America.
356. Similarly, we think that before any licence for a commercial television station is revoked by
the Minister, the licensee should have the opportunity of being heard at a public sitting of the Board.
Section 312 of the Communications Act 1934 of the United States, as amended by the Communications Act
Amendments 1952, provides, inter alia, that before revoking a licence the Federal Communications
Commission shall serve upon the licensee an order to show cause why an order of revocation should not be
issued, specifying the matter with respect to which the Commission is inquiring, and calling on the licensee,
within a period of not less than 30 days, to appear before the Commission and give evidence on those
matters. Similar principles would appear to us to be desirable in Australia, with the necessary
modifications required in view of the fact that the Minister would, if our recommendations are accepted,
be the authority with power to revoke licences. It is perhaps unnecessary for us to add that if, as we
propose, a general power of revocation of licences for commercial television stations is vested in the Minister,
it is most desirable that it should be exercised after proper inquiry and report.
357. Renewals of licences for commercial television stations should also, we think, be subject to
similar rules relating to public hearings to those in force in the United States of America. Section 309 of
the Communications Act 1934 provides that if on the examination of an application for, inter alia, the
renewal of a licence the Federal Communications Commission finds that public interest, convenience or
necessity would be served by the renewal thereof, it shall grant the application (i.e. without public hearings) ;
if, however, the Commission on examination of an application for renewal, is unable to make a finding that
the licence should be renewed, it shall notify the applicant and other known parties interested of the grounds
and reasons for its inability to make such a finding, and shall then provide an opportunity for reply and,
if necessary, for a hearing of the matter. Renewals of licences, if our recommendations on this aspect are
accepted, would be made annually by the Minister, on consideration of reports by the Board, and it is
evident that failure to renew would be equivalent to revocation.
358. We did not hear any evidence addressed specifically to the issues discussed in the preceding
paragraphs, but we did receive certain evidence on the subject of security of tenure for commercial television
stations, mainly on the period for which licences should be Issued, which we discuss in the following
paragraphs.


Tenure of Licences for Commercial Television Stations.
359. Several witnesses gave evidence to us on the question of the tenure of licences to be granted for
commercial television stations. The Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations and the
Australian Association of Advertising Agencies regarded the current practice of issuing broadcasting
licences for one year as being unrealistic, and urged that this precedent should not be applied to television.
They submitted that licences should be issued for an unlimited period subject to compliance with the
appropriate legislation and regulations. The Federation conceded that the Minister administering the
Television Act, in addition to the power to grant licences, should have power to suspend or cancel them
in certain instances, but maintained that this should be subject to a right of appeal to an independent
tribunal. A number of other witnesses, including Mr. C. Ogilvy (Macquarie Broadcasting Service Pty.
Ltd.) and Mr. S. R. I. Clark (Queensland Newspapers Pty. Ltd.), also expressed the view that licences
should be granted on a continuing basis. Mr. W. Dunstan (Melbourne Herald and Weekly Times
Limited) suggested that the initial licence period should be seven years, and that future renewal periods
should be determined by the controlling authority, whilst Sir John Butters (Associated Newspapers
Limited) felt that the initial licence should be granted for ten years with renewal periods of five to
seven years.
360. The arguments advanced in support of the above-mentioned contentions may be summarized as
follows:
(а) Maximum initial investment would be encouraged;
(б) licensees would be encouraged to reinvest earnings and improve standards of equipment
and service; and
(c) advertisers would be able to arrange long-term contracts.
On the other hand, it was put to us that if the tenure of licences were limited to a relatively short period,
it would have the unfortunate result of reducing the amount which might be invested in the establishment
and operation of television stations, with the result that the emphasis would be on the production of the
cheapest programmes sold at the highest price to receive the maximum return. We were not able to
accept these arguments. It is to be assumed that licences for television stations will only be granted to
applicants who can demonstrate their capacity, financial and otherwise, to conduct the service in accordance
with the standards which are prescribed. Many businesses are carried on under licences of some form or
another from the Government, and these licences are almost invariably for yearly periods subject to
renewal on certain prescribed conditions as to good behaviour and conformity with the law and the public
interest. So far as we have been able to ascertain, there is no evidence that in any field of private enterprise,
including commercial broadcasting, has there been any significant retardment of investment because of a
limited licensing period. Although the Federal Communications Commission on sth November, 1953,
altered its rules to provide for licences for television stations to be issued for a normal period of three years,
licences in the United States of America were originally issued for one year only. This did not, it would
seem, deter the investment of private capital. In its “ Notice of Proposed Rule Making ” dated 23rd July,
1953, the Federal Communications Commission stated that “ the one-year licence period for television
broadcast stations w T as appropriate during the early formative period of the television broadcast service ”.
The Broadcasting Act 1942-1953 provides that licences for commercial broadcasting stations may be
granted for a period not exceeding three years and may be renewed for any period not exceeding one year.
We recommend that the same provisions should apply in the case of licences for commercial television
stations. In the following chapter we refer to the significance, from the point of view of the maintenance
of programme standards, of the annual review of the performance of television stations: it would seem,
indeed, that in a licensing system, with provision for annual, or at least frequent, renewals of licences, lies
the only effective administrative device for securing positive adherence to the high standards of programmes
which are clearly desirable.
361. The submissions (mentioned in paragraphs 349 and 359) which were made to us in favour of
some form of right of appeal (presumably to a judicial body) against decisions of the Minister with respect
to the revocation, or suspension, of licences were not strongly pressed or very clearly argued. It is
extremely difficult to formulate either the cases in which there should be such an appeal from the Minister,
or the precise form of an appropriate appellate tribunal, and it would seem to us to be inconsistent with the
Parliamentary responsibility of the Minister to provide for appeals in these matters. It will, however, be
evident from what we have said in paragraphs 356 and 357 that, in respect of both failure to renew a
licence and of revocation of a licence, we have given careful consideration to the question of the rights of
the licensee to a fair hearing. We consider that if, as we suggest, decisions on these matters are made by a
responsible Minister, after taking into consideration recommendations made by an independent statutory
body which is required to conduct public hearings before reporting to the Minister, the interests of licensees
will be fully protected. MTe may add that, in our opinion, the power to suspend licences should
be restricted to a very limited period, at the expiration of which either the suspension must be removed, or
the licensee given notice (as proposed in paragraph 356) of intention to revoke the licence.


Limitations on the Ownership of Commercial Television Stations.
362. The question of the restrictions (if any) which should apply by way of limitation of ownership
of commercial television stations was referred to by a number of witnesses. The Australian Federation of
Commercial Broadcasting Stations submitted that any limitations on the ownership of commercial television
stations should not be more restrictive than those which apply in the case of commercial broadcasting
stations, that is as provided by section 53 of the Broadcasting Act 1942-1953, which are as follows:
A person shall not own, or be in a position to exercise control, either directly or indirectly, of, more
than —
(a) one metropolitan commercial broadcasting station in any State;
(h) four metropolitan commercial broadcasting stations in Australia;
(c) four commercial broadcasting stations in any one State; or
(d) eight commercial broadcasting stations in Australia.
Mr. C. Ogilvy (Macquarie Broadcasting Service Pty. Ltd.) told us that he believed that the satisfactory
operation of commercial television stations in Australia could best be achieved by network operation and
the plan which he submitted to us envisaged the grant to his company of a number of licences. He believed
that in this way a complete and thorough service could be provided to a maximum number of communities,
since not only would each station have its own local facilities, but would be linked to a central organization
for the advantages of planned programming during the main part of its schedule. On the other hand the
League of Women Voters of South Australia urged that there should be a greater limitation on the
ownership of stations than is the case with broadcasting stations.
363. Mr. A. C. Paddison regarded network operation as a possible threat to the independence of
licensees. He advocated that television licences should be distributed to as many interests as possible to
prevent any form of monopoly control and maintained that the real safeguard against the development of
monopoly control would be through the issue of licences to independent operators. The suggestion that
“rural stations ” and “sub-metropolitan stations” should be satellites of city stations immediately raised
the question of monopoly control —“ channels would become the means for creating an insidious vested
interest which in the wrong hands could be capable of embarking on a mass-experiment in thought control ”,
Mr. Paddison claimed that the widest distribution of licences would be achieved if —
(a) no single group controlled more than one capital city station;
( b) city stations were not permitted to control country stations or enter into exclusive
agreements for relays of programmes;
(c) licensees of country television stations were required to operate on a non-exclusive basis
offering their facilities to all city stations;
(d) a maximum number of city stations were licensed.
364. Mr. N. V, Nixon (Australian Association of Advertising Agencies) expressed the view that
every care should be taken to prevent the establishment of a monopoly 'which would be against the public
interest. To prevent this, he felt that only one licence should be granted to any one organization. He
added that this “would not preclude the free association of independent stations in operational—but not
financially interlocked —network systems ”.
365. We are in agreement with the vieAV that some limitation on the concentration of control of
television stations U necessary in the public interest. On the other hand, it is evident that, in certain
directions, there may be advantages to be derived from the common ownership or control of a number of
stations. For example, we envisage that the licensees of metropolitan stations may be prepared to establish
and operate relay stations in districts which may not be in a position to provide the necessary financial
support to justify a station operating as an independent unit. Indeed, it was put to us that it should be
made a condition of any licence granted for a station to serve a metropolitan area that the licensee should,
within a reasonable period, be required also to undertake the operation of a station in a country district,
and it is clear that in certain circumstances this would assist in furthering the extension of television to the
country.
366. In our view provisions similar to those in section 53 of the Broadcasting Act (see paragraph
362) if enacted with respect to television stations, would be sufficient to prevent such a degree of
concentration of ownership as would be contrary to the public interest, and at the same time would enable
advantage to be taken of the economies of operation which the ownership of a number of stations would
permit. Within the framework of the limitation suggested, any concentration of control which might be
regarded as contrary to the public interest could be adequately dealt with through the issue of licences. In
arriving at any such determination, the Minister and the Board would necessarily be guided by
developments, the nature of which cannot at present be foreseen. We have noted that in the United States
of America the Federal Communications Commission has recently revised its Rules to impose greater
limitation on the multiple ownership of stations. It is now provided that no entity shall have a direct or
indirect interest in, or be stockholders, directors or officers of, more than five television stations.


Transfer of Licences.
367. It was suggested to us that licences to operate commercial television stations should be issued
on the condition that they are not sold or leased, except with the approval of the Minister or the Board;
this was essential to prevent undesirable trafficking in licences. Mr. C. Ogilvy said that transfers of
licences should not be permitted until after a station had been properly established and was adequately
servicing its coverage area, but such a condition should not preclude the sale of stations after a reasonable
time had elapsed, if circumstances justified it. He said that, after the value of broadcasting licences was
realized, there were several cases where the successful applicant sold or leased his licence or erected a
station of the sketchiest nature and sold it at a profit. Sir John Butters agreed that licences should be
issued on condition that they were not sold, but he submitted that amalgamation should be permitted.
Mr. N. V. Nixon agreed that conditions of some kind were inevitable; failure to comply with those
conditions should properly result in the loss of the licence and one condition should be that licences
should not be sold.
368. With respect to broadcasting, section 50 of the Broadcasting Act 1942-1953 provides that
“ except with the consent in writing of the Minister, a licensee of a commercial broadcasting station shall
not transfer the licence or assign, sublet or otherwise dispose of the licence or admit any other person to
participate in any of the benefits of the licence, or to exercise any of the poAvers or authorities granted by
the licence It seems to us that the extension of this proAdsion to commercial television stations would
deal satisfactorily with the matters AA 7 hich have been raised.
369. There are no provisions in the Broadcasting Act regulating transfers in shares in companies
holding licences for commercial broadcasting stations, and Ave were told that it was legally and
administratively impracticable to provide directly for the regulation of such transfers. In order that
some form of control may be exercised over such transactions, which could have the effect of rendering
nugatory the provisions of section 50 of the Act (referred to in the preceding paragraph), it had been
found necessary to incorporate in each licence a special condition providing that control of a station shall
not be varied without the consent of the Minister. AYe feel that the same condition should apply to the
transfer of shares in a company holding a licence for a commercial television station.
Licence-fees.
370. We have given some consideration to the question whether a fee should be imposed for the
grant or renewal of a licence for a commercial television station and the amount of such a fee. The
Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations suggested that a nominal fee only should
be charged, and that it should not be related to the revenue of stations, Avhich Avas regarded by the industry
as “ a penalty on efficiency ”. The Federation suggested that if any such fee Avas imposed, it should be
assessed on revenue from the sale of time only, and not on total turnover. Mr. C. Ogilvy (Macquarie
Broadcasting Service Pty. Ltd.) supported this view and told us that, in his opinion, because a licence
fee Avould, in the early stage of development, impose an additional financial burden on operators, it would
result in higher costs for station time and facilities, a course which should be avoided since the standard
of service to the public would depend upon the extent to Avhich advertisers Avould be in a position to
sponsor feature programmes. We feel, hoAveA r er, that the imposition of such a fee is justified. It will
contribute to some extent to the cost of administration of the commercial television service, and, in any
case, some charge in respect of the valuable public franchise held by a licensee is clearly reasonable. In
view of the criticisms Amiced by some witnesses of the method by Avhich the fee payable by commercial
broadcasting stations is now calculated, we have also considered alternative methods for determining the
fee which might be adopted for television stations. The licence-fee at present payable annually in respect
of commercial broadcasting stations was imposed on the recommendation of the Joint Committee on
Wireless Broadcasting (the Gibson Committee) in 1942, and, in conformity Avith the provision of the
Commercial Broadcasting Stations Licence Fee Act 1942, is calculated on the formula of £25 per annum
plus one-half of 1 per cent, of the gross earnings if the operation of the station in the preceding year
resulted in a profit. Although this method of determining the fee is open to certain objections, we have
been unable to formulate any proposals that possess any definite advantages over it, and we recommend
that the same principle should be applied to the television service. We consider, hoAvever, that the annual
fee should be £5O plus one-half of 1 per cent, of gross revenue of a station and that this fee should be charged
whether or not a profit is made.
74


CHAPTER VII. —PROGRAMME STANDARDS AND HOURS OF OPERATION.
1. Introductory.
371. We were specifically directed to report on the standards to be observed in the programmes
of national and commercial stations to ensure the best use of television broadcasting in the public interest,
and in the following paragraphs we discuss some of the implications of this problem. In Chapter IV.
we have referred to the evidence we received concerning the impact that television might have on the
intellectual, cultural and moral life of the community and we are indebted to those witnesses who assisted
us on this aspect of our inquiry. Clearly one of the major reasons underlying our appointment as a Royal
Commission was the need for a full and open discus non, on the one hand, of the dangers inherent in
television and, on the other, of the advantages that might be derived from it, so that the reasons underlying
the fears and apprehensions, the enthusiasm and anticipation felt by the various sections of the community
might be clearly analysed and brought into proper perspective. We have already indicated (see Chapter
V.) that we are convinced that we should proceed cautiously with the introduction of the service, and we
referred in that chapter, as one of our reasons for that conclusion, to the necessity for establishing, from
the outset, adequate standards of quality in television programmes. We now proceed to discuss this aspect
of our inquiry more fully.
2. The National Television Service.
372. We have, in Chapter VI., expressed the view that the responsibility for the provision of
programmes on the national television service should be vested in the Australian Broadcasting Commission,
and that, in this field, the Commission should have the same degree of responsibility and independence
as it has in the field of broadcasting. We are of the opinion that, so far as the national television
programmes are concerned, it is not necessary to say more than it is to be expected that the Australian
Broadcasting Commission, with full recognition of its great responsibilities to the people and Parliament,
and within the limits of the available funds, will, as it has been required to do, and has substantially
succeeded in doing, in the field of broadcasting, “ take in the interests of the public all such measures
as, in the opinion of the Commission, are conducive to the full development of suitable programmes ”.
(Broadcasting Act 1942-1953, section 18.)
3. The Commercial Television Service.
373. Most of die evidence which we received was directed to the problem of securing adequate
programme standards on commercial television stations, and this we shall now proceed to consider.
374. The question of programme standards may be considered from two aspects. In the first place,
there is the negative aspect, which is the prohibition of the broadcasting of indecent, obscene and
blasphemous material. This is a matter that is already taken care of by law and is not, in our view, really
a serious problem from the point of view of the regulation of the commercial television service. It may be
expected that, as in the case of broadcasting, instances of the televising of indecent, obscene or
blasphemous material will be exceedingly rare, if they occur at all. If they do occur, they may be dealt
with. It is true that there is the related, and more difficult problem of preventing the televising of incidents
which, while not strictly indecent or obscene, are offensive or improper: we were told that in the field of
broadcasting programmes this problem presents the greatest difficulties. It is our view that this problem,
which is really one of good taste, must be resolved by encouraging and securing positive standards, which
we discuss in the following paragraphs.
375. There is, on the other hand, the positive aspect, which is essentially the problem of the means
of establishing and maintaining a standard of programmes in order to provide, not only for the
entertainment and enjoyment of viewers, but also for their education (in the broad sense we have described
in Chapter IV.) and enlightenment. The use of this new medium of communication must, in our view,
be regarded, by commercial as well as national stations, as in the nature of a public trust for the benefit
of all members of our society/ In our view there is essentially the same responsibility for positive
values in television programmes in the case of the commercial service as in the case of the national service.
We have already given some reasons for this proposition in Chapter IV,, and point out there that, basically,
it depends on the nature of the medium itself.
376. We were urged by a number of witnesses, mainly representing commercial broadcasting or
allied interests, to recommend that licensees of commercial television stations should be left free to operate
their services within the framework of the general law, free from censorship or aibitraiy control, on the
grounds that the development of the art of television broadcasting would thus be best promoted, and
that interference with freedom of expression, which is a violation of demociatic principles, would be
avoided. It was argued therefore that the system of self-regulation was most desirable from all viewpoints
and was effective to secure adequate programme standards. Self-regulation would, it was urged, affoid
the greatest control of all throug'h the weight of public opinion whilst at the same time placing no
prohibition or crippling impediment in the way of initiative and creatne ability.
(1) Report of the Royal Con'mission on National Development in the Arts, Letters and Sciences, Canada, 1951. Chapter 18, para. 3, p. 276/7.


377. Mr. H. B. Beaver, President of the Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting
Stations, said—
What has to be guarded against, the Federation feels, is that a Government-appointed body should be
permitted to stretch out beyond the field of radio and television broadcasting to the field of listening or viewing.
This is a trend we believe to be fraught with danger . . . It is the Federation’s belief that the best way
to improve the arts of radio and television broadcasting is to give them liberty to develop and expand .
The Federation takes the view that it is essential to the continued operation of a democracy that radio and
television broadcasting should be free to operate within the framework of the general law and to provide
news, information and entertainment to the general public, free from censorship and arbitrary control. There
should be no mandatory regulations which would control programme content, except the laws of the land
relating to such matters as libel, defamation, gaming and betting, treason, obscenity, &c. . . . The freest
possible mass communications, including radio and television broadcasting, are essential rights of a democratic
population to inform and to be informed. Centralized domination of mass communications is not in the
interests of free citizens. Any medium of mass communication should operate within the framework of the
general law and should not be subject to discriminatory controls which limit its freedom of operation
That does not mean that no control will be exercised over radio and television programmes. There will
always be the greatest control of all—the factor of public acceptance. In addition, there is a very keen
appreciation on the part of people in broadcasting that they are “ operating in a glass bowl ” They recognize
that with the great opportunities which are theirs come also great responsibilities . . . They know full
well that eieiy receiving set is equipped with the convenient means of tuning their programmes in or out
and that, under such a system oi freedom of choice, the judgment of the people is the ultimate standard of
acceptability. From a practical point of view, unless the types of programmes we broadcast and the content
of our programmes meet with the approval of our audiences, we cannot attract advertisers to use our facilities
• • ; T he Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations has its “ Standards of Broadcasting
Pi actice , and, when television comes, standards will be developed for the new medium. Any recommendation
by this Commission that there should be control of programmes would take from the Australian public and
the broadcasting industry an important part of its liberty and freedom of activity. Such control would
seiie to destroy the creative ability of the industry and would stereotype programming and, what is more
serious, would stifle the development of television from the beginning.
378. Sir John Butters stated that—
Standards and controls which are self-established will be more realistic and effective than those which
are imposed and our managements will be very sensible of their responsibilities. Above all, public opinion
will express itself unmistakably. It is, we feel, important that before any standards or conditions regarding
programmes are established they should be the subject of conferences with licensees , , . We feel that
the best results will be obtained by the National Controlling Authority imposing the fewest possible restrictions
and as liltie rigidity as possible and allowing managements to work out by experience in
co-operation with the Authority the best practice for Australia. This has worked out well with radio and
should be equally satisfactory with television.
379. Sir John Chandler informed us that, in nis estimation, public opinion imposed a greater sense
of discipline on the manager of a broadcasting station than either the code of the Australian Federation of
Commercial Broadcasting Stations or the regulations of the Australian Broadcasting Control Board.
380. Mr. Clive Ogilvy said —
I feel that self-reguktion will be the best form of regulation of the television industry, and I have no
doubt of the ability and willingness of the individuals who will be concerned with the development of
television in Australia to evolve Standards of Practice voluntarily which will be the best that can be devised.
381. Substantially similar views were put to us by many witnesses, including Mr. W. Dunstan
(Herald and Weekly Times Limited), Mr. K. A. MacDonald (Advertiser Broadcasting Network), Mr.
S. P. P. Lamb (Newcastle Broadcasting Co. Pty. Ltd.), Mr. J. S. Larkin (Broadcasting Station SDN), Mr.
A. C. Paddison (Broadcasting Station 2KA), and Mr. S. R. I. Clark (Broadcasting Station 4BK).
382. It will be observed that emphasis was placed by these witnesses, all of considerable experience
in the field of broadcasting, on “ self -regulation ” operating through the force of public opinion, as an
adequate force for maintaining programme standards, positively as well as negatively.
383. On the other hand we were urged by a number of witnesses representing churches, educational
institutions, children’s organizations, cultural associations and similar bodies that self-regulation by the
industry of television programmes would not be an adequate means of maintaining standards The best
in the view of these witnesses, that could be expected from self-regulation, was that programmes would not
perhaps offend against good taste, but that the very nature of commercial operation, depending as it
does upon the financial support of advertisers who must of necessity satisfy the greatest number of viewers,
would make it impracticable for commercial stations to produce programmes at any higher than minimum
levels. The danger, therefore, was that in producing for the majority, the responsibility of operators to
raise the levels of public taste and the public standards would be forgotten, and the medium would be
reduced to mediocrity, or worse. Other factors that would tend to lower standards would be the quantity
of Australian talent available (especially if long hours of entertainment were to be provided) and the
pressure that the high cost of television would exert to allow the introduction of cheap and inferior quality
programmes from overseas sources. These witnesses urged that a controlling authority, vested with


statutory power, should be constituted with the object of setting and maintaining standards that would
not only satisfy the negative requirement of preventing the televising of offensive programmes, but would
also meet the positive requirement of raising the general cultural and educational level.
384. The submissions which are summarized in the preceding paragraph were made by a large
number of witnesses whose statements of evidence covered a wide field, and we do not therefore propose to
extract from them any specimens of the arguments presented (indeed in many eases it would be necessary
to quote the whole of some lengthy statements). We wish, however, to express our gratitude particularly
to Mr. J. L. J. Wilson, Director of Tutorial Classes, University of Sydney; Mr. Paul Freadman; Mr. John
Metcalfe, Principal Librarian, Public Library of New South Wales; Dr. H. Penny, Principal, Adelaide
Teacher’s College and the representatives of the Australian Council for the World Council of Churches, the
Archbishop of Melbourne’s Committee on Television and the Catholic Church in Australia. It will be
evident that the issues here are in many respects indistinguishable from those we have reviewed briefly in
Chapter IV.
385. In this aspect of our inquiry we paid particular attention to the practices in the United States,
which is so far the only example of self-regulation in the field of television programmes. In the United
States, the Federal Communications Commission, which is the licensing authority for all television stations
(see Chapter VI.), is empowered to suspend licences if a licensee has transmitted “ profane or obscene words,
language or meaning ”, but is expressly stated to have no “ power of censorship ”. However, in the exercise
of its power to renew licences on the basis of compliance with “ public interest, convenience and necessity ”,
the Federal Communications Commission takes into consideration the programme performance of stations
although its power to do so appears to be a matter open to some dispute, as the somewhat voluminous
literature on the subject indicates.
386. Perhaps the most interesting and illuminating development in television in the United States
of America has been the formulation and acceptance by the National Association of Radio and Television
Broadcasters (N.A.R.T.8.) of the “ Television Code”, or “Schedule of Operating Standards for Television
Programmes in the United States of America ”, which was adopted on 6th December, 1951, and became
effective on Ist March, 1952. This code was the industry’s attempt to provide for self-regulation of the
programme matter transmitted by commercial television stations. The reasons for adopting the Code, its
enforcement principles, and the philosophy behind it were explained at some length to the Congressional
Committee which, in May, 1952, investigated radio and television programmes in the United States of
America and to which we refer in the succeeding paragraph. The Director of Television of the IN.A.R. T.B.
told the Committee that action was taken by the industry “because for one thing there was a sense of
watchful waiting on behalf of Congress and on behalf of accountable and responsible organizations; the
shadow of incipient censorship by Government regulation was evident . lie also explained that the
licensees of stations in operation at the time felt “ a voluntary sense of responsibility to develop and
continue, insofar as was co-operatively possible, a wholesome stature for the commeicial television mdustiy
in the years to come ”.
387. On 12th May, 1952, the United States House of Representatives directed the Committee on
Interstate and Foreign Commerce to conduct an investigation to determine the extent to which radio and
television programmes contained immoral or otherwise offensive matter or placed improper emphasis upon
crime, violence and corruption and to make recommendations designed to eliminate offensive and undesirable
radio and television programmes, and to promote higher standards. Ihe investigation was made by a
sub-committee of the Committee (known as the Harris Committee) which heard evidence from
representatives of various civic and religious groups, the radio and television industry and its trade
associations, the N.A.R.T.8., advertising agencies, sponsors and the Federal Communications Commission.
Approximately 1,200 communications were received from the general public. The report of the
sub-committee, after reviewing the nature of the evidence tendered by witnesses and commenting upon the
steps which had been taken by the television broadcasters themselves and the television networks to exercise
control over programmes for the purpose of eliminating offensive matter therefrom, contained the
following conclusions: —
(а) That substantial progress had been made in the self-regulation by the industry of television
programmes and that such a course was preferable to Government enforced regulation.
It was felt that there were no good reasons why such controls should be imposed before
the industry had explored firstly whether effective self-regulation was possible.
(б) That there had been programmes offered to the public containing offensive, suggestive or
objectionable material and that the industry should give greater recognition to the
problem with a view to taking additional corrective action.
(c) That there was entirely too much emphasis on crime programmes and that too much time
was being devoted to such programmes. Crime subjects were not suitable for children’s
programmes or for programmes so timed that they were likely to be watched with some
degree of regularity by children.


(d) That cultural and educational programmes were finding increasing favour with the public
and that sponsors were becoming more interested in such programmes, and that their
development would avoid the complaints advanced against comedy and variety shows on
the one hand, and crime shows on the other.
(e) That the best assurance against improper programmes lay in the interplay between an alert
and articulate public and an alert and conscientious broadcasting industry.
(/) That poor taste had been used in the advertising of certain licensed and regulated products
which had been offensive to a large segment of the public. Immediate cognizance should
be taken of this problem and measures adopted to correct the condition.
In concluding its report the sub-committee stated that Congressional study of the problems involved
in television and radio programming should be continued, and recommended that the investigations already
undertaken should be expanded and proceeded with during the next Congress. The sub-committee stated
that it believed that such studies of the relevant important complex and controversial problems constituted
one of the best assurances that the industry’s efforts at self-regulation would be alert and in the public
interest.
388. The most recent discussion of the position in the United States which has come under the notice
of the Commission is the dissenting opinion of Commissioner Frieda B. Hennoek of the Federal
Communications Commission handed down in relation to the decision of the Federal Communications
Commission on 23rd July, 1953, with respect to a Notice of Proposed Rule Making dealing with the
licence period for television stations. Commissioner Hennoek expressed the view generally that the standards
reached by television stations were not adequate; she said—
In January, 1951, the (Federal Communications) Commission, in considering renewal of licences of
some 44 television broadcast stations, was sufficiently disturbed by their program performances to announce
publicly that —
. . . a public conference will be scheduled, at a date to be announced later, for the discussion
of television broadcasting problems from the point of view of the public, the Commission, and
industry.
Approximately a year later, in 1952, the Commission once again reviewed the programming record of the
existing television stations. I think it fair to say that this review did not show any substantial improvement.
Accordingly, the Commission found it necessary to place a number of licensees on temporary licences and
only renewed their licences upon receipt of assurances that the stations in fact had, or in the future would,
improve their public service programming . . . Such time as the Commission has spent in evaluating
program performance has indicated that that performance fell substantially short of being satisfactory.
389. In Canada, while licences for a number of commercial television stations have been approved, at
the date when the report was being written only two such stations had commenced operation. The Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation, which, it will be recalled, under the Broadcasting Act 1936 and the Radio Act
1938, is required to make recommendations to the Minister with respect to (inter alia ) the renewals of
licences of commercial broadcasting stations (including television stations), and has power to make
regulations with respect to the programmes of such stations, has not yet, we understand, made any
regulations specifically relating to television stations. The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, in 1953,
promulgated new revised regulations for sound broadcasting stations after hearings in public session in
January and consultations on wording with representatives of the Canadian Association of Broadcasters
and other interested parties. We were informed that the Canadian Association of Broadcasters (the
industry body) expressed substantial agreement with the revised regulations. The Board of Governors
of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation has indicated that it proposes to issue regulations governing
television broadcasting but wishes an opportunity to study actual television operations. In the interval
it is expected that television stations will operate within the spirit of the regulations governing sound
broadcasting. The annual review of the activities of broadcasting stations, which, under section 24 of the
Broadcasting Act, is made by the Corporation and is taken into account when the renewal of licences is
being considered, will also apply to television stations.
390. We have further considered in this"connexion the provisions of the Broadcasting Act 1942-1953
relating to the licensing of commercial broadcasting stations, to which we have already referred in Chapter
VI., and the evidence dealing with the procedure and policy of the Australian Broadcasting Control Board
in relation to renewal of licences for commercial broadcasting stations. As we have explained in Chapter
VI., before exercising the power to renew licences the Minister takes into consideration the reports and
recommendations of the Australian Broadcasting Control Board. These reports include a careful review
of the overall programme performance of the stations in the period preceding the renewal of the licence,
and are made on the basis of general standards relating, inter alia, to the programme service provided by
the stations. These standards have been formulated after consultation with the representatives of the
Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations.
391. There is no need for us to repeat here the discussion in Chapter IV. and elsewhere in this report
of the impact that television will have on cultural and moral values generally, and particularly on children
and adolescents. We do not suggest, as some witnesses who appeared before us have done, that this


potentiality of television justifies unnecessarily gloomy views of its possible ill-effects. We believe, on the
other hand, that the right approach to television should rather emphasize the very great advantages which
may be derived from it, if adequate provision is made, not only to avoid socially undesirable features,
but also to secure the maintenance of high standards of service, so that the best and not the worst results
may be obtained from the new medium. This is a matter upon which we feel strongly that no risk should
be taken.
392. As will be apparent from the evidence which has been summarized in this chapter, there are
two conflicting viewpoints. On the one hand it is held that self-regulation is the most effective means of
securing adequate programme standards, and on the other hand there is a strong body of opinion that
some regulatory control by a statutory authority is essential to establish and maintain proper standards.
398. We feel that there is considerable value in industry codes as a method of self-regulation, but we
do not believe that these alone would satisfy the public. These would perhaps be sufficient if all that is
necessary is the prevention of undesirable features, but we believe strongly that the fundamental
requirement is the securing of positive standards which will ensure that programmes are of good quality.
It is obvious that to secure this result negative prescriptions are of little value. In implementing a system
of voluntary self-regulation, there are difficulties which are illustrated in the United States of America by
the evidence tendered to the Harris Committee (see paragraph 387). It is not out of place to add, although
it is obvious enough, that perhaps the most acute difficulty in effectively implementing a system of
self-regulation through a voluntary association of television broadcasters is the fact that compliance with
a code involving positive obligations will add to programme costs. Where compliance with such a code
will reduce profits, the difficulties of enforcement by a voluntary association are obviously very great.
394. Although we have not been persuaded by the argument that self-regulation will produce
adequate standards, we do not think that the only alternative is that there should be detailed administrative
or bureaucratic control of programmes.
395. We have been impressed by the evidence of close consultation between the Australian Federation
of Commercial Broadcasting Stations and the Australian Broadcasting Control Board on all aspects of
broadcasting administration and, in particular, with respect to the formulation of standards relation to
programmes. AVhile it is, of course, impossible to expect that on all matters the Board and the Federation
will be in agreement, we have been informed that, in all cases in which specific determinations have been
made by the Board relating to programmes of commercial broadcasting stations (some examples of these
are given in Chapter VIII.), there has been not only consultation, but agreement, between the Board and
the Federation. Failing agreement, it is clearly essential that there should be a reserve of authority (which
we suggest will most effectively be exercised through the licensing system) which will be designed to
secure that commercial programmes will, in the broadest sense, serve the public interest. We feel, therefore,
that, on the whole, the extension to commercial television stations of the existing practices with respect to
the regulation of programmes of commercial broadcasting stations affords the most effective method of
securing, not only that undesirable programmes should not be broadcast, but that programmes of really
good quality should be available from commercial television stations. It will, of course, be necessary to
have some legislative provision, along the lines of the present provision of the Broadcasting Act relating
to the programmes of commercial broadcasting stations, to secure that prompt measures may be taken
(apart from regular reviews of station performances in the ordinary course of the administration of the
licensing system) to prevent objectionable material from being transmitted.
396. We would hope and expect that the formulation of a suitable code of operating standards for
programmes of commercial television stations in Australia would, as soon as possible after the licensing of
commercial stations has commenced, be undertaken by the representatives of commercial television stations.
AVhile we do not express any opinion as to the adequacy or otherwise of the television Code of the National
Association of Radio and Television Broadcasters in the United States, it is evident that much valuable
assistance can be obtained from a consideration of this interesting document. A code of this kind would
be of great value as a guide, not only to the television stations in their day-to-day arrangement and
production of programmes, but also to the Board as a set of standards to be applied in the consideration
of recommendations for the renewal of licences of commercial television stations.
397. We are conscious that the discharge by the Board of the responsibilities in respect of programme
standards which we have suggested above will throw a heavy burden on a body which already has
substantial functions. AVe have therefore given some consideration to the question of whether the additional
responsibilities do not call for some addition to the membership of the Board. We have come to the
conclusion that it would be desirable to strengthen the Board in this respect by the appointment, on a
part-time basis, of two additional members who should not, however, be representative of any sectional
interest. The function of the proposed additional members would be primarily in the field of programmes
and we think that they should be selected on this basis. It is apparent also that it would be most advisable
to secure the maximum amount of public participation in this field and we feel this might very well be
achieved by the appointment of advisory committees. The functions of these committees should be to advise
the Board in respect of the scope and content of particular classes of programmes, and the constitution of


the committees should depend upon the precise functions to be performed. At this stage we consider
that it is probably only necessary to set up two committees, one to advise on religious programmes and
the other upon children’s programmes.
398. It will be apparent from the discussion in Chapter V. that we have been concerned by the extent
to which it is possible that financial and economic considerations may control the quality of television
programmes, and it will be recalled that it was for this, among other reasons, that we came to the conclusion
that there should be a gradual approach to the introduction of television services. This is clearly a vital
matter, and decisions with respect to the quality of programmes and the number of hours of transmission
will inevitably affect the financial operations of commercial television stations. Although it is a matter
which has caused us considerable concern, we have come to the conclusion that the operation of commercial
television services on the limited scale which we recommend for the establishment period is the only
practicable method of ensuring the provision of programmes of adequate quality. We hope that commercial
television stations will realize that in the programme field they have not only great responsibilities, but
great opportunities, and that from the outset their approach to the formulation of the code which has been
discussed earlier will be with the object of securing the highest possible standards. As we have repeatedly
stated throughout this report, in this respect the standards must be pitched as high as possible, if television
is to be a success.
399. We believe that the obligation to ensure high standards of programmes rests on all sections
of the community, and we feel that the Government should welcome, and indeed, might seek, the undoubted
opportunities that exist in television to encourage the creation of programmes that will set acceptable
cultural standards, and will further important national objectives. The outlets provided by commercial
television stations will be no less useful in this respect than those of the national service. It may be
appropriate for the Government to give consideration to such means of achieving this objective as the
making of financial grants to cultural bodies capable of producing programmes acceptable to the operators
as well as to the viewers, and the expansion of the Film Division of the Department of the Interior for
the production of films designed to further and to intensify the interest of the people in the problems,
responsibilities and functions of the Australian community. We further suggest that steps along these
lines should be taken immediately so that the full weight of their influence can be felt from the
commencement of the television service.
4. Quotas of Australian Programme Material.
400. We were strongly urged by some witnesses that, in order to provide scope for the development
of the talents of Austialian aitists in a manner calculated to foster our distinctive national characteristics,
and as a means of preserving our national heritage and culture, a strict limitation should be placed on the
quantity of programme material admitted from other countries. On the other hand, we were just as
strongly pressed by other witnesses to recommend that, in order to provide an adequate supply of
programme material and to allow the Australian community to have access to the cultural contributions of
other countries, no restriction should be placed on the importation of programme material.
401. We were invited by the Ptadio and Television Writers’ Guild, for example, to recommend that
“ the importation of filmed or kinescoped television shows from Britain and America should be rigidly
controlled . The Guild maintained that local television stations W’ould be eager to reduce production costs
by importing cheap programmes while overseas programme agencies and television film producers would
be anxious to offset their production costs by making Australia a dumping ground for obsolete films
402. The contrary view was expressed by the Australian Association of Advertising Agencies which
stated that “in view of the difficulties in the way of securing or producing in Australia sufficient
programmes of a high standard . . . there should be no restriction whatever upon the importation
of programme material”. Mr. Nixon (President of the Association) went on to say, “There is still room
for the importation of a certain number of overseas programmes. I say that at the risk of putting Australian
actors and performers out of work, because I do not see how a country like Australia, so remote from the
rest of the world, numerically small in population, so culturally isolated, can live wholly on its own cultural
artistic sources
403. Another view was expressed by Mr. Ogilvy (Macquarie Broadcasting Service Pty Ltd ) who
said— ‘ ’'
If we prevent overseas material from coming in, we will invite retaliation in the future • an eventual
overseas market for our own programmes is desirable, and necessary, and so we should not go bevond the bounds
of reason by entirely eliminating the use of overseas programmes at any time. However! what is more
important to the viewer, we should always encourage the use of the best form of entertainmen from whatever
source it becomes available, both from the satisfaction of the set owner and to provide comparisons for Z
improvement of our own standards of production. 1 SOIS tor the
404. The Department of Trade and Customs advised us that there were no regulations at present in
force to cover the admission of television material, but that it would be reasonable to assume that
conditions similar to those relating to the importation of films for public exhibition would be applied


405. Some witnesses claimed that the objective of encouraging local talent could be achieved by
placing an obligation on television operators to broadcast a fixed proportion of programmes of Australian
origin, whilst other witnesses expressed the opinion that any fixed quota would deny to the commercial
operator the degree of flexibility essential for the success of his venture.
406. We were informed by Actors and Announcers Equity Association of Australia that there should
be a fixed quota of Australian produced programmes and that —
The quota of Australian programmes should be apportioned in accordance with the quota percentages
laid down, but any television station could, if it so desired, televise a greater proportion of Australian
programmes than is provided for in the applicable quota. The quota of Australian programmes should be
apportioned by each station so that the quota would apply to the various categories of programmes, such as,
but not necessarily limited to —dramatic, comedy, musical comedy, musical, operatic, variety, documentary,
educational, sporting, and programmes specially devised for children, in such a manner that the amount of
time taken up by the televising of Australian programmes by each and any television station of each and any
of the foregoing categories of programmes, would be in exactly the same ratio to non-Australian programmes
of a similar category as is laid down in the particular overall quota.
407. Mr. C. Moses (Australian Broadcasting Commission) stated —
The only appropriate means of guarding against an excessive use of imported material is to stipulate
that there shall be a minimum percentage of Australian material in all programmes (national and commercial)
in much the same way as the Broadcasting Act provides that at least per cent, of music broadcast by all
radio stations shall be, Australian. Apart from the obvious need to prevent the flooding of Australian television
programmes with cheap overseas films of poor quality, it is desirable, both in the interests of our artists and
writers to encourage the development of Australian drama, that all television programmes should include an
appropriate minimum percentage of Australian material, whether “ live ” or on film . . . Moreover, by
giving adequate opportunities to local talent, avenues would be open for the exportation of the best Australian
material, on film or as telefilms, to other broadcasting organizations, thus providing an excellent outlet for
information about our country overseas which would help to develop a better understanding and appreciation
of Australia. In fixing quotas, it must be realized that if they were merely to provide that an overall
percentage of programmes shall be of Australian origin, stations would be free to do little or nothing in the
way of developing Australian television drama or variety, since the Australian proportion could easily be made
up of sport, discussions, cookery demonstrations, &c. The intention of the quota would thus be largely
defeated.
408. Mr. Ogilvy (Macquarie Broadcasting Service Pty. Ltd.) expressed the view that television
stations should be recommended to broadcast a progressively increasing percentage of programmes of
Australian origin, certainly not less than 25 per cent, in the developmental stage rising to higher
percentages as Australian material becomes available, provided, of course, that all types of televised
presentations are included. He did not, however, consider it wise to fix a figure by mandatory regulation.
409. We are in agreement with those witnesses who advanced as a basic proposition that Australian
artists should play a real and steadily increasing part in Australian television, and we believe that there is
an undoubted obligation on the operators of television stations to ensure that the best use is made of
Australian talent. It would not be practicable, at present, however, before any actual experience has been
gained as to the amount of talent available or its capacity to provide a good standard of programme, for
any authority to lay down quotas for the Australian content of television programmes, even if the
principle of encouraging the employment of Australian artists by the imposition of quotas is valid. This
principle is, indeed, open to question and there are some dangers that the quota system, if aoopted, might
lead to a deterioration in programme standards.
410. We consider, too, that in respect of imported programmes, it is not feasible to determine, in the
absence of actual experience, the extent to which an embargo (if any) on imports should be imposed, and
we are of the opinion that in the early stages of the development of television in Australia it would be of
great benefit to have access to overseas programmes of high quality. (In the following sections of this
chapter we consider the question of excluding poor quality material.) Wh consider, therefore, that no
general embargo should, at least in the initial stages, be placed on the importation of piogiflmmes fiom
other countries, but that this question should be kept under review as television develops.
5. Censorship.
411. We have referred in Chapter IV. to the question of censorship of television programmes and the
evidence that we received in this connexion. We feel that we should also make some comments on this
question in this chapter insofar as censorship may be said to relate to the standards of progiammes. It
seems to us that the question of censorship must be considered from two distinct aspects. First must be
considered the application of censorship to Australian-produced programmes, which will comprise both
« live ” productions and recorded programmes, and secondly its application to imported programmes, which
will necessarily be entirely recorded. In the case of commercial stations, recorded programmes will also
contain a proportion of advertising matter, and this may be either of Australian origin or imported. Any
attempt to censor Australian “ live ” programmes would, in our opinion, be completely impracticable and
would render it most difficult to carry on the day-to-day business of commercial stations. Actuality
broadcasts of outside events (such as cricket matches) would be deprived of the sense of immediacy, which
F.5242/5A—6
81


is one of their main attractions. It is, nevertheless, desirable that there should be some reserve power to
prevent the presentation of material where there is reason to believe it is likely to cause offence, and this
power we think must necessarily involve some modified form of censorship, to be exercised, however, only
in the case of specific programmes or types of programmes. Imported programmes would, of necessity, all
be recorded and we see no reason why the provisions applying to the censorship of imported films for motion
picture exhibition should not be applicable equally to such programmes. These programmes should also be
subject to the same rules as we suggest above should be applied to Australian programmes.
412. There is one other matter to which our attention was specifically invited by Mr. J. 0. Alexander,
Chief Film Censor for the Commonwealth, who advised us that —
Other than the power exercisable under the Customs Act enabling the prohibition of and/or licensing
the import of film exposed outside Australia, no constitutional power vests in the Comraonw r ealth Parliament
to legislate for—
(a) Censorship of films produced in Australia for theatrical exhibition witbin tbe Commonwealth;
( b ) Classification of films for purposes of theatrical exhibition;
(c) Censorship of locally produced programme advertising matter;
( d ) Control of films subsequent to censorship or correct entry under the Customs Act.
With the advent of television a peculiarly anomalous position in regard to censorship generally may, and in
respect of films will, arise. Assuming that censorship of all material used for purposes of television
programmes is intra vires the communications powers vested in the Commonwealth Parliament, censorship of
the same material for theatrical exhibition will still remain the prerogative of each individual State. As
theatrical exhibition of the film has assuredly become tbe universal form of mass entertainment, and televised
programmes will eventually become available to all in the home, and will probably in certain circumstances be
extended to motion picture theatres, it is suggested that the existing divided control of censorship of films for
theatrical and television purposes respectively, be rectified by transfer by the various State Governments to
the Commonwealth Government of the powers of censorship and classification of films for theatrical exhibition,
together with the power of censorship of all advertising matter used in connexion therewith. Such transfer
would not deprive the States of their existing powers of control of public entertainments (including film
exhibition), theatres, public halls, &c., but would serve to ensure uniformity of censorship standards, and
enable control of film by the appropriate Commonwealth Authority subsequent to censorship, e.g. to order
withdrawal of a film from public exhibition for further censorship should it be necessary to rectify an oversight
during the initial censorship, or for other good and sufficient reason in the public interest.
413. Although this is a matter which is perhaps riot strictly within our terms of reference, we feel
that it is of sufficient importance to warrant consideration by the Governments concerned.
6. Hours of Operation.
414. We were urged by some witnesses that strict limitation should be imposed on the total number
of hours daily during which television should be permitted, and also that television should not be
permitted during certain specified hours. These limitations, it was claimed, were necessitated by the
shortage of programme material of suitable quality and by certain social and domestic considerations.
It was stated that the limited amount of good material available would necessarily limit the number of
hours of operation if a reasonable standard of programmes was to be maintained, and that social and
domestic considerations, themselves, imposed the need for limitations, irrespective of the availability of
programmes.
415. Witnesses who advocated that some limitation of hours was necessary included the following,
listed in order of appearance:—
Mr. R. J. F. Boyer, Chairman, Australian Broadcasting Commission.
Mr. N. H. Rosenthal, Director, Visual Aids Department, University of Melbourne.
Dr. A. Fabinyi, Publishing Manager, F. W. Cheshire Pty. Ltd.
Rev. A. Chrichton Barr) . , .
„ „ , ... Church of Australia.
Rev. G. A. Beattie J
Mr. S. K. Farrell, State School Committees’ Association of Victoria.
Mr. A. L. Hall.
Mr. R. C. Bird.
i\li*s -A. Pciton ”1
" ' ' ',, [-Victorian Council for Children’s Films and Television.
Mrs. B. Falk J
Mr. S. F. E. Liebert, Australian Council of School Organizations.
Mr. H. Alexander, Actors and Announcers Equity Association of Australia.
Rev. W. C. Francis) . , ,
Rev W J Ilobbin J Methodist Church Australasia—New South Wales Conference.
Bishop^'w'^llilliard J‘ Australian Council for the World Council of Churches.
Mr. N. Pringle, Director of Variety, Australian Broadcasting Commission.
Dr. M. S. Brown, New Education Fellowship, New South Wales Branch.
Mr. J. Douglass, Director of Rural Broadcasts, Australian Broadcasting Commission.
Mr. M. B. Keogh, Australian Culture Defence Movement.


Mr. L. A. Hooke, Amalgamated Wireless (Australasia) Limited.
Airs. B. Ewart.
Mrs. E. F. Byth, National Council of Women of Australia.
Mr. B. Foley, National Farmers’ Union of Australia.
Mr, E. H. Pearce, SKA Broadcasting Company Limited.
Rev. E. H. Woollacott I
Canon A. E. Kain [-United Churches Social Reform Board.
Mr. S. B. Denton J
Rev. E. H. Woollacott j_ r .. x , „ 4 , . .
Mr S B Denton j Methodist Church of Australasia —South Australian Conference.
Dr. C. M. Davey, League of Women Voters of South Australia.
Mrs. D. A. Chettle IXT1 XT .. , „ .. „ _ TT „ . .
Council of Women of South Australia.
Miss M. Mills
Mr. P. C. W. Disney, Film and Television Council of South Australia.
Rev. W. Kick, Australian Federation of Women Voters.
Miss M. L. Wauchope, Senior Lecturer, Teachers’ College, Adelaide.
Dr. T. L. Robertson, Director of Education, Western Australia.
Mm. M. L. Calclei l-y^ omen > s g erv i ce Guilds of Western Australia.
Mrs. I. E. Swift J
Mr. R. H. Featherstone, State School Teachers’ Union of Western Australia, Inc.
Mr. W. D. Neal, New Education Fellowship, Australian Federal Council.
Rev. W. J. H. Aikin, Australian Religious Film Society.
Archdeacon J. A. Schofield 1 . ~ . , „ n, , ... m , . .
m ___ of Melbourne s Committee on Television.
Rev. T. W. Thomas J
Mr. V. R. Long, Education Department of Tasmania,
Rev. W. J. Hobbin, Child Welfare Advisory Council of New South Wales.
Dr. H. S. Wyndham, Director-General of Education, New South Wales.
Mrs. T. C. Metcalfe, National Council of Women of New South Wales.
Mrs. G. Hain, Housewives’ Association, Victorian Division.
Mrs. B. J. Cullen, Country Women’s Association of Australia.
416. The reasons put forward by these witnesses were not necessarily the same, and, indeed, there
were varying degrees of emphasis even when the witnesses were broadly in agreement as to the reasons why
the restrictions on the hours of operation of stations were necessary. We have not attempted to set out
the actual views expressed by each witness, but consider that it will be sufficient if we indicate the main
arguments which were advanced, and quote views expressed by some witnesses that could be regarded as
reasonably representative of the general viewpoint.
417. The main arguments advanced were that limitation of hours of operation would be in the
public interest because it would prevent the degradation of quality of programmes, either through lack of
finance or from lack of ideas for programme material; that it would enable the artists engaged in television
to cope with production of programmes; and that it would prevent television from reducing the normal
after-school activities of children such as outdoor play or the reading of books. The main arguments
advanced for a complete cessation of transmission at certain periods related primarily to children’s sessions.
It was submitted that a complete break in transmissions was necessary to assist parents in discharging
their responsibility of managing their homes and their children. It was claimed that television was so
engrossing that no programmes should be transmitted for a period of one or two hours after the children’s
programme had ceased, to permit proper attention being given to the evening meal, to enable younger
children to be put to bed without the distraction of an absorbing television programme, and to give older
children an opportunity to do their homework and read books.
418. The Australian Council for the World Council of Churches expressed the view that—
It is desirable to restrict the number of hours of television broadcasting in the interests of quality,
and bearing in mind the effect of television on the social and working habits of the community. For the first
year, it is suggested that two hours of television in the afternoon and tvo hours in the evening should be the
maximum for any one channel. The practice of the British Broadcasting Corporation in leaving the hours
between 6pm and 8 p.m in general free of television should be carefully considered during the period when
television is being introduced into Australia. Any provision of programme during these hours should be for
the purpose of enriching family life and cultivating better parent-child relationships. particulaily, the
careful supervision of what limited material may be broadcast duiing those hours is to the advantage of
children and assists their parents at an hour when most of them are preparing to go to bed, oi engaged in theii
home lessons.
419. Dr. H. S. Wyndham, Director-General of Education for New South Wales, said—
I am of the opinion that there should be a specific limitation upon the duration of childrens television
sessions out of school hours. The precise hours will obviously be a matter of debate in the light of the
variations in domestic arrangements but I am of the opinion that such sessions should not commence before
5 p.m. and be limited, in total, to one hour. I consider, too, that television sessions of any kind should not be
resumed till 8 p.m.


420. We were informed by the Country Women’s Association of Australia that a conference,
representative of the six States of the Commonwealth, had decided that programmes should be restricted to
certain hours and that children’s programmes should be shown at suitable times. Mrs. B. Cullen,
representing the Association, said —
We recommend restricted hours and one of the hours we thought was a bad time was the smaller
children’s bed time, or around about 6 p.m. . . . We do not approve of television between the hours of
6 p.m. and 8 p.m.: most children —those you still call real children—would be going to bed between those
hours.
421. Mrs. Thelma Metcalfe, President of the National Council of Women of New South Wales,
expressed the following views:—
Under the British Broadcasting Corporation system, 30 hours per week is provided and this is
considered the maximum time that can be filled with material of reasonably good quality with the resources
available. When television is introduced in Australia hours of viewing should be limited and there should be
no television broadcasts between 6 p.m. and 8 p.m. Special times should be set aside for children’s
programmes, between 5 p.m. and 6 p.m.
422. We were told by Mr, N. Rosenthal that, because the qualitative control of programmes was so
difficult, quantitative limitation might be required in the early period.
423. Some of the representatives of the Churches who appeared before us also claimed that certain
times on Sundays should be reserved for Christian education and public worship, and that the times set
aside for education should be outside the established hours of public worship. We refer to this in paragraph
476 in Chapter VIII.
424. On the other hand some witnesses informed us that any limitation on the number of hours per
day during which commercial television stations would be permitted to transmit programmes would impose
unnecessary restrictions on the activities of the stations and would make it extremely difficult for them to
operate profitably, and that this, in turn, would react detrimentally on the standards of programmes that
they would be able to provide. Flexibility of operation was essential if operators were to be able to bring to
their viewers programmes including, for example, such outstanding events as Test Cricket or Davis Cup
tennis at the time the events were taking place. It would therefore be impracticable to lay down any specific
hours during which these Stations must not transmit programmes. It was also claimed that unless an
adequate number of hours of programmes was provided, the sale of receivers would be adversely affected.
The witnesses who expressed these views included the following, listed in order of appearance:—
Mr. N. V. Nixon, Australian Association of Advertising Agencies.
Mr. W, J. Cudlipp, Australian Association of National Advertisers.
Mr. W. Dunstan, The Herald and Weekly Times Limited, Melbourne,
Sir Ernest Fisk.
Mr. C. G, Scrimgeour, Associated TV Pty. Ltd.
Mr. H. E. Beaver, Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations.
Sir John Butters, Associated Newspapers Limited and Radio 2UE (Sydney) Pty. Ltd.
Mr. J. E. Ridley, Country Broadcasting Services Limited.
Mr. S. R. I. Clark, Queensland Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
Mr. E. Oliver.
Mr. L. J. Sanders, Sanders Chemical Limited.
Mr. K. A. McDonald, Advertiser Newspapers Limited.
Mr. L. R. Coleman, J. Walter Thompson Aust. Pty. Ltd.
Mr. G. Ogilvy, Macquarie Broadcasting Service Pty. Ltd.
Mr. K. S. Brown, Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd.
425. There was some evidence in favour of establishing a minimum number of hours of operation
during which commercial stations should be obliged to transmit programmes, but in general the witnesses
who expressed this view claimed that there should be no upper limit, but that this should be left to the
discretion of the operators.
426. Mr. H. E. Beaver (Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations) said that
The Federation’s view is that there is no case for arbitrary limitations, but that the position can safely
be left to find its own level. Obviously, in the beginning the operators of television stations will wish to
transmit for only a very limited number of hours per day. However, it is important that the position should be
flexible so that as additional programme material of suitable quality becomes available, the industry may be
able to expand its operations in the public interest, without being impeded by arbitrary restraints.
427. Mr. W. Dunstan said —
Our company urges that there should be complete liberty in hours for television broadcasts. Experience
of public requirements will soon set the standards. It is recognized that programme quality is a most important
consideration and high standards will be desirable from the start to attract new viewers, expand the industry
and make balanced operational budgets possible. J
428. Mr. K. S. Brown stated —
I think the most important thing is that there should be a reasonable number of programme hours per
week in any location. An abbreviated period of television transmission each week is not going to be conducive
to persuade the public to invest in receivers.


429. Mr. Ogilvy said —
I do not think it is realistic to attempt to set up any arbitrary limits, save only that of a minimum
period of transmission ... I suggest, therefore, that apart from fixing a minimum period of transmission,
no attempt should be made to regulate the number of hours by mandatory authority.
430. This view was also put forward by Mr. S. R. I. Clark and others. Mr. Clark said: “ Would it
not be a better plan if the Television Authority fixed a reasonable minimum and not a maximum number
of transmission hours per week as a condition to the granting of a licence? We believe that any statutory
regulation covering anything but a minimum service would hamper the industry’s development and foster
irresponsibility.”. Mr. Clark also said that “ the patterns of Australian daily life would naturally have
to be considered in planning transmission schedules, but why not encourage the television operators who
will have studied the habits of their own communities to take them into account? No common time
schedule of a blanket nature would suit all localities in the Commonwealth.”.
431. It was pointed out to us by the representatives of commercial interests that it would be
necessary for some stations to maintain constant transmission, at least during normal working hours, to
assist in the sale and maintenance of sets. Mr. Clark said: “We would like to bring to the notice of
this Commission the necessity for transmission of some kind to take place during daylight hours, whether
they be picture frames or otherwise: any station not being allowed to send a signal out during the daytime
hours would make it impossible for people to install receivers in the home or service the receiver. We
must have a signal, as any adjustments of the receiver must be made on an actual transmission.”.
432. We have noted the practices in the United Kingdom, the United States of America and Canada,
and whilst we agree that there is much to be said for the limited number of hours and the compulsory
breaks in transmissions such as apply in the United Kingdom, we are of the opinion that these would not
necessarily be equally applicable to Australian conditions. We have come to the conclusion that, although
in the initial stages the availability of programme material will, of itself, impose restrictions on the number
of hours of operation, it would be undesirable to endeavour, at this stage, to lay down any hard and fast
rules as to the actual hours during which stations should operate. We feel that in this matter flexibility
is essential and that the actual hours of operation must be determined by experience and in the light of the
considerations put before us by the witnesses whose views we have summarized above.
* See supplementary observation No. 1, by the Chairman and Mrs. Foxton.
85


CHAPTEK VIII. —SOME PARTICULAR PROGRAMME ISSUES
1. Introductory.
433. We were asked by paragraph (e) of our terms of reference to report on “ any conditions which
may be considered desirable to apply to the television broadcasting of —
(i) political and controversial matter and issues;
(ii) religious services and other religious matters;
(iii) advertisements.”
These are all matters which are clearly of great importance in relation to the programmes of television
stations and have given rise to special problems in the field of broadcasting. We proceed to consider them
separately in this chapter,
2. Political and Controversial Matter.
434. The broadcasting of political and controversial matter and issues is a subject to which
considerable attention has been given in all English-speaking democracies since the inception of broadcasting,
and the general attitude to the question is, as might be expected, one of concern that this medium of mass
communication should be used fairly for the dissemination of differing opinions on such questions. The
Broadcasting Committee in Great Britain (the Ullswater Committee) in 1935 (Cmd. 5091), expressed
this view in the following terms: —
The control of political broadcasting is one of the most difficult and important problems which the
advent of “ wireless ” has created. It is obvious that a medium whereby expressions of political opinion
can be brought into seven or eight million homes needs very careful safeguarding if it is not to be abused.
It would be possible for those in control of broadcasting to maintain a steady stream of propaganda on
behalf of one political party or of one school of thought. They could to some extent make or mar the
reputations of politicians, and by a judicious selection of news items and the method of their presentation
they could influence the whole political thought of the country.
In the United States, the Chairman of the Federal Communications Commission stated in 1941
The prospective radio speaker is not a publisher who can always find a printing press and run off a few
extra pages; radio channels are limited and broadcast time cannot he stretched beyond twenty-four hours
a day. If printing presses were few and their output severely limited, a democratic society surely could not
‘allow the small group of owners unlimited discretion as to what is and what is not printed. The opinion
market wmuld be cornered and the public deprived of the competition in ideas so necessary for government by
the people.
In Canada, the statement of policy issued by the Board of Governors of the Canadian Broadcasting
Corporation on political and controversial broadcasting on 27th May, 1953 (adopting the words used in
previous statements) said that its policy was based on the following principles:—
(1) The air belongs to the people, who are entitled to hear the principal points of view on all
questions of importance.
(2) The air must not fall under the control of any individuals or groups influential by reason
of their wealth or special position.
(3) The right to answer is inherent in the democratic doctrine of free speech.
(4) Freedom of speech and the full interchange of opinion are among the principal safeguards
of free institutions.
In Australia, the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Broadcasting (the Gibson Committee) in 1942
said—
The broadcasting of political talks is a matter of vital concern to the community. At election times,
particularly, the necessity for a reasonable discretion and control of the use of this important medium for
the creation and influencing of public opinion is obvious.
435. The introduction of television will provide a new medium of mass communication and, although
there are many differences between sound broadcasting and television, it is useful to review the legislation
and practices of English-speaking countries in the field of political and controversial broadcasts as a
preliminary to our consideration of the difficult question of the conditions which should be applied to the
televising of such matter. In the succeeding paragraphs, we give a brief summary of the legislation and
practices in Great Britain, the United States and Canada.
436. Great Britain. —The charter and licence granted from time to time to the British Broadcasting
Corporation by the Postmaster-General have imposed no obligations on the Corporation in respect of the
broadcasting or televising of political or controversial matter, except that the current licence granted by
the Postmaster-General in 1952 provides that the Corporation shall broadcast an impartial day-by-day
account of the proceedings of Parliament. Consideration has been given to the subject by Parliamentary
Committees which have from time to time reviewed the activities of the Corporation. In 1935, the Ullswater
Committee in its report (Cmd. 5091) made the foliow r ing observations: —
Controversy. —We think it important that controversial topics should continue to be discussed. If
broadcasting is to present a reflection of its time, it must include matters which are in dispute. If it is to
hold public interest, it must express living thought. If it is to educate public opinion, it must look upon the
questions of the hour from many angles.


In our opinion the 8.8. C. has exercised the responsibility confided to it with outstanding independence
and has handled the problems of presentation with wisdom. In the trust that this policy will continue, we
make no special suggestions, except with regard to political broadcasting, but would leave to the 8.8. C. the
responsibility for choosing speakers and subjects, ensuring any necessary consultation, preserving an impartial
and representative balance, and arranging that controversial opinions are expressed in a proper context.
Our recommendations with reference to broadcasting during a General Election campaign will be
found in the two succeeding paragraphs. At other times, though we are far from implying that all broadcast
treatment of political questions should be controlled by the political party organizations, we recommend that
on the major political issues of the day there should be close co-operation and consultation between the 8.8. C.
and the authorized spokesmen of the recognized political parties. The 8.8. C. must, of course, continue
to be the judge of the amount of political broadcasting which the programme will stand, and while recognizing
in the allotment of time, according to current Parliamentary practice, the preponderating position of the
main political parties, should allow adequate expression to minority views, however unpopular.
For the conduct of political broadcasting during a General Election campaign, the 8.8. C. should, we
consider, first offer for election speeches such time as may seem appropriate. The allocation of this time
between the Government, the official Opposition and other parties should then be arranged by agreement
between them, in default of which the Speaker of the House of Commons might perhaps be asked to make
an arbitral decision.
The broadcaster who has the last word during an electoral contest is in a position of great advantage,
because there can be no adequate reply to whatever he may say. In the fear that this advantage might be
unfairly used in the production of a surprise issue at the last moment, it has been suggested to us that all
political broadcasting should cease for three days before the Poll. There is force in the suggestion; the
General Election of 1935 has shown it to be practicable; and we recommend its adoption.
437. The recommendations of the Ullswater Committee were substantially adopted, and in a
statement which the 8.8. C. submitted to a later committee (the Beveridge Committee, 1949) it explained
its practices in regard to controversial and political fields in the following terms: —
Controversy. —The Corporation has always been under the obligation to refrain from broadcasting its
own opinions by way of editorial comment upon current affairs. The broadcasting of controversial matter was
at first not allowed but was admitted in March, 1928, since when the area of controversy has been gradually
widened. The development of controversial broadcasting was approved and encouraged by the Ullswater
Committee, who commended the Corporation’s policy, at the same time underlining the importance of its
trust to preserve an impartial and representative balance of opinion. During the war, the nation’s single-
minded pursuit of victory, as reflected in the party truce and in the virtually undisputed acceptance of the
National Government’s policies, left little scope or justification for controversial broadcasting, though occasion
was found for the airing of opposing views on the future of India, in May, 1942, and on other, for the most
part relatively minor, issues from time to time. With the end of the war and the return to party government,
the normal processes of debate were resumed in the country, and the Corporation embarked on a policy designed
to promote the free expression of opinion at the microphone over a wider field and in more vigorous foims
than ever before.
Political Broadcasting .—Politics are bound to figure prominently in controversial broadcasting and
the Corporation is free to arrange talks, debates, and discussions on political topics as well a.-> on other matters.
In this field, however, a special responsibility is laid upon file 8.8. C. Broadcasting has become a recognized
medium for pronouncements of national importance by Ministers of the Crown. During Geneial Election
campaigns, and at other times, broadcasts by spokesmen of the political parties have a duect in uence on
the casting of votes by the electorate. In the regulation of all such broadcasts the closest co-operation and
consultation has alwavs been sought with the authorized spokesmen of the political parties of the day This
course was enjoined upon the Corporation by the Ullswater Committee (Eeport, paragraph 92). After the
late war, the whole of political broadcasting was accordingly reviewed in consultation between the leaders of
the three principal parties and the 8.8. C. As a result, a comprehensive agreement was reached, the mam
purport of which can be briefly stated —
(a) In view of their responsibilities for the care of the nation, the Government should be able to
use the wireless from time to time for Ministerial broadcasts which, for example, are
purely factual, or explanatory of legislation or administrative policies approved by
Parliament; or in the nature of appeals to the nation to co-operate in national policies.
(b) A limited number of controversial party political broadcasts is allocated to the leading parties
in accordance with their polls at the last General Election. (The number agreed upon for
the present year is 12, divided as to Government 6, Conservative Opposition 5, Liberal
Opposition 1). The subjects of the broadcasts and the speakers are chosen by the parties
and either «ide is free, if it wishes, to use one of its quota for the purpose of replying to a
previous broadcast. The 8.8. C. reserves the right, after consultation with the party
leaders, to invite to the microphone a member of either House of outstanding national
eminence who may have become detached from any party.
(c) Apart from these limited broadcasts on major policy, the 8.8. C. is free to invite members of
either House to take part in controversial broadcasts of a round-table character, in which
political questions are dealt with. _ . . .. . , . , ,
(d) No discussions or statements may be broadcast on any issue which is within a fortnight of
debate in either House. Members of # Parliament may not be used in discussions on matters
while they are the subject of legislation.
The arrangements as outlined above take account of the fact that it has long been the practice of the
... o,» XT T.Xd B :X SSJKTSB X
SSsaasasß “ » ju .»■ m •«« •>«»»


Government
.. 10
Official Opposition (Labour)
.. 10
Liberal Opposition
4
24
8.8. C. at no time becomes an alternative simultaneous debating forum to Parliament. Within the terms of
(c) there has been a wide range of discussions on political topics arranged by the 8.8. C. in the normal course
of its programmes, in which Members of Parliament and others have taken part. It is recognized that the
appearance of a Member of Parliament at the microphone, whether the subject of the broadcast be political
or non-political, may inevitably carry with it a degree of publicity for the party to which he belongs. The
Corporation therefore takes steps to ensure, in the interests of impartiality, that the appearances of Members
of Parliament in any type of broadcast are regulated broadly over quarterly periods so as to accord with the
party ratio adopted for the party political broadcasts.
General Election Broadcasts. —The procedure adopted for political broadcasting during General Election
periods has been in accordance with the recommendations of the Ullswater Committee—
“ that during a General Election campaign the time available for political speakers should be
allotted by agreement between the parties (paragraph 93) and that all political broadcasting should
cease three days before the Poll (paragraph 94) ”, (Summary of recommendations.)
The time allotted for election addresses before the war varied according to circumstances but did not exceed
some dozen periods in all on any one occasion (there are normally only seventeen days, exclusive of Sundays
and public holidays, between Dissolution and Polling Day). In 1945, however, it was decided, because of the
long interval since the last election, that more time should be allowed. The Dissolution was announced in
advance and it was agreed that the General Election broadcasts should cover the period from the announcement
of Dissolution to Polling Day. Provision was made accordingly for twenty-four broadcasts to be given by the
spokesmen of the three main parties. The allocation was agreed upon between the parties, as follows :• —
These broadcasts were given after the 9 p.m. News. In addition, it was arranged in advance that minority
parties would qualify for a broadcast if on Nomiantion Day they had more than twenty candidates in the field.
Two parties, Commonwealth and Communist, qualified under this arrangement and one broadcast was allotted
to each after the 6 p.m. News. All these broadcasts were included in overseas transmissions for the benefit of
men and women serving in the Forces. They are known to have been heard by very large audiences in the
home country.
The Beveridge Committee in its report appears to have approved generally of the principles and
practices of the 8.8. C. in this field, although it made some specific recommendations designed to provide
greater opportunities for political broadcasting. The Government, in a White Paper published in 1952
(Cmd. 8550), stated that it proposed “to discuss the Broadcasting Committee’s recommendations about
political broadcasting with the Opposition and the 8.8. C.”, but we are unaware of the outcome of these
discussions.
438. Canada. —As stated in Chapter 11., the Canadian Broadcasting Act 1936 confers upon the
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation specific powers relating to the control of broadcasting in the Dominion.
AVith respect to the broadcasting of political matter, section 22 of the Act provides that the Corporation may
make regulations “to prescribe the proportions of time which may be devoted to political broadcasts by
the stations of the Corporation and by private stations and to assign such time on an equitable basis to all
parties and rival candidates”. Pursuant to this requirement the Corporation has made the following
regulation:—
Each station shall allocate time for political broadcasts as fairly as possible among all parties and
candidates desiring to purchase or obtain time for such broadcasts.
There is a number of other provisions with respect to political broadcasting, including in particular the
prohibition of dramatized political broadcasts, which, according to the Corporation, «is held to prohibit all
political broadcasts incorporating any device which could be considered theatrical, and to declare that
political broadcasting must be restricted to strictly political addresses and announcements ”,
439. In a statement of policy issued by the Board of Governors of the Canadian Corporation on
May 27, 1953, which was in similar terms to previous statements, it was indicated that a general plan had
been instituted to cover party political broadcasting. This plan includes the provision of network time
free of charge to recognized political parties during elections with the objective of providing all parties
with the opportunity of speaking to a wide public, irrespective of their capacity to buy time plus a limited
amount of free network time to recognized party leaders or their representatives in the periods between
elections. In addition to free net-work time, provision is made for the purchase of time on privatelv
owned stations under such control as will ensure an equitable division of such purchased time and (as
stated by the Corporation) secure the public against an excessive amount of political broadcasting to the
exclusion of entertainment and other normal programme material. The national networks on which
facilities are provided free to the parties, comprise both stations operated by the Corporation and nrivate
stations affiliated with a national network. In addition, other privately owned stations are invited to carrv
the national broadcasts without charge and on the condition that the broadcasts of all political parties are


440. The Corporation has determined that the privilege of free network time for political broadcasting
will be granted to bona fide parties which are national in extent and which reflect a substantial body of
opinion throughout the country. While it was thought impossible to lay down an exact definition, it was
suggested that such a party would meet all the following requirements:—
(a) Have policies on a wide range of national issues;
(b) Have a recognized national leader;
(c) Have a nation-wide organization established as the result of a national conference or
convention;
(d) Have representation in the House of Commons;
( e ) Seek the election of candidates in at least three of the provinces and put into the field a
minimum number of 66 officially nominated candidates (approximately one for every
four constituencies).
Time is distributed on the basis that an adequate amount of free time will be set aside on the national
networks to provide for adequate presentation of the policies of the national political parties involved. The
parties will be asked to agree mutually on the division of the time. Free network time will also be allotted to
parties with no representation in the House of Commons if at nomination day they have provided definite
evidence of meeting the other provisions outlined in the previous paragraph. To new national political
parties the Corporation will allot an amount of free national network time to bring to listeners an adequate
presentation of the party’s programme and policies. The time so allotted will be over and above the amount
given to the existing national political parties. Individual privately owned stations are at liberty to sell
time to political candidates and parties for single station broadcasts either at or between election campaigns,
subject to the requirements of the regulations referred to previously, and subsidiary network broadcasts
within provinces are permitted.
441. United States of America. —The broadcasting of political matter in the United States of
America is governed by section 315 of the Communications Act 1934 (as amended) which provides as
follows:
(a) If any licensee shall permit any person who is a legally qualified candidate for any public office to
use a broadcasting station, he shall afford equal opportunities to all other such candidates for that office in
the use of such broadcasting station: provided, that such licensee shall have no power of censorship over the
material broadcast under the provision of this section. Ho obligation is hereby imposed upon any licensee to
allow the use of its station by any such candidate. _
( h ) The charges made for the use of any broadcasting station for any of the purposes set forth in this
section shall not exceed the charges made for comparable use of such station for other purposes.
(c) The Commission shall prescribe appropriate rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of
this section.
The Federal Communications Commission has promulgated rules governing broadcasts by candidates
for public office. In general, the rules elaborate but do not add to the provisions of the Communications
Act referred to above.
Summary.
442. The position in these three great English-speaking democracies may, it seems, be briefly
summarized as follows: —
(a) In Great Britain, the responsibility for arranging political and controversial broadcasts
is left to the discretion of the British Broadcasting Corporation, which confers with the
Government and Opposition parties in the Parliament in connexion with arrangements for
political broadcasts. #
(b) In Canada, statutory authority to regulate political broadcasts is vested in the Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation, which, in conference with the major parties, allocates time
for political broadcasts over its own stations and provides by regulation that each
privately operated station shall allocate as fairly as possible time for political broadcasts
among all parties and candidates desiring to purchase or obtain time for such broadcasts ”.
(c) In the United States, wdiere all stations operate under licence from the Federal
Communications Commission, each licensee is required by statute to “ afford equal
opportunities ” to all legally qualified candidates for public office, if he permits any such
candidate to broadcast.
3, Televising of Political Matter.
443. Great Britain. —The arrangements whereby the British Broadcasting Corporation confers with
the main parties in regard to the allocation of time for political broadcasts is apparently being applied
also to the television service. In its annual report for the year 1952-53 (Cmd. 8928) the Corporation
reported that “under the agreement reached between the mam political parties and the 8.8. C. on t e use
to be made of television for party political broadcasting during the year beginning Ist April, 1953, the
Conservative Party and the Labour Party will each have two television broadcasts, and m addition each will
have the right to take two from its existing quota of sound broadcasts as television broadcasts. The Libera


Party will have the right to take its one broadcast on sound or television or on both simultaneously.
Ministers of the Crown broadcast during the year on a number of matters of national importance. The
use which might be made of television for this type of broadcast was still under consideration at the end of
the broadcasting year ”.
444. Canada. —We have ascertained from the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation that in the field
of television no special regulations have yet been promulgated to cover the transmission of political matter.
Operations by privately owned stations did not begin until October, 1953, and the Corporation television
stations have functioned within the spirit of the regulations governing broadcasting stations. During the
1953 general elections the political parties in Canada agreed mutually not to use television. The
Corporation indicated that, in consequence, “ there has not been any experience to judge the modifications
of interpretation which will be required for television to give effect to the statutory prohibition of
dramatized political broadcasting ”,
445. United States of America. —The same provisions apply to political telecasts as to political
broadcasts (see paragraph 441). Although we are aware from the press and from broadcasting industry
publications that there has been much discussion of the extent to which television was used for political
purposes in the presidential elections of 1952 (including the previous televising of the party Conventions),
and of the remarkable interest which was aroused by the televising of certain political addresses, the
information available to us was incomplete. Mr, L. C. Webb, Reader in Political Science, Australian
National University, however, gave us a valuable review of the available evidence, which, among other
things, appeared to demonstrate the extraordinary quality of television as a medium of political education
as well as propaganda.
4. Legislation in Australia with respect to Broadcasting.
446. The provisions of the Broadcasting Act 1942-1953 relating to the broadcasting of political and
controversial matter are contained partly in section 89 and partly in section 6k (2.). Section 89 provides
as follows:
(1.) Subject only to this section, the [Australian Broadcasting] Commission may determine to what
extent and in what manner political speeches or any matter relating to a political or controversial subject
may be broadcast from national broadcasting stations, and, subject only to this section and to Part la. of this
Act, the licensee of a commercial broadcasting station may arrange for the broadcasting of such speeches or
matter from that station.
(2.) The Commission or the licensee of a broadcasting station shall not, at any time prior to the close
of the poll on the day on which any election for the Parliament of the Commonwealth or a State or for any
House of any such Parliament or for any vacancy in any such House is held, or at any time on either of the
two days immediately preceding that day, broadcast, in whole or in part, any speech or matter —
(a) commenting on, or soliciting votes for, any candidate at the election;
( b ) commenting on, or advocating support of, any political party to which any candidate at the
election belongs;
(c) commenting upon, stating or indicating any of the issues being submitted to the electors at the
election or any part of the policy of any candidate at the election or of the political party
to which he belongs; or
( d ) referring to any meeting held in connexion with the election.
(3.) Neither the Commission nor the licensee of a commercial broadcasting station shall broadcast any
dramatization of any political matter wdiich is then current or w r as current at any time during the last five
preceding years.
Section 6k (2.) (which is the provision in Part Ia referred to in section 89) enacts that the Australian
Broadcasting Control Board shall, inter alia, “ ensure that facilities are provided on an equitable basis for
the broadcasting of political and controversial matter ”, (This provision, it will be observed, does not apply
to the national broadcasting service.)
5. Political and Controversial Broadcasts in Australia,
447. The Australian Broadcasting Commission has since its establishment in 1932 always had
complete discretion in respect of the broadcasting of political and controversial matter, and the Joint
Parliamentary Committee on Broadcasting (the Gibson Committee 1941) expressed the view that in the
national broadcasting service the aim of “ guaranteeing a degree of impartiality to everybody ” had been
generally achieved in connexion with political broadcasts. The Committee stated in its report that the
system adopted in the allocation of time for the broadcasts of policy speeches and party leaders’ addresses
preceding elections was as follows: —
(a) The A.B.C. recognizes parties already established in Parliament, but not aspiring parties which
have not won representation in Parliament.
(h) The facilities are the same for all parties so recognized.
(c) The order of time is—
(i) the Leader of the Government,
(ii) the Leader of the Opposition, and
(iii) other recognized parties as arranged between themselves, or, failing agreement between them,
by lot.


( d ) In the case of Federal elections, the following rules apply:—
(i) The broadcasts by the leaders of the recognized parties or their nominees to open a campaign
are nation-wide and must not exceed one hour each.
(ii) The said leaders or their nominees are each allowed an intermediate State-wide broadcast in
each State not exceeding 30 minutes or, alternatively, two such broadcasts not exceeding
fifteen minutes each.
(iii) In addition, the said leaders or their nominees are each allowed one closing broadcast not
exceeding 30 minutes.
(e ) In the case of State elections, the leaders of recognized parties or their nominees are each allowed
a State-wide broadcast of one hour for their policy speech and a State-wide broadcast of 30 minutes for a
concluding address.
The Committee expressed its agreement with this policy. We understand that it is still being substantially
followed by the Commission, but that on some occasions the Commission has allocated time to minority
parties not represented in Parliament. During the 1951 Federal Election Campaign, the Commission
allocated eight hours for political broadcasts on a network of National stations. The time was divided
equally between the two Government parties and the Opposition, six hours being devoted to the initial
policy speeches of the party leaders and other addresses on simultaneous national relay throughout the
Commonwealth, and two hours to broadcasts on State relay, which took place at different times in the
various States.
448. Unless action is taken by the Australian Broadcasting Control Board to “ ensure equitable
facilities ” as provided in section 6k (2.) of the Act, under section 89, licensees of commercial broadcasting
stations are subject to no restrictions or requirements in respect of the allocation of time for the broadcasting
of political and controversial matter. The Gibson Committee reported in 1942 that —
Most commercial stations sell time to political parties on equal terms, but_ where time is purchased or
where political parties own and control broadcasting licences there is inequality of opportunity for the
inculcation of party views during the election period, and control of the manner and method of broadcasting
has been practically non-existent,
and recommended that —
The commercial stations be required by legislation to adopt the same practice as has been recommended
for the national service : and that where time for the broadcasts is sold an equitable arrangement be evolved by
the proposed Parliamentary Standing Committee.
The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Broadcasting was established in 1942 and in its second
report to Parliament (1943) it recommended that regulations should be made to require commeicial
broadcasting stations —
(a) To observe the same policy as may be adopted by the A.B.C. according to the circumstances
prevailing at the time, in regard to the recognition of parties. .
(h) To sell time, at the card rates in operation not less than three months before the election, to any
such recognized party or individual desiring to broadcast on behalf of such party, provided that
(i) The card rates for political broadcasts shall not exceed those charged by the station concerned
for talks of other types; . ,
(ii) Equal opportunity shall be afforded to all such recognized parties at the outset;
(iii) The broadcast shall be preceded by an announcement of the name of the party on whose
behalf it is made; _ - ~ , ,
Civ) The Federation shall supply to the Postmaster-General s Department a copy of the rate card
for each station, and any alterations to it from time to time, so that it may be available tor
inspection on application and so that the Department may institute any check found to be
desirable.
449 No action was taken on this recommendation, but when the Broadcasting Act 1942-1946 was
amended in 1948 to provide £or the establishment of the Australian Broadcasting Control Board, it was
prescribed that the Board, as mentioned above, should “ ensure that facilities are provided on an equitable
basis for the broadcasting of political and controversial matter The Board was established in March,
1949, and in relation to the Federal Election of 1949, it made an order under section 6k (2.), the objectives
of which were summarized in evidence as follows: » ~
(o) that all commercial broadcasting stations should broadcast such of the addresses of the
leaders of the political parties as were broadcast on interstate relay by the Australian
Broadcasting Commission; .
(h) that in any case where a commercial broadcasting station broadcast political matter during
the election period, the time available for such broadcasts should be allocated on a basis
which would afford fair and reasonable opportunities to parties and candidates
(c) that there should be no discrimination between parties in respect of charges and t e
provision of facilities.
450 This order received a hostile reception in the press and in Parliament, where an adjournment
motion was moved in the House of Representatives on 28th September, 1949, to discuss the matter (see
n ion ,‘„ 7 . . n v . vollime 9Q3 nao-es 643-659). It was quite clear from the discussions
Commonwealth Parliamentary Debates, volume z = ; nT m pv bv the
that it was not the desire of Parliament, either House of which has power to disallow any oi .ei made by t e
Board thTthe provisions of tho order should be applied to the broadcasting of poht.eal matter during he
election period The Board, therefore, on 6th October, 1949, made a further order repeal,ng ah the


provisions of the original order, except those which required licensees of commercial broadcasting stations
to refrain from discriminating between parties and candidates in respect of charges and to submit returns
to the Board relating to political broadcasts during the campaign. The Board has not, since 1949, attempted
to exercise the powers conferred by this provision in the Broadcasting Act.
451. We do not wish to make any observations on this matter, which we have noted is discussed at
considerable length in the Second Annual Report of the Board, other than to draw attention to the fact
that the Board has requested Parliament to review the provisions of section 6k (2.) quoted above, and has
suggested that Parliament itself should enact such provisions as it thinks appropriate for the regulation
of political broadcasts.
452. The evidence we have received both from officers of the Australian Broadcasting Control Board
and from commercial broadcasters would appear to indicate that, in spite of the fact that no legal
requirement has been imposed on commercial broadcasting stations in respect of the allocation of time for
political broadcasts, they may be fairly said to have substantially complied with the spirit of the Act. The
principal exceptions have apparently been in the case of stations for which the licences are held on behalf
of political parties. In view of the importance of this matter we set out in Appendix C the valuable
statistical information supplied to us by the Board.
6. Applicability of Broadcasting Practices and Principles to Television.
453. It is evident from the information which we have set out above concerning the legislation and
practices of Great Britain, Canada, the United States and Australia, that persistent efforts have been made
in all these countries to ensure that political matter is broadcast in accordance with democratic principles,
and we have carefully considered to what extent there is justification for applying comparable conditions
to the televising of political matter. There are many points of difference between broadcasting and
television, but they both provide means whereby information may be conveyed to great numbers of people
in their homes, and their capacity to influence opinions is very great. We have in Chapter IV. referred to
the fact that television possesses a greater appeal than either broadcasting or the printing press and its
possibilities as a medium for propaganda would seem to be considerable. It therefore appears to us
prudent that, at least until some practical knowledge is acquired of the operation of television in this
country, no less effective safeguards should be applied to television stations than have been found necessary
in the case of broadcasting stations. The information contained in paragraphs 443-5 suggest that this
course is being followed in the television services of Great Britain, the United States and Canada.
454. This question was referred to in evidence given to us by Mr. R. J. F. Boyer, Chairman of the
Australian Broadcasting Commission, who said —
Whatever he the differences as between sound broadcasting and television as technical media, it is clear
that their controversial and political responsibilities are in the same dimension, but the impact of television is
likely to be much more pronounced. Television, indeed, will undoubtedly prove more politically and
controversially potent than sound broadcasting. The swing of a camera may have political implications quite
as potent as, for example, the choice of a news item or the subject of a commentary. If our experience in
Australia to date can be taken as any guide, it is obvious that similar political and controversial safeguards
should be attached to a national television service as had been developed under a radio service. In my view,
the present legislative conditions which apply to the national radio service in respect of political and religious
safeguards, can be regarded as adequate. Further, they should be applied without diminution to a national
television service. The fact that the present legislation has grown out of our indigenous Australian conditions
and temper, through trial and error and after extensive parliamentary scrutiny, should indicate, I suggest, that
it would be unwise to vary them in any notable degree.
We would add to Mr. Boyer’s assessment only the consideration that, at the time of our inquiry, it was
impossible to expect that there would be any conclusive evidence of the actual effect of television as a
political medium; all that is known (and that mainly from experience in United States of America) is that
it is very powerful, although the techniques are still to be perfected.
455. These considerations seem to support the general conclusion we have reached that the practices
followed in Australia at present in regard to the allocation of facilities for political broadcasts, to which
we have referred in paragraphs 447-52 should, at least in principle, be followed in the television services.
We have come to this conclusion, notwithstanding that, in the early years of television there may be only
a few commercial stations, and in consequence there may be only a very limited time available for political
television and the cost will be very high. These considerations may have implications which do not arise
in sound broadcasting with its multiplicity of stations but these, we feel, will have to be considered in the
light of experience,
7. Televising of Political Matter on the National Television Service,
456. We have explained in previous paragraphs that under section 89 of the Broadcasting Act
1942-1953 the Australian Broadcasting Commission has complete independence in the field of political
broadcasts. The Gibson Committee (1941), which was representative of all parties in the Commonwealth
Parliament, commended the Commission for its success in “guaranteeing a degree of impartiality to


everybody ”, and after a lapse of a further seven years Parliament amended section 89, in the words of the
Chairman of the Commission, to make “it quite clear that the discretion in this area rested solely and
absolutely upon the Commission This amendment was carried unanimously by both Houses of the
Commonwealth Parliament, and in the course of our hearings, no witness gave us any evidence to suggest
that the confidence reposed by Parliament in the Australian Broadcasting Commission had been misplaced.
Mr. Webb told us that he was, on balance, in favour of the same autonomy being granted to the Australian
Broadcasting Commission in the field of television as the Commission has in respect of the national
broadcasting service, although he expressed the opinion that it was necessary that the rights of minority
groups not represented in Parliament should be respected. Mr. Webb had in mind that the general practice
of the Australian Broadcasting Commission during recent election campaigns had not afforded to parties
which were not then established in Parliament facilities to put their views to the people. We have, however,
observed that the Commission’s policy has been determined in the light of conditions prevailing at the time
of each election, and that the rule requiring representation in Parliament has not always been applied.
457. We are of opinion that the principle laid down in section 89 of the Broadcasting Act should
apply to the televising of political and controversial matter on the national television service and in this
specially difficult field we take the same view as we have expressed earlier on other aspects of the Commission’s
functions, that the Commission should have full and unrestricted power and responsibility to determine
to what extent and in what manner political and controversial matter may be televised on national
television stations.
8. Televising of Political Matter on the Commercial Television Service.
458. The transmission of political matter by commercial television stations clearly presents very
difficult problems. We have, as we have already pointed out, been informed of the difficulties which have
been encountered in the administration and application of the existing statutory provisions governing the
broadcasting of political matter by commercial broadcasting stations, but it is important to note that we
have also been told that the great majority of commercial broadcasting stations make reasonable efforts to
afford equal opportunities to parties and candidates. There will be, at least in the early stages, a limited
number of television stations in operation, the hours of transmission will probably be relatively restricted
and the costs of operation will be high. These factors have, in some quarters, given rise to the view that it
will not be possible for the same degree of impartiality as had been practised in the field of broadcasting to
be extended to television, and that in consequence the transmission of political matter by commercial
stations should be completely prohibited. This was originally proposed with respect to such stations in
Great Britain ( see Cmd. 8550), but has now been abandoned (see Cmd. 9005). We received no evidence
to support such a contention, although Mr. Beaver, President of the Australian Federation of Commercial
Broadcasting Stations, informed us that, in his personal opinion such a proposal would be acceptable.
On the other hand, other witnesses whom we questioned on the matter deplored the suggestion and in
general maintained that it would impose an unnecessary restriction on commercial operation and would
result in the public being deprived of an important means of political education. Mr. Webb expressed
the view that the imposition of a prohibition on the commercial station operators would remove a very
useful safeguard which now exists in the broadcasting field, where the commercial stations and the national
stations “ have tended to look at politics and arrange political broadcasts in very different ways We are
in general agreement with these views and believe that it would be most unfortunate to prohibit the
transmission of political matter by commercial television stations.
459. The basic issue here is whether there should be any regulation of this respect of commercial
television at all. The Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations told us that in their
view commercial television should enjoy the same freedom as the press in regard to political and controversial
issues, that is that they should be subject to no special obligations or restrictions. It was the Federation’s
view that the transmission of political matter should be arranged on the same basis as is the case with all
other material and that the power of acceptance or otherwise of political material should remain within
the “ domestic policy of the station licensee ”. Similar views were also expressed to us by a number of
other witnesses, including the Australian Association of Advertising Agencies and the Australian
Association of National Advisers. Sir John Butters said
So far as political and controversial matters are concerned the existing legislation in connexion with
radio works with reasonable satisfaction and if there are to be conditions at all those laid down for radio might
be extended to television. On the other hand our view is again—the fewer conditions imposed the better.
Our newspapers without compulsion give the same space to reports of speeches by political leaders at election
times and when controversial issues are before the public. Our radio stations by law do likewise, and welcome
periodic talks of the “ fireside chat ” type by the Prime Minister of the day on national affairs which are
not of a Party character. I have no doubt that television stations would do the same.
Mr. Dunstan also submitted that there was no need in this field to depart from the broad principles
applying to radio broadcasting of political subjects. The League of Women Voters of South Australia,
after referring to the provisions of section 6k of the Broadcasting Act, urged that this provision should
extend to television broadcasting from both national and commercial stations.


460. In approaching this question we think that, subject to some qualifications which we make later,
there is an obligation on the part of every commercial television station, which allocates any time for the
televising of political or controversial matter, to afford reasonable opportunities for the presentation of
opposing views. This obligation can only be expressed here in general terms, but the underlying principle
has perhaps been made reasonably clear in the discussion in earlier paragraphs of this chapter relating to
the practices in broadcasting in the English-speaking democracies. In the following paragraphs we shall
indicate the extent to which and the manner in which we think this obligation should be the subject of
direct statutory provisions.
461. We think that, on the whole, experience has demonstrated that a distinction can be drawn
between the obligation of commercial television operators in this field during an election period and during
times other than election periods. It is possible to define an election period for this purpose with precision,
as the period commencing on the day on which the writs for an election for a House of the Parliament of
the Commonwealth or a State or for a referendum are issued and ending at midnight on the Wednesday
preceding the day of the poll {see paragraph 446). Our view is that except during an election period (as
defined), commercial television stations should, subject to the general principle which we have laid down
in the preceding paragraph, and to our recommendations in paragraphs 466 and 467, be free to allocate
time for the televising of political or controversial matter in the ordinary course of business. The
evidence appears to have demonstrated that commercial broadcasting stations in Australia have, with
perhaps some few exceptions, shown a sense of responsibility and impartiality, and we can see no reason
for supposing that commercial television operators would fail to measure up to this standard.
462. We are persuaded, however, that during election periods (as defined above) it is essential to
lay down in some detail the precise responsibilities of commercial television stations in this field. Here
we think that different considerations apply to a commercial station which operates in an area in which
there is no national television station, from those which apply to such a station which operates in the same
area as a national station. In the former case, there are strong reasons for requiring by law that the
commercial station shall provide a reasonable amount of time for political matter; these reasons may be
shortly summarized as the importance of television as a political medium, the great significance of
parliamentary elections during which political addresses directly influence the choice of governments, and
the basic obligation of licensees to which we referred in paragraph 460. We think that this obligation
can be discharged by requiring the commercial station to make available (without charge) to the leaders
of the parties (or their nominees) an amount of time equivalent to that allocated by the Australian
Broadcasting Commission for the televising from national stations of the main policy speeches of the
parties.
463. Where there is both a national station and a commercial station in the same area, our view
on the conditions which should apply during election periods may be summarized as follows:
{a) the commercial station should be entitled, if it thinks fit, to refuse to allocate any time for
political matter;
(b) if, however, the station allocates any time for political matter, it shall be obliged to afford
equal opportunities for the presentation of opposing views to all the parties contesting
the election which are represented in the appropriate Parliament at the time of the
dissolution or vacancy leading to the election (but there should be no obligation on the
station to provide time free of charge).
464. We are conscious that in the preceding paragraph we have stated summarily views on issues
which have given rise to great diversity of opinion and great legislative and administrative complexity.
The conclusions which we have reached will, we hope, be accepted as a reasonable attempt to hold the
balance between opposing views, and will also be realistic and applicable in practice in the day-to-day
operation of commercial television stations. We would point out in particular that whilst sub-paragraph
( h ) of the preceding paragraph appears to favour parties already represented in Parliament, the proposed
requirement will not prevent a licensee of a commercial television station from providing time for parties
not so represented. This is a matter in respect of which we feel that it is appropriate to leave some
discretion to the licensee. Otherwise the burden on commercial television stations during an election
period might be intolerable.
465. The obligations which we have set out in the preceding paragraphs should, we urge, be stated in
direct legislation passed by the Parliament ; that is, they should not, as in the Broadcasting Act as it
stands at present, be left to the exercise of the administrative discretion of a statutory body. We ao-ree
with the Chairman of the Australian Broadcasting Commission that the existing legislative provision is
“quite impossible of enforcement”. In the legislation which we feel to be required we appreciate that
Parliament will probably be able only to lay down broad general principles, but we think that the foregoing
recommendations should form a reasonable basis, not only for the necessary legislation, but also for their
application in practice. It will be recalled that in Chapter VII. we have proposed that the general
• See supplementary observation No. 3 by Mr. E. G. Osborne.


programme performance of each commercial television station should be reviewed annually in connexion
with the renewal of its licence: the extent to which a station discharges its obligations in relation to the
televising of political and controversial matter is clearly an important factor to be taken into account in
this connexion, and may be in certain circumstances a proper subject for a public hearing.
9. Other Conditions Relating to Televising of Political Matter.
466. We are of the opinion that the provisions of section 89 (2.) of the Broadcasting Act 1942-1953
which provides that no political matter shall be broadcast on the two days preceding the day on which
any election for either House of the Parliament of the Commonwealth or a State, or for any vacancy in
any such House is held, should be applied to the televising of political matter on both the national and the
commercial television services. This practice we have noted is followed in both the United Kingdom and
Canada.
467. We think that it is desirable that the prohibition of the dramatization of any political matter
which is provided for in section 89 (3.) of the Broadcasting Act 1942-1953 should be extended to the
national and commercial television services. It may well be that dramatization of political matter on a
television station may have to be defined in different terms from those which the Australian Broadcasting
Control Board prepared for the guidance of licensees of commercial broadcasting stations in 1949 ( see
Board’s Second Annual Report, paragraphs 186 and 187 and also paragraph 438 above for the Canadian
definition), but this, we suggest, would be a matter for discussion between the Australian Broadcasting
Commission, the licensees of commercial television stations and the Board. We consider that it would be
most undesirable for the television services to be used as a medium for the threatrical presentation of
current political issues or scenes designed to hold political personalities up to ridicule.
10. Grant of Television Licences to Political Parties.
468. As we have pointed out previously in this report, it is probable that for a long time to come the
number of television services available in any one area will be limited and this factor, we suggest, gi\es
added force to the views we have expressed concerning the obligation of licensees to provide equal opportunities
for the televising of political and controversial matter. Some fears were expressed to us in evidence
that if licences were granted to political parties for commercial television stations, facilities for the televising
of opposing views might not be provided by those stations. We were informed that although some
commercial broadcasting stations are owned and operated by interests associated with pontical parties,
the same danger does not exist because of the relatively large number of stations in operation. In
consequence, the ownership and control of stations is vested in a diversity of interests and, as we have
mentioned, the commercial broadcasting service as a whole can be regarded as being reasonably impartial
in the presentation of political views. We believe that the licensing system which we have recommended
in Chapter VII. will provide adequate safeguards against any objectionable concentration in the control
of television stations. We would add, however, that in our opinion it would be most undesirable for
licences to be granted to representatives of political parties whilst conditions exist which severely limit the
number of stations established in any one area. We appreciate, of course, that as the service develops an
the number of stations increases, circumstances may justify the ownership of stations by political interests.
469. As will be appreciated from the general tenor of this chapter, we have, in reaching our
conclusions on the subject of the televising of political and controversial matter, been influenced very
greatly by the experiences of English-speaking countries in the field of broadcasting. On the evidence
available to us we believe, as we mentioned in paragraph 455, that the conditions governing the broadcasting
of political and controversial matter will prove to be substantially applicable to television. As we ave
already pointed out, however, the technique of televising political matter is as yet on ym t e eve opment
•stage and in the early stages in Australia there may be some special technical difficulties due to tic
absence of reiav facilities. There is no doubt that the general principle of equal opportunity should be
applied, but it may well be that experience with television will demonstrate the need for some modification
of certain of the detailed conditions which we have proposed.
11. Religious Services and other Religious Matter.
470. In considering what recommendations should be made on the conditions which should be applied
to the televising of religious services and other religious matter, we have had regard to the legislation in
Australia relating to the broadcasting of religious programmes and the practice that has been adopted to
give effect to these provisions.
471. The Australian Broadcasting Commission provides a very extensive series of religious
broadcasts of a varied kind, including not only broadcasts of divine worship from chore ics am : re igious
talks, but also devotional services and other broadcasts special!*-designedfor particular groups and
of listeners. The special problem which confronts any national broadcasting service is to allocate time and
facilities for religLs broadcasts among the various denominations in such a way as to be fair and
reasonable and generally acceptable to them. Broadly, the Commission allocates time for this purpose


mainly, but not wholly, in accordance with the numerical strength of each denomination as revealed by
the Commonwealth census, but pays due regard to the claims of minority groups and to the desirability
of affording opportunities to outstanding broadcasters, irrespective of their particular denominations. It
appeared quite clearly from the evidence that the Australian Broadcasting Commission has been successful
in performing a very difficult task.
472. The Broadcasting Act requires the Australian Broadcasting Control Board, inter alia, “to
ensure that divine worship or other matter of a religious nature is broadcast for adequate periods and at
appropriate times We were informed by the Board that, in pursuance of this provision, and for the
guidance of commercial broadcasting stations, it has indicated some general principles which should be
adopted in the case of religious broadcasts: briefly, these provide for the allocation by commercial stations
of at least one hour per week to the broadcasting of religious matter, either by way of broadcasts of divine
worship or by studio presentations, and for the division of time among the various denominations broadly
on a population basis. We understand from the evidence that these principles meet with general approval,
and that most stations not only comply with these minimum requirements but also, in varying degrees,
provide much additional time for different kinds of religious broadcasts.
473. A number of witnesses, principally those representing the major religious denominations,
impressed on us that it was of the utmost importance that the Christian message should be brought to the
people through television. They claimed that, in the early stages at least, the number of stations would be
strictly limited and, therefore, the stations granted the privilege of operating what was, in fact, a monopoly
had an obligation to use it in the public interest. In a Christian community this undoubtedly included the
provision of adequate facilities for the presentation of the Christian faith and the Christian way of life. It
was therefore necessary, in the view of these witnesses, that there should be a statutory obligation on the
part of both national and commercial stations to provide adequate time for the televising of religious services
and ceremonies and other religious matter.
474. Most of the churchmen who gave evidence before us asked that, as television was costly and the
Churches were not wealthy bodies, such time should be provided free of charge. Others considered that,
if this was not practicable, a substantially reduced rate should be charged. The Australian Council for
the World Council of Churches considered that financial aid should be provided from public funds (either
alone or in conjunction with the revenues of commercial stations) to assist in meeting the cost of the
presentation of religion. Whilst most of the Churches expressed satisfaction with the method adopted in
broadcasting of allocating time in accordance with the numerical strength of the various denominations,
we were urged by some that time should be made available only if the standard and quality of the material
offered justified its inclusion in the stations’ programme schedules. However, the method of allocating time
in broadcasting w T as questioned by the Australasian Inter-Union Conference of Seventh Day Adventists,
which contended that the “ time for telecasts of a religious nature be made available on the basis of the
merit of the programme rather than the numerical strength and influence of any particular body of
Christians, and that thought should be given to the desires and needs of that large section of the community
who are not represented by any particular church and yet who do enjoy a religious programme ”.
475. It was claimed by representatives of commercial broadcasting stations that the presentation of
church services on television would not generally be a satisfactory means of using the medium, and that if
Churches were given a statutory right to time, particularly free time, there would be no incentive for them
to present programmes that would attract large audiences. They claimed that this was borne out by
experience in broadcasting where, in general, the religious programmes that commanded the best audience
ratings were those that were producd by the Churches which paid for their sessions. The Churches, however,
maintained that they were aware of the new responsibility and opportunity that television afforded them
for the presentation of their faith and that they would inevitably develop techniques of using the medium
in a way that would command audiences.
476. The New South Wales Conference of the Methodist Church of Australasia submitted that each
station should make available one hour each Sunday for the televising of the Christian message. They
considered that the best use of this time would be in four fifteen-minute sessions, and that, in addition to the
Sunday hour, all stations should make provision for one hour per week for the transmission of religious
programmes, spread over the six of the week and used for drama, talks and other purposes. The
Presbyterian Church of Victoria urged that “ a substantial allocation of time should be allotted to the
television of religious matter, including services of worship ”, and that “on Sundays and the great
occasions of the Christian year, such as Christmas Day, Christmas Sunday, Good Friday and Easter Day,
all inappropriate matter should be excised and worthy provision made for religious sessions allocated to
the various churches on the basis of the latest available census figures ”, The Methodist Church of South
Australia stated that “ television has an immense potential for the presentation of the Christian faith
through drama as well as other aids in which the Church must hasten to become skilled ”. The representatives
of this Church also recommended “ that certain time on Sundays be specifically reserved for this field of
Christian education and propaganda and such times, as far as possible, to be outside the established hours
of public worship ”.


477. The Reverend Hamilton Aikin, Director of the Australian Religious Film Society, stated that—
. . having regard to the prominent place which religion should have in the life of the community
and does normally have in the community, and taking into consideration the high costs of television it would
seem desirable that the stations which might be expected to make time available to the Churches and religious
groups, should fix the charges with a view to the ability of the Churches to pay . . . Freedom of expression
can probably be more effectively secured if time is available on commercial stations than on a national
monopoly system ... It may not seem equitable that such facilities are available only to persons and
oroups with adequate financial resources to pay for them. However, while ability to pay is the freely accepted
method by which commodities and services can be secured, there would appear to be no other practicable
alternative. The Australian Religious Film Society therefore submits the opinion that while in principle it is
more desirable to be able and free to buy time at will, whatever the price, than to be denied the facility
completely, it must be borne in mind that the financial resources of Churches are limited and will probably not
be adequate to pay normal schedule rates for station time. The Society is therefore of the opinion that
commercial television stations should by law be required to make provision for either free time or time at
substantially reduced rates for recognized religious programmes (assuming, of course, that the programmes are
good quality television as such) . . . It is essential that national television services should make quality
the first criterion and that the rank or status of any particular applicant, in this case a Church or the
Churches combined, should not by itself justify a privilege or a right which would not be granted if the
applicant were another party, the quality of whose television is below the normal standards required.
Mr. Aikin also stated that he contemplated that about half an hour should be made available on Sunday
evenings between 7 and 8 p.m., either free or at a minimum cost, and that the Churches should be free, as in
broadcasting at present, to buy time as a commercial proposition.
478. The Australian Council for the World Council of Churches submitted that—
Provision must be made on all television channels for the expression of minority opinion. Carelessly
handled television could take us further toward the development of a drab and uniform mass mind. The
threat to minority opinion will not necessarily come from government sources. Only the most powertul
commercial interests will be able to operate commercial television and to them will be given great influence over
the thought life of the community. Regulations will be necessary which will preserve for minority groups such
as educational and religious sections of the community the privilege of reaching the people through television.
479. Bishop Lyons, representing the Catholic Church in Australia, said
Our view is that there should be a statutory obligation to provide adequate time for the broadcasting of
religious ceremonies, such as divine worship and other religious matter. But it should not be. just a_ casual
matter, it should be from the beginning part of the whole system for the national and commercial stations, or
the licensees. I would emphasize . . . that we feel it is a distinct credit to the Commonwealth Government
and a tangible recognition by our Parliament that we are God-loving people that there is already, for soun
broadcasting 8 a statutory obligation of this kind. The Australian Broadcasting Control Board has imposed
upon it by the relative Broadcasting Act a statutory obligation to ensure that stations I™adcas; such material
and the allocation is according to the national census figures, and the time is made available as t .
of the Commission will know, free of charge. The stations are required to give tha t
... We strongly urge that, in Australia, at least similar provisions to those relating to sound broadcasting
should be applied to the telecasting of religious ceremonies and other religious The C mc
that religious ceremonies and matter can be more attractive and elective
presentation by television than by sound alone; and that the telecasting o suc . , standards
benefit on all, particularly the young, and contribute much to. the raising “d Proton
while, at the same time, providing a welcome antidote to the increasing °” J™® B*Z 8 *Z somethin*
religious telecasts should not be restricted to Sundays since re igion is a y > which might be
“ served out” on Sunday. It is, of course, appreciated hat he specie amount otame
available for religious purposes would necessarily depend, to a urge e , p prove in practice
observed by stations both initially and ultimately. On the other hand however lt
that both national and commercial stations would welcome having^ access to a
Sve tl c~televi»ed ceremonies, when skilfully planned
and competently presented, can be to the twentieth. . ,
480. On the other hand, we were informed by other witnesses, mainly representing eommercia
interests, that while they believed every opportunity should be given to the C rare esi to
services, ceremonies and other religious programmes to the people, shoi f b e >m rtatu o I
on the television operators to provide time for these programmes: .bej.
between the stations and the Churches, These witnesses stressed the
expensive that operators would need the utmost flexibility if they were to nuke <>.“^"hrators,
venture. Not only would the obligation to programmes would, especially
but any requirements that certain hours should be .. oc , apTl fioi rpvcnue Mr. N. V. Nixon
if they were peak listening hours, prevent the stations , g inclined to
(Australian Association of Advertising Agencies) . • . , s ] loxl id be able to air
give time or if any religious organisation is a matter that you
their views or their programmes. . • ■ We t , t t tolerance and toleration, that every
cannot legislate for, and we believe it trea et any way „ Mr
opportunity should be given, and that no leg Advertisers) submitted “that the broadcast of religion
W. J. Cudlipp (Australian Association of National Advertisers) suommea
F.5242/SA-7


should be governed by public demand. If the public in sufficient numbers wishes to see church services
they will undoubtedly see them, but any idea of forcing religion into the home by means of the television
screen is repugnant to public conscience. We feel quite sure that this question will solve itself on the basis
on which all television material should be governed, the desire of the public ”. Mr. Cudlipp also maintained
that it would be the proper function of the national authority to set aside certain limited but specified time
for religious purposes. He went on to say “ the cost of operating a television station will be very considerable
and the operator will necessarily have to charge quite a large amount of money for his time and that will
mean that television advertising will be expensive. If, instead of being able to sell ‘x’ hours on television,
he can only sell ‘ x ’ hours minus one or minus two, whatever it may be, then he will have to charge more
for his time, and any one of a number of influences could come from that decision, most of them
undesirable. That is an example of what we would regard as ‘ over-regulation ’”.
481. Mr. A. C. Paddison informed us that, in his opinion “ the licensee should be allowed to operate
his station with absolute discretion. To safeguard both political and religious sectional interests the
licences should be distributed in the same way as they have been in the Sydney area. If the Council of
Churches and the Catholic Church both have priority of access to one particular television station—without
necessarily owning the licence —there can be no danger of the exclusion of any major religious group from
television facilities’'’. Mr. C. Ogilvy expressed the view that “it would not be at all a sound thing to
attempt to lay down arbitrary rules, other than to suggest that a certain minimum amount of time should
be made available for the presentation of religious programmes. Australian Churches of all denominations
could secure large audiences were they to follow the lead given in the United States of America, where
many religious programmes obtain high audience ratings. Religious programmes both on radio and in
television require a specialized approach. Australian churchmen might well study the technique employed
in the United States of America, and if this type of programme was developed in Australia, the churches
would command time, and would not find it necessary to demand it by regulations ”, The Australian
Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations informed ns that the “ Federation feels that this also
is a matter which should not be the subject of any special mandatory conditions. It believes that the
operators of commercial television stations can be relied upon to have proper regard to the wishes and
needs of the public in this connexion ”. Mr. Beaver went on to say “ there is no reason why religious
services should not be made more attractive, particularly from the television point of view. But in the
past I do not think the Churches have done very much to develop an attractive radio programme. I think
if they set out to use radio in the right way they could do a very good job and make religion more attractive
to people and they would get more followers and I think they would be using the medium to very much
greater advantage than they have in the past ”. Mr. S. R. I. Clark stated that his company believed that
“ religious bodies should have regular access to television, but that compulsory broadcasts will defeat
their purpose. We make this submission because in our experience in sound broadcasting we have found
that some religious bodies who are assured of free time make little attempt to train personnel in
broadcasting technique”.
Conclusions.
482. We believe that the presentation in suitable form of religious services and other religious
matter is one of the important obligations of television stations to the public, to be discharged in
co-operation with the Churches and other religious bodies. There are, however, certain features which
distinguish television from broadcasting and it may not be appropriate to prescribe the same conditions
for television stations as have been applied in the field of broadcasting. Indeed, we think that it would
be undesirable to attempt to formulate any precise rules until some practical experience of the new medium
has been obtained. It is clear that at the outset at least the cost of television as compared with broadcasting
will be extremely high and stations will be transmitting programmes for a relatively limited number of
hours per week. It is evident also that the techniques for presenting religious programmes on television,
are as yet, imperfectly known even in those countries where some practical experience has been gained.
483. It may be expected that the Australian Broadcasting Commission will, in the field of television,
give the same careful and impartial attention to religious matters as it has done in the field of broadcasting.
In general, it would appear that the same principles as to allocation of time as have proved practicable
and acceptable in the field of broadcasting will be applicable to television, although with the much more
limited hours of television programmes it is not to be expected that the same total amount of time will be
available. We had some interesting evidence from the Rev. Kenneth Henderson, Supervisor of Religious
Broadcasts in the Australian Broadcasting Commission, who discussed in a general way the technical
problems associated with the production of religious television programmes.
484. So far as commercial television stations are concerned, we have come to the conclusion that, at
this stage, it is not necessary or practicable to do more than indicate, as we have done in paragraph 482,
the general obligations of licensees in this field. Any specific provision requiring the allocation of time by
commercial stations to religious bodies would be premature at this stage, and we would think that there,
as with other aspects of programmes, the annual review of the performance of stations in connexion with
the renewal of licences ( see Chapter VII.) will be a convenient and effective way of securing that the


stations do not neglect their responsibilities. It may be expected that there will be consultation between
representatives of religious bodies, the commercial stations and the Australian Broadcasting Control Board
on this subject, and also full interchange of views and experience on the techniques of televising religious
programmes between these bodies and the Australian Broadcasting Commission. In paragraph 397 we
have recommended that there should be an advisory committee in this field to assist the Australian
Broadcasting Control Board and the commercial stations.
12. Advertisements.
485. In Australia the provisions of the Broadcasting Act relating to advertising by commercial
broadcasting stations are contained in section 6k, which requires the Australian Broadcasting Control
Board to “ determine the extent to which advertisements may be broadcast in the programme of any
commercial broadcasting station ”, and in section 61, which is as follows:
(1.) Subject to this Act, the licensee of a commercial broadcasting station may broadcast
advertisements.
(2.) A licensee desiring to broadcast advertisements shall publish a tariff of advertising charges, and,
except as prescribed, shall make his advertising service available without discrimination to any person.
(3.) A licensee shall not broadcast advertisements on a Sunday except in such manner and in
accordance with such conditions as the Board determines.
(4.) Except as prescribed, an advertisement relating to any medicine shall not be broadcast unless the
text of the proposed advertising matter has been approved in writing by the Director-General of Health or,
on appeal to the Minister under this section, by the Minister.
(5.) The Director-General of Health may delegate to any medical officer of a State his power under
this section to approve of the text of advertising matter.
(6.) Any such delegation shall be revocable in writing at will and no such delegation shall prevent the
exercise of the power by the Director-General of Health.
(7.) Any person may appeal to the Minister from any decision of the Director-General of Health, or
a delegate of the Director-General of Health.
We were informed that the Australian Broadcasting Control Board had made two determinations under
these provisions, one relating to advertising time standards and the other to Sunday adveitising. These
determinations are set out in Appendixes A and B. It will be noted that the control of the text of
advertisements relating to medicines is vested in the Director-General of Health and no adveitising
matter of this kind may be broadcast unless the text has been approved in writing by the Director-General.
There is, however, a right of appeal to the Minister from any ruling of the Director-General. We were
informed that appeals are very infrequent.
486. Mr. N. V. Nixon (Australian Association of Advertising Agencies) submitted that the
broadcasting of advertisements on television should not be restricted by “ arbitrary legislative conditions
The Association believed that “ self-regulation will take care of morals and competition will take care of
quality”. They considered that the content and form of television advertisements will be largely dictated
by the viewing public; any advertisement which offended the good taste or failed to command the inteiest
of viewers would not be transmitted. The Association, however, recommended that certain regulations in
respect of broadcasting laid down by the Australian Broadcasting Contiol Board (lelating to the amount
of advertising either in words or in time in a given programme peiiod) and the piovisions of the
Broadcasting Act relating to advertisements for proprietary medicines, should be extended to television.
The Australian Association of National Advertisers advocated that advertising on television should be
regulated to ensure truth, technical accuracy and dignity. They suggested that the body set up to control
television should take advantage of the Association’s knowledge and experience before laying down
conditions for advertising. The Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations saw no
reason for imposing any conditions on television advertising; unnecessary restrictions on advertising would
be likely to damage commercial television and retard its development. Mr. C. Ogilvy supporte t is
submission but he suggested that if some official regulations were considered essential, they should be
framed only after consultation with station operators, the Australian Association of National Advertisers
and the Australian Association of Advertising Agencies. In their individual representations, many of the
members of the Federation urged that rigid rules should not be prescribed and that advertising prac ices
should be left to self-regulation by the industry.
487. Other witnesses, however, contended that, both in matters of detail and of broad principle
regulations would be necessary and desirable and should be enforced by some ant ou y. was
that more stringent control should be exercised over television advertising than was exercised by the
Australian Broadcasting Control Board over radio advertising. Other witnesses, including the League of
Women Voters of South Australia, expressed the view that the provisions relating to the present i
advertisements on commercial television should follow closely those laid down in the Broadcasting Act.
488. Although they appreciated that some difficulty might be experienced in prescribing limitsfor
commercial announcements, many witnesses stated that the determination of the extent to which
advertisements should be shown on television should not be left to the discretion of television operators.


This was referred to by Reverend A. Walker (Australian Council for World Council of Churches), Messrs.
W. H. Dye (Arts Council, Victoria) and H. Alexander (Actors and Announcers Equity), Miss E.
Tildesley (British Drama League) referred to the question of commercial announcements during plays,
and urged that they should be limited to three minutes per hour before or after the production. Actors
and Announcers Equity Association urged that an adequate restriction should be placed on the length of a
“ commercial ” and the number of “ commercials ” in any one programme or in any period of time, to
protect the public from a surfeit of advertising.
489. Several witnesses advocated that some provision should be made to ensure that the continuity or
atmosphere of programmes is not destroyed by frequent breaks for advertising. Messrs. R. H. Featherstone
(State School Teachers’ Union, Western Australia), W, H. Dye (Arts Council, Victoria) and J. L. J.
Wilson (Director of Tutorial Classes, University of Sydney) urged that the commercial motive should not
be allowed to dominate the matter broadcast and that care should be taken to prevent entire programmes
being disfigured by advertising. The British Drama League and the League of Women Voters of South
Australia confined their recommendations to dramatic productions and requested that no advertising should
be permitted during the course of a play, including the interval.
490. The Australian Council for the World Council of Churches and the Methodist Church of New
South Wales proposed that a restriction should be imposed on the number and length of programmes
available to any one sponsor as a safeguard against the development of a monopoly of channels by financially
powerful advertisers. Such virtual monopoly, it was suggested, would be to the detriment of the
community as a whole, since “ buying power ” rather than suitability of material would determine access
to available channels.
491. Actors and Announcers Equity Association suggested that, in the interests of Australian actors
and announcers, there should be a complete ban on the importation of advertisements on film. This was
supported by Mr. J. L. J. Wilson on the grounds that American advertising was frequently misleading and
offensive and any funds available for the purchase of film should be devoted to procuring good films for
entertainment rather than filmed commercials.
492. The Australian Council of School Organizations urged that particular care should be taken to
ensure that advertising permitted between the hours of 4.30 and 5.30 p.m. should not contain any matter
damaging to children. Mrs. B. Falk and Mrs. A. Baton (Victorian Council for Children’s Films and
Television) suggested that some control over advertising in children’s sessions was desirable to ensure that
only appropriate and truthful methods of advertising were used. Miss M. L. Wauchope (Teachers’ College,
Adelaide) and Mrs. T. C. Metcalfe (National Council of Women) presented the view that commercial firms
would not be fully aware of children’s needs and that children’s sessions were not suitable for sponsorship.
493. Two witnesses requested that advertisements of intoxicating liquor should be banned at all
times. Miss N. M. Mills (Woman’s Christian Temperance Union, Queensland) vigorously condemned the
presentation of advertisements or the sponsorship of programmes by the liquor industry. It was claimed
that in America programmes sponsored by breweries were designed to appeal to young people and the
organization represented feared that similar advertisements on Australian television screens would “ invade
the sanctity of the home ”. Reverend Courtenay Thomas stated that the Council of Churches in Victoria
would like to see a complete prohibition against advertising of liquor. The Victorian Brewers’ Association
presented evidence in reply to these witnesses, referring to what it described as the natural right of the
alcoholic beverage industry in Australia to equal and non-discriminatory treatment with other lawful
industries on television.
494. The League of Women Voters of South Australia expressed the view that, as for broadcasting,
Sunday advertisements should be broadcast only in accordance with such conditions as were determined
by the Australian Broadcasting Control Board. Some Church representatives urged that all advertising
matter should be eliminated from commercial programmes on Christmas Day, Good Friday and Sundays,
or, if this was impracticable, advertisements should not be permitted to predominate on these days.
Reverend W. Francis, representing the Methodist Church in New South Wales, considered, however, that
Sunday broadcasting on most radio stations is satisfactory and if the same standards were extended to
television no further conditions in regard to advertising would need to be introduced.
495. Several witnesses maintained that it was necessary to prohibit sponsored programmes on
television to ensure the independence of licensees in the selection of programmes and referred to the report
of the Beveridge Committee and recent discussions in Great Britain on this subject. The Australian
Culture Defence Movement, while not advocating that sponsored programmes should be prohibited, suggested
that sponsors should buy programme material and not time alone from station managements. In this way,
it was claimed, station licensees would control the programme output and would accept responsibility for
the production of all programmes. Mr. C. Ogilvy urged the necessity for the acceptance of the principle
that the licensee should have the fullest control of all programmes. We refer to this in some detail in
paragraph 498.


Conclusions.
496. The question whether there shall be advertising on television in Australia has been determined
by the Television Act 1953, which provides for the establishment of commercial stations. We were, however,
required to report upon any conditions which we thought it was desirable should be applied to the televising
of advertisements. It seems clear, on consideration of the experience in the administration of the
Broadcasting Act in this respect, and of the evidence summarized above, that effective provision should be
made to ensure that advertising matter does not constitute an excessive part of the programmes of
commercial television stations. This can, in our opinion, be achieved by the establishment of appropriate
standards which will set limits to the extent to which advertising matter may be televised. If provisions
similar to those contained in the Broadcasting Act were applied to commercial television stations they
would, in our view, enable this matter to be dealt with on a satisfactory and workable basis. We have been
impressed by the way in which the standards determined for broadcasting advertisements have been worked
out by the Australian Broadcasting Control Board in consultation with representatives of broadcasting
stations and of advertising interests, and by their general acceptance in practice. Similar consultation
between the Board and representatives of television stations and of advertisers will be necessary to work out
the detailed standards for television. It is evident that it will not be sufficient merely to adopt the
quantitative limitations which have been fixed for broadcasting advertisements, since there are many
differences between the advertising techniques applicable to broadcasting and to television. While such
standards can only be worked out effectively in the light of practical experience we would think that, at
the outset, the adoption of the general principles of the broadcasting standards would achieve the desired
results.
497. We were urged by many witnesses, whose evidence we have set out briefly in preceding
paragraphs, to make recommendations with respect to particular kinds of advertisements and to the
televising of advertising matter at specified times. We feel that it would not be practicable, at this stage, to
attempt to lay down particular rules, which can only be determined in the light of experience, and that, in
general, the broadcasting principles (for example, as to advertising on Sundays) should be applied at the
outset.
498. In paragraph 495 we referred to the evidence of certain witnesses who urged that there should be
a complete prohibition of sponsored programmes on commercial television stations. This is a question which
has led to a great deal of discussion recently in connexion with the introduction of some form of commercial
television in Great Britain. {See, for example, The 8.8. C. from Within, by Lord Simon of Wythenshawe,
formerly Chairman of the Board of Governors of the 8.8. C., Chapter XVII.) The question is also
discussed by the Beveridge Committee in its report (paragraphs 351 and following and especially paragraph
360). There are, it would seem, considerable differences in the sense in which the expression “sponsored
programmes” may be used; the British White Paper on Television Policy of November, 1953 (Cmd. 9005),
for example, uses “sponsoring” to signify “that advertisers would hire time on the television transmitters
and provide and control their own programmes”. It seems to be accepted in England that the expression
refers to a state of affairs in which the advertisers, and not the stations, control the content of television
programmes. We have considered this aspect of the question of television advertising with some care. e
have ascertained that, although the expression “sponsored session” is used in Australian broadcasting
practice (as, for example, in the Advertising Time Standards of the Australian Broadcasting Control
Board set out in Appendix A) it does not necessarily imply that the advertiser (sponsor) contro s 1 ®
content of the programme, but is a description of a particular kind of programme with which the
products of a particular advertiser are associated, as distinguished from “spot” advertisements which are
separate advertisements for different advertisers inserted in a programme at regular interva s. n ac ,we
understand that it has been generally established in Australian broadcasting practice tatte ic n ■
responsible for all programmes (whether “sponsored ”or not) which are broadcast from his motion. e
were informed by the Australian Broadcasting Control Board that some licensees had put to the Board the
view that they were not responsible for certain programmes broadcast by their stations on the groun a
these programmes had been prepared by organizations not under their control. T oar ano accep e
this contention, and, after consultation with the Australian Federation of Commercial Broadens i g
Stations, had recently reminded all stations that the responsibility for the observance of programm
standards rested on the licensees.
499 We are strongly of opinion that the licensee of a commercial television station must accept
responsibility for all programmes transmitted by the station, and cannot delegate this “
advertiser or to any one else. The adoption o£ this principle (and we see
applied in commercial television as in broadcasting) will, we think, preven e ev
practices in relation to “ sponsored ” television programmes.
101


SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS.
1. Introductory.
1. In the foregoing chapters we have examined the issues referred to us and have set down our
conclusions and recommendations w'here it was appropriate after a discussion of the issues and the evidence
presented to us. We set out in this chapter, for convenience, a summary of our recommendations with
reference to the relevant part of the report, but wish to emphasize that the report should be read as a whole,
and that our recommendations should be read in conjunction with the reasons and explanations which
accompany them. It should also be clearly understood that our recommendations relate only to the
establishment period for television services, and do not pretend to contain a blueprint for the long-term
development of television in Australia, which must be flexible in scope and the implementation of which
must depend on circumstances that, at present, cannot be foreseen.
2. A notation has been made against those recommendations on which individual members of the
Commission have expressed supplementary observations.
2. Recommendations.
1. Television should be introduced on a gradual basis. (Paragraphs 161 and 320.)
2. A limit on the number of television stations to be established in the early stagas is justified and
necessary. (Paragraphs 246 and 307.)
3. There is no justification for requiring some definite period to elapse before any national or
commercial television stations should be established. (Paragraph 268.)
4. As far as the national service is concerned, the first station should be erected in Sydney and the
second in Melbourne. As finances become available further expansion should be made to the other State
capital cities and to other centres of population with the object of providing a service to the widest
population as soon as practicable. (Paragraph 311.)
5. The national television service should be planned on the basis that, within a reasonable period at
least, the major part of the expenditure wmuld be covered by revenue which can be reasonably attributed
to the provision of the service, but there should be some flexibility in the application of this principle.
(Paragraph 308.)
6. As far as the commercial service is concerned, initially licences should be issued in Sydney and
Melbourne, two licences being made available in each city. The subsequent expansion of the commercial
service in Sydney and Melbourne (within the limits of the channels available for those cities) and its
extension to the remaining capital cities and other centres of population (including the larger country
towns) should be effected as rapidly as circumstances permit, subject to the Minister being satisfied,
after receiving a report from the Australian Broadcasting Control Board ( see recommendation 18), that
any applicants for licences for these centres are capable of supplying a satisfactory service.
(Paragraph 320.)
7. The requirements of Australia as a whole in respect of commercial television should be kept under
continuous observation by the Australian Broadcasting Control Board, with a view to recommending to
the Minister the extension of the number of commercial licences as soon as financial and other considerations
permit, (Paragraph 246.)
8. Licences should be issued for commercial television stations in country centres as early as possible.
(Paragraph 324.)
9. The television service should be developed and expanded, as far as possible, by the use of the
very high frequency channels, without the need of utilizing channels in the ultra high frequency band, and
a close examination should be made of the possibility of further channels in the very high frequency band
being made available. We are not convinced that it would be impracticable to make some re-arrangement
of frequencies which, whilst still enabling the demands of other services to be met, would provide additional
V.H.P. channels for television. (Paragraphs 105-106.)
10. At an early stage in the development of the Australian television service, a complete frequency
allocation plan, which will make adequate provision for future developments, should be formulated by the
Australian Broadcasting Control Board. In particular such a plan should make adequate provision for
development in country areas. (Paragraphs 110 and 112.)
11. As far as possible all transmitters serving one area should be located on the same site.
(Paragraph 120 (c).)
12. A system under which all television transmitters would be under the control and ownership of
a public authority and made available to national and commercial operators as required should not be
adopted. (See supplementary observation No. 2by Mr. Osborne.) (Paragraph 329.)


13. The national television authority should operate with the same degree of independence of
political control as the national broadcasting authority has operated. (Paragraphs 338 and 372.)
14. The provision of the programmes on the national television service should be the responsibility of
the Australian Broadcasting Commission ( see also recommendation 31). (Paragraphs 341 and 372.)
15. The membership of the Australian Broadcasting Commission should be increased from seven to
nine. (Paragraph 345.)
16. The operation of all technical services, directly associated with the production of television
programmes in the studios of the national television stations, should be included in the responsibilities of
the Australian Broadcasting Commission. (Paragraph 347.)
17. There should be a licensing system for commercial television stations similar to that which at
present applies to commercial broadcasting stations. The licensing authority should be the Minister, who
should exercise the functions of granting, renewing and revoking licences. In exercising these powers he
should be required to take into consideration recommendations made by a statutory authority, which
should also discharge certain technical and other administrative and regulatory functions. The statutory
authority, in the exercise of its technical, administrative, and regulatory functions, should not be subject
to direction by the Minister. (Paragraph 351.)
18. The statutory authority referred to in the previous recommendation should be the Australian
Broadcasting Control Board. (Paragraph 353.)
19. Two additional part-time members should be appointed to the Australian Broadcasting Control
Board. (Paragraphs 353 and 397.)
20. In the case of the original grant by the Minister of a commercial television licence for any
locality, before making any recommendations, the Australian Broadcasting Control Board should conduct
a public hearing of the applications received for licences in that locality. (Paragraph 355.)
21. Before any licence is revoked by the Minister, the licensee should have the opportunity of being
heard at a public sitting of the Australian Broadcasting Control Board. (Paragraph 356.)
22. In any case where the Australian Broadcasting Control Board proposes to recommend to the
Minister that a licence for a commercial television station should not be renewed, or where the Minister
proposes not to renew the licence, this licensee should be notified of the reasons therefor, and should have
the right to a public hearing by the Australian Broadcasting Control Board, which shall report thereon to
the Minister. ' (Paragraph 357.)
23. Licences for commercial television stations should be granted for a period not exceeding three
years and should be renewed for a period not exceeding one year. (Paragraph 360.)
24. It is not necessary or desirable to provide for a right of appeal against the decision of the
Minister with respect to the revocation or suspension of a licence of a commercial television statlo J*
1 (Paragraph 361.)
25. The Minister’s power to suspend licences should be restricted to a very limited period, at the
expiration o£ which the suspension must be removed or the licensee given notice of intention to revoke the
licence (Paragraph 361.)
"W Provisions similar to those contained in section 53 of the Broadcast mg Act 1 942-1953 if enacted
with respect to television stations, would be sufficient to prevent undesirable concentration °(°™ers P
of such stations, and at the same time enable advantage to be taken of the economies of
the ownership of a number of stations might permit. Any concentration of cent.“» h *
regarded as contrary to the public interest could be adequately dea t wit i t ggs and , 66 )
27. The extension of the provisions of section 50 of the Broadcasting Act 1942-1953 to « om “ er “ al
television stations would be adequate to deal with the transfer of television licences, (Paragraph 368.)
28. A condition should be incorporated in the licence for every commercial tdenm station that the
control of a station shall not be varied without the consent of the Minister. ( S
29. The licence-fee for a commercial television station should be £5O plus* on ®' ® f 1 pGr
of gross revenue of a station, and the fee should be charged whether or not a piofit m )
30. The objective of all television stations, from the outset, must be to provide "
have the effect of raising standards of public taste. . ,
31. While the Australian 7oZZ^ld°dZo V the national
the Commonwealth to the highest possible and m)


32. Provision should be made for an effective overall pattern of national and commercial stations
which will be truly complementary in providing a television service of high quality. It is essential,
therefore, that there should be the utmost co-operation between national and commercial stations, and
that such co-operation might reasonably be required of commercial operators, e.g. in the conditions of
licences. (Paragraph 334.)
33. Where there is a commercial station only in any area, certain selected public service programmes
of the national television service should be made available to that station. There should be a statutory
obligation on the Australian Broadcasting Commission to make available these programmes to the
commercial station. There should be a similar statutory obligation on the part of the commercial station
to transmit these programmes. (Paragraph 834.)
34. The formulation of a suitable code of operating standards for programmes of commercial
television stations in Australia should be undertaken by the representatives of commercial television
stations as soon as possible after licences have been granted. (Paragraph 396.)
35. Self-regulation will not be sufficient to secure that commercial television programmes will be
of suitable standard to satisfy the public. The Australian Broadcasting Control Board and licensees of
commercial television stations should endeavour to reach agreement on programme standards, but where
the Board and the representatives of commercial television stations cannot agree on standards, there should
be a reserve of authority (which will most effectively be exercised through the licensing system) designed
to secure that commercial programmes will, in the broadest sense, serve the public interest.
(Paragraphs 393 and 395.)
36. Legislative provision should be made (along the lines of the present provision of the
Broadcasting Act relating to the programmes of commercial broadcasting stations) designed to secure that
prompt measures can be taken to prevent the televising of objectionable material. (Paragraph 395.)
37. The two additional members, which it is recommended should be appointed to the Australian
Broadcasting Control Board ( see recommendation 19), should have special responsibility in respect of
programme matters. These members should not be representative of any particular interest.
(Paragraph 397.)
38. Advisory committees should be appointed to advise the Board in respect of the scope and content
of particular classes of programmes. One such committee should be appointed in respect of religious
programmes and the other in respect of children’s programmes. (Paragraph 397.)
39. Immediate steps should be taken to encourage the creation of programmes that will set acceptable
cultural standards and further important national objectives. (Paragraph 399.)
40. There is an obligation on all television stations to ensure that the best use is made of
Australian talent. (Paragraph 409.)
41. Quotas for the Australian content of television programmes can only be determined after
actual experience has been gained in the operation of the service. * (Paragraph 409.)
42. No general embargo should be imposed, at least in the initial stages, on the importation of films
from other countries, but the question should be kept under review as television develops.
(Paragraph 410.)
43. Any attempt to censor Australian “ live ” programmes would be completely impracticable, but
there should be some reserve power to prevent the presentation of material where there is reason to believe
it .s likely to cause offence. (Paragraph 411.)
44. The provisions relating to the censorship of imported films should be applied to imported
television programmes, which should also be subject to the same rules as “live” programmes.
(Paragraph 411.)
A-i* 4s ' ° n the natlonal statlons tllere should be a regular children’s programme specially designed for
the different age groups and also designed to cover a wide range of interests. (Paragraph 183.)
46. Where a commercial station is operating in an area where there is no national station it should
be required to transmit, at a suitable time, a children’s programme recorded by the Australian Broadcasting
Commission. ~, , ®
(Paragraph 184.)
, . commere « l television stations should provide, at suitable times, programmes especially
designed for children.
(Paragraph 184.)
48. The actual hours of operation of television stations must be determined by experience (See
supplementary observation No. 1 by the Chairman and Mrs. Foxton.) '(Paragraph 432.)
49 As far as the national television service is concerned, the principle laid down in section 89 of the
Broadcasting Act 1942-1903 should apply to the televising of political and controversial matter. The
Australian Broadcast.ng Commission should have full and unrestricted power and responsibility to
determine to what extent and in what manner political and controversial matter may be televised on
national television stations. /t j , * v
(Paragraph 457.)


50. The transmission of political matter by commercial television stations should not be prohibited.
(Paragraph 458.)
51. There is an obligation on the part of every commercial television station which allocates any
time for the televising of political or controversial matter to afford reasonable opportunities for the
presentation of opposing views. (Paragraph 460.)
52. Except during an election period (as defined), commercial television stations should, subject
to the general principle set out in the preceding recommendation, and to recommendations 57 and 58, be
free to allocate time for the televising of political or controversial matter in the ordinary course of business,
(Paragraph 461.)
53. During an election period (as defined), a commercial television station which operates in an area
in which there is no national television station should be required, by law, to make available (without
charge) to the leaders of the parties or their nominees, an amount of time equivalent to that allocated by
the Australian Broadcasting Commission for the televising from national stations of the main policy
speeches of the parties. (Paragraph 462.)
54. During an election period (as defined), a commercial television station which operates in an area
where there is a national television station should be entitled, if it thinks fit, to refuse to allocate any time
for political matter; if, however, the station allocates any time for political matter it shall be obliged to
afford equal opportunities for the presentation of opposing views, to all the parties contesting the election
which are represented in the appropriate Parliament at the time of the dissolution or vacancy leading
to the election (but there should be no obligation on the station to provide time free of charge). (See
supplementary observation No. 3 by Mr. Osborne.) (Paragraphs 462-3.)
55. The obligations on commercial television stations set out in recommendations Nos. 51-54 should
be stated in direct legislation passed by the Parliament: that is they should not, as in the Broadcasting
Act as it stands at present, be left to the exercise of the administrative discretion of a statutory body.
(Paragraph 465.)
56. The extent to 'which a commercial television station discharges its obligations in relation to the
televising of political and controversial matter is clearly an important factor to be taken into account in
the annual review of the programme performance of a commercial television station in connexion with the
renewal of its licence. It may, in certain circumstances, be a proper subject for public hearing.
(Paragraph 465.)
57. The provisions of section 89 (2.) of the Broadcasting Act 1942-1953, which provides that no
political matter shall be broadcast on the two days preceding the day on which any election for either
House of the Parliament of the Commonwealth or a State, or for any vacancy in any such House is held,
should be applied to the televising of political matter on both the national and the commercial television
services. (Paragraph 466.)
58. The prohibition of the dramatization of any political matter which is provided for in section
89 (3.) of the Broadcasting Act 1942-1953 should be extended to the national and commercial television
• (Paragraph 467.)
services. v & '
59 It would be undesirable for licences for commercial television stations to be granted to
representatives of political parties whilst conditions exist which severely limit the number of stations
established in any one area. (Paragraph 468.)
60. The presentation, in suitable form, of religious services and other religious matter is one of the
important obligations of television stations to the public, and should be discharged in co-operation with the
i n ~ ... v (Paragraph 482.)
churches and other religious bodies.
61. Until .some practical experience ot tic new medium has been obtained it would be undesirable to
attempt to formulate any precise rules concerning the televising of religions matter. (Paragrap .)
62. The Australian Broadcasting Commission should, in general, apply the same principles to the
allocation of time for religious broadcasts and other religious matter as have provecand
acceptable in the field of broadcasting.
63. It would be premature, at this stage, to lay down any specific provisions requiring the allocation
of time for religions services and other religious matter by commercial television
64 The extent to which commercial television stations carry out their responsibilities in respect of
v. , 1 e : . . V religious matter should be considered during the annual
the broadcasting of religious services and other re g » r rParap-ranh 484 )
review of the performances of stations in connexion with the renewal of licences. (Paragraph 484.)
65. Effective provision should be made to ensure that advertising matter do» not constitute an
excessive part of the programmes of commercial television stations. ( g P


66. Provisions similar to those contained in sections 6k and 6l of the Broadcasting Act 1942-1953,
relating to the control of advertising, should be extended to commercial television stations.
(Paragraph 496.)
67. Until practical experience has been gained in the operation of television, the general principles
of the standards at present applicable to the broadcasting of advertisements by broadcasting stations should
be applied to advertisements on television stations. (Paragraphs 496-7.)
68. The licensee of a commercial television station must accept responsibility for all programmes
transmitted by the station, and cannot delegate this responsibility to an advertiser or to any one else.
(Paragraph 499.)
We have the honour to be, Sir, Your Excellency’s most obedient servants,
Authorized to be printed—
K. Collings (Secretary).
Melbourne, 13th November, 1953.
6. W. PATON (Chairman).
R. G. OSBORNE.
C. B. BEDNALL.
R. C. WILSON.
N. S. YOUNG.
M. C. FOXTON.
Sydney, 20th February, 1954.
106


SUPPLEMENTARY OBSERVATIONS.
Hours of Transmission.
Observation by the Chairman and Mrs. M. C. Foxton.
1. One of the principles on which the report is based is that television should be introduced on a
gradual basis. In two respects, we wish to carry this principle further than our colleagues are willing to go.
In the initial period we consider that —
(a) there should be a compulsory break in transmission on all stations for one hour after the
end of the children’s programme;
( b ) until experience has demonstrated that a high quality of programme can be achieved, the
hours of transmission should not exceed 30 a week.
G. W. BATON.
M. C. FOXTON.
Public Ownership or Joint Use of Transmitters.
Observation by Mr. R. G. Osborne.
2. I do not agree with the reasons given by the majority of the Commission for rejecting the
proposals put to us with respect to the establishment of joint national-commercial stations and the public
ownership of all transmitters (Chapter Y., paragraphs 325-333). I do not think that these proposals are
necessarily impracticable or contrary to principle and, indeed, they have some advantages which would, I
feel, facilitate the introduction of both national and commercial services on an economical basis. However,
I do not dissent from the conclusions of the Commission, since I am of opinion that the terms of the
Television Act 1953 do not authorize the adoption of either of the proposals discussed in the paragraphs to
which I have referred.
R. G. OSBORNE.
Televising of Political and Controversial Matter.
Observation by Mr. R. G. Osborne.
3. 1 do not agree with the recommendation in paragraph 463 so far as it would restrict the light to
allocation of time on commercial stations to parties represented in Parliament. In my opinion, commercial
television stations should (as was recommended by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Broadcasting
in 1942) observe the same principles as to the recognition of parties as are applied from time to time by
the Australian Broadcasting Commission. This would involve the publication of those principles by the
Commission, and I think this would, in any case, be desirable.
R. G. OSBORNE.
Television in Lesser Populated Areas.
Observation by Mr. R. C. Wilson.
4. I agree with the report that television should be introduced gradually.
i believe in the dual system as applied to ratio but I am afraid, because of the very high costs
involved in providing equipment and suitable programmes, that dual system television will be confined to
the larger capital cities.
Under present technical knowledge, costs and conditions, I do not see how television can be carried
far out into country areas. .
If television is to be taken into lesser populated areas, then I think it can be done only by having
a single station in each rural area and there must be co-operation between the national authorities and
the commercial interests in doing this.
Presumably, licence-fees will be charged to owners of receiving sets, even though the only service
they can receive may come from a commercial station. If this is so. I think the commerciall station should
receive assistance up to the amount of licence-fees paid by its viewers. This may be either by cash subsidy
or by direct assistance from the Australian Broadcasting Commission in providing suitable programme
material
On the other hand, if the Australian Broadcasting Commission is prepared to extend to * ™™l
area where there is no commercial station, but is prevented from doing so by the fact that viewe
i ca • + + Lqqv post nf the service then X think consideration should be
licence-fees are not likely to be sufficient to bear the cost ot tne service,
given to the Australian Broadcasting Commission taking sponsored programmes *
, . . . , ..1 • mi irv ami as nreviously stated, I agree with the gradual
I realize that this is going beyond the mqu r\ , 1 • t +pip V ision should be
development of television-hut, after the first stage has been passed, I am anxious that television should be
ueieiopment oi ieie\isiuii , . r r i n not want television to become merely another expensive
extended for the benefit of country viewers. I do not want leieMsiux
luxury to be viewed only by dwellers in some of onr already overcrowded capital cities.
R. C. WILSON.


Duration of sponsored programme.
Number of words permissible
for advertisements.
Maximum duration of
presentation of advertisements.
5 minutes
150 words
1 minute
7£ minutes
200 words
1 minute 30 seconds
10 minutes
250 words
2 minutes
15 minutes
300 words
2 minutes 30 seconds
30 minutes
450 words
3 minutes
45 minutes
600 words
4 minutes 30 seconds
60 minutes
750 words
6 minutes
Type of announcement.
Maximum time or words permitted for complete
presentation of announcement.
25 word announcement
50 word announcement
100 word announcement
45 seconds
1 minute
140 words
Appendix A.
ADVERTISIN'G TIME STANDARDS.
Memorandum eeom the Australian Broadcasting Control Board to all Commercial Broadcasting
Stations on 13th October, 1953.
Th.e Broadcasting Act 1942-1951 provides that the Board shall determine the extent to which
advertisements may he broadcast in the programme of any commercial station.
2. After carefully examining the Standards of Broadcasting Practice adopted by the Australian
Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations, and similar standards operating in other English-speaking
countries, the Board has, in accordance with the provisions of section 6k (2.)(&)(iv) of the Act, determined
the conditions under which advertisements may be broadcast in respect of duration and wordage, and in
respect of the extent to which advertisements may be broadcast from Monday to Saturday inclusive. *
3. These conditions are as follows:
(a) In the case of advertisements in sponsored sessions, the number of words and the maximum
time occupied by the complete presentation of such advertisements should not exceed the
following:—
For programmes exceeding 60 minutes the rate at which advertising matter is broadcast
should not exceed 125 words in a maximum period of one minute for each ten minutes of
overall programme time.
(6) Direct advertising announcements (“spot advertisements”) should be distributed at
intervals throughout periods set aside for the broadcasting of such announcements,
and should not be so placed as to destroy the value of the entertainment or service provided
in the remainder of such programme periods.
( c ) In the case of direct advertising announcements (“spot advertisements”) and of time
purchased for announcements only, the following standards should be observed
(d) Direct advertising announcements (“ spot advertisements ”) may be grouped, provided that
not more than three advertisements occur in any one group and no group exceeds one and
one-hail minutes in duration.
(e) Of any programme period during which direct advertising announcements (“spot
advertisements ) are broadcast not more than 30 per cent, may be devoted to advertising
matter; and not more than eighteen minutes may be so occupied in any period of 60
minutes, J *
(/) The limitations of the preceding paragraphs do not apply to advertising matter which is
broadcast in the form of a service programme such as a “shopping guide"”, or programmes
consisting of market reports or service matter, provided that the total time devoted to such
programmes does not exceed nine hours in any one period of seven days
108


Appendix B.
SUNDAY ADVERTISING.
Memorandum from the Australian Broadcasting Control Board to all Commercial Broadcasting
Stations on 4th June, 1952.
As you know, section 61 (3.) of the Broadcasting Act 1942-1951 provides that “a licensee shall not
broadcast advertisements on a Sunday except in such manner and in accordance with such conditions as the
Board determines
Advertising on Sunday is at present regulated under the rules laid down by the Postmaster-General
in 1943, which were adopted by the Board. The Board has recently reconsidered this matter, in consultation
with the Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations, and has decided to make certain
alterations in the present rules. The principal alteration is that, in certain circumstances and subject to
certain conditions, prices may be mentioned in advertisements broadcast on Sundays. In addition, the existing
rules have been rewritten.
The conditions which shall apply to advertising on Sundays will be as follows:
SPONSORED SESSIONS.
1. Except as otherwise provided, advertisements may be included in a sponsored session, but the time devoted to
advertising matter in such a session shall not exceed ten per centum of the total time occupied by the session, and the
number of advertising announcements shall not exceed two in any period of 15 minutes.
SPOT ADVERTISEMENTS.
2. Except as otherwise provided, direct advertising announcements (“spot advertisements”) may be broadcast, but,
except as expressly provided in paragraph 5, the total time occupied by such announcements shall not exceed 6 minutes in
any period of one hour and the number of such announcements shall not exceed two in any period of 15 minutes.
REFERENCE TO PRICES.
3. The price of any article or service shall not be mentioned more than once in each advertising announcement
relating to that article or service.
SHOPPING GUIDE.
4. A session containing a group of advertising announcements, in the form of a shopping guide, may be broadcast at
a time, not later than 6 p.m. (local time), to be approved by the Board, provided that—
\a) the time occupied by such session does not exceed 15 minutes;
(6) the time occupied by any single advertising announcement in such session does not exceed 1 minute in duration
or contain more than 140 words; and
(c) the session shall not be broadcast between 11 a.m. and 12.15 p.m., but a licensee may, after consulting the
Board, substitute for this period another period usually accepted by the majority of churches in the area
served by the station as the hour for holding Divine Worship.
MANNER OF BROADCASTING ADVERTISEMENTS.
5. All advertising announcements, except those included in a transcribed sponsored session, shall be spoken by the
station announcer.
6. Direct advertising announcements (“spot advertisements”) which have been pre-recorded shall not be broadcast.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
7. No advertisements relating to alcoholic liquor shall be broadcast.
RESTRICTIONS ON BROADCASTS IN CERTAIN PERIODS.
8. Advertisements (other than opening and closing announcements) shall not be broadcast by a station during any
part of a sponsored session which is devoted to the broadcasting of Divine Worship or other matter of a religious nature.
Opening and closing announcements in respect of such a session shall not contain any reference to the price of any goods oi
services.
9. Direct advertising announcements (“spot advertisements”) shall not be broadcast during a session which is
devoted to the broadcasting of Divine Worship or other matter of a religious nature.
PRESENTATION OF ADVERTISEMENTS.
10. Advertisements should be presented in good taste and with discretion and as unobtrusively _P^® lble -
Repetition and sensational presentation should be avoided, especially in statements re ating o' P • o
relating to medicines and medical and toilet preparations should be kept strictly within the bounds of good t s e.
I am specially directed by tbe Board to invite the station’s attention to paragraph 10 above and to say
that it is hoped that this requirement in particular will be strictly observed according to the spirit of t e
paragraph.
109


Nature of Broadcast.
1949 Elections.
1951 Elections.
Hours.
Hours.
Party Leaders’ initial speeches
236
277
Other matter authorized by parties
1,548
905
Organizations other than parties
362
74
Total
2,146
1,256
Hours.
1949. Metropolitan stations (24)
332
Country stations (77) ..
.. 1,216
Total
. . 1,548
1951. Metropolitan stations (24)
199
Country stations (77) ..
706
Total .. . . . . .
905
1949.
-
Common-
wealth.
New South
Wales.
Victoria.
Queensland.
South
Au tralia.
Western
Aust ralia.
Tasmania.
Met
ROPOLITAN.
Country Party
7
5
8
6
6
8
5
Labor Party ..
41
39
40
43
42
42
42
Liberal Party
50
52
52
47
50
47
53
Other Parties ..
2
4
4
2
3
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
Country.
Country Party
21
26
19
28
7
10
Labor Party ..
29
26
35
25
36
22
38
Liberal Party
48
47
44
42
53
64
62
Other Parties ..
2
1
2
5
4
4
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
Metropolitan and Country Combined,
Country Party
18
23
16
24
6
9
2
Labor Party ..
31
27
36
28
39
32
39
Liberal Party
49
48
46
43
52
56
69
Other Parties ..
2
2
2
5
3
3
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
Appendix C.
ELECTION BROADCASTS.
Summary of Statistical Information Concerning Political Broadcasts from Commercial Broadcasting
Stations in Connexion avith the Federal Elections of 1949 and 1951.
Political broadcasts in the “election periods ” preceding the Federal Elections of December, 1949, and
April, 1951, were divided into three main parts: —
Policy speeches by party leaders;
Talks and advertisements authorized by parties; and
Talks and adA r ertisements authorized by organizations other than parties.
The total time devoted to political matter by the commercial stations in the tw r o campaigns was as
follows:
Initial policy speeches were made by the leaders of the Country Party, the Labor Party, and the Liberal
Party. Returns show that in 1949, 84 commercial stations broadcast all three speeches, four broadcast two
speeches, and eleven stations did not broadcast any of the policy speeches. Tavo commercial stations also
broadcast the policy speech of the non-Communist (Lang) Labor Party. In the 1951 election campaign 85
commercial stations broadcast all three policy speeches, fourteen broadcast two, and three broadcast only one
speech.
Broadcasts authorized by parties were made as follows:
The allocation of this time to each party is shown in the following table:—
110


1951.
-
Common-
wealth.
New South
Wales.
Victoria.
Queensland.
South
Australia.
Western
Australia.
Tasmania.
Meti
IOPOLITAN.
Liberal Party
y 49
I 5 o
36
| 32
41
50
(
Country Party
\ 2
4
57
40
43
Labor Party ..
46
39
58
52
Other Parties ..
5
7
2
16
2
1
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
c
OUNTRY.
Liberal Party
r 42
28
\ 46
44
76
f 33
Country Party
Labor Party ..
38
I 18
35
25
46
} 4.
53
23
1
47
Other Parties ..
6
5
1
13
3
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
Mb'!
’ROPOLITAN A1
std Country
Combined.
Liberal Party
\ 55
/ 44
30
\ 43
43
69
/ 54
Country Party
Labor Party ..
Other Parties ..
40
5
\ 15
36
5
21
48
1
1 43
14
55
2
30
1
\
46
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
1949.
Organization.
Metropolitan.
Country.
Total.
21
48
43
Organizations representing banks or bank employees
40
20
24
Federal Independence Fund
16
8
10
Constitutional League
17
6
8
Citizens Rights Association
6
18
15
Other organizations and persons ..
100
100
100
1951.
Percentage of time.
Organization.
37
Australian Council of Trade Unions
21
People’s Union Party ..
8
Federal Economic Council
6
Australian Coal and Shale Employees Federation
5
Queensland Institute of Public Affairs ..
23
Other organizations and persons (18)
100
— • . . a „„ mint „ nv Dar t of any programme sponsored by any 01 me aoovo
(Note.—The above statement does not take into account a y p y
organizations which did not consist of political matter.)
An important part of the 1949 campaign was the contribution of organizations other than parties, which
occupied 17 per cent, of the total time allocated to political matter. In the 1951 campaign only 6 per cent, ot
the total time was occupied by organizations. The distribution of time was made as follows.
Hours.
64
1949. Metropolitan stations .. • • • • • • * • " “ 298
Country stations .. • • • • • • ' ’ ”
362
16
1951. Metropolitan stations .. •• •• ** ” ’ gg
Country stations . • • • • • • • * * * ’
74
In each case a large number of organizations took part, but in each case the bulk of the time was used
by relatively few of them as shown in the following tables.
111


The distribution of political matter between stations was not evenly made, but it is convenient to strike
an average figure for the amount of time per station so occupied in each campaign. In 1949 this average was
21.25 hours per station or 4.2 per cent, of the total hours of transmission during an election period of five weeks
and two days; in 1951, 12.3 hours per station, or 3.1 per cent, of the total hours of transmission during an
election period of four weeks.
The Australian Broadcasting Commission is, under the provisions of section 89 of the Act, solely
responsible for political broadcasts from national stations. In each case the Commission adopted a period of
eight hours per stations for election broadcasts —six hours on national relay and two hours for State
transmission. (In areas served by two national transmitters this time was shared between the stations.) In
the 1949 campaign 30 minutes was allocated to the non-Communist (Lang) Labor Party for transmission in
Sydney and Melbourne only.


Appendix D.
ALPHABETICAL LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMISSION.
Aikin, Rev. W. J. 11., Managing Director, Australian Religious Film Society.
Alexander, Professor F., Dean of the Faculty of Arts, University of Western Australia.
Alexander, H., General Secretary, Actors and Announcers Equity Association of Australia.
Alexander, J. 0., Chief Commonwealth Film Censor.
Allen, E. E., Chief Engineer, Radio Station 4BK, representing Queensland Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
Armstrong, R. E., Assistant Secretary (Assimilation), Commonwealth Department of Immigration.
Arnold, C. E., Acting General Secretary, Postal Telecommunications Technicians’ Association (Aust.).
Badenach, R. M., Director of Airways, Department of Civil Aviation.
Barr, Rev, A. C., Presbyterian Church of Victoria.
Beattie, Rev. G. A., Presbyterian Church of Victoria.
Beaver, H. E., President, Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations.
Benson, J. E., Amalgamated Wireless (Australasia) Limited.
Bird, R. C., Hawthorn, Melbourne,
Bishop, Professor J., Professor of Music, Adelaide University, representing the Film and Television Council
of South Australia.
Boyer, R. J. F., Chairman of the Australian Broadcasting Commission.
Broadby, R. R., Secretary, Australian Council of Trade Unions.
Brown, K. S., Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd.
Brown, Dr. M. S., President, New Education Fellowship, New South Wales Branch.
Burton, B. L., Department of Trade and Customs, Canberra.
Butcher, F. E. J., Commonwealth Bank of Australia.
Butters, Sir J. 11., C.M.G., M.8.E., V.D., Chairman of Directors, Associated Newspapers Ltd. and of Radio
2UE (Sydney) Pty. Ltd.
Byth, Mrs. E. F., 0.8. E., National Council of Women of Australia.
Calder, Airs. AI. E., Women’s Service Guilds of Western Australia Inc.
Cameron, The Hon. A. G., ALP., Speaker of the House of Representatives, Canberra, representing the Victoria
District Committee of the Liberal and Country League of South Australia.
Cargher, J., Glen Iris, Alelbourne.
Casely, Miss E., Hon. Secretary, Australian Federation of Women Voters.
Chandler, The Rt. Hon. Sir J. 8., Chairman of Directors, Broadcasters (Aust.) Pty. Ltd.
Chettle, Airs. D. A., National Council of Women of South Australia.
Chippindall, G. T., C.8.E., Director-General, Posts and Telegraphs.
Clark, S. R. 1., Manager, Brisbane Broadcasting Pty., representing Queensland Newspapers Pty. Ltd.
Coleman, L. R., Managing Director, J. Walter Thompson Aust. Pty. Ltd.
Crouch, E. C., Country Broadcasting Services Limited.
Crowley, N. G., Assistant Director, Department of National Development.
Cudlipp, W. J., President, Australian Association of National Advertisers.
Cullen, Airs. B. J., Country Women’s Association of Australia.
Davey, Dr. C. AI., League of Women Voters of South Australia.
Davies, 8., Senior Lecturer, Adelaide 1 niversity, representing the lilm and television Council of South
Australia.
Dawes, E. R., Vice Chairman, Australian Broadcasting Commission.
Denton, S. 8., Director, SKA Broadcasting Company Limited; United Churches Social Reform Board (South
Australia) ; Methodist Church of Australasia—South Australian Conference. .
Disney, P. C. W., Headmaster, Scotch College, Adelaide, representing the Film and Television Council of
South Australia. .
Donovan, J. M., Assistant Secretary, Australian Broadcasting Control Boaid. _
Douglass, J., Director of Rural Broadcasts, Australian Broadcasting Commission.
Dunstan, W., V.C., General Manager, The Herald and Weekly Times Limited, Melbourne.
Dye, H. W., Hon. Secretary, Arts Council of Australia (Victorian Division).
Evans, E. A., Alanaging Director, 7EX Pty. Ltd,, Launceston.
Ewart, Mrs. 8., Concord, Sydney. . a
Ewers, J. K., President, Fellowship of Australian Writers (Western Australia Section).
Fabinyi, Dr. A., Publishing Manager, F. W. Cheshire 1 ty. Ltd. _ _
Falk, Airs. 8., Victorian Council for Children’s Films and Television.
Farrell, S. K, State Schools Committees’ Association of Victoria. . T m
Faudell, C. L., Electronic Industries Limited, Chief Supervisor, lye Electronic I ty. Ltd.
Faulkner, A. D., Newcastle Broadcasting Company Pty. Ltd.
Featherstone, R. lE, General Secretary, State School Teachers I nion of V.A. Inc.
Fisher, J. A., Church of Christ, Perth, Western Australia. T -
Fisk, Sir E. T., formerly Managing Director, Electric and Musical Industnes Limitec.
Fogarty, R. F. G., Chairman, Victorian Associated Brewers.
Foley, 8., Vice-President, National Farmers’ Union of Australia
Forrester, J., Electrical Trades Union of Australia (Queensland Branch).
Fox \ E T? Amfllo-fnnated Wireless (Australasia) Limited. .
Frauds, Rev.’W e /President, New South Wales Conference, Methodist Church of Australasia.
Freadman, P., Managing Secretary, National Gas Association of Austiaha.
Glover, A. G, Federal President, Wireless Institute of Australia
Gronow, W. R., Federal Vice-President, Wireless Institute of Austiaha.
Hain, Airs. G. A., President, Housewives’ Association, \ ictonan Dmsion.
Hale, E. V., Sydney.
Hall, A. L., McKinnon, Alelbourne. . . . ~ , r , •
Hawes, S. G., Producer-in-Chief, Film Division, Department of the Intel m .
F. 5242/5L—B


Heath, H. F., President, Hew South Wales Teachers’ Federation.
Henderson, Rev. K. T., Supervisor of Religious Broadcasts, Australian Broadcasting Commission.
Hilliard, Rt. Rev. W. G., Bishop-Coadjutor of Sydney. Executive Member, Australian Council for the World
Council of Churches.
Hobbm, Rev, W. J., Director, Social Service Department, Hew South Wales Conference of the Methodist
Church of Australasia; Member of Standing Committee, Child Welfare Advisory Council of Hew South
Wales.
Hooke, L. A. G., Managing Director, Amalgamated Wireless (Australasia) Limited; Chairman, Electronics
and Allied Industries Division, Chamber of Manufactures of Hew South Wales.
Hooper, E. M,, Chief Engineer, Radio Station 3DB, representing the Herald and Weekly Times Limited.
Howell, F. R., Executive Member, Victorian Wheat and Wool Growers Association.
Howse, J. 8., M.P., Parliamentary Huder Secretary, Minister for Territories; Member for Calare Hew
South Wales.
Hull, G. M., Federal Secretary, Wireless Institute of Australia.
James, C. R. 8., Hon. Director, Adult Deaf and Dumb Society of Victoria.
Jeffares, Professor A. H., Professor of English, Adelaide Fniversity, representing the Film and Television
Council of South Australia.
Jones, S. 0., Technical Director, Philips Electrical Industries Pty. Ltd.
Jose, D. A. A., Director of Programme Services, Australian Broadcasting Control Board.
Rain, Rev. Canon A. E., Church of England, South Australia.
Keogh, M. 8., Australian Culture Defence Movement.
Kiek, Rev. Winifred, Vice-President, Australian Federation of Women Voters.
Lamb, S. P. P., Managing Director, Hewcastle Broadcasting Company Pty. Ltd.
Lane, R. E., Sydney.
Larkin, J. S., General Manager, SDH Broadcasting Station.
Leonard, R. 8., Herald and Weekly Times Limited.
Liehert. S. F. E., President, Australian Council of School Organizations.
Long, V. R., Superintendent of Primary and Modern Schools, Education Department, Tasmania.
Lyons, Most Rev, Monsignor P. F., Auxiliary Bishop to His Eminence Cardinal Gilroy, representing the
Catholic Church in Australia. 8
MacAlphine, E. W., Editor-in-Ohief, Consolidated Press Ltd.
McDonald, D., Director of Technical Services, Australian Broadcasting Control Board.
MacDonald, K. A., Manager, Advertiser Broadcasting Hetwork, representing Advertiser Hewspapers Limited.
McDowall, Mrs. K. S., South Yarra, Melbourne.
McGmwan, L. T., General Secretary-Treasurer, Professional Radio Employees’ Institute of Australia.
. cKenzie, A. J., Assistant Director of Technical Services, Australian Broadcasting Control Board.
Maclean, Miss M., Heutral Bay, Sydney.
McMillan, Professor J. R. A., Dean of the Faculty of Agriculture, University of Sydney.
Martin, A ; F., Amalgamated Wireless (Australasia) Limited.
Medley, Sir J. D. G., Member, Australian Broadcasting Commission: Formerly Vice Chancellor University
of Melbourne, ’
Metcalfe, J. W., Principal Librarian, Public Library of Hew South Wales.
Metcalfe, Mrs. T. 0., President, Hational Council'of Women of Hew South Wales
Mills, Miss M., Hational Council of Women of South Australia.
Mills Miss H. M., General Secretary, Queensland Woman’s Christian Temperance Union.
t irecto r Agriculture, Chicago, Hational Broadcasting Company, United States of America.
aVloses, L. J. A., General Manager, Australian Broadcasting Commission.
Moulds,H. G., Secretary, Australasian Inter-Union Conference of Seventh Day Adventists
Mountain, G R., Chief Inspector and Senior Economist, Hational Bank of Australasia Ltd., Melbourne.
Mulrooney, J. L., M.V.0., M.8.E., Australian Hational Football Council.
Murphy. B. Buller, Barrister, 462 Chancery-lane, Melbourne.
Haden, L. 0., Australasian Inter-Union Conference of .Seventh Day Adventists
Hash, C. H., Secretary, Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations.
Neal, W. D., Hon. Federal Secretary, Hew Education Fellowship.
Hixon, H. V., Australian Association of Advertising Agencies.
O’Donnell M. W Assistant Secretary, General Finance and Economic Policy Branch, Commonwealth
Department of the Treasury, representing the Treasury.
Oplvy, C., Managing Director, Macquarie Broadcasting Service Pty. Ltd.
2,S r^' y ’ T F ‘Q P ‘’ Superintendent (Engineering) Commonwealth Department of Supply, South Australia.
O Kelly, J., Secretary, Australian Broadcasting Control Board.
Oliver, E., Engineer, Brisbane.
Paddison A C., General Manager, Transcontinental Broadcasting Corporation Limited
Baton, Mrs. A., Chairman, Victorian Council for Children’s Films and Television
Pearce, E. H., General Manager, SKA Broadcasting Company Limited
Penny, Dr. H. H., Principal, Adelaide Teachers’ College!
Perkins, W. H., Lecturer in Education, University of Tasmania.
Phillips, A. 0., President, Fellowship of Australian Writers (Victorian Branch).
PoiJter i Jo , C^, niub f representing the Principal Racing Clubs of Australia.
Federation". P pal ’ TeacJiers 001 le £ e ’ Launceston, representing Tasmanian State School Teachers’
PrAo-l f Pr Nr fO TT° r T W IS• De T ° f Faculty of Economics and Commerce, University of Melbourne,
Pringle H. H. L., Director of Variety, Australian Broadcasting Commission
Reynolds, E. A., Adult Deaf and Dumb Society of Victoria.
Ridley, A., Country Broadcasting Services Limited. ’ _
Ridley, J. E., Chairman of Directors, Country Broadcasting Services Limited
Robertson, Dr. T. L., Director of Education, Western Australia,


Rosenthal, H. lE, Director, Visual Aids Department, University of Melbourne.
Russell, E. A., Senior Lecturer in Economics, Adelaide University, representing the Film and Television
Council of .South Australia.
Sanders, L. J., Managing Director, Sanders Chemical Limited.
Schofield, The Venerable Archdeacon J. A., Chairman, Archbishop of Melbourne’s Committee on Television.
Scrimgeour, C. G., Chairman and Managing Director, Associated TV Pty. Ltd.
Smith, E. K., Radio and Television Writers’ Guild.
Spielvogel, E., Centelex Trading Company.
Stevenson, M. H., Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations; Chief Engineer, Radio 2UE
(Sydney) Pty. Ltd.
Stewart, E. J., Supervising Engineer, Postmaster-General’s Department.
Swift, Mrs, I. E., Women’s Service Guilds of Western Australia Inc.
Taylor, 11. V., Architect, Melbourne.
Thomas, Rev. T. W., Hon. Secretary, Archbishop of Melbourne’s Committee on Television.
Thomas, Rev. W. C., Hon. Secretary, Council of Churches in Victoria.
Tildesley, Miss E. M., M.8.E., President, British Drama League (Aust.).
Towner, A. D., M.8.E., Engineer, Burnie, Tasmania.
Traine, A. G., General Secretary, Farmers’ Union of Western Australia Inc.
Turner, E. L. A., Hon. Secretary, Public Affairs and Parliamentary Reform Movement.
Ure, R. M., Directing Architect, Commonwealth Department of Works.
Wadham, Professor S. M., Dean of the Faculty of Agriculture, University of Melbourne.
Walker, Rev. A., Executive Member, Australian Council for the World Council of Churches.
Warner, Hon. A. G., M.L.C., Managing Director, Electronic Industries Limited.
Warner, G. A., Electronic Industries Limited.
Wauchope, Miss M. L., Senior Lecturer, Teachers’ College, Adelaide.
Webb, L. C., Reader in Political Science, Australian National University.
Weeden, W. J., Director, Commonwealth Office of Education.
White, J. M., Secretary, Taxpayers’ Association of Hew South Wales.
Wilson, J. L. J., Director of Tutorial Classes, Sydney University.
Woollacott, Rev. E. lE, Director, United Churches Social Reform Board; Methodist Church of Australasia-
South Australian Conference.
Wordley, E. G., Author, Hobart.
Worrall, D. T., Manager, Radio Stations 3DB-3LK.
Wyndham, Dr. H. S., Director-General of Education, Hew South Wales,
115


Appendix E.
BIBLIOGRAPHY.
This bibliography comprises literature on sociological aspects of television, and legislation arising
through the impact of television on society. A review has been made of the literature available in Australia
as at Ist December, 1953, and precedence has been given to the more recent literature, but a proportion of
older references has been chosen for its historical interest, and to indicate logical developments.
Ihe arrangement is alphabetical under broad subject headings, except in the case of legislation where
references are in chronological order.
ADMINISTRATION AND LEGISLATION.
Australia.
JOINT Parliamentary Committee on Broadcasting. Report. 25th Mar., 1942. Chairman—senator the Hon. W. G. Gibson.
PARLIAMENTARY Standing Committee on Broadcasting. Reports. 1942-1948.
AUSTRALIAN Broadcasting Act 1942-1953.
TELEVISION Act 1953.
AUSTRALIAN Broadcasting Control Board. Annual reports. 1949-1952.
Canada.
CANADIAN Broadcasting Act 1936 (as amended).
RADIO Act 1938 (as amended).
ROYAL Commission on national development in the arts, letters and sciences. Report. 1949-1951. Chairman—Viscount
Massey.
IARLIAMENT. House of Commons. Special committee on radio broadcasting. Minutes of proceedings and evidence
Nos. 1-11. Nov.-Dee., 1951.
(Includes report on policies and aims of the U.8.C.)
CANADIAN Broadcasting Corporation. Annual reports. 1950-1953.
Great Britain.
TELEVISION Committee. Report, 1935. Chairman—Lord Selsdon. (Cmd. 4793.)
TELEVISION Committee 1943. Report 29th Dec., 1944. Chairman—Lord Hankey.
BROADCASTING Policy. Lond., H.M.5.0., July, 1946. (Cmd. 6852.)
BROADCASTING Committee. Report, 1949. Lond., Jan., 1951. Chairman—Lord Beveridge. (Cmd. 8116.)
Appendix H. Memoranda submitted. (Cmd. 8117.)
BROADCASTING. Memorandum on the report of the Broadcasting Committee 1949
July, 1951. (Cmd. 8291.)
May, 1952. (Cmd. 8550.)
Nov., 1953. (Cmd. 9005.)
BROADCASTING. Copy of licence and agreement between H.M. Postmaster-General and the British Broadcasting
Corporation. Lond., June, 1952. (Cmd. 8579.)
Draft of Royal Charter for continuance of 8.8. C. Lond., June, 1952. (Cmd. 8580.)
BRITISH Broadcasting Corporation. Annual report and accounts for the year 1952-53. (Cmd. 8928.)
TELEVISION Advisory Committee 1952. First Report. Lond., H.M.5.0., 1953.
Basis for plan for use of frequencies in Great Britain for television purposes.
‘•TELEVISION space for sale.*’ (Editorial.) Economist, pp. 751-3, 13th June, 1953.
te(4mkaiT developments"' 110 ° f ,1U1 " 1,( ‘ 1 ' of lolevision cl,annel& ' that reserved for British commercial networks in view of 8.8. C.
United States of America.
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION. Communications Act of 1934 (as amended).
Annual reports 13-18th. 1947-1953.
Sixth report and order. Final television allocations report. Broadcasting Telecasting, Part 11. 14th Apr. 1952- also
published in Federal Register, v. 17, no. 87, 2nd May, 1952, Wash. ’ ’
Investigation of radio and television programs. Final report of the F.C.C. Sub-Committee to the Committee on Interstate
and loreign Commerce. Chairman—O. Harris. Wash., Govt. Ptg. Off., 1952.
Study to determine the extent to which programs contain immoral and otherwise offensive matter, or place improper emphasis
on crime, violence and corruption. 1 11 mpnasis
COPYRIGHT.
GREAT BRITAIN. Copyright Committee. Report. Lond., H.M.5.0., Oct., 1952.
SPRING, S. Risks and rights in publishing, television, radio, motion pictures, advertising and the theatre. Lond., 1952.
STRASCHNOV, G. ( opyright obstacles to the International exchange of television programmes ” BBC Quart 6no 2 ■
88-95, Summer, 1951. ‘ ’’ ’ ’ ‘
ECONOMIC ASPECTS.
DUNNING, J. “The radio and television industry: a post-war survey.” Three Banks Review No 14 June 1952
it ttSS"” ” * •* '» » «*» * >«. •• im Important single item 1„
DUNNING, J. “Prospects for radio and television in 1953.” District Bank Review No. 105- 128-42 Mar 1953
Review of trends and developments in Great Britain in 1952. ’ ' ”
FAUGHT, M. C. “Television: an interim summing-up.” Saturday Rev. Lit., 26th Aum ]950
Subscription television considered necessary to finance good programmes.
FAUGHT, M. C. “Television: an interim summing-up.” Saturday Rev. Lit.. 1952.
Problems of television broadcasting are rooted in economic causes. Subscription’ telecasting a solution.
FAUGHT, M. C. “Positive approach to the future of television.”
Text of speech delivered before the Men’s Advertising Club of Washington, on 17th Mar., I9bg.
FEDERAL COMMISSION. Broadcast financial data for networks and AM, FM and Television
stations. \\ asli., luoz.
kj’ andECKLAND, G. N. - Probable effects of television on income of other media.” Journalism Quart., 29:
Analysis of past and future distribution of advertising dollars.
GREENE, H. ( . television transcriptions: the economic possibilities.” 8.8. C. Quart 7no 4- 216-221 Winter iq-v?
A growing market for British television transcriptions, both films and kinescopes in United SMies vn • ’ ,
Commonwealth television services established. ana Kinescopes, in lin ted Stares. Market will increase when
HQWARD, J. “Hollywood and television: year of decision.” Quart. Film, Radio and Television, 7, no. 4: 359, Summer,
To avoid television being a mediocre dispenser of low grade radio nine ho-v,t i . , . . .
necessary to finance development. * 1)1118 sight ’ theat,e television or subscription television


NATIONAL BROADCASTING CO. Television to-day: its impact on people and products June 1951
A study as to the effectiveness of television advertising conducted in the New York metropolitan area in Jan., 1951.
Television to-day: Report II: Additional findings and research methods of the second NBC-Hofstra' studv bv T E
Coffin. Apr., 1952. ' j ■ ■
NAPOLITANO, G. “Television broadcasting and its legal and economic problems.” C.I.T. Bull. 1: 159-163 1951.
Proposals for the Study Groups of the International Television Committee, submitted at conference held in Paris 12th-13th
Feb., 1951. Exchange of programmes considered necessary. c u mus, mu iaui
RENWICK, R. “Television programmes: a new link of Commonwealth.” New Commonwealth , 25: 267-8 16th Mar
1953.
Opportunity for Britain to provide acceptable films for countries which must rely largely upon programmes compiled elsewhere.
« TELEVISION’S time of trouble.” Fortune, p. 75, Aug., 1951. (Editorial.)
Phonevision and/or theatre television necessary, as advertising cannot wholly finance television broadcasting.
HISTORY OF DEVELOPMENT.
GORHAM, M. Broadcasting and television since 1900. Lond., Dakers, 1952.
In Great Britain.
HORTON, D. Television’s story and challenge. Bond., Harrap,, 1951.
In England, U.S.A., Russia, France and Germany.
SIMON, Ernest Darwin, Ist Baron Simon of Wythenshawe (Chairman of 8.8.0. 1947-1952). 8.8. C, from within. Lond
1953.
SIMON, Ernest Darwin, Ist Baron Simon of Wythenshawe. “ Broadcasting in other countries.” Political Quart., 24,
no. 4: 345-8, Oct.-Dec., 1953.
SWIFT, J. Adventure in vision. Lond., Lehmann, 1950.
U.S. Federal Communications Commission. Radio broadcast primer. INF-2, p. 14-22, Wash., Nov., 1952.
WILLIS, E. E. Foundations in broadcasting. N.Y., Oxford U.P., 1951.
LEGAL ASPECTS.
BORSOCK, E. “Television, its legal limitations,” Boston Univ. Law Rev., 32: 179-89, Apr., 1951.
Television and governmental programming limitations; television and state control; television and the rights involved In
telecasting sport events.
ROBBINS, E. C. “ Some legal problems of television in England.” European Broadcasting Union Doc. and Inf. Bull., 1,
no. 3: 226-229, 15th Sept., 1950.
SAGLE, R. F. “ The nature and effect of major sports restrictions on radio and television broadcasting rights under the
Sherman Act.” Geo. Wash. Laic Rev., 21: 466-82, Mar., 1953.
SOLINGER, D. M. “Unauthorized uses of television broadcasts.” Columbia Law Rev., 48: 848-75, Sept., 1948.
TERROU, F., and SOLAL, L. Legislation for press, film and radio. Unesco, Paris, 1951.
WARNER, H. P. Radio and television law: a standard reference book on the legal and regulatory structure of the radio
industry. N.Y., Matthew Bender Co., 1948.
WARNER, H. P. Radio and television rights: the law of copyright, trade marks and unfair competition and the broadcasting
industry. N.Y., Matthew Bender, 1953. (In 4 vols.)
TELEVISION IN EDUCATION.
(o) General.
ADAMS, M. “Television and education.” J. Roy. Soc. Arts, 97: 195-203, 11th Feb., 1949.
Second Cantor Lecture on television delivered on 29th Nov., 1948.
OARSON, S. Television and education: Panel discussion with the co-operation of Nat. Assoc, of Educ. Broadcasters on
need for reservation of channels for educational broadcasting. Symposium. New Republic, 26th Feb., 1951.
COOLEY, H. Vision in television: the origins and potentialities of educational television. N.Y., Channel Press, 1952.
DENNY, R. “ A note on the educational television channels.” Chicago Univ. “ Round Table”, No. 782, 29th Mar., 1953.
DUNHAM, F. “The obligations of an educational television station.” Educ. Reccyrd, 33: 392-402, July, 1952.
Address before the American Council on Education.
HOLTZMANN, J. L. “ E-TV ” —The challenge of educational television. Univ. of State of N.Y. Press, 1953.
LASSWELL, H, “ Educational broadcasters as social scientists.” Quart. Film, Radio and Television, 7, no. 2: 150, Winter,
1952.
LEVENSON, W. 8., and STASHEFF, E. Teaching through radio and television. N.Y., Rhinehart, 1952.
McNICKLE, R. K. Television in education. Editorial Res. Reports, 1, no. 20: 31st May, 1951.
“NOTES for our ‘Time capsule’: reflections on educational television.” See and Hear, 7, no. 5: 7, 1952. (Editoiial.)
Writer considers evolution of visual education was delayed through lack of orderly planning by visionaries, and that television
also has these visionaries. To meet cost of television station, lowa’s State College leases some of the station s time for poor
programmes such as low-comedy and strip tease.
NEWSON, C. V., Ed. Television policy for education: Proceedings of the Television Programs Institute, held undei the
auspices of the American Cbuneil on Education at Pennsylvania State College, Apr., 21-24, 1952.
NEW YORK UNIVERSITY, State Education Dept. Use of television for educational purposes in the State of New York.
Albany, 1952. , ..
Television broadcasting should further the democratic aim of increasing the understanding of the many.
NEW YORK UNIVERSITY. Addresses given at Conference at Schenectady, 12th-13th Nov., 1952.
Advantages of pooling resources of cultural institutions of the State of New York for educational programmi s. . .
OLSON, 0. J., Ed. Education on the air 1952. 22nd year-book of the Institute for Education by Radio and Television.
Ohio State Univ. Press, 1952.
PAULU, B. “Challenge of the 242 channels” Pt. I. Quart. Film, Radio and Television, 7, no. 1; 1, Fall, 1952.
tfieUvMoi SS’sSatlon. and analysis of functions, costs and possibilities of educational television stations.
SIEGEL, S. N. “Educational broadcasting in the United States.” 8, no. U. Spring, 1953
Audience building will be necessary, owing to lack of proper information about programmes, 8< P
of audience and size they might have. . a TTnocpn
SIEPMANN, C. A. Television and education in the United States. Press, film and radio in the world to-day Senes. Unesco,
Paris 1952
D. “The possibilities of educational television on commercial stations.” Educ. Record, 33: 392-402, July, 1952.
Address before American Council on Education, Chicago, 2nd May, 1952.
TAYLOR, T. “Television as an educational medium.” Educ. Rec. 33: 30-4, Jan., n^ 2 .I age i s broadened and diversified.
Possibilities of television for educational purposes cannot be realized until its econo ■ •
TELEVISION: a challenge and a chance for education. Courier, Unesco, 6, no. 3, March, l.m.t.
U.S, JOINT COMMITTEE on Educational Television. Television channels for education: a s a emen on le
potentialities of educational television. Wash., 1951.
WIGMN, H, E. “ Educational television: some .Jipti®. 1 " JU eommunlt'y groups, end
Educational television is community centered television arising out of e „ . kj ..
Elves opportunity for discussion of problems in public forum. Aims to develop tinman,, .
r.5242/54. —9


( b ) Adult Education.
DAVIES, S. W. “Adult education telecasts in Baltimore.” Adult Educ., 11, No. 1, Oct., 1951.
FORD FOUNDATION Fund for Adult Education. Annual report, 1051, p. 33-34 TV-radio workshop.
FORD FOUNDATION Fund for Adult Education. Challenge of lifetime learning, 1953. Describes how more than s2m
has been spent on radio-TV projects during 1.1.52 to 30.6.53,
FRASER, A. “Limits to democracy. The standardized mind.” Voice, p. 12, July, 1953.
Discusses part played by pn ss, radio and television in trend towards development of standardized mind.
MILLER, K. C. “ Scientific museum’s experiment in television.” Museum, Unesco, 5, no. 4: 248-50 1952.
Television program “ Science in action ” sponsored by California Acad. Sciences.
MOORE, R. W. “Television: a cautionary approach.” 8.8. C. Quart., 5, no. 1: 8-12, Spring 1950.
Fears television by increasing standardized entertainment will prevent individuality.
SCHOENER, A. “An art museum’s experiment in television.” Museum, Unesco, 5, no. 4: 239-244 1952.
San Francisco Museum of Art has put on regular television programmes ‘Art in your life” since April, 1951.
COAST Committee for Humanities. Humanities in television: a symposium. Pacific Spectator, 6, no. 3; 272-90
Conference held at San Francisco in Feb., 1952, “ E-TV at adult level ”.
standing Sears. ° f ** E ' Mowry ‘ Literature and the adult laity by R. B. Heilman. Value of Imaginative under-
REHAGE, K. J., and HEYWOOD, S. J. “Television and education.” Elementary School J., 133-135 Nov. 1952.
i uclud , eB son,e fi I n( l ings ? f tb f ilon ‘, cl , air .’ N J - television in education project. K' search needed for most effective" use of 040
r\ channels reserved for education. Television best media for continuing adult education.
SOOP, E. J. “University of Michigan television hour.” Adult Educ. (U.5.),2: 113-116, Feb., 1952.
(c) School Use of Television.
•BATTLEGROUND: Why we oppose the television boom.” Annual Fall inventory of new audio-visual materials 1952
published by See and Hear (Editorial). ’
CLARKE, E. “ Television experiment in Salt Lake City. Local co-operation.” See and Hear p 13 Nov 1951
Programs using public school students since Sept., 1949. 1 ’ ’ ”
CONRAD L H. Television in educational project. Educational television moves forward: report of a full school day of
nUra-liigh frequency classroom television programs in the public schools of Bloomfield and Montclair, New Jersey
on 30th Apr., 1902. Montclair State Teachers’ College, July, 1952. y
DUNHAM, F. “Television brings new challenge to teaching.” School Life, Nov., 1951.
Televised subji cts in degree course at Western Reserve University.
DUNHAM, F, “ Effect of television on school achievement.” School Life, pp. 88-89 Mar. 1952.
Comment on Xavier survey—How do children with television sets compare with non-television owners.
GABLE, M. A. “ The viewers’ views on classroom television.” Educ. Screen, June 1951
A Philadelphia survey records reactions of pupils, teachers and parents who are viewing and using school telecasts
LEVIN, B. “Television and the schools.” Harvard Educ. Rev., 20, no. 4: 255 Fall 1950
Writer considers television tends to induce literalmindedness and prevents creative snirit • slip pvninnf.» pwi..a n i n i. ln K 1«
Spectators School television programmes and prefers 8.8. C. children's programmes ’ e ' aluat 8 Pluladel P hla Pubhc
LEWIS, P. “T.V.’s impact on Teen-agers.” Phi Delta Kappan, Nov., 1951
Summary of survey held at South Shore High School in Chicago
PHILADELPHIA PUBLIC SCHOOLS. Television schedules.
Monthly bulletin of television school programmes.
WITTY, P. “ Television and the high school student.” Education, Dec., 1951.
WITTY, P. “Television and the educative process.” School and Society, 369-72, 15th Dec. 1951.
Summary of survey held at Evanston, Illinois, of 2,100 elementary pupils and 1,700 parents to see how children’s strong inter st
m television can be utilized to best advantage and to stimulate varied interests and reading. cnuciren s strong inter, st
PROGRAMMES.
BAILEY, K., Ed. Television annual for 1953. Lond.
BENOIBT, P. “Le theatre k la television, un nouvel art a deeouvrir.” La television pratique, Apr. 1953.
Televis d theatre productions seem flat; need for dramatic work to cater for reauirement« nf feWiciJn « , ~
speeches and artificiality do not go over well. requirements of television. Static action, lengthy
BOGARDUS, E. S. “Television scale and television index.” Amer. Social Rev 17- ?20-3 Anr 1952
and opportunity o to®view! ° survey of 20 ty P es programmes to s. e how people would react To television programmes if given time
BUSSELL, J. Art of television. Lond., Faber, 1952,
Art of producing programmes. Television a powerful means of national expression.
CARSON, S. “ TV’s brave new experiment.” The Nation, 17th Jan., 1953.
Innovations in programmes produced by Ford Foundation’s T.V.—Radio Workshop.
CLARK. M. “Television prospect”, pp. 174-187, Cinema 1952, Lond., Pelican.
Television the ideal medium for feature programmes.
COOKE, A. “Television ‘code’ in the U.S.” Listener, pp. 1108-9, 27th Dec., 1951.
GORHAM, M. “TV: a medium in its own right?” pp. 131-146, Cinema, 1951, Lond., Pelican.
HODAPP, \\ . Television manual: practical guide to television production and programming for education public affairs
and entertainment, N.Y., Farrar, Strauss & Young, 1953. ’ 1 1C dnails
HUBEELL, R. Television programming and production. N.Y., Murray Hill, 1945.
HULBERT, J. “ Television and entertainment.” J. Roy. 80c. Arts , 97 203-13 11th Feh uuo
Third Cantor Lecture on television. ’ ’ ’
SJSw. “ BB ' C - TV: “ i " terv, * w wil, ‘ *■*" Manvell ” «»•*.
Details of British television programme service.
NATIONAL BROADCASTING CO. NBC radio and television broadcast standards XY 1951
Company recognizes its basic responsibility is to serve and advance the public Interest ’ ’’
NE ™HAM, J, K. Television behind the scenes. Lon, Convoy Pubs, 1948. 8.8. C. programmes. Chap. II.—“ The
ORME, F. “New television code.” Quart. Film, Radio and Television, 6, no. 4; 404-413, Summer 1952.
PENNELL. E. “Home economics in television.” 11. J. Home Econ., 45: 239-42 4pr 1953
There is a declining Interest among viewers in home economics programmes; suggestions’ for Improvements.
®WEZEY, R. D. Ghe the TV code a chance. Quart. Film, Radio and Television 7no I - 13-24 Fall 1959
Development and provisions of the Code for programme stanrlardu nnrt m'*- ‘ , . ’ „ ivoe,.
Broadcasters. Writer considers Code is sincere attempt by American television broadcasted to fniprod
TELEVISION: the viewer and the advertiser Text of a memo, on competitive television and drlf ~Cs for the
regulations of programmes, submitted jointly by the Inc. Society of British Advertisers and the Institute of Inc
Practitioners in Advertising to H.M. Postmaster-General. 1953. suluie 01 Jnc -
UNESCO, World survey. Paris, 1953.
Comprehensive world'survey of present television stations and plans for future introduction of televi«mn m „
non-self-governing territories. 1 0(11,1 ' 10,1 or television in 45 countries ami


UNITED STATES. Text of NARTB [National Association of Radio and Television Broadcasters] television code.
Broadcasting Telecasting, p. 81, 10th Dec., 1951.
In force as from Ist March, 1952. Adopted on a voluntary basis by the television industry.
US. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE. Office of Information. Television report. Sec. 111. Programme methods. Feb.,
' 1953.
YOUNG, M. S. “Television: how bad can it be.” Amer. Scholar, 20: 447-54, Autumn, 1951.
Discusses poor quality of programmes and future trends.
SOCIAL ASPECTS AND CRITICISM.
(a) General.
BATTEN, Barton, Durstone & Osborne Inc. What’s happening to leisure time in television homes? N.Y., 1951.
BEVERIDGE, William Henry, Baron Beveridge. “Monopoly and broadcasting.” Political Quart., 24, no. 4; 387 95,
Oct.-Dec., 1953.
BRACKBILL, C. “The church must use television.” Religion in Life, 22: 110-21, Winter 1952-53.
CASSIRER, H. R. “ The television set becomes a French village meeting place.” Courier, UNESCO, p. 3, Aug.-Sept., 1952.
Community television.
COFFIN. T. E. “Television’s effects on leisure time activities.” J. Applied Psychology, Oct., 1948.
COLLINS, N. “ Television and the future.” 8.8. C. Quart., 4, no. 1: 26-31, Apr., 1949.
COLLINS N. “Nature of ‘competitive’ television.” Political Quart., 24, no. 4: 368-75, Oct.-Dec., 1953.
COOK, A. “Television’s impact on American home life.” Listener, 6th July, 1950.
DAVIES, E. “Public control of commercial television.” Political Quart., 24, no. 4; 387-95, Oct.-Dec., 1953.
Control over 8.8. C. is exercised by Licence and Agreement between it and P.M.G., and thence to Parliament. Writer considers
similar control through licensing procedure should be imposed upon all alternative services.
De FOREST, L. Television now and onwards. Lond., Hutchinson, 1946.
DUNLAP, 0. E. Future of television. N.Y., Harper, 1947.
GOULD J. What TV is doing to us: a survey of the effects of television on American life. New York Times (Reprint
of 1 days’ articles published in June, 1951, based on nation-wide reports from more than 100 “Times” correspondents).
GREEN, R. S. “ Narcom (North Atlantic relay communications) and United (United telecommunications): world-wide
television within five years? not a dream, but a real possibility.” U.N. World, pp. 28-31, Feb., 1953.
GRUBER, F. C. “ Radio and television and ethical standards.” Annals of Amer. Acad. Pol. and Soc. Science, Mar., 1952.
HALEY, W. “An extension of broadcasting,” 8.8. C. Quart., 4, no. 3: 129-36, Oct., 1949.
LEE, R. E. Television: the revolution. N.Y., Essential books, 1944.
McDONAGH, E. O. “Television and the family.” Sociol. and Social Res., 35, no. 2: 113, Nov.-Dee., 1950.
Survey of a community of 800 families in South California.
MADDEN, C. “Television: problems and possibilities.” 8.8. C. Quart., 2, no. 4: 225-228, Jan., 1948.
MANVELL, R. The crowded air: study of the problems and potentialities of American and British television. N.\.,
Channel Press Pub., 1953.
MARX, H. L. Television and radio in American life. Reference Shelf series, 25, no. 2. N.Y., H. V. Wilson, 1903.
MORRISON, H. “Commercial television: the argument examined.” Political Quart., 24, no. 4: 338-44, Oct.-Dec., 1953.
NAPOLITANO, G. “Social aspects of television.” C.I.T. Bull. (International television committee), 1, no. 1: 115-118,
1951. , , , ...
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION RADIO AND TELEVISION BROADCASTERS. Television Information Committee.
Facts about TV.
•*•<*•« BOW circulation ot hooka; « decrease In "pot hollers", hut an increase
in books on world events, economics, history, &c.
Oct., 1953. Health and medicine. . ...
How the medium is being employed in the furtherance of pu •
PATCH, B. W. Television boon. Editorial Res. Reports, 1, no. 4, 26th Jan., 1949.
Effect on family activities. „ _. r 7 , Q .„
RICHARDSON, G. D. “ Television and the public library. Aust. Lib. J., 2, no. 3, 04-07, Jod. . „
RILEY, J. W., CANTWELL, F. V., and RUTTIGER, K. F. “ Some observations on social effects of television. Pub.
System and Rutger’s Cniv. to study social consequences of television ownership
impact of broadcasting on Great Britain’s life and ontioob ” B.M .I no. 1. 1-0. Apr.. 1048.
SARNOFF, D. “What’s next in television.” U.S. News & B orld Report, ,p. c - , ov -> * „
SARNOFF, D. “Facing the future in radio and television broadcasting: opportunities and responsibilities. Comm.
and Fin. Chronicle, 177: 1961, 7th May, 1953. Anr-pips 29th Anr 1958
Address before the Nat. Assoc. Radio PMlosophieal and psychological aspects of
SIEPMANN, C. A. Radio, television and society. N.Y., uxiom u.i., moo. t v j
“ National policy on television.” Pub. Opin. Quart., 461-474, Fall, 1950.
SMYTHE, D. W, Ratio p J television” Quart. Film, Radio and Television, 6: 109-128, Winter,
SMYTHE, D. W. “The consumer’s stake in radio and television.
Speech delivered at Consumers' Union Conf., \ assar College, Summer, 9" 1953
TAYLOR, S. “8.8. C. or commercial radio” Political Quart., 24, no. 4: 357-67, Oct.-Dec., 1953.
“ TELEVISION Revolution.” Platform, Sept., 1951 (Editorial). , Mplli Tpcli College on 16th Anr
VICTORIAN Women Graduates’ Assoc. Report on television, read at General Meeting Melb, Tech. Colley p..
1953; in Baty Health (Vic. Baby Health Centres Assoc.) 2, no. 9, June, 1953.
Review of social implications in America and <ngaiu. vy Morrow 1938.
aad entcrtainme ” t ' s ’ ,all radio lake
WIBBb; «*- ~ “
Social objectives of television and radio programi.
(b) Children and Television.
. nnr Ouart 2. no. 2: 81-89, Summer, 1950.
ADAMS, M. “Programmes for the young viev ln progra mmeB.
Need for programmes for small child as we 1 . „oo ripe 1950.
ANON. “What shall be do about television? ’ ma ’ n }/ problems’ Induced by television.
Several parent. Illustrate how a commonsense Bo ’m.. p 154-166, Nov., 1950
rOGLEE, S. “ Prometheus or wcaHoned » P n favourite leisure occupation.
Reports an Investigation in which 1.208 children w„re


" INFLUENCE of television crime programs on children’s health.” J. Amer. Med. Assoc., 150-1, June, 1952.
Mental, physical and social consequences of television programmes on health of children. Continuation of findings by Dr. Preston.
LEJEUNE, C. A. “Television for children” Family Doctor [published by B.M.A.] 3, no. 10: 535-38, Oct., 1953.
8.8. C. programs for graded age groups; experimenting in programs for deaf children, and for teen-agers from 16-19 years.
MACCOBY, E. E. “Television: its impact on schoolchildren.” Pub. Opin. Quart., 15, no. 3: 421-44, 1951.
Study of family behaviour in which 332 mothers of 622 school-children 4-17 years were interviewed in Cambridge, Mass., Dec.
1900-Feb., 1951. 1 9 *’
PRESTON, M. I. “ Children’s reactions to movie horrors and radio crime.” J. Pediatrics, 19, no. 2, Aug., 1951.
Study of emotional responses of 200 children 6-16 years to horror films, programmes and literature, and health reaction.
SEAGOE, M. V. “Children’s television habits and preferences.” Quart. Film, Radio a7id Television, 6: 143-53, Winter
1951. ’ ’
Children show distinct preferences for adventure, family programmes and comedy.
SEAGOE, M. V. “A score sheet for children’s television.” Quart. Film, Radio and Television, 6: 327-337, Summer 1952
Necessary factors in programmes for children. What the child himself demands.
SHAYON, R. L. Television and our children, N.Y., Longmans, Green, 1951.
STOCKS, M. “Television and the young viewer.” Political Quart., 24, no. 4: 349-56, Oct.-Dec., 1953.
Difference in impressions received by adult and child of 8.8. C. programs.
WITTY, P. A. “ Children’s, parents’ and teachers’ reactions to television.” Educ. Digest, p, 4-7, Feb., 1951,
WITTY, F. A., and BRIOKEB, H. Your child and radio, T.V., comics and movies. Chicago Science Res. Assoc. 1952.
“TV and the Young.” Mother and Child (Journal of Maternal and Child Welfare, Great Britain), 23, no. 10: 246 Jan
1953. (Editorial.) ’ *’
Approves of 8.8. C. programmes for children.
(o) Public Opinion.
BOGARDUS, E. S. The making of public opinion. N.Y., Assoc. Press, 1951, p. 92-5. Rise of television. Necessity to
safeguard the people against malign manipulations of opinion-making.
BOGARDUS, E. S. “Television and the political conventions.” Social, d Social Res., 37, no. 2: 115-121, Nov.-Dee 1952
Television increased Interest in U.S. conventions, and may change life of nation by increased interest in politics.
GOSSETT, W, T. “Justice and television: some thoughts on Congressional investigations.” Amer. Bar Assn. J 38-
15-18, Jan., 1952. ’
LANG, K., and LANG, G. E. “ The unique perspective of television and its effect.” Amer. Social. Rev., 18, no. 1: 3-12,
1953,
Pilot study of television broadcasting of a public event (McArthur Day in Chicago) upon the television audience and upon
participant observers. Differences in perspective of viewer and spectator. p
SELDES, G. The great audience. N.Y., Viking Press, 1950, p. 160-191 “Pandora’s box: television.” Programmes to
satisfy mass audience.
SHAFFER, H. B. Televising Congress. Edit. Res. Reports, 1, no. 15, 20th Apr., 1953
will appointments 011 ° f P ersonalities of candidates and of officials in performance of public duties
TAYLOR, T. The issue is pot TV but fair play: TV is only the medium. The need is for higher standards in Congressional
hearings.” N.Y, Times Mag., Sec. 6, p. 12, 15th Apr., 1951.
Effect of televising Kefauver Hearings.
WIEBE, G. D. “Responses to the televised Kefauver Hearings” Pub. Opin. Quart., 16, no. 2: 179-200 Summer 1952
Impact of the Hearings on thinking and behaviour of a sample of 260 New Yorkers. Interest aroused/but no constructive
problem-solving behaviour. ’ u wusnumve.
(d) Research and Audience Impact Studies.
BRITISH BROADCASTING CORPORATION. Television inquiry (1950). Viewer Research Report.
T> ar £ tt ' I ntro( luction--Genesis of the inquiry, the methods employed and the degree of co-operation obtained
Part II: Viewers- —Study of the TV public and their viewing facilities.
Part III: Viewing—Behaviour of the viewing public and the effects of television on leisure.
DECKINGER, E. L. Let s end the confusion in radio and television audience research: ratings laboratory is proposed to
measure differences among services.” Advertising Agency, p. 64-65, Sept., 1951.
FLORIDA. Miami University. The television audience in Miami. TV survey No. 5, Dec. 1949.
GEORGIA. Emory University. Social impact of television on Atlanta households:’ social investigation of dwelling units
within the Atlanta corporate area, under the direction of R. Stewart, Div. of Journalism. 1952. °
HELMICH, R. E. Survey of educators’ attitudes and opinions towards television. (Thesis) Teachers’ College University
of Cincinnati, Dec., 1950. 6 ’ J
Under grant from Crosley Broadcasting Corp.
HUDSON, T. R. Family life habits in television and non-television homes. (Thesis). Stanford University, Calif., 1951.
KINGSTON, W. K. “ The second New York television survey.” Quart. Film, Radio and Television 6 no 4- ’317-326
Summer, 1952. ’ ’ ’
NATIONAL ASSOC. OF BROADCASTERS. Plan for the evaluation of audience measurement methods: Reports to the
Radio and Television industry by the Special Test Survey Committee. Wash., 1951.
NATIONAL ASSOC. OF EDUCATIONAL BROADCASTERS.
Los Angeles Television, 23rd-29th May, 1951, by D. W. Smythe and A. Campbell. Monitoring Study No. 2. Urbana, 111.,
Dec., 1901.
Chicago Summer Television, 30th July-sth Aug., 1951, by D. Horton, H. O. Mauksch and K. Lang. Monitorin- Study
No. 3. Chicago University, 1952. ° °
New York Television, 4th-10th Jan., 1951-1952, by D. W. Smythe. Monitoring Study No. 4. Urbana 111. Au<*. 1952.
OHIO. State University. Radio-Television Studies: 1949-50:
No. 4 —Radio, television and evening household activities of Columbus men and women
No. s—Radio5 —Radio and television in television-equipped homes.
No. 6 —Radio program preferences of children of school age.
No. 7— Evening listening to radio and television in a city in which half of all homes have television sets
RENICK, R. A. “News on television.” Florida, Miami University, May, 1950.
Report of an investigation carried out under the terms of a fellowship of the Kalt’enborn Foundation
SILVEY, R. “Methods of viewer research employed by the 8.8. C.” Pub. Opin. Quart., Sprin/ 1951 15 no 1- 89 104
Spring, 1951. r °’ ’ ’ ° ’
SILVEY, R. “ Viewers, viewing and leisure.” 8.8. C. Quart., 7, no. 1: 31-40 Sprint 1952
I„wer S Sec h <.«o»lc .KSXSr °‘ °* A " tUm " 1948 ’ 'Vision Is SHU „„„ pop„,.r
™ E Ho°°e sries No a l.°F”r, n^ri962 eleTi3i<>,l: “ in reception in french villages. Clearing
WHAN, F. L. Boston trade and distribution area radio-television audience of 1952- a studv nf + i
listening habits. Wichita, Westinghouse Radio Stations Inc., Jan., 1952 7 * dult radl °-^levision
WOODBURY COLLEGE, Los Angeles. Tele Census Surveys Nos. 2-5, Nov. 1949-June 1951
Impartial surveys concerning consumer reaction to television. ’ ’
WOODBURY COLLEGE. TV’s impact on education. Special study, Jan., 1951.
XAVIER COLLEGE, Cincinnati. Of children and television. 1951.


—
Paragraph.
Aotors and Announcers Equity Association
154, 406, 415, 488, 491
Adams M., “ Television and Education ”, J. Royal Arts Society, 11th February, 1949 ..
149
Advertise m ents —
485, pages 108-9
Conditions applied to broadcasting
Evidence submitted —
493
Advertising by liquor industry ..
Advertising in children’s sessions
492
Control by regulation ..
487
Extent of adveitising ..
488-90
Imported advertisements
491
Self-regulation
486
Sponsored programmes
495
494
496-9
225, 381, 424
Sunday advertising
Conclusions
Advertiser Newspapers Limited ..
Advertising, Sunday (broadcasting) —Appendix B ..
page 109
page 108
397, 484
168, 293, 415, 477
163
Advertising Time Standards (broadcasting)—Appendix A
Advisory Committees recommended
Aikin, Rev. W. J. H.
Alexander, Professor F.
Alexander H. See also Actors and Announcers Equity
154, 415, 488
412
90, 99, 114, 120, 210, 227,
281,291,415
Alexander J, 0* •• •• •• • • •• •• •• • •
Amalgamated Wireless (A/sia.) Ltd. See also Hooke, L. A.
Anthony, The Hon. H. L. See Postmaster-General.
Appendixes —
A. —Advertising Time Standards (broadcasting)
• •
page 108
page 109
B. —Sunday Advertising (broadcasting)
* *
C.—Election Broadcasts, 1949 to 1951
D —Alphabetical List of Witnesses ..
pages 113-115
pages 116-120
5, 254, 337, 384, 415
E.—Bibliography .. • • . • •
Archbishop of Melbourne’s Committee on Television
••
Areas to be served —
315-20
by commercial stations
308-11
by national stations
321-4
Extension of service to country areas
93-106
Frequency position
304
Limiting factors
107-13
Population distribution and other problems .. • • • •
60
Argentina, television stations in ..
5, 488, 489
Arts Council of Australia (Victorian Division) .. • • • • 7 ** T
Associated Newspapers Limited and Radio 2UE (Sydney) Pty. Ltd. See a so u ,
••
90, 100, 217, 250, 359,
424
424
Associated TV Pty. Ltd. •• •• • • * * „ A'
242, 359, 364, 402, 424,
Australian Association of Advertising Agencies. See also Nixon, N.
' 459, 480, 486
Australian Association of National Advertisers
242, 424, 459, 480,486
9
Australian Broadcasting Act, 1942
13
Australian Broadcasting Act, 1948 •• • • '* . „
Australian Broadcasting Commission. See also National Television Service
61, 336
and television legislation
341, 372
as national operating authority .. • •
277-84, 288-9, 296
Availability of programmes, evidence submitted
76
Composition
345
Increased membership recommended • • • •
67, 76, 446
Conditions of operation as national broadcasting authority
205, 234, 241, 307
Establishment of national stations, plan submitted
245, 309, 310, 323
Conclusions on plan
337, 338, 372, 456-7
Independence of
, ,
5
Introduction of television services .. • • . * • j ‘ A
342-3
Maintenance and development of broadcasting service recommen
Programmes—
, ,
446-7, 456-7
Political and controversial matter
471, 483, 484
Religious services and other religious matter
372
Standard of
346-7
Studio Technical Services .. • • • • Vf T E
Australian Broadcasting Commission, Chairman. See Boyer, . • •
Australian Broadcasting Commission, General Manager. See Moses, o.
72
Australian Broadcasting Control Board —
Composition
353, 397
Increased membership recommended
13
Establishment
95, 98, 103, 110, 120,
Evidence submitted
319, 498, pages 108-112
68-9, 72-5, 348
Powers and functions (broadcasting) ..
485, 486, 494, 496
Advertising
Political and controversial matter
446, 448-52, 467
348, 390, 395,498
Programme standards .. ; •
Religious services and other religious mattei
472, 479
13, 61, 63, 92, 348
Powers and functions (television) .. ••
246, 349-57, 366
Recommendations and discussion relating to
Administration of licensing system
Programmes
Technical matters ..
162, 395-7, 465, 484, 496
92, 110, 112,322
308n, 451, 467
238
Reports .,
Australian Canegrowers’ Council ..
INDEX TO REPORT.
121


—
Paragraph.
Australian Council of School Organizations
168, 337, 415 492
Australian Council of Trade Unions
5, 255 '
5, 168, 295, 384, 415, 418
Australian Council for the World Council of Churches
Australian Culture Defence Movement
474, 478, 488, 490
5, 415, 495
258
Australian Dairy Farmers’ Federation
Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations. See also Beaver, H. E.
100, 104, 157, 168, 214
272, 281,332, 333,359’
362, 370, 377,390, 395,
424, 426,459, 481,480
Australian Federation of Women Voters .
498
337, 415
285
168 293 415 477
Australian National Football Council
Australian Religious Film Society
Australian Vegetable Growers’ Federation
258
258
258
Australian Wheat Growers’ Federation
Australian Wool and Wheat Producers’ Federation
Availability of Programmes. See Programmes, availability of.
Baird television
23, 24
168, 415
168 415
Barr, Rev. A. Crichton. See also Presbyterian Church of Victoria
Beattie, Rev. G. A. See also Presbyterian Church of Victoria
Beaver, H. E. See also Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations
157, 168, 214, 221, 377,
Belgium, experimental transmissions in
424, 426, 458, 481
60
27, 337, 338, 339, 344,
Beveridge Committee (Great Britain) (Cmd. 8116) ..
Bibliography, Appendix E.
Bird, R. C.
437, 495, 498
page 116
Bishop, Professor J.
415
337
134, 136, 205, 326, 332,
333, 337, 338,339,345,
Boyer, R. J. F.
Brazil, television stations in
415, 454, 456,465
60
British Broadcasting Corporation. See also Great Britain—
Colour, television, experimental transmissions ..
115
337,338
22-31
24, 26, 29, 169, 302, 418,
Constitution as a public corporation ..
Growth of television service ..
Hours of operation
Integration of broadcasting and television
421
339, 344
Programmes—
Available to Australian Broadcasting Commission ..
Educational
289, 296
for children
186, 190,197
for the deaf
138, 169,176-7, 183
Origination of ..
141
29
436-7, 442
443
32
443
31
Political and controversial (broadcasting) ..
Political and controversial (television)
Proposed developments
Report, 1953 (Cmd. 8928)
Revenue and expenditure (television)
Royal Charter
British Drama League (Australasia)
22, 28, 436
Broadby, R, R, See also Australian Council of Trade Unions
O, 488, 489
Broadcasting Act 1942-1953—
* *
22o
Provisions relating to broadcasting—
Advertising
485, 496
Limitation on ownership
* '
Organization of national and commercial services ,
’ 1
* *
362, 366
05-78, 338, 348, 372, 390
Political and controversial matter
* *
Religious broadcasts
* *
• •
446, 448, 456,457
Quota of Australian music
* *
* *
472, 479
Tenure of licences
* *
* *
407
Transfer of licences
* *
360
Provisions relating to television
* *
368
Broadcasting and Telecasting, Vol. 45, August, 1953
* *
* *
63—4, o2, 348
Broadcasting and television, integration of. See Integration of broadcasting and televising
126n
Broadcasting Committee, 1949 (Great Britain), See Beveridge Committee.
Broadcasting, Organization of. See also Australian Broadcasting Commission and Commercial
Service
Broadcasting
65-78
Broadcasting Station 5DN
225, 237, 300, 381
Broadcasting Stations 5KA, 5AU, 5RM (5KA Broadcasting Company Ltd )
Broadcasting Station 4BK, Brisbane. See also Clark, S. R. I
225, 240, 256, 415
Broadcasting Station 7EX Pty. Ltd.
300,381
Broadcasting Station 3DB Melbourne
216
Brown, K. S. See also Standard Telephones and Cables Pty Ltd
281
Brown, Dr. M. S. See also New Education Fellowship, New Smith W« W
90, 99, 120, 211, 424, 428
Browne, Professor G. S.
168, 415
Butlin, Professor S. J. . .
193
Butters, Sir John
251
90, 100, 217, 250, 359,
Byth, Mrs. E. F. See also National Council of Women of Australia
367, 378, 424, 459
168, 337, 415
C.C.I.R.
88, 89, 90, 92
Calder, Mrs. M. E. See also Women’s Service Guilds of Western Australia Inc
Cameron, The Hon. A. G.
168, 337, 415
252
122
Index to Repoet— continued.


—
Paragraph.
Canada. See also Canadian Broadcasting Corporation —
46, 389, 438
Broadcasting Act, 1936
Canadian Association of Broadcasters
389
Financing television in
43-4
Frequency assignments
111
Government television policy
37—9
Massey Commission (1949-1951)
37, 337, 340,375n
Political and controversial matter
434, 438-40, 442, 444
Private stations
37-8, 46, 352, 355, 389
Radio Act, 1938
46, 389
Receiver sets, number in use
40
Regulation of programme standards ..
389
42
37-46, 347
Relay facilities
Television in
Canadian Association of Broadcasters
389
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. See also Canada—
37, 434, 439
Board of Governors
Constitution as a public corporation ..
337, 349, 352
Political and controversial matter —
Policy
Broadcasting of .. , • •
434, 439
438-40
444
Televising of ..
389
289, 296
37-45
Powers with respect to programmes on commercial stations
Programmes available to Australian Broadcasting Commission ..
Television services of
Capital costs. See Financial considerations.
337
155. 168, 257, 294, 384,
Casely, Miss E. See also Australian Federation of Women Voters
Catholic Church in Australia
' 479
Chamber of Manufactures of New South Wales, Electronics and Allied
154-8, 411-3
Industries Division.
See also
90
Hooke, L. A.
224, 236, 379
Chandler, Sir John .. .. • • „ • •
Chettle, Mrs. D. A. See also National Council of W omen of South Australia
337, 415
Children’s Programmes. See Programmes.
168, 415
Child Welfare Advisory Council of New South Wales
113, 267
Chippindall, G. T.
265
Civil Aviation, Department of
300. 359, 381, 424, 430,
Clark, S. R. I. ..
431, 481
424
Coleman, L. R.
Colour television—
114-9
Discussed ..
115
in Great Britain
59,116
in United States of America
99, 114, 117-19
Technical standards in relation to
116
Columbia Broadcasting System ..
189
Columbia University (United States of America)
Commercial Broadcasting Service —
68-75, 348, 390
Administration and organization
485, 496
Advertising, conditions applied to
360, 362, 366, 368
Conditions of licences
370
Licence fee for broadcasting stations ..
446, 448-52, 466, 467
Political and controversial broadcasts . •
395
Programme standards
472
Religious broadcasts .. • •
370
Commercial Broadcasting Stations Licence Fee Act, 1942
Commercial Television Service —
Advertisements —
486-95
Evidence submitted
496
Suitability of broadcasting standards • • • •
* *
496-9
Recommendations .. • •
, ,
304, 315-20
Areas to be served • ■ • • ’ •
Co-operation with national service recommended
334
* *
4-6,247-69
Deferment
312-20
Establishment of commercial stations
207-12, 246
Financial considerations —
Capital costs ..
235-40, 246
Operating costs
Revenue
..
.
242-3, 244, 246
3, 5, 21, 61-2, 348
Legislation for .. • • • • . ' ‘ .
Licences for commercial stations. See Licensing system.
246, 306, 307, 312-20
Limitation on number of commercial stations ..
272-6, 281-6, 290-5,
297-302
458-67
Programmes—
Availability of
Political and controversial matter
470-82, 484
Religious services and other religious matter
498
Sponsored .. •• •• ' ’ ’
Standard of. See Programme Standards.
213-19, 253, 258
Proposals for unrestricted development
183, 334, 375, 398, 460
Public service responsibility of operators
482
316
Foreign Commerce/ United' Statea Senate Investigation into
Radio and
259, 262
412
9-21
Television Programmes, 1952. See Harris Commi ee.
Commonwealth Bank of Australia
Commonwealth Film Censor . - • • . .
Commonwealth Government decisions on television **
123
Index to Report — continued.


—
Paragraph.
Commonwealth Office of Education
172, 196, 199
450
120
168
Commonwealth Parliamentary Debates, Vol. 203
Community television systems
Consolidated Press Limited
Constitutional aspects—
Commonwealth powers, validity of
7
Censorship of films ..
412
Control of television transmitters..
Coombs, Dr. H.
325-333, page 107
262
284-6
Copyright of sporting events
Costs. See Financial considerations.
Council of Churches in Victoria ..
5, 493
321-4, page 107
100, 300, 322, 424
, 253, 415, 420
60
242, 424, 480
Country areas, extension of television to ..
Country Broadcasting Services Ltd.
Country Women’s Association of Australia
Cuba, television stations in
Cudlipp, W. J. See also Australian Association of National Advertisers
Cullen, Mrs. B,
253, 415, 420
Davey, Dr. C. M. See also League of Women Voters of South Australia
Davies, Mr. B.
337, 415
Defence, Department of..
lb8, 337
269
Defence, effect of television on
Deferment of television ..
265, 269
Definition of television—
4-6, 122, 247-67, 268-9
Method of transmission and reception of images
80-4
Nature of the medium
Denton, S. B. See also Broadcasting Station 5KA, Methodist Church
Churches Social Reform Board
of South Australia and United
132 52 } 453
168, 225, 240, 337, 415
Disney, P. C. W.
Douglass, J.
168, 337, 415
Dual system
301, 41o
Dunham, F., “ Television brings new challenge to teaching ”, School Life. Novpmhpr
1951
3, 5, 21, 325—34
127n
Dunlop, 0. E., The Future of Television, N.Y. 1947
Dunstan, W. ..
126n
114, 120, 146, 168, 208,
218, 242, 292,359,381,
Dye, W. H. See also Arts Council of Australia (Victorian Division) ..
424, 427,459
488, 489
Economic consideration—
Deferment on economic grounds discussed
4-6, 247-56
Conclusions
Evidence on effect of television on—
268-9
Consumption ..
259, 262, 263
Investment
National development ..
259-64
Manpower
259, 261, 264
Overseas resources
259, 260, 265
Production
259, 266
Eddy, W. M., Television : The Eyes of Tomorrow, N.Y. 1945
259, 263
Education Department, New South Wales..
126n
Education Department, Tasmania
200, 415, 419
Education Department, Western Australia
168, 195, 415
Educational programmes. See Programmes.
168, 415
Election broadcasts (1949 and 1951) —On commercial stations, Apponrliv p
page 110
Electronic Industries Limited
Eva a n b s liS A m F nt ° f ' Australian television services. See Number of television stations which should be established.
99, 114, 211, 242
Ewart, Mrs. B.
216
168, 415
Fabinyi, Dr. A.
Falk, Mrs. B. ..
168, 415
Farmers’ Union of Western Australia
168, 415, 492
Farrell, S. K. ..
256
Featherstone, R. H, See also State School Teachers’ Union of Western r„„
168, 415
federal Communications Commission (United States of America). See also Uniter! ' .
As licensing authority .. .. . , ' United States of America—
168, 415, 489
349, 351, 356, 357, 360,
Colour television, policy adopted
366, 385, 442
Conditions relating to hours of operation
59, 116
Frequency assignments
56
Political and controversial matter, determinations on
52, 88, 111
Powers in respect of programmes
434, 441
Programme standards and tenure of licences
385
Reports ..
388
Television policy
Federal Flax Growers’ Federation
47, 48
48-56, 59
Fellowship of Australian Writers (Western Australian Section)
258
Film and Television Council of South Australia
5
Film industry in Australia, capacity of
5, 168, 256, 337, 415
Films for television
297-8
* • r *■
149
124
Index to Report— continued.


—
Paragraph.
Financial considerations —
Commercial service—
Capital costs ..
207-25, 246
Operating costs
235-40, 246, 398
Revenue
242-3, 244, 246
National service—
Capital costs
205-6, 245
Operating costs
234, 245
Revenue
241, 245
Receivers, cost of ..
229-33
Relay facilities, cost of
226-28
Fisk, Sir Ernest
327, 424
Fogler, S. J. Educ. Social. Nov., 1950. “ Prometheus or Frankenstein ? ” ..
127n
Foley, Mr. B. ..
258, 415
Ford Foundation Fund for Adult Education (United States of America)
189
Fox, A. E. R. ..
281,291
France —
Educational programmes
191, 196
Technical standards for television in ..
88
Television in
60
Francis, Rev. W. C. See also Methodist Church of Australasia, New South Wales Conference ..
415, 494
Frankfurter, Mr. Justice F. (United States of America)
134
Freadman, P. ..
384
Frequency channels —
Adequacy of channels reserved for television
94-6, 103-6, 109
Alienation from public ownership
325-9
Allocation
86, 93-106
Allocation in United States of America
47, 51-3, 111
Characteristics of transmission on V.H.F. and U.H.F.
96-9
Problems associated with use of U.H.F.
96-7, 99, 102-4, 118, 231
Recommendation for development of television by use of V.H.F.
105-6
Recommendation for formulation of frequency allocation plan
110-12
Specimen assignment plans ..
103,109
Technical requirements and standards
85-92
Use of U.H.F. in United States of America and provisions for use in Canada and Great Britain
97
Frequency modulation broadcasting. See Very high frequency broadcasting.
Germany, television in ..
, ,
60
Gibson Committee —
Recommendations —
9
on introduction of television
on licence fee for broadcasting stations
370
on political broadcasts ..
434, 447, 448, 456
Gorham, M. Television : Medium of the Future. Lond., 1949
Gould, J. “ Television : boon or bane ”, Public Opinion Quarterly, Vol. 10. Fall
141n
1946
126n
Government decisions on television, survey of
9-21
Government grants—Suggestion for financial grants to cultural bodies
399
Graziers’ Federal Council of Australia
258
Great Britain. See also British Broadcasting Corporation —
142
Audience, socio-economic status
Number of licensed viewers
30
Beveridge Committee, 1949 (Cmd. 8116)
27, 337, 338, 339, 344,
437, 495, 498
Colour television, developments in .. ‘ •
115
Commercial television, proposals for ..
2o, oo-o, 4yo
97
Frequency position
Government White Papers, Television Policy—
28, 344
28, 33, 437, 458
36 326, 458, 498
1951 (Cmd. 8291)
1952 (Cmd. 8550)
1953 (Cmd. 9005)
25
31
29
Hankey Committee, 1943, recommendations
Licence fee
Population coverage
Programmes. See British Broadcasting Corporation.
226
Relay facilities
23
Selsdon Committee, 1935 (Cmd. 4793)
124, 127, 128, 140, 141
Social impact of television
’ 169’ 177, 181
Effect on children
24 29 88
Technical standards
28,32,115
22-36, 347
Television Advisory Committee
Television in
434, 436, 437
Ullswater Committee, 1935 (Cmd. 5091)
Hain, Mrs. G. A. See also Housewives’ Association, Victorian Division
415
154
Hale, E. V.
415
Hall, A. L.
25
Hankey Committee, 1943 (Great Britain) ..
57, 386, 387, 393
Harris Committee, 1952 (United States of America)
' 298, 299
Hawes, S.
485
Health, Director-General of .. ••
168 337
Heath. H. F. See also New South Wales Teachers Federation ..
127n
Helmich, E. “ Survey of Educator’s attitudes and opinions towards television
483
Henderson, Rev. K. .. •• •• ;• . "
388
Hennock, Commissioner Frieda B. (United States of America)
114, 120, 146, 168, 208,
Herald and Weekly Times Ltd., Melbourne. See also Dunstan, VV. ..
242, 292, 359,' 381, 424
Hilliard, Bishop W. G. See also Australian Council for World Council of Churches
168, 415
125
Index to Report— continued.


—
Paragraph.
Hobbin, Rev. W. J. See also Methodist Church, New South Wales ..
168, 415
Holland, experimental transmissions in
60
Hooke, L. A. See also A.W.A. (A/sia.) Ltd.
90, 99, 114, 120, 210,
223, 415
Hours of operation—
Evidence submitted
170, 414-31
in Canada
40
in Great Britain
24, 26, 29, 169
in United States of America
56
Recommendations ..
184, 432, page 107
Housewives’ Association, Victorian Division
5, 256, 415
Hutchinson, T. H. Here is Television : Your Window to the World, N.Y., 1946
126n
Impact of television. See Social impact of television.
Inquiry, the —
Conduct of
pages 7-8
Scope of ..
7-10
Integration of broadcasting and television—
Beveridge Committee, conclusions on
339, 344
in Canada
37-45. 340
in Great Britain
22-32, 339
Proposal by Australian Broadcasting Commission
205, 234, 241
Proposal by Australian Federation of Commercial Broadcasting Stations
214
Recommendation for extension of powers and functions of Broadcasting Control Board
353
Recommendation for operation of national services by Australian Broadcasting Commission
337, 338, 341-2
Suitability for television of radio programmes ..
280-2
Interference
120
Interior, Department of, Film Division
298
International Radio Consultative Committee
88, 89, 90, 92
International Telecommunications Convention
93
International Telecommunications Union ..
«8
Iowa State College (United States of America)
189
Italy, television in
60
Japan, television stations in
60
Joint National-Commercial Stations
330-333, page 107
Joint Parliamentary Committee on Broadcasting. See Gibson Committee.
Jones, S. 0.
99, 118, 211,222, 239,
328
Kain, Canon A. E. See also United Churches Social Reform Board ..
168, 387, 415
Keogh, M. B. See also Australian Culture Defence Movement
415
Kiek, Rev. W.
337, 415
Lamb, S. P. P.
238, 300, 381
Lane, Sir Allen
146
Lane, R. E.
281
Larkin, J. S.
225, 237, 300,381
League of Women Voters of South Australia
5, 337, 362, 415, 459,
487, 489, 494
Lee, R. E. Television : The Revolution, N.Y. 1944
. .
126n
Legislation for Television—
Australian Broadcasting Act, 1942
9
Australian Broadcasting Act, 1948
, ,
13
Broadcasting Act, 1942-1953
63-4, 92, 348
Television Act, 1953
, ,
3, 21, 81-2, 336, 348, 496
Letters Patent
, ,
pages 5, 7
Lewis, P. “ T.V.’s Impact on Teen-agers ”, Phi Delta Kappan, Nov., 1951
Licence Fees—
, ,
138n, 169, 174
in Canada, abolition of
44
in Great Britain
, .
, ,
31
on radio receiving sets
78
on television sets, proposal by Australian Broadcasting Commission
# t
241
Payable by commercial broadcasting stations ..
370
Recommendation for fee for television stations
370
Licensing System —
Administration
348-57, 361
Appeal, right of
361
Grant of licences
355
Licence fees
370
Limitations on ownership
362-6
Public hearings before grant, revocation and renewal recommended
354-7, 361
Renewal of licences..
357, 360, 395, 465, 484
Revocation of licences
356
Suspension of licences
361
Tenure of licences ..
359-61
Transfer of licences and shares in licences
367-9
Liebert, S. F. E. See also Australian Council of School Organizations
168, 337, 415
Long, V. R.
168, 195,415
Lyons, Bishop P. F. See also Catholic Church in Australia ..
155, 168, 257, 294,479
MacAlpine, E. W.
168
MacDonald, K. A. .. .. .. .. .. ..
•• ■
• •
•.
225, 381, 424
126
Index to Report— continued.


—
Paragraph.
Macquarie Broadcasting Service Pty. Ltd. See also Ogilvy, C.
209, 215, 242, 273, 281,
290,350.359,362, 370,
403.408, 424
McRae, Professor C. R. ..
251
Marconi—E.M.I. System
23, 24
Massey Commission (Canada)
37, 337, 340,375n
Medley, Sir John
249
Menzies, Rt. Hon. R. G.
19
Metcalfe, J. • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
384
Metcalfe Mrs. T. C. See also National Council of Women of New South Wales
337, 415,421,492
Methodist Church of Australasia, New South Wales Conference
415, 476, 490, 494
Methodist Church of Australasia, South Australian Conference
5, 256, 415, 476
Mexico, television stations in
60
Mills Miss M. See also National Council of Women of South Australia
337, 415
Mills, Miss N. M.
168, 493
Mitchell, E. C.
301
Moses, C.
114, 205, 234, 271, 277,
339, 407
Mountain, G. R.
259, 264
Mulrooney, J. L.
285
National Association of Educational Broadcasters Monitoring Studies
127n
National Association of Radio and Television Broadcasters (United States of America)
129, 386, 396
National Broadcasting Service. See Australian Broadcasting Commission.
5, 168, 337, 415
National Council of Women of Australia ..
National Council of Women of New South Wales ..
5, 337, 415, 421, 492
National Council of Women of South Australia
5, 337, 415
National Development, Department of
National Farmers’ Union of Australia .. .. • •
260, 2oo
258, 415
National Television Service. See also Australian Broadcasting Commission —
Administration of
Areas to be served • • • • • • • • • • .
336-47
304, 308-11
Australian Broadcasting Commission recommended as operating authority
341, 372
306-11
334
4-6, 247-69
Conclusions on establishment and development of
Co-operation with commercial operators
Deferment
205-6
234
Estimated capital costs
Estimated operating costs
241
Estimated revenue ..
244 5
Estimates of costs, conclusions on
307-8
Financing the service
337, 338, 349, 372, 456-7
Independence of operating authority ..
3, 5, 21, 61-2, 336
Legislation for
Programmes —
183
Children’s sessions
453-7, 466-7
473 83
Political and controversial matter
Religious services and other religious matter
372™
Standard of • • • •
*147
Studio technical services, recommendation relating to .. • • • •
168, 415
5, 168, 256, 415
5, 168, 415
Neal W D Nee also New Education Fellowship, Australian federal Council ..
New Education Fellowship, Australian Federal Council
New Education Fellowship, New South Wales Branch
200, 415, 419
New South Wales Education Department ..
5, 168, 337
New South Wales Teachers’ Federation
136, 146
New York Times Survey, 1951
238, 300, 381
Newcastle Broadcasting Co. Pty. Ltd. .. • • • • . ’ '
Nixon, N. V. See also Australian Association of Advertising Agencies
242, 364, 367, 402, 424,
480, 486
Nord West Deutscher Rundfunk ■ • • • ,
• -
• •
296
Number of television stations which should be established—
Commercial stations —
320
Establishment, recommendation relating to
246, 306, 307,312-20
General conclusions on limitation
National stations —
308, 311
Establishment, recommendation relating to
306-11
General conclusions on limitation
107-8
Population distribution, effect on
93-103, 303
Technical standards in relation to
Ogilvey, C. See also Macquarie Broadcasting Service Pty. Ltd.
209, 215, 220, 242, 281,
350, 359, 362, 367, 370,
380, 403, 408, 424, 429,
481, 486, 495
424
o“on?a Education on the Air 1952 ”, 22nd Year Bool. Institute for Education by Radio and Television,
189n
Ohio, 1952
Operating costs. See Financial considerations.
7, 363, 381, 481
Magazine : December, 1950. “ What shall we do about Television 1 ”
127n
9, 10, 11, 12, 448
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Broadcasting
168, 415,492
Paton, Mim. A* • • • • ,* „ T r * att kpm
Pearce, E. H. See also Broadcasting Stations oKA, 5AU, 511
415
159, 169, 337, 384
IS of breasting of television programmes. See Houm of operation.
Philips Electrical Indust -ies Limited. See also Jones, b. U. ..
99, 118, 211, 239, 328
127
Index to Report— continued.


—
Paragraph.
Political and controversial matter and issues—
Applicability of broadcasting practices and principles to television
453-5, 466-7, 469
Broadcasting legislation
446
Broadcasts, review of
447-52
Grant of television licences to political parties
468
Legislation and practices—
Canada
434, 438-40, 442, 444
Great Britain ..
434, 436-7, 442, 443
United States of America
434, 441, 442, 445
Recommendations and discussion on television broadcasts—
Commercial service
458-67, page 107
National service
456-7, 466-7
Population distribution—Effect on provision of television services
107-8
Portus, Professor G. V. ..
163
Postal Telecommunications Technicians’ Association (Aust.)
5
Postmaster-General—
Functions and responsibilities (broadcasting) ..
69-71, 74, 75, 346, 348
Investigation of television in United Kingdom and United States of America 1952
19
Powers (television) ..
61, 348
Recommendations relating to powers and functions (television) ..
351-2, 354-8,361, 365-6,
368-9
Statements on television policy of Government—
(1950)
15
(1952)
18
Television Act, 1953, introduction to ..
3, 21, 62
Postmaster-General’s Department—
Allocation of frequency channels
94, 106
Effect of television on services
267
Estimates—Capital costs
206
Evidence submitted on relay facilities..
113, 227
Responsibilities (broadcasting) .. .. .. .. .. .. .,
67, 77-8, 346
Studio technical services and
346-7
Tenders for television stations (June, 1948)
12
Postponement of television. See Deferment of television.
Potter, A. G. ..
284
Poulter, Dr. M. See also Tasmanian State School Teachers’ Federation
337
Presbyterian Church of Victoria ..
168, 415, 476
Prest, Professor W.
259, 263
Primary Producers Council of New South Wales
258
Prime Minister ..
19
Pringle, N.
415
Programme standards—
Censorship
154-6, 158, 411-3
Commercial service—
Conclusions
392-9
Controlling authority to set standards, proposals for
383-4
in Australian commercial broadcasting service
390
in Canada
389
in United States of America ; review of system of self-regulation
385-8
Problem of maintaining positive standards
374-5
Prohibition of unsuitable material
374
Recommendation for appointment of Advisory Co mmittees ..
397
Recommendation for formulation of code of operating standards
396, 398
Recommendation for increase in membership of Control Board
397
Recommendation for prevention of televising of objectionable material
395
Renewal of licences and review of programme performance ..
162,357,360,395,465,484
Self-regulation
157, 376-94
Control, the problem of
153-67
Hours of operation in relation to standards
398, 414-32
National service, recommendation relating to ..
372
Programmes of cultural and national significance
399
Quotas of Australian programme material
400-10
Programmes—
Educational
185-7
Adult education
188-91
in schools
193-200
Recommendations and conclusions
192, 201
For children —
Proposals relating to children’s sessions
170,414-22
Recommendation for appointment of Advisory Committee ..
397
Recommendation for regular programmes ..
183-4
For viewers in country areas
301
Political or controversial. See Political and controversial matter and issues.
Religious. See Religious services and other religious matter.
Sponsored
495-9
Programmes, availability of—
Conclusions
302
Estimates of
270-4
Film industry, capacity of ..
297-8
Network operations in relation to
300
Problems associated with
299
Sources of programme material
275
Live studio productions
276-82
Outside broadcasts
283 6
Feature films and films for television
287-95
Newsreels and documentary films
296
Suitability for television of broadcasting programmes
280-2
Public Affairs and Parliamentary Reform Movement
337
Public ownership of transmitters
325-9, page 107
128
Index to Report— continued.


—
—
Paragraph.
Queensland Council of Farmers and Graziers
258
Queensland Newspapers Pty. Ltd. See also Clark, S. R. I.
359, 424
Quotas of Australian programme material—
Conclusions and recommendations
409-10
Evidence submitted .. .. .. .. .. ...
400-8
Racing clubs of Australia
284
Radio and Television Writers’ Guild
401
Radio Diffusion Francaise
296
Receiver sets—
118, 229-33
Cost of
For U.H.F. transmission
99
Number in use in Canada
40
Number in use in Great Britain
..
30
Number in use in United States of America
55
Recommendations, summary of ..
pages 102-106
Relay facilities —
87, 113
Discussed ..
Effect on services of Postmaster-General’s Department ..
267
Estimates of costs ..
226-8
Religious services and other religious matter—
Evidence submitted
151, 473-81
in Great Britain
• •
34
on national and commercial broadcasting stations
471-2
Recommendation for appointment of Advisory Committee
397
Recommendations for television broadcasts —
482, 484
482-3
on commercial service ..
on national service
Revenue for television stations —
National service
Commercial service
241, 244-5
242-4. 246
100, 300, 322, 424
Ridley, J. E. ..
168 415
Robertson, Dr. T. L.
Rosenthal, N. H.
145, 165, 168, 173, 198,
415, 422
Royal Commission on National Development in the Arts, Letters and Sciences, 1949-1951 (Canada).
See
Massey Commission.
Royal Commission on Television —
19-20, 121, 371
Appointment
Inquiry, the—
pages 7-8
Conduct of
7-10
Scope of
page 7
Public sessions
page 7
page 113
60
Terms of reference ..
Witnesses examined, Appendix D
Russia, television stations in
J. A. See also Archbishop of Melbourne’s Committee on Television
424
254, 337, 415
424
Scrimgeour, C. G. .. • • •• , *:
23
Selsdon Committee, 1934 (Great Britain) (Cmd. 4793) • •
295, 474
Seventh Day Adventists, Australasian Inter-Union Conterence ot
269
Shpmannfprof e c! riC TF and Education in the UnitedStates, - V 1953 ”
Simon, Ernest Darwin, 1st Baron Simon of Wythenshawe, The B. . . fr , •»
152n, 178, 181, 193, 194
498
120
ImlthfB 61 ? 18 : There ought to be a Law”. Harper's Monthly 1943
Smythe, Prof. D. W. “ National Policy on Television . Public Opinion Quarterly, Fall, 19 0 .,
126n
135
Social impact of television —
168-84
Child, the
18.5-201
Educational programmes
124-31
Literature and periods of development, survey of
132-52
Nature of television
153-67
Problem of control ..
337
South African Broadcasting Corporation ..
60
South America, television in
258
South Australian Chamber of Rural Industries
60
Spain, experimental transmissions in
495
Sponsored programmes, proposals for prohibition of
498-9
Conclusions ...
305, 311, 316, 320
Stages of establishment of television stations • •
Standard of programmes. See Programme standards.
Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd. See also Brown,
90, 99,120,211,227,424
377
Standards of broadcasting practice • •
Standa'ds. technical. See Technical standards.
168, 415
State Schools Committees’ Association of Victoria ..
168, 256, 415, 489
State School Teachers’ Union of Western Australia
page 107
Supplementary observations
265
Supply, Department of
120
Swtft, E. See also Women’s Service Guilds of Western Australia Inc. .. • • • •
337, 415
60
Switzerland, experimental transmissions in
165, 195, 415
Tasmanian Education Department
5, 337
Tasmanian State School Teachers’ Federation
129
Index to Report— continued.


—
Paragraph.
Technical standards —
Effect on establishment of television stations ..
93-103, 303
in Australia
85-92, 117-8
in France ..
88
in Great Britain
29, 88
in United States of America
29, 47-9, 51, 88
in Western Europe
88
Television —
Method of transmission and reception of images
80-4
Nature of the medium
132-52
Television abroad
22-60
Television A ct 1953 —
Print ipal provisions
3, 21, 61, 348, 496
Provision relating to national operating authority
336
Purpose of Act
62
Television Advisory Committee, 1950
17
Television Advisory Committee (Great Britain)
28, 32, 88, 115
TeleAffsion legislation. See Legislation for television.
Terms of reference
pages 5, 7
202-3, 335, 371, 433
Thomas, Rev. Courtenay. See also Council of Churches in Victoria ..
493
Thomas, Rev. T. W. See also Archbishop of Melbourne’s Committee on Television
337, 415
Thompson, J. Walter
424
Tildesley, Miss E. See also British Drama League (Aust.) ..
488
Trade and Customs, Department of
404, 412
Transcontinental Broadcasting Co. Ltd. See also Paddison. A. C.
7
Treasury (Commonwealth), Department of
261
Turner, E. L. A.
337
Ullswater Committee (Great Britain) (Cmd. 5091) ..
434, 436, 437
Ultra high frequency band. See Frequency channels.
UNESCO Courier, Vol. VI., No. 3, March, 1953
172
United Churches Social Reform Board
5, 168, 337, 415
United States of America. See also Federal Communications Commission —
Colour television
59, 114, 116, 118
Communications Act, 1934, and Amendments, 1952
356-7, 441
Educational stations
53, 129
Frequency channels for television—
Allocation
47, 51-3, 111
Use of U.H.F. ..
97
Harris Committee, 1952
57, 386 -7, 393
Hours of operation of television stations
56
Licensing system for television and broadcasting
349, 351, 355-7, 360, 366,
385
N.A.R.T.B. television code ..
127, 129, 386, 396
National Television System Committee
48-9, 116
Number of stations in operation
54
Programme standards : review of system of self-regulation
385-9
Programmes —
Agricultural
301
Children’s
172, 177, 181
Educational
187, 189, 193-4, 196
Political and controversial programme matter
434, 441, 442, 445
Receiver sets, number in use
55, 140
Relay facilities
226
Social impact of television —
Child, the
169, 171-4, 177-8, 181
Nature of medium
134U6, 138, 140. 142
Survey of literature and periods of development
124-31
Revenue of commercial television stations
58
Technical standards for television
47-9, 51, 88
Television in
47-59
University of Miami, television surveys
127n
Venezuela, television stations in ..
60
Very high frequency band. See Frequency channels.
Very high frequency broadcasting
95
Victoria District Committee of Liberal and Country League of South Australia. .
252
Victorian Brewers’ Association
493
Victorian Chamber of Agriculture
258
Victorian Council for Children’s Films and TV
’ 168,415,492
Victorian Wheat and Woolgrowers’ Association
256
Wadham, Prof. S. M.
248
Walker, Rev. A. See also Australian Council for World Council of Churches ..
168, 415, 488
Warner, The Hon. A. G.
99, 114, 211, 242
Wauchope, Miss M. L. ..
168, 415, 492
Webb, L. C. ..
239, 445, 456, 458
Western Australian Education Department
168, 415
Wilson. J. L. J.
139, 164, 251, 337, 384,
489, 491
Wilson, Dr. R.
261
Wireless Institute of Australia
120
Wireless 1 elegraphy A ct 1 905-1936
63
Witnesses, list of, Appendix D
page 113
130
Index to Report— continued.


—
Paragraph.
Witty Prof. P. “ Television and the High School Student ”, Education, Dec., 1951. “ Television and the
169,173
Educative Process ”, School and Society, Dec., 1951
Woman’s Christian Temperance Union —Queensland Branch
168, 493
Women’s Service Guilds of Western Australia
5, 168, 256, 337, 415
Woodbury College, Tele-census Surveys. Nos. 2-5
127n
Woollacott, Rev. E. H. See also United Churches Social Reform Board, Methodist Church, South Australia
168, 337, 415
Works, Department of ..
206
Worrall. D.
281
Wyndham, Dr. H. S.
200, 415, 419
Xavier University, Survey on Children’s Leisure Hours and TV, 1951
127n, 173-4
Printed for the Government of the Commonwealth by A. J. Aether at the
Government Printing Office, Canberra.
131
Index to Report— continued.










