

1847.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
DRY DOCK; COCKATOO ISLAND.
REPORT FROM THE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON THE
PROPOSED FORMATION OF A DRY DOCK AT COCKATOO ISLAND.
WITH
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE,
AND
PLANS.
OUfiBBBD, Bt THE COUNCIL, TO BE 'PRINTED,
September) 1847.
vmmm w w.'w '**m, At the aommmm rnmmtmc*,.
-• . ■ beni-btrekt. '
184.7 •
149<-«-ar


EXTRACTS FROM THE VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS OF THE
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
• Vows N0.,12, TrasiiAY, 1 Jum, 1847.
f3l Dry Dock; Cockatoo Island.
Off- A. BITZ ROY, MesmgeNo. 11.
■ Governor. '
With, reference to the Secretary of State’s Despot* of the 10th of June, 1846,
No. 39, relative to the proposedmonstruotion of a Dry Do* on Cockatoo Island, the
Governor snbmitsHo the Legislative- Council,a Bap.anfl aji Eslimate which he has
eausod to he prepared of the cost of the undertaking; and should the Council he pre-
pared to subject into their consideration, Hia Excedenoy proposes
to place the sum of £looo.ttpon.ilis,Estimatos, in order that tho work may
taken at once, while Convict labor is availahlefor tho purpose—by which it will bo
perceived there ■will be a considerable saving of expense.
Government House, Sydney,
; Ist June, 1-84-7.
Votes No. 18, TinmsuAY, 10 Jmns; 1847.
Drv Dock; Cockatoo Island:-The Governor’s Message, No, 11, in reference to the
formation of a Dry Dock on Cockatoo Hand, received on the Ist instant, having been
Motedhv tho Colonial Secretary, That a Select Committee be appointed, to toko into
consideration the Message of His Excellency the Governor, transmitting a Plan and
Estimate of a Dry Dock, proposed to bo constructed at Cockatoo Island, and to repoit
upon the expediency of undertaking % execution of this work upon the scale pro-
■ . posed The Committee to consist of seven Members.
Debate ensued.
Question put; Council divided.
Ayes, 15.
Mr. Parker, Mr. M Deay,
Mr. Allen, Mr. Brewster,
Mr, Cowper, Mr. Lowe,
Mr. Xcely, Mr. Wmdeyer,
Mr. Grant, Mr. Danpir,
Captain Dnmarcsq, Mr. Wild,
The Collectorol Customs, .Mr, Murray, (Teller.)
The Cplonjal Secretary, . ... i
the Attorney General,
Mr. Lamb,
The Auditor General,
Captain O’Connell,
Mr. 'Wentworth,
Mr. Bowman, ,
The Colonial Treasurer, (Teller,)
Tho following Committee appointed accordingly. <
The Colonial Secretary,
The Colonial Treasurer, - - , Captain O’Connell,
Mr. Lamb, „ -V. .1 Mil K .# nson ’
The Collector of Customs, Captain Dumaresq.
aVotbs-No. 29, Wi»3ESDAv,-30 rJp»E, ;! IB47.
Convict Labor on Dry Dock Dr. Bland presented a Petition from certain Inhabitants
of Sydney';aga|nst:the.,Binploynieat of ; Cpnyiot jLahpr ,in (he oonstruotion of a Dry
Bock on Cockatoo Island.
Petition read and received.
Votes No. .77, Wednesday, 23 September, 1847.
2 Drv Dock The Colonial Secretary, as Chairman, brought up the Report, “ a
upon tho Table the Evidence Select Committee appointed onthe 10th
S last, to take into considerationdie - Message of His Excellency Ao Governor,
(No. 11, of Ist June last,) transmitting a Han and Estimate of a Dry Dock prop se
to be constructed at Cockatoo Island, tad to report npovtlw expediency of undertaking
the execution'of this work upon tha .scale ,proposed.
Ordered to be printed.
LIST OF WITNESSES EXAMINED.
Page.
PmtalnP P King E N T‘ Oapt. Owen Stanley, E.K., F,,R.,5.. 10
StiLniidLAanes Gordon 4 Morion Moriarty. Esq., B. N......... U
Gother Kcit Maim, E5q,...................... 6


1847.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
REPORT FROM THE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON THE
PROPOSED FORMATION OF A DRY DOCK AT COCKATOO ISLAND.
t " tr-
“ ZTtXg the execution of this work upon the scale proposed, have
agreed to-the following Report.
T .,. r fVmmittee have had under their consideration the Plan and Estimate
Your Committee nave nan Exce ll enoy the Governor, and they have
S?£IS? to *„o”, - ««~y.«
soale - 1. general advantages.
Vml , Gmnmittae conceive it to be beyond dispute that the construction ot
*n within this Port would be the source of many advantages to the
and ship of ww not lees than f the evidence of-
In sunnort of this view, your wimmree uig w icia »
Cptain P P PP King, R.N., and' Gaptaim Owen, Stanley, of H. M. S. Rattle
snake. . of gf} o ffi ee rs, when, interrogated as to the general propriety
the farmer ot ! . . « i t jn n n it would confer great advan- ,
of Tesse l s .to visit tie Port that
apSn Stole,, w. 5 ..M :
dom,ly lhe"«'n“ , «J» Gommil-
X.'tSZi, .“S“ &»«” Hemisphere, .. wh.eh ,e.„l.
° a “ construction of a. Dry Dock in-
this Colony are fully appreciatedl by
“/accommodation would doubtless be derived from such a work.
2 SITE OF THE PROPOSED. DOCK.
i„ d. letter before alluded to, the Lords of the Admiralty have-expressed'
G nr?nlv 6 an all exoeeding!y good one, but .perhaps the_very best .that
not exoeea ngg g 4 ske d whether Ooekatoo-Wand as a suitahle
1.49 r-b-r
Question Ko # .3E.
Question SY.
Questions 3 &
Question 34.
Question 14..


In like manner, speaking of tlie eligibility of Cockatoo Island, Captain
Stanley states, “ I have not seen any position more eligible.’’ Being asked if the
situation is well sheltered ? Captain Stanley replies—“ quite so, — and between
“ the Island and the main land there is plenty of water for the largest ship to lie
“ there in perfect security while she is wailing to go in.”
liieutenant-Colonel Gordon, Commanding Royal Engineer, states, “ I think
“ upon the whole it (Cockatoo) ia the spot in the Harbour the best adapted—inde-
pendently of the adrantage.of.the use of convict labor.”
6. K. Mann, Esq., Civil Engineer, late of the lion. E. India Company’s Ser-
vice, being asked whether he considers the position a suitable one, replies, “ 1 have
“ not seen a more suitable one.” , , ;
Without needlessly multiplying these quotations, it may be sufficient to
state that the evidence elicited bv your,. Committee warrants them in asserting that
the proposed site possesses the following leading advantages, namely ;
(1.) It has ample depth of water close alongside.
Captain Stanley states, that Ih#W Hre’Tout and a half fathoms within two
chains of the shore—quite sufficient water for any ship the Harbour is capable of
receiving. ■ - ■ - •
(2.) It is completely sheltered.
(3.) There is always smooth water. ,
(4.) It has good anchorage on hoik sides of it,
(5.) The access to it is by a clear channel quite uninterrupted from the Sou)
and Pigs upwards, ■. ■
(6.) ft will be entirely within the. protection of the future defences of the
City, —a consideration, doubtless, of the highest moment.
(7.) The nature of the rock that, would have to be excavated is favorable for
such an undertaking.
3. NAVAL DEPOT.
‘ Your Committee have availed themselves of the opportunity of ascertaining
whether, in the event of a Naval Depot being hereafter established in conjunction wilh
the proposed Dock, the locality would be suitable for the purpose. Upon - this
point the following evidence is cited
In reply to tbs question, “ Do you consider Cockatoo Island to be suitable
"as a site of a Naval Depot, in the event of one being required f” Captain King
’states —" I think it very suitable in every other point of view, (than its distance
“ from Sydney)—it is large enough for the erection of storehouses, and it is protected
" from the approach of an enemy, from the proximity of the projecting points of
"land on each side. For if these points were properly fortified, ft would be next
“to impossible for any ship to come up there.”
Colonel Gordon states, “ I think upon the whole it is an eligible site for a
“ Naval Depot.” “ T'bey.Cthe buildings on the Island) arc all substantial buildings
“and could be welladapted to stores, except that they are now only one story high,”
“An additional story could he put to them,” “They are all built on the rock,”,
"Any of them could be used as a (Naval), Hospital.. They are in a very"healt'h'y,
“ position, being chiefly built on the summit of the Island” “It (the site) is pe-
“ culiarly salubrious I should say.” '
Lieutenant Merion Moriarty, R.N., Port Master, states, “ I think it would
“be a very convenient place (for a Naval Depot)—-it is, scarcely large enough for,
" the arsenal of a great nation ; but for any practical purpose for this Colony, it,
“ will probably answer very well for the next century.”
4. PLAN OE THE DOCK.
According to the Report and Estimate enclosed in the Governor’s Message,
it was proposed to construct a Diy Dock of the following dimensions, hewn out*of
the solid rock, via :
Length from piers on the level of the top altar .... 266 feet
Do do do of keelfloor .......226 „
Breadth on level of. top altar 90 „
Do do do of keel floor ...... .. 34 „
Do of entrance between piers 48 „
Depth of do from high water line, ordinary tides ~. ,17 „
The entrance to be, closed by means; of an iron-plate Caisson fitted to a
stone sill, but capable of being floated out, ~, ,
To the general character of the Plan and’Estimate ;submitted,to them your
Committee have no Objection to offer,, but they conceive that it would be very
desirable that the proposed dimensions should be enlarged, in the manner proposed
by Mr. Mann, who prepared the original Plan. In the preparation of-that Plan it
was assumed that a Dock of seventeen feet water at its entrance would be capable of
receiving toy vessel, when light, that could enter .the Harbour of Port Jackson,
, - when


when laden, by the passage of the “Sow and Pigs.” But on subsequent investi-
gation it appeared that the depth of water at the “Sow and Pigs” had been
somewhat under estimated.
From the evidence of Captain Stanley (who, at the request of the Executive
Government, obligingly undertook an elaborate survey of this part of the Harbour)
it appears that, although the channel is somewhat narrow, there are four fathoms
of water at low water spring tides, the rise and fall averaging five feet.
With this depth of water Captain King thinks that a Seventy-four could be
brought in readily, under any circumstances, with the aid of steam, and cites the
case of the “ Warapite,” which sailed up the Harbour some years ago. Captain
Stanley thinks that the Harbour is capable of receiving any vessel drawing under
twenty-four feet, including (old) Eighty Gun-ships ; and Lieutenant Moriarty, the
Port Master, states, that any ship might come up by taking out her stores, but,
practically, no larger ship than a Seventy-four would come in here.
Under these circumstances your Committee conceive that the breadth of the
Dock, at, high water line, should be increased to fifty feet, and the depth at the
Caisson-sill to nineteen feet.
5. ESTIMATE OP EXPENSE.
The entire estimate for this work, according to the original Plan, was
£4,085 7s. 2d., (employing convict labor) or £9,348 Is. 6d., if free labor were
resorted to. And it is estimated that the additional cost for the enlargement now
proposed will be £641 18s. lid,, (with convict labor) or £1,029 Bs. lid. with free
labor, making a total coat of £4,626 16s. Id., employing convict labor, or
£10,1377 10s, 6d. with free labor.
This estimate covers the cost of labor, tools, implements, materials, and
machinery, but does not. include rations and clothing, if convict labor be employed,
or, in either case, the cost of superintendence. The cost of rations and clothing for
convicts would render it necessary to add to the estimate about two-thirds of the
amount estimated as the wages of free labor. As the convicts would have to be
maintained, at any rate, at the expense of the Colony, in consequence of the recent
order to discontinue transportation to Van Diemen’s Land, this should not, it is
conceived, be considered in the estimated expenditure of this work.
It will, of course, be necessary to employ an Engineer, with subordinate
officers to superintend the work; but it is fully anticipated that this charge would
be met by the sale of the stone removed in the excavation of the Dock, which
Mr. Mann values at £I,OOO.
6. REVENUE.
Your Committee beg to state their conviction that if the proposed Dry Dock
were completed, and a moderate scale of charges framed for the use of it, (not
exceeding those paid for the use of the Patent Slip) not only would the original
outlay be eventually refunded, but it would ultimately become a permanent source
of revenue to the Colony.
Captain King, whose opinion in matters of this nature is entitled to much
consideration, states, “ 1 think the Dock would never be empty, and would, even
“ with moderate charges, pay a considerable interest on the money laid out.”
7, RECOMMENDATION.
In conclusion, your Committee beg to state their opinion, First,—That the
construction of a Dry Dock within the Harbour of Port Jackson would be of great
and permanent advantage to the Colony.
Secondly.—That Cockatoo Island is a most eligible situation for such a
work.
And finally, your Committee beg to recommend that the construction of the
proposed Dry Dookshould be undertaken on the enlarged scale above referred to.
Question 2.
Question 18.
E. DEAS THOMSON
Chairman.
Legislative Council Chamber,
Sydney, 22nd September, 1847.


1847.
PROPOSED FORMATION OF A DRY DOCK AT COCKATOO ISLAND,
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFORE
THE
SELECT COMMITTEE
ON THE
PROPOSED FORMATION OF A DRY DOCK AT COCKATOO ISLAND.
miDAT, 9 JULY, 1847.
Drewnt:— ■
THE COLONIAL SECKBTAR7,» *« C««. __ „ ' '
the colonial teeastoeb, j
JOHN LAMB, Em., I
CAPTAIN O’CONNELL.
Captain Phillip Parker King, B. N„ called in and
1. You are aware that it has been in contemplation to construct a Dry
Island in the Harbour of Port Jackson ? I a “- „ nurposa ? I think it is.
2. Are you of opinion that that is-a suitable ita J a 0 f any X know. I dare aay
3. Do yon consider it the mostsurtable ? Tlx t tll6 4ter would be so deep
many might be found squally suitable; but Ido n-nox
close to the shore, as by the plan it From the plan,’and my recollection of a
4. There is deep water to it up to that point_• “ t; ? tl)e Jea r 1822, there is deep
anchomge'on the north and oast sides; but I would rooomnxen
MSS:»S sSS* *»
oftheHarbour? Tee; the that'point? Tea. y,
S" £?£ i that is the only in—noe
I Clothe Dock hang nponCoctatoolsUnd. lnaW aualS on the opposite shore
Yes; that knd w n 0
available for the purpose of erecting r «itocßS B the p l a „ it is between 400
9. What is the distance from the island to the mam biioib J
and 600 yards. , . »g the site of a Naval Depot the
10. Do you consider Cockatoo Isl “| } suitable in every point of view; it is
aris tsss * wafts
rr» is »• “* “
s’S » ««m. «»• “ “ in * ■'
rivuis it— sr« «* ,«**-—*** •- *• **
atoo Island ? About a mile and a half, or rathm more. s or eoula they go up in
X 3. Would it be necessary that ships should be tow P J al asmo ra expeditiously,
the ordinary way ?Of course a ship be mucli W wor p illg „ p with perfect
s“',rz “*« * * ‘"• w
m- —* * D,ik!
TJnSSSt- t-a ,»*. - *.« >■ *“ » • '"i - ” -
struct a Dock 1 I am. ~ ~ « j jj &Te not been ou the island to examine it;
* te * abest>ftom l “ ccWDg30 p
the'edge of the island. , think is the largest ship capable of
entering the Harbour? I think a sovemy , mentlon tll6 oa3o of he “Waraprte,
cumstanoes, with the sl ®““ e Aether by the east or west channel. I think
™ h “””i
149—0
Capt. P- P-
King, R. N.
0 July, IBit.


Cap*. P. P.
King, E. N.
9 MyTm.
of that day ought not to be brought hi evidence now, when tha difference of a foot is of im-
portance, because we know that the depths do decrease from rubbish and ballast being thrown
overboard from ships.
18. It is likely also that a quantity of silt and sand may have washed from the streets, which
would affeot the depths, more particularly of the shallow parts of tho Harbour!' Yes, we
have only to look at tha present state of Sydney Gove to see an instance of that. It would
bo desirable that the surveyor should report upon the nature of tho bottom in the channels,
whether rook or sand, because tho steam dredge might in some parts deepen tho channel a
foot or two.
19. With reference to your general iaipreasion as to the capacity of tha Harbour to receive
ships of a certain size, what capacity of Dock do you think ought to be constructed, so as to
bo available for any vessel that could enter tho Harbour ? It appears to tao that the plan of
a Dock now on the Table is a very suitable ono for any vessel that could oomo into tho
Harbour, excepting the entrance or gate, which, from tho dimensions of man-of-war of tho
larger class, ought to be Wider.
20. Is it sufficiently wide to admit a saventy-four ? No ; according to the plan tho breadth
is only forty-eight feet. Tho beam of an eighty gun ship at its extreme breadth is, I believe,
raty-aix feat nine inches. I think that this question requires much consideration; and tho
subject one to be very cautiously decided upon, in order that the width between the plor
heads be not too narrow, and yet not wider than is absolutely necessary for the admission of,
at least, one of tho large frigates. If the Dock be constructed with a view to admit suoh a ship,
or large merchant ships with cargoes, then I do not think that forty-eight feotaro sufficient.
The largest vessel that can eater the Harbour of Port Jackson, and cross tha bar at tho
sow and Pigs, ig a seventy gun ship, whose greatest breadth may be about'fifty-six foot;
but, as the pier heads will not be more than two feet above tho high tide mark, tho width
need not be so much p still 1 think the space should not bo less than a clear fifty feci at the
high tide mark. This is, however, a point of such importance, that the best information
should bo obtained upon tho subject from England.
21. According to a plan which has been submitted to the Government, by Mr. Mann, tho
proposed depth of tha Dock is seventeen feet, do you consider this to bo sufficient for ships of
the capacity to winch you have alluded ? Ido not.
2-. What additional depth do you consider necessary? I should propose, at least eighteen
inches more, that is eighteen feet and a-half in nil, for I think a foot mow than tho light
•frniT o Ti? 1 afdlI P a ? B-hf.S. •'Vernon" would not be too much, Tho light draught
? “if* . osoawan” is twenty-one feet forward, and twenty-two foot throe inches aft.
Ja. JixainiDing the plan in other respects, do think it suitable ,? Yes, I do, Ido not sen
any objection to it, except the breadth of the entrance, and the depth.
24, With respect to the length ? There is abundance of length,—tho present length would
admit: two merchant snips in with ease,
25, With reference to steam vessels—da you consider that tho Dock, with tho increased
dimensions you have recommended, would admit steam frigates of tho ordinary capacity ? If
the paddle boxes are high enough to pass over tho plor heads of the gate in going in. war
steamers of the largest size might go in and out with the greatest facility.
,if paddles were removed ? The paddle wheels would have to bo removed, but tho
axle must remain, aud that extends almost as far. If, however, tho caisson were constructed
WJtla rderence to that, tho axle might pass over the pier heads. I would state that tho
dimensions of tho large Dock at Davenport are two hundred and sixty fool; long, by oightv-
hve teat broad, and twenty-seven feet deep, which will admit a three decked ship, Ido not
know tho width of the entrance.
27, Is is not usual to dock a ship with everything on board ? No; but during the war when
tho services of a ship could not bo well spared, it has, I beiiovo, frequently occurred at some
mb and I have heard that it is now'of frequent occurrence.
Captaw■ Dmmssri; The evidence you have given has boon with reference to mon-of-
war ? Yes, and to large merchant ships also.
3p ?J £9n wi ‘hreference to the Harbour being fortified, and not as it is now ?
it is not fortified at all now. .
80. If the heads ware fortified, would there be any advantage in forming the Dock at the
quarantine ground ? I think Cockatoo would bo the best part of tho 'Harbour, both
as to protection from an enemy and as to tho advantage of smooth water. Tho only advantage
that would result from forming a Dock at the qnaramiiiegroimd would bo that vessels of the
*3‘ sl f that "' oul , d ~ot P MS 011 «thar side of tho “Sow and Pigs” might deck; they would
.f"Tft, 0 w* 7 .? 1 ?? 11 J* * l6 mel ’ oy of an <mom s’, not sufficiently protected from the
swell at the North Harbour, or tho quarantine ground.
~rLTXr i 8 C!mmmn • What is your opinion as to tho general policy of the Govarnmmit
unleitalcmg mi expense of tins kind? I think it would confer groi advantages apo " the
14 ld r iuce T 1 Tasso,s t 0 visit * 0 P ort tlmt would not otherwise come aud
cMse a large expenditure of money both Home and Foreign. ’ ftUd
Naval tT 1 ! 130 ? 6 “ 09t . suitablo station hi tho Australian Colonies as a
Colony P 6 ? 7 ' l Unk UndW fte ou ' curastalloa ““s hoing tho head .quarters of the
® sw , are facilities here for tho repair of ships in Her Majesty’s Navy f I think so
■excepting.the want of labor, but it will follow, as a matter of course, that whore there is u
dock-yard shipwrights wd other dock-yard laborers would collect. * ° &
foui,to i >™vf 0 ** I **!* the matoria!a? 1 think tho wood of this
So! ThaSri Iff, ! H WP r WoT “*‘ h,n ? e,sa woul ? lla ™ t 0 b « imported for a time,
imagine not ■inan i ■ apprehend, at- any tuns in obtaining the necessary articles 1 I
Stores to "meet tha"demand. mWeantl 6 commu nity there would always bo an abundance of
3D.


if this Should become a station i, t So ™“ menl: «tare ? 1 should think so ;
in my opinion, bo very impollrtS *1 C °"7 1 f' 3,,ts * 1 tM,lt i 4 ■»«* it would
37. From the and rtl ,Tu ah ?! havo . » M*«l store heM.
desirable place of refreshment for vessels .„, n i sal “ b ! lt y of tbo ohnrnte, it would form a vary
those circumstances wSWT *?. the tr T? al olimate rf M*? Yes!
38. For a oonsidorabls time i Dock of this Hnd °wrf .'P 3 , l '°ii n ! rin ? ™pau- to be sent here,
navy ? Perhaps, it would. ® ‘ Und WCmW bB QDl y *» the mercantile
Dock would not bo oapabfeof o ft o,tUs Col 9»y> as that
Uio expanse of docking small vessel/? It strL?- , • lg f oS l tßd ltsdf to 7°“ of diminishing
was larger than was absolutely necessary tit " >“ looking at the plan, that the Dock
tnight be formed of smaller ™
an advantage, hlasnuioli as it would save the IT f .■ 300 tons > might be
B9 fo •***
think so! amß S ' eam 61, « 1n9 ”« h * bsarailablß ftr pumping ort both .Docks? I should
tons,—prefer heaving down togoingupra exceeding 500 orfiOO
case, but if I had a ship of 500 toil requmna renal fiL /"? m ,* a ' var 1 B of a ’J individual
her on the slip. 1 q 8 p ’ 1 wo «W rather heave her down than put
Most undoubtedly, as tho espouse and Lliv i P ?* >0s oc^ 3 -than .heave down ?
for docking. P Q and. delay of heaving down would be so much greater than
rjf° dBrive l f T 41181,300 f the i
orabla interest upon the money laid out. ’ mm modsratß puy.a oonsid-
%Df “« admi ‘ “«*
this proposed Dock would bo for oominmwnl 4 \ } ,ma S in ® that tho principal use of
luge of it if it won /oontai!.tLTbrt 2 f pilrpo3os e aud fct™»*varv*H take advan-
war. would
to form a smaller Due!? • wtIL r\ / to P les ® n Vifc might be tho most useful expenditure
course, if ‘° be °. Mi S 0d tB but of
lightening her would be considered. “ I!U1 -° f -™ r ropatr, no inconvenience of
.thJd T 1 prh ’f 1 - lo> w ™! d “ n °®«* « «~*a of a man-of-war, if time per.
Ku P f 18 VOSSeI 1U at a l!g,lt dmft ° f ’"‘“l t 0 oil bb ~ and^.
•18. On the principle that she is less liable to strain in the Dock when light than when u*. ?
Yes ; umn-01-wargo into Dock with them guns and Koros on
4-d. Do you think a charge equal to that now made for tho use of the Patent Sim
«mdo to merchant -vessels using the Dock ? I think so. h gU be
doubtadlyf" tbink Irterchant TOSSob would give a preference to the Dry Dock? Most urn-
-51. iJy the Ohm-man t No doubt any revenue to be derived from the Dock -would bo mi
iucreasing one j that it would incratue with tho traffic to the port f Tos. ’
o . And I presume that the existence of a Dock here, would induce a cumber of vessels to
oonm here, that would not come without ? I think so. T ® SSIS t 0
of. So that the actual tommge now visiting the port is no criterion ? Certainly not,
(>4. Uhe vessels at course coming under such circumstances, would be vessels ramiriiw repairs
if T m T 6 f y gf usotbisDock? Yes > a,,dwonlds P end >”™ B y“the”. p '
o. By 38 . Lamh ; You are aware that France has a large heel iu these seas ? Yes.
56. Do you not think, m the event of there being a Dock here, that French vessels of war m
well as comraeroial vessels, wanting repair, would come here ? No doubt; we have a proof of
w* 55 1;° ! lat tw °y ears a S° a French man-of-war was hove down here,
indioft ■’ Up -°P ‘v 0 , whole > “ a « enoral “ att, w of policy, you think it would be
mif, !V 001is ’ derab5e surfm >rf necessary, of Colonial money in undertaking this
iioasme ■ I think it,would be to the advantage of the Colony to do so, even if it had no
assistance from Government.- ■ 11 u ““ uo
58. By the. Colonial Treasurer; Do yon know Mossman’s Bay on the North Shore ? I have
been m there.
n 9. Do you think that would be a preferable place to Cockatoo Island for a Dry Dock? | do
aiot know the depth oi water therej but I should decidedly prefer Cockatoo Island* ;
WEDNESDAY,


WEDNESDAY, 14 JULY, 1847.
jjitiWttt
THE COLONIAL SECRETART, m the Chaie,
THE COLLECTOR OF CUSTOMS, | THE COLONIAL TREASURER,
CAPTAIN DDMARESQ, 1 JOHN LAMB, Esq.
Lieutenant-Colonel James Gordon, Commanding Royal Engineer, called in and examined i—
-1 You toe prepared an estimate for the Dry Dock proposed to he formed at Cockatoo
Island ? I superintended the preparation of it ; the details were confided to Mr. Mann. I
S,‘ ™“f“ It, K I»P”« “■ f
fss ftsrsj. f; r
5. ,uo you consiu . 5 independently of the advantages of the use of convict labor.
t Wh“ “ofSI STi i/» sandstone rod? with a little shale and debris
r “tone hard? I consider it to he the medium hardness of the rock in the Harbour.
The formation is the same as that all round about the Sydney Harbour.
fsavrsa? wemifßep.«««.«.
'mae b/sale * That is a question that has been a good deal discussed by myself and Mu
||- ann It is as good stone as any in the vicinity of Sydney ; and if there is much build-
ZTmma on the stone quarried could he sold to some advantage. .
<) S Therlis nothing in the nature of the work to prevent the stone being out out m blocks of
proposed depth of the Dock? No; we
oulv indue by analogy, and we presume that the rock will probably get harder as we descend.
Tl Fmra thl examination yon have made of the estimate, are you satisfied that is of a mo-
rtiueV Ris a work of which an exact estimate could not he made; because it will
“S, upon one particular, the nature of the rook ;if there ate extensive fissures in
tke will require a considerable sum to meet the expense of pumping; hut we do not
■mticimte that —that is the main point of uncertainty in the estimate.
12 If that occurred it would be necessary to erect an engine forthwith . Yes. .
13' The engine hat would be available for working the Dock afterwards would be sufficient
fc.tt.niimw 5 Yes, and more than sufficient. , ■
H There b nothing to prevent the' erection of the engine, and the necessary buildings,
ItJg tire progress of the work 1 Nothing whatever; the permanent site for the engine can
15 1 «* ***** and a-half feet of water on the
outside of the entrance, it would, therefore, appear to be useless to deepen the Dock to twenty-
two faia is now proposed, as a vessel of get «r m
dial of inequality on the outside, and the soundings have not been taken with That minute-
deal o| in q y , . within a foot or twoj in all parts. The soundings
ww taken at low witer. It we were to reverse the entrance the expense would be greatly
fncreasl because a very large additional mass of superincumbent rock would have to be
i-pmnvpd in. order to enable ns to effect this alteration. •
16 Bn the Chairman; Are you in possession of information that will enable you to judge
lithe capacity of vessels that a Dock of the dimensions stated in. the plains capable of taking
inV No lam not competent to give correct information upon that point.
1/ From your acquaintance with the island and its locality, do you consider it » fitting
place for aVaval Depot, in the event of one being established within tins Harbour ? I think
iinon the whole it is an eligible site for a Naval Depot.
•,1 Have you any means of stating the area of the island? I cannot just now state pro-
area, but I know it to be ample for any naval establishment that could possibly be
irßtL above the position of the City it would be within the protection of any defence
that might be erected ? Yes, that is one adTantage of lm?ing the Dock erected th re. _
20. There -would be no separate expense on this account ? No, the Dock would be withm
istod timt woaia “ fit u for a Depot?
Nous that l ean possibly conceive ; it is well adapted for any buildings.
Are any of the buildings that are there now of a permanent character, capable of being
oonVfflted into stores,'on their ceasing to be required for convict purposes ? They are all
substantial . buildings, and could be well adapted to stores, except that they aie only one
Is! Ar?thoy from the thickness of the walls capable pf being added to? Yes, an addi-
tional story could be put to them. ~ , v
34, They are built on stone ? Yes, they ara all on tlip rock. . v w
05 ft/ Mr. Lamb; Ara any of the buildings capable of being converted into a Naval Hos-
pital f Any of. them could ba used as an Hospital j they are m a very healthy position, being
cMefiy built on the summit of the island, gg


26. You consider that to bean eligible site for an hospital oh the score of health? It is
Deouliarly salubrious I should say. « ~ «
27. Bv tho Chairman: It is snrrounded entirely by deep water at all times of tide . Yes.
28 In the event of its being necessary to increase the depth and breadth of the Dock, do
vou consider that there is anything in the position in which it is intended to be placed that
can interfere with this proposal ? Nothing whatever; yon could make it ht for any ship that
has ever been built; with a proportionate expense the Dock could be made to admit the
29® From P tL” portion of the Island, is there any likelihood of a boisterous sea or any sea
affecting the docking of vessels during any state of the weather f No; the spot chosen for
the entrance of. the Dock is particularly well sheltered.
30 At that part of tho Harbour have you aver known anything at at all like a sea ! JNo«
at that point; at the other end of the island there is sometimes a little sea,
31. How is the island supplied with fresh water? There has been a sufficient supply of
water, by filtration from the rooks, for the convicts on the island at all seasons, and there at
I think about 200 men on the island.
32 Is the water of good quality ? Very good, ,
33! Is it such as would be availala for the watering of vessels ? To the extent of the supply.
34' How is the water collected ? In tanks, by filtration from the high grounds. Thera are
some wells, but the water in these is not so good.
85. These are artificial tanks out out of the solid rock? xes. _
36. Can you state the dimensions of these tanka, their capacity in gallons f
ITSBT.
Three tanks each 67 X X 4 = 63613 gallons.
One tank 24 X 9 X 7 = 0072 gallons.
Total 73684 gallons,
37™ So an XratnnMtedlupply of good fresh water could be obtained? Only limited
38 * Have not a much larger number than 200 convicts been kept on the island at one time ?
.......»»..
40 m iathere B any I difficulty in communicating with Sydney from the island.? None whatever j.
the distance is not more than three miles.
Lieut, Colonel
J. Gordon.
UJulyj3*7.‘
(Jollier Kerr Mann, Esq., called in and examined ■—
1 Ton were formerly in tlie Bombay Artillery ? Yes. . , fiml Tfn
2. And were educated as a Civil Engineer ? Tea, I passed an examination as a Civil En
gineer ; but subsequently entered the East India Company s Seiyice. , .
I Ton have latterly been practising as a Civil Engineer in this Colony . Yes, having
fired from the East India Company’s Service on halt-pay. , . ...
4 You have been employed under Colonel Gordon of the Royal Engineers, in preparing the
estimate of a Dry Dock to be formed at Cockatoo Maud ? X have.
r And have gole very fully into the details of that measure ? Into every item.
6. Are you fully satisfied that the estimate is sufficient to. provide for the necessary work 1 1
feel very confident that it is sufficient. _
*7 According to the dimensions laid-down in your plan>. Yes. , «
5 mi you state to the Committee on what grounds those dimensions- have been proposed 1-
I had'to the first instance,: some difficulty in deciding upon what ought to be the proper
dimensions of the Dock j but upon consulting various works on the subject, and looking to the
capabilities of the harbour, I came to the conclusion that,the best, or, if X- may use the teira,
si 7p for the Dock would he as X have drawn it,
9 Your general instructions were to prepare an estimate for a- Dock of sufficient capacity to
Ij™' W S could enter the libour, at the-Sow and Pigs ? Yes, when Men
10 You conslderthat the dimensions stated in the-plan would meet that object ? Yes, and
lam still impressed that way; hut after-considerable conversation upon the subject, and deep
X think it might be, perhaps, better to err on the sure side, and I should b
inclined to enlarge tbe entrance of the Dock. , , ,
11. To what depth ? I have-made an additional estimate for increasing the depth to nineteen
..ml the width to fifty feet at high water line, ~,,,,
12 ’What would be- the additional expense for increasing the breadth and depth in the way
lou propose over your former estimate? The-addition for materials, working by prison labor,
would be £641 Bs. lid., and the wages by free labor would be-£4-88. If done by free labor,
it would come to £1,029 Bs. lid. (bs Estimate mi Beporf appended.J _ ■ ;
Erom your knowledge of the locality, would there be-any difficulty in increasing the
LmensSs y in theway you have proposed? I see no-difficulty, I went down to the island
veSay and re-sounded off the different parts; I found the bottom very even, and plenty of
iafov in the offing—as much as .twenty-five feet at low water. n , ,
,4 What is the depth at low water at the point where you intend to' construct the Dock -
There is rather abroad portion of made ground there, and hy an old survey, I find that there
are two and a half fathoms close in, and at the edge of it, there are three fathoms, and three
and a quarter, deepening very rapidly as you get out. .
15 Atwhat timeof tide were you sounding? At.low water.,
149—d. *"
G. K. Mann,.
Esq.
U jSyTSt'T.
WEDNESDAY, 14 JULY, 184-7'.


16. What is the rise of tide there ? B averages about five feet; it has exceeded that at spring
tides,
17. ■ So that if the Dock were deepened to nineteen feet, yon have no doubt there would he attf-
■' ficient water for vessels of that draft ? Xam fully convinced there would be. lam not prepared
to say whether there would be any obstacles in the channel, but close to the Island 1 have dis-
covered nothing that would prevent a vessel of that draft of water from going in. About seventy
or one hundred feet off the shove, we have twenty-five feet water at low tide, and a muddy
bottom,
18. What have you estimated as the depth of water over the Sow and Bigs! hour
fathoms.
19. How did you arrive at that information ? X derived it from old surveys, the survey of
lieutenant Hoe, and, I believe, Captain King, and also from conversation I have had with
nautical men, and others who were acquainted with the matter, I find that the east channel
is marked upon the charts as four fathoms ; the other, X believe, is a little deeper, but it is
very narrow, and large vessels do not attempt it,
20. Have you carefully examined the nature of the soil that It would be necessary to excavate
at the Dock ? I have,
21. Will yon state what it is? The sutfaceris sandstone mixed with a stratum of clay j but
upon removing that off to about the level of twenty inches above, the high water line, we
come to a close grained sandstone rock,
22. Is it of a hard or soft nature? It is rather soft on the surface, and is partially covered
with a bed of clay, but on going down farther, we find a hard solid rock.
23. Is it rock that would be useful for building purposes? It would be very useful.
24. Is there anything in the nature of the work that would prevent this stone being quarried
into a suitable size for sale ? There is nothing) and I have in my estimate allowed a sum
for cutting the blocks into ashlar.
25. Have you made any deduction from the expense on account of the probable sale of the
stone ? No,
26. Are you able to make any approximate estimate of the sum that might be received from
that? Xam of opinion that the stone will be worth £lOOO ; others differ from me on that
point. Some builders have considered it of no value—but they are interested parties. lam
sure, however, that the stone would be worth about two-pence a cubic foot, to be employed
upon any wharf or locality to which it could be removed by a boat from Cockatoo Island,
although it might not be worth much to cart it after landing.
27. In the estimate have you made any allowance for the cost of superintendence ? I have
not put down any sum for superintendence,—nothing but the amount for actual mechanical
labor, tools, implements, materials, and the requisite machinery.
28. In the increased dimensions of which you have prepared an estimate, are you satisfied
that they are to the full extent that possibly could be required for any vessel the harbour is
capable of receiving ? That is a point that I should not like to answer decidedly. Thera are
many able nautical men who think it would he better to have the entrance wider, although I
am still under tile impression that it is wide enough. That is a question that might, how-
ever, he left open for the present, and need not delay the formation of the Dock. It would,
perhaps, be advisable to send to England for the frame-work and plate for the caisson, and at
the same time information respecting some of the Ducks there might be obtained, which would
set the 1 question completely. at rest,
20. The increase would be merely necessary at the entrance) there would be none required in
the Dock itself ? No, merely in the entrance. The Dock is now wider than the large eastern
Dock at Woolwich, constructed by Sir William Denison,-which is eighty-one feet at the level of
top altars; I have made this 90 feet, and there is no additional expense in riialdng it in that
way ; it gives light and air to the men at work at a ship’s bottom.
30. Then the principal additional expense in widening the Dock would bo in making the
caisson? Yes, that is the only item that would be increased by wideminj the Dock entrance.
31. By Mr. lamb; Does the estimate you have put in cm brace the additional expense for
the enlargement of the caisson ? Yes, and the increased power which will be necessary for
the engine, together with additional tools, implements, and materials.
82. By the Chairman : Have you calculated the additional time that would he. necessary to
pump the Dock in consequence of its additional capacity ? It would make a slight difference,
but I propose to add ten horse to the power of the engine, without increasing the number of the
pumps, and by that means I should actually reduce the time in draining the Dock, compared
with the calculation in the original estimate.
38. What would be the additional expense of working an engine of that kind? The addi-
tion-would be trifling, viz , for extra fuel and sundry small expenses, probably not exceeding
altogether ss, on the original estimate.
,34. Then the most important,addition will he the first cost? Yes, in fact the only one, with
the exception of this trifle,
35, It will not make it necessary to have additional wen to work the -engine ? Not at all. I
may mention here, that it has since appeared to -me that it might be desirable, 'instead of
having one thirty horse power, engine to have two of fifteen horse power, as it might not bo
necessary at all times to employ the full power; for instance, a leak might occur when a
■vessel was docked, and the Dock might be kept dry by working one- pump, or if anything hap-
pened to -the machinery of one engine there would he the other iua slate for working.
Whether that would entail the expense of extra hands is to he considered.
36, By Mr. Bamb: Are you aware that the breadth of the “ Vernon” is fifty feet eight inches ?
I -believe it is fifty-two feet eight inches.
37, In making the entrance to the Dock fifty feet wide, do you .assume that the extreme breadth
pf a vessel would pass over the .stone work at the entrance ? Yes; in taking in the “Vernon"
light, I think you would reduce the breadth of the- vessel at the floating line to under fifty feet.
The water there is so very still, that if you have the piers fifteen or eighteen inches above the
Jpyel of high water you will be perfectly safe, ’ jg'
G. IC, Maim,
Esq.
14 July, 1847;


M Wl °f at6d Wbeo f r the pr °P° Sea di —« will ««-
I hid Lf ’ ,Wlnß ref “f o6 t 0 their Paddle-boxes ? la drawing the plan,
X boa icteience wther to large steamers than, to heavy vessels, and the way I propose that
th7toli°of d fi “ allowing the paddle-boL to pass over
the excepto of ihe •• ***
;fmore **“ Pr ° PoSea P ° Slti!m ° f Dock ' to be a suitablß 0116 ? 1 lla « se “
41, Are you prepared to state any objection to it at all ? I know of none, executing that T
baokwnrftn ‘f “ “ b i eoti °* ! ' that the workmen would have a difficulty 1 in getting
badewaul,,nd forward. I know, however, that at the heaving-down place at Mossmon’s Bar
accounr Aaff 18 di ® Cult of acc - ss> ttere is serious inconvenience experienced on this
43. What is the distance across from the Island to the mainland? I am not prepared to state
ImftL m , Im t y " atl thißk * is »*« an'advanfagfto
li.ivi, the men away from the Dockyard, as there will then he no cooking or fires in its vioiuitv
thC ■u“ l v* C e f ranoe t 0 the Dooli: > 11 il wore made sufficiently wide to admit
mmifi " W ( lth r l,t ? kwg It 61 , 1 ' ! ’ alidles off > i 4 would be necessary to make the entrance
attuity m seventy-five feet, and I have never heard of a Dock with so wide an entrance.
It 4,1 f , no . at any time in removing the paddle-wheels ? Not at all. '
44, What additional time do you calculate would be necessary to finish the work, if the Dock
thuty-lom or thirty-live days, but the actual time in working will be something more than that,
In cause only a certain number of men can work in the diving-bell, and, therefore, any in-
crease in the number of men would not expedite that portion of the work. I think, there-
fore, the increase of lime will be about three months.
43. What examination have you made of the nature of the stone helow the surface s I have
EL™ " P pl * Ce * l^ re Mld there 1 * have , not i um l*d to any depth, hut X have no doubt
of soradej^tt neu.ee, and the appearance above, that we shall come upon a solid stratum of rook
4(i The quality of that rock may still vary,? It might vary in colour and texture, but it is
not likely to vary in density. ’
47. Might it not be harder? It might.
48. Would not that cause increased difficulty and expense in working if? 1 think the dif-
ference would be very trifling. If we were to come into a different rook—a granite or trap—
it would make a difference, hut so long as we are in sandstone it will not make much differ-
ence. I have not in my estimate taken the softest rock, but approaching to the hardest. I
have estimated that a man could gutter four feet a day, and of the rock we are now upon he
could gutter six or eight feet. As we quarry lower down we shall probably come to harder
rock, X have allo wed lor that.
40. What snperintoudonee would you think necessary for a work of this kind ? Thera ought
to bo a fire man and overseers of the work, to see that the work was properly executed as
laid out by the engineer. The superin ten dance that would bo necessary if prisoners were
employed upon the work, I can hardly speak to, r
.30, Would more than one overseer bo necessary, if it wore performed by froc labor, in addition
to the superintending control of the engineer? Yes; I think it would require a foreman of
the works, undone or two overseers, and it might be desirable to give some of the men a small
addition to tUou* wages to act as working overseers.
51. I),/ Captain Bumamsq; To keep the meiTto their work? To keep thorn to their work
Xlio foreman of the works ought to see that the work was properly done, ’« marked out Bv
the engineer. ' . J
f 3-; B V fa Chairman : The expense of this supeiiiiteodonce, I think you Imre stated, would
bu m addition to tlxa estimate tlt would be; but if the atone realize what I suppose it will
that would anver any. additional expense of ■thia ldnd. • : J .
55. Ihj Captain jDitmn'mq: Would this work require the constant superin tendance of the
foreman r xes, it would occupy the whole of Ills time,
54. Could he not devote a portion of his time to other works ? No; at the commencement
of the work it would require the whole of his time j and at the conclusion of it, in forming the
altars, stops, and slides, ho must be constantly, on the.ground.
65. There must bo thou an engineer, » foreman, and overseers ? Yes; tha engineer could
find enough work to occupy this greater part of his time, particularly at certain portions of
the work.
66. By tip Chairman: What is the proposed length of tho dock ? Two.hundred and twenty-
six feet upon the keel floor. There is no difficulty in increasing or decreasing-that Item. ’■
67. In tlie event of its being considered desirable to increase the length of the Dock, that can
bo,done at, any time after its completion ? ,Yes. ,
58, Have you any moans of knowing the length of the vessels employed at present in afeatk
communication between Suez and the Indian Presidencies? They vary from, two hundred to
two hundred and twenty feet in length. ■ : .
5!). Than this Dock, according to ..the proposed dimensions, with the increase which has now
bean suggested, would be sufficient to dock any vessel of that description ? T believe that the
Dock, as it now stands on the plan, is capable of docking any steamer, with the exception of
the “ Groat Britain,” or » Great Western,” the former being three hundred and twenty, add
the latter two hundred mid forty feet long.
<SO. Has the plan been taken from the most approved plans of Her Majesty’s Dockyards at
Homo ? I have made some slight alterations and variations, By gathering in the altars as much
as


as possible below low water-line, in order to reduce the quantity of water remaining to bo-
pumped out.
61. Have you, taken care to avoid the possibility of interfering with the form of ships, and to
* allow sufficient room for working at their bottoms in all parts ? Yes; the keel floor drops
twenty inches, but I now propose to make it two feet below the level of the caisson sill, in
order that every part may be got at.
63. 1$ the plan of the caisson taken from any approved plan in England 1 I have not seen
a detailed plan of an iron plate caisson,' but I have seem am estimate of the quantity of iron
that would be required.
63. Would there be any difficulty in constructing a caisson if the material were obtained from
England ? No, Ido not think there would be any difficulty at all.
64. If the accurate dimensions were given, could it not be brought out in pieces and put
together here ? Yes; and I think that would be the best mode of doing it. Messrs. Ditch-
burn and Mares, of Blackwall, have made caissons for the Dock at Woolwich of iron plate,
from designs furnished by themselves.
06, Is your estimate for the steam engine; which will be necessary, formed upon the cost if
> Ike Colony, or the cost if imported ? It is formed upon the cost in the Colony ; I
think the cost from Home would be greater, as the engineers are now so fully employed upon,
the railroads, that they can scarcely undertake any other works. X think, a high pressure
engine could be made as well here as at Home.
66. ,Xa your estimate for a high pressure engine ? It is.
67. In your estimate of the expense of the work, if performed by convict labor, have you in-
cluded the expense for rations and clothing for the prisoners ? I have not, but merely the
materials that will be used.
68. By Captain Bumaresq: If the men were allowed a small gratuity of tea and sugar, would
they not give additional work, which would more than compensate for the cost of those articles ?•
I am of opinion that they would.
69. Do you think they would do as ranch work as free men 7 No; but I think, even with,
the additional expense for indulgences, a considerable saving would be effected.
70. By the Chairman: Have you a sufficient supply of fresh water on the Island to work the
engine? I think it can be collected on the Island ; a considerable quantity of water would,
drain off the higher rocks, which might,be collected in tanks.
71. Besides the metal for the caisson, are there any other articles that will have to be pro-
cured from England? Nothing, with the exception of boiler plate; there may not possibly
be boiler plate enough for the manufacture of the boilers, although I believe there is sufficient*.
All the rest might be manufactured in the Colony.
APPENDIX REFERRED TO
DRY DOCK, COCKATOO ISLAND.
3&EPOET and Estimate of additional expense for increasing the breadth, at high water-line,,
to fifty feet, and the depth,, at caisson sill, to nineteen feet,
ABSTRACT:
Item 1 Tools, Implements, and Materials £ 112 8 H
„ 3 Iron plate : Caisson 99 0 0
» 4 Steam Engine SBO 0 0
Total addition, Prison Labor ...... 641 8 II
Amount of Wages, Free Labor 488 0 0>
Total addition, Free Labor. £1,029 8 11
REPOST.
The addition to Item 1, of Estimate, provides the necessary increase of Tools, Implements, and 1
Materials requisite for the proposed enlargement of the Dock,
The addition to Item 3, of Estimate, provides-the requisite Material'and. Labor for increasing the
o*e of Caisson. ... .
The addition to Item 4, provides the requisite increase of power for draining the Dock from low
water-mark.
"With the increased depth, the total estimated quantity of water to be drained by the Engine will
he 1,877,054 gallons, the height being 24 feet. By.the addition of 10 horse power the engine will make-
-25 revolutions, raising 4,500 gallons per minute, including the Additional 2 feet in height, or the total,
quantity in 5 hours, The displacement caused by a vessel is not taken into account here,
. ESTIMATE.


Adda.
£
s.
a.
£
s. d.
to
20
Picks, Quarry or Masons 5 .........
3
0
0
Item I.
300
Wedges, Quarry, of sizes
14
4
4
15
Shovels, Ballast.;
2 12
6
150
Steel, Spare Blister, lbs.,
® 7d.
4
7
6
224
Bar Iron, do,. Plat, lbs., .........
1
8
0
10
Barrows, Wheeling, Common or Stone ,(ch 27s
13 10
0
450
Powder, Blasting, as..
28
2
a
150
Oases, Tin, for Blasts under Water .......,.,..4d. each-
2 10
0
150
Tabs, do, do. do., feet (o| Bd. foot.
1 17
6
20
Bags, Uanvass, for hoisting with Diving Bell. (a) 8s. eaoh,
8
0
0
4
Oil, Olive, Gallons
3 12
0
28
White Lead, lbs
J7n) 4r1
0
9
4
2
Blocks, 10in., Lignum Vitas Skives .........20in,, (al 8d, in.
0 13
4
200
Rope, Sin,, fathoms,
5|ewfc , @ 6Bs.
17 17
6
£
102
4
6
Contingencies
10
4
5
Item 3
2
Boiler Plate, tons
50
0
0
112
8 XX
1
Bar and Angle Iron, ton .........
fifi jzw
15
0
0
Labor ...................
10
0
0
Communication Bridge, &c. .....
•••••
16
0
0
£
90
0
0
Contingencies
9
0
0
99
0 0
Item 4
10 horse power to Steam Engine, @ 4J80'®- horse power ...
300
0
0
Contingencies
30
0
0
330
0 0
Total Addition (Prison Labor)...,.......
541
8 11
, •
'
Laborers
Hoisting and Landing
■ 28
ms
Filling and Wheeling
1GT
Filling and Landing.........
938
Filling and Wheeling
68
170S
21*i!
Add Sundays
448
mi
PRISON LABOR.
PEfiB LABOR AND WAGES.
TOTAL,
Quarrymen....,........
HIS
744 (c& 4s. .
se s. a,
148 16 0
iS s. flj
Laborers .....................
167
102 @ 2s. lOd.
14 9 0
Diving Bell......,,,
1708
USB ® 5s.
284 15 0
Amount of Wages (free labor)
448 0 0
G. K. Maim,
Esq.
U July, 1847-
ESTIMATE.
ESTIMATE OP TIME—PRISON LABOR.
ESTIMATE OF TIME AND AMOUNT OP WAGES_PEEE LABOR.
149—e
TEUMBAY,


THURSDAY, 19 AUGUST, 1847.
IPresott:—
THE COLONIAL .SECRETARY is -the Chair, ■
THE COLLECTOR OF CUSTOMS.
Captain Owen Stanley, Ei K, F, R. S., -Comm»t)der of H. ;M. S, “Rattlesnake,*’ called™ and
examined;—
1. You have been recently engaged in the survey of the Harbour of Port Jackson ? Yes,
, inore particularly of the entrance..
2, Will you be so good as to state to the Committee, the result of your survey of the channel
■on both sides the'“Sow and Pigs" ? It appears that there is a very .narrow channel, having
four fathoms at low water, but it ia too narrow to be available, and you could not bring in a
vessel drawing more than twenty-four feet, and even then you would have to wait for the
tide.
8. That is at -low water spring tides ? Yes.
4. In ytmr observation, what is tbs greatest rise of the tide ? During the month we have
been surveying, the greatest rise has been five feet,
5. What has been the lowest f The greatest rise and fall has been five feet.
6. Is the channel to which you refer on tha north or south side of the “Sow and Pigs” ? , Thera
Is one on each side.
7. Of equal-depth ? Of equal depth ; the eastern channel is much the widest of the two,
except at its northern entrance, where it is mnoh contracted by a narrow spit eXtanding from
the main steal,
8. Comparing the soundings taken by you, with those taken by Lieutenant Roe, what
dfffetenoe do you find ? Generally speaking, in the Harbour there appears to have been very
little change; but the shoal of the " Sow and Pigs” appears to have extended to the southward.
The obelisk erected for the purpose of enabling vessels to olear tho end of the shoal, now no
longer does so.
9. What bottom did you find in the main channel? Rooks with sand, which makes tho
bottom vary uneven.
10. What is the largest class of ships of tho Navy that you think the Harbour ia capable of
receiving t Any vessel drawing under twenty-four feet, This Table, copied from a work by
Mr. Bdye, Chief Assistant to tha Surveyor of the Navy, and considered good authority, gives
the draught of water of all tbs vessels in the service in the year 1832; since that, some of
the ships constructed by Sir William Symonds draw more water, in proportion to tho number
of guns they cany. [Vide Tailed
11. The ordinary class of seventy-four gun ships pan come in 1 Yes. _
12. And even-eighty -gnu -ships f - Yer-old --eighty gun ; ships t perhapsono of Sir William
SymoncU’ new ships might have scale difficulty, and bo obliged to get‘her,guns out.
13. Have you-oxamined the Harbour, from the point to which you have referred, as far as
Cockatoo Island? '.'llfeSj.aad.thera,. appears to he no diffioulty whatever. Thera appearsto
hate been very little change as far as Cockatoo. Island,, and the channel, though narrow in
places, has plenty of water fdr'lte'largest ship. ’‘ ' ,
14. Have you examined the depth of water round the immediate vicinity of Cockatoo
Island ? Yes, I have.made an.elahorate.survey of that part of the -Island where the Dock
is intended to-be iforraed. •
15. What depth ‘of water did you find close to it? Four and a half fathoms’ within' two
chains.
18. -And there ia quite sufficient water there for any ship the Harbour is capable of receiving ?
Yes- - - ■- '■ •
17. Have yon examined minutely the site whore it ia proposed to construct the Dock ? Yes.
18. Do you consider that to bo an eligible situation, or do yon not ? I think it a very eligibla
situation.
19. Do you consider tho island to be suitable for a Naval depdt, if it became necessary to form
one t As far as its size goes it is very well suited, but it is not very large.
20. What size would you recommend that the Dock should be constructed, so os to be capable
of receiving the largest ship that the Harbour would take in 1 That is a question which an
engineer would be more competent to answer; but in consequence of the groat length of soma
rf-'the large Steamers it would require to he long enough to take them in.
21. Will you.favor tteiCommittee with.u copyof-your plan of the Harbour, and of Cockatoo
Island?.. .Yes.. .[.Vide Pirns. -- -
Is the situation well (sheltered? Quite so; and between the .Island and the main land
therein plenty of water for'the Driest ship to lie there in perfect security, while she is waiting
to-go-in. ■■ '■ ' '
33. Is there any difficulty aa to a vessel working up there? It would ho requisite to tow
her rip. A vessCLrequiring to be docked has generally received some-damage -which would
make it necessary to dismantle her.
24. Do you consider that there isony more eligible; situation for a Dock than'that which is
propoaedto be'selected ? I have not seen any portion more eligible. The only objection
that I see to tiie position at ‘Cockatoo ‘lsland is, that'vessels would require to be towed
up.
25. Is there not this advantage however, that any defences that might be erected for tha pro-
tection of the City, would be available also for the protection of this Dock ? Most certainly 5
Cockatoo Island is ip a very protected situation.
'■ -i . 36.


Draught of Water.
Load light
ST"i
r % r 3
: g : g
: p. s (L
O -I to O £' '
3.
S IS ob cs '
,o so .$*. cs a
l» ,. o 3 5 S*
ts ' 3 » Cl S -
jsl'
12 in. addi. keel.
fed
• . ■
j— o — 5 a*
«
a
' ■
■ s ■
o , s» —s . TO f
■ -ts
S3 S3 O W S’
S3 S B p
«* «„ 5=1 ~ .
a
6 itu add! keel.
.— :
gw
g <g
CO ' w
■ a: =
si J rfw t- S‘
i.
- 1 ® - . ■?
» :*» •. s “■ ■? _
00 ir7
-- S» rr-
??
-4 jB. CS ,5'
oT
S3 S -4 '.«s
w ta ■
ea cs to cs S’ .
a .S
— _ -£a
cb
a= *a w' S'
- -If.
CS ;«4 <5 -5’ :
''' ”r :
36. Do you think it desirable that there should be a Dry Dock in these seas? I do, very,
there being so little rise and fall of tide any where in this neighbourhood.
ST. Do yon think it would be useful for ships of the navy employed in these seas ? Certainly ;
as at present, in the event of their getting on shore, or sustaining any damage, their only
alternative is to heave down, by which they are very much strained, or else to go to a distant
port to repair. 1 /
28. Is there any means of .docking ships at China ? lam not aware of any, and I believe
there is not.
29. There is no other port besides Bombay where vessels can be docked ? I believe that is
the only one.
30. Then If this Dock were constructed it would be available for ships employed la the Chinese
seas ? Hardly, as the distance, even in a direct line, from Canton to Sydney is nearly the
same as from Canton to Bombay, and by the route ships would have to come, would be yearly
one .thousand miles longer.
31. Would it not bo more desirable that the man should be brought to a salubrious climate,
such as this is, than that they should go to the tropical climate of Bombay ? Yes.
32. Where 100 they would be able to obtain provisions at a cheap .rate? Yes; the only
objection would be that they could get labor cheaper at Bombay.
33. I believe there would bo no difficulty in having the necessary repairs effected in this
Colony ? None whatever; the work hero, though expensive, is extremely good.
34. Have you had any .opportunity of observing the quality of the timber of the Colony for
ship building purposes.? No, I have not.
Table jiefbueed to. 1
DRAUGHTS of Water of Her Majesty's Ships copied from Edyo’s work on the Eqaipnwwi
and Displacement of Vessels of War.
THURSDAY, 19 AUGUST, 1847.
Merien Moriarty, Esq., R. N., called in and examined:—
I. Yon are a Lieutenant in the Royal Navy, and Port Master of this Colony ? Yes.
3. Under the directions of the Government, you have recently made a survey of the channels
near the “ Sow and Pigs ” ? I have.
3. Will you state to the Committee the result of that examination ? I find the lowest depth
of water at the highest spring tide to ho not less at any one spot than twenty-one feet—-that
is at low water—l am now speaking of the regular channel on the west side of the
“ Sow and Pigs.”
4, Is that the deepest channel ? It is the largest and best—the most regular.
0, Did you examine the east channel also f I did; that is subject to a groat deal of variety ;
the soundings are very irregular; the least depth found there is twenty-two feet, but the
depth is very irregular, and the passage is tortuous ; indeed it is such a passage aa a man
would not like to bring a large ship through ; there is one particular spot where the water is
not more thon twentyrone feet.
6. What is the rise and fall of the tide ? It does not exceed five feet.
7. Is that at spring tide ? Yes, that is the greatest rise.
8. What is the rise when it is not spring tide? Not more than three feet.
0. Have yon examined the channel as far as Cockatoo Island ? Yes.
10. Is there any impediment after passing the channel at the “Sow and Pigs” ? None what-
ever ; the largest ship in the world may go up there; there is not less than five fathoms water
all the way till you get close alongside the island.
11. What is the largest class of vessels in the Navy that you think this Harbour is capable of
receiving ? The greatest depth of water you can calculate upon is twenty-six feet, at high
water spring tides. I have had the soundings taken on board the light-ship, at the “ Sow and
Pigs," every successive hour for a mouth, and the greatest rise has been five feet. If, therefore,
a vessel drew more than twenty-three or twenty-four feet water, she would have to wait till
the top of the spring tide, and would thon have to lio lowed over.


i 12. Then, practically, no vessel drawing more than twenty-four feel ought to attempt to come
into this Harbour ? Certainly not, without taking out her guns and stores.
, 13. What class of ship do you think might corns in 1 Lina of battle ships, seventy-four guns ;
* first-fate men-of-war cannot come up.
14 Eighty gun ships ? I think they draw twenty-five feet. Any ship might come up by
taking out her stores, but, practically, no larger ship than a seventy-four would come in hero.
15. Have you examined Cockatoo Island, with reference to its eligibility as a site for a Dry
Dock ? I have.
16. What is your opinion of that ? That it will answer very well for that purpose.
17. Do you consider that the island itself is suitable for a Naval Dep6t, in the event of its
being necessary to establish one in these seas ? I think it would be a very convenient place.
It is scarcely large enough for the arsenal of a great nation, but for any practical purpose for
this Colony it Will, probably, answer very well for the next century.
18. Can you give the Committee any information as to the size the Dock should be for the
purpose of receiving the largest class of ship which the Harbour is capable of admitting ?
The largest class of ship which the Harbour is capable of receiving is a steam frigate, which
although larger than line of battle ships hava not so great a draught; for example, the
" British Queen” was two hundred and seventy-five feet long, and sixty feet oyer all in breadth,
and the “ President” was seventy feet over all.
18. That includes the paddle-boxes ? Tos.
20. For the purpose of being docked, a vessel may be so lightened that the paddle-box will
float over the entrance of the Dock ? Yes, if the water is nearly level with the summit of
the Dock.
21. It is not necessary to construct the gates of the Dry Dock much higher than the level
of high water mark ? Vary little; but if the height of the Dock is ranch higher than
the gates, in that case they would have to take off the wheels.
22. That may be done without any great expense or difficulty, I apprehend f It is a very
troublesome business.
23. Supposing the paddle-boxes could float over the entrance gate, what width do you con-
sider that the entrance to the Dock ought to be constructed, in order to receive a large class
steam frigate ? I think it ought to be more than forty feet, at all events. Indeed I think
it will be necessary to allow for the breadth of the paddle-wheels, because the taking them off
will not be so easy a matter as yon appear to imagine,
24 On board a steam frigate, 1 apprehend, there are always engineers competent to effect a
•work of that kind? Yes, but the great weight of the wheel would render it difficult.
2S. What length ought the dock to be ? I think not less than two hundred and fifty feet.
The length of the twelve hundred tons steam ships that carry the mails to America is two
hundred and twenty-eight feet; the “ Great Western” is two hundred and forty feet, and the
“Avon” and “Severn” are more than that. If the Dock were made fifty-six feet in breadth, that
would take all the steam ships that carry the mails to Halifax, and, probably, the vessels that
may come out here may be about the size of them. But my opinion is clear, that in con-
structing a Dock it should be made capable of taking in a steam] ship, all standing, of one
thousand eight hundred tons* to provide for esses of emergency.
