

REPORT
AUSTRALIA-Royal Commision on the Bosic Wage.




1920.
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OP AUSTRALIA.
REPOET
OF THE
ROYAL COMMISSION
ON THE
BASIC WAGE,
TOGETHER WITH EVIDENCE.
Presented hy Command, ; ordered to he printed.
I Cost of Paper: —Preparation not given ; copies; approximate cost of printing and publishing,
Printed an' 1 Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by Albert J. Mullett,
Government Printer for tha State of Victoria.
No .- -F.J.7723 Price, s. d.


CONTENTS.
P \ QE
Royal Commission—Letters Patent (3) .. .. .. .. .. .. 4-6
■lntroductory
Origin of the Commission . . . . . . .. . . .. . . . , 7
Previous History of the Subject . . . . . . . . . . .. ~ 8
Origin and Method of Adjustment of the Basic Wage . . . . . . .. .. 8
The Need for a Review of the Position . . . . . . . . .. .. 9
Analysis of the Harvester Decision .. . . . . . . . . .. .. 9
Adjustment of the (Harvester) Basic Wage . . . . . . . . , H
Criticism of the Fairness of the Basic Wage . . . . . . . . . . 12
Sittings of the Commission . . . . . . . . .. . . 13
Questions as to the Humblest Worker and as to Separate Findings for the component mem-
bers of the Typical Family .. .. .. .. ..14
Decision as to Class of Worker . . , . . . . . . . .. 14
What are Reasonable Standards of Comfort . . . . . . . . . . 18
Household Budgets . . . . . . .. . . . . .. 18
The Cities visited . . . . . . . . . , . . .. 18
Basic Wage for Country Towns . . . , . . . . . . .. 19
The Claims of the Federated Unions . . . , . . . . .. 19
Counter Claim . . . . .. .. .. . . . . . . 19
Division I.—The Present Cost of Living according to Reasonable Standards of Comfort
and the Basic Wage—
Section I. —Rent—
General .. . . . . . . . . .. . . .. 20
Owner Occupiers .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. ..21
Rent Basis of the Commission's Finding .. . . . . . . 22
Melbourne Evidence . . . . . , . . . . . . 22
Personal Inspection . . . , . . . . . . . . 22
Evidence as to other Cities . . .. . . . . . . . . 23
Housing Problem and the Stabilization of Rent . . . . .. 23
Section 11.- Clothing—
General . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. 25
Ages of the Three Children .. . . . . .. . . . . 25
Nature of the Evidence . . . . . . .. . . . . 26
Interwoven Questions . . .. . . . . . . . . 26
Trade Witnesses .. . . ... . . .. . . ~ 27
Household Witnesses . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Sydney . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . , 28
Brisbane . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .. 28
Adelaide, Perth, and Hobart. . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Men’s and Boys’ Clothing . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Women’s and Girls’ Clothing . . . . .. . . . . 29
Method adopted for ascertaining the Cost of necessary Clothing. Tentative Regimen 29
The Standard . . . . . . . . .. . . .. 29
Total and Detailed Cost of Clothing in Melbourne .. .. . . 29
Indicator List of Clothing . . , . • . . . . . . . . 30
Sales and Saving by Home-sewing, &c. . . . . . . . . 32
The Counter Claim in Melbourne . . . . . . .. .. 33
Section lIP Food
Method of Determining Cost of Food for the Typical Family .. .. 34
Factors in Determining the Food Total . . . . .. . . 34
Calories for the Man-unit . . , . . . . . . . . . 35
Standards ascertained by Investigators .. . . .. . . 35
Pre-war Investigators .. .. . . .. . . .. 36
Opinions of Scientific Writers as to Calories per Man-unit . . .. 37
Oral Evidence for the new Standard suggested by the Unions .. . . 38
Physiological Balance . . . . .. .. . . .. 41
Finding as to Calories per man .. . . .. . . . . 41
Co-efficients .. ... .. .. .. .. .. 42
Finding as to Co-efficients . . . . . . . . .. . . 42
Indicator List used to ascertain the Cost of Living with regard to Food .. .. 43
Indicator List —Food—Weekly Consumption .. .. .. .. 43
Cost of Food in Indicator List .. .. .. .. .. .. 44
Indicator List —Food .. ~ ... .. .. .. ~ 44


Page
Section IV. —Miscellaneous Items —
Life Assurance .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 45
Unemployment Insurance .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 46
Old-age Annuity .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 46
Variation of Basic Wage according to the World’s Production .. .. ..47
Church and Charity .. .. . . .. .. .. .. 47
Alcoholic and “ Soft ” Beverages .. .. .. .. .. 47
Domestic Assistance . . . . .. .. .. .. .. 47
Tuition in Music and Art .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 48
Miscellaneous Items included—
(l) Fuel and Lighting .. .. .. .. .. ..48
(2) Groceries, other than Food .. .. .. .. .. .. 49
(3) Renewal of Brush ware, &c. .. .. .. .. .. 49
(4) Renewal of Household Drapery .. .. .. .. 49
(5) Renewal of Crockery, Glassware, &c. .. .. .. 49
(6) Union and Lodge Dues .. .. .. .. .. 49
(7) Medicine and Dentist .. .. .. .. .. 49
(8) Amusement, Recreation, and Library .. .. .. 50
(9) Fares .. .. .. .. .. .. 50
(10) School Requisites .. .. .. .. .. 50
Indicator List—Miscellaneous Items .. .. .. .51
Weekly Cost ~ ~ .. .. .. .. .. 51
D ivision II. —The Corresponding Cost of Living in 1914-1920
Rent . . .. . . .. .. .. . . .. .. 52
Clothing .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 52
Food and Groceries .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 53
Miscellaneous Items .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 53
Total Cost of living, 1914 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..53
Conclusion .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 53
Observations as to the Basie Wage in 1914 .. .. .. .. .. .. 54
Division 111. —Automatic Adjustment of the Basic Wage .. .. .. .. 55
Method of Adjustment .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..55
Length of Interval for Adjustment of the Basic Wage .. .. .. .. .. 55
Summary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 57
Findings .. .. .. .. .. ■ .. .. .. .. 58
Work of Secretary and Statistician .. .. .. .. .. .. 59
Minority Report .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 61
Protest by Chairman .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 63
Appendices .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..65
Appendix I.—Claims of Federated Unions .. .. .. .. 66
Appendix ll.—Employers’ Counter Claim .. .. .. .. .. 84
Appendix lll.—Comments by Commission on Professor Osborne’s Evidence and Rejoinder
by Professor Osborne .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 85-6
Division I.—The Present Cost of Living according to Reasonable Standards of Comfort
and the Basic Wage—■ continued.


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
GEORGE THE FIFTH, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, King, Defender of the Faith, Emperor of India .
TO Our Trusty and Well-beloved George Mason Allard, Esquire ; Rudolph Cheney, Esquire;
Harry Collins Gibson, Esquire ; Joseph Anthony Harper, Esquire ; Ernest Edward
Keep, Esquire; Thomas Cletus Maher, Esquire; and Albert Bathurst Piddington,
Esquire, K.C.
Greeting :
KNOW YE that We do by these Our Letters Patent, issued in Our name by Our Governor-General of Our Commonwealth of
Australia, acting with the advice of Our Federal Executive Council and in pursuance of the Constitution of Our said
Commonwealth, the Royal Commissions Act 1902-1912, and all other powers him thereunto enabling, appoint you to be
Commissioners to inquire into the following matters :
1. The actual cost of living at the present time, according to reasonable standards of comfort, including all matters
comprised in the ordinary expenditure of a household , for a man with a wife and three children under fourteen
years of age , and the several items and amounts which make up that cost:
2. The actual corresponding cost of living during each of the last five years :
3. How the basic wage may be automatically adjusted to the rise and fall from time to time of the purchasing power of
the sovereign :
AND WE APPOINT you the said Albert Bathurst Piddington to be the Chairman of the said Commissioners :
And We direct that at any meeting of the said Commissioners four Commissioners shall be sufficient to constitute a quorum,
ana may proceed with the inquiry under these Our Letters Patent , notwithstanding the absence of the other Commissioners :
And We further direct that in the event of the absence of the Chairman from any meeting of the said Commissioners, the
Commissioners present may appoint one of their number to act as Chairman during such absence : And We further direct
that in the event of the votes given on any question at any meeting of the said Commissioners being equal , the Chairman, if
present, and, if the Chairman is not present, then the Commissioner appointed to act as Chairman in his absence, shall have
a second or casting vote : And We require you, with as little delay as possible, to report to Our Governor-General in and over
Our said Commonwealth the result of your inquiries into the matters entrusted to you by these our Letters Patent.
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patent, and the Seal of Our said
Commonwealth to be thereunto affixed.
WITNESS Our Trusty and Well-beloved Sir Ronald Craufurd Munro Ferguson, a Member of Our
Most Honorable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint
(1.5.) Michael and Saint George, Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order, Governor-General
and Commander-in-Chief of the Commonwealth of Australia, this sixth day of December, in
the year of our Lord One thousand nine hundred and nineteen, and in the tenth year of Our
reign.
R. M. FERGUSON
Governor- General.
By His Excellency's Command ,
JT. M. HUGHES.
Entered on Record by me in Register of Patents , No. 6, page 462, this eighth day of December, One thousand nine
hundred and nineteen.
M. L. SHEPHERD.


GEORGE THE FIFTH, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and
of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, King, Defender of the Faith, Emperor of India.
TO Our Trusty and Well-beloved Alban Cyril Morley, Esquire , LL.B., Barrister-at-Law.
Greeting :
WHEREAS by Letters Patent , issued in Our name by Our Governor-General of Our Commonwealth of Australia, acting with
the advice of Our Federal Executive Council and in pursuance of the Constitution of Our said Commonwealth, the Royal
Commissions Act 1902-1912, and all other powers him thereunto enabling, We did on the sixth day of December, in the year
of our Lord One thousand nine hundred and nineteen, appoint George Mason Allard, Esquire ; Rudolph Cheney,
Esquire; Harry Collins Gibson, Esquire ; Joseph Anthony Harper, Esquire; Ernest Edward Keep, Esquire; Thomas
Cletus Maher, Esquire ; and Albert Bathurst Piddington, Esquire, K.C., to be Commissioners to inquire into the
following matters :
1. The actual cost of living at the present time, according to reasonable standards of comfort, including all matters
comprised in the ordinary expenditure of a household, for a man with a wife and three children under fourteen
years of age, and the several items and amounts which make up that cost:
2. The actual corresponding cost of living during each of the last five years :
3. How the basic wage may be automatically adjusted to the rise and fall from time to time of the purchasing power
of the sovereign:
AND WHEREAS the said George Mason Allard, Esquire , has resigned Ms appointment as such Commissioner
and such resignation has been accepted :
NOW THEREFORE KNOW YE that We do by these Our Letters Patent, issued in Our name by Our Governor-General
of Our Commonwealth of Australia , acting with the advice of Our Federal Executive Council, and in pursuance of the
Constitution of Our said Commonwealth, the Royal Commissions Act 1902-1912, and all other powers Mm thereunto enabling,
appoint you to be one of the Commissioners for the purposes of the said first-mentioned Letters Patent as fully and effectually
to all intents and purposes as if your name had been inserted therein in the place of that of the said George Mason Allard,
Esquire.
WITNESS Our Trusty and Well-beloved Sir Ronald Craueurd Munro Ferguson, a Member of
Our Most Honorable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of
(1.5.) Saint Michael and Saint George, Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order, Governor-
General and Commander-in-Chief of the Commonwealth of Australia, this twenty-fourth day
of December, in the year of our Lord One thousand nine hundred and nineteen, and in the tenth
year of Our reign.
R. M. FERGUSON.
Governor- General.
By His Excellency's Command ,
P. McM, GLYNN ,
for the Prime Minister.
Entered on Record by me in Register of Patents, No. 6, page 463, this thirty-first day of December, One thousand
nine hundred and nineteen.
M. L. SHEPHERD.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.


GEORGE THE FIFTH, by the Grace of God , of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, King, Defender of the Faith, Emperor of India.
TO Our Trusty and Well-beloved William Duncan Gilfillan, Esquire.
Greeting :
WHEREAS by Letters Patent issued in Our name by Our Governor-General of Our Commonwealth of Australia, acting with
the advice of Our Federal Executive Council and in pursuance of the Constitution of Our said Commonwealth, the Royal
Commissions Act 1902-1912, and all other powers him thereunto enabling, Wedid on the sixth day of December, in the year
of our Lord One thousand nine hundred and nineteen, appoint George Mason Allard, Esquire', Rudolph Cheney,
Esquire ; Harry Collins Gibson, Esquire ; Joseph Anthony Harper, Esquire; Ernest Edward Keep, Esquire;
Thomas Cletus Maher, Esquire; and Albert Bathurst Piddington, Esquire, K.C., to be Commissioners to inquire into
the following matters :
1. The actual cost of living at the present time, according to reasonable standards of comfort, including all matters
comprised in the ordinary expenditure of a household, for a man with a wife and three children under fourteen
years of age, and the several items and amounts which make up that cost :
2. The actual corresponding cost of living during each of the last five years :
3. How the basic wage may be automatically adjusted to the rise and fall from time to time of the purchasing power
of the sovereign:
AND WHEREAS the said Joseph Anthony Harper, Esquire, has resigned his appointment as such Commissioner
and such resignation has been accepted ;
NOW THEREFORE KNOW YE that We do by these Our Letters Patent issued in Ourname by Our Governor-General
of Our Commonwealth of Australia, acting with the advice of Our Federal Executive Council and in pursuance of the
Constitution of Our said Commonwealth, the Royal Commissions Act 1902-1912, and all other powers him thereunto
enabling , appoint you to be one of the Commissioners for the purposes of the said first-mentioned Letters Patent as fully and
effectually to all intents and purposes as if your name had been inserted therein in the place of that of the said Joseph
Anthony Harper, Esquire .
WITNESS Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Sir Ronald Craufurd Munro Ferguson, a Member
of Our Most Honorable Privy Council, Knight Grand Gross of the Most Distinguished Order of
(1.5.) Saint Michael and Saint George , Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief of the Common-
wealth of Australia, this twenty-sixth day of May, in the \year of our Lord One thousand nine
hundred and twenty, and in the eleventh year of Our reign.
E. M. FERGUSON
Governor-General.
By His Excellency's Command,
E. J. RUSSELL ,
for the Prime Minister.
Entered on Record by me in Register of Patents, No. 6, page 495, this first day of June, One thousand nine hundred
and twenty.
M. L. SHEPHERD.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.


[CONFIDENTIAL.
REPORT.
To ll is Excellency the Right Honorable Henry William, Baron Forster, a Member
of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross of the
Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, Governor-General
and Commander-in-Chief in and over the Common wealth of Australia.
May it please Your Excellency ;
We, your Commissioners, were appointed by Letters Patent dated the 6th December, 1919.
to inquire into and report upon the foliowing matters :
1. The actual cost of living at the present time, according to reasonable standards of
comfort, including all matters comprised in the ordinary expenditure of a house-
hold, for a man with a wife, and three children under fourteen years of age, and
the several items and amounts which make up that cost.
2. The actual corresponding cost of living during each of the last five years.
3. How the basic wage may be automatically adjusted to the rise and fall from time to
time of the purchasing power of the sovereign.
The Deport is divided as follows :
Introductory.
Division 1. —The Present Cost of Living according to reasonable standards of comfort
and the Basic Wage.
Section I. —Rent.
Section II. —Clothing.
Section lll.'—Food.
Section IY.—Miscellaneous.
Division 11.-—The Corresponding Cost of Living in 1914-1920.
Division HI.- —The Automatic Adjustment of the Basic Wage.
Summary.
INTRODUCTORY.
Origin op the Commission.
The intention of appointing this Commission was first announced by the Prime Minister
the R ght Hon. W. M. Hughes, P.C., in delivering the policy speech of the Government at Bendigo
on the 30th October, 1919, for the General Election of that year. The announcement was thus
reported -
“ If we are to have industrial peace we must be prepared to pay the price, and
that price is justice to the worker. Nothing less will serve. We have long ago adopted
in Australia the principles of compulsory arbitration for the settlement of industrial dis-
putes arid of the minimum wage. The cause of much of the industrial unrest, which is like
fuel to the fires of Bolshevism and direct action, arises with the real wage of the worker—
that is to say, the things he can buy with the money he receives. This real wage decreases
with an increase in the cost of living. Now, once it is admitted that it is in the interests
of the community that such a wage should be paid as will enable a man to marry and
bring up children in decent, wholesome conditions —and that point has been settled
long ago- -it seems obvious that we must devise better machinery for insuring the
payment of such a wage than at present exists. Means must be found which wall insure
that the minimum wage shall be adjusted automatically, or almost'automatically, with
the cost of living, so that within the limits of the minimum wage at least the sovereign
shall always purchase the same amount of the necessaries of life. The Government is.
therefore, appointing a Royal Commission to inquire into the cost of living in relation
to the minimum or basic wnge. The Commission will be fully clothed with power to
ascertain what is a fair basic wage and how much the purchasing power of the sovereign


has been depreciated during the war ; also how the basic wage may be adjusted to the
present purchasing power of the sovereign, and the best means when once so adjusted
of automatically adjusting itself to the rise and fall of the sovereign. The Government
will at the earliest date possible create effective machinery to give effect to these
principles. Labour is entitled to a fair share of the wealth it produces. The fundamental
question of the basic wage having been thus satisfactorily—because permanently—
settled, there remain other causes of industrial unrest which must be dealt with if we are
to have industrial peace. . . . — (Age, 31st October, 1919.)
It was later on arranged that three representatives of employers and three representatives
of employees should be appointed, and that, if they should agree upon a Chan man, the Govern-
ment would make the appointment. Accordingly Mr. G. M. Allard, of Sydney, was appointed
on the nomination of the Associated Chambers of Commerce of Australia; Mr. J. A. Harper, of
Adelaide, on the nomination of the Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia ; and Mr.
E. E. Keep, of Melbourne, on the nomination of the Central Council of Employers of Australia.
The employees’ representatives, appointed on the nomination of the Conference of Federated
Unions of Australia, were : —Mr. R. Cheney, of the Federated Carters and Drivers’ Industrial
Union; Mr. H. C. Gibson, of the Federated Engine-drivers and Firemen’s Association of Aus-
tralia; and Mr. T. C. Maher, of the Commonwealth Public Service Clerical Association. These
representatives having agreed upon Mr. A. B. Piddington, K.C., Chief Commissioner of the
Inter-State Commission, as Chairman, he was so appointed.
Mr. G. M. Allard and Mr. J. A. Harper were members of the Commission as originally
constituted, but Mr. Allard having resigned on 16th December, 1919, and Mr. Harper having
resigned on 24th February, 1920, their places were taken by Mr. A. C. Morley and Mr. W. D.
Gilfillan respectively.
Mr. J. T. Sutcliffe was appointed as Secretary and Statistician. Mr. Sutcliffe has been the
officer in charge of the Labour and Industrial Branch of the Commonwealth Statistician’s Office
for many years, and in that capacity has had unique experience of cost of living statistics, and
also in the preparation and submission of evidence for the Commonwealth Arbitration Court.
The Commission has been greatly helped by Mr. Sutcliffe’s knowledge, which is unrivalled in the
Commonwealth sphere. This help has been especially valuable on the side of statistics.
Mr. Jelley, who has acted as accountant on the staff of the Inter-State Commission, was
appointed Assistant Secretary.
The Commonwealth Statistician’s Department courteously supplied all tables and other
information asked for, and officers of this Department gave valuable evidence on certain aspects
of the inquiry.
Previous History of the Subject.
Origin and Method of Adjustment of the Basic Wags.
In 1906 the then President of the Commonwealth Arbitration Court, the late Mr. Justice
O’Connor, pointed out, in the following passage, that wages must have reference to existing
standards of social conditions ;
“ there must also be added something for the increased cost of
living in Australia, not only by reason of the higher cost of some of life’s necessaries,
but also by reason of the increased comfort of living and the higher standard of social
conditions which the general sense of the community in Australia allows to those who
live by labour.”
-—Merchant Service Guild v. Commonwealth Steamship Owners’ Association,
1 C.A.R,, page 27.
In the following year His Honour Mr. Justice Higgins, in what is known as “ The Harvester
Case,” laid down as a liv'ng wage the sum of 7s. per day, and stated with regard to the standard
of “ fair and reasonable conditions of remuneration ” under the Excise Tariff Act 1906 that he
“ could not think of any other standard appropriate than the normal needs of the average
employee regarded as a human being living in a civilized community,” and further alluded
to the necessity for “a condition of frugal comfort estimated by current human standards”
{ex parte H. V. McKay, 2 C.A.R., pages 3-4).
The wage so defined came to be known later on as the ” basic wage,” and in the intervening
years this wage had been raised from time to time by the Commonwealth Arbitration Court
according to the following process:—
The amount of 7s. per day consisted of a rent of 7s. per week, an average expenditure
amongst nine households of £1 ss. sd. per week for food and groceries, and the balance — 9s. 7d,
—■was to cover clothing and miscellaneous requirements.


Since 1912 it has been the practice of the Commonwealth Statistician to ascertain by
such inquiries as were deemed suitable the fluctuations in the cost of rent, food, and groceries
all taken together. No such fluctuations were assessed in the case of clothing or of miscellaneous
requirements. These inquiries of the Commonwealth Statistician were not designed for the
purpose of fixing the basic wage or any wage, but they were utilized by the Commonwealth
Arbitration Court (being the only means readily available for such a purpose) to make
variat.ons in the basic wage corresponding with variations in the cost of living. It was thus taken
for granted, first, that the proportion of clothing and miscellaneous requirements to the total of the
basic wage as fixed in the Harvester Case (about 23 per cent.) was the normal ratio for
workers’ households, and second, that the sections of expenditure in question, viz., clothing and
miscellaneous requirements, fluctuated always pari passu with the cost of rent, food, and
groceries taken together, as ascertained by the Commonwealth Statistician.
The Need for a Review of the Position.
The history, since 1907, will now be considered.
The outstanding fact of that history is that neither the Commonwealth Arbitration Court
nor any other Arbitration tribunal in the Commonwealth has ever conducted an inquiry into
the cost of living untrammelled by dependence to a greater or less extent upon the decision in
the Harvester Case.
That decision was not given in an arbitration hearing but in proceedings by an employer
to obtain a declaration (under the Excise Tariff Act) that his conditions of remuneration were
fair and reasonable. Such a declaration would obtain for the applicant exemption from the
Excise provisions of the Act. His Honour refused the declaration asked for, but laid down
as the l ’ Excise Tariff Standard ” for all manufactures referred to in the Act the minimum
wage of 7s. per day. A year later both the doctrine of a living wage and the finding of 7s. a day
were translated into the body of arbitration law by the same Judge’s decision in the Marine
Cooks Case (2 C.A.R. 53). His Honour said at page 61, “We must first find what wage a man
needs to live in the civilized sense —the living wage ”, and at page 63 : —“ Now, according to my
finding in the Harvester Case, in the present circumstances of Australia, 7s. per day, or £2 2s. per
week, is the least wage that can meet the ‘ normal needs of the average employee regarded as a
human being living in a civilized community’”.
Analysis of the Harvester Decision.
It now becomes necessary to point out that while the Harvester Case laid down the doctrine
that a basic wage should be at least adequate to cover the cost of living according to reasonable
standards, the decision in the case was given without that cost of living having been ascertained
by evidence except to a partial extent. At page 2of the decision His Honour says :
“ The Act left me free to inform my mind as best I could and I was at full liberty
to limit the evidence or even to act without evidence.”
The ivliole of the material before His Honour in the pioneer days of the new system is set
out in the following passage from page 5 to page 7 of the decision :
I come now to consider the remuneration of the employees mentioned in this
application. I propose to take unskilled labourers first. The standard wage the
wage paid to most of the labourers by the applicant —is 6s. per day of eight hours, with
no extra allowance for overtime ; but there is one man receiving only ss. 6d. There is
no constancy of employment, as the employer has to put a considerable number of men
off in the intervals between the seasons. The seed-drill and plough season, lam told,
is in the earlier part of the year, about April ; but the busiest time is the harvester
season, about August to November. But even if the employment were constant and
uninterrupted, is a wage of 365. per week fair and reasonable, in view of the cost of living
in Victoria ? I have tried to ascertain the cost of living —the amount which has to be
paid for food, shelter, clothing, for an average labourer with normal wants, and under
normal conditions. Some very interesting evidence has been given, by working men’s
wives and others ; and the evidence has been absolutely undisputed. I allowed Mr.
Schutt, the applicant’s counsel, an opportunity to call evidence upon this subject even
after his case had been closed ; but notwithstanding the fortnight or more allowed bim
for investigation, he admitted that he could produce no specific evidence in contradiction.
He also admitted that the evidence given by a land agent, Mr. Aumont, as to the rents,
and by a butcher as to meat, could not be contradicted. There is no doubt that there
has been, during the last year or two, a progressive rise in rents, and in the price of meat,


and in the price of many of the modest requirements of the worker’s household. The
usual rent paid by a labourer, as distinguished from an artisan, appears to be 7s. ; and,
taking the rent at 75., the necessary average weekly expenditure for a labourer’s home
of about five persons would seem to be about £1 12s. sd. The lists of expenditure
submitted to me vary not only in amounts, but in basis of computation. But I have
confined the figures to rent, groceries, bread, meat, milk, fuel, vegetables, and fruit;
and the average of the list of nine housekeeping women is £1 12s. sd. This expenditure
does not cover light (some of the lists omitted light), clothes, boots, furniture, utensils
(being casual, not weekly expenditure), rates, life insurance, savings, accident or benefit
societies, loss of employment, union pay, books and newspapers, tram and train fares,
sewing machine, mangle, school requisites, amusements and holidays, intoxicating liquors,
tobacco, sickness and death, domestic help, or any expenditure for unusual contingencies,
religion, or charity. If the wages are 365. per week, the amount left, to pay for all these
things is only 3s. 7d. ; and the area is rather large for 3s. 7d. to cover —even in the case
of total abstainers and non-smokers—the case of most of the men in question. One
witness, the wife of one who was formerly a vatman in candle works, says that in the
days when her husband was working at the vat at 365. per week, she was unable to
provide meat for him on about three days in the week. This inability to procure
sustaining food —whatever kind may be selected —is certainly not conducive to the
maintenance of the worker in industrial efficiency. Then, on looking at the rates ruling
elsewhere, I find that the public bodies winch do not aim at profit, but which are
responsible to electors or others for economy, very generally pay 7s. The Metropolitan
Board has 7s. for a minimum ; the Melbourne City Council also. Of seventeen
municipal councils in Victoria, thirteen pay 7s. as a minimum ; and only two pay a man
so low as 6s. 6d. The Woodworkers Wages Board, 24th July, 1907, fixed 7s. In the
agreement made in Adelaide between employers and employees, in this very industry,
the minimum is 7s. 6d. On the other hand, the rate in the Victorian Railway Workshops
is 6s. 6d. But the Victorian Railways Commissioners, do, I presume, aim at a profit
and as we were told in the evidence, the officials keep their fingers on the pulse of external
labour conditions, and endeavour to pay not more than the external trade minimum
(page 388). My hesitation has been chiefly between 7s. and 7s. 6d. ; but I put the
minimum at 7s. as 1 do not think that I could refuse to declare an employer’s remunera-
tion to be fair and reasonable, if I find him paying 7s. Under the circumstances, I cannot
declare that the applicant’s conditions of remuneration are fair and reasonable as to
his labourers.”
The material thus available to His Honour was not challenged by the employer-applicant.
It will now be pointed out how the specific finding of 7s. was reached and how far the cost of
living was ascertained and entered into that specific finding.
It is clear that there was no concrete evidence that 7s. per day would in 1907 meet the cost
of living, and that the only evidence as to that concrete figure being a reasonable remuneration
was that public bodies “ not aiming at profits but responsible .... for economy ” were
paying this wage, which was also that awarded by the Woodworkers’ Board.
Further, this rate of 75., lies between the rate of 6s. 6d. in the Victorian Railway Workshops
and an agreement made in Adelaide in the Harvester industry. So far as the cost of living was
ascertained by evidence and entered into the wage then determined, it was limited to the amount
of £1 12s. 5d., the average of the budgets of nine housewives for rent, food and groceries combined.
With regard to rent, the 7s. per week was apparently determined on the evidence of one land
agent, Mr. Aumont, together, probably, with that of the housewives called, and it cannot be
gathered from the judgment how many rooms a house at such rental contained, or in what other
respects such a house afforded reasonable comfort for “a labourer’s home of about five persons ”
for whom ( vide page 6 of the Judgment) the living wage was to be provided.
With regard to food and groceries, there was presumably evidence from the nine house-
wives examined that the amount of £1 ss. sd. (left after deducting 7s. for rent from the average
£1 12s. sd. for rent with food and groceries) did afford a sufficient supply of food.
But when the now recognised sections of the cost of living- Clothing and Miscellaneous
requirements —came to be provided for, no evidence as to the cost of living was taken in the
Harvester Case. It was evidently thought that if the wage fixed were 6s. per day-—the amount
then being paid by the applicant—the residuum of 3s. 7d. left after providing £1 12s. sd. out of a
weekly rate of 365. would be insufficient for clothing and miscellaneous requirements, but the
effect of the decision in favour of 7s. a day was that for clothing and miscellaneous requirements
the residuum was 9s. 7d. instead of 3s. 7d.
No evidence was given to determine whether or not 9s. 7d. would meet the cost of living
in respect of the sections —Clothing and Miscellaneous requirements —but it may be inferred that
the fact that employers who were public bodies paid 7s. a day was taken to suggest to His Honour’s


mind that that amount was enough to cover the total cost of living and that, therefore, 9s. 7d.
was sufficient for the unascertained items next enumerated. This amount of 9s. 7d. was deemed
to cover light, clothes, boots, furniture, utensils (being casual, not weekly expenditure), rates,
life insurance, savings, accident or benefit societies, loss of employment, union pay, books and
newspapers, tram and train fares, sewing machine, mangle, school requisites, amusements and
holidays, intoxicating liquors, tobacco, sickness and death, domestic help, or any expenditure
for unusual contingencies, religion, or charity.
Adjustment of the (Harvester) Basic Wage.
The judgment in the Harvester Case did not expressly state that the rent of 7s. per week
was for houses in Sunshine (then a small suburb), about 8 miles from Melbourne, but this appears
to have been the case from a statement of Mr. Justice Powers in the Public Service Clerical
Association v. the Public Service Commissioner (1918) as follows :
“The original living wage of 7s. a day was fixed in 1907 on, I understand, 9 household
budgets of persons residing at Sunshine.” (12 C.A.R. at p. 567.)
In all subsequent adjustments of the basic wage, however, both in the Commonwealth
sphere and by State arbitration tribunals, it has been assumed, because the Harvester judgment was
delivered in Melbourne, that the rent of 7s. per week adopted in that judgment was the rent for a
worker’s house in Melbourne, not in Sunshine. But the Commonwealth Statistician’s figures
(published five years after the Harvester Case) show that the rent of a four-roomed house in Melbourne
in the year 1907 was Bs. lid., nearly 2s. per week more than was laid down in the Harvester Case.
It would seem to be a fair inference that the rent of 7s. included in the Harvester wage was that
of a four-roomed house in Sunshine in 1907. As this Commission has determined rent upon the
basis of a five-roomed house being necessary for the typical family, the cost of living hereinafter
determined must be higher on this consideration alone. On the other hand, in 1914, Mr. Justice
Heydon, after a very exhaustive investigation, came to the conclusion that the amount —
£1 ss. sd. for Food and Groceries, in 1907 —was too large.
The next point that arises is the method by which the basic wage of 7s. a day (adopted in
the Marine Cooks’, &c., Case from the judgment in the Harvester Case) has been from time to
time adjusted in intended accordance with the doctrine that the cost of living should determine
the basic wage. It has been mentioned (page 9 of this Report) that since 1912 the Commonwealth
Statistician, for statistical purposes only, and originally with no intention of having his figures
made applicable either to determining or to adjusting the living wage, has published index-
numbers which compare the cost of rent, food and groceries, all taken together, from year to year,
taking their cost in 1911 as a basis and calling its index number 1,000. The practice in the
Commonwealth Arbitration Court, followed with minor modifications by State Arbitration Courts,
has been to utilize these index-numbers as primd facie evidence for the purpose of obtaining a
factor by which to multiply (and in an epoch of continuously rising cost of living since 1907 it
has always been a question of multiplying) the basic wage of 7s. a day originally fixed in the
Harvester Case so as to bring that wage up to date. Thus if the index-number for the year 1914
in Melbourne was 1105 as compared with 875 in the year 1907 then the 7s. per day would be
multiplied by in order to fix the basic wage in 1915, the 1914 index-numbers being only
O /O
available early in 1915. It will at once be seen that assuming 7s. a day in 1907 to have been
enough to cover the cost of the four sections, Rent, Food, Clothing and Miscellaneous, then to
multiply the sum which included all four component sections by the factor obtained by combining
two of them, viz., Rent and Food in a comparative figure for two relevant years, can only be a
correct method if the remaining components, Clothing and Miscellaneous taken together or
separately, also vary in a ratio expressed by the same factor.
At this point another matter acutely debated before the Commonwealth Arbitration Court
comes into the history of the decisions. In 1914 the Commonwealth Statistician found that
Rent and Pood together constituted (speaking approximately) 60 per cent, of the ordinary
expenditure of a household, leaving 40 per cent, for Clothing and Miscellaneous. These percen-
tages were ascertained as a result of analyzing certain household budgets collected in 1913.
Since 1914 it has been assumed that the percentage for Clothing and Miscellaneous (40
per cent.) out of the total cost of living remained constant year after year. This, again, can only
be the case if people need year after year exactly the same proportion of money for each component
part of the necessary cost of living. It was, however, strongly contended in the years of the War
that clothing in particular had increased in price at a greater ratio than any other section of the
cost of living, and this contention the figures now ascertained by this Commission fully justify.
The inevitable result of the cost of necessary clothing increasing at a greater ratio than necessary
rent and food was that the standard of clothing could not be maintained at the same level by
using the factor derived from rent and food to determine what should be inclusively provided,
in the basic wage, for clothing.


Criticism of the Fairness of the Basic Wage.
It will thus be seen that decisions as to the basic wage have depended upon two elements.—
first, the basic wage laid down in the Harvester Case ; and second, the methods above described
for adjusting this to later figures of the cost of living. Such decisions, therefore, were open to any
criticism that could be based upon error in either or both of the elements mentioned above. It
ought, however, to be pointed out that while the second of these elements, viz., the principle of
applying the Statistician’s figures to the Harvester wage, was very frequently the subject of
objections strongly urged; yet, it was not until 1917, ten years after the Harvester Case, that the
decision itself of 7s. a day or the grounds upon which such decision was based were in any way
challenged. This might indicate that, at the time the decision was given, whatever its grounds
were, it conformed fairly to what employees believed to be fair and reasonable remuneration,
though it must be remembered that, as the basic wage was for a family “ of about five persons,” all
employees with a less number of dependants would be receiving a wage more than enough for
their needs on the footing of the Harvester Case. And Mr. Justice Higgins says (Meat Industry
Case, 10 C.A.R. at p. 479) “ Employers and employers’ representatives have since that time [KO7]
often assured me that the figure of 7s. a day was not a penny too much at the time.”
The suggestion that the Harvester Case, the foundation itself of all the decisions, should
be re-opened, came from the Commonwealth Arbitration Court as will appear from the
following quotations :
In the Storemen and Packers’ Case (1916, 10 C.A.R., p. 644), Mr. Justice Powers said—
“ I certainly think that an inquiry should be made as soon as we get back to normal
times to ascertain as nearly as possible what a fair living wage for a Commonwealth
award should be, based on the ordinary regimen of a working man and his family and
on the cost of all the items taken into consideration ; not on food and groceries only,
supposed rightly or wrongly to be 40 per cent, of the expenditure. Rent, it is true, is
included, but that, it is admitted, has been stationary for some time past. The estimated
increase in cost of at least 40 per cent, of the supposed expenditure at the present time
is based on the rise and fall of food and groceries, assuming that the regimen is the same
in 1916 as in 1911.
The Statistician informs me that it would be possible in normal times to ascertain
what it does in fact cost an average working man and his wife and family of two or three
to live in reasonable comfort in the Commonwealth, and if that inquiry was made it
would be conducted on a different basis although possibly unless the 1911 regimen is
altered materially before the inquiry the results may prove tfie correctness of the mass
units adopted in 1911, taking into consideration the decreased purchasing power of a
sovereign.”
This suggestion was repeated in March of the following year by the President of the Court,
Mr. Justice Higgins (Glass Manufacturers’ Case, 1917, 11 C.A.R., p. 34) —
“ Nor does any respondent in this case bring any evidence to show independently
of the finding of 1907 and of the Statistician’s estimate of the change, what is the cost
of living at the present time An inquiry on this subject is eminently
desirable, now that the finding of 1907 has stood for nearly ten years, but I cannot force
parties to an arbitration to undertake the labour of such an inquiry. I hope, however,
that some party will exercise his undoubted right to challenge the figures as to the existing
cost of living. The matter is one of extreme importance to the industries of the Common-
wealth.”
The Deputy-President again alluded to the President’s recommendation in the Federated
Engine Drivers’ and Firemen’s Case (1917, 11 C.A.R., p. 217) —
“ I may say that I have previously recommended the appointment of a Commission
to inquire into the question of a Federal living wage The President of this
Court in the Glass Manufacturers’ Case, in March, 1917 .... suggested a similar
inquiry.”
The invitation extended to re-open the Flarvester Case was accepted by the Federated
Carters and Drivers’ Union in their case, begun in April, 1917. During the hearing, the
representative of the Union submitted, in a written address, statements and arguments why
the Court should no longer derive its basic wage from the Harvester basic wage. The Deputy
President of that Court refused to re-open the matter upon the ground, amongst others, that
it would involve his departing from the practice of the Court since its inception, and
His Honor suggested that the representative of the Union should offer himself as a witness
“ when the Commission or Board is appointed to make the much-needed inquiry into the cost
of living/’ 1


City.
Opening Date.
Closing Date.
No. of Public Sittings.
.
No. of Witnesses.
No. of Exhibits.
Melbourne
filth Dec., 1919 ..
26th Mar., 1920 ..
47
\24th Aug., 1920 ..
24th Sept., 1920 ..
4
Sydney
April 6th, 1920 ..
14th May, 1920 ..
28
144
82
Brisbane
24th May, 1920
8th June, 1920
12
95
107
Newcastle
14th June, 1920 ..
14th June, 1920 ..
1
10
13
Adelaide
29th June, 1920 ..
9th July, 1920
7
104
80
Perth
14th July, 1920 ..
25th July, 1920 ..
8
103
73
Hobart ..
16th Aug., 1920 ..
25th Aug., 1920
8
86
53
Total
••
115
796
580
•
Amongst other utterances of the President and Deputy-President in the same sense was that
of the Deputy-President, Mr. Justice Powers, who in 1918 spoke as follows (Australian Common-
wealth Public Service Association, 12 C.A.R. at p. 543) :
“ At the close of the evidence the representative of the Acting Public Service
Commissioner, the representative of the Employers’ Federation of Victoria and New
South Wales, and the representative of the seven unions now before the Court, joined
in urging that the Federal Government should appoint a Commission or some body to
take evidence with a view to fixing a Federal living wage for a man, his wife, and family
of three, on a scientific and humane basis, or to authorize the Commonwealth Statistician
to do so.
“ The President of this Court and I have, on more than one occasion, recommended
that course to the Federal Government, because we know that men, although they obey
awards, feel that they are not getting more than, a wage on which they can exist, and
because we were not satisfied that, in adopting the Statistician’s tables of 1913, tables and
percentages which admittedly were not obtained for the purpose of fixing a living wage,
we were doing justice to those who applied to the Court. The request of the Employers’
Federations, of the employees, and of the Public Service Commissioner, and the facts
which will be submitted to Parliament with the award of this case, will, I hope, show
that the necessity for such an inquiry or commission is urgent in the interests of the
public-—the Government- —the employers, and the employees.
It will thus be seen that the present inquiry was inaugurated in response to repeated requests
by the President and Deputy-President of the Commonwealth Arbitration Court, and that the
announcement of the Government’s intention to make effective the finding of the Commission,
coupled with the two definitions that of the basic wage by Mr. Justice Higgins, and that of “ the
actual cost of living according to reasonable standards of comfort ” in clause 1 of the Letters
Patent —indicates that the purpose of the Government in appointing this Commission was to obtain
authentic materials upon which a charter of comfort for employees in the Commonwealth
might be framed, and framed in such a way that the reasonable standards of living, to
determine which has been the crucial task in this inquiry, should be permanently secured by a
provision for the automatic adjustment of the basic wage to fluctuations in the cost of living.
In the course of the present investigation it has become clear that, had the Harvester decision
been re-opened, it would have been found that while up to a certain point it proceeded upon the
principle of ascertaining by evidence what amount was necessary to cover the cost of living, yet
at that point a serious hiatus occurred. That hiatus was due to the absence of evidence as to
the amount necessary for the two sections of the cost of living, Clothing and Miscellaneous. So
far as the section of Rent is concerned, the comments made above relate not to the absence of
evidence, but to the sufficiency or otherwise of the evidence for a determination as to Rent which,
in the sequel, has affected practically every worker in the Commonwealth.
If the basic wage of 7s. provided in 1907 the cost of living at the then standard of comfort,
it would be due to one error (namely that in Pood) balancing another (namely that in Rent), or
possibly two others, since the amount for Clothing and Miscellaneous (9s. 7d.) in 1907 may have
been too little as was that for Rent.
Throughout, the course of the Commission has been —first, to regard the field as entirely
clear, and then to ascertain, section by section and item by item, what are reasonable standards
of comfort in the Commonwealth to-day, what each of these items cost to provide, and lastly,
how a means may be devised of seeing that in the future the basic wage shall be such, having regard
to the purchasing power of money, as will permanently insure the attainment of those reasonable
standards of comfort.
Sittings of the Commission.
The Commission first met on 11th December, 1919, and held its first sittings for the taking
of evidence on that date. In all, the Commission held sittings and examined witnesses as appears
in the following table :■ —


In addition to public sittings, the consultations of the Commission occupied 69 sittings
in all, Co of which took place after the Commission’s final return to Melbourne, on August
28th, 1920, and were occupied in preparing this Report.
In order to shorten the inquiry, elaborate written lists and returns were prepared in advance
or during the taking of evidence by State, municipal, and other officials, as well as by lay
witnesses and retail traders, and, in view of the numerous demands nowadays made for statistical
information, the Commission cannot but express its appreciation of the courtesy shown in giving
so much time and labour to facilitate its work. Samples were supplied upon request. The
lists and other exhibits thus collected constitute a valuable body of evidence both as to prices
and as to the customs of the people in the present year.
In every city visited the general public took an active interest in the inquiry, though
naturally the task of presenting evidence was left almost exclusively to the counsel and
invest gators representing the respective interests of employer and employee.
Mr. Foster, of counsel, appeared throughout for the Federated Unions.
Mr. Ferguson, of counsel, appeared in Melbourne for the Victorian Employers’ Federation ;
the Victorian Chamber of Manufactures, Employers’ Federation of New South Wales ; Chamber
of Commerce, New South Wales, and Chamber of Manufactures, New South Wales, until 9th
March, when his retainer for the New South Wales employers was withdrawn. Subsequently
Mr. Russell Martin, of counsel, appeared for the Victorian employers throughout the inquiry.
The Commission acknowledge with pleasure the ability and courtesy shown throughout by
counsel and their staffs, including the investigators : —Miss Muriel Heagney and Mr. F. J. Riley,
throughout the inquiry, for the'Federated Unions ; and Miss Janet Down, in Melbourne, and Mr.
Pennefather, throughout, for the Employers’ Associations represented.
Questions as to the Humblest Worker and as to Separate Findings for the Component
Members of the Typical Family.
Throughout this Report the term “ typical family ” wall be used to denote “ a man, wife,
and three children under fourteen years of age,” as described in the Letters Patent.
Early in the Melbourne sittings an application was made on behalf of the employers to
adjourn the taking of evidence so as to permit of the Government effecting two alterations of
the Letters Patent —(1) so as to limit the inquiry to the case of “ the humblest worker ” ; (2) so
as to direct the Commission to return separate findings for the man, the wife, and each of the
three children. The Commission refused this application on the ground that its only duty was
to carry out the inquiry as directed. (The reasons are set out in the remarks of the Chairman
at page 13 of the Evidence.) Subsequently, a deputation of employers waited on the Prime
Minister to urge these alterations, but the Commission received no further or other directions.
With regard to limiting the cost of living to that of the humblest wmrker, the Commission
judged it wiser to gather evidence freely from all classes of employees who have access to the
Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration, and to postpone, till the conclusion of
evidence, the determination of this point.
Decision as to the Class of Worker.
In the addresses at the close of the inquiry, two views were put forward as to the proper
basis on which the Commission should proceed in determining the standard of comfort.
On behalf of the Federated Unions, Mr. Foster suggested that the Commission should
not select any special occupation, whether skilled or unskilled, and ascertain the cost of living
of the family of an employee in the occupation so selected, but should endeavour to picture the
“ typical Australian man ” and determine what is his “ reasonable standard of comfort.”
Mr. Russell Martin, for the Employers’ Federation, contended, on the other hand, that
the Commission should (as he put it) “ first catch its man ” or in other wmrds select a man in some
definite calling, which, he maintained, should be that of “ an unskilled labourer ” or “ the humblest
worker ” or the “ lowest-paid employee ” or “ basic-wage earner,” and ascertain for that employee’s
family the reasonable standard of comfort.
The exact terms of the Letters Patent which bear on this controversy are as follow :• —•
From Clause I.—“ The actual cost of living at the present time, according to reasonable
standards of comfort, including all matters comprised in the ordinary expenditure
of a household for a man with a wife and three children under fourteen years of
age.”
From Clause 3.-—“ How the basic wage may be automatically adjusted.”


While Clause 1 does not in terms limit the scope of the inquiry to any individual occupation,
or even to the wage-earning classes as distinguished from the professional and employer classes
and people of independent means, yet Clause 3 cannot be treated as if “ the basic wage ” meant
something not related to the “ actual cost of living ’’ defined in Clause 1. On the contrary, the
history of the inauguration of this inquiry {vide supra), the announcement with regard to making the
Commission’s findings effective, the generally accepted view throughout the inquiry, and finally
the obvious consideration that in Australia whatever is found to be “ the actual cost of living
according to reasonable standards of comfort ” will by one legal method or another become the basic
wage —all these considerations left no doubt in the minds of the Commission that its task was to
ascertain what the actual cost of living is in order that the amount so ascertained might be made
the basic wage whether by the direct or indirect action of Parliament, or by its adoption in the
Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration, or in other industrial arbitration tribunals
of Australia.
In its answer to Clause 1, therefore, the Commission is bound to remember that the standard
of reasonable comfort is to be limited to employees. If this is done, the amount of money
necessary to provide such a standard can be taken by Parliament or the Courts as the basic wage,
from which a scale of wages may be derived, allowing for skill or special hardship or difficulty or
any other consideration.
Nor is it necessary that the Commission should select one particular occupation known
under existing awards to be that of a basic-wage earner, e.g., that of a street-sweeper or a
lamplighter, or a porter, and ascertain what it costs to keep that selected employee and his family
according to reasonable standards of comfort. In this connexion it may be well to review the
definitions which are to be found either in Statutes or in decisions or other pronouncements which
bear on the meaning of a “ living ” or a “ basic ” wage.
1907, Higgins, J 2 C.A.R., page 3
The standard of ‘ fair and reasonable ’ must, therefore, be something else ;
and I cannot think of any other standard appropriate than the normal needs of the
average employee, regarded as a human being living in a civilized community.”
1907, Higgins, J., 2 C.A.R., page 4
“ Surely the State, in stipulating for fair and reasonable remuneration for the
employees, means that the wages shall be sufficient to provide these things [food and
shelter] and clothing and a condition of frugal comfort estimated by current human
standards.”
1907, Higgins, J., 2 C.A.R., page 4.
“ I cannot think that the agreement is reasonable if it does not
carry a wage sufficient to insure the workmen food, shelter, clothing, frugal comfort,
provision for evil days, &c., as well as reward for the special skill of an artisan if he is
one.”
1907, Higgins, J., 2 C.A.R., page 6
“ The usual rent paid by a labourer, as distinguished from an artisan, appears
to be 75.; and, taking the rent at 7s. the necessary average weekly expenditure [for food,
groceries and rent] for a labourer’s home of about five persons would seem to be about
£1 12s. 5d.”
1916, Meat Industry Case, 20th September, 10 C.A.R., page 477 (Higgins, J.) —
“ It is also reassuring to see a consensus of opinion as to the need for finding a
basic wage, based on the cost of living, as distinguished from the secondary wage, based
on skill or other exceptional qualifications ; to find also agreement as to the fundamental
principles and methods for ascertaining the basic wage.”
South Australian Act 1912, No. 1110, s. 22
“ The Court shall not have power to order or prescribe wages which do not secure
to the employee affected a living wage. ‘ Living wage ’ means a sum sufficient for the
normal and reasonable needs of the average employee living in the locality where
work under consideration is done or is to be done.”
1916, The Industrial Court of South Australia {per Mr. President Jethro Brown) —
“ Custom has prescribed, Australian Courts have approved, and many reasons
of expediency have sanctioned, a higher rate of wage than the living or minimum wage,
where the work is of a skilled character involving, it may be, long years of apprenticeship
or training.” {Tinsmiths’ Case, page 2.)


West Australian Act 1912, No. 57, s. 84 (2) —
“No minimum rate of wages or other remuneration shall be prescribed which
is not sufficient to enable the average worker to whom it applies to live in reasonable
comfort, having regard to any domestic obligations to which such average worker would
be ordinarily subject.”
1915, Higgins, J. —“ New Province of Law and Order,” page 5’ —
“ In the first true arbitration case —that relating to ship’s cooks, bakers, &c.- —
the standard of 7s. per day was attacked by employers, but I do not think that it has
been attacked since, probably because the cost of living has been rising. The Court
announced that it would ascertain first the necessary living wage for the unskilled
labourer, and then the secondary wage due to skill or other exceptional qualifications
necessary. Treating marriage as the usual fate of adult men, a wage which does not
allow of the matrimonial condition and the maintenance of about five persons in a home
would not be treated as a living wage. As for the secondary wage, it seemed to be the
safest course, for an arbitrator not initiated into the mysteries of the several crafts,
to follow the distinctions in grade between employees, as expressed in wages for many
years.
“ The distinction between the basic or primary or living wage and the secondary
wage, attributable to exceptional qualifications necessary for the performance of the
function, is not fanciful; it was forced on the Court by the problems presented and by
the facts of industrial life.
1918, Heydon, J. ( Bulletin , AbS.IF. Board of Trade, page !)• —
“ The fixation of the living wage in New South Wales is, by section 79 of the
Industrial Arbitration Act 1912, as amended, committed to the New South Wales Board
of Trade.
“ The terms of the section are as follows :■ —
“79.-—(1.) The Board of Trade shall, from year to year, after public
inquiry as to the increase or decrease in the average cost of living, declare what
shall be the living wage, to be paid to adult male employees and to adult female
employees in the State or any defined area thereof. In declaring such living
wages, the Board of Trade shall make a separate public inquiry into the cost
of living of employees engaged in rural occupations, and shall make a separate
declaration as to the living wages to be paid to such employees, and shall declare
what deductions may be made from such wages for board or residence or board
and residence, and for any customary privileges or payments in kind conceded
to or made to such employees.
(2.) No industrial agreement shall be entered into and no award made
for wages lower than such living wage.”
;jc tji Hs # >K %
page 9- —
“ Then the living wage must relate to the humblest class of worker. It has to
recognise a standard, and that standard must clearly be his. Otherwise, there would
be as many living wages as classes, whereas the living wage is the lowest which any male
adult worker, not licensed as a slow worker, should receive ; and is based, not on the value
of his work, but on his requirements as a man in a civilized community which has resolved
that, so far as laws can do it, competition shall be no longer allowed to crush him into
sweated conditions.”
1919, Declaration N.$.lF. Board of Trade (Bth October)- —
“ The principles underlying the judgment of 16th February, 1914, are as follows
(1) The average cost of -living should be calculated upon the basis of
the average requirements of the lowest paid class of workers.
*l# j*
•T 1* V 'J'
(3) The standard of living should be such as to provide a w r orker of the
said class, and his said dependent family, with the normal requirements of a
member of a civilized community.”
It would appear, therefore, that in every case Parliaments, or Courts and tribunals with the
acquiescence of Parliaments, have deemed the first inquiry to be what is the amount necessary
to provide the essentials of comfort for an employee’s family, and then, having ascertained that
amount, to decree that that amount should be the “ basic ” or “ nv.ng ” wage. And, further,
in making the inquiry into the essenhals of comfort, no Statute and no decision discriminates
between the standard reasonable for one type of employee and that which is reasonable for another
type.


It was not contended at any time during the inqu'ry that it makes a difference to the amount
necessary for a reasonable standard of comfort under the section of Rent or of Rood or of Miscel-
aneous Requirements whether the employee is a skilled or an unskilled worker. Nor was an
attempt made to establish any distinction in the section of Clothing, as far as the employee’s wife
or his children are concerned. The only point, therefore, n which a difference s arguable is as
to the regimen of c l othing for the man. There is no decision to suggest to the Commission the
conclusion that the skilled ! abourer ought to have a different “ reasonable standard of comfort ”
in respect of clothing than the unskilled. AVhat is-more important than the absence of decisions
is that there was no ev dence before the Commission establishing such a difference as being found
to exist in actual fact. On the contrary, all the evidence showed that, except for special occupational
c’oth ng, sensible wage-earners of all occupations dress very much'alike.
The Commission, therefore, determined, so far as men’s clothmg is concerned, to base
its finding upon articles of a description and quality such as are ingredients, common to
all the wage-earning classes, of a reasonable standard of dress. So far as the number
of these articles is concerned, that has been determined by excluding all special
occupational clothing, and estimating what the duration of an arkcle of the selected
quality would be according to the average “ severity ” on clothes of all occupations.
A selection so made will conform to all the statutory or judicial definitions quoted above
and also to the main principle of the modern regulation of wages m Australia, viz.,
that even the humblest worker ought to receive a wage which will afford him “ reasonable
standards of comfort ” in regard to “ all matters comprised in the ordinary expenditure of a
household.” This course will also avoid the pitfall of supposing that, because the humblest
worker ought to be paid the “ actual cost of living according to reasonable standards of comfort,”
therefore that “ actual cost of living according to reasonable standards of comfort ” must be ascer-
tained by finding what the humblest worker does actually expend. That supposition involves
a preceding assumption that the humblest worker does actually obtain reasonable standards of
comfort by what he actually spends. Whether he does or not can obviously be proved only after
first defining the measure of comfort which it is reasonable that he should have.
Nor would it matter logically whether the Commission arrived at the conclusion in view
of the navvy’s requirements or the bank clerk’s, as long as with regard to each item under
discussion those requirements coincided with what the Commission concluded would be common
to all the wage-earning classes. The method suggested by Mr. Martin would have led the Courts
into the labyrinth of finding a number of different basic wages for different types of worker. . To
be consistent, each individual of each type would need a basic wage to himself, according to his
own standards and habits and those of each member of his family.
From all the cases it is clear that the Courts consider that the true statement is “ the basic
wage is that which will meet the cost of living,” not “ the cost of living is what the basic wage-:
earner spends.” The Commission, therefore, has determined reasonable standards of comfort,
not by reference to any one type or group of employees, but by reference to the needs which are
common to all employees, following the accepted principle that there is a standard of living below
which no employee should be asked to live.
With the authorities quoted above, which deal with the legal obligation in Australia to
pay a basic w r age, may be compared the following extracts from the Tentative Budget Inquiry
conducted in Washington 1).C., by Mr. Royal Meeker, Commissioner of the Bureau of Labour
Statistics, U.S. Department of Labour in the year 1919 ;■ —
p. 5 —■“ The minimum of health and comfort level. —This represents a slightly higher level
than that of subsistence, providing not only for the material needs of food, shelter,
and body covering, but also for certain comforts, such as clothing sufficient for bodily
comfort and to maintain the w-earer’s instinct of self-respect and decency, some insurance
against the more important misfortunes-—death, disability, and fire-—good education
for the children, some amusement, and some expenditures for self development.”
p. 7—“ Budget of Health and Decency not intended as an ideal.” —-It needs to be emphasized
that the budget level adopted in the present study is in no w-ay intended as an ideal
budget. It w r as intended to establish a bottom level of health and decency below which
a family can not go without danger of physical and moral deterioration. This budget
does not include many comforts which should be included in a proper ‘ American standard
of living.’ Thus no provision is directly made for savings other than insurance, nor for
vacations, nor for books and other educational purposes.
“ On the other hand, a family with the items listed in this budget should be able
to maintain itself in health and modest comfort. It would have a sufficiency of food,
respectable clothing, sanitary housing, and a minimum of the essential ‘ sundries ’
F.l 7723.-2


Little need be said as to the standard of comfort as the measure of the cost of living. The
expression “ current human standards ” used in the Harvester Case (2 C.A.R., p. 4) and accepted
everywhere in the Commonwealth as the ground work of living wage inquiries, implies such
standards of comfort as are attained, accord’ng to general usage, in a household which lives
moderately and without either privation or extravagance The term used in the Letters Patent,
“ reasonable standards of comfort,” made it the duty of the Commission to ascertain, by the
evidence of temperate-minded witnesses, familiar with our current standards, and by applying
its own knowledge—representing, as it did, the community generally —of Australian conditions to
that evidence, what amount would satisfy the reasonable claims of the employees to enjoy
family life in comfort. In the. Tentative Budget Inquiry conducted by Mr. Royal Meeker, it is
said that three conceptions had distinguished previous Budget studies ;■ —
1. The pauper or poverty level.
2. The minimum of subsistence level.
3. The minimum of health and comfort level.*
In the Tentative Inquiry referred to, the last of these conceptions was followed, and,
Your Excellency’s Commissioners have pursued a similar aim and sought to find the amount which
will provide real but moderate comfort in each section of this Inquiry. Nothing less than this
standard would conform to the definitions, and their implications, of the Letters Patent.
In no point has the present investigation been more valuable than in the public ventilation
of ideas as to what is necessary for comfort. Many extravagant claims were put forward
in the belief stili widely cherished that any tribunal will be likely to adjudge something near to
what is stoutly asserted. Experience showed that, even with,regard to matters well within the
lifelong experience of every member of the Commission, some witnesses were ready to imitate
the litigant who concludes his declaration for damages to a little finger by the pompous assertion
“ and the plaintiff claims £1,000.” The evidence of such witnesses the Commission regards
as, at the best, misdirected propaganda, and, at the worst, futile imposition. Apart,
however, from witnesses more interested in tactics than in truth, evidence throughout the
States as to the currently accepted standards of the main items of family life was copious
and trustworthy.
Household Budgets.
In order to get as much light as possible on the current habits and standards of the people,
the Commission invited the public to fill up household budget forms during a period of four
weeks. A specimen of the budget thus circulated is printed in an Appendix to the evidence.
Though over 9,000 of these forms were issued, only about 400 were returned to the
Commission, a result due, no doubt, to the exacting labour necessary to fill in a multitude of details,
every one of which is essential if safe inferences are to be drawn.
An examination of the returns leaves no doubt that this method, though frequently adopted,
is not effective even to discover what is the general level of expenditure. And, of course, the
level of expenditure is not per se a criterion of the level of comfort.
Subject to these observations, the Commission has made use of the Budgets returned,
not as guides to what the standard of living ought to be, but as affording indications of tendency
in the distribution of expenditure, and for related purposes. Even in such respects it has to be borne
in mind that the returns are made by persons as a rule unskilled in a matter which requires careful
and detailed recording such as one would expect of a competent bookkeeper.
The Cities Visited.
The Commission decided that evidence should be confined to the six capital cities, chiefly
on the ground of the expense and delay involved in extending the inquiry any further.
Moreover, the application of the Commission’s findings to country centres is, to a great extent,
a matter of adapting those findings to country conditions upon material that can be obtained
readily without oral evidence.
To the six capitals, Newcastle was added on account of the great and growing industrial
importance of that city, but the evidence there was limited to the Section Rent, since in all other
Sections, according to the statement put forward by the Federated Unions, and not disputed,
the cost of living is the same as in Sydney.
* Page 8 of Tentative Jiudgct Inquiry.
What are Reasonable Standards of Comfort.


City.
Amount per Week.
£ s. d.
Melbourne
11 3 0
Sydney ..
11 10 0
Brisbane
10 16 0 '
Adelaide
11 1 6
Perth ..
11 9 0
Hobart ..
11 13 0
With regard to the basic wage for the larger country towns, such as in the past have been
the subject of separate adjudication, it is considered that the machinery for the automatic adjust-
ment of-the basic wage in the cities which has been suggested under Division 111. of this Report
could be utilized just as easily to determine what the same standard of comfort would cost in the
country towns as for determining what the standard of comfort costs at different times in the same
city. It has not, however, been thought advisable to delay the completion of this Report in
order to enable what is solely a matter of calculation and adjustment upon lines that are already
clearly laid down, to be investigated.
It is understood, therefore, that the same standard of comfort as regards the size of the
house, and other specified conditions relating to it, and also as regards Clothing, Food, and
Miscellaneous items ought to be obtainable by workers in country towns as in the cities; but the
working out of figures for these sections n places other than the capitals is left to the Bureau
that is suggested in Division 111.
The Claims op the Federated Unions.
In Appendix I. will be found the claims put forward by the Federated Unions in
Melbourne. The claims for other capitals differed chiefly in regard to prices, the regimens in each
section being substantially the same in all the States. The total amounts of the claims at the
prices ruling when the Commission sat in the respective States were as follows :■ —
In all the States the amount claimed by the Federated Unions and the details of which it
was composed have been found to be open to the comments already made upon extravagance
in evidence. It is, indeed, more than likely that those witnesses who did put forward inflated
estimates of their requirements had taken their cue from the claims they knew Were being made.
If this were all, no great harm would have been done other than waste of time and effort, but
it is possible that the knowledge circulated throughout Union circles of the amount of the claim
made in their name may have disinclined capable witnesses of a moderate bent of mind, and
imbued with a sense of responsibility, to come forward with their evidence, when to do so would
be to incur the odium of undermining contentions made in their behalf. In point of facta great
number of witnesses were called for the Unions, and most of them had the courage to ignore the
claim as put forward, and to give independent evidence as to their experience, which showed the
claim, us presented, to be extravagant.
Counter Claim.
No general answer to the Unions’ claims was put forward on behalf of employers, but in
Melbourne a list of suggested clothing and prices, which came to be called “ The Counter Claim,”
was put in. This will be found in Appendix 11., and is the subject of comment in the section
dealing with Clothing (vide p. 33).
Basic Wage for Country Towns.


DIVISION I.
THE PRESENT COST OF LIVING ACCORDING TO REASONABLE STANDARDS OF
COMFORT, AND THE BASIC WAGE.
SECTION I.-RENT.
General.
In determining the cost of living in respect of the item Rent, it became important to
consider the elements of reasonable comfort in a house for the typical family. Those elements
are—
1. An allotment of sufficient area.
2. A fairly good locality.
3. Suitable arrangement and size of rooms.
4. A sufficient number of rooms.
5. Elementary conveniences, such as bath, copper, and tubs —all fixed.
A great deal of interesting and valuable evidence was given by architects who desire to
see a better type of house for working men, with wider space than at present obtains. The
Commission was invited by Mr. Foster, for the Federated Unions, to lay down an allotment
area of approximately 6,000 square feet {e.y., 50 x 120 feet or 40 x 150 feet), and it was
pointed out that some municipalities insisted on this as the minimum allotment for new
buildings.
While the Commission is of opinion that such an allotment is in the highest degree
desirable, it is not prepared, in view of the evidence, and of what was seen during inspections, to
lay down that such an allotment is indispensable for comfort, and so to reject evidence as to
rents of any houses with a smaller area. The better course is not to postulate any specific
minimum area in considering houses already built, but to include the size of allotment as one of
the elements which decide whether a house visited or described in evidence is reasonably
comfortable.
With regard to locality, it was conceded on behalf of employers that certain districts
in Melbourne might be left out of consideration, as being congested areas in which but few
houses afforded any comfort. These districts are mentioned on p. 22.
The planning of houses, in many instances —particularly where the houses were old —
that came under notice, is totally opposed to reasonable standards of comfort. The single-
fronted house, while not necessarily to be condemned, is almost always ill-lighted and
ill-ventilated, and, as a rule, is arranged on what is termed the ‘gun-barrel’ plan, i.e., with
a long narrow passage from the front door, and rooms on one side of it, till the passage merges in
the sitting-room, through which the kite,hen is reached. Such an arrangement entails a
great amount of unnecessary work. But, here again, in spite of this and equally serious
deficiencies, the matter of room arrangement can only be considered together with other
elements in determining whether a house reaches a fair standard. And so, too, but within
stricter limits, as to the size of rooms.
Two points, however, do permit of definite determination as criterions. Accepting current
standards, no house for the typical family can be considered to comply with that family’s
reasonable requirements unless it has the three elementary household conveniences of bath, fixed
copper, and fixed tubs. In some of the capitals the copper and tubs frequently belong to the
tenants, and are movable ; the houses being, in this respect, below the standard which should
be observed in Australia. The Commission adopts and repeats the recommendation of the Inter-
State Commission, in its Report on Rents (Prices Investigation No. 12), at page 49, which is in
these terms--
“ 9. That the desirability of making compulsory the provision of bath, copper,
and tubs in every tenement, be brought under the notice of the State authorities.”
More important still is the requirement of at least five rooms. This appeared so clear to
the Commission that, at a certain stage, the Commission having got the impression that the point
Would not be disputed, announced its intention of confining the evidence for the future to houses
of that size. In deference, however, to the protest of Mr. Ferguson, the matter was re-opened.
The only consequence was a loss of time in collecting evidence as to smaller houses, while not
one witness —either house agent or medical authority or architect—was found to maintain that a
four-roomed house Was a proper standard for the typical family. The Commission had learnt
from an officer of the Commonwealth Statistician’s Department that in 75% of the cases, of
a family of three children under fourteen, two would be of one sex, and the third of the opposite
sex. This necessitates two bed-rooms at least, apart from that of the husband and wife, and,
as the kitchen is always counted as a room, the four-roomed house leaves the worker without
any other sitting-room or social room than the kitchen.


Speaking in 1914, Mr. Justice Heydon, President of the Arbitration Court of New South
Wales, thus spoke of the necessity for a sitting-room (Bulletin of New South Wales Board of
Trade, 1918, pp. 5-6) :
“ I have considered whether a house with two rooms and a kitchen could he fairly taken as
the standard, but I think that the immense importance of preserving decency in the home, and the
great help which reasonable house accommodation gives towards maintaining a good standard
of manners and civilization, must require us to reject it. With a family of, say,two children there
should be, as they begin to grow up, a sitting room, one sleeping room for the parents, and one
for the children.”
The United States Department of Labour Statistics in its Monthly Labour Rev'ew (Yol.
IX. No. 3, September, 1919) publishes the opinion of Professor Ogburn, that overcrowding begins
when the number of rooms per person falls below one.
Strong confirmation of the views thus expressed will be found in the evidence of house
agents and housewives in every State, as well as of architects and other observers. It need hardly
be pointed out that the New South Wales decision referred to the housing needs of a family
containing two, not three, children, so that, conformably with that decision, a five-roomed house
is necessary for the typical family dealt with in this Keport. Again, it was proved that modern
builders of working-men’s homes provide at least a five-roomed house almost always, thus
recognising the popular demand.
It is true that the amount allowed for Rent in the Harvester Case was the rent of a house
with less than five rooms, and that the Commonwealth Arbitration Court has, in its later decisions,
brought the wage, which included the rent of such a house, Tip to date with the help of the
Commonwealth Statistician’s figures; but evidence has never been taken as to current standards
of comfort in this respect, nor has the present point been argued or a decision given. Now that
full opportunity has been given for proving that a four-roomed house complies with a reasonable
standard of comfort for the typical family, the entire absence of evidence in support of such a
conclusion is fatal to its acceptance.
The Commission gave full consideration to the contention advanced by Mr. Ferguson—
that, in view of the fact that a large number of typical families do actually live in four-roomed
houses because of the present shortage of houses, the Commission’s finding as to the “ actual cost
of living ” in regard to housing ought to be based upon the rent of a four-roomed, not of a
five-roomed house. It was urged that if the rent of a five-roomed house was included in the
Commission’s finding, then many families would receive in the basic wage a sum for rent which
would not be spent on rent. Employers, it was said, ought not to be called upon to provide
money except for what is actually procurable.
On the other hand, it was considered by the Commission that its quest being the “ actual
cost of living according to reasonable standards of comfort,” then, since a five-roomed house is
necessary for the reasonable comfort of the typical family, the present-day rent of such a house
s part of the actual cost of living at the standard described. Though this disposes of the argument
as to insufficient supply of five-roomed houses, one or two subsidiary points may be mentioned.
The most important is that a great number of typical families are actually living in five-roomed
houses, and that if the basic wage were lowered by the difference between their rental and the
rental of a four-roomed house, such families would be penalized to the extent of this reduction,
only because other similar families are putting up with less than proper accommodation.
It is more in accordance with what is fair that these latter families should receive what will
procure them the normal standard if or when they can obtain five-roomed houses. The amount
over and above their actual rent while living in four-roomed houses may fairly be regarded as
enabling them to obtain other comforts as a balance or compensation for the deficiency in their
housing accommodation forced upon them by existing circumstances. Finally, if the Commission
adopted Mr. Ferguson’s argument, it might equally be urged that there are not enough four-roomed
houses for the families of our cities, and many are in fact compelled to live in three-roomed
houses. It can hardly be suggested that the basic wage should be determined as to its rent
content upon the three-roomed house.
Owner Occupiers.
The evidence brought to light a fact not very generally recognised, that in certain suburbs
of every city a large percentage of workmen own, or are in course of purchasing, their
homes. This applies chiefly to suburbs where large subdivisions for this class of home have been
made in the past. The Commission cannot, however, exclude, by reason of this fact, the item of
ent from the actual cost of living, because- —•
(i) rent is one of the “ matters comprised in the ordinary expenditure of a household ”
(Clause 1 of the Letters Patent).


(ii) The basic wage being the same for owners, or rent purchasers, or renters, the
two latter classes—probably by far the largest number of the working class
—would be exposed to sharp privations if they had to meet'rent purchases
or rent from the residuum of the ascertained cost of living.
(iii) Where the home is already paid for, the owner has, as a rule, purchased future
immunity from rent by years of self denial, and he ought not to be deprived
of the benefits he has thus bought.
(iv) No tribunal has ever omitted rent from the actual cost of living.
The figures of the 1911 Census for houses owned and houses rented in the capital cities
and suburbs were 116,308 and 202,135 respectively. The houses owned would include those of the
well-to-do and those in course of rent purchase.
Rent Basis of the Commission’s Finding.
Throughout this Report, therefore, the rental found by the Commission as a necessary
item in the actual cost of living, according to a reasonable standard of comfort, will be the rental
ordinarily paid by the tenant of a five-roomed house in sound tenantable condition ; not actually
cramped as to allotment; situated in decent surroundings ; and provided with bath, copper and
tubs.
Further, the Commission has taken the rent actually being paid by tenants, not the rent
which a house would bring if re-let to a new tenant, the latter rent being almost universally
higher as a result in the main of the shortage of houses.
Melbourne Evidence.
The Commission took evidence with regard to the following suburbs :■ —Prahran, Hawthorn,
Brunswick, Flemington (including Newmarket and Kensington,) Essendon (including Ascot
Yale and Moonee Ponds), Coburg, Northcote, Williamstown, and also from the group, which
Mr. Ferguson conceded {vide page 20 of this Report), might be omitted from consideration, not as
entirely condemned but as containing undesirable or congested areas : —Richmond, Footscray,
North Melbourne, Collingwood, Carlton, Port Melbourne, Fitzroy, South Melbourne. Evidence was
also given as to Sandringham, Brighton, Malvern, St. Kilda, and Camberwell, described by Mr.
Ferguson as specially attractive, and therefore (he contended) not a fair average of residential
districts. In view of the general character of the standard adopted, the Commission has not
found it necessary either to include or exclude any of the areas respectively mentioned for those
purposes in Mr. Ferguson’s suggestions.
Leading house-agents of Melbourne and the suburbs dealing with this class of property were
called, the practice being for the witnesses to give the average rental of houses of a stipulated
size on their books, and, in many instances, to produce complete lists of houses and addresses in
their hands for letting. They were then further examined in order to sift out from the reckoning,
houses definitely above or definitely below a fair and reasonable standard of comfort, as this
term has been explained above. Finally, in a great number of cases, such witnesses were asked
to state what, in their locality, was the rent of a five-roomed house conforming to such require-
ments as those now summarized above.
The witnesses of this class furnished evidence as to the rentals of approximately 1,334
houses in all, and of 452 five-roomed houses.
Another class of evidence was the rentals shown in municipal books. These comprised
about 8,000 houses in all, but it was seldom possible to get the number of five-roomed houses
separately. Two more serious drawbacks to this class of evidence were —(1) that it does not
contain any information as to the condition of the houses, or the size of allotments or any other
detail of suitability, nor could witnesses, official as a rule, supplement this deficiency by their own
testimony; (2) such evidence was often as much as two years out of date since the system of
rating in Melbourne and the suburbs does not need annual collection of data. By actually
visiting houses suggested to the Commission by municipal officers as being fair samples of the
accommodation obtainable at given rentals, the Commission found that in 25 per cent, of the
cases, rents had gone up since the last municipal collection of figures.
Some employees and their wives also gave evidence as to rent, but the number of these
was small.
Personal Inspection.
At the conclusion of the evidence on this part of the inquiry, the Commission visited the
suburbs named in order to ascertain the nature of the accommodation and the rental necessary to
secure it. The system adopted was to obtain from agents or municipal officers, or both, the
addresses of houses which, in their opinion, were fairly representative of the class of house obtainable


City.
So. of Five-roomed Houses,
Agents.
Municipal or Govern-
ment Authorities,
Melbourne
452
Not available.
Sydney . .
413
226
Brisbane
365
8,334
Newcastle
32
1,847
Adelaide
330
19,040
Perth
302
1,979
Hobart . .
134
106
2,028
31,532
£ s.
d.
Sydney
..12
0
Newcastle . .
.. 10
6
Brisbane
.. 0 17
0
Adelaide
.. 0 19
6
Perth
.. 0 19
0
Hobart
.. 0 19
0
for the rental which, according to their evidence, would be the rental actually being paid by
persons occupying a house conforming to the reasonable standard of comfort already described.
These houses w r ere then visited and facts with regard to them noted. The data thus collected
have proved of the greatest assistance to the Commission in forming its opinion as to the amount
necessary for rent. In no point is statistical evidence more likely to be misleading, or verbal
testimony to be unconvincing, than in this branch of the inquiry—in both cases because the great
essential of the quality of the housing accommodation cannot be readily defined with certitude in
a return.
After examining the data obtained from all the above sources, the Commission find that
the average rental, as on November 1, 1920, being paid for a five-roomed house of a reasonable
standard of comfort, as defined on page 22 of this Report, is, for Melbourne, £1 Os. 6d. per
week.
Evidence as to Other Cities.
In Sydney, and in other cities, precisely the same methods of investigation (including
personal inspection) were followed as those described in the case of Melbourne, and it is only
necessary, therefore, to summarize the data collected. In Sydney, evidence was given with regard
to the following suburbs Annandale, Ashfield, Auburn, Balmain, Bexley, Bondi, Burwood,
Campsie, Canterbury, Chatswood, Coogee, Concord, Croydon, Daceyville, Drummoyne, Enmore,
Erskineville, Haberfield, Hornsby, Hunter's Hill, Kogarah, Marrickville, Mosman, Newtown,
North Sydney, Paddington, Petersham, Randwick, Rockdale, St. Leonards, St. Peters, Strath-
field, Summer Hill, Waverley, Willoughby.
The number of five-roomed houses in all the cities included in the returns or evidence
of house agents, and in returns or evidence of municipal officers is shown in the following Table :
The finding of the Commission in respect of the item of Rent for the cities visited after
Melbourne, adopting the same methods and standards as for Melbourne is as follows :■ —
The Housing Problem and the Stabilization of Rent.
The evidence brought into prominence the continuous increase of house rents in the capital
cities of Australia, resulting from the shortage of houses during the last few years. Personal
contact with tenants during the course of the inquiry has led the Commission to the consideration
that inadequate accommodation in houses may be a potent cause in industrial unrest. The family
oppressed by unpleasant surroundings is apt to feel that such grievances as it may have against
the existing social order are fomented by the chronic discomforts of the space and atmosphere in
which it lives. Discontent on this score is increased by the idea widely held that the tenant of a
home to-day gets less service and little improvement from the landlord for more rent.
For years past Commissions and reformers have denounced these unsatisfactory
social conditions, but since little has been done to remedy them, the consequence has
only been to draw pointed attention to the unequal situation of tenants when their bargain
is being struck, and to the poor prospect of a remedy from that competition which, in regard to
commodities freely produced, is the best safeguard against unfair exactions. Fortunately for the


community, landlords do not, in general, press to the full the economic advantage they possess
under present circumstances. The evidence showed in all the capital cities that it is the practice
of landlords not to raise, or at any rate not to raise to the full market rental, the rents that are
paid by tenants who have been in long continued possession. Still, of late years there has been a
gradual and general increase in rents, even for tenants of this kind, and when a house does become
vacant, it is almost invariably the case that the new tenant is called upon to pay a higher rent.
The increases in rent here spoken of are those that take place without any additional service or
improvement being rendered to the tenant ; and indeed the complaint more generally is that
houses are not even kept up to a proper state of repair and comfort, even though the rents are
raised.
The only effective cure under present circumstances for this state of things is a steady
building programme under some form of governmental or municipal action similar to that being
taken under the War Service Homes Act, whether that takes the form of assistance to
co-operative schemes or is more direct. The Inter-State Commission's Report on Rents in April,
1919, dealt very fully with this matter, and described various schemes in the Commonwealth
and elsewhere, including the Imperial Government’s programme of building 300,000 homes
for England and Wales, under a system of financial assistance to Local Government Authorities.
The Inter-State Commission recommended (pp. 49-50) :
“ 1. That the Federal Government, preferably in conjunction with State and Local
Authorities, and with approved co-operatively managed institutions, undertake
at once constructional work to -meet the existing shortage of houses. It is
estimated that this shortage amounts to 25,000 homes in the three eastern States.
10. That action be taken, in co-operation with State Governments and Local
Authorities, for the re-designing and reconstruction of city and suburban
areas where the conditions are admittedly below reasonable standards of
comfort.”
Other ancillary recommendations as to supply of material, &c., need not be reproduced.
In every city visited your Commissioners were deeply impressed with the urgency of the
case. In the older parts of the cities the contrast is striking between the fine streets and buildings
on the outside of many blocks and the hovels and slums concealed in the centre. Every year
of neglect makes the congestion worse, but already, as a consequence of earlier want of foresight,
Australia has become a country of wide spaces and narrow habitations.
While, however, the overtaking of supply is the only permanent remedy, another important
question which was not raised by either the Federated Unions or the Employers in the course
of the enquiry came under observation while the Commission was considering its report. Under
the system contemplated by the Letters Patent of adjusting the basic wage according to the
purchasing power of the pound sterling, it would, appear that if rents were increased irrespective
of any additional service rendered by a landlord to a tenant, the basic wage would be adjusted
to meet that increase, and the burden would fall on the employer, because he would be paying in
increased wages an increased amount for rent.
This opens up the question of the stabilization of rents which was one objective of the
{lmperial) Increase of Rent <Tc. {War Restrictions) Act 1915, the Hew South. Wales Act No. 66
of 1915, and the Queensland Act No. 31 of 1920. These Acts differ widely in their methods
for determining the “ standard rent ” (as it is called in England), but they have these features
in common—
1. They are limited to houses below a defined value—broadly, such as working men’s
homes.
2. They stabilize rents as they were on a date named in the Act. Such rents can
only be raised after equitable reasons, such as expenditure on improvements,
are shown to a Court.
3. Rents are determined on the application of landlord or tenant by a Court.
The question thus opened up of the stabilization of rents is not directly within the scope
of the Commission, and it is sufficient therefore to indicate the position, which may need to be
considered by the Governments of the several States, in view of the fact that the producers and
manufacturers of a State which takes no action may be adversely affected in Inter-State competition.
The Commission desires to make it clear that the matter is dealt with, not as a matter of
policy in the general case, but only because under the basic wage adjustment if employers are
controlled in their contract v, ith employees in such a way that theirs is the purse from which
increases of rent must be paid, the case needs special consideration. It may be said that somewhat
similar considerations apply to other Sections of the basic wage such as Food, &c.,but in no other
Case is competition at present so entirely absent, or legislative action so simple.


SECTION II. —CLOTHING.
Note.'—(Throughout, “ Clothing ” includes Boots and Shoes.)
General.
With regard to Clothing, Mr. Foster, on behalf of the Federated Unions, put forward in each
State a claim for each member of the typical family, framed so as to show the annual cost of
clothing. The items for each member showed the article, its price, its expected duration or
‘ life,’ and the resultant annual cost. The Clothing Claims will be found in full in Appendix I.
In Melbourne, Mr. Ferguson, for the Federated Employers, put forward a list of suggested
clothing, alluded to as the Counter Claim. This is printed in Appendix 11.
Ages of the Three Children.
The Clothing Claim was based on the assumption that the three children of the typical
family were a boy of ten and a half years, a girl of seven, and an infant. This separation of the
ages was not based on any statistical footing, but was accepted by Mr. Ferguson for the purpose
of preparing the Counter Claim. In all the States the evidence was presented on both sides on the
same assumption.
The Commission has found itself compelled to depart in one particular from the basis thus
put forward, viz., in regard to taking the youngest child as an infant, and the finding of the
Commission will be given on this point as for a boy of three and a half years of age. It need
scarcely be said that all three specified ages are only approximations for the purpose of arriving
at the average case, but the separation now adopted has a sound basis, for the following
reasons :■ —
1. Without a specific census inquiry ad hoc it cannot be ascertained what, in a family
of three children under fourteen, is the average age or sex of the eldest or second
or third child. As to sex, statistics show that there are about as many males
as females under fourteen in the Commonwealth, and this balance of the
totals probably exists amongst families with three children under fourteen
as amongst all families.
But the average age of all children under fourteen in the Commonwealth
is known statistically to be about seven. Excluding therefore any physically
possible, but not practically known, variations in death-rate at the various ages
in the group between birth and seven, and in the group between seven and
fourteen, the average age of the second child may be taken to be seven (the
mean age of all), that of the eldest ten and a half, and that of the youngest three
and a half. The exact relevant ages according to the 1911 Census are 10‘45,
6'47, and 3 - 09.
2. In all estimations of the requirements by way of clothing, close attention is necessary
to the position, that what has to be determined is not the cost initially
of an outfit or wardrobe, but of the replacement of articles as a recurring
expenditure. This has involved in every article the task of calculating its
durability for its primary purpose and often, for a secondary purpose, such,
e.g., as a second-best or a converted use. In any intelligently managed
household very little is thrown away. With regard to infant’s clothing the
difficulty arises that, while the typical family maintains its structure ( i.e .,
contains three children, and no more, under fourteen), the question of carry-
over or replacement of infant’s clothing is almost an insoluble one.
3. The Federated Unions’ claim with regard to Food was based on the assumption that
the third child was about three and a half years of age. The structure of the
typical family was thus altered from the ages taken for Clothing. The
inconsistency was pointed out to the parties more than once during the
sittings, but neither party attached any importance to it, or (apparently)
thought that the cost of keeping an infant in food and clothing taken
together would be any more or any less than the same cost for a child of
three and a half years. It is, however, clear, upon scientific evidence as
to necessary food, that a child of three and a half years needs more than an
infant, and the Commission accordingly determined that it would be more
symmetrical to take the same hypothetical age for clothing as for food, in case
the clothing regimen for an infant might be found to cost more than that for a
child between three and four years of age. This decision was reached without
any comparison between the respective regimens having been made.
In inquiries such as the present, no recognised separation of ages has yet been reached,
nor was any specific separation of ages suggested by the terms of the Commission. In the
Tentative Budget Inquiry in the United States {vide page 17 of this Report) the sexes and


ages selected for estimation were a boy of eleven, a girl of five, and a boy of two
In the well-planned investigation by Mr. Giblin, the Government Statist of Tasmania, it was
suggested that, as the ultimate objective of that inquiry was to fix a minimum wage, it wa
desirable to take all the children as near to the vanishing-point of dependency'—fourteen years of
age —as possible, since families of that structure won d be liable to suffer privation if the cost of
living was based on the supposition of younger children. This, no doubt, is true with regard to
food requirements and probably with regard to clothing, but the Commission is satisfied that the
only just basis is the average, not the exceptional, case. If the minimum wage is to cover all cases,
then it should provide, not for children of average size, health, and conduct, but for children of
the maximum of size (and therefore, according to physiologists, of food requirements), of maximum
expensiveness for doctor and dentist, and of maximum destructiveness with regard to their
own and others clothing, and to the equipment of the household. In taking average ages for the
three children in order to frame the cost of living of a family (when provision for that cost is to
be a permanent part of the institutions of the country) the family purse will have had during the
years of earlier age of the three children advantages which, if prudently recognised, will
obviate any inconveniences in the latter period of the children’s dependency.
For these reasons the Commission, instead of returning a finding of the cost for clothing
an infant, took the course of applying, with suitable modifications, the list of clothing selected as
necessary for a boy of ten and a half to the needs of a boy of three and a half.
With regard to the sexes of the three dependent children, since in any one family there must
be two of one sex and one of the other, the Commission accepted the basis on which the case was
presented by both parties, taking the eldest as a boy and the second as a girl. The third child
has been taken as a boy for reasons given above.
There seems no ground for supposing that the total cost of clothing the three children
would differ from that determined in this inquiry if the sexes were distributed at the three
respective ages of ten and a half, seven, and three and a half in any other arrangement as to sex
than that here adopted.
The family structure thus selected is not ideal from some points of view. It is probably the
rule, where there are three children, that the intervals of age between them are less than 31 years.
Where the children are nearer in age the opportunity of passing on out-grown garments is likely to
be more frequent, but the Commisison has felt that the first essential was to assume a family of
such ages as would represent average expensiveness for Clothing and Food- —the two sections of
cost which alone vary to any appreciable degree with age.
Nature op the Evidence.
In no branch of the inquiry was more ample evidence adduced by both parties, and in no
branch was the value of popular participation in the investigation more clearly shown, than with
regard to Clothing. Only by such means was it possible to arrive at clear determinations of a
matter involving so many complicated considerations, as does the question of the amount
necessary to provide a reasonable standard of comfort in dress. The Commission had the
advantage of evidence from a great number of witnesses, with various experience and points
of view, on the initial question of the kinds and articles of clothing which are essential to
comfort according to current standards.
It is not proposed to canvass in detail the evidence of individual witnesses on individual
points, but a summary of the nature of the evidence is desirable.
The witnesses consisted of three classes ;—l. Traders. 2. Household witnesses called by
either party or by the Commission. 3. Volunteer witnesses, being chiefly witnesses who came
forward at the desire of certain organizations, but including some individual witnesses who came
forward out of a general interest in the evidence that was offered.
Inter-woven Questions.
It is important to remember that prices, material, make, duration, and number of
garments cannot be separately considered. Within the moderate ranges of quality with which
the Commission has been called on to deal, the initial price paid will so determine the material and
the make that the duration or life of garments will to some extent vary inversely with the price.
The universal opinion of witnesses, whether in the trade or in private life, was that there is no
real economy in merely buying what is cheapest to begin with. Indeed, in many instances—and,
of course, within the limits of moderate qualities—the higher-priced article is cheapest in the
long run.
In view of this, the lists prepared, and the evidence given, were always directed to showing
how long a given number of articles at a given price would last.
Again, the question of total duration or life of garments is inter-connected with the
questions of carry-over and replacement. The task of the Commission being to ascertain what is
necessary by way of replacement, it should be assumed that at the end of any postulated period
(usually a year) there would be in the house the same amount of carry-over with which to begin


the next period as there had been at the beginning of the postulated period. It will readily be
seen that the replacement necessary in a year can be ascertained from the total life of the
garment.
If, e.g., a man’s hat will last eighteen months, and a man begins 1920 with a hat, “ A,”
which has already served twelve months, then he will need a new hat, “ B,” in June, 1920, which
will last till January, 1922, and then another, “ C,” which will in January, 1923, have served
twelve months, so that the same carry-over is present in January, 1923, as in January, 1920, two
new hats having been purchased in the three years.
Trade Witnesses.
In accordance with this principle, trade witnesses presented their lists of estimated
requirements for replacement always in the form of the article, the price, and number required
per year, while, for garments lasting more than a year, the total life was stated.
In gauging the value of these lists, it has to be borne in mind that the witnesses had a
particularly difficult task. If a trader could be sure that a customer bought exclusively from him
over a period, he might give evidence of definite fact; but, since his customer may buy any article
or articles anywhere else, and since, in clothing, one garment so often saves wear upon another,
instances Were lacking of such definite facts. The evidence of traders, therefore, had to be, in the
main, evidence of opinion, or estimation, though of the opinion and estimation of persons with
unusual opportunities of judging. Even so, such evidence is not as convincing as the evidence
of householders speaking from personal experience, especially, as in making estimates for other
people’s comfort, the natural tendency,is to cater liberally rather than sparingly.
Many trading firms assisted the Commission greatly by supplying, at the request of the
parties, lists of prices of the articles included in the claim, divided into minimum, maximum, and
fair average quality prices. These lists Were prepared in advance for the Commission’s sittings,
and time Was thus saved. In no case Was any list accepted without oral examination, and it was
generally found that by fair average quality in the lists supplied witnesses meant the quality of
which they sold most to their customers, being at the same time a quality as to material and
make which would give good wear and appearance.
The evidence from the Clothing Trades in all the capitals combined came from about 50
firms, including all the leading firms whose business is chiefly or partly with the working classes,
and including suburban firms.
The Commission acknowledge with pleasure the help given by traders with regard not only
to their experience as to duration and character of garments, but also in producing samples, and,
where necessary, supplying confidentially costings and other figures as to their transactions and
turnover.
Household Witnesses.
A number of housewives and some working men gave evidence as to the amount spent
in the home upon Clothing and the requirements of various members of the family. The general
trend of such evidence was that at present prices and with present wages, families of the typical
size or larger, have gone short of necessary clothing or lived to some extent upon what they already
had, without being able to make necessary replacements. There can be no doubt, either, that since
1914, the standard of clothing enjoyed by families has been lowered, or that the evidence visible
every day in the streets of a higher standard of dress than that obtaining before the war is confined
to employees of either sex who have benefited by the increase of wages, based on a typical family’s
requirements, without having the liabilities of such a family. In all countries an increase in
spending power is at once reflected in expenditure on clothing, but the increase in spending
power in Australia is limited to the unmarried or childless ; the family’s spending power has been
lowered, and this has resulted in privation chiefly in regard to clothing.
Instances were given of families with three or more dependent children where various
expedients, ingenious and occasionally pitiful, had to be resorted to in order to keep the children
clad, and it was a common theme with married witnesses that, as the basic wage has hitherto
been ascertained, the advent of a third child had resulted in their having to forego some part of
what thev had before enjoyed —a reasonable standard of comfort in clothing. And though during
war-time such difficulties were borne without repining, it is impossible to overlook the sense of
dissatisfaction expressed by witnesses thus affected with the present state of things. Few people
realize the shifts and additional labour to the housewife thus involved —labour which, when added
to the other trials of a family too large for its means, in some cases mentioned before the
Commission, may well have been the cause of loss of health. The findings of the Commission
as to Clothing will remedy whatever is well-grounded in such complaints coming from the typical
family.
From the point of view of national life, it is clear that the married worker with children,
who is in receipt of the present basic wage, finds his position sharply contrasted —and to his
detriment —with the unmarried man who, beyond the age when men usually marry, is receiving
a wage which is deemed to include provision for a wife and three children, and so is able to spend


upon his own clothing the whole sum included for the former purpose in the basic wage. Such
a position, which is not confined to Clothing, but applies to all the elements of the basic wage,
ay easily result in discouraging marriage and the growth of families. No reflecting mind can
picture any one influence nr ore inimical to national .welfare, nor any country that can less afford
to foster such an influence, than the encouragement in Australia of single life (if for selfish
mocives), with its waste of wealth, its impairment of character, and its unmanly distaste for the
national duties of husbandhood and fatherhood.
The household witnesses numbered 95, coming from various callings, including, amongst
others, the following; —Salesmen, Municipal employees, Clerks, Factory employees, Engine-
drivers, Tanners, and Labourers.
Sydney.
The evidence taken in Sydney with regard to Clothing followed in the main the lines described
on pages 26 and 27 of this Report, but it was developed more fully than in Melbourne. In particular,
the Commission had the advantage of having evidence from a great number of volunteer witnesses
who came before it out of a genuine public concern to have a just finding reached. This was
notably the case with certain public bodies, the Housewives’ Association, the National Council of
Women, and the Women’s Service Guild. Representatives of such bodies in some instances cross-
examined witnesses called by either of the counsel, and did so with admirable point and
brevity. The President and other officers of the Housewives’ Association, and witnesses from the
other bodies named, gave evidence. The Commission was greatly impressed with the impartiality
and exact knowledge of these public-spirited witnesses, and it has derived great help from the
lists of requirements either put in by them or prepared at.the Commission’s request.
In the course of the hearing the practice, common in all cities, came to light of some
of the leading traders allowing a special discount at all times to their own salesmen. Such firms
courteously furnished the Commission with the names of employees at various levels of salary
and the amounts of their purchases. The Commission called the employees mentioned in camera,
and examined them so as to find what purchases they made outside their own firm. It was
thus possible to obtain some fairly exact accounts of the purchases of individual wearers, and
to find out what their own and family’s expenditure was in fact, and what it needed to be, in
order that they might have suitable clothing.
This class of evidence was later obtained in other cities, but nowhere so fully as in Sydney.
Brisbane.
The evidence taken in Brisbane, though very voluminous, did not include any new methods
of investigation. Its chief importance lies in the fact that it showed that the clothing worn in
sub-tropical Australia does not differ much from that worn in more southerly parts. The principal
differences are in fabrics and weights, not in make. Then, again, in summer time washing-suits
are worn to some extent, but by .no means universally ; light tweeds being very commonly w r orn also.
The Commission saw no reason to conclude that the number and prices of the articles included in
the Indicator List should be altered, since the same articles, though sometimes of lighter fabric
or weight, will be required ; whatever advantage may be gained from the lower initial cost of
washing-suits being counter-balanced by the additional number required to give the same wear.
Accordingly, the cost of Clothing for Brisbane has been ascertained by applying that capital’s
prices to the Indicator List.
Adelaide, Perth, and Hobart.
Voluminous evidence was given in these cities, but the only matter in the way of new
method which calls for mention is that in Perth and Hobart, the Commission, instead of obtaining
valuations of the Tentative Regimen referred to on page 29 from heads of each department
in the leading stores, were able, by the courtesy of the firms in question, to have the valuations
made by Sectional Committees. In each separate branch of Clothing (e.j., men’s clothing, women’s
boots, &c.), representatives from every firm were appointed to a Sectional Committee for that
branch. This Sectional Committee then made a joint valuation of each article in its own branch,
and elected one of its members to give evidence on the joint valuation and the subject generally
to the Commission.
Men’s and Boys’ Clothing.
As in all branches of the subject, the Commission has had to consider the widely varying
experience of different individuals. The witness who said he required five tailor-made suits per year
may have been a Beau Brummel building up a variegated wardrobe, but, apart from such
extravagant assertions, there is no dnubt that the care men take of garments, their skill in buying,
and their habits, lead to great variety in their experience as to the duration of clothing.
A considerable body of evidence was given bearing on the question of tailor-made as against
ready-made clothing. It was established that there is a widespread preference for tailor-
made suits, at any rate for best wear, and that as a result of shortened spending power,
many heads of families have taken to ready-made suits as a matter of necessity. On the other
hand, the latter class of clothing has much improved of late years.


With, regard to material for men’s suits, it was shown that, at the present time, Australian
tweeds afford better value than the imported, but that the former only supply 20 per cent, of
the Commonwealth’s requirements. It has consequently not been possible for the Commission
to sett'e this item on the footing of Australian material being used. Similar remarks apply to
Australian hosiery and underwear. As regards boots the position is reversed, the Australian
industry supplying practically the whole of the consumption by employees in the Commonwealth.
Women’s and Girls’ Clothing.
• So far as women's and girls’ apparel depends upon woollen piece-goods, the Australian
wearer is more dependent upon imported materia] than is the case with men’s c’othing. The
reason is that Australian manufacturers do not, except as to serges, cater, to any adequate
degree, for the lighter fabrics used in women’s costumes, &c. Nor do they or can they, with a
home market so limited, produce the desired variety of weights and patterns of tweed.
In dealing with this branch, therefore, the Commission was again obliged to consider the
prices of garments made from imported as well as from Australian materials, both in costumes
and in hosiery and underwear.
Method Adopted for Ascertaining the Cost of Necessary Clothing. Tentative
Regimen.
At the conclusion of the Melbourne sittings, the Commission, realizing that the important
points of principle that had aiisen and been discussed in the course of taking evidence would
be the same in all the States, and, further, that the clothing worn does not differ very markedly
in any of the States, proceeded to consider a Tentative List or Regimen of necessary clothing which
should include all articles of common use. The Claim and Counter Claim supplied, so far only as
the names of the artic es were concerned, a satisfactory starting-point. The Commission then
considered the number of such articles annually necessary for replacement purposes, selecting
from a large number of exhibits produced by various firms— articles which conformed to the
standards presently described. The whole of the articles in the tentative or trial regimen thus
selected were taken to the States subsequently visited and the opinion of experts was invited
as to their general suitability in providing a reasonable standard of comfort, according to
current standards of dress for wage-earning employees.
The suitability of the articles in themselves was accepted in all the States, except in tire
case of one or two articles generally regarded as “on the low side.” The expert witnesses were
not invited to express any opinion as to the number of the articles so submitted which would be
necessary for the members of the typical family, but the regimen was utilized for the secondary
purpose of obtaining a comparison of prices in the different capitals. This, indeed, is the only way
in which such a comparison can be made, seeing that any named article of clothing, such, e.g., as a
suit or a costume, is susceptible of all degrees of value according to fabric, make, and finish, &c.,
and that therefore comparative valuations in different cities cannot be made on the strength of
mere description.
The Standard.
In determining upon the Tentative Regimen above described, the Commission acted on the
following principles
1. A good wearing quality as to fabric, and sound workmanship were regarded as
the prime essentials.
2. So far as duration is concerned, no deference was paid to the dictates of fashion.
It was not, however, necessary in the case of any item to predicate a life for
clothing which would result in garments being worn till they were hopelessly
obsolete in style. This paragraph concerns chiefly women’s and girls’ outer
garments.
3. A good standard of appearance and fit were considered essential for all outer
garments for both sexes.
4. The regimen was limited to the articles necessary for each person’s equipment
according to a reasonable standard of comfort. For this reason many articles
of an “ alternative ” character, more particularly as regards Women’s clothing,
were omitted altogether. For where such articles take the place of those
- named in the tentative regimen, e.g., a rain-coat in lieu of a top-coat, the relief
thus given to the named article prolongs its life to a corresponding extent, and
leaves the total of expenditure practically unchanged.
Total and Detailed Cost of Clothing in Melbourne.
At the conclusion of the visits to other cities, the Commission returned to Melbourne and
reviewed the tentative regimen in the light of evidence subsequently received. As a result they
determined the actual cost of living according to a reasonable standard of comfort in dress to
be for Melbourne on November 1, 1920, as appears in the Table on p. 33.


Husband.
Articles.
Duration.
Price.
Annual Cost.
£
s.
d.
£
,9.
d.
Suits
2
to last
3
years . .
8
0
0
5
6
8
Hat .,
1
1
1
1
6
1
1
6
Socks
6
1
0
4
6
1
7
0
Ties ..
2
1
0
5
0
0
10
0
Braces
1
3
0
6
6
0
2
2
1
i
0
3
3
0
3
3
Shirts, working
4
i
0
10
0
2
0
0
„ other
5
3
0
14
6
1
4
2
Flannels
2
1
0
10
0
1
0
0
Underpants ..
2
55
1
55
0
13
0
1
6
0
Collars
6
1
0
1
1
0
6
6
Handkerchiefs
0
1
0
1
0
0
6
0
Pyjamas
3
55
2
55 • ♦
0
19
6
1
9
3
Working Trousers
2
55
1
55
0
19
6
1
19
0
Overcoat
1
4
5
0
0
1
5
0
Umbrella
1
3
0
14
0
0
4
8
Boots, best
1
2
1
18
6
0
19
3
,, working
3
2
I
3
9
1
15
7
Shoes
1
2
0
15
0
0
7
6
Boot Repairs .
3 per year
0
6
6
0
19
6
Sundries
•
••
0
5
0
£23
18
0
Wife.
Articles.
Duration.
Price .
Annual Cost.
£
S.
d.
£ s.
d.
Hats
, .
2
to last
2 years ..
1
i
0
1 1
0
1
2
>>
0
12
6
0 6
3
Costume, winter
1
3
11
0
6
3 13
6
,, summer
1
3
5
5
0
1 15
0
Skirt, blue serge
1
3 3
3
;? • •
2
5
0
0 15
0
,, tweed ..
1
2
1
10
0
0 15
0
Blouse, silk
1
2
1
10
0
0 15
0
,, voile ..
1
1
0
15
0
0 15
0
,, cambric
3
2
0
5
0
0 7
6
,, winceyetto
3
33
2
,,
0
9
0
0 13
6
Camisoles
2
1
0
8
6
0 17
0
5)
2
33
1
>3
0
6
0
0 12
0
Combinations, woollen . .
2
53
2
1
7
6
1 7
6
,, cotton ..
2
2
0
12
9
0 12
9
Undervests, woollen
1
33
2
>> • •
0
13
6
0 6
9
,, cotton
3
33
2
3 3 • *
0
4
6
0 6
9
Bloomers, winter
2
2
•3 . .
0
8
0
0 8
0
Nightdresses ..
4
33
2
33
0
14
6
1 9
0
Underskirts, white
1
3
1
G
0
0 8
8
,, moreen . .
1
>}
3
53 * *
1
5
0
0 8
4
Corsets
1
3 3
2
1
5
0
0 12
6
1
I
0
11
6
0 11
6
Dressing Gown
1
33
3
33 • •
1
7
0
0 9
0
Aprons
4
1
33 • •
0
5
0
1 0
0
Stockings, cashmere
3
1
0
7
6
1 2
6
„ cotton
3
33
1
33 • •
0
3
9
0 11
3
Handkerchiefs
6
33
1
33 • •
0
1
3
0 7
6
Gossamer
1
33
1
33 • •
, .
0
5
6
0 5
6
Veil ..
1
1
33 • •
0
2
6
0 2
6
Gloves, silk ..
1
33
1
33 * *
0
12
6
0 12
6
„ cotton
1
33
1
33 ■ •
0
4
0
0 4
0
Top Coat
1
33
4
33 • *
3
15
0
0 18
9
Golfer ..
1
)}
3
1
15
0
0 11
8
Umbrella
1
33
3
33 * *
0 17
G
0 5
10
Shoes, best
1
1
1
15
0
1 15
0
„ second
1
1
1
1
0
1 1
0
Slippers
1
33
1
33 • •
0
9
0
0 9
0
Repairs, best ..
1
1
33 * *
0
5
6
0 5
6
„ second
1
1
1) • •
0
5
6
0 5
6
Sundries
•
••
1 0
0
£30 4
6
The details of this total will be found in the following Indicator List :■ —
Indicator List op Clothing, Melbourne, November 1, 1920.


Boy,
10J Years.
Articles.
Duration.
Trice.
Annual Cost.
£
S .
d.
£ s.
I.
Overcoat
i
to last
3
years ..
2
9
0
0 16
4
Suits
2
2
5 5
2
7
6
2 7
6
Pants
2
2
0
12
6
0 12
6
2
2
0
9
0
0 9
0
Jersey
1
2
55
0
13
6
0 6
9
Summer Coat..
2
2
55 • •
0
10
0
0 10
0
Shirts
4
1
55 * •
0
6
0
1 4
0
Stockings
4
55
1
5 5
0
3
11
0 15
8
Caps
1
1
55
0
2
6
0 2
6
Straw Hat
1
2
55 • *
0
5
0
0 2
6
Soft Hat
1
1
55
0
2
6
0 2
6
Handkerchiefs
6
I
55
0
0
6
0 3
0
Braces
1
1
•5
0
2
6
0 2
6
Ties
2
1
0
1
6
0 3
0
Singlets, wool..
2
2
55
0
10
0
0 10
0
,, cotton
2
2
55
0
3
6
0 3
6
Pyjamas
3
55
2
-5,
0
9
0
0 13
6
Boots, best
1
1
55 * •
1
0
0
1 0
0
,, school ..
2
1
0
15
9
1 11
6
Repairs
2
55
1
55
0
5
6
0 11
0
Collars
3
>5
1
55
0
1
0
0 3
0
£12 10
3
Girl,
7 Year
Articles.
Duration.
Price.
Annual Cost.
£
s.
d.
£
s. d.
Singlets
2
to last 2 }
ears . .
0
4
3
0
4 3
Stays .. .. . *
2
,,
1
35 * • ' *
0
5
11
0
11 10
Bloomers, cotton
2
1
53
0
3
9
0
7 6
,, woollen
1
2
35
0
8
0
0
4 0
Petticoats, winter
1
2
0
7
11
0
3 Hi
,, summer
1
55
2
5 ,
0
6
11
0
3 5|-
Dresses, best ..
1
1
53 * *
1
3
•9
1
3 9
,, voile
1
1
0
17
6
0
17 6
,, print
2
,
I
35
0
8
0
0
16 0
Jersey
1
! 5
2
5 5
0
12
6
0
6 3
Hats
1
1
0
10
6
0
10 6
55 • * • • • •
1
55
1
55 ‘ ‘
0
4
6
0
4 6
Cap
I
J 5
1
55
0
2
6
0
2 6
Pyjamas
2
>5
3
55
0
11
9
0
7 10
Socks
4
1
5) • •
0
3
0
0
12 0
Handkerchiefs
6
1
0
0
6
0
3 0
Top Coat
1
3
5 5 * * ‘ •
1
12
6
0
10 10
Boots, best
2
3
0
12
0
0
8 0
,, school ..
3
2
0
11
6
0
17 3
Repairs
2
1
3,
0
4
6
0
9 0
Sundries
0
10 0
£9
13 11
Indicator List of Clothing— continued.


Boy, 3J Year?.
Articles.
Duration.
Price.
Annual Cost.
£ s. d,
£ s. d.
Overcoat
1 to last 3 years . .
1 1 0
0 7 0
Suits, light
1 „ 2 „
0 18 6
0 9 3
» heavy ..
1 „ 2 „
1 2 6
0 11 3
Pants
1 „ 1 „
0 8 3
0 8 3
Jersey
1 „ 2 „
0 9 6
0 4 9
Blouse Coat . .
2 „ 2 „
0 6 6
0 6 6
Shirts
2 „ 1 „
0 4 6
0 9 0
Stockings .
4 „ 1 „
0 2 3
0 9 0
Cap
1 1 1
J. 5 J J 2 5 5
0 3 0
0 2 0
Hat . .
i „ n „
0 1 6
0 1 0
Handkerchiefs
3 1
0 0 6
0 1 6
Braces
1 „ 1 „
0 1 9
0 1 9
Singlets
2 „ 1 „
0 4 0
0 8 0
Nightshirts .. . . . . .. , .
2 „ 1 „
0 2 9
0 5 6
Boots, best ! ..
1 „ 1
0 10 6
0 10 6
Shoes
2 „ 1 „
0 6 0
0 12 0
Collars
2
0 0 9
0 1 6
Boot Repairs
1 a year ..
0 2 0
0 2 0
£5 10 9
Percentage of transactions at sale time in Clothing.
Number of Firms.
Total Annual Turnover.
Sale Time.
Average spree rime
.Reduction spread over
total Sales.
Turnover.
Per Cent, of
Total Turnover.
31
£
15,570,877
f
3,108,854
19-9
2-7
The total annual amount is £Bl 17s. sd. per annum, before making the deductions
mentioned below.
It is to be distinctly understood that the Commission'in no sense regards this Indicator
List as being likely to be invariably followed, or as setting any model to be followed. But no
typical family will fall short of reasonable comfort which is able to purchase the total annual
replacements above described, and where taste, buying skill, and domestic management are at a
reasonably high level, such families will be suitably clad on all occasions, giving weight within
sensible limits to the consideration that Australians are a well-dressed community.
Sales and Saving by Home Sewing, Etc.
The Counter Claim put in by Mr. Ferguson (see p. 25) amounted to£lC4 15s. 10d., subject
to the following footnote. At present prices the amount would be £llB.
This list has been compiled without making any allowance for the following :
(а) Purchasing at sale or bargain prices.
(б) Purchasing ready-made suits.
(c) Home sewing and making up.
{d) Making down portion of parents’ clothes for children.
The discount to be allowed for such economies is impossible of exact calculation, but it is submitted such thrift is practised in every
well-ordered household, and the money so saved in the above list can be applied in a more lavish cxponditi re on individual items according
to personal taste and rcquLomcct or particular exigency.
The making of some garments at home from bought materials, the cutting down and adapting
of garments of the parents for children, the lessening of expense by purchases at sales or other
bargain-buying, are all, in varying degree, possible sources of saving. They have been considered
under the following heads :■ —
1. Sales. —The Commission considered that it would be unfair to expect that men or
their wives should buy all clothing at sale prices. It could not, indeed, be done. On the other
hand, people of average prudence do purchase at sales to the extent of their opportunities.
The Commission, therefore, first of all ascertained what proportion of the total amount of goods
sold is sold at sale time, and at what percentage of reduction. To do this, the leading firms doing
a good medium business—indeed all of them “ household words ” in one or more city—were asked
to furnish the Commission confidentially with the particulars as to their business under the
heads in the following Table :
Indicator List of Clothing— continued.


Melbourne
Annually.
75 6 5
A
1
VuekI
9
y-
0
Sydney
70 3 10
1
7
0
Brisbane
m .
67 9 6
1
6
0
Adelaide
73 9 7
1
8
3
Perth ..
72 4 1
1
7
9
Hobart ..
, ,
75 18 1
1
9
2
—
Melbourne.
Sydney.
Brisbane.
Adelaide.
Perth.
Hobart.
£
s.
d .
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
6‘.
d.
£
s.
</.
£
s. d.
Husband
0
8
5
0
7
9
0
7
6
0
8
3
0
7
9
0
8 6
Wife
0
10
9
0
9
8
0
8
9
0
9
11
0
10
2
0
10 6
Boy (10J) ..
0
4
6
0
4
3
0
4
7
0
4
7
0
4
3
0
4 9
Girl (7)
0
3
5
0
3
6
0
3
4
0
3
7
0
3
9
0
3 6
Boy (3|) ..
0
1
11
0
1
10
0
1
10
0
1
11
0
1
10
0
1 11
Total
i
9
0
1
7
0
1
6
0
1
8
3
1
7
9
1
9 2
It will thus be seen that the total price paid by the public for their total purchases in the
year is less by about 3 per cent, than if all goods were sold at ordinary prices {i.e., without
sale-time reductions).
The amalgamated figures given above reveal the fact that sale-time transactions are not
mere incidental and occasional episodes, but a regular and uniform feature of each year’s business,
about 20 per cent, of all sales being effected during sale-time. Further, the Commission ascertained
that the percentage reductions are applicable to “ bread and butter ” lines such as those utilized
in the Indicator Lists, which are based on ordinary, not sale-time, prices.
It was, therefore, decided that a deduction from each of the totals of the Indicator Lists
of 3 per cent, should be made to allow for the average advantage to the average housewife of sale-
time purchasing.
2. Home-making, cutting-down , &c.- —In view of the economical character of large-scale
manufacture of underwear'—in which, principally, home-making can be done—not much can be
saved by making at home. Cotton piece-goods, e.g., will have carried the wholesaler’s and the
retailer’s profit when the housewife buys them, while the labour-cost in such garments as she would
make at home is a small element.
In order to determine what may be saved by cutting-down parents’ garments for children,
the Commission examined the Indicator Lists to see what savings could be effected by this means.
The Lists have been compiled so that the life of each garment would be its life for the first
wearer, but it often happens that what cannot be further used for the father or mother can be
put to some use for one or other of the children. The Commission prepared a list of such
specific garments in the Indicator Lists for the three children as could thus be saved, and their
cost. It does not publish these items, since different families would need and make different
adaptations of discarded clothing. But the amount of saving ascertained as above was found
to be about 5 per cent, of the total clothing cost for the family, and this sum, it is thought, should
be deducted from the total annual cost in the Indicator List.
The two deductions for sales and for cutting-down, &c., amount to 8 per cent., and the totals
, shown in the Indicator Lists will, after this deduction, cost as on Ist November, 1920-
These figures will thus be the final finding of the Commission as to the cost of Clothing.
The following Table shows the distribution of the above amounts according to the
component members of the family :
The Counter Claim in Melbourne.
It will be observed that the amount found for Clothing is considerably below the amount
of what was called the Counter Claim put in by Mr. Ferguson {vide p. 19). Had this Counter Claim
been accepted by Counsel for the Federated Unions, a difficulty might have arisen,
though it is practically certain that even then the Commission, in a matter of
such moment and also of such complexity, would have insisted upon evidence to justify
it in adopting the amount mutually agreed to. As it is, the Commission is satisfied
that the Counter Claim cannot be relied on as a guide, partly because in some instances
the provision of a cheaper quality has inflated the number of garments annually
necessary, and the total annual cost. The Commission has ascertained that the Counter Claim
was the result of the advice of at one time, five, and at another time, three firms called into
consultation by the legal advisers of the employers, and it cannot accept the opinion thus
formulated against the marked preponderance of a great body of testimony given in open court.
F. 17723. —3


SECTION III.—FOOD.
In determining the actual cost of living in respect of Food, which, throughout this Report,
will be used as including groceries consumed as food, it has not been necessary to consider separately
the several States of the Commonwealth since, broadly speaking, the standard of comfort for Food
is the same, and the diet of the people is the same, throughout the Commonwealth.
Method of Determining Cost op Food for the Typical Family.
By the universal consent of writers upon such questions, the sufficiency of food for any
human being can only be stated with precision in terms of heat-units or calories —1,000 calories
being one Kilo-calorie or one Calorie (spelt with a capital). A Calorie is the amount of heat
required to raise 1 kilogram of water 1° Centigrade. The Calorie value of any article of food
can be determined by laboratory measurement, and calculations of this kind have resulted in
tables of the Calorie value of different foods being constructed, which are generally accepted.
It is not a very satisfactory nomenclature which uses the same word (as pronounced) to denote a
unit and also the same unit multiplied by 1,000, distinguishing between them only by writing the
Word with a capital letter when the 1,000 multiple is meant; but since in the literature of the
subject the Kilo-calorie or Calorie is always used to express the measurement of Food regimens,
that unit of measurement will be used exclusively in this Report.
It may be as well to point out that while the method of determining the standard of food
by its equivalent in Calories savours of technicality and is, therefore, sometimes ridiculed as if it
were a pedantic way of treating a homely subject, yet it is a method which, as a method, has given
universal satisfaction under the severest practical tests, such as the feeding of great armies and
navies in peace and in War. Moreover, during the recent Great War this method Was the basis
of the rationing systems of all countries which were compelled by reason of war conditions to
conduct the feeding of their people upon a regulated system.
It was obvious that if the finding of the Commission as to the cost of Food was to have any
value other than that of mere assumption or conjecture as to the necessary quantities of a great
number of articles of diet taken together, it would be necessary to adopt some recognised method
of determining, in the form of measurement, the total amount of Food which was to be the basis
of the finding. No other method was suggested nor, indeed, could be suggested, than that already
in use by persons or authorities charged with the duty of determining dietary standards for
various community purposes. The term Calorie is really, by this time, no more technical than
such terms as clinical, thermometer, or microbe.
Factors in Determining the Food Total.
The prime conditions in the provision of a family’s food are- —■
First—-that it shall be sufficient in food values, expressed in Calories, to provide warmth
and energy, to renew tissue so as to maintain the weight of the body, and to satisfy
the requirements of growing and developing children.
Second —that it shall contain a proper proportion of the three main constituents of
food, viz., Proteins, which produce new growth or replace tissue lost, Fats and
Carbohydrates to supply energy. Such a proportion is deemed necessary in order
to obtain a proper physiological balance in the total equipment of Food so as to
maintain the various functions of the body.
Third—the supply must permit of a sufficient variety of food for the preparation of
palatable and digestible meals.
Fourth —the varieties of food must conform generally to the habits of the community.
With regard to the first condition, the question of the number of Calories necessary for a
family involves the consideration of two points-—first, the number of Calories necessary for
a “man” ; and second, the “coefficients” or proportions to the man-unit Calories, which are
to be adopted so as to provide for the wife and for each of the children according 'to age.
Thus, according to one authority, Atwater, for every 1,000 Calories required by a man, a woman
requires 800, a boy of 10 requires 600, a child of 7 requires 500, and a child under 5 requires
400 Calories, the total Calories for such a family being 3,300.


Man
..
.. 1.0
Woman
.8
Child (IQi)
. • • «
.6
Child (7)
• • • •
.5
Child (31)
.4
Total . .
.. 3.3
Another way of stating the same observer’s conclusions is to say that the coefficients to be
used in calculating the requirements of other members of the family from the requirements of the
“man” are —•
Such a family would be described as consisting of 3.3 “ man-units.”
From this it will be seen that the Commission’s first duty was to determine what number of
Calories should be taken for the man-unit, which involved the scrutiny of a number of scientific
writings, since experiments and observations have so far been entirely lacking in Australia, except
for a few sporadic and desultory inquiries. However, in the United States and in Europe such
experiments and observations have been carried out over a large field, and with remarkable care
and precision. The next step was to settle what set of coefficients should be adopted as having the
balance of scientific authority in its favour. When the man-unit Calories and also the co-
efficients had been determined, the total number of Calories for the typical family followed as a
matter of calculation.
Having determined the number of Calories required weekly for the typical family, the
Commission made use of the Household Budgets that had been returned in order to insure that the
necessary number of Calories should be obtained by a diet which was in conformity with the
ordinary habits of the people as disclosed by the Budgets.
Lastly, attention was paid to the question of variety of food and to the necessity, mentioned
above, of maintaining a physiological balance between Proteins, Fats, and Carbohydrates.
Stated in less technical terms, the Commission had to arrive at the cost of Food, first of all,
by determining upon foods of sufficient variety, and in sufficient quantity, to insure for the typical
family health, energy, and palatable meals according to familiar standards and habits of eating.
Secondly, prices had to be applied to the dietary requirements thus found to be necessary. It
may be mentioned that the first of these steps, viz., the determination of the kinds and quantities
of food, was completed before the second process was begun, the Commission feeling that to attempt
to dictate what the food habits of the people ought to be by selecting, as the basis of the cost
of living, foods which would merely comply with the strict physiological needs of the people
in the cheapest possible way, was a function altogether outside the Commission’s province. It may
be true that all the requirements, for life and energy, of the family table can be obtained more
cheaply by a skilful adjustment of the physiological balance to cheaper kinds of food than those
ordinarily consumed by the people, but a reasonable standard of comfort cannot be obtained if
the known tastes of the community are ignored.
The evidence and contentions on the several points in controversy will now be dealt with
seriatim.
Calories for the Man-unit.
A notable attempt was made by counsel for the Federated Unions to induce the Commission
to ignore standards recognised as satisfactory by European and American authorities, and to make
a new departure in dietetics by setting up an Australian standard. The Federated Unions’ claimfor
Food was formulated with this objective, and will be found in Appendix I. The dietary thus
formulated was submitted to Professor Osborne, of the Melbourne University, who gave evidence
upon it. In Sydney, Professor Chapman and Acting-Professor Priestley gave evidence
supporting the claim up to a certain point. Dr. Springthorpe, of Melbourne, was called by counsel
for the Employers, while General Sir James McCay, now Chairman of the Victorian Fair Profits
Commission, and Dr. Corlette were called by the Commission, the former to give evidence, which
proved to be of great value, as to the diet of the Australian soldiers in the training-camps in
England.
In view of the suggestion that an Australian standard should be set up by the Commission's
finding, it became incumbent to consider what the standards hitherto recognised by scientific
writers, or adopted by food authorities, have been; and also to consider what comparative value
should be given to the opinions of the authors of such accepted standards, and to the arguments
adduced by witnesses who supported the proposed new departure.
Standards ascertained by Investigators.
It is obvious that the results of actual experiment or observation being the foundation of
subsequent scientific discussions, must be the prime guides for laymen to accept. There was in
existence before the war a great body of such results. But during the war there has been an
extraordinary augmentation of this knowledge, by observations carried on with regard both to
civilians and to soldiers, whose consumption of food could be, and was, regulated under the
conditions of the war in all European countries.


Monk
Calories per dav
.. 3022
Wolff ..
.. 3030
Volt
.. 3055
Rubner
.. 3092
Playfair
.. 3140
Molescliott
.. 3160
Atwater
.. 3520
Observational results are often classified according to the occupations included in the
dietetic study in which they have been ascertained. The classifications generally adopted are : men
engaged in hard muscular work, in moderate muscular work, in light muscular work, and in
sedentary work. 'The Commission fully discussed the question which of these classes should be
taken for the purpose of determining the cost of living for the typical family, and the conclusion
was reached that the man doing moderate muscular work ought to be taken as representative
upon the following grounds.
According to an approximating calculation, made by the Statistician to the Commission (Mr.
Sutcliffe), 70 per cent, of employees in the Commonwealth belong either to this class (which alone
comprises nearly half the employees) or to the two classes- light muscular work, and sedentary
work —which are below this class in point of food requirements. While a man at heavy muscular
work requires more food than a man of the class selected, yet his requirements in other directions,
notably as to Clothing, may involve him in less cost than the man of sedentary occupation or the
man doing light muscular work or moderate muscular work. The rationing of civilians in
England appears to have been always on the footing of an average man engaged in average
work. The class here selected as furnishing the starting point for all classes is, if anything,
somewhat above the man “at average work.” Again, the co-efficients to be applied to the
other members of the family are always based upon the man-units for a man doing moderate
muscular work.
Pre-War Investigators.
The following authorities whose investigations took place before the war are quoted by
Hutchison, in “ Food and Dietetics,” page 29 (1918), the figures being for the man doing moderate
muscular work :
On the same page occurs the following passage :
“ In the latest American standard (Langworthy) the loss both from waste material
in the food as purchased and from non-absorption is allowed for thus—
“ Dietary Standard for man in full vigour at moderate muscular work.
Food as purchased . . . . .. 3,800
Food as eaten . . .. . . . . 3,500
Food as digested . . . . . . 3,200 ”
It is not clear from this passage whether these figures are the result of actual experiment
by Langworthy or whether they refer solely to the division of the food as purchased, as eaten
and as digested when 3,800 Calories have been supplied, but from other sources it is found that
Langworthy’s figure of 3,800 is not the result of any separate investigation, but is taken byway
of a standard on which to base the above comparison.
At page 32-33 of Hutchison’s work a table is given of 53 sets of studies in various countries
and for various occupations. The author then summarizes his own conclusions by saying “On
examining the table it will be observed that on the whole the results conform very closely to the
ideal standard already laid down. . . . Taking the results as a whole, however, one is
astomshed at the closeness with which the actual corresponds to the ideal.”
The “ ideal ” thus referred to is mentioned on page 29, where Hutchison says “ The energy
value of such diet is close upon 3,000 Calories. Such a standard may be regarded as suitable for
a man of average build and weight leading an active life and doing a fair amount of muscular
work.” The standard thus referred to by Hutchison is on the basis of food as eaten and should
have, say, 10 per cent, added to it in order to find the amount of food as purchased. Thus
Hutchison's opinion of the final conclusion to be drawn from all the studies utilized in his work
leads to a standard of 3,300 Calories in food as purchased.
The investigations quoted from above comprise all the 'lmportant ones that were made
before the War. During the War the whole of the Belgian population, some of whom, as is
known, were kept hard at work by the German authorities, were supported, on a supply of food
averaging 2,000 Calories per person per day. Five persons, equalling on this basis 3.3 man-units,
this would in a family bring out a result of 3,030 Calories per “ man ” per day. In England
many observations were made of the Calorie consumption amongst munition-workers. According
to Dr. Leonard Hill, writing in July, 1916, (Memorandum No. 11. A second Appendix to Memor-
andum No. 3 (Industrial Canteens)), “the investigation was made at a well-managed hostel,


where each worker may eat as much as he or she desires. In the dining hall there are separate
tables for men and women, and by weighing the food supplied to a definite number at given
tables, and by weighing the uneaten residue, the cost of each ingredient being known, the
management obtained the cost price of food per week . . . .” The results ascertained in
this observation showed in round figures. 3,900 Calories per man.
Two points have here to be noted, first that the labour of munition-workers in 1916 was
notoriously intense, and, second, that where there is unrestricted access to food, especially if
that is with people who have been stinted most of their lives, over-eating is likely to occur.
In an admirable memorandum prepared for the New South Wales Board of Trade by
Mr. Sawkins, the Board’s Statistical Officer, in June, 1920, under Table 6, “Composition of diets
of men at moderate and hard work,” a summary of 18,000 cases by Dr. Leonard Hill is quoted
as showing for English munition-workers in 1917 an energy value of food consumed of 3,465.
On page 17 of Mr. Sawkins’ memorandum he quotes from an analysis by Professor Ogburn,
of the diet of families included in a survey carried out by the United States Bureau of Labour and
Statistics, which shows that for selected families the diet averaged in energy value about 3,500
Calories per man-unit per day as calculated from the co-efficients used by the United States Bureau
of Statistics. It may be mentioned that had Atwater’s co-efficients, dealt with later in this
Report, been used, the figure would have been probably about 3,660 per man-unit instead of
3,500.
In his evidence before this Commission on 12th March, General Sir James McCay gave
invaluable evidence as to the character and adequacy of the rations supplied to the Australian
soldiers in training-camps under his control. The actual dietary sheets for the several days of
the week were also produced, and calculations have been made from them, applying recognised
standards of Calorie value to the various food supplied. During the period when, according to
General McCay, the rations enabled troops to undergo a training as severe as it was possible to
make it, and to embark for France in the acme of physical condition, the average Calories per
man per day were approximately 3,500. It is of the highest importance that these rations were
found perfectly satisfactory from the point of view of the troops’ contentment, always a vital
matter.
No doubt, in the ordinary household the excellent economical use of every particle of food
so interestingly described by General McCay in his evidence would be impossible, but even
on the absurd assumption that the 3,500 Calories in food as purchased for the troops were to be
treated as being food actually eaten—thus assuming that every particle of food, bone, rind, &c.,
was eaten —and 10 per cent, added, as is usual in allowing for waste, the result would be only
3,850 Calories.
Opinions of Scientific Writers as to Calories per Man-Unit.
Passing to the opinions of scientific writers, as distinguished from actual investigations, on
the question of Calories per man-unit, it is clear that according to opinions published
both before the War and during the War, the Atw r ater standard of 3,520 Calories is by no
means a low 7 one. Some authorities will now 7 be quoted which in part recount other
investigations, and in part express the opinion deduced by the writers in question from studies
or investigations conducted by themselves.
Dr. Mary S. Rose, Ph. D., Assistant-Professor, Department of Nutrition, Teachers’ College,
Columbia University, in her work “ Feeding the Family,” published in 1916, quotes from a table
taken from the “ Fundamental Basis of Nutrition” by Lusk, which gives the average consumption
of farmers in America, Mexico, Finland, and Italy as 3,551. She estimates that writers, teachers,
bookkeepers, shoemakers, tailors, physicians, and persons similarly occupied require 2,200 to
2,800.
Dr. Leonard Hill, M. 8., F.R.S., in his revised Report re “ Investigation of Workers’ Food
and Suggestions as to Dietary,” says ;• —“Numerous investigations have shown that the energy
required by a man engaged in moderately light munition w 7 ork is about 3,500 Calories of food
as purchased.”*
The Report of the “ Working Class Living Committee 1918, U.K.,” says- —“ A man in
ordinary work is believed to need food producing from 3,000 to 3,300 Calories a day.”
The United States Department of Labour says : —“ Various scientific students of food
have estimated that the number of Calories needed by a man at moderately hard muscular work
is 3,500 per day.” (Tentative Budget Inquiry, U.S.A., p. 15, 1919.)
The Fourth Report of the Factory Investigation Committee of New York, 1915, says—
“ A man generally needs enough food to furnish 3,500 Calories per day.”
* Memorandum No. 11.—A second Appendix to Memorandum No. 3 (Industrial Canteens),


Protein (grains).
Fuel Energy (Calories).
Men
.. 115
.. 3,500
Women
.. 92
.. ■ 2,800
Children (under 14)
• 571
.. 1,750
In “ Human Needs of Labour ’’ by Seebohm Rowntree, March, 1918, appears the following
statement" 1 therefore take the following standard as representing the amount of food
necessary for unskilled workers and their families -
In “ Feeding of the Nations,” Professor Starling calculates the total requirements of
Calories in eaten food as 3,136, representing 3,450 in food as purchased.
Professor Starling also quotes the Food (War) Committee of the Royal Society as suggesting
the following classification of occupations and their requirements in Calories :
Sedentary .. .. .. .. .. 2,106
Light work .. .. .. .. .. 2,406
Moderate work .. .. .. .. 2,806
Heavy work .. .. .. .. .. 3,706
Treating 2,806 for moderate work as referring to food as eaten, and allowing 10 per cent,
on food purchased for waste, the requirements as purchased would be 3,086.
The Committee of the Royal Society in a Report on the Food Supply of the United Kingdom
1916, said, on page 3 ; — u A full consideration of the dietary requirements of a nation for the
most part engaged in active work has convinced the Committee that these requirements cannot be
satisfactorily met on a less supply in the food as purchased equal approximately to 3,400
Calories per “ man” per day, a man being an average workman doing an average day’s work.
The Committee has adopted this as their minimum standard.” A footnote says :■ —■“ Jt should
be noted that these figures refer to total food constituents as purchased, and not to digestible
constituents.”
The Medical Research Committee, National Health Insurance, in their Special Report,
dated December, 1917, give the result of an inquiry into the composition of the dietaries of munition
workers made by Viscount Dunluce and Major Greenwood. The Report says —■“ The
data show that the material purchased for each man’s diet contained yielding
energy equivalent to 3,463 Calories.”
The Inter-Allied Food Commission, upon which Professor Chittenden and Professor Lusk
represented the United States, and Professor Starling and Professor T. B. Wood represented the
United Kingdom, reports as follows ; —“ It was decided that a man of average Weight, 70 kilos
or 154 lbs., doing average work during 8 hours a day, requires food as purchased with an energy
value of 3,300 Calories daily.” The Inter-Allied Food Commission, however, expressed this
opinion at a time when all the Allies were faced with the prospect of short commons, and
possibly allowance would need to be made for the influence of this consideration.
Professor Starling in “ Feeding of the Nations,” page 48, says “ Laborious direct determina-
tions of the energy output of recruits in training, carried out for the Army Medical Department by
Professor Cathcart [in the United States], have shown that the needs of this class, mostly young
men, cannot be satisfied with a daily ration of less than 3,750 Calories. 3,800 Calories, therefore,
seems a fair average to allow for all classes of soldiers and sailors, and this figure was adopted by
the Inter-Allied Scientific Food Commission for the Forces of the United Kingdom.”
Professor Bayliss in “ The Physiology of Food and Economy in Diet (1917)” says at page
32 :■ —•“ The following are the quantities which are generally accepted at the present time as a
sufficient daily diet for a man of average weight, doing a moderate amount of muscular work.”
He then gives the details of a diet having a total energy value of 3,300 Calories.*
Deal Evidence roe the New Standard suggested by the Unions.
It has been mentioned that the Federated Unions’ Claim was submitted to Professor
Osborne, but apparently the claim for Food was not originallv prepared under the advice of any
scientific authority. It contained items which Professor Osborne states he at once recognised
as being extravagant. His own method of dealing with the dietary was to cut it down by a
process which he himself described as applying “my opinion due to experience-T was going to
say instinct ” (Q.20070a). In his evidence given in September, Professor Osborne added that when
it Was cut down in this way he found that it was below the ration for the United States Navy,
and he therefore added in such a way as to bring it up to that level in Calorie value, with the
result that the amended regimen submitted by him to the Commission provided approximately
5,000 Calories per man-unit per day. No reason was given why the ordinary Australian working-
man should require as much as is provided for the United States Navy, nor did the witness know
of what the U.S. Navy ration consisted. In point of fact, its high Calorie value is largely due to
* See his table, p. 30, where the last column, if calculated according to the figures for energy value of the Food Supply
Committee of the Royal Society, would result in a total of 3.390 Calories.


Protein
9 m
.. 506 Calories
Carbohydrate
. .
.. 2,075 „
Fat
.. 705 „
3,286 Calories
the amount of pork and cocoa it contains, these articles having a very high Calorie value
per gramme. It was further suggested by this witness that the Australian habitually eats
more than people in other countries, and the eating of our travellers at railway
refreshment rooms and the Continental caricatures of the Britisher as a weedy and underfed
individual were alluded to as supporting the position that Australians are heavy eaters in
comparison with Englishmen. Except with regard to meat, no attempt was made by the witness
to prove this position by reference to statistical or other records.
Since this evidence was given the memorandum already referred to by Mr. Sawkins ( vide
page 37) has appeared, and it contains a carefully Worked-out demonstration of the writer’s
view that, taken as a race, Australians eat less than Englishmen. It is not, however, necessary
for the Commission to express an opinion upon this point further than to say that it would be
acting altogether without evidence to base a decision on the assumption that Australians eat
more than their own race does in other countries. It may indeed be taken for granted that a larger
proportion of Australians obtain what is necessary in the way of food than do the citizens of any
other country, but this does not involve the inference that the Australian who obtains what is
necessary eats more than the American or the Englishman who obtains what is necessary.
It may be noted that in training camps for soldiers in the United States, according to •
Professor Ogburn, the food consumed showed an average energy value of 3,900 Calories. He
quotes from a study reported in the “American Journal of Public Health,” June, 1919. This
figure may be compared with the figure of 3,500 already mentioned as the number found to be
adequate for Australian trainees according to General McCay’s evidence. So far as it goes, this
comparison would prove that the Australian habit is to consume less, not more, than the American,
under similar circumstances.
The opinion of the Commission as to the value of Professor Osborne’s evidence given in March
was read by the Chairman on 24th September, in the following circumstances; About a
month after giving evidence, Professor Osborne had published a book, “Elementary Practical
Biochemistry,” which, according to its preface, “ represents the course of elementary
instruction in practical biochemistry found suitable for large classes and local
conditions.”
At p. 100 the following occurs ;
Human Calorie Requirements per diem.
Sedentary .. .. .. .. 2,700
Light muscular work .. .. 3,000
Medium muscular work .. .. 3,500
Heavy muscular work .. .. 4,500
On p. 102 it is said that a diet satisfying inter alia human requirements for moderate
muscular work can be made up of
These passages confirmed the authorities as to a standard of 3,500 calories, all of whom
the witness had invited the Commission to discard (Q. 22490). The passages were quoted to
counsel at the sittings of the 31st August, and Professor Osborne was recalled at the request of
the Federated Unions on 24th September. He then informed the Commission that he had seen
the book after giving his evidence in March, and before its publication, and that the figures
quoted slipped in by inadvertences, that the book was not intended for the public, but only for
students, who would use it in conjunction with its author’s explanation of its mistakes, and that
there were worse errors than this in the book. The Commission had before the sitting formulated
their comments on the March evidence, and in view of the witness’s adherence to the position which
his own work (published while the controversy was fresh in his recollection) undermined, and of
his efforts to lead the Commission to treat all writers of repute as obscure or out of date, the
Commission’s comments were read by the Chairman with the concurrence of his colleagues.
Since then Professor Osborne has been supplied at his request with a copy of these comments,
which are now to be found, together with a rejoinder by the witness and notes by the Commission,
in Appendix 111. This rejoinder the Commission has closely examined, and it is satisfied that its


comments made on 24th September are just, and that the want of care admitted by the witness
in the preparation of his book for publication was also shown in submission of his evidence tending
to support the new standard put before him by the Unions.
In Sydney, Professor Chapman made a Report suggesting a man-unit standard of 5,000
Calories. This was put forward as an appropriate figure for a man doing moderate muscular
work, on the ground that such a man might be called upon from time to time to do heavy
muscular work, but such a reason Would render all classification nugatory. It might equally be
said that the man at moderate muscular work should only receive what the man of sedentary
occupation needs, since on Sundays and holidays he is free to sit down all day. Professor
Chapman admitted quite frankly that it Was “pure assumption” that the average Australian
Worker needed 5,000 Calories per day (Q. 45056), and that investigations during the war had
not altered the recognised standard for the average worker (Qs. 44993-44994), 3,500 Calories
being still “ the authoritative figure” (Q. 45174).
Acting-Professor Priestley, also examined in Sydney, at first supported a standard of 5,000
Calories, largely on the ground that food having been cheap and plentiful in Australia, it Was the
custom of most people to eat more than they required, and, further, that the average Australian
is very wasteful where food is concerned.
Following up Professor Cathcart’s determinations, the witness said in the course of his
Report: —“ Laborious direct determinations of the energy output of American recruits in training
during the war have shown that the needs of this class cannot be satisfied with a daily ration of less
than 3,750 Calories. If we take 4,000 Calories for an average ‘ man,’ I think it allows for a
reasonable margin for Australian conditions for calculating the Food requirements of women and
children. In my experience of working class families it is the man of the house who eats the
most, and particularly the most of the high Calorie foodstuff, meat, and I think a safe outside
margin for him is 5,000 Calories, which is among the highest figures given for hard work in other
countries.”
In the course of his evidence this witness made it clear that he relied upon “ the social
habits of the people ”in support of the new contention. It was then pointed out to him that the
current prices for the dietary he postulated, if applied to a family of man, wife, and three children,
would absorb the whole of the then basic wage in Sydney, that is to say, that such a family would
have nothing with which to pay rent, purchase clothing, or meet any other requirements whatever.
It was further pointed out to the witness that while many complaints had been made to this
Commission of shortage in other respects, no family having three dependent children had complained
of any shortage of food. The witness then admitted that this fact indicated that a good deal of
this assumption as to the social habits of the people “ went by the board” (Q. 45353). He had
already stated that there was “ no scientific basis for dieting in Australia-—no facts at all that
are known” (Q. 45306).
Dr. Springthorpe, who was called in Melbourne on behalf of the employers, made the
following suggestion in his Report;—“ Under all the circumstances as known to me, it seems
that for us in Victoria some 4,000 ‘ Calories ’ ‘ per man ’ per day, if suitably selected, should
safeguard the dietetic requirements of a healthy man on medium work, the number and kind
being varied as per approved scale, according to ; age, sex, and season.”
Dr. Corlette, who was called in Sydney by the Commission, gave it as his opinion that
Atwater’s figure of approximately 3,500 Calories was still the most authoritative standard, but
in a letter to the Commission, dated 11th September, 1920, he said that, after a close study of
the position for nearly three months, for the purpose of a memorandum for the New South Wales
Board of Trade, he was satisfied that “ the Calorie standard for moderate work should not be
more than that of the Inter-Allied Food Commission, viz., 3,300 Calories, as purchased.” By
the courtesy of the New South Wales Board of Trade a copy of this memorandum, which had
been, on the 27th of September, ordered to be printed, has been furnished to this Commission.
The memorandum contains an exhaustive discussion of the whole position up to date, and gives
reasons for supposing that a man in the northern parts of the United States of America requires
“not less than 200 Calories per day beyond the requirements of an otherwise similar individual
living in Sydney.” (cf. Mr. Sawkins’ view p. 39 of this Report.) He further says that “ after
careful consideration, my own conclusion is that Atwater’s standards are more than merely safe
for the United States, they are over-generous. There can be little doubt, if he were now alive,
he would revise them.”
In conclusion, it appears to be abundantly clear, both from authorities and from the new
investigations that were for the first time in the history of this subject made possible on a large
scale, and over extended periods, as the result of war conditions, that the general trend of
scientific opinion is towards a reduction upon the standards accepted before the war, and not to an


-
Weight irf Grams.
Weight, in Oz.
Energy Value in Calories.
Protein . .
100
3-75
400
Fat
100
3'75
900
Carbohydrates
500
18-00
2,000
Total energy value, 3,300 Calories.
increase upon those standards, such as it was suggested this Commission should inaugurate.
As the Sydney witnesses called by the Federated Unions abandoned, in effect, the position taken
up in the reports they had written beforehand in support of the new standard of 5,000 Calories,
the case for that standard depends solely on the evidence of Professor Osborne already dealt
with.
Physiological Balance.
It is not necessary to discuss at length the question of the requisite physiological balance
between Proteins, Fats, and Carbo-hydrates. The saying of Bayliss, “ Take care of the Calories
and the Proteins will take care of themselves,” is quoted with approval by other writers, and has
received a singular confirmation from experience according to the testimony of Professor Ogburn.
Mr. Sawkins says in his Memorandum, page 10 :
“ The extensive household Budget Inquiry carried out by the U.S. Bureau of
Labour Statistics, in 1918-1919, which covered nearly 13,000 families in 92 towns and
cities in the United States, has been analyzed as regards diet by Professor Ogburn.
The method of survey was such that usually the agent could obtain accurately from
the housewives information with regard to the amount and price of the 145 articles
of food scheduled, only for a short period, such as a week, and had to compute the yearly
consumption by multiplication, due consideration being given to seasonal variations
and family circumstances. The work was done, however, states Professor Ogburn,
with extreme care, and the result may be accepted as accurate within a narrow margin
of error if the survey be regarded as a cost-of-living study, and not a dietary study.
Professor Ogburn states that it seems impossible to get some single unit of measurement
for the adequacy of diet. A partial solution at least is however, he considers, afforded
by the fact that those dietaries of the survey which yield 3.500 Calories per man per
day are usually abundant and varied enough to be fairly well balanced, and fairly adequate
in the amounts of the necessary constitutents.”
It would thus appear that if the diet of 3,500 Calories per man unit per day is obtained
by a family purchasing their food according to ordinary eating habits, the food of the family will—
it might almost be said, automatically—conform to a proper physiological balance. The generally
accepted balance is, according to Bayliss (Physiology of Food and Economy in Die 1 , page 32), the
following ;
Finding as to Calories per Man.
Upon a review of all the authorities and considerations mentioned above, the Commission
came to the conclusion that it was advisable for them as a Commission of laymen to ground their
decisions upon facts actually demonstrated, and it appeared that the conclusion reached by Atwater
that 3,500 Calories is a just measure of the food requirement of a man engaged in moderate muscular
work, had in its favour—first, that it was obtained as the result of actual investigations by an
observer universally regarded as being in the first flight; second, that it had been supported
at least as being liberal, by subsequent observations carried out over a scale and in diversified
conditions such as could leave no doubt of the value of the results obtained. Nor can there be
any question that this standard would be regarded by scientific authorities to-day as a perfectly
safe figure from which to commence the building-up of a family dietary.
The Commission, however, deems it desirable, and even necessary, that definite dietetic
studies on a comprehensive scale should be undertaken in Australia under Government auspices.
In our Universities and in professional life, the men best qualified, for such investigations are too
fully occupied with their ordinary work to give the time that is necessary for such a research to
be of value. This end can only be achieved by a highly qualified observer or observers devoting
full time to the purposes of the inquiry. In particular, questions of diet in the tropical and
sub-tropical parts of Australia call for attention.


—
Engel.
Hubiier,
Atwater.
Zuutz.
American
Household.
L'uigworthy.
Lusk.
Man ..
1-00
1-00
1 -oo
roo
1-00
1-00
1-00
Wife ..
■857
1 -oo
•80
■80
•90
•83
•83
Boy of 10|
•571
•492
•60
•75
•75
•60
■83
Girl of 7
■186
•45
•50
•50
•75
■50
•70
Boy of 34
•371
■354
•10
•10
•15
•40
•50
Total, Equivalent
Man Units
3-285
3-296
3-30
3-15
3-55
3-33
3-86
Table 11.
Iiitor-Allied Food Commission.
Atwater.
Co-efficients.
Calories.
Co-efficients.
Calories.
Man
ro
5,000
1-0
5,850
Wife
•83
4,150
•8
4,680
Boy of 10| ..
•83
4,150
•6
3,510
Girl of 7
•70
3,500
•5
2,920
Boy of 3J
•50
2,500
•4
2,340
3'86
19,300
3-3
19,300
Co-Efficients.
The Unions contended that the Commission ought to adopt the co-efficients of the Inter-
Allied Scientific Food Commission rather than those of Atwater. The following table exhibits
various sets of co-efficients, including those just mentioned :
Table I.
(Adapted from p. 21 of Memorandum by Mr. Sawkins.)
Scale of Co-Efficients for Members of Typical Family.
The mean of the first six of the above authorities for the family is 3’368 equivalent man
units, approximating very closely to that of Atwater, adopted by the Commission.
The question of the set of co-efficients to be adopted in conjunction with the number of
Calories per man-unit is interwoven with the preceding part of this discussion, because in many
instances it occurs that an investigation has been made not with individuals but with families —
the investigator afterwards dissecting the total consumption in Calories of the family, and
assigning to each member that member’s share according to one or other set of co-efficients.
The position may be illustrated by assuming the consumption of the typical family to
be 19,300 Calories per day, and distributing this among the members of the family
according to the co-efficients of the Inter-Allied Food Commission and of Atwater.
It seems not improbable that, in adopting the higher co-efficients for wife and children here
referred to, the Inter-Allied Scientific Food Commission was influenced to some extent by the
consideration that the objective of its work was the rationing of entire populations, so that one
ground of the preference for the higher co-efficients may have been that these would permit of a
greater amount of food supply for the growing population of the Allied countries, with a
corresponding reduction for the parents, who may best be called upon to bear any shortening of the
food supply. It will be seen from Table 11. that, under the Inter-Allied Food Commission’s
co-efficients, all the children get more and both the parents less, than under Atwater’s
co-efficients, the family consumption being the same.
In his evidence in Melbourne Dr. Springthorpe urged that ’the co-efficients for young
children were too high, particularly in taking the consumption of the average of all children
up to five years of age as being half that of a man. He had never, he said, seen a child of five
eat half an average man’s consumption.
In Sydney, Acting-Professor Priestley, who had strongly advocated the new co-efficients, said
when the co-efficient for a child from o—s0 —5 was put to him in this homely way that it was too high,
that it was absurd that a child of 3 should eat half a workman’s amount, and that this served to
dis-establish the percentage [as being reliable] at once. (Qs. 45358 to 45360.)
Finding as to Co-Efficients.
This comment would seem unanswerable, and while recognising the very great weight
to be given to the decision of the Inter-Allied Scientific Food Commission, it has been
thought desirable to follow the co-efficients settled by Atwater, inasmuch as these are interwoven
with the standard of Calories for the man-unit ascertained by the same investigator and adopted
by this Commission, while the later co-efficients were probably adopted for the special circumstances
of the War, a view thought quite tenable by Professor Osborne, who had supported them.
(Evidence 24th September, 1920),


INDICATOR LIST.—FOOD.--WEEKLY CONSUMPTION.
Items.
Quantity.
Protein.
Fat.
Carbo-hydrates.
Calories.
G famines.
Grammes.
Grammes.
Bread
20 lbs.
726
108
4,762
23,520
Flour
3 „
157
14
1,020
4,953
Oatmeal
U „
no
49
460
2,787
Rice ..
k lb.
18
1
179
816
Sago and Cornflour
i
■> m
18
1
179
826
Eggs ..
1 doz.
81
65
922
Milk ..
7 quarts
270
317
397
5,688
Sugar..
51 lbs.
2,444
10,230
•Tarn . . -
2
5
1
452
1,890
Treacle
1 ib.
5
143
608
Butter
2 lbs.
9
769
7,208
*Beef
8
550
521
7,100
Mutton
■1 „
236
434
5,000
Fish ..
2
167
39
1,052
Bacon
i ib.
22
136
1,173
Fruit (fresh)
8 lbs.
18
7
435
1.9&8
Raisins
i Ib.
3
3
90
407
Currants
1
4 >>
2
2
71
320
Potatoes
11 lbs.
90
5
734
3,421
Onions
11 ..
3
1
97
174
Vegetables
8 „
33
8
147
800
Tea ..
1- lb.
, ,
. .
Coffee
1
4' >>
Total per Week ..
2,523
2,481
11,550
80,823
Per man per day
109
107
500
3,499
—
Protein grammes.
Fat grammes.
Calories per lb.
Lean
Moderate Fat
-•
70-375
67-125
48-125
82 ; 125
735
1,040
Mean of Lean and Moderate Fat
68-75
65-125
887-5
It will be seen by using Table 11. above that the following results in the nature of a
reductio ad absurdum arise from adopting Professor Osborne’s man-unit basis (5,000 Calories)
and his co-efficients, which produce a family total of 19,300 Calories, if the current (Atwater)
standard of 3,500 Calories for a man is sufficient
(1) A girl of 7 requires as much as a man at moderate muscular work requires,
viz., 3,500 C.
(2) A boy of 10J requires 18 per cent, more than such a man, viz., 4,150 C. instead
of 3,500 C.
(3) A woman also requires 18 per cent, more than such a man.
(4) Applying the prices used in the Indicator List, the typical family would need to
spend on Food alone nearly £4 10s. Od. per week.
Nor do the figures adopted by this Commission depend on the authority of Atwater alone,
since, as will be seen by Table 1. on page 42 they are within - 068 of the mean of several high
authorities in dietetics, including Atwater and his successor, Langworthy, whose figure is only
■O3 above Atwater.
To conclude, therefore, as to this branch of the inquiry, it has been decided to adhere to the
standard of Calories fixed by Atwater’s investigations for all the members of the typical family.
If it is thought that this standard or any part of it is in need of revision for Australian conditions,
that can be done by carrying out the local research previously suggested {vide p. 41).
Indicator List used to ascertain the Cost op Living with regard to Food.
Following out the principles already laid down in this Report, the Commission determined
that the following foods and quantities would be sufficient for a family consisting of a husband,
wife, and chi'dren aged respectively 104, 7, and 34 years, where the father of the family is engaged
in moderate muscular work.
The Calorie values here assigned to the respective foods are those adopted by the Food
Supply Committee of the Royal Society (1916), which are of the highest authority.
*ln this particular, viz., that of beef, a departure has been made by assuming that the type of beef ordinarily purchased and
consumed by Australians is the mean of lean and moderately fat beef, it being known that in general the Australian meat supply
is somewhat leaner than that of America or England. The following table exhibits the various standards dealt with :
Analysis of Beef .
The assumption here made results in a difference of about 53 Calories per man per day, making the basis for the man-unit
3,500 instead of 3,553.


INDICATOR LIST
For a Family op Five, consisting op
— FOOD PER WEEK.
Man, Wife, Boy 10|-,
Girl
7,
and Boy 3|
Melbourne
Sydli
ey.
Veekly
Cost/
.Brisbane.
Adelaide.
Pi
Perth.
Pf
Hobart.
Commodity.
Unit of
Measure-
ment.
Quantity.
Price.
Weekly
Cost.
Price.
A
Urice.
Weekly
Cost.
Price.
Weekly
Cost.
ice.
Weekly
Cost.
ice.
Weekly
Cost.
-i?.
d.
£
s.
d.
A*.
d.
£
<9.
d.
s.
d.
£
<s .
d.
A’.
d.
£
•S.
d.
d.
£
s .
d.
d.
£
d.
Bread
4-Jb. loaf
5 loaves
0
101
0
4
4.1
i
01
0
5
9 I
i
0
0
b
0
0
11
0
4
7
0
11
0
4
7
0
11
0
4
7
Flour
2-lb. bag
3 lbs.
0
0
0
0
9
0
(>
0
0
9
0
OH)
0
91
0
()
0
0
9
0
51
0
0
8
0
r>i
0
0
8
Oatmeal ..
lb.
U lbs.
0
4
0
0
0
0
4
0
0
6
0
~)}y
0
0
8}
0
b
0
0
71
0
5
0
0
71
0
41-
0
0
(ij
Rice
,,
1 lb...
0
71
0
0
35
0
71
0
0
3}
0
81:
0
O
4
0
8.1
0
0
41
0
8
0
0
4
0
8 1-
0
0
R
Sago
,,
1 lb-••
0
4-1,-
0
0
I
0
4
0
0
1
0
4
0
0
1
0
4
0
0
1
0
4
0
0
1
0
6
0
0
11
Cornflour ..
,,
11b...
0
91
0
0
24-
0
81
0
0
2
0
8
0
0
2
0
8
0
0
2
0
8
0
0
9
0
10
0
0
9L
Eggs
dozen
I dozen
2
0
0
2
0
2
5
0
2
5
I
9
0
1
9
1
111
0
]
m
1
0
0
0
1
10
0
1
10“
Milk
quart
7 qts.
0
8
0
4
8
0
8
0
4
s
0
7?
0
4
«i
0
7?
0
4
Hi
0
81
0
4
in
0
0
0
5
3
Sugar
ib.
5| lbs.
0
11
0
2
9
0
(i
0
2
9
0
(>
0
2
9
0
o
0
2
0
0
()
0
2
9
0
(i
0
2
9
Jam
,,
2 lbs.
0
91-
0
1
7
0
10
0
i
8
0
101
0
1
9
0
11
0
i
10
0
10
0
i
8
0
9. 1 ,
0
1
7
Treacle
,,
4 lb...
0
5.1
0
0
3
0
5
0
0
2|
0
5
0
0
21
0
i)
0
0
3
0
()
0
0
3
0
51
0
0
9 3.
Butter
,,
2 lbs.
9
10
0
5
8
2
8,1
0
5
5
2
41
0
4
9
2
8
0
5
4
2
8
0
5
4
2
10
0
5
8 1
Beef
,,
8 lbs.
1
1
0
8
8
0
11
0
7
4
0
81
0
5
8
0
11
0
7
4
0
10
0
0
8
1
2
0
9
4
Mutton
,,
4 lbs.
(»
10
0
3
4
0
9
0
3
0
0
9.1
0
3
2
0
11
0
3
8
0
71
0
o
0
1
i
0
4
4
Fish
2 lbs.
0
9
0
1
()
0
r>
6
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
9
0
1
0
0
9
0
i
0
■ 0
9
0
1
b
Bacon
,,
J lb...
2
1
0
1
0}
2
0
0
I
0
1
8
0
0
10
-■)
2
0
1
1
9
1
0
01
1
9 \
0
0
10|
Fruit
,,
8 lbs.
0
0
2
8
0
5
0
3
4
0
4
0
2
8
0
5
0
3
4
0
3.1
0
2
4
0
3
0
2
0
Raisins
,,
-i-ib...
0
111
0
0
3
0
10.1
0
(I
21
1
i
0
0
31
1
0
0
0
3
0
10
0
0
•M
I
0
0
0
3
Currants ..
,,
1 lb...
0
101
0
0
21
0
101
0
0
2'i
1
0
0
0
3
1
0
0
0
3
0
11
0
0
91!
1
0
0
0
3
Potatoes ..
14 lbs.
11 lbs.
1
10
0
]
5
2
4
0
1
10
2
51
0
1
Hi
2
2
0
1
81
3
91
0
9
4
2
0
0
1
7
Onions
lbs.
U lb.
0
3.1
0
0
N
0
4
0
0
6
0
4
0
0
6
0
4
0
0
6
0
4
0
0
0
0
4
0
0
6
Vegetables
,,
8 lbs.
0
2
0
1
4
0
9 L
0
1
t>
0
2
0
1
4
0
21
0
1
6
0
3
0
2
0
0
3
0
2
0
Tea
,,
i ib...
1
11
0
0
m
2
0
0
1
0
2
3
0
1
11
2
4
0
1
2
2
1
0
i
0.1
I
U
0
0
111
Coffee
,,
i lb.. .
2
0
0
0
(i
O
41
0
0
7
2
4
0
0
7
2
7
0
0
7 J
2
0
0
0
6
9
1
0
0
Condiments
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
2
6
11
2
6
8J
2
3
14
2
7
1 3
2
4
11|
2
8
111
As will be seen by the Indicator List, the physiological balance s duly observed,, but it is
desirab e to emphasize the point that the main feature in determining the kinds and weights to
foods has been the normal eating habits of the people, as far as it has been possible to ascertain
them. The amount of meat-stuffs is below what is generally believed to have been the average
consumption of meat, before the War and the drought of 1915 combined to raise meat prices to
a ieyel which is very much higher than the level in 1914. The amount of meat included in the
Indicator List is, however, approximately equal to that consumed according to the househo d
budgets received this year. Both with regard to food in general, and with regard to other expendi-
ture, these budgets are not very reliable, as indicating the amount normally purchased by thepeopie.
In every group of income, from those below £3 per week to those as high as £5 and over per week,
the budgets show that the average families were expending during the budget month considerably
more than their income. If this state of things were normal, then the tradesmen who purvey to the
househo der would have reached the Bankruptcy Court between tlie month of February, when the
budgets were taken, and the present date. The facts, however, suggest the conclusion that during
the budgeting period, knowing that the budgets were to be used for the purpose of arriving at the
basic wage, householders lived rather according to their liking than according to their means, or to
their normal habits.* This very fact, however, and it seems to be a fact, renders the budgets
exceptionally reliab e as an indication of the classes of food that are purchased when the people
are purchasing what they like to have.
The Commission would have had no hesitation in basing the cost of food upon
a dietary which would assume a return to the average consumption of meat in
1914 if it had considered that this consumption wms necessary for the health or
comfort of the community, since it could not be reasonably contended that the
standard of comfort in Australia ought to be lower in the present year than it was
in 1914. But the authorities seem to be overwhelming in support of the position that
the altered habit of our people, in consuming less meat, is far from inflicting any injury
to health or any hardship, provided that the total amount of food which is necessary
is obtained. The Commission has, therefore, accepted what appear to be the present habits of
the people in respect to the eating of meat.
Cost of Food in Indicator List.
The prices of the items of food included in the Indicator List are prices secured by inquiry
from firms who gave evidence before the Commission, and all relate to the end of October. Prices
for that month in all the capital cities were kindly supplied by the Commonwealth Statistician
and were used for comparative purposes, as well as for arriving at prices of some articles for which
information’ was not available or inadequate. It may be observed that the relative cost of the
items included in the Indicator List in the various capital cities agrees very closely with that
shown by the index-numbers for food and groceries for October, published by the Labour and
Industrial Branch of the Bureau of Census and Statistics.
* JS.O.-'-The Western Australian Budgets—in number showed a Calorie consumption of 3,622 in 1917 ; the budgets obtained by
this Commission show 4,150, taking in each case all families. It is impossible to believe that in 1920, with its higher prices as a
corrective, the people of the Commonwealth, as a normal thing, were eating 13 per cent, more than the people of Western Australia in 1917,


SECTION IV. —MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS.
Every householder knows that, apart from the outstanding questions of Rent, Food and
Clothing, there is a large number of items “ comprised in the ordinary expenditure of a house-
hold” (to quote the terms of Clause 1 of the Letters Patent), which absorb a substantial part of
the family income. Such items it is not easy to group into anything more definite than a Section
known as “ Miscellaneous Items.” The Federated Unions submitted a Claim, which included no
less than 198 separate articles, and which (it would appear) would cover every possible
expenditure, either to replenish household equipment or to add to the part to be taken by the
family in social and intellectual pleasures. The Claim is printed in Appendix I.
But while in the ordinary case, provision is necessary for a very extended list of separate
items under this heading, the position is changed when the case is to be considered of a family
which has grown up in the epoch during which wages have been subject to judicial determination.
It has been mentioned earlier in this Report that the ages of 104, 7, and 3.' years for the three
children commended themselves to the Commission as being the best approximation to the average
distribution of the ages of children in the typical family. And since Arbitration Courts have fixed
wages directly, and since also their awards have affected indirectly the level of wages paid in all
occupations throughout the Commonwealth, it is important to observe that, except in New South
Wales, it has been the universal practice of such tribunals to determine the basic wage on the
assumption that the wage-earner is called upon to provide for a wife and three children under
the age of 14 years. This assumption is known to be contrary to the statistical fact as to the
average number of children in Australian families, but the assumption is firmly rooted in Arbitra-
tion Court procedure. In New South Wales there is this difference, that the family taken for
the purpose of fixing the basic wage includes only two children. In the Queensland Industrial
Arbitration Act 1916, the necessity of awarding a wage for a family containing three dependent
children was imposed upon the Court by the provisions of the Statute itself. Except in the last-
mentioned instance, the assumption that the wage-earner has in all cases to support a wife and
three children has its origin only in the judicial carrying out of the power to award a minimum
wage.
Adopting, however, the assumption in question, as this Commission is bound to do under
Clause 1 of the Letters Patent, it has next to be pointed out that inasmuch as, for many years past,
the wage-earner is supposed to have received, speaking generally, a wage sufficient for the support
of a wife and three children, that wage-earner, in the typical family with which this Commission
is dealing, and of the ages which the Commission has selected as the fairest in point of distribution,
has been receiving, in the form of wages, the following amounts :
Peeiod.
Between Marriage and Birth of eldest child
~ Birth of eldest and of second child (viz., 3| years)
~ Birth of second and of third child (viz., 3| years)
The Cost of Maintaining—
Three non-existent children.
Two non-existent children.
One non-existent child.
Of course, previously to marriage, the wage-earner will have received wages on the assumption
of his having to support a wife also.
In view of these facts, it has seemed to the Commission that a great number of items included
in the Federated Unions’ Claim under this section ought not to be entertained, because they relate
to a replenishment of household equipment in regard to which there will have been substantial
opportunities of keeping that equipment in a sufficient condition as to number, quantity, and
efficiency for the typical family to carry on without any new expenditure until the eldest child
ceases to be wholly dependent and may become a contributor to the family purse. A comparison
of the Unions’ Claim with the articles which have been, after this process of elimination, admitted
for the purpose of determining the amount necessary for Miscellaneous Items, will show what
articles, or groups of articles, have been excluded by the decision here mentioned. But, with
regard to some other articles for which no amount has been allowed under the heading of Miscel-
laneous Items, the Commission’s disallowance of such articles rests upon different grounds, and
rejected items of the Claim to which this remark applies will now be considered.
Life Insurance.
The Commission records its considered conviction that life insurance for the bread-winner
of the family is one essential of a reasonable standard of comfort. Parents who are ordinarily
thoughtful for the future of their children can hardly have any comfort of mind, though they
may have sufficient for the daily satisfaction of ordinary material wants and even for the higher
demands of human beings living in a civilized epoch and community, so long as they are pressed
by the fear that everything may be struck away by the death of the bread-winner himself.


But, though convinced of the necessity for life insurance for the bread-winner as an element
of a reasonable standard of comfort, the Commission is equally clear that it is impossible to include
provision for this in the cost of living, when that is intended to be the foundation of the basic wage.
Looking again at the typical family, as that term has been interpreted by the Commission, the
Commission has no means of deciding what measure of actuarial probability there is that such a
family will be deprived ol the husband and father while the family still retains in other respects
its present structure. That probability will depend upon the present age and condition of health,
of the father ; upon the numerous possible accidents, either of injury or disease ; and it may even
include considering the possibility of the widow re-marrying. In the absence of any measure of
the average father's expectancy of life, no scale of premiums can be applied. So far as the
amount of the suggested insurance policy is concerned, that will depend upon circumstances
equally numerous and complex. Moreover, the Commission’s task is to find the cost of
living on the assumption that the husband’s needs are provided for, whereas upon his death,
the structure of the family changes. In his valuable evidence before the Commission in
Melbourne, Mr. C. H. Wickens, Supervisor of Census, Commonwealth Statistician’s Depart-
ment, gave various figures showing the amount of premium that would be necessary in
order to ensure given sums by way of insurance to the widow of a working man. Mr.
Wickens expressed the opinion, hovrever, that the difficulties could not be met satisfactorily
by any scheme which would add the cost of meeting the premium for life insurance to the basic
wage to be paid by employers. It is obvious that a very great number of employees who
are heads of the typical family will not die during the period when that family is dependent upon
them, and to include provision for life insurance in the basic wage to be paid to all married or
unmarried bread-winners, with or without the children of the typical family, or without any
children whatever, and whether the husband survives the period of dependence of all or any of
the children, or survives his wife, would be to add an enormous burden to the obligations of
employers in order to secure benefits which a great number, probably a very large majority,
of employees, would never need. Mr. Wickens’ evidence showed that he had made a very
thorough study of the systems of national insurance that have been adopted in other parts
of the world, and all such systems have this marked superiority over any random scheme of paying
wages to include life insurance (which may or may not be taken out with the wage-element so
provided) that it is possible, by an actuarial survey of the life statistics and occupations of the
whole community, both to pool the liabilities and to adjust securely the benefits, in such a way as
to avoid diverting large sums of money into channels of little fruitfulness.
In conclusion, the Commission wishes to state with the utmost clearness that in excluding
any provision for so vital a part of the comfort of a family as insurance against the death of the
bread-winner, it has done so in the hope that National Insurance for such a contingency will be
undertaken at an early date under Government auspices.
Unemployment Insurance.
For similar reasons the Commission has not included any amount for unemployment
insurance, as to which an additional reason exists for excluding it. It is customary for Arbitration
Courts, when dealing with individual occupations in which unemployment frequently occurs from
causes inherent in the occupation, so to adjust the minimum wage to be paid under awards as to
provide that on the average of the figures, including employment and unemployment, the wage-
earner shall always receive sufficient to cover the cost of living. This method has the great
advantage over the proposal to include insurance against unemployment as a uniform part of
the basic wage, that it permits of discrimination between occupations according to the extent
to which they are exposed to periods of unemployment.
Old-Age Annuity.
Included amongst other suggestions of the Federated Unions was a proposal that
the cost of living, and subsequently the basic wage, should be such as to provide for the
wage-earner leaving off work at 60, and then having an annuity purchased out of the amount so
included in the basic wage. This proposition is open to all the difficulties pointed out under the
heading “ Life Insurance ” (p. 45), but in addition there is the objection that to do what
is proposed would be to intrude upon a province already occupied by legislation, viz., the Old-
age Pensions Act. If the present provisions of that Act are inadequate, it is not for this Commis-
sion to suggest a change of policy involving its repeal and the substitution of a new system —that
of including in the basic w r age a sum sufficient for the premiums of an annuitant’s policy. The
sum suggested by the Federated Unions was such as would buy an annuity of 30s. per week
each for man and wife.


Variation op Basic Wage according to the World’s Production.
One witness was called in support of the contention of the Federated Unions that a scheme
should be recommended by the Commission, under which, it was alleged, the world’s productivity
might be reflected in periodical adjustments of the basic wage and other wages. Apart from
the time needed to design, and the expense necessary to equip, the colossal apparatus that would
be required to measure up the world’s relative productivity from period to period and declare and
apply the results of the computation, the matter is outside the Commission’s function as limited
by Clause 3 of the Letters Patent. ' That function is to suggest adjustment of the basic wage,
not according to relative world-productivity (which might result in lowering or raising
the Australian standard), but to the fluctuation in purchasing-power of money ; the task
of the Commission therefore is not to re-organize the distribution of wealth, but the simpler
one of determining what is essential for a reasonable standard of comfort, immediately and
permanently obtainable. It is inevitable that if there are richer outputs throughout the world
they will be accompanied in this century by attention to the allocation of the fruits of human
energy and skill, but other means for this are being explored, and will, it is hoped, be provided
in every country that works and is self-governing.
Church and Charity.
No amount has been included by the Commission under this head, on the ground that for
the basic wage-earner money demands for these purposes are not likely to be at all a substantial
item of expenditure. There was no evidence submitted which would enable even an approxima-
tion to be made to the amount which wage-earners contribute to the support of any church, while,
as to,money-donations for charity, any sum allotted, if used rigidly for that purpose only, would be
in reality the charity of the employer, and, if not so used, should not be included in a finding as to
the cost of living. People of limited means help one another wonderfully here, as in all countries,
but this help is not so much in money-donations as in the kindly personal offices and sacrifices
that make such mutual help far more acceptable and useful.
Alcoholic and “ Soft ” Beverages.
This item was included by the Federated Unions in the Claim for Miscellaneous Items.
There seems to be no reason for regarding the regular consumption of alcoholic or soft drinks as
essential to a reasonable standard of comfort. No amount, therefore, has been included under this
head. The Commission’s decision involves no consideration either of the desirability or
undesirability of the use of alcoholic or soft drinks.
Domestic Assistance.
It was pressed upon the Comjmission that the practice is almost universal for wives in the
typical family to do the whole of the work, year in and year out, of the home, without any domestic
assistance. It was pointed out that in the Tentative Budget Inquiry in the United States, alluded
to on page 17 of this Report, there was included an item for domestic assistance on one
day in each week at a cost of $2 (= Bs. 4d.) It was therefore asked that an amount which
would permit of the wife having assistance for a period of four weeks annually should be included
in the cost of living. It cannot be disputed that housewives in a typical family are amongst the
most strenuous toilers in the whole community. To cook, wash, sew, and keep the house clean
and bright for such a family requires physical work, some of it arduous, during a long stretch of
hours, and with rare intervals of relief, during the whole currency of the year.
In dealing with the cost of Clothing the Commission declined to adopt the argument that
all clothing should be obtained upon a ready-made footing, as was agreed should be the case for
female employees by the joint committee of employer and employee representatives in a recom-
mendation to the New South Wales Board of Trade in 1919. It was thought by the Commission
that savings by cutting-down, &c., are an admirable form of thrift, and that the work involved is
not in itself the most laborious of a housewife’s duties. Indeed, it is far from distasteful, as
appealing to the exercise of skill and an age-long feminine art.
It seems just, however, that in the course of a year the housewife should have some reward
for her skill in these and similar savings, and definite relief from incessant household work.
Domestic assistance every week could not possibly be obtained- —the necessary supply not being
in the country —and therefore the only way in which relaxation can be provided is in the shape of
an annual holiday, and for this there has been included the sum of £4 per annum. It is believed
that this inclusion will benefit greatly the health of wives and mothers who carry daily and
cheerfully a proportion, seldom recognised, of the nation’s burden of work.


Tuition in Music and Art.
Some parents may feel keenly tin ir inability to provide tuition for children who possess
any exceptional gift in music or any other art. A housewife who had, as she put it, by iron
discipline, kept every member of the family up to some definite task, and who, by careful study
(which even included the study of the Calorie values, &c., of foods), was able to make an
inadequate income still provide her husband and children with a sufficiency of food, and
who was, moreover, a skilful dressmaker, making all her own and her children’s clothes,
was asked by counsel for the Federated Unions whether she was not at times tired of
“ this slavery.” While making the spirited answer that to work for her husband and children
was not slavery, she yet complained that two of her children had had to go to work in order to
help the family, though each of them, she said, had some special talent which she could not afford
to develop.
The Commission has to take the evidence of witnesses as a whole and not stress the view
of any one witness. Very little evidence- beyond mere suggestion- was called by the Federated
Unions as to this item in their claim. No evidence was tendered upon the question whether the
daily presence of possible singers or potential artists in the house would add to the reasonable
standard of comfort of a family of five.
To claims such as that of the witness mentioned, the real answer is that such cases,
being based upon exceptional gifts, come rather within the sphere of general action in regard
to musical education or tuition in art than within the sphere of the cost of living according to
average needs. From this point of view, such a claim is outside the function of the Commission
to consider.
Miscellaneous Items included.
Passing now to the articles in the claim for Miscellaneous Items, which can, after the matters
already dealt with have been taken into consideration, be justly included in what is necessary for
a reasonable standard of comfort, they are comprised in the following list ;• —
(1) Fuel and Lighting.
(2) Groceries, other than food.
(3) Renewal of brush-ware, &c.
(4) Renewal of household drapery.
(5) Renewal of Crockery, Glassware, &c.
(6) Union and Lodge dues.
(7) Medicine and Dentist.
(8) Recreation, amusement, and library.
(9) Fares.
(10) School requisites.
(1) Fuel and Lighting.
Fuel.
Evidence regarding fuel requirements could not be obtained on any statistical basis,
but the Commission heard the evidence of wood and coal merchants who were familiar with the
ordinary purchases of a family such as that now in question, and also the evidence of house-
holder witnesses, as to the amount consumed during winter and summer respectively. From
these data, the Commission determined upon an annual sum which appears in the Indicator List
printed below. The amount thus determined will, according to other evidence, be adequate
for gas, where that is used in substitution for wood and coal, for the purposes of cooking and
warmth.
Lighting.
In respect to lighting expenses, the local gas companies and the electric supply companies
or authorities in each State assisted the Commission by preparing well thought-out returns
from their books as to the cost of lighting a five-roomed house occupied by such a family as
that which is the subject of this inquiry.
In the case of electric light supply and of gas supply for lighting, it was necessary to guard
against any confusion which might arise from electric light consumers using the current for the
purpose of an electric iron, or in the case of gas consumers from their using gas for cooking as
well as for lighting. The amount which the Commission has determined for lighting, therefore,
excludes such user whether of electric current or of gas, and is also, in the opinion of the Com-
mission, a fair average amount to cover lighting by kerosene, where that illuminant has still to be
used. The uniform charge, therefore, is included in this Report under the heading of Lighting
simply.


(2) Groceries, other than Food.
These include certain laundry and kitchen requisites. Certain articles have not been
included which recur so infrequently that provision can be made for them out of the total
weekly amount set down.
(3) Renewal of Brush-ware, Ac.
The amount allowed under this heading includes household and toilet brush-ware, and some
few kitchen utensils, the wear of which makes the recurring expenditure upon them sufficiently
frequent to justify their inclusion.
(4) Renewal'of Household Drapery.
Under this important section of Miscellaneous Items, a great amount of evidence was
collected, both from trade witnesses and from householders. As in the case of Clothing, trade
witnesses expressed their opinion as to the durability of household drapery of given quality. In
the case of blankets, in particular, it was possible to obtain evidence with a fair amount of
definition, since there is considerable standardization of these articles, which, in the case of
Australian manufacture, includes sizes and weights. Moreover, apart from specific standardiza-
tion, certain makes and qualities are sufficiently known to make possible an estimation of cost
by reference to such recognised lines.
The method of calculation in this case has been to apply the evidence as to the duration
of articles of a given quality (this being closely related to price) in such a way as to bring out
the amount annually necessary for replacement, as was done in the case of Clothing.
(5) Renewal of Crockery, Glassware, Etc.
This is an item which may vary indefinitely in different homes, but the amount that has
been fixed for it is limited to necessary articles most often broken, such as cups, plates, &c. It
has been assumed that in the average household such articles will be handled with due care.
(6) Union and Lodge Dues.
Union.
Since the majority of employees belong to a Union, and since in all Arbitration Courts
which are empowered to award a living or a basic wage, the Court can only be moved by Unions
as applicants, the ordinary subscription fees to a Union are a normal part of the cost of living.
They have been easily and precisely ascertained upon the evidence of Union Secretaries.
Lodge.
Again, the majority of employees are members of some Benefit Society, and the
Lodge subscription covers medical attendance and medicines ordered by the doctor for the family,
and sick pay for the bread-winner. As the result of a highly-developed system of management,
which, for many years, has been under State supervision and audit, the Friendly Societies have
now provided, with respect to sickness in the family, that economy in contribution due to
co-operation which has been indicated as one of the advantages of a scheme of national insurance
against the death of the bread-winner. Had it not been for this, the Commission would have had
great difficulty in determining (even if it had been possible to do so at all) the amount proper to
cover these inevitable expenses, but as it is, it may be said that, as a result of experience, the
relations between risks and benefits have adjusted themselves. The Commission has accordingly
taken from the statistical data provided by officials dealing with the affairs of Friendly Societies,
the average contributions for Lodge benefits as being a fair, convenient and just measure of the
provision to be included in the cost of living for sickness in the typical family.
(7) Medicine and Dentist.
In most of the States there exist voluntary associations of men engaged in the profession
of dentistry which are doing excellent work in educating the public to the importance of the care
of the teeth. It is commonly said that Australians, as a race, have not good teeth, and that a
very large number of rejections of recruits took place on this account. Office holders from such
associations came before the Commission and explained what was being done in each State by way
of community action to bring about a general spread of reform in caring for the teeth. The system
adopted by the Education Department of New South Wales of dental examination of children,
coupled with the State’s provision for free dental attention in some cities, and for travelling dental
hospitals visiting country schools, was alluded to by the President of the Victorian Odontological
Society, in terms of generous appreciation. It appears to the Commission that a comprehensive
scheme of examination of teeth, while children are at the State schools, is the only hope
of bringing needed improvement in this vital matter, but in the absence of provision at all
F. 17723.—4


large enough in scale to be adequate, the Commission considered the evidence of dentists holding
representative positions who set out what they believed to be the average necessity for the typical
family in the way of dental attention and its cost. The Commission has not thought it necessary
to attempt to divide with accuracy the separate needs of individual members of the family, but
has included a sum thought to be sufficient as a general amount to be expended in the year.
(8) Amusement, Recreation, and Library.
The claim of the Federated Unions with regard to recreation and amusement was supported
by the argument that families should have a due share of the intellectual and social enjoyments
of life. The argument may be conceded to be just, but it is not to be forgotten that the best
part of such enjoyments is often to be found in a family’s own resources when this family is
not oppressed by poverty or the fear of poverty. The mistake is in supposing that life has no
pleasures other than bought excitements. It is probable that few communities possess easier
access, or access to a greater variety, of pleasure than the Australian community possesses, and
can exploit at little, if any, cost in money. Nor could anything be done to earmark any sum for
recreations of an intellectual character. The Commission has, therefore, included a sum under
the one heading of Recreation, Amusement, and Library, leaving the use of the sum thus included
to the choice of the wage-earner. The sum thus provided would, it has been considered, enable
a family to procure a moderate measure of amusement or recreation. Nothing has been included
for magazines, as to which the Tentative Budget Inquiry in the United States provided at least
one per week.
(9) Fares.
In all the capital cities a mass of figures and calculations was submitted bearing on the
number of passengers carried on the trains or trams from different suburban stations to the centre
of the city, the cost of monthly tickets from different distances, and similar matters of transport
statistics. It is, however, impossible to deduce any working rule from such figures, and the
Commission has provided for fares to and from work, bearing in mind the following principles.
1. In fixing the amount to be included in Rent the Commission treated each capital city as
one area.
2. In the industrial districts a great many employees live within walking distance of their
work. Where that is the case, the saving is likely to be balanced by an increase over and above
the average rental of the metropolitan area treated as a whole.
3. Broadly speaking, residents of outlying districts will pay as much less in rent as they
do more in fares from their district to the mean zone of the whole area.
4. A sum of Is. 6d. per week for all employees has been estimated as being, for Melbourne
the average amount necessary for a journey each way on six working days. This permits of the
worker travelling by train or tram a distance such as is travelled by the average of workers.
The sums for other cities have been assessed on the same footing.
5. Nothing has been allowed for exceptional cases such as are dealt with by the Courts in
computing travelling time allowances or fares to distant places.
Finally the Commission has included such fares as are necessary, in addition to those
of the head of the family in going to and coming from work, e.g., fares for the wife when
doing her shopping, and for all the members of the family, either in visiting places of
amusement, or in occasional seaside trips or other similar requirements.
(10) School Requisites.
The practice varies in different States as to the extent to which the State, in addition to
providing free teaching, also provides free school books and free materials. In no State is this
done completely, but in each of the States, the Department of Education was able to furnish the
Commission with an exact statement as to details, whether of books or of writing or other school
material, which it is necessary to buy, apart from the supplies the Department itself issues.
The amount included for the respective States under this heading is, therefore, the result of
these official communications.


Melbourne.
—
Annual.
Weekly.
S. d.
s. d. s. d.
Fuel and Light—
Fuel, 1J cwt. wood, at 2s. 6d.
3 9
Lighting
1 0
4 9
Groceries (not Food) ..
1 6
Renewals of Household Utensils (General and Cooking) ..
0 6
Renewals of Household Drapery, &c.—
1 pair D.B. Blankets, to last 15 years, at 65s. each
4 3
2 pairs S.B. „ „ 15 ,, 37s. 6d. ,,
5 0
1 D.B. Quilt, „ 15 „ 69s. 6d. ,, .. ..
4 6
2 S.B. Quilts, „ 10 „ 21s. „
4 3
1 pair D.B. Sheets ,, 2 „ 28s. 6d. „
14 3
2 pairs S.B. ,, ,, 2 ,, 19s. 7d. ,,
19 7
5 Pillow Slips ,, 1 „ 2s. 6d. ,,
12 6
3 Towels, ,, 1 „ 3s. 6d. ,,
10 6
1 Table Cloth „ 5 ,, 17s. 6d. ,,
3 6
5 Serviettes, ,, 5 ,, 2s. ,, ..
2 0
2 pairs Window Curtains, ,, 4 ,, 25s. ,,
12 6
1 9
Renewal of Household Crockery, Glassware, and Cutlery
0 4}
Union Dues
0 6
Lodge Dues
1 3
Medicine, Dentist, &c.
0 9
Domestic Assistance
1 6
Newspapers, Stationery, and Stamps . .
1 0
Recreation, Amusements, and Library
2 0
Smoking
2 0
Barber
0 3
Fares . . .. .. .. .. ....
2 6
School Requisites
0 3
1 0 10|
Weekly Cost of
Miscellaneous Items.
Particulars.
Melbourne.
Sydney.
Brisbane.
Adelaide.
Perth.
Hobart.
•
£
s.
d.
£
8.
d.
£
8.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
6‘.
d.
£
s.
d.
Fuel and Light
0
4
9
0
4
n
0
3
n
0
4
3
0
5
0
0
3
n
Groceries (not Food) ..
0
1
6
0
1
6
0
1
5
0
1
6
0
1
6
0
1
7
Renewal of Household Utensils
0
0
6
0
0
6
0
0
6
0
0
6
0
0
6
0
0
6
„ „ Drapery
0
1
9
0
1
9
0
1
9
0
1
9
0
1
9
0
1
9
„ „ Crockery,
&c.
0
0
44
0
0
4>
0
0
44
0
0
11
*2
0
0
4->
0
0
44
Union Dues ..
0
0
6
0
0
6
0
0
6
0
0
6
0
0
6
0
0
6
Lodge Dues ..
0
1
3
0
1
3
0
1
3
0
1
3
0
1
3
0
1
3
Medicine, Dentist, &c.
0
0
9
0
0
9
0
0
9
0
0
9
0
0
9
0
0
9
Domestic Assistance ..
0
1
6
0
1
6
0
1
6
0
1
6
0
1
6
0
1
6
Newspapers, Stationery, and
Stamps
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
3
0
1
0
Recreation, Amusements, Library
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
Smoking .. ..
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
Barber
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
3
Fares
0
2
6
0
3
4
0
3
4
0
3
4
0
3
4
0
2
G
School Requisites
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
3
1
0
104
1
1
4
1
0
1
1
1
24
1
2
24
0
19
10
INDICATOR LIST.—MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS.
The cost for items and service included in the allowance for miscellaneous expenditure
has been based upon prices on November 1, 1920, in Melbourne, with the necessary variations for
the other cities where variations occur. It will be obvious that for such items as union and lodge
dues, medicine, dentist, &c., recreation, smoking, and barber, the allowance must be the same
for each city. The variation in prices of fuel and light, groceries (not food), fares, and school
requisites, where such occur, has been allowed for.
The aggregate of all sections of the Cost of Living will be found on page 58, and the
details of all sections on page 59.


1914.—COST OF CLOTHING.
—
Melbourne.
Sydney.
Brisbane.
Adelaide,
Perth.
Hobart.
-v. d.
*. d.
s. d.
-v. d.
a. d.
a. d.
Weekly cost
17 4
16 3
15 7
17 0
16 9
17 7
DIVISION II.
THE CORRESPONDING COST OF LIVING IN 1914-1920.
In the second clause of the Letters Patent the Commission was directed to ascertain the
actual corresponding cost of living for the years from 1914 to the present time. The Com-
mission has so far been able to complete this branch of its investigation for the year 1914
only, and it has decided to furnish a report in this Division with regard to that year, and to
await further direction from your Excellency as. to completing the task under Clause 2 in respect
of the subsequent intervening years.
The determination of the cost of living for 1914 has been made upon the footing that the
same standard of comfort should be regarded as having been reasonable in that year as is found
by the Commission to be a reasonable standard in the present year. That being so, the task
under Clause 2 becomes almost entirely a matter of statistics, and the methods adopted may
therefore be shortly stated under the different heads or divisions of the cost of living that have
been already adopted.
Rent.
The rent stated below as part of the cost of living in 1914 is the rent for a house similar in
all respects to that described on page 22 of this Report, but inasmuch as there are no statistical
returns limited to the rent of houses of that description, it is necessary to adopt as a modifying
factor for bringing the present day rent of such a house back to the 1914 level, a figure which has
been obtained by accepting the Commonwealth Statistician’s ratio between the rents of 5-roomed
houses as to which he collected information in 1920 and the rents for which returns were sent to
him in 1914. This it has been safe to do because the type of house as to which house-agents have
been for years past sending in their returns to the Commonwealth Statistician has been the
same throughout the intervening period, and moreover house-agents have been, so the
Commission ascertained during- the taking of evidence, in the habit of filling in their
returns period by period from the rents of the same houses as far as possible. To apply, therefore,
to the 5-roomed house of the type determined upon by this Commission the Commonwealth
Statistician’s ratio between the rents of 5-roomed houses in 1920 and the rents of similar houses
in 1914 involves only one element of hypothesis, and that is, that the rents for a house of this
kind have fluctuated pari passu with the rent's for other 5-roomed houses dealt with in the
Commonwealth Statistician’s computations. The result of applying this method will be found in
the first column of the Table on the next page.
Clothing.
With regard to Clothing, the Commission has taken into consideration the following matters
in ascertaining the proportion by which the cost of living at the present time exceeds the 1914
figure.
1. The Indicator List determined upon has been regarded as furnishing the standard of
jiving appropriate to the year 1914, the Commission having already, in determining upon articles
and qualities for the purpose of this inquiry, followed the principle that the standard of 1914
was not now to be lowered.
2. The traders in Melbourne who furnished the articles in the Indicator List have given
their valuation of those articles in 1914. From these valuations a ratio has been obtained between
1914 and 1920 prices for Melbourne, and this ratio has been used for the other capitals upon the
assumption, which woul d appear a sound one, that the rate of increase in price over so large a
number of articles and so wide a period will have been substantially the same in all capital cities^
3. As a check upon this method a list has been made of fair average quality garments of
the kind and of the number specified in the Indicator Lists, and the prices as in 1914 and in
1920 from the same traders’ catalogues have been calculated so as to arrive at totals for each
of the years compared.
In view of these considerations the Commission has come to the determination that
the cost of the articles included in the total of the Indicator List (before any deduction was made
either for purchasing at sales or for adaptation of discarded garments) was as shown in the
Table below :■ —
Deducting as before {vide p. 33 of this Report) 8 per cent, of this amount for the
causes mentioned earlier the final result as the cost of Clothing in 1914 is shown in the Table
on the next page.


—•
Melbourne.
Sydney.
Brisbane.
Adelaide.
Perth.
Hobart.
£
5.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
S.
d.
£
S.
d.
£
S,
d.
Rent
0
16
3
1
0
0
0
13
11
0 16
7
0
16
5
0
11
10
Food
1
2
9
1
4
0
1
3
10
1
5
7
1
8
4
1
5
9
Clothing
0 15
11
0
14
11
0
14
4
0
15
8
0 15
5
0 16
2
Fuel and Light
0
2
9
0
3
0
0
2
1
0
2
10
0
2
11
0
2
3
Groceries (not Food) ..
0
0
9
0
0
9
0
0
10
0
0 10
0
0
11
0
0
9
Renewals of Household Utensils,
Drapery, and Crockery
0
0
10
0
0
10
0
0
10
0
0
10
0
0
10
0
0 10
Union Dues ..
0
0
6
0
0
6
0
0
6
0
0
6
0
0
6
0
0
6
Lodge Dues
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
Medicine, Dentist, &c.
0
0
9
0
0
9
0
0
9
0
0
9
0
0
9
0
0
9
Newspapers, Stationery,
and
Stamps
0
0
71
1 2
0
0
n
0
0
n
0
0
74
0
0
71
* 2
0
0
7*
Recreation ..
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
Smoking
0
1
4
0
1
4
0
1
4
0
1
4
0
1
4
0
1
4
Domestic Assistance ..
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
Barber
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
Fares
0
2
0
0
2
7
0
2
7
0
2
7
0
2
7
0
2
0
School Requisites
0
0
H
0
0
H
0
0
n
0
0
i*
0
0
1*
3
7
9
3
12
H
3
4 11
3
11
5
3
13
11
3
6
1
Table.
—
Rent.
Clothing.
Food.
Miscellaneous.
Total.
Percentage of
Increase, 1914 — 1920.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£
s.
d.
£ s.
d.
£ s. d.
Melbourne ..
0 16 3
0 15 11
1
2
9
0 12
10
3 7 9
71-95
Sydney
I 0 0
0 14 11
1
4
0
0 13
7
3 12 6
61-38
Brisbane
0 13 11
0 14 4
1
3
10
0 12
10
3 4 11
63-54
Adelaide
0 16 7
0 15 8
1
5
7
0 13
7
3 11 5
62-54
Perth
0 16 Q
0 13 5
1
8
4
0 13
9
3 13 11
54-11
Hobart
0 11 10
0 16 2
1
6
9
0 12
4
3 6 1
76-92
Food and Groceries.
In this Section it was, as a rule, only necessary to apply prices supplied by the courtesy
of the Commonwealth Statistician to the Indicator List mentioned on page 44 of this
Report, but where the prices were not available from this source, prices obtained from various
traders were utilized.
It is true that in one instance, viz., that of Meat, the consumption in 1914 constituted a
greater proportion of the food of the family than in 1920. On the other hand, meat was in that year
very much cheaper in comparison with other main foods than it is now ; but a conclusive reason
for making the finding for 1914 upon the basis of the Indicator List mentioned above is that though
the eating habits of the people were in respect of meat different in 1914, yet in that year the Food
described in the Indicator List would have provided a reasonable standard of comfort in the
ordinary acceptation of the term, just as in 1920. In applying the Commonwealth Statistician’s
prices to the Indicator List, use has also been made of the very elaborate list of prices and brands
during 1914 of commodities manufactured and prepared in Victoria, and of the list of grocery
prices (Melbourne) which are to be found as Appendices to the Inter-State Commission Report on
Groceries (No. 6 Prices Investigation, March, 1918). The cost of living thus ascertained for Food
is shown in the Table below.
Miscellaneous Items.
Methods described under the preceding three sections have been followed under this
the remaining one, but it has been possible to apply them with a greater use of direct comparison
than of percentage ratios. In this case, however, where the items are somewhat diversified, it is
not necessary to go into detail with regard to each item and the way in which its cost in 1914 has
been computed. The total cost in 1914 under the heading Miscellaneous Items is to be found
in the Table below.
Total Cost of Living, 1914.
The following Table shows for each city the relative cost in 1914 of all the items which
go to make up the cost of living
Conclusion.
In answer to Clause 2 of the Letters Patent the Commission finds that the actual cost of
living in 1914 corresponding with the cost of living according to reasonable standards of comfort
in 1920 is made up of the following sections :■ —


Observations as to the Basic Wage in 1914.
It will be observed that the cost of living ascertained by the preceding methods for
1914 is higher than the basic wage or than the minimum wage which was ordinarily awarded
by various Arbitration Tribunals within the Commonwealth. The reasons for this will be found
in the discussion as to the Adjustment of the Harvester Basic Wage on pp. 11 et seq.
Shortly stated, the main reason for the difference between the finding given by the
Commission and the various basic or minimum wage levels that were in force in the Commonwealth
in 1914 is that the various Courts, in the circumstances under which they made their awards,
adopted certain working assumptions, whereas the opportunity has now been for the first
time provided by your Excellency’s Letters Patent to investigate by continuous public
examination the extent to which these working assumptions are found to be borne out by the
facts with regard to the actual cost of living according to current standards of reasonable comfort.


DIVISION III.
AUTOMATIC ADJUSTMENT OF THE BASIC WAGE.
Method of Adjustment.
The object which it is desired to attain by a scheme for the automat e adjustment of the
bas'c wage is stated in the speech of the Prime Minister already quoted: “ That within the limits
of the basic wage at least the sovereign shall always purchase the same amount of the necessaries
of life.” (In this quotation as in Clause 3, the “ sovereign” is.to be regarded as synonymous with
the pound sterling). Throughout the investigation and more particularly in determining upon
the methods or principle of ascertaining the cost of each section of living expenses, the Commission
has borne in mind the necessity of adopting such methods as would result in creating the opportunity
for devising a practically workable scheme under Clause 3 of the Letters Patent.
Had the scope of the inquiry of the Commission been confined to the actual cost of living
at the present time its proceedings would have been simplified. But under Clause 3 of the
“ Letters Patent ” the Commission has to inquire “ how the basic wage may be auto-
matically adjusted to the rise and fall from time to time of the purchasing power of the sovereign.”
The term automatic is used in this clause, and the Commission has to consider what it means.
It is clear that the purchasing power of the sovereign will not automatically adjust itself to the
basic wage unless the basic wage is regulated. The moving force which is to “ automatically ”
adjust the basic wage to the rise and fall from time to time of the purchasing power of the sovereign
must be derived from without.
The Basic Wage should follow as closely and as rapidly as practicable the variations in the
purchasing power of the pound sterling so that the wage earned will always purchase the same
number, quantity, and quality of those articles which go to make up reasonable standards
of comfort without having an investigation before a Wages Board, Arbitration Court, or other
industrial tribunal, often a slow and costly process.
It would, therefore, appear that this Commission is asked to suggest some simple and effec-
tive method whereby the above result might be obtained.
First, it will be necessary to devise some automatic machinery whereby the variations in
the purchasing power can be ascertained at regular stated periods.
In the United States, the Bureau of Labour Statistics of the Labour Department carries
out all inquiries regarding industrial matters. This Commission does not suggest the creation
of a new Department of Labour, but it advises that a separate Bureau for the purpose of collecting
the necessary data should be established, for which the officers should be drawn from existing
departments where similar work is already done so that no new appointments would be necessary.
With the Indicator Lists in Part I, the variations would be adjusted according to the following
sections:—
1. Kent.
2. Clothing.
3. Food.
4. Miscellaneous.
The next or second step will be to give effect to the finding as to the cost of living based
upon the results so obtained. This could be done in the following manner.
Upon receipt of a certificate from the chief officer of the Bureau at regular periods
the Commonwealth Arbitration Court, after satisfying itself of the accuracy of the finding stated
in the certificate, would apply that finding in determining the basic wage to be legalized by
whatever methods Parliament deems fit to prescribe.
Assuming that the findings of the Commission under Clause 1. of the Letters Patent are
made the basic wage by some form of legislative action, the Commission does not think it
desirable to prescribe minutely the methods to be adopted by such a Bureau for the purpose
of bringing the basic wage into line with prices. It would, e.g., be for the Bureau to ascertain
at the prescribed period, the rent of such a house as has been described in this Report.
The methods might be those adopted by the Commission or such better methods as time
might suggest. With regard to Clothing the need is specially imperative for a practical
authority to closely order the comparisons from time to time of prices and qualities of the
items in the Indicator List. A complete selection of clothing according to the prices in those
lists has been made by the Commission and can be retained as standards which could provide
one method of tracing fluctuations in price. But this requires care and personal inquiry from
traders. Other methods and checks are various but they need not be detailed. A similar but
easier task of the Bureau would be to apply current prices to the Indicator List of Food and to
the Itemized List of Miscellaneous Expenditure set out in the Report.
Length of Interval for Automatic Adjustment of the Basic Wage. .
Difficult questions arise in determining how long the interval should be between each
declaration as to the cost of living. The following matters have to be borne in mind. First,
during the interval between declarations the worker who obtains a basic wage as fixed at the


beginning of the interval will be worse off or better off according as the cost of living goes up or
comes down. Second, employers naturally desire as great a measure of stability as can be obtained,
and therefore desire that the interval should be as prolonged as possible. Third, the Arbitration
Court has ordinarily taken about a year as the shortest interval for reviewing the basic wage in
the light of cost of living fluctuation.
Dealing first with the first of these positions, it has been the case during the last six years
that the cost of living has always been rising. As a result a basic wage which at the beginning of
any one year was, or was deemed to be, sufficient to meet the cost of living was bound to be insuffi-
cient during some part at least of the time before the next fixation of the basic wage. If, on the
other hand, a period of falling prices were to set in, the wage-earners would, during any
interval, be receiving more than the amount necessary to meet the cost of living until the ensuing
fixation of the basic wage ascertained to what figure that ought to be reduced.
Next, with regard to the desire of the employers for as great a measure as possible of stability
in the wage, the risk they run as the result of wages increasing as the cost of living increases is
that they may enter into contracts, either for construction work or for the supply of goods or
services or for export, at prices based on the wage at the time of contracting, which prices may
prove unprofitable if wages rise before the termination of the contract. In the case of contracts
which permit of it, this difficulty can be got over by a clause such as is now common, providing
that prices to be paid shall increase correspondingly with any increase in the declared basic wage.
But a great deal of business is carried on under arrangements which do not permit of such a saving
clause.
With regard to readjustment at intervals not shorter than a year, the Arbitration Court has
taken the view that in re-stating the basic wage, the fluctuations for at least one year should be
applied for the following reason. Some of the staples of life, e.g., eggs, meat, butter, fruit,
and vegetables, are dearer in winter than in summer so that to fix a basic wage at the
end of winter taking into account only the fluctuation during, say, the last quarter, would
mean increasing the basic wage by what is probably the maximum fluctuation in the price
of necessaries during the year. On the other hand to fix the basic wage on the fluctuation during
the summer months as ascertained at the end of the summer would have the opposite effect, and,
to equalize the contrary tendencies, a year is taken from which to measure the fluctuation which
is to be applied. In choosing then between quarterly or half-yearly or yearly re-adjustments of
the basic wage to the purchasing power of money these seasonal influences have to be considered.
The Federated Unions suggested that adjustments should take place every quarter, but
upon this principle. It should be assumed that whatever tendency, whether of increase or
decrease in prices, was disclosed by the examination at the beginning of any given quarter would
continue till at least the middle of the ensuing interval. There should then be a projection, so
to speak, of the adjusting ratio between prices at the beginning of the interval and prices during
the preceding quarter, in such a way as to make the basic wage anticipate a continuance during
the first half of the ensuing quarter of the ratio so ascertained. In this assumption the worker
would again be better off or worse off according as prices were found to have fallen or to have
risen since the preceding quarter. There is therefore no special reason for preferring this system
to a simpler one.
Apart from reasons of business and contracts, the more closely the fluctuations in the cost
of living are reflected automatically in the basic wage, the more equitable the system would be.
So far as business or contracting risks are concerned, the employer who has to deal upon
the footing of short term deliveries will be advantaged by having his wage obligation known at
short intervals, while as to long term deliveries the employer can only be prejudiced in the first
of the possible three cases. First, if the cost of living rises during the currency of a contract;
second, if it remains stationary ; third, if it falls. In any event such an employer can in
many instances safeguard himself by the saving clause for a shifting price already alluded to.
The Commission therefore suggests an interval which will reduce to a not substantial
figure the risk of the wage-earner being paid too little. An interval of three months would produce
this effect. It is very unlikely indeed, that with such an interval prices can so seriously rise as to
jeopardize substantially the worker’s comfort. And of course there is the contrasted chance
always that prices will fall and the worker benefit. Again, it is necessary that the adjustment
should take place upon a system which recognises the seasonal character of the fluctuations in
price of staple commodities, and it is therefore suggested by the Commission that, at each quarterly
declaration, the basic wage should be fixed on the average of the determinations of the cost of
living in each of the four preceding quarters. Thus the declaration to be made in November
1921, would be based on the average of the cost of living determinations at November, 1920,
February 1921, May 1921, August 1921. This system will inclusively represent all seasonal
fluctuations, and also the latest trend or tendency of prices at November, 1921.


Quarter ending.
Determination.
November, 1920
..£550
February, 1921
..500
May, 1921 ..
..500
August, 1921
5 5 0
Average . .
..£526
The following illustration as to equalizing seasonal fluctuations may be of use. If £5 ss. Od.
a week is taken as the cost of living in November, 1920, and the seasonal variation is assumed to
be ss. a week less during six months other than winter months, then the wage in November, 1921,
will be determined thus :■ —•
If in the year November, 1921--November, 1922, all other elements but seasonal fluctuations
were to remain constant, £5 2s. 6d. would be the basic wage at each of the next four quarters.
The worker would then have £5 2s. 6d. throughout the year, being 2s. 6d. below the cost of living
from May to November and 2s. 6d. above it from November to May.
No system can be devised which will completely eliminate other chances of variation
because the cost of living can never be ascertained in advance.
SUMMARY.
Clause 1 or the Letters Patent.
1. The main task of the Commission has been to ascertain definitely the cost of living
according to reasonable standards of comfort for the typical family. The review of this matter,
contained on pp. 8 to 13, shows that this inquiry was suggested by the President and
Deputy President of the Commonwealth Arbitration Court to put an end to doubts as to the
adequacy of the basic wage, that Court not having been able to conduct a completed inquiry of
this kind. The history of the Court’s previous inquiries and decisions shows :
(a) That all decisions in the Court have hinged upon the finding in the Harvester
Case, 1907.
( h ) That this finding was (no doubt, necessarily) the result of evidence upon the question
- of Rent and Food, but not of evidence in the case of Clothing and Miscellaneous
Requirements. In the sections of Rent and Food, the evidence was very
circumscribed.
(c) Subsequent decisions have assumed the sufficiency of the Harvester Wage, and
have purported to bring it up to date by applying to it the declarations of the
Commonwealth Statistician, based on the fluctuations in price of rent and food
combined.
(d) In the case of rent, subsequent decisions have wrongly assumed that the rent
found in the Harvester Case was the rent at the time in Melbourne, whereas
it was that in Sunshine.
2. The Commission examined the question independently of the Harvester Case, giving a
free opportunity to all parties to put forward their contentions as to —(i) what are reasonable
standards of comfort in each of the Sections—Rent, Food, Clothing, and Miscellaneous ; (ii) what
is the present cost of those standards.
3. The Commission determined a concrete standard in each section and the amount
necessary to obtain that standard at the prices on Ist November, 1920.
4. The standard as to Rent is set out in the Report, p. 20 et seq. It differs from that
in the Harvester Case, which was the rent of a four-roomed house, because the evidence was over-
whelming that a five-roomed house is necessary for the typical family. It conforms, however,
to the standard prescribed in 1914 by Mr. Justice Heydon, of a four-roomed house for a family
with one child less than the typical family.
5. The standard as to Clothing is set out in the form of an Indicator List. This is not
intended to prescribe a regimen, but to serve as an example of the articles, their kind and their
price, necessary for replacements. The list is limited to articles of wear common to all classes
of wage earners. A deduction of 8 per cent, has been made for passing on garments from one
member to another of the family, and for purchasing at sale time.
6. The standard for Food is also shown in the form of an Indicator List, with the same
intended purpose as in the section of Clothing. To ascertain that standard, it was necessary
to have a specific basis of total dietary requirements, and this has been discussed in pp. 34 et seq.


Melbourne
£ s. d.
.. 5 16 6
Sydney ..
.. 5 17 0
Brisbane
.. 5 6 2
Newcastle
.. 5 15 6
Adelaide ..
.. 5 16 1
Perth
.. 5 13 11
Hobart ..
.. 5 16 11
The basis of total dietary requirements has been ascertained in the terms of the now universal
method of such measurement (which is the only method possible to be used for such a preliminary
purpose), the Commission determined upon the articles and their quantities by adopting broadly
what the household budgets showed were the habits and tastes of the people in food.
7. The standard of Miscellaneous Requirements was determined by including such specific
items of those claimed by the Federated Unions as seemed to be necessary. In only one part
of this section was it necessary to frame a list, viz., in that of Household Drapery (see p. 51.)
8. The standards, services, articles, quantities, qualities, and prices determined upon in
each section were such as to conform to current standards of reasonable comfort for the
average worker.
Clause 2 op the Letters Patent.
9. In answer to Clause 2 of the Letters Patent, the Commission has only so far computed
the corresponding Cost of Living for the year 1914, and awaits further direction as to intervening
years.
Clause 3 of the Letters Patent.
10. (a) In regard to propounding a method of automatically adjusting the basic wage
to the purchasing power of the pound sterling, the Commission is of opinion that as its findings
in each section—Rent, Clothing, Food, and Miscellaneous—involves specific determinations of
the services and commodities going to make up the necessary cost of living, it is only necessary
that these determinations be brought up to date by experienced officials who should apply to
them current prices.
(5) The critical and responsible character of this work necessitates a Bureau of Labour
Statistics, which can be staffed from the Public Service without any fresh appointments. It is
proposed that, upon examining the periodical findings of such a Bureau as to the cost of living,
the Commonwealth Arbitration Court should declare the basic wage upon such methods as
Parliament prescribes.
(c) The fixing, in the past, of the basic wage at intervals of not less than a year had the
inequitable result, in a period of rising prices, that the worker during each year of that period
received a wage based on the lower cost of living of the. preceding year. In a period of falling
prices, the inequity would be felt by the employer, who would be compelled to pay more than
what is necessary for reasonable standards of comfort, because the basic wage would be fixed on
the higher cost of the preceding year.
The shortest interval to minimize these possible inequalities, consistently with accurate
estimation by the suggested Bureau, and with a due regard to reasonable stability for both
employers and employees, was found to be, the interval of a quarter between the determinations
of the cost of living.
( d ) In order to balance inequalities arising from the seasonal fluctuations, it is proposed
that the mean of the four quarters preceding each quarterly determination should be taken.
The working of the proposal is illustrated on p. 57.
FINDINGS.
The findings of the Commission are as follows :■ —
In answer to Clause 1 of the Letters Patent'—
1, The actual cost of living at the present time, according to reasonable standards
of comfort, including all matters comprised in the ordinary expenditure
of a household, for a man with a wife and three children under fourteen
years of age, is in


2. The several items and amounts which make up that cost are as follows
1 —
—
Melbourne.
Sydney. f
Brisbane.
Adelaide.
Perth.
Hobart.
£
S.
<1.
£
s.
!
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
S.
d.
Rent
1
0
6
1
2
0 !
0
17
0
0
19
6
0
19
0
0 19
0
Clothing —Man
0
8
5
0
7
9
0
7
6
0
8
3
0
7
9
0
8
6
,, Woman ..
0
10
9
0
9
8 '
0
8
9
0
9
11
0
10
2
0
10
6
„ Boy (10+)
0
4
6
0
4
3
0
4
7
0
4
7
0
4
3
0
4
9
„ Girl (7) ..
0
3
5
0
3
6
0
3
4
0
3
7
0
3
9
0
3
6
„ Boy (31) . .
0
1
n
0
1
10
0
1
10
0
1
11
0
1
10
0
1
11
Food
2
6
H
2
6
8f
2
3
H
2
7
13
1 4
2
4
11J
2
8
Hi
Fuel and Light
0
4
9
0
4
n 1
0
3
0
4
3
0
5
0
i 0
3
n
Groceries (not Food) ..
0
1
6
0
1
6
0
1
5
0
1
6
0
1
6
i 0
1
7
Renewal of Household Utensils,
Drapery and Crockery
0
2
n
0
2
n
0
2
n
0
2
n
0
2
71
0
2
n
Union and Lodge Dues
0
1
9
0
1
9
0
1
9
0
1
9
0
1
9
0
1
9
Medicine. Dentist, &c.
0
0
9
0
0
9
0
0
9
0
0
9
0
0
9
0
0
9
Domestic Assistance ..
0
1
6
0
1
6
0
1
6
0
1
6
0
1
6
0
1
6
Newspapers, Stationery
and
i
Stamps
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
3
: o
1
0
Recreation. Amusements
and
Library
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
Smoking
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
Barber
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
3
Fares
0
2
6
0
3
4
0
3
4
0
3
4
0
3
4
0
2
6
School Requisites
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0
3
5
16
6
5
17
Of
5
6
21
5
16
n
5
13
11
5
16
Hi
£
s.
d.
Melbourne
, ,
,
.. 3
7
9
Sydney ..
.
.. 3
12
6
Brisbane
,
.. 3
4 11
Adelaide ..
.. 3
11
4
Perth
.. 3 13
11
Hobart ..
,
,
.. 3
6
1
In answer to Clause 2 of the Letters Patent
1. The actual corresponding cost of living in 1914 was
2. Findings as to the last four years 1915-1919 are deferred pending Your
Excellency’s further directions.
In answer to Clause 3 of the Letters Patent, the Basic Wage may be automatically
adjusted to the rise and fall from time to time of the purchasing power of the
sovereign as follows :
1. It should be the duty of a Bureau of Labour Statistics, staffed from existing
members of the Commonwealth Public Service, to estimate, &c., from
quarter to quarter the actual cost of the several services and items
set forth in the Report as to Rent, Food, Clothing, and Miscellaneous.
2. This Bureau should declare that actual cost upon an average of prices of
the preceding four quarters of the year.
3. This declaration should be reported to the Commonwealth Arbitration
Court with a view to its being made the Basic Wage by the Court in
such manner as Parliament may prescribe.
WORK OF THE SECRETARY AND STATISTICIAN.
No terms could be too high in which to describe tne remarkable work done by the Secretary
and Statistician, Mr. J. T. Sutcliffe. His intimate knowledge of every branch of the subject, nis
intense industry, and Ms great power of organization, were all brought to bear upon this task in a
spirit of unselfish devotion, and without services of this exceptional character the work of the
Commission could not have been done in the time actually taken.


Mr. Commissioner Keep and Mr. Commissioner Gilfillan, in a Minority Report, dissent from
any expression used in the Report which seems to imply that the findings of the Commission
as to the cost of living must necessarily become the Basic Wage.
The same Commissioners also dissent in their Minority Report from any conclusion
being drawn from a comparison of the findings as to the cost of living in 1914 with the
present cost which would imply that the Basic Wage in that year was too low.
We have the honour to be,
Your Excellency’s most obedient Servants,
(Sgd.) A. B. PIDDINGTON, Chairman.
(Sgd.) R. CHENEY, Commissioner.
(Sgd.) HARRY C. GIBSON, Commissioner,
(Sgd.) W. D. GILFILLAN, Commissioner.*
(Sgd.) ERNEST E. KEEP, Commissioner.*
(Sgd.) THOS. C. MAHER, Commissioner.
(Sgd.) - ALBAN. C. MORLEY, Commissioner.
(Sgd.) JAS. T. SUTCLIFFE, Secretary and Statistician.
Offices of the Inter-State Commission,
Melbourne, 19th November, 1920.
* Subject to dissent.


MINORITY REPORT
BY
MR. COMMISSIONER KEEP AND MR. COMMISSIONER GILFILLAN.
May it please Your Excellency ;
We have the honour to present our Minority Report to the Report presented by the
Commission dated the day of November, 1920, dealing with the cost of living.
There are certain considerations in connexion with the questions submitted for report and
inquiry to the Commission to which we think due weight has not been given. The Commission
was appointed to inquire into and report upon two principal matters : —(1) The actual cost of
living at the present time according -to reasonable standards of comfort, including all matters
comprised in the ordinary expenditure of a household for a man with a wife and three children
under fourteen years of age, and the several items and amounts which make up that cost.
(2) How the basic wage may be automatically adjusted to the rise and fall from time to time of
the purchasing power of the sovereign. A third matter referred to the Commission was inquiry
and report as to the actual corresponding cost of living during each of the last five years. This
latter matter has not appeared to us to be very material to the main inquiry of the Commission
and can be disregarded as not affecting the substance of our present considerations. The more
we look at clause (1) and (3) of the Letters Patent, the more we feel that they deal with two
different matters. The actual cost of living is one thing; the adjustment of the basic wage in
accordance with the rise or fall of the purchasing power of the sovereign is another. The Report
seems to assume that the amount which the Commission finds to be the cost of living at the present
time will be fixed as a basic wage. But several considerations occur before we can accept this
assumption as final; —(1) It is open to doubt what value (if any) the Judge or Judges of the
Federal Arbitration Court will attach to the finding of the Commission. (2) It is questionable
whether the Federal Parliament has any constitutional power to make the finding of a Commission
as to the cost of living the foundation of a basic wage in the Commonwealth. (3) The Prime
Minister said at Bendigo that a Royal Commission was to be appointed “ to inquire into the cost
of living in relation to the minimum or basic wage.” He never promised that the amount found
to be the cost of living would necessarily be adopted as the basic wage. (4) The actual amount
of the cost of living by an inquiry into the cost of house rent and the price of clothing, food, and
miscellaneous items may be of some statistical value. But the suggestion that the rate of wages
depends solely on the amount which the worker is paying for rent, clothing, food, and miscellaneous
items is of doubtful economic value. A basic wage as it appears to us is not really a wage earned
by the employee as reward for work done, but an allowance for suggested requisites of living, to
be paid by the employer to the employee. It may very well be that increased prices are the
results of decreased production, On this point we have no desire to be controversial. But if the
cost of living goes up because of the decreased production by the wage-earners, it seems unreasonable
that the community should have to pay to the wage-earner by way of a basic wage an amount
which the latter has not earned. Slackness in production may increase the cost of living. The
community, on the assumption that the basic wage must not be less than the cost of living, has to
pay for it. It is, moreover, a matter of fair observation that throughout the whole of the Inquiry
before the Commission it was never suggested on behalf of the Federated Unions that, if the basic
wage was increased, any increase in production could be relied upon. It may be suggested that
these are considerations not for this Commission, but for the Government when it creates effective
machinery to give effect to these principles. But we feel that we should be neglecting the interests
of employers, and indeed of the community generally, on this Commission, if in this our Minority
Report we did not call attention to them. But we are pressed by the consideration that, if a basic
wage was fixed to correspond exactly with the ascertained cost of living, however that may vary,
this would operate as a burden on existing industries, and be a deterrent to new industries in
Australia.
We consider that the above considerations suggested by us have not been sufficiently
dealt with in the Report. We are fully alive to our responsibility on this matter, and respectfully
commend the attention of Parliament to these aspects of the two questions of the cost of living
and the basic wage.


There is a further point to which we venture respectfully to ask attention. The Inquiry
was directed towards the actual cost of living “at the present time.” It is by no means clear
whether this meant the time at which the Commission was appointed in December, 1919, or the
time at which it is presenting its Report in November, 1920. This consideration becomes of
importance when we examine the prices set out in the Indicator Lists, particularly of clothing. It
must be borne in mind that this Inquiry was conducted in abnormal times and during a period of
continuously rising prices. This, in our view, discounts alike the val ue and the chance of
permanency of the figures in the indicator lists since it is not unreasonable to suppose that prices
will drop at no distant period.
Probably at no time in history has the question of standards of comfort been the subject
of so much controversy, and, like the selection of the typical man, was one of the most difficult
matters the Commission had to decide.
While it is universally admitted that a high standard of comfort is desirable, it is shown
that such could only be obtained in normal times, and that any attempt to introduce an ideal
standard during the abnormal times we are passing through would add an intolerable burden
to a young community unless compensated for by considerably increased production.
We are unable to agree with the general conclusions regarding the Harvester Case. While
the evidence may have shown that the amounts of some of the items were incorrect, it is more
than probable that the remark at p. 13 of the Report, that probably “ one error, namely food,
balances the two others,” and the remark at p. 12, that “ it conformed fairly to what employees
believed to be fair and reasonable remuneration,” accurately state the facts. This would account
for the fact, as stated by Mr. Justice Higgins, that his finding had been unchallenged for ten years.
Moreover, we have no evidence before us that the subsequent awards of the Arbitration Court
did not provide a reasonable standard of comfort in accordance with the then current standards.
It is quite conceivable that the great and rapid changes brought about by war conditions caused
hardship to all sections of the community. This, unfortunately, is one of the effects of war, but
probably no country in the world suffered less in this respect than Australia.
We are not in accord with the explanation of the difference between the finding of the
Commission for the cost of living in 1914 and the awards of the Arbitration Court for that year,
for, as already stated, these awards appear to have provided reasonable comfort according to the
then current standards.
It is more probable that the explanation lies on the fact that this Commission, conducting
an inquiry during an abnormal period of high prices, has arrived at a higher standard of comfort
than the existing standard in 1914, and this consequently does away with the inference that the
1914 awards were too low.
Beyond expressing an opinion that we do not consider that some of the higher priced articles
mentioned in the Indicator Lists are indispensable to a reasonable standard of comfort, and
recording our view that we are not in agreement with minor matters, after taking into consideration
the nature of the evidence, we do not substantially dissent from the General Report.
Our position is that during the proceedings of the Commission considerations arose which
must mutually affect not only employers as a body but employment in Australia generally.
We should be failing in our duty to the employers, whom we represent, if we had not given
consideration to these matters. They are sure to be subjects of comment and inquiry by
employers after the Report appears. It is because, in our view, certain aspects of the probable
result of the Commission are not sufficiently dealt with in the Report, and it might be suggested
that we had been neglectful of them, that we take this opportunity of calling attention to them
now.
(Sgd.) ERNEST E. KEEP, Commissioner.
(Sgd.) W. D. GILFILLAN, Commissioner.


PROTEST BY THE CHAIRMAN.
May it please Your Excellency :
I desire to record my protest against the time and manner in which the Minority Report
of my colleagues, Mr. Commissioner Keep and Mr. Commissioner Gilfillan, has been brought
forward. All the relevant decisions as to amount on Clause lof the Letters Patent had been
reached on 15th October, and though, as usual, there had been disagreements in various
matters of, detail, these had all been overcome, and 1 proceeded the next day to draft a Report
on behalf of the whole Commission which should embody the decisions already arrived at.
Except for adjusting figures to present-day prices, which it had been unanimously agreed should
be done, the Report embodies precisely and faithfully all the decisions reached by 15th
October. The draft of the Report in its passage again presented differences of opinion, but
it was not until yesterday afternoon at 5 o’clock, when the last revise of the Report had been
received from the Printer, and when the Commission had gone through the Report page by page
to the end, and while I was still under the belief that the Report would be signed without any
Minority Report of this kind, that Mr. Commissioner Keep mentioned that he had prepared
a Memorandum (now the basis of the Minority Report) which he asked to have considered at
an adjourned meeting. At that adjourned meeting, held last night, Mr. Commissioner Gilfillan
mentioned the matter of the comparison between the years 1914 and 1920, now dealt with in
the Minority Report. The whole of that matter had been fully debated and had been in type
for many days, except the actual figures on pa e 53 of the Report, much of it having been
modified on .suggestions by Mr. Commissioner Gilfillan. Though the figures were more recent,
it had been stated at more than one meeting that the 1914 corresponding cost of living was higher
than the then Basic Wage.
In the Minority Report the following paragraph occurs :
“ Beyond expressing an opinion that we do not consider that some of the higher-
priced articles mentioned in the Indicator Lists are indispensable to a reasonable standard
of comfort, and recording our view that we are not in agreement with minor matters,
after taking into consideration the nature of the evidence, we do not substantially dissent
from the General Report.”
This, Mr. Keep stated at our meeting to-day, was meant as an equivalent of the following
passage in the Memorandum referred to :
“ On the evidence submitted in the various States, and as the result of investigation
and observation, we cannot dissent from the conclusion that at the present time a
reasonable standard of comfort for a man with a wife and three children under fourteen
years of age cannot be obtained at a less cost per week than that indicated in Appendix
[This had reference to the findings of the Commission as to the cost of living on p. 58 of
the Report, wrongly supposed to be in an Appendix.]
Mr. Commissioner Gilfillan was not and is not a party to the opinion in this form, but it is
now quoted in its more ample form because it shows that Mr. Commissioner Keep was and is in
complete agreement with the main conclusion of the Commission, viz., that as to the cost of
living, and shows also how little the Commission could have expected, in the final moment of its
work, the introduction of matter so little relevant to that work as is the Minority Report.
While forwarding, as 1 am bound to do, the Minority Report of my colleagues, I desire
respectfully to object that the whole of the political and economic matters in the Minority Report
are extraneous to the duty of the Commission, and I would add that the implied strictures on
the Commission’s Report to the effect that certain aspects of the probable result of the
findings of the Commission are not sufficiently dealt with in the Report, misrepresent the
position. The Commission in its consultations consistently excluded political and economic
views as being no part of their function. It was never suggested, from beginning to end of
the Commission’s work, that such views, e.g.. as those regarding output, should be dealt with
in our Report, nor was the point as to the date for which the cost of living should be determined
ever mentioned.


1 express neither agreement nor dissent with any of the political or economic doctrines
embodied in the Minority Report, nor with reference to the point of constitutional law mentioned,
my objections being (1) that these and other matters were suggested for the first time
at the last moment; (2) that under cover of a Minority Report the propriety of existing or
contemplated legislation or of the wisdom of the Letters Patent ought not to be questioned.
I regret that this Protest should have been evoked by a course unexampled in my experience,
though I wish to record my sincere appreciation of the part taken by the colleagues in
question in the decisions and conclusions of the Report.
I beg respectfully to ask that this Protest be forwarded to Your Excellency’s Advisers, with
a request that it be printed together with the Report and Minority Report.
I have the honour to be,
Your Excellency’s most obedient servant,
A. B. PIDDINGTON,
Chairman.
19th November, 1920.
We desire to associate ourselves with the above Protest—
R. CHENEY, Commissioner.
HARRY C, GIBSON, Commissioner.
THOS. C. MAHER, Commissioner.


APPENDICES.
F. 17723.—5


Melbourne.
Sydney.
Brisbane.
Item.
Quantity
per Week.
Cost per —
Weekly
Cost.
Quantity
per Week.
Cost per—
Weekly
Cost.
Quantity
per Week.
Cost per—
Weekly
Cost.
£
•9.
d.
£
d.
£
s.
d.
Bread ..
30 lbs.
4-lb.loaf, lid.
0
6
10J
28 lbs. . .
2-lb. loaf, 6Jd.
0
7
31
24 lbs. . .
2-lb. loaf, Gd.
0
6
0
Flour, self-raising
3 2-lb. pkts.
2-lb.pkt.,8Jd.
0
2
n
2 2-lb. pkts.
2-lb. pkt.,
0
1
9
2 2-lb. pkts.
pkt., lOd. ..
0
1
8
lOJd.
Flour, plain
Tea
2 lbs.
lb., 3d.
0
0
6
4 lb.
lb., 3s.
0
1
6
J lb.
Ib.,2s. 7d. ..
0
1
3.1
J lb.
lb., 2s. 7d. to
0
1
5
3s.
Cocoa ..
J-lb. tin . .
lid.
0
0
11
J-lb, tin ..
1 tin, lOJd...
0
0
10J
J lb.
J-lb. tin,
0
1
4J
Is. 4|d.
J lb.
lb.. Is. lOd.
0
0
51
J lb.
lb., 2s. 4d. ..
0
0
7
Jib.
Jib., Is. IJd.
0
0
6J
Sugar ..
Sago ..
8 lbs.
lb.,3Jd. ..
0
2
4
8 lbs.
lb., 6d.
0
4
0
8 lbs.
lb., fid.
0
4
0
1 lb.
lb.,7d.
0
0
7
\ 1 lb.
lb.,7d.
0
0
7
1 lb.
lb., Gd.
0
0
6
Rice or Tapioca..
1 lb.
Ib.,8d.
0
0
8
/
Jam
2 IJ-lb. tins
tin, Is. 3d. ..
0
2
G
2 l|-lb. tins
tin, Is. 3d. ..
0
2
6
2 l|-lb. tins
tin, Is. 4Jd.
0
2
9
Honey
Jib.
lb.,7Jd.
0
0
4
J lb.
lb., lOJd. ..
0
0
6i
J bot.
0
0
9J
Golden Syrup
J lb.
2-lb. tin, lOd.
0
0
2
Jib.
2-lh. tin, 9Jd.
0
0
21
2-lb. or i
tin
tin, 9Jd.
0
0
5
Oatmeal
2 lbs.
lb., 5d.
0
0
10
2 lbs.
lb.,5Jd.
0
0
11
2 lbs.
(9d. to lOJd.)
0
1
8
i lb.
lb., 10d.
0
0
5
9d.lb. ..
" Raisins or
J lb., Is. 2d.
0
0
7
Currants
1 lb. ..
lb., 95d. ..
0
0
5
lid.lb. ..
lb. average
0
0
11
Sultanas,
Sultanas
Jib. ..
lb.,9jd.
0
0
4
Is. IJd. ..
j
J lb.
lb., Is.
0
0
Currants,
6
I i lb.
Cana way Seeds..
2 ozs.
oz., 2d.
0
0
4
2 ozs. aver-
oz., 2Jd.
0
0
7
Potatoes
14 lbs. ..
14 lbs., Is. Gd.
0
1
6
..
14 lbs., 2s. ..
0
2
0
14 lbs. ..
0
2
8
Onions
3 lbs.
lb., 2d.
0
0
6
3 lbs.
Ib., 2Jd.
0
0
74
5 lbs.
qt., 8d.
0
1
0
Milk ..
10J qts. . .
qt., 6d.
0
5
3
12 J qts. . .
qt.,7Jd. ..
0
7
10
12J qts. ..
0
8
4
Condensed Milk..
1 tin
tin, Is, Id. ..
0
1
1
Butter—Table ..
3 lbs.
lb., 2s.
0
6
0
3 lbs.
lb., 2s. Old.
0
6
11
3 lbs.
lb., 2s. 4Jd...
0
7
1 lb.
lb.. Is. 5d. ..
0
1
5
lb., Is. 3d. ..
0
6
74
J- lb.
lb., Is. 2d. ..
0
0
7
j ib.
lb., Is. 4d. ..
0
0
8
4 lb.
Eggs
2 doz.
doz., 2s.
0
4
0
2 doz.
doz., 3s. 2d.
0
6
4
2 doz.
doz., 3s. fid.
0
7
0
1 lb.
lb.. Is. lid.
0
1
ii
1 lb.
lb., 2s.
0
2
0
1 lb.
lb., 2s. 2d. ..
0
2
2
Pickles
bot.
bot., Is.
0
0
6
J bot.
bot., Is. Id.
0
0
61
4 bot.
(Is. 3d. to
0
0
9
Is. Gd.)
Tomato Sauce ..
I bot.
bot., I0d. ..
0
0
10
1 bot.
bot., lid. ..
0
0
11
4 bot.
(10|d. to iljd.)
0
0
5J
Worcestershire
J bot.
bot., Is. 3d.
0
0
H
J bot.
bot., Is. 4d.
0
0
8
‘ \ bot.
(9d. to Is. 4d.)
0
0
fi
bot., 11 Jd. ..
0
0
6
Vinegar
1 pint
pt.,ld.
0
0
i
J pint
pt.,3d.
0
0
11
J bot. . .
Salt
Mustard
1 oz.
oz., 3d.
0
0
3
1 oz.
oz., 3d.
0
0
3
1 oz.
Jib., is. 3d.
0
o’
4
Pepper
1 oz.
oz., 3d.
0
0
3
1 oz.
oz., 2Id.
0
0
9.1
“2
1 oz.
J lb., 8d. ..
0
0
2
Curry ..
Barley
14 Ozs.
oz., 3d.
0
0
44
li ozs.
oz., IJd.
0
0
24
2 ozs.
(Is. 2d. and
Is. 7Jd.)
0
0
8
J'lb.
lb.,4d.
0
0
2
J lb.
lb,,4d.
0
0
2
Jib. ..
0
0
8
Peas, split
Biscuits
Custard Powder..
J lb.
lb., 4d.
0
0
2
J lb.
lb.,4d.
0
0
2
J lb.
5d.
0
0
2*
1 lb.
1 pkt.
lb., lOd. ..
pkt.,5d.
0
0
0
0
10
5
1 lb.
lb., lOJd. ..
0
0
10J
lib.
1 pkt.
lb., lOd.
pkt.,7d.
0
0
0
0
10
7
Arrowroot or Com-
1 pkt.
pkt., 9Jd. ..
0
0
94
1 pkt. (Is.,
pkt,, lOJd. ..
0
0
10J
1 pkt.
pkt., 9d.
0
0
9
flour
9d.)
Jelly Crystals
1 pkt.
pkt., 5d,
0
0
5
1 pkt.
pkt., fid.
0
0
6
1 pkt.
pkt., Gd.
0
0
0
6
Essence and Spices
1 pkt.
pkt., 7|d. ..
0
0
n
1 pkt.
pkt., lOd. ..
0
0
10
3
Boiled Lollies
2 lb.
lb., lOd. ..
0
1
8
i ib.
lb., lOd. ..
0
0
10
1 lb.
lb., lid. ..
0
0
n
Cordials or Soft
2 bot.
0
1
6
2 bot.
bot., 3Jd. . .
0
0
7
3 bot.
bot., 4Jd. ..
0
1
Drinks
G
0
Alcoholic Liquors
. .
0-
1
G
0
1
I
6
(including those
used medicinally
in household)
Fruit —Eating ..
10 lbs.
lb., 2|d. .. '
0
2
1
10 lbs.
lb.,3Jd. ..
0
2
11
12 lbs. ..
lb.,4d.
0
4
0
Cooking..
6 lbs.
lb., 2d.
0
1
0
6 lbs.
lb., 3d.
0
1
6
4 lbs.
Ib.,4d.
0
1
4
Vegetables —Cab-
2
each, 4d.
0
0
8
2 (Cabbage,
each, 7d.
0
1
2
2
each, Gd.
0
1
0
bage or Cauli-
6d., or
flower
Cauliflower,
8d.)
Marrow or Pump-
6 lbs.
lb., 2d.
0
1
0
6 lbs.
lb., 2d.
0
1
0
6 lbs.
lb., IJd. ..
0
0
9
kin
APPENDIX 1.
CLAIMS OF FEDERATEDUNIONS.—FOOD.


Item.
Adelaide.
Perth.
Hobart.
Quantity
per Week.
Cost per—
Weekly
Cost.
Quantity
per Week.
Cost per—
Weekly
Cost.
Quantity
per Week.
Cost per—
Weekly
Cost.
£
a.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
Bread ..
28 lbs. ..
2-lb. loaf. 5id.
0
6
5
28 lbs.
2-lb. loaf, 5Jd.
0
6
5
28 lbs. ..
2-lb. loaf, 5-|d.
0
6
5
Flour, self-raising
2 2-lb. pkts.
2 lb. pkt, 9jd.
0
1
7
2 2-lb. pkts.
pkt.,9d.
0
1
6
2 2-lb. pkts.
2-lb. pkt, Did.
0
1
7
Flour, plain
Tea
4 lb.
1 lb., 2s. 6d.
0
i
3
|lb.
lb., 2s. 6d. ..
0
1
3
i lb. ..
lb., 2s. 3d. ..
0
i
li
Cocoa ..
ilb. ••
1 lb., 2s. 5d.
0
0
7
ilb. ..
lb., 3b.
0
0
9
i lb. tin ..
lb., 2s. 6d. ..
0
0
n
Coffee ..
i lb.
1 lb., 2s. 6d.
0
0
71
ilb.
lb., Is. lOd.. .
0
0
5i
i lb.
lb., 2s. 2d. ..
0
0
6i
Sugar ..
8 lbs.
lb.,6d.
0
4
0
8 lbs.
Ib., 6d.
0
4
0
8 lbs.
lb.,6d.
0
4
0
Sago ..
Sago, 6d.
lb.,7id. ..
0
0
7*
Sago, 6d.
lb., 7d.
0
0
7
Sago, 6d. lb.
lb.,7id. ..
0
0
7i
Rice or Tapioca..
Rice, 9d.,
Rice, 8d.,
Rice, 9d.,
1 lb.
i ib.
1 lb.
Jam
2 li-lb. tins
tin, Is. 4d. ..
0
2
8
2 XJ-lb. tins
11-lb. tin, Is.
0
2
6
2 14-lb. tin
tin, Is. 4d. ..
0
2
8
3d.
Honey
4-lb. tin ..
lb. lOd.
0
0
5
i lb.
2-lb. tin. Is.
0
0
5
i ib.
2-lb. tin 2s.
0
0
7
8d.
4d.
Golden Syrup..
i lb.
2-lb. tin Is.
0
0
3
i lb.
2-lb. tin Is.
0
0
3
4 lb.
2-lb. tin Hd.
0
0
24
Oatmeal
2 lbs.
lb. 5d.
0
0
10
2 lbs.
1 lb. (flaked)
5kk
0
0
11
2 lbs.
lb. 5d.
0
0
10
Raisins, Currants,
Raisins, Is.
lb., Is. Ud.
0
1
li
Raisins. Hd.
lb., Hid. ..
0
0
Hi
Raisins, Is.,
lb. , Is.
0
1
1
Sultanas
Id. ; Cur-
rants, Is.,
Sultanas,
Currants,
lid.; Sul-
tanas, Is.,
Currants,
Is. ; Sul-
tanas, Is.
Is. 3d.,
1 lb.
2d., 1 lb.
1 lb., aver-
a«:c
Carraway Seeds..
2 OZS.
oz., 2-Jd.
0
0
5
2 ozs.
lb., 2s. 6d, ..
0
0
4
2 ozs.
oz., 2d.
0
0
4
Potatoes
14 lbs. ..
14 lbs.,2s. 4d.
0
2
4
14 lbs. ..
14 lbs., 3s. ..
0
3
0
14 lbs. ..
14 lbs., 2s. 3d.
0
2
3
Onions..
3 lbs.
1 lb., 2.U1. ..
0
0
71
3 lbs.
lb., 3d.
0
0
9
3 lbs.
lb., 3d.
0
0
9
Milk ..
12.V qts. ..
qt.,8d.
0
8
4
12i qts. ..
qt., 8id.
0
8
10i
12i qts. . .
qt.,9d.
0
9
44
Condensed Milk
Butter—Table ..
3 lbs.
lb., 2s. 6d. ..
0
7
6
3 lbs.
lb., 2s. 6d. ..
0
7
0
3 lbs.
lb.,2s. 7d. ..
0
7
9
Cooking
Cheese
i lb.
lb.. Is. 41-d. ..
0
6
81
i lb.
lb., Is. 7d. ..
0
6
9i
4 lb.
Ib., Is. 7d. ..
0
0
9|
Eggs ..
2 doz.
doz., 2s. 2d.
0
4
4
2 doz.
doz., 3s.
0
6
0
2 doz.
doz., 2s. 3d.
0
4
6
Bacon ..
1 lb.
lb.. Is. lid.. .
0
1
11
1 lb.
lb., Is. Hd.. .
0
1
11
i ib.
lb.. Is. lOd. ..
0
1
10
Pickles
4 bot.
bot.. Is. Id.
0
0
61
1 bot. ..
bot.. Is. Id.
0
0
i bot.
bot., Is.
0
0
6
Tomato Sauce ..
1 bot.
bot., lid. ..
0
0
11
1 bot.
bot., lOd. ..
0
0
10
1 bot.
bot., Hd. ..
0
0
11
Worcestershire
J bot.
bot., Is. 3d.
0
0
71
i bot.
bot., Is 3d.
0
0
7i
i bot.
bot., Is.
0
0
6
Sauce
Vinegar
J bot.
pt. bot.,9d.
0
0
4 pt.
pt. bot, 9d.
0
0
4-1
4 pt. ■ •
pt.,7d.
0
0
34
Salt
tib.
lb., Id.
0
0
1
Mustard
loz.
1 lb. tin, Is.
0
0
4
1 OZ.
oz., 3d.
0
6
3
1 OZ.
oz., 3d.
0
6
3
4d.
Pepper
1 oz.
Jlb.,8d. ..
0
0
2
1 oz.
i lb., 7d. ..
0
0
2
1 oz.
oz., 2d.
0
0
2
Curry ..
14 ozs.
ilb., Is. ..
0
0
41
li ozs.
i lb., 7d. ..
0
0
2
1| ozs.
oz., 2d.
0
0
3
Barley
4 lb- • •
lb.,4|d. ..
0
0
2i
i lb.
lb., 4d.
0
0
2
4 lb.
lb.,4d.
0
0
2
Peas, split
I lb.
lb., 5d.
0
0
24
4 lb.
lb.,4id. ..
0
0
24
i lb.
lb..4|d. ..
0
0
21
Biscuits
1 lb.
lb., Hid. ■ •
0
0
Hi
1 lb.
Ib., Hid. ..
0
0
Hi
I lb.
lb., Is.
0
1
0
Custard powder
Arrowroot or Com-
Arrowroot,
pkt., lid. ..
0
0
ii
Arrowroot,
pkt., 8|d. ..
0
6
84
Arrowroot,
pkt., 10|d. ..
0
6
104
flour
Is. ; Corn-
flour, 9|-d.,
6d. ; Corn-
flour, 10d.,
Is. ; Corn-
flour, 9d.,
1 pkt.
1 pkt.
1 pkt.
pkt., 6d.
Jelly Crystals
1 pkt.
pkt., 6d.
0
0
6
1 pkt.
pkt. , 6d.
0
0
6
1 pkt.
0
0
6
Essence and
1 pkt.
Essence, 8d.,
0
0
3
1 pkt.
pkt., 9d.
0
0
9
Essence, 9£d.,
Spices
Spice, 2d.
1 lb.
Spice, lid.
Boiled Lollies
1 lb.
lb., Is.
0
1
0
1 lb.
lb., XOd. ..
0
0
10
lb., Is.
0
1
0
Cordials or Soft
2 bots.
bot., 4d.
0
0
8
2 bots.
bot., 6|d. ..
0
1
1
2 bots.
bot., 3id. ..
0
0
7 ■
Drinks
Alcoholic Liquors
0
1
6
, ,
. .
0
1
0
. .
0
1
6
(including those
used medicinally
in household)
10 lbs. ..
lb., 3d.
Fruit — Eating ..
10 lbs. ..
lb., 3d.
0
2
6
10 lbs. ..
lb., 4d.
0
3
4
0
2
6
Cooking ..
6 lbs.
lb., 2Jd. ..
0
1
3
6 lbs.
lb., 3d.
0
1
6
6 lbs.
lb., 3d. ...
0
1
6
Vegetables — Cab-
2
each, 6d.
0
1
0
5 lbs. Cab-
lb., 2d. i
0
2
0
2 lbs.
lb., 3id.,
0
0
7
bage or Cauli-
bage,
approx.
flower
7 lbs.Cauli-
flower
lb., 2d. J
Marrow or Pump-
6 lbs.
lb., lid. ..
0
0
9
6 lbs., aver-
ib., lid. ..
0
0
9
6 lbs.
lb., 2Jd.
0
1
14
kin
age
approx.
DIX 1.
UNIONS.—FOOD.


Item.
Melbourne.
Sydney.
Brisbane.
Quantity
per Week.
Cost per—
Weekly
Cost.
Quantity
per Week.
Cost per —
Weekly
Cost.
Quantity
per Week.
Cost per—
Weekly
Cost.
£
6*.
d.
£
S,
d.
£
8 ,
d.
Tomatoes or Beet-
4 lbs.
lb., 3d.
0
l
0
Tomatoes,
lb., 4d.
0
i
4
4 lbs.
lb., 3d.
0
i
0
root
4 id.; Beet-
root, 3|d.,
4 lbs.
Beans or Peas ..
4 lbs.
lb., 3d.
0
i
0
Beans, 4d. ;
Peas, 8d.,
4 lbs.
lb., 6d.
0
2
0
4 lbs.
lb., 5d.
0
i
8
Carrots, Parsnips,
1 buncheach
bunch, 3d. ..
0
0
9
1 buncheach
bunch, 3d. •.
0
0
9
f Carrots ..
1 bunch
0
0
3
or Turnips
Parsnips
1 .,
0
0
6
Lettuce, Celery or
(_ Turnips..
0
0
3
.,
0
i
6
1 per week
average 3d...
0
0
9
( Lettuce ..
0
0
3
Radish
each
< Celery, ..
Radish ..
1 bunch
.1 „
0
0
0
0
6
3
Meat—Beef
14 lbs. ..
lb., 9d.
0
10
6
10 lbs.
Ib.,9id.
0
7
11
10 lbs.
ib., aid. ..
0
5
5
Mutton ..
14 lbs. ..
lb., 6d.
0
7
0
10 lbs. ..
lb.,7£d. ••
0
G
3
10 lbs. ..
lb., 8d.
0
6
8
Pork
2 lbs.
lb., Is.
0
2
0
2 lbs.
lb., Is. 6d. . •
0
3
0
2 lbs.
lb., Is. 6d. ..
0
3
0
Total
••
••
£4
i
5i
••
£4
4
9
••
£4
10
3
Articles.
Quantity.
Cost,
Weekly Cost.
Bread
28 lbs. per week
4-lb. loaf, lid.
£ s. d.
0 0 5
Flour, self-raising ..
2 2-lb. pkts.
Per 2-lb. pkt., 8|d.
0 1 "5
Tea
| lb. per week
Per lb., 3s.
0 16
Cocoa
| -lb. tin per week ..
Per tin, lid.
0 0 11
Coffee .. ..
| lb. per week
Per lb., Is. lOd.
0 0 5|
Sugar
8 lbs. per week
Per lb., 3|d.
0 2 4
Sago and Bice
1 lb. per week
Per lb., 7|d.
0 0 U
Jam
2 14-lb. tins per week
Per tin, Is. 3d.
0 2 6
ifoney
|-lb. per w eek
Per lb., 7|d.
0 0 4
Golden Syrup
lb. per week
Per 2-lb. tin, lOd, .,
0 0 2
Oatmeal ..
2 lbs. per week
Per lb., 5d.
0 0 10
Raisins, Currants, and Sultanas
1 lb. per week
Per lb., lOd.
0 0 10
Carraway Seeds
2 ozs. per week
Per oz., 2d.
0 0 4
Potatoes ,.
14 lbs. per week
14 lbs., Is. 6d.
0 1 6
Onions
3 lbs. per week
Per lb., 2d.
0 0 6
Milk
12| quarts per eveek
Per quart, 6d.
0 6 3
Butter, table
3 lbs. per week
Per lb., 2s.
0 6 0
Cheese
\ lb. per week
Per lb., Is. 2d.
0 0 7
Eggs
2 doz. per w r eek
Per doz., 2s.
0 4 0
Bacon
1 lb. per week
Per lb,, Is. lid.
0 1 11
Pickles ,. . . .,
hot. per week
Per bot., Is.
0 0 6
Tomato sauce
1 bot. per week
Per bot., lOd.
0 0 10
Worcestershire Sauce
| bot. per week
Per bot., Is. 3d.
0 0 11
Vinegar
I pint per week
Per pint, Id.
0 0 1
Mustard ..
1 oz. per week
Per oz., 3d.
0 0 3
Pepper ,, .. ....
1 oz. per week
Per oz., 3d.
0 0 3
FOOD AND GROCERIES.
(As approved by Professor Osborne.)
Claims of Federated


Item.
Adelaide.
Perth.
Hobart,
Quantify
per Week.
Cost per —
Weekly
Cost.
Quantity
per Week.
Cost per —
Weekly
Cost.
Quantity
per Week.
Cost per —
Weekly
Cost.
Tomatoes or Beet-
4 lbs.
lb., 0d.
biittcll, 3d.
lb.,6d.
£ S. d.
0 16
4 lbs.
lb., 3d. -|
£ s. d.
0 0 8
4 lbs.
lb., 3Jd. ..
£ s. d.
0 1 1
root
Beans or Peas ..
4 lbs.
0 2 0
4 lbs. Beans
lb., 2d.
(average, 2d.)J
lb.,4d. \
0 16
approx.
Carrots, Parsnips,
1 bunch each
bunch, 8d. ..
0 0 9
Peas ..
1 bunch each
lb.,6d. /
bunch, 2Jd.
0 0 7|
1 hunch each
builch, 3d. ..
0 0 9
or Turnips
Lettuce, Celery or
1 biiSoh Bafch
2<b each
o o n
1 bunch ,.
Lettuoe,lid.,h
0 0 7
I bunch each
Lettuce, IJd.,")
Celery, 3d., )
Badish, Ijd.)
lb., Is.
0 0 6
Badish
Meat—Beef
10 lbs. ..
Lettuce
bunch or head
4d., bunch,
lid.
lb., lljd. ..
0 9 7
10 lbs. ..
Celery, 4d. >
Badish, 14(1,,)
lb., Hid. ..
0 9 7
10 lbs.
0 10 0
Muttoh ..
10 its. ..
lb., lid.
0 9 2
10 lbs. . .
lb.,9d.
0 7 6
10 lbs.
lb., Is.
0 10 0
Pork
2 lbs.
lb., Is. 4d. ..
0 2 8
2 lira.
lb.. Is. 5d. ..
0 2 10
2 lbs.
lb., Is. 6d. ..
0 3 0
Total
£4 7 111
£4 9 SJ
£4 7
Article.
Quantity.
Cost.
Weekly Cost.
Curry
oz. per week
Per oz., 3d.
£ s. d.
0 o
Barley
•J- lb. per week
Per lb., 4d.
0 0 2
Split Peas
| lb. per week
Per lb., 4d.
0 0 2
Biscuits
1 lb. per week
Pet lb., lOd.
0 0 10
Arrowrbot or Cornflour
1 pkt. per week
Pet pkt., 9|d.
0 0 9J
Jelly Crystals
1 pkt. per week
Per pkt., 5d.
0 0 5
Essences and Spices
1 pkt. per week
Per pkt., T|d.
0 0 7i
Boiled lollies
1 lb. per week
Per lb., lOd.
0 0 10
Cordials or Soft Drinks
2 bbts. per week
0 16
0 1 6
Alcoholic Liquors (including those used medicinally in
Per week ..
Household)
Per lb., 2*d.
0 2 0
Fruit. Eating
10 lbs. per week
Fruit, Cooking
6 lbs. per week
Per lb., 2d.
0 10
Cabbage or Cauliflower
2 per week
Each, 4d.
0 0 8
0 1 0
Marrow or Pumpkin
6 lbs. per week
Per lb., 2d.
Tomatoes or Beetroot
4 lbs. per week
Per lb.. 3d.
0 10
Beans or Peas
4 lbs. per week
Per lb., 3d.
0 10-
Carrots, Parsnips, or Turnips
1 bunch per week each
Per bunch, 3d. each
0 0 9
0 1 6
Lettuce, Celery, or Radish ..
Per week . .
Meat—
Per lb., 9d.
0 16
Beef
10 lbs. per week
Mutton ..
10 lbs. per week
Per lb., 6d.
0 5 0
Pork
2 lbs. per week
Per lb., Is.
0 2 0
Total
3 12 7
Unions. —Pood— continued.
GROCERIES.
Professor Osborne.)


CLAIMS OF FEDERATED UNIONS.—CLOTHING.
Item.
Melbourne.
Sydney.
Brisbane.
Adelaide.
Perth.
Hobart.
Quantity.
Price.
Annual
Cost.
Quantity.
Price.
Annual
Cost.
Quantity.
Price.
Annual
Cost.
Quantity.
Price.
Annual
Cost.
Quantity.
Price.
Annual.
Cost.
Quantity.
Price.
Annual
Cost.
Mem’s Clothing.
Each.
Each.
Each.
Each.
Each.
Suits
£
s.
d.
£
$,
d.
£ «.
d.
£
8.
d.
£ s.
d.
£
•5.
d.
Z s.
d.
£
S.
d.
£
8.
d.
£
8.
d.
£
£
d
2
9
9
0
18
18
0
3 for 2
9 0
0
13
10
0
i
9 0
0
9
0
0
3 for 2
10 10
0
15
15
0
u
10
10
0
15
13
0
H
10
10
0
15
15
0
years, or 1
1 extra
2 5
0
2
5
0
years, or
with 2
pair of
1 with 2
extra
trousers
extra
trousers
trousers
for 1 year
Washing Suit
Trousers
2 5
0
Trousers
2
10
0
..
. .
X
5 0
0
2
10
0
W ashing trousers
I extra ..
1 2
6
0
11
3
Hats
3
1
i
0
3
3
0
2
o ie
6
1
13
0
2
1 5
0
2
10
0
2
1
1
0
2
2
0
%
1
5
0
p
10
0
9
1
5
D
]
*>
10
o
Caps
12 pairs
0
. .
6
14
1
0 4
11
0
4
11
. . . .
i
0
6
6
0
6
6
i
0
5
11
0
5
11
i
0
5 1
o
1]
Socks
4
2
0
9 pairs ..
0 5
9
2
11
9
9 pairs
0 5
9
2
ii
9
9 pairs ..
0
5 11
2
13
3
9 pairs ..
0
5
6
2
9
6
9 pairs ..
0
5
6
9
9
6
Ties
4
0
6
(cashmere)
3
0
14
0
4
0 3
11
0
15
8
4
0 4
6
0
18
0
4
0
4
6
0
18
0
4
0
3 11
0
15
8
4
0
4
6
o
18
0
Braces
Belt
2 pairs ..
0
3
6
0
7
0
2 pairs ..
0 3
11
0
7
10
2 pairs ..
1
0 4
0 3
6
11
0
0
9
3
0
11
2 pairs ..
0
4
6
0
9
0
2 pairs ..
0
3
6
0
7
0
2 pairs ..
0
4
6
0
9
0
Shirts, working
6
0
io
6
3
3
0
6
0 9
0
2
14
0
6
0 9
11
2
19
6
6
0
12
9
3
16
6
6
0
10
R
3
3
0
6
0
10
6
3
3
o
Shirts, best ,.
3
0
12
6
1
17
6
3
0 10
6
i
11
6
3
0 12
6
1
17
6
3
0
12
6
1.
17
6
3
0
11
1
14
6
3
0
13
6
o
o
6
Flannels
3
0
7
6
1
2
6
2 Singlets,
0 8
6
0
17
0
2 Singlets,
0 7
6
0
15
0
3 Singlets,
0
14
0
2
2
0
3 Sinciets
0
14
6
2
3
6
3 SinMets,
0
14
6
9
3
6
summer
cotton
woollen
,
woollen
2 Singlets,
0 16
6
1
13
0
2 Singlets,
0 12
9
1
5
6
3 Under-
0
14
0
2
2
0
Underpants ..
winter
woollen
vests
• ■
3 pairs ..
0
12
6
1
17
6
2 pairs,
0 9
3
0
18
6
2 pairs,
0 7
6
0
15
0
3 pairs ..
0
12
6
i
17
6
3 pairs,
0
13
6
2
0
6
summer
cotton
woollen
2 pairs,
0 17
0
1
14
0
2 pairs.
0 12
6
1
5
0
Collars
winter
winter
12
0
1
0
0
12
0
12
0 1
2
0
14
0
12
0 1
3
0
15
0
12
0
1
0
0
12
0
12
0
1
0
0
12
0
12
0
1
3
o
15
o
Pyjamas
2 pairs ..
0
13
6
1
7
0
2 pairs ..
0 16
6
1
13
0
2 pairs ..
0 17
6
1
15
0
2 pairs ..
0
17
6
1
15
0
2 pairs ..
0
17
6
1
15
0
2 pairs ..
1
0
0
2
0
0
Handkerchiefs
9
0
1
0
0
9
0
12
0 1
1
0
13
0
12
0 1
6
0
18
0
12
0
1
2|
0
14
6
12
0
1
3
0
15
0
12
0
1
6
0
18
0
Studs
6
0
0
3
0
1
6
0
1
6
Sports Coat ..
i
1
15
0
0
17
6
£ House
1 io
0
0
15
0
| Sweater
0 19
0
0
9
6
J House
1
2
6
0
11
3
I House
1
15
0
0
17
6
4 House
1
10
0
0
ll
0
Trousers, flannel
coat
coat
Coat
Coat
i pair ..
0
19
6
0
9
9
| pair ..
1 15
0
0
17
6
i pair ..
1
12
6
0
16
3
4 pair ..
1
15
0
0
17
6
■J pair ..
1
6
8
o
13
9
Trousers, working
2 pairs ..
0
18
6
1
17
0
2 pairs ..
1 7
6
2
15
0
4 pairs ..
0 16
6
3
6
0
2 pairs ..
0
19
6
1
19
0
2 pairs ..
1
2
6
n
5
0
2 pairs ..
1
O
2
5
o
Trousers, dungaree
2 pairs ..
0
10
6
1
1
0
2 pairs ..
0 9
6
0
19
0
2 pairs *. .
0
10
9
1
1
6
2 pairs . .
0
12
6
1
5
0
0
12
0
1
0
Overcoat
n
5
0
2
12
6
1 Oil Coat
5 5
0
1
15
0
X
7 7
0
2
9
0
i
4
7
6
1
9
2
4
0
0
1
6
8
i
0
i
15
0
1 13
6
1 Oil Coat
2
0
0
1 Oilskin
1
10
0
1 Oilskin
1
15
0
1 Mackin-
Coat
Coat
3 5
0
. ,
1 Mackin-
3
18
6
I Mackin-
3
10
0
1 Mackin-
3
0
0
tosh
tosh, to
last 2
tosh
tosh
Oils or Mac
dntosh'j
Oil or Mad
dntosh
Oilskin Co
at
and
Oil or Mac
kintoshl
average at 33/6
9
average at
40/-
Mackintosh, aver-
average at 35/-
and bo/-
respec
y
1
4
and 78/6
respec
-
>
1
19
6
age at 30/-
and
y
1
5
0
and 60/—
respec-
>■
i
3
9
tively tor z years
(
j
tively for 2 years
70/- respectively
tively for.
2 years
.
for 2 years


Umbrella
I
0
16
6
0
8
3
X
0
13
0
0
4
4
i
0
16
6
0
8
3
1
0
16
6
0
5
6
1
'3
0
18
6
0
6
2
1
3
0
18
6
0
6
2
Bathing Costume
i
0
9
6
0
9
6
1
0
10
0
0
10
0
i
0
9
6
0
9
6
1
0
8
6
0
8
6
i
0
8
6
0
8
6
Boots, best
1 pair ..
1
15
0
1
is
0
1 pair ..
1
15
0
1
15
0
1 pair ..
1
12
6
1
12
6
1 pair ..
1
12
6
1
12
6
1 pair ..
i
15
0
1
15
0
1 pair ..
1
15
0
1
15
0
Boots, working
2 pairs ..
1
i
0
2
2
0
2 pairs ..
1
2
6
2
5
0
2 pairs ..
1
1
0
2
2
0
2 pairs ..
1
5
0
2
10
0
2 pairs ..
i
2
6
2
5
0
2 pairs ..
1
5
0
2
10
0
Shoes, rubber soled
1 pair ..
1
0
0
1
0
0
1 pair ..
0
9
11
0
9
11
1 pair ..
0
16
9
0
16
9
1 pair ..
0
0
11
0
5
11
I pair ..
0
'•
11
0
7
11
Slippers
1 pair
0
6
11
0
6
11
1 pair ..
0
12
9
0
12
9
1 pair ..
0
9
11
0
9
11
1 pair ..
0
8
11
0
8
11
I pair ..
0
10
6
0
10
6
Goloshes
1 pair ..
0
7
11
0
7
11
1 pair ..
0
6
11
0
6
11
1 pair ..
0
8
11
0
8
11
1 pair ..
0
9
11
0
9
11
Boot Laces
6 pairs .
0
6
4
0
2
0
6 pairs ..
0
0
3
0
1
6
6 pairs ..
0
6
3
0
1
6
6 pairs ..
0
0
3
0
1
6
12 pairs
0
0
3i
0
3
6
6 pairs ..
0
0
4
0
'2
0
Repairs, soled and heeled
6
0
6
6
1
19
0
6
0
7
0
2
2
0
6
0
6
6
1
19
0
6 repairs
0
6
0
2
0
6
6 repairs
0
7
6
5
0
6 repairs
0
7
0
2
0
Totals
50
10
0
47
19
6
46
16
5
51
3
0
50
7
2
51
17
5
Women’s Clothing.
Hats ..
3, at aver-
1
1
0
3
3
0
3— 2 at ..
1
10
0
I 3
15
6
3—
1, Summer,
1
7
6
]
2
1
15
0
3
10
0
2
1
5
0
2
10
0
age
I at ..
0
15
G
/
Summer
1
19
6
1
i
14 5
best
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
Winter
Ready to
wear
2
0
2
12
0
11
1, Winter,
best
1, ready to
wear
1
0
9
19
6
6
r
1C
6
1, ready to
wear
0
15
0
0
15
0
Costume, Winter
.1
12
12
0
6
6
0
i
12
12
0
6
6
0
1
13
13
0
4
11
0
i
¥
12
12
0
6
6
0
1
12
12
0
4
4
0
i
¥
12
12
0
6
6
0
Costume, Summer
1
5
5
0
5
5
0
i
5
5
0
5
5
0
i
4
19
6
4
19
6
J, Assam
9
9
0
4
14
6
i.
4
4
0
2
0
silk
Dress Summer
1
2
2
0
2
2
0
i
2
9
6
2
9
6
1, silk ..
1, voile ..
2 cambric
4
2
1
4
10
5
0
0
0
4
2
2
4
10
10
0
0
0
i
2
15
0
2
15
0
1, voile ..
3
3
0
3
3
0
i
3
15
0
3
15
0
Skirt, blue serge
1
3
9
6
3
9
6
i
3
9
6
3
9
6
i
4
15
0
2
7
6
i
, 9
9
6
2
9
6
i
3
9
6
3
9
6
3
15
0
1
17
6
Skirt, tweed ..
1
1
19
6
1
19
6
i
2
12
6
2
12
6
i
i
2
6
1
2
6
i
1
15
0
1
15
0
i
2
10
0
10
0
Blouse, silk
2
1
1
0
2
2
0
9
i
7
6
2
15
0
1
1
5
6
1
5
6
i
i
15
0
1
15
0
i
1
9
6
1
9
6
i
1
9
6
1
9
6
Blouse, voile ..
2
0
14
6
1
9
0
2
0
12
11
1
5
10
1
0
18
11
0
18
11
2
0
15
6
1
11
0
2
1
1
0
2
2
0
2
0
17
6
1
15
0
Blouse, cambric or
2
0
6
11
0
13
10
4
0
8
11
1
15
8
2
0
6
11
0
13
10
3, cambric
0
8
11
1
6
9
3, cambric
0
10
6
i
11
6
2
0
10
6
1
1
0
winceyette
8
13
0
11
6
6
0
Camisoles
6, average
0
7
6
2
5
0
0
0
8
9
2
12
6
4
0
7
6
1
10
0
6
0
7
11
2
7
6
6
0
11
2
6
4
Combinations, calico ..
6
0
13
6
4
1
0
is
8
Knickers
6 pairs ..
0
7
9
2
6
6
4
0
7
6
1
io
0
6 pairs ..
0
7
11
2
7
6
6 pairs ..
0
7
11
2
7
6
4 pairs
0
8
11
1
Undervests, woollen
2
0
io
11
1
1
10
ii
0
10
6
0
15
9
H
0
13
6
1
0
3
ij
0
9
11
0
14
11
u
0
9
11
0
14
10i
H
0
16
6
1
4
9
Undervests, cotton
3
0
3
6
0
10
6
6
0
4
11
1
9
6
6
0
4
6
1
7
0
4
0
3
11
0
15
8
6
0
4
11
1
9
6
4
0
5
11
1
3
8
Nightdresses ..
4
0
15
6
3
2
0
4
0
12
9
2
11
0
4
0
12
6
2
10
0
4
0
12
9
2
11
0
4
0
12
6
2
10
0
3 ..
0
16
6
2
9
6
Underskirt , white
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
15
9
0
15
9
1
0
17
11
0
17
11
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
2
6
i
2
6
Underskirt, dark moreen
1
1
2
6
1
2
6
I, or Ro-
man
satin
0
19
11
0
19
11
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
15
6
0
15
6
1
0
13
6
0
13
6
Bloomers
2 pairs,
0
6
11
0
13
10
2 pairs ..
0
7
11
0
15
10
2 pairs,
0
12
9
1
5
6
2 pairs,
0
11
6
1
3
0
2 pairs,
0
15
9
1
11
6
woollen
woollen
woollen
woollen
Corsets
2 pairs ..
1
7
6
2
15
0
2 pairs ..
0
14
11
1
9
10
2 pairs ..
1
5
6
2
11
0
2 pairs ..
0
17
6
1
15
0
2 pairs ..
0
17
6
1
15
0
u
1
5
0
1
17
6
Dressing gown
i
1
1
0
0
10
6
x
2
9
6
1
4
9
kimona
1
2
6
0
11
3
1
2
1
15
0
0
17
6
i
¥
1
7
6
i , woollen
2
7
6
0
1
3
9
Aprons, white
2
0
6
6
0
13
0
4
0
5
9
1
3
0
3 overalls
0
10
6
1
11
6
4
0
5
11
1
3
8
4
0
7
11
1
11
8
4
0
6
1
6
0
Aprons, black
2
0
7
6
0
15
0
0
Stockings, cashmere
6 pairs ..
0
8
11
2
13
6
6 pairs ..
0
5
3
1
11
6
4 pairs ..
0
5
6
1
2
0
6 pairs ..
0
6
11
2
1
6
6 pairs ..
0
6
11
2
1
6
6 pairs ..
0
i
6
2
0
Stockings, silk
2 pairs ..
0
7
11
0
15
10
1 doz. ..
0
0
12
0
Handkerchiefs
1 doz. ..
0
1
0
0
12
0
1 doz.
0
1
0
0
12
0
1 doz.
0
1
0
0
12
0
1 doz.
0
0
6
0
6
0
1 doz. ..
0
1
0
0
12
0
0
i
Veil s
4
0
2
6
0
10
0
3
0
2
6
0
7
6
3
0
5
6
0
16
6
3
0
2
6
0
7
6
3
0
5
11
0
17
9
3
0
3
6
0
10
c
Gossamer
1
0
5
0
0
5
0
1
0
7
6
0
7
6
1
0
5
0
0
5
0
1
0
7
6
1
0
7
11
0
7
11
Gloves ..
3 pairs ..
0
5
11
0
17
9
2 pairs 1
0
5
11
10 15
9
3 pairs — (
0
10
6
3 pairs —
3 pairs —
3 pairs —
8
11
1 pair )
0
3
11
/
0
5
11
[l
0
4
Kid ..
0
8
11
'I
Kid ..
0
12
6
)
0
(
0
3
11
)
Silk ..
0
5
11
SO 17
9
Silk ..
0
7
11
1
5
4
• • . .
0
7
6
>0 19
8
Cotton
0
2
11
)
Cotton
0
4
11
)
0
3
3
15
Top coat
1
¥
7
7
0
3
13
6
i
3
5
15
0
1
18
4
J, average
5
15
6
1
18
6
i
4
19
6
2
9
9
i
6
6
0
2
2
0
1
3
5
5
0
1
c
Aust.


1
Item.
.
Melbourne.
Sydney.
Brisbane.
Adelaide.
Perth.
[ Hobart.
Quantity.
Price.
Atimuil
Cost.
Quantity.
Price. |
1
Annual
Cost.
Quantity.
Price.
Annual
Cost.
Quantity.
Price.
Annual
Cost.
Quantity.
Price.
Annual.
Cost,
1 Quantity.
Price.
Annual
Cost.
Women’s- Clothing —
e
icll.
Each. i
Each.
Eacn.
continued.
£
■S'.
d.
£
.V.
d.
i
£
,s.
d. 1
C
,v.
d.
£
.V.
d.
£
S,
d.
£
4.
£
.9.
d.
i£
S.
d.
£ ». d.
£
d.
£ -s.
&
Raincoat
1
jj
i
3
0
0
13
9
,
Golfer
2 , „
1 0!
0
1-
5'
0-.
i- 1 -
2
9
r.
i
4
9
I
2
7
6
0
15
10
1
a
2
10
0
1
5
0
1-
3.
9
8
1 14 9
3
19'
6l
1 14
9
Umbrella
T
£
1
0
o.
10'
(1
T:
i
i
0
0
7
0
_ij
0
10
6
0
d
3
1
0
10
6
0
3
ft
I
0
15
(>
0 .5 2
: r
1
•>
6
0 7
§.
I’araso!
7
0
15
0
0
7
ft
r
Scarf
i
O'
2
0
•>•
.>
0
fiir or
3
!»
0
i
3'
2*
r
i
19
6
0
13
2
1.
2
2
0
1
1
0
1
3
3
3
0
I 1 0
1 1
0
10
0
0 1ft
8
1 scarab -I-
Bathing Gown
U
0
13
0
O'
7
6
i_
0
17
o
0
8
9
i'
2"
0
15
6
0
7
9
1.
0
18
()
0 9 3
1.
0
n
6
0 8
q
Sundries
2
2
0
i..
3
3
0
3
3
0
3
3
0
3 3 0
3 3
0
Shoes
2 pairs ..
1
1.3
0
3
10
0
[2 pairs,
1
15
0
3
10
0
2 pairs . .
1
7
6
0
15
0
2 pairs
1
12
ft
3
5
0
2 pairs,
1
17
6
3 15 0
2 pairs,
i
10
0
3 0
0
best
i
best
best
best
House siloes, mimes’
1 pair
0. 13i
9
, b pair
O’ 13:
9‘
1 1 ! pair ..
0
12
9
I pair
0
13
9
0
13
9
1 pair ..
0
11
6
0. U 8
1 pair ..
0
n
9
o- 11
9
Sand shoe.^
1* pair
O'
4
ft'
1 . .
1 pair
0
d
U
0
d
11
1 pair
0
5
n
0- 5 11
1 pair,
rubber
0
6
11
0* 6
n
Slippers
soled
1 pair
0
8
11
0
8
11
jl pair ..
0
9
11
(»■
9
lit
I 1 pair
0
7
6
0
7
6
1 pair ..
0
9
11
0
9
11
1 pair
0
8
11
0 8 11
1 pair ..
0
8
11
0 8
n
Goloshes
4! pairs ..
0
,1 pair
0
d
6
0
d
6
I pair ..
0
6
9
0
6
9
1 pair ..
0
8
11
0. 6 11
1 pair
0
d-
n
0. 5
11
liepaii's
0
d-
I
2’
o.
.4;-pairs ..
0
0
0
£
4>
0
|4 pairs ..
0
6
0
1
4
0
4 pairs,
0
5
9
1
3
0
4 pairs ..
0
0
6
1 6 0
4 pairs ..
0
6
0
I 4
0
japprox.
soled and
heeled
4' pairs ..
0
i
0
O'
6.
0!
.4 pairs,
i heeled
[ only
0
1
9
0
7
0
i4 pairs,
, heeled
' only
0
1
6
0
H
0
4 pairs,
heeled
only
0
1
9
0
7
0
4 pairs,
heeled
only
0
1
9
0. 7 0
4 pairs,
heeled
0
1
3
0* 5
0
Totals ..
64
14
1
t
64
7
0
57
7
1
..
• •
61
1
1
65 9 6J
59 18
7
Bov’s Clothing.
i
( 1 01 years.)
j
Overcoat
- 1
2
; 2
d
0
b
2
(1
1 1
3
0
0
1
10
0
1
2
2
13
0
1
*
6
average,
Aust. and
imported
material
2
15
0
1
7
6
1
2'
2
15
0
1 7 6
1,
3
0
0
1 10
«
Suits
2
.■>
d
1 1
1
11
10
b, woo! ..
2
12
6
d
d
0
1, best . .
2
13
0
9
15
0
2
2
2
0
4
4
0
2
2
5
0
410 0
2, all wool
2
0
0
4 4
0
Suit, summer
)..
i
1
2
(j
1
•>
ft
Rants
6-pairs . .
0
S’.
11
2
13
0
.4 pairs ..
0
12
0
•>
H
0
,2 pairs,
0
9
ft
0
19
0
4 pairs ..
0
12
6
2
10
0
4 pairs ..
0
10
6
220
4 pairs ..
0
13
6
2 14
e
1
1 tweed
|
14 pairs.
0
t
11
0
19
s
j
j drill
Jersey
i
0
12
(■;
0
ii
(j
il
0
7,
3-
0
7.
3
h
0
10
6
0
d
3
1
0
8
11
0
8
11
1
0
10
6
010 ft
1
0
U
6
0 12
6
Summer ('oat
i
0
s
11
0
S'
11
! 1
0
12
6
0
L2.
(4
1
0
12
0
0
12
a
1
0
10
6
0 10 8
1
0
12
6
O' 12
e
Shirts
(i
0
5
11
1
15
6
*6
i
0
d
6
1
1-3
O
16 shirts or
waists
0
d
6
1
13
0
6
0
4
n
1
9
0
6
0
6
8
I 19 0
6
0
O
6
1 13
0
Stockings
6 pairs . .
0
5
6
1
13
0
•6* pairs- . .
0
4
9
1
H
6
|4i pairs ,.
0
d
6
1:
2
0
6 pairs ..
0
4
9
1
8
8
6 pairs.
0
5
11
1 15 6
6 pairs ..
0
5
9
1 14
s-
Hats, felt
golf
i
0
7
6
0
7
6
12
0
9
o
0
19
0
L, best felt
0
8
ft
0
8
6
9.
0
8
n
0
17
10
2
0
8
11
0 17 10
2'
0
8-
6
0- 17
0
Hh-ts, straw . .
i
0
(i
6
0
o
6
1, Panama
0
10
6
0
10
ft
Hats, school . .
l!
0
3
11
0
3
11
G6ps
2
0
•>
ft
0
5
0
2
0
3>
6
0
7
0
:o
0
4
6
0
9
0
0.
0
2
11
0 3 10
2'
0-
2
6
0 5
0
Handkerchiefs
u>
0
0
6
0
o
11
12
0
0 101
0
10
6
he
0
0 104
0
k»
8
112
0
1
OJ
0
12
6
12
0
O'
6
0 6 0
12
0
1
Ol 0 12
e
0611a rs
! o
0
1
t
0
6
0-
l 4i
0
1;
3
0
5
0
. .
1


Braces
1 pair
0
9
0
0
2
G
2 pairs ..
0
1
0
0
3
0
2 pairs or
0
2
1
0
4
9
2 pairs ..
0
2
6
0
5
0
2 pairs ...
0
1
11
0
3
10
2 pairs ..
0
2
0
0
5
ft
belts
Ties
3
0
I
0
0
4
a
3
0
2
0
0
G
0
4
0
2
11
0
11
8
3
0
3
6
0
10
6
3
0
1
6
0
4
6
3
0
1
3
0
3
9
Singlets, wool. .
,»•
0
s
11
1
O'
9
9
0
0
(i
0
13
(>
11
0
7
3
0
10
1 1
,3
0
5
6
0
1G
0
;3
0
8
11
1
6
9
3
0
10
0
1
10
0
Singlets
2, wool and
0
r>
0
0
10
0
3, cotton.
0
4
11
0
14
9-
• cotton
Pyjamas
2. paii's
0
10
(i
1-
i,
0
2 pairs . .
0
s
0
0
17
0
2 pairs . .
0
9
0
o. 19
0
-2- pairs ..
0
9
G
0
19
O'
2 pairs ..
0
11
(1
1
3
0
] 2'pairs ..
01
10
0
1
1
0
Bathing Costume
i:
0
3
()
0
ir
i,
0
9
9
0
2
9'
i
0
3
9
0
3
9'
i
0
d
11
0
a
11
!1
0:
3
(3 1 O'
S
ft
StmdHes
■ Studs. &f.
0
i
0
Studs, &c.
0
1
O'
0
9
G
i . ,
ft
1
ft
Bbots. best
1 pair
1
1.
0
I
1
I)
I'pair
0
17
p
0
17
9
1 pair . .
1
1
0
1
i
It
*]. pair
1
2
6
1
2
G
1 pair
1
3
6
1
3
6
1 pair ..
0
IS
n
0
18 11
Bools, s, hool
3 pairs
0
Lii
9
•>
10
3.
3 pairs ..
0
15
9
•)
~
3
2. pairs ..
0
17
(>
1
15
O'
2 pairs ..
1
i
0
2
2
0
2' pairs ..
0
15
11
1
11
10
|2 pairs ..
01
1G
(>
1
13
ft
Sandshoes
T'pair
0
4
1 1
»
4
11:
4 pair
0
d
11
0
d
11
1 pair ..
0
6
11
0
G
11
1 pair
0
d
11
0
5
11
) I pair
O'
o.
ii
a
5
Hi
Repairs
(>
0
()
1
13
0
'(j* soled and
0
4
9
1,
S'
0’
! 4-
0
d
0
i.
2
0
0, soled and
0
d
9
1
14
(i
6
0
d
9;
1
14
G
:e.
O'
d
0
i
10
a
heeled?
(approx.)-
heeled
])er pair
Totals . ,
22
I
s
22
12
s
<
r
19
9
li
22
1
ii
22
6
11
22
a
7
(hlli.S ri.oTlIIN,;.
j
(7J years.)
Singlets, woollen
t
0
ii
(')
c
(>
0
0}
0
.*)
1 !
0
11
10
u
0
7
G
0
ii
3
3
0-
d
1!
0
17
9
3
0
6-
G
0
19
0
,3
0
8
11
i
b
9
Singlets, wool and cotton
41
0
3!
1L
0
15
8-
.3;
0
3
(i
0
10
I)
Stays.
2 pairs
0
9
11
0
19
10
2 pai . .
0
s
9
0
17
G
|2lp?urs ..
0
3
ii
0
T
10-
2 pai i s ..
0
9
11
0
19
10
2 pairs ..
0
4
11
0
9
10
2 pairs ..
0
11
0
13
10
Bloomers. cotton
4 pairs
0
3' 11
0
17
8
4 pairs . .
0
3
9
0
15
0
Impairs ..
0
2
10>
0
17
0
4 pairs ..
0
d
11
1
3
8
4 pairs ..
0
9
11
0
11
8
4 pairs ..
0
4
I)
0
18
0
Bloomers. woollen
2 pairs
0
8
G
0
17
0
2 pairs . .
0
~
9
0
15
I)
‘
2 pairs ..
0
0
11
0
13
10
2 pairs ..
0
d
11
0
11
10
2 pairs ..
0
4
9
0
iu>
6
Bettif-oats, winter
3
0
9
11
1
9
9
■2
0
9
ii
0
19
10
;•>
0
8
11
0
17
10'
i
0
0
11
0
G
11
9
0
5
11
0
11
10
2
0
9
It
0
19
0
Rett-icoats, .summer
•>
0
9' 11
li
9*
9
3:
0
8
9
1
(V
3
,3
0
8
11
1
G
9
9
0
d
11
0
11
10
2'
0
4
11
0
9
10
<3
0
9
6
1
8
e
.Dress, blue, serge
i:
4?
4
0
n
4
0.
1
•)
o
j
11
0
;r
3
17
0‘
1
18
9'
-I, best, ..
2
10
0
1
d
0
_i_
o
19
G
1
9
9
2
19
0
1
9
9
Dress 4 blue, t weed
i
3
3
0
3
3‘
0
1, winter,
9
(>
1
9
0.
1, cotton
0
12
(j
0
12
0
1. school
2
2
0
2
2
0
1, school
0
17
0 !
0
17'
0
'1, school
1
3'
6
1
3
6
school
tweed
Dross, best summer, voile
I:
I
r*'
11
1
9.
1!
i
2
5
0
2'
.V
0
], voile ..
I
7
0-
1
7
6
1, best,
1
15
0
1
15
0
i
I
•)
6 :
1
9‘
G
ii
1
12
0
1
12
6
summer
G
Dross, tobraleo, summer
1
1.
o’.
G
I'
5'
o-
3', school
I
i
0
3
3,
o.
3, school.
0-
17
G
2’
12
0
3, school
0
15
6
9
G
0
3, school
0
11
2
3
6
Dross-, cambric, summer
2!
0
19 1
11
1'
19
10-
3, cambric
0
17
0
2
12
G
summer
(•oiler, woollen.
it
1.
19'
0
1'
19i
{)>
.1’
I
19
(b
0
19 :
9<
\
I
d
0
0
12
G-
i
1
3
o
0
11
9
I
8
G
0
14
3
UL
9'
>
0
1
6
Hht«
4;
0
15-
0
3)
0.
0
5
0
12
(>
1
~y-
0'
i
1
i
0
1
•>•
o-
15
0
1
10
O'
2; best ..
0
18
G
1
17
O'
■2
0
10
0
I
1
0
2
0
l(i
(>
1
13
0
i
0
8
11
1
15
10
2
0
8
n
0
17
10
2, school
0
15
0
1
11
0
2
0
15
0
1
10
0
i
0
d
11
j
Pyjamas
2 pairs
0
15.
11
1
11
10
2‘puirs ..
0
12
9
1
r>-
0
2’pai is ..
0
7
0
0
14
0’
2 pairs . .
0 10‘
G
1
1
0
2’ pairs ..
0
9
11
0
19'
10
[2 pairs . .
0
12
0
1
;>
0
Sochs-
O'-pairs
0-
4»
9
1
S'
G
6'pairs ..
0
4
3
1
d
O'
6 pairs . .
0
4
0
1
i
0
6 pairs ..
0
4
3
1
5
G
0 pairs.
0
4.
3
1
d
G
•6 pairs ..
0
3
<1
I
a
cashmere
*
Handbetvliieb
0-
0.
O)
1 9
12
0
0
G.l
O'
O'
In
12
0
0
4J
0
4
O'
12
0
0
4
0
4
0
12
0
0
n
0
4
li
:12
0
9
d
0
">
0
Top Coat
x
4
!)
()
.)<
4
9
A Rain-
3
17
G
1
IS
9‘
1
'2'
1
7
G
0* 13
9 1
1
2 1 •
1
19
G
O'
19
9
1
2
1
7
6
0
13
9
•i
2
9
9
0
1
4
ft
Cloves
1 pair
0
2
11
0
2
ii
1 pa if ..
0
2
14
O'
2
ii
1 pair . .
0
3
11
0
3
11
1 pair ..
0
3
11
0
3
11
I pair . .
0
2
9
0
•>
9
Umbrella
.1.
0
li
9
()■
3
d'
.1.
0
7
G
O'
3
9
i
0
d
11
0
3
O'
0
7
11
0
4
0
i
0
.>
b
0
9
Bathing (V>stunic
i
0
(>
9
0
0
9
1
0
4
0
0
4
0
i
0
0
11
0
0
11
i
0
4
11
0
4
11
1
0
7
n
0
7
ii
Handbag
i
0
8
0
0
s
0
1
0
3
6
0
3
1)
i
0
G
0
7
G
i
0
4
6
0
7
6
I
0
5
n
0
5
ii
Sundries (Ribbons, (bl-
I.
0-
(4
1
12
(v
1
d'
0
1
2
(>
1
10
0
l l
1
10
0
lars, &c.l
Shoos? best
1 pair
1
1
0
1
1
0
1 pair ..
0
1G
3
0
1G
o
1 pair ..
0
17
G
0
17
G
1 pair ..
0
16
6
0
16
G
I pair ..
0
15
G
0
15
G
li pair ..
0
17
u
0
17
11
Boots, school
3 pairs
0
IT
(i
o
12
G
3 pai rs . .
0
10
G
1
11
G
2 pahs ..
0
15
G
1
11
0
2 pairs ..
0
1’5
0
1
11
0
2 pairs ..
0
13
3
1
6
G
2 pairs ..
0
13.
I L
I
7
10
Shoes, rubber soled
1 pair ..
0
3
9
0
3
9
1 pair ..
0
3
11
0
3
11
1 pair ..
0
4
11
0
4
11
I pair ..
0
4
11
0
4-
11
1! pair ..
0
3
ii
0
3
11
Repairs
6
0
4
(>
i
X
0
G, soled'and
0
d
G
1
1j3.
0
3
0
4
0
0
1.2-
0
0 repairs
0
4
G
1
7
0
0 repaired
0
3
9
1
2‘
0
6 repairs
0
4'
0
I
4
0
heeled
approx.
and
and
heeled
heeled
To bO IS- . .
36
9
1
30
2
8
21
14
1
25
i
d
1 Ui
16
4
..
26
4
7


Melbourne.
Sydney.
Brisbane.
Adelaide.
Perth.
Hobart.
Item.
Quantity.
Price.
Annual
Cost.
Quantity.
Price.
Annual
Cost.
Quantity.
Price.
Annual
Cost.
Quantity.
Price.
Annual
Cost.
Quantity.
Price.
Annual.
Cost.
Quantity.
Price.
Annual
Cost.
Each.
Each.
Each.
Each
Each.
Each.
Baby’s Clothing.
£
9
d.
£
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
S.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s
d.
£
s .
d.
£
•5.
d.
£
S.
d.
£
6*.
d.
Singlets
6
0
2
6
0
15
0
6, woollen,
0
5
11
1
15
6
6, second
0
3
11
1
3
6
6, woollen,
0
3
11
i
3
6
6, woollen,
0
3
11
1
3
6
6, woollen,
0
3
9
1
2
6
second
size
size
second
size
second
size
second
size
Nightdresses, cotton
4
0
3
11
0
15
8
6
0
6
11
2
1
6
3
0
5
11
0
17
9
6
0
5
11
i
15
6
6
0
5
11
1
15
6
6
0
8
6
2
11
0
Nightdresses, winceyette
2
0
5
11
0
11
10
3, flannel-
0
5
11
0
17
9
12
0
1
6
0
18
0
12
0
1
9
i
1
0
6
0
1
11
0
11
6
12
0
1
0
0
12
o
12
0
1
11
1
3
0
6.
0
2
9
0
16
6
Napkins
4 doz. ..
1
5
0
5
0
0
4 doz.
1
5
0
5
0
0
4 doz. ..
1
5
6
5
2
0
4 doz.
1
5
0
5
0
0
4 doz. ..
1
7
0
5
8
0
4
1
2
6
4
10
0
(doz.
)
(doz.)
(doz.
)
(doz.)
(doz.
)
(doz.)
3
0
6
11
1
0
9
3
0
10
9
i
12
3
3
0
5
11
0
17
9
3
0
6
11
i
0
9
3
0
5
6
0
16
6
Dresses
12
0
5
11
3
11
0
4, best ..
0
10
9
2
3
0
4, average
0
7
6
1
10
0
6
0
12
6
3
15
0
6, average
0
12
6
3
15
0
9
0
10
6
4
14
6
5, best,
0
6
9
i
13
9
5, average
0
12
0
3
0
0
plainer
11
2
0
6
11
0
13
10
2
0
12
9
i
5
6
3, flannel
0
10
6
1
11
6
2
0
o
11
0
11
10
2
0
0
0
11
10
2
0
5
6
0
11
0
4
0
4
11
0
19
8
4
0
4
11
0
19
8
6
0
6
11
2
1
6
4
0
0
11
1
3
8
4
0
0
11
1
3
8
4
0
6
6
1
6
0
1
0
19
6
0
19
6
1
1
3
0
1
3
0
1
0
19
11
0
19
11
1
1
2
6
1
2
6
1
1
9
6
1
9
6
4
0
3
11
0
15
8
4
0
5
9
1
3
0
4
0
4
9
0
19
0
4
0
3
6
0
14
0
4
0
7
6
1
10
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
5
0
1
5
0
1
1
2
6
1
2
6
i
1
2
6
1
2
6
1
1
12
6
1
12
6
Bootees
6 pairs ..
0
2
11
0
17
6
6 pairs ..
0
2
11
0
17
6
6 pairs ..
0
1
11
0
11
6
6 pairs ..
0
1
6
0
9
0
6 pairs . .
0
2
11
0
17
6
6 pairs ..
0
2
3
0
13
6
Kid Slippers ..
2
0
3
11
0
7
10
2 pairs ..
3 pilchers
0
0
8
3
9
9
0
0
17
11
6
3
1 woollen,
0
4
6
0
4
6
3 pilchers
0
3
6
0
10
6
3 pilchers
0
4
11
0
14
9
3 pilchers
0
3
11
0
ii
9
3
0
3
11
0
11
9
4
0
3
11
0
15
8
10J
2
0
1
6
0
3
0
2
0
1
9
0
3
6
4, flannel
0
1
0
0
4
0
2
0
1
0
0
2
0
2
0
0
0
i
9
2
0
2
6
0
5
0
Feeders
6
0
1
0
0
6
0
Rompers i.
Shoes, baby ..
3
2 pairs ..
0
0
5
3
6
11
0
0
16
7
6
10
4 pairs ..
0
1
6
0
6
0
1, Gondola
6
15
0
11
0
0
1, Gondola
u
1
0
1, Gondola
7
10
0
11
i
0
1, Gondola
10
10
0
11
i
0
1, Gondola
7 12
6
u
i
0
Push Chair
i
3
0
0
1
1
i
1
1
17
0
/
i
2
10
0
j(avge.)
i
4 17
6
((avge.)
For
whole
1 of each
pur-
1 of each
pur-
1 of each
pur-
family
chased
chased
chased
for
for
for
family
whole
whole
family
family
3
0
1
0
0
3
0
3
0
0
5
0
1
3
3
0
0
6
0
1
6
3
0
0
9
0
2
3
3
0
0
6
0
i
6
3
0
0
6
0
i
6
W aterproof Sheeting ..
Feeding Pottles
Teats for Bottles
2 yards ..
0
4
11
0
9
10
2 yards ..
6
0
0
4
1
3
9
0
0
8
10
6
6
2 yards ..
6
0
0
6
2
11
6
0
0
11
15
10
0
2 yards ..
6
0
0
4
2
11
6
0
0
9
15
10
0
2 yards ..
6
0
0
5
1
6
11
0
0
u
n
0
6
2 yards ..
6
0
0
5
1
9
9
0
0
ii
10
6
6
6
0
0
5
0
2
6
6
0
0
6
0
3
0
6
0
0
9
0
4
6
6
0
0
6
0
3
0
6
0
0
6
0
3
0
Tins Powder ..
12
0
11
0
0
11
0
10
0
1
0
0
10
°
10 ..
0
1
6
0
15
0
10
0
1
6
0
15
0
10
0
1
3
0
12
6
10
0
1
3
0
12
6
2
0
1
0
0
2
0
2
0
2
3
0
4
6
2
0
o
0
0
4
0
2
0
2
6
0
5
0
2
0
1
3
0
2
6
Soap
Sponge
12 cakes
0
0
6
0
6
0
12 cakes
0
0
5
0
5
0
12 cakes
0
1
0
0
12
o
6 cakes ..
0
0
10
0
5
0
12 cakes
0
1
3
0
15
0
12 cakes
0
1
1
0
13
0
2
0
0
6
0
1
0
2
0
0
9
0
1
6
2 sponges
0
1
11
0
3
10
2
0
1
6
0
3
0
2
0
2
6
0
5
0
2
0
1
0
0
2
0
Totals ..
20
12
—
10
. .
26
10
2
..
27
19
I
22
19
4
23
3
3
26
7
9
Clothing — continued.


LIST OF ITEMS ALLOWED FOR IN CLAIM FOR SUNDRIES.— REGIMEN OF WOMEN’S CLOTHING.
Item.
Melbourne.
Sydney.
Brisbane.
Adelaide.
Perth.
Hobart.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Cotton
6 reels, 300 yards,
£
d.
f
s.
d.
£
S.
d.
£
s.
d.
■C
s.
d.
£
.<!
d.
0
3
3
6 reels, 400 yards.
0
5
O
12 reels, 200 yards,
0
7
6
12 reels, 200 yards,
0
7
0
12 reels, 200 vards.
0
7
0
12 reels, 200 yards,
0
6
Thread
at 6£d. each
at 10£d, each
at 7jd. each
at 7d. each
at 7d. each
2 reels, 50 yards,
0
0
8
I reel, 2 ozs., at
0
I
11
1 reel, 2 ozs., at
0
0
10i
3 reels, at 3|d. each
0
0
104
1 reel, 2 oz., at Is.
0
1
0
1 reel, 2 ozs., at Is.
0
1
0
at 4d. each
Is. lid.
10id.
Silk
3 reels, 50 yards,
0
1
n
3 reels, 50 yards,
0
1
H
3 reels, 50 yards,
0
0
9
3 reels, 50 yards,
0
0
74
3 reels, 50 yards,
0
0
U
3 reels, 50 jnmls,
0
0
74
Mending Wool (Chad-
at 4Jd. each
at 4jd. each
at 3d. each
at 2Jd. each
at 2-Jd. each
4 balls at Is. 9d.
0
7
0
4 balls at Is. 9d.
0
7
0
4 balls at 9d. each
0
3
0
4 balls at Is. 9d.
0
7
0
4 balls at 9d. each
0
3
0
2 balls at 2s. 6d.
0
0
wick’?)
each
each
each
Needles (Sewing)
2 pkts. at 3d. pkt.
0
0
6
2 pkts. at 2|d. pkt.
0
0
5
2 pkts. at 3jd. pkt.
0
0
7
2 nkts. at 3d. pkt.
0
0
O
2 pkts. at 3d. ukt.
0
0
6
2 pkts. at 4Jd. pkt.
0
0
9
.Needles {Darning)
1 pkt. at 3d. pkt.
0
0
3
1 pkt. at 3d. pkt.
0
0
‘>
1 pkt. at 4d. pkt.
0
0
4
1 pkt. at 3d. pkt.
0
0
3
1 pkt. at 4d. pkt.
0
0
4
1 pkt. at pkt.
0
0
44
Needles (Machine)
6 at Id. each
0
0
6
6 at Id. each
0
0
0
6 at 2d. each
0
1
0
6 at 2d. each
0
1
0
6 at 2d. each
0
1
0
6 at 2d. each
0
1
0
Pins (Best)
6 pkts., 1 07.., at
0
2
O
6 pkts., 1 oz., at
0
]
9
9 pkts., 1 oz., at
0
2
3
6 pkts, 1 oz.. at
0
2
3
6 pkts., 1 oz., at
0
3
0
6 pkts., 1 oz., at
0
3
0
Safety Pins
4Jd. pkt.
3Jd. pkt.
4M. pkt.
4Jd. pkt.
6d. pkt.
6d. pkt.
6 cards, each card
0
i
9
6 cards, each card
0
1
6
6 cards, each card
0
1
6
6 cards at 1 Jd. each
0
2
3
6 cards, each card
0
3
0
6 cards, each card
0
2
9
1 do?.., at 3id.
1 doz., at 3d.
I doz., at 3d.
1 doz., at bd.
1 doz., at 7Id.
Hooks and Et'es
each
each
each
each
2 cards, 2 doz. on
0
0
6
2 cards, 2 doz. on
0
0
4
2 cards, 2 doz. on
0
0
4
2 cards, 2 doz. to
0
0
6
2 cards, 2 doz. to
0
0
6
2 cards, 2 doz. to
0
0
7
card, at 3d. card
card, at 2d. card
each card, at 2d.
each card, at 3d.
each card, at 3d.
each card, at 34d.
Press Studs
card
card
card
card
4 doz. at 4|-d. doz.
0
1
6
4 doz. at 4d. doz.
0
1
4
4 doz. at 2d. doz.
0
0
8
4 cards at 3d, each
0
1
0
4 cards at 3d. each
0
1
0
4 cards at 1 |d. each
0
0
6
Assorted Tapes
2 bdls. at 9Jd. bdle.
0
1
7
1 bdle. at Is. lid.
0
1
n
1 bdle. at Is. 3d.
0
1
3
I bdle. at Is. 3d.
0
1
3
1 bdle. at Is.
0
1
0
1 bdle. at Is. 6d.
0
1
6
Hair Pins ..
4 pkts., 50 in pkt.,
0
0
10
4 pkts, at 2d. pkt.
0
0
8
4 pkts, 1-oz. pkts.,
0
0
10
4 pkts., l-oz. pkt.,
0
0
8
4 pkts., 1-oz. pkt.,
0
0
8
4 pkts., 1-oz. pkt.,
0
1
0
Buttons for replace-
at 2Jd. pkt.
-
at 2Jd. pkt.
at 2d. pkt.
at 2d. pkt.
at 3d. pkt.
0
2
6
0
2
B
0
2
6
0
2
6
0
2
6
0
o
6
ment
Hair Slides, &c.
0
5
0
0
5
0
0
5
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
Hat Pins
0
2
6
0
2
6
0
2
6
0
2
6
0
2
6
0
2
6
Shoe Laces
4 prs. at Is. pr. ..
0
4
0
4 prs. at Is. pr. ..
0
4
0
4 prs. at 8d. pr. ..
0
2
8
4 prs. at 4jd. pr...
0
1
6
4 prs. at 3 Jd. pr...
0
1
2
4 prs. at 4Jd. pr...
0
1
6
Boot Laces
1 doz. at lOid. doz.
0
0 10i
1 doz. at lOJd. doz.
0
0
10i
1 doz. at lOJd. doz.
0
0
10i
1 doz. at Is. 3d. doz.
0
1
3
1 doz. at 2s. doz...
0
2
0
1 doz. at 4s. doz...
0
4
0
Darter Elastic
3 yds. at 8d. yd.. .
0
2
0
3 yds. at Is- yd...
0
3
0
3 yds. at Is. 3d. yd.
0
3
9
3 vds. at Is. yd. . .
0
3
0
3 vds. at Is. yd. . .
0
3
0
3 yds. at lOJd. yd.
0
9
74
Hat Elastic
3 yds. at 4Jd. yd...
0
1
2
3 yds. at 4d. yd...
0
1
0
3 yds. at 4d. yd. ..
0
I
0
3 yds. at 4d. yd. ..
0
1
0
3 yds. at 3|-d. yd.. .
0
0
104
Cleaning and Pressing
0
8
6
0
8
6
0
8
6
0
8
6
0
s
6
Costume
*
Kibbons, &c.
0
3
6
Petersham Belting,
2\ ins., at Is. 6d. yd.
(Petersham Belt-
Neckwear and Fronts
Is'. 3d. Vi)
Linings, &c., for re-
0
11
6
0
15
0
0
13
0
0
14
9
0
8
11
pairing and refining
r
clothing
1
Adornments — Beads,
i
Brooches, &c.
J
£2
2
1
£3
3
0
£3
3
0
£3
3
5
£3
3
Oi
£3
3
0
LIST OF SUNDRY ITEMS ALLOWED FOR IN CLAIM FOR SUNDRIES.— REGIMEN
OF GIRLS’ CLOTHING.
Hair Ribbons, 9 per year at Is. 6d. ..
£0
13
6 12 per year at Is. 9d.
£1
1
0
Collars, Dress
Ribbons
0
5
6
0
U
6
£0
19
0
£1
12
6


CLAIMS OS’ FEDERATED UNIONS.—
MISCELLANEOUS,
Item.
Melbourne.
Sydney.
Brisbane.
Adelaide.
Perth.
Hobart.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost. »
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Amount per A'ear.
Aimual
Cost.
t
S.
d.
£
S.
d.
£
S.
d.
£
S.
d.
£
S .
d.
£
A*.
d.
Union Dues
Average cost
X>er
i
0
0
Average cost
per
1
6
0
Average cost per
1
10
4
Average cost per
1
6
0
Average cost per
1
19
0
Average cost jier
1
7
10
year
vear at 6d.
per
year at 7d. per
year
year
year
week
week
Lodge Fees (A. N. A.)..
Average cost
per
4
0
1
Average cost
per
3
9
4
Average cost per
4
0
0
Average cost per
2
12
0
Average cost per
3
C>
8
year
year
year
year
year
Newspapers —
Momingand.E.v,ening
1ft at Itb each,
2. at
3
0
8
Morning, 7. at
2d,
3
0
8
Morning, 6 at. Id.
1
6
0
Morning, 6 at IJd.
1
19
0
Morning,. 6 at 2d.
o
12
0
Mornings 6 at 2d.
2
12
0
2d. each
each
each
each
each
each
Evening, 6 at
t|d..
I
19
0
Evening, 6 at. Id:
1
6
0
Evening, fi at Id.
1
6
0
Evening, (5 at 2d - .
2
12
0
each
each
each
each
Delivery, at Id, per
0
4
4
week
Political, Industrial,
3d. per week.
0
13
0
3d. per week
0
13
0
3d. per week
0
13
0
3 per week
0
13
0
3d. per week
0.
13
0
3x1, j>er week
0
13
ft
Social, Religious,
or, Sporting
Sunday Paper
1 at 3d. per w'eek
0
13
0
Sunday, I at 4d. ..
0
1,7
4
*•
Stationery —
Envelopes
150
1
150
I
150
15° .. ~1
150 .. j
i5°. .. n
Writing Pads
3
1
3
1
3
3 ..
3 .. 1
3 .. )
Ink
i
0
8
0
y
0
8
0
0
8
0
0
8
0
y
0
8
0
I
0
S
0
Pens
i
1
Pencils . .
i
i
1
Blotting Paper, &c.
J
* * •
,
j,
J
Stamps
3 per week.
0
19
6
3 per week
0
19
6
3 per week at U-d.
0
19
6
3d. per week
0
19
6
3 per week at IJd.
0
19
6
3 per week
0
13
6
each
cacb
Social, Recreation, and.
5s. per week
13
0
0
os. per week.
13
0
0
5s. per week
13
0
0
5s. per week
13
0
0
5s. per week
13
0
0
5s, per week
13
it
O
Amusements ■
\
Church and. Charity ..
Is. fid. per week..
3
18
0
Is. 6cL per week ..
3
18
0
Ls. 6d. per week ..
3
18
0
Is. 6d. per week . .
3
18
0
Is. fid. per week. . .
3.
18
0
ILs. fid. per week ..
3
IS
ft
School Requisites
Average cost
pdr
4
5
0
Average cost
per
Average cost per
I
13
0
Average cost per
1
4
0
year
year
year
year
Lighting (Gas or Elec-
Average cost
per.
2
12
0
Average cost per
3
0
0
Average cost per
3
9
0
Average cost per
13
1
tricifcy)
vear
year
year
year
Smoking Requisites —
Tobacco
1 lb. ■ ■
1,
i,
4ozs. peroz.
7
7
4
0
4 o7.s. at 8d. per oz.,.
6
18
8
4 ozs. per week at
*
16
Q
1;
i
per week, 2k LOd.
■i
2s. 8d- per week
tkf. or,., ,3s. per wk.
Pipes
I
L 3s. per week
7
16
0,
! 3fe. per week
7
IB-
0
••
Pouch
r
• i
Pocket Kai£e
i
i
. i
Holders, &c.
j
J
■ 2d. per week
0
8
8-
■j
4d, week
0
17
4
2d. week
0
8
a
Barber —
*
5
i
Hair Cuts
8 at Is.
0
14
0
.8 at Is.. 3d.
i
0 18
0
,8 at Is. 3d. \
Q
18
0
.8 at Is. . , \.
0
14.
0
.8 at 9d, per man \
0
12
0
8 a* Is. (man), \
0
12
0
8 at 9d.
i
8 at Is. ..
/
8 at Is. (boy’s) J(
8 at 9d. /
8 at ild. per boy /
8 at fid. (boy) j


Shaving Requisites —
Brush
Strop
Soap
0
3
0
0
5
0
0
5
0
. .
0
5
0
. .
0
5
0
O
5
0
Sharpening and Set-
ting
Fares for husband
Average per year
8
0
0
. .
*>»
Dental
Average per year
2
12
0
. ,
3
0
©
Tooth Paste
10 tubes at Is. 3d.
0
12
6
10 tubes at Is. 3d.
0
12
0
10 tubes at Is. 6d.
0
15
0
10 tubes at Is. 6d.
0
15
0
10 tubes at Is. 3d.
0
12
6
10 tubes at Is. 3d.
O
12
ih
Handbag (Ladv’s)
4 at 25s.
0
8
4
1 at 25s.
0
8
4
0
9
2 j
4 at 20s.
0
6
8
J, at 27s. 6cl.
0
9
•>
4 at 30s.
0
10
0
Fuel (Firewood and
1| cwt. Wood perl
week !
■}, cwt. Coal per f
1 cwt. Wood per
11 loads Firewood,
6
1
0
1 cwt. Wood per
6
15
0 ;
11
14
©
Coal ,
10
16
8
week at 2s. Od.
averaging 94 owt.
week at 2s. 1
7
16
0
per cwt.
■
13
0
0
per load, at 11s.
1 owt. -Coal per j
week J
1 cut. Coal per
per load
week J
wedk at 2s. 6(1. 1
3 bags Coke at
0
4
0
per cwt. J
Is. 4d. per bag
1 ban Coal at 3s.
per bag
0
3
0
57
8
9
51
16
4
42
2
4
49
6
2
49
9
G
53
IS
s
HairC'omi>
0
o
0
1 at Is. (’id.
0
1
6
1 at 3s. 6d.
0
3
6
1 at Is. 3d.
0
1
3 !
1 at Is. ..
0
1
0
1 at Is. Od.
0
i
(6
Brushes —
M
1 at Is.
■0
i
i0
1 ait 104d.
0
0
M»i!
1 at Is. 3d.
0
1
3
1 at Is. ..
0
1
0
1 at 9d.
0
0
9
1 a 4 Is. 3d.
0
I
3
Scrubbing
1 at 2s.
0
•>
0
1 at 2s. 6d.
0
2
6 !
1 at Is. 6d.
0
1
6
1 at 2s. ..
0
2
0
1 at Is. 5d.
0
1
5
1 at Is. 9d.
0
1
9
Tooth
10 at 2s.
1
0
0
10 at 2s.
1
0
0 .
10 at Is. lid.
0
19
2
10 at Is. 6d.
0
15
0
10 at 2s.
1
0
0
10 at Is. 6d.
0
15
O
Hair (Woman’s) ..
l/10th
0
4
0
l/10th at 18s. 6d.
0
X
9
l/10th at £1
0
2
0
l/7th at 7s. 6d. ..
0
1
0
l/7th at 7s. Od. ..
0
1
1
l/7th at 19s. Cd.
0
2
8
Hair (Mem’s 1 )
l/7th at 25s.
0
3
6 i
1/7th at 18s.
0
1
9
l/7th at 15s.
0
2
0
l/10th at 5s.
0
0
6
l/10tli at 7s. 6d.
1/lOth at 6s. 6d.
0
0
9
l/10th at 10s. 6d.
0
1
O
Clothes ..
1/lOth at 7s. Od.
0
0
9 !
l/10th at os.
0
0
6
l/10th at 4s. lid.
0
0
6
1 /10th at 3s. 6d.
0
0
4
0
0
8
l/IOth at 4s. 6d.
0
O
5
Ban-mister
11. at Is. \
0
3
9 1
14 at 2s. Od.
0
3
9
11 at Is. 6d.
0
2
3
14 at 2s.
0
3
0
14 at 2s.
0
3
0
1| at 2s. 6d.
0
3
S
1 at 2s. 3d. )
Boot
-J at 4s. 6d.
0
1
14)
4 at 4s.
0
1
0
at Is. 6d.
0
0
9
1/I0that2s.
0
0
9JL
-2
l/4th at 3s. (set)
0
0
9
1/lOth at 7s. 6d.
0
O
9
Sundry 'Brushes —•
(set 3)
Heafftlh [Brush
1
Average 2s.
0
2
0 i
4s. 4d.^average
0
2
0
2s. 6d.) average
0
2
0
2s. 9d. 1 average 2s.
0
2
0
4s. 9d.) average 2s.
0
2
0
2s. 6d.\averaae 2s.
0
■f
©
Stove Brushes, &c.
!
Is. 3d. J
Is. 4d. J
2s. J
Is. 9d. I
Is. 9d. J
i
Brooms—
American Millet
1 at 3s. Od.
0
3
9 ■
1 at 3s. 6d.
0
3
6
1 at 3s. ..
0
3
0
1 at 3e. ..
0
3
0
1 at 4s. ..
0
4
0
1 ait 3s. 0d.
0
3
6
Hair
at 7s.
0
i
9 :
7 ]- a/t 7s. (without
0
I
9
£ at 5s. Gd.
0
1
*4
-J ait-4s. 6d. (without
0
1
i|
at 6s. 9d.
0
1
8
4 at 8s. 6d.
0
O
1?
Yard
handle)
handle)
J- at 4s. (id.
0
2
o
4 at 4s. 4d.
0
o
2
-g- at 4s. .. ..
0
2
0
-J- at os. ..
0
O
6
4 at 3s. 9d.
0
1
10
4 at 4s. 6d.
0
3
Household .Sundries —
Paste Board ami
1 doth at 7s. 6d.
0
0
9
Paste Board, 4s.,
0
0
0
1/T0th at 8s.
0
0
10
Paste Board 4s. 9<l.,
0
0
7
Paste Board ( s. 9d.,
0
0
10
Paste Board 5s. 6d.,
Roller
Roller, Is. 6d.,
Roller Is. 3d.,
Roller is. 3d.,
Roller 2s.,
(»
O
@
Steeps
1 /10th at 5s. 6d.
1 /10th at 6s.
1/lOth at 8s.
1/lOth at 7s. 6d.
1/Toth at 15s. ..
0
1
0
1/20th at £1
0
1
0
l/loth at 17s. 6d.
0
1
2
l/20th at 17s. 6d.
0
0
10
l/20th at 21s. ..
0
1
0
1/20th at 20s.
0
I
0
Glotbes Pegs
2 doz. at 3d. doz.
0
0
6
2 doz. at 44d. doz.
0
0
9
2 doz. at 44d. doz.
0
0
9
2 doz. at 5d. doz.
0
0
10
2 doz. at 4d. doz.
0
0
8
2 doz. at 4d. doz.
0
0
8
Scrubbing Board ..
1 /3rd at 2s. 6d.
0
0
10
1/ 3rd at 3s.
0
1
0
l/3rd at 2s.
0
0
8
1 /3rd at 3s.
0
1
0
l/3rd at 4s. lid.
0
1
8
1 /3rd at 3s. 6d. ..
0
1
2
Shopping Basket ..
l/3rd at 6s.
0
2
0
l/3rd at 4s. 6d. ..
0
1
6
1 /3rd at 4s. 3d. ..
0
1
5
1 /3rd at 4s.
0
1
4
l/3rd at 4s. lid.
0
X
8
1 /3rd at 4s. 6d. ..
0
1
t>
insurance
To be determined
(Life) to be deter-
mined
(Life) to be deter-
mined
To be determined
To be determined
To be determined
Insurance (Furniture)
To bo determined
To be determined
To be determined
To be determined
To be determined
To be determined
Garden Requisites —
Seeds
Plants
Stakes
6
O
Manure ..
At (id. per week
1
0
0
At 6d. per week ..
1
G
0
At 6<1. per week ..
1
6
0
At 6d. per week ..
1
6
0
At 6d. per week ..
1
6
0
At 6d. per week ..
1
Soil
Garden Tools
Lawn Mower —
Water „ _
_
•


Item.
Melbourne.
Sydney.
Brisbane.
Adelaide.
Perth.
Hobart.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ 5. d.
£ .3. d.
Household Miscel-
laneous —
Mangle upkeep
1
Ringer and Repairs
Clothes Horse
Iron (Electric or Gas)
Ironing Board
Ironing Equipment
Repairs to Machine
Wire Safe
•
Lunch Bag
Travelling Bag
Hot Water Bag
Scissors ..
Ui ..
1 0 0
£1 average
1 0 0
£1
1 0 0
£1 per year
10 0
£1 per year
1 0 0
£1 per year
1 0 0
Trays
(Sewing machine
(Sewing machine
(Clothes hoise and
Jam Jars
repairs not included)
repairs not included)
Sewing machine »e-
Bellows ..
pairs not included)
Tin Opener
Skewers ..
Corkscrew
Kitchen Knife, Fork,
&c.
Spoon
Sewing Machine Re-
pairs.
Crockery —•
Cups and Saucers ..
6 at Is. 9d-
0 10 6
6 at Is. 7d.
0 9 6
6 at Is. 9d.
0 10 6
28s. 6d. doz., 6 per
0 14 3
£1 doz., 6 per year
0 10 0
£1 doz., 6
per year
0 10 o-
year at 2s. 4|d.
at Is. 8d.
at Is. 8d.
Plates —
Dinner ..
Average, 1 doz.
0 12 0
Dinner, r
Average
0 13 0
Dinner, | Average
1 0 0
18s. doz.
Average
0 19 0
15s. doz.
Average
0 14 0
18s. doz. '
Average
0 16 G
replacements at
16s.doz.
1 doz.
24s. doz.
I doz.
1 doz.
1 doz.
I doz.
Dessert ..
Is. each
Dessert,
replace-
Dessert,
replace-
21s. doz.
replace-
14s. doz.
replace-
16s. 6d.
replace-
12s. doz.
ments at
21s. doz.
ments at
ments
ments
doz.
ments
Soup
Soup,
Us. Id.
Soup,
Is. 8d.
23s. 6d.
’"per year
18s. doz.
* per year
18s. 6d.
’’per year
16s. doz.
each
15s. 6d.
each
doz.
at
at
doz.
at
Bread
Bread,
15s. doz.
Is. 7d.
10s. doz.
Is. 2d.
13s. doz.
Is. 4|d.
7s. 9d.
each
each
each
doz.
.
Jugs
9s. 6d. ~j
3s. each
9s. 6d. 1
2s. 6d. "1
set
set
each
Meat Dish ..
6s. 6d.
os. each
5s. 6d.
os. 9d.
each
each
each
Vegetable Dish
13s. 6d.
Average
Average
Average
replace-
0 10 0
Average
replace-
0 10 0
each
0 10 0
0 10 0
>replace-
0 10 0
>replace-
0 10 0
Basins
■ments
ments
4s. 4d.
replace-
Is. 9d.
ments
2s. 3d.
ments
2s. each
ments
each
ments
each
each
Teapot
Ss. 3d.
7s. 6d,
5s. 6d.
4s. 3d.
each
each
each
each
Toilet
87s. 6d.
70s. set
65s. set
50s. set
9
set
i
Miscellaneous — continued.


Glassware —
.1
Fruit Bowls ,.
''
6s. 6d.~]
7s. 6d.
4s. 6d. "1
5s. each
Salad
each
each
each
6s. 6d.
5s. 6d.
5s. 6d.
3s. 6d.
Butter Dishes
each
each
each
each
2s. each
3s. 6d.
2s. 6d.
2s. 6d.
Jam Dishes
each
each
each
Average replace-
0
10
0
Average
replace-
0
10
0
2s. each
3s. 6d.
2s. each
2s. 6d.
Drinking Glasses ..
ments
ments,
including
each
Average
0
10
0
Average
0
10
0
each
Average
0 10 0
Water Jug
Average
0
10
0
18s. 6d.
>replac
15s. doz.
>replace-
11s. doz.
> replace-
Cake Dishes
replace-
doz.
ments
ments
ments
6s. 6d.
'ments
6s. each
4s. 6d.
7s. 6d.
each
each
each
Sugar Basin
2s. 9d.
16s. 6d.
doz.
Tum-
blers
6s. 9d.
Water
Jug
3s. 9d.
each
8s. 6d.
Water
Jug
2s. each
5s. Od.
Water
Jug
2s. 3d.
each
7s. 6d.
Water
Jug
Cutlery —
Average,
i
set
in
To be renewed
in
Average,
1
set
in
Renewed in 20 years
Renewed in 20 years
Renewed in 20 years
Jvni ves —•
20 years
20 years
20 years
Carvers
per set.
£1
0
0
per set .
.£1
8
0
per set ..
£1
12
6
-
per pair..
£1
5
0
per set . .
£1
5
0
per set ..
£1
10
0
lable ..
per doz.
2
10
0
per doz..
. 3
5
0
per doz...
2
15
0
per doz...
2
5
6
per doz..
2
5
0
per doz...
3
0
0
Dessert
per doz.
2
O
0
per doz..
. 2
IB
0
per doz...
2
5
0
per doz...
2
i
0
per doz..
2
0
0
per doz..
2
10
0
Bread ..
each
0
3
0
each
. 0
2
0
each
0
2
6
each
0
2
6
each
0
3
6
each
0
4
0
6
15
0
0
6
9
F orks —
Table ..
per doz.
£1
9
0
per doz..
.£2
18
0
per doz...
£3
0
0
per doz.,
1
12
0
per doz..
2
4
0
per doz...
1
6
0
Dessert
per doz.
1
5
0
per doz..
. 2
2
0
per doz...
2
10
0
per doz..
1
4
6
per doz..
1
15
0
per doz...
1
4
0
Bread ..
each
0
7
6
each
. 0
4
0
each
0
5
6
each
0
7
6
each
0
3
6
each
0
7
6
0
5
Q
Spoons —
Table ..
per doz.
£1
9
0
per doz..
.£2
18
0
per doz...
£3
0
0
per doz..
1
12
0
per doz..
2
4
0
per doz...
1
6
0
Dessert
per doz.
1
5
0
per doz..
. 2
2
0
per doz..
2
10
0
per doz..
1
4
6
per doz..
1
15
0
per doz...
1
4
0
Tea
per doz.
0
14
6
per doz..
. 1
2
0
per doz...
0
18
6
per doz..
0
13
0
per doz..
0
16
6
per doz...
0
12
6
12
8
6
0
12
5
18
19
0
0
19
0
6
8
6
0
6
6
12
7
6
14
11
6
Sundry Cutlery—
Average per year
0
12
4
Average per year
0
14
7
Jam and Salt
Jam Spoon 0
2
6
Jam and
0
2
11
Jam
0
2
6
£0
3
6
0
5
0
Spoons
Salt
Spoon
Butter Knives ..
” is.
0
1
0
Butter
0
2
6
Spoon
Butter
Butter
0
i
9
0
O
O
6
0
4
6
Pickle Fork
Knives
Knives
0
3
9
Knives
Pickle
Fork
0
3
0
Pickle
Pork
Pickle
Fork
0
3
6
0
3
6
0
4
0
Salt
0
1
3
Salt
0
1
3
Salt Spoon 0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
Spoon
Spoons
0
1
0
0
9
3
0
0
6
0
8
9
0
11
6
13
18
6
Average per year
0
0
5
Average per year
0
0
7
Average per year
0 13 11


Melbourne.
Sydney.
Brisbane.
Adelaide.
Perth.
Hobart.
Item.
Amount per Year,
Annual
Cost.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
Amount per Year.
Annual
Cost.
—
-
... -
£
s. d.
£
$, d.
f s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
5. d.
*
s. 4.
Cooking Utensils,
minium—
Sauoefpaafis
Alu-
Replacement in 15
years- —•
4 sizes ..£1 19 0
Replacement
years—
4 sizes— £1
5 s..
in
17
15
3
Replacement in
years—
4 sizes— £2 12
8s. 9d.
15
3
Replacement in
years—
4 sizes— £2 5
8s. 6d.
15
0
Replacement in
years —
4 sizes— £2 7
5s.
15
6
Replacement in
years—
4 sizes— £2 0
15
0
lie.
9s. 6d.
8s. 6d.
14s.
11s. 6d.
16s. 6d.-
7s. 3d.
18s. 6d.
15s. 6d.
7s. 3d.
6
1 3
0
Kettle ..
i
16
0
Kettle ..
i
10
0
Kettle, 1
o
6
Kettle . .
1 10
O
1 7
4 pints
1 14
0
1 14
I 4
0
Boiler
Preserving Pan
i
14
0
Boiler ..
i
14
0
Boiler .. 1
7
0
Boiler .
1 14
0
i
17
6
Preserving
Pan
i
4
0
Preserving 1
Pan,
enamel-
5
0
Preservin
Pan
1 10
0
1 4
u
0
ware
0 7
Pry Pain ..
Colander
Steamer ..
12
G
0
12
6
Try Pan 0
8
(1
Fry Pan
0 7
6
0 6
6
0
o
12
0
Colander
(1
12
6
Colander 0
13
0
Colander
0 12
6
0 6
3
0 9
0
9
6
Steamer
0
9
6
Steamer 0
12
6
Steamer
0 9
6
0 9
6
0 9
6
9
0
0
0
12 0
7
19
9
0
10 8
8
1
8
0 10
8
8 8
0
0
11
3
7 15
3
0
10 4
7 15
0
10 4
Enamchvare —
Pic Dish ..
jSiiximg Bowl
■Milk Plan
Tea Pan ..
Coffee Pot
Replacement in 10
years—
3, cost £0 10 0
0 4 0
0 (i 0
0 5 0
0 7 6
Replacement
years—
3, cost ..£0
0
0
0
0
in
8
4
3
8
10
6
6
9
3
0
Replacement
years—
3, cost ..£0
0
0
0
0
In
7
2
4
5
11
10
6
0
9
6
6
Replacement in
years—
3 at 3s. 3d. 0 9
0 7
0 3
0 5
0 7
10
9
0
6
3
0
Replacement in
years—
3 at 3s. 6d. 0 10
0 6
0 7
0 5
0 8
10
6
6
6
6
6
Replacement in
years—
3, cost ., 0 7
0 4
O 6
0 6
0 8
10
3
10
«
6
6
1
13
6
0
3 4
1
10
0
0
3 0
1
a
3
0 3
2
1 12
6
0
3
3
1 18
6
0
3 10
1 12
1
0
3 3
Average replacement
in o years
Average rt
placement
in 5 years
Average replacement
£ s. d.
in 5 years
£ s, d.
Average replacement
£ s. d.
in 5 years
£ s. d.
Average replacement
£ s. d.
in 5 years
£ -9. d.
Average rejilacement
£ 5. d.
in 5 years
£ a. d.
Tinware—
Strainer. Soup
Steamer ..
i. •>. U .
0 1 6
0 2 0
0 2 6
0 4 3
0 1 6
0 16
Strainer.
Tea 0
Strainer.. 0
0
1
t
8
9
o
0 2 0
0 3 3
0 2 3
0 0 10
0
0
2
4
0
0
Wash-up Dish
o 3 (>
i>
3
9
0 16
0 3 9
0
1
5
Dipper ..
o i 6
’)
0 5 0
0 3 10
0
3
9
Bucket ..
U 4 U
12
10
G
0 11 0
0 11 6
0
17
0
Refuse Tin
Slop Bucket
0 12 6
0 6 6
0 In 4
0 8 0
0
6
0 5 6
0 8 6
0
10
6
1 11 0
0
6 2
1 12 11
0
6 7
1
16
5
0 7
3
1 8 3
-•
0
0
8
1 10 8
0
0 1
1
18
8
0
5 6
Miscellaneous Tinware-
2 0
1 3
3 0
O 4
0 2 6
-I
0 2 3
0
2
3
1
flour Sitter
p 1 3
0 2 0
0 0 9
0 0 9
0 16
!
0
2
0
Dust Pan
Grid Iron
Graters ..
Tunnel ..
Average -
year
s. per
0
2 0
Average
replace-
ments
0
2 0
Average is. per year
0 2
0
0
2
0
0 2 0
0 0 7
0 0 10
-
0
2 0
0
0
0
2
0
0
6
6
9
I
|
0
2 O
lea Strainer
O 6
per year
0 13
0 0 9
0
1
4
i
Egg Beater
Party Pan
1 0
1 2doz._,
:s.
0 10 doz.
0 2 0 doz.
1
0 doz.
J
)
Miscellaneous — continued.


Family Social Needs —
I
1
0
0
0
0
1
o
o
1
0
0
i
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
Toys
Presents ..
Photographs and
1
0‘
0
..
1
0
0
i
0
0
1
0
0
• •
1
0
0
Frames (Family
bo Photos) ..
0
5
0
..
0
5
0
0
5
0
..
0
5
0
0
5
0
0
5
0
Tuition in music or
| art, &c. (two chil-
05 dren)
12
12
0
..
12
12
0
..
12
12
0
..
12
12
0
12
12
0
12
12
0
Household repairs —
Household Utensils..
I
0
0
0
_
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
5
0
Renovations
1
o
. .
’ J
Scissors and Knife
r
Sharpening
Unemployment
j
To be determined
To be determined
To be determined
To be determined
To be determined
To be determined


CLAIMS OF FEDERATED
UNIONS
—HOUSEHOLD DRAPERY—REPLACEMENTS.
Assumed House contains :— 1
Double Bed,
3
Single Beds, 7 Windows.
Item.
Melbourne.
Sydney.
Brisbane.
Adelaide.
■ Perth.
Hobart.
Amount
per Year.
Price.
Annual
Cost.
Amount
per Year.
Price.
Annual
Cost.
Amount
per Year.
Price.
Annual
Cost.
Amount
per Year.
Price.
Annual
Cost.
Amount
per Year.
Price.
Annual.
Cost.
Amount
per Year.
Price.
Annual
Cost.
Blankets —
Each.
£
£
Each
£ 5.
d.
£ s.
d.
Each.
£ 6-. (1.
£ s.
d.
Each.
£ s. d.
£
S.
d.
£
5.
d.
£
S.
d.
£
Each.
8. d.
£
s.
d.
Double Bed
J pair ..
J pair ..
2
7
6
} approx
i pair -.
2 10
0
0 8
4
l/6th pair
2 15 0
0
ii
0
1 P air ■ ■
4
4
0
0
14
0
i pair • ■
4
5
0
0
14
9
Single Bed ..
i pair.
| pair . .
i
11
11
) 1 15
0
3/6th pair
2 0
0
1 0
0
3/5 pair
pair
1 13 6
1
0
0
3/6 pair. .
pair
1 17
6
0
18
9
3/6 pair..
pair
2 5
0
1
2
6
girl’s,
and J
pair
approx.
pair
pair
pair, boy’s
Baby’s Cot..
..
Quilts —
Double Bed
i
l/5th ..
2
10
0
) approx
1/6th ..
2 10
0
0 10
0
1/5
1 17 6
0
7
6
.1
9,
5
0
0
7
6
1
o
Q
0
1
10
1
0
0
Single Bed ..
£ girl's, and
i boy’s
3/5ths ..
1
10
0
1 1 8
0
3/5th
1 15
0
1 1
0
3/5
1 5 0
0
15
0
3/6
i
7
6
0
13
9
3/6
2
2
0
Baby’s Cot
1
¥
Sheets —
Double Bed
2
1 pair ..
1
17
9
1 17
3 5
9
1-|- pairs
1 10
0
2 5
0
1 pair ..
1 15 0
1
15
0
1 pair ..
i
15
0
1
15
0
1 pair ..
1
17
6
1
17
6
Single Bed . .
2 girl’s.
3 pairs . .
1
1
9
3
4 1- pairs. .
1 5
0
5 12
6
3 pairs ..
pair
15 0
3
15
0
3 pairs . .
pair
1 5
0
3
15
0
3 pairs ..
pair
1 11
6
4
14
6
Baby’s
2 boy’s
2
pair
pair
pair
Pillow Slips —
Plain
10
12
0
2
6
1 10
0
12
0 2
0
1 10
0
12
0 2 6
1
10
0
12
0
2
3
1
7
0
12
0
3
0
1
16
0
Towels —
Bath
12
6
0
6
6
1 19
0
6
0 7
6
2 5
0
6
0 5 3
1
11
6
Face
6
0
4
9
1 8
6
6
0
5
6
1
13
0
6
0
7
11
2
Tea
12
12
0
2
10
1 14
0
12
1 15
0
12
0 2 11
1
is
0
12
0
2
6
1
10
0
12
0
2
1 1
1
/\
15
0
Table Cloths ..
2
2
1
10
0
3 0
0
1
1 12
6
1 12
6
1
1 3 9
1
3
9
9
1
10
0
3
0
12
0
9
9
o
0
Q
0
Serviettes
6
6
1
10
0
0 15
0
6
2 5
0
1 2
6
6
1 10 0
0
15
0
6
0
2
1
0
6
6
0
2
6
0
15
0
doz.
doz.
doz.
D’Oyleys
4
4
0
2
6
0 10
0
4
0 1
11
0 7
8
4
0 1 6
0
6
0
4
0
i
0
0
4
0
4
0
1
3
0
5
0
Tray Cloths ..
2
0
6
6
0 13
0
2
0 8
11
0 17
10
2
0 6 6
0
13
0
9
0
3 11
0
7
10
9
0
5
6
o
11
o
Window Curtains
2
Replace
1 10
0
Replace
1 10
0
Replace
1
10
0
Replace
1
10
0
Replace
1
£
5
0
all in 7
avge
all in 7
avge.
all in 7
avge
all in 7
avge
all in 7
ivge
years
0 18
0
years
years
vears
years
Cushion Covers
4
0
4
6
4
0 5
6
1 2
0
4
0 5 6
i
2
0
4
0
5
0
i
0
0
4
0
5
3
1
1
o
Sideboard Runners
1
1
0 6
6
1
0 8
6
0 8
6
1
0 5 6
0
5
6
1
0
5
6
0
5
6
1
0
6
6
o
6
6
Toilet Sets
3
1
0 6
9
1
0 8
11
0 8
11
1
0 7 6
0
7
6
1
0
6
6
0
0
6
1
o
5
11
o
5
11
Kapok
6 lbs.
0
2
0
0 12
0
6 lbs.
0 2
0
0 12
0
6 lbs.
0 2 3
0
13
6
6 lbs. ..
0
2
6
0
15
0
6 lbs.
0
2
3
0
13
6
lb.
lb.
lb.
lb.
lb.
Tea Cosy
. .
1
0 4
11
0 4
11
1
0 4 11
0
4
LI
Table Covers ..
2
23 8
9
24 13
8
20
1
2
20
15
4
25
1
1


Melbourne.
Sydney.
Brisbane.
Item.
Quantity
1
Cost
Quantity
Cost
Quantity
Cost
ner
Week.
i-Tjce. I
ner
Week.
Cost.
pei
Week.
j. nee.
rer
Week.
Cost.
rer
Week.
rnce.
rer
Week.
Cost.
s.
d.
s.
d.
£
s. d .
s.
d.
s.
d.
£
s. d.
S.
d.
s. d.
£ s. a
Washing Material —
]
Starch
i lb. ..
0
10
0
24
iib. ..
0
10
0
24
4 lb.
0
10
0 24
Blue
1 oz.
0
11
0
n
1 oz.
0
1
.
0
14
1 oz.
0
1
0 1
Household Soap
1 bar
1
3
1
3
1 bar
1
8
1
8
1 bar
1
9
1 9
Soda or Soap Extract
1 pkt. . .
0
2
0
9
i-6 10
0
1 pkt. . .
0
2
0
2
0 2
U 16
0
Cloudy Ammoina
J bottle ..
0
71
0
2
J bottle..
0
10
0 24
7 9 6
4 bot. ..
0
74
0 2
Borax
1 oz.
0
1
1 oz.
0
1
0 1
Toilet Soap..
1 cake ..
0
6
1 cake ..
0
6
0
6
J
1 cake . .
0
04
0 64
Household Cleaners —
Sand Soap ..
J cake . .
0
4
0
1
1
I
J cake . .
0
5
0
1
4 cake . .
0
4
0 1
1
Black Lead..
1 oz.
0
H
0
U
1 oz.
0
1
1
2
0
li
1 oz.
0
14
0 14
Floor Polish
i tin
1
0
0
3
I
1 19
0
4 tin
1
1
0
3
}■
1 19 0
4 tin
1
0
0 3
U 19
0
Metal Polish
4 tin
1
0
0
1*
I
| tin
0
11
0
14
4 tin • •
1
0
0 14
Phenyle
i pint ..
0
74
0
2
J
4 pint ..
0
7
0
2
J
4 pint ..
0
7V
1 2
0 2
J
Household Sundries—
Boot Polish
1 tin
0
6
0
6
3 0
8
1 tin
0
7
0
7
1 tin
0
64
0 64
] q i •i
s
Matches
1 doz. ..
0
8
0
8
I
1 doz. ..
0
8
1
2
0
84
c
3 11 6
1 doz.
0
104
0 104
Salt
0
1
3
Medicines—
Olive Oil
-
Castor Oil ..
Sulphate of Soda
1 6
Pills
. f
0
6
1 6
0
>
0
6
1 6 0
. y
0 6
0
Patent Medicines
Aspros
b
Tincture of Quinine ..
•J
Replacements —
To be re-
1 10
Lino
Mats .. s
Carpet runner 1
To be re-
Average
To be re-
Average
0
placed
110
0
placed
10 0
placed
every 10
years
every 10
years
1 7 0
every 10
years
Library
0
3
0 13
0
0
3
0 13 0
0 3
0 13
0
Domestic assistance
4 weeks
per
annum
5 0
0
4 weeks
per
annum
5 0 0
4 weeks
per
annum
5 0
0
Adelaide.
Perth.
Hobart.
Item.
Quantity
rer
Price.
Cost
rer
Annual
Quantity
rer
Price.
Cost
rer
Annual
Co.it.
Quantity
per
Price.
Cost
rer
Annual
Week.
Week.
Week.
Week.
Week.
Week.
5.
d.
S.
d.
£ s.
d.
5.
d.
8.
d.
£ s. d.
S
d.
8, d.
£ 8.
d.
Washing Material —
Starch
i lb. . .
0
10
0
2J
'
4 ib. ..
0
10
0
24
4ib. ..
0
11
0 24
Blue
1 oz.
0
1
0
1
1 oz.
0
¥
0
1*
1 oz.
0
14
0 14
Household Soap
1 bar
1
7
1
7
1 bar
1
8
1
8
1 bar
0
11
011
Soda or Soap Extract
1 pkt. ..
0
2i
0
24
f-7 16
0
1 pkt.
0
C
0
2
i-7 9 6
1 pkt. ..
0
14
0 14
U10
6
Cloudy Ammonia
J bottle..
1
0
0
3
4 bottle..
0
10
0
24
4 bottle..
1
0
0 3
Borax
Toilet Soap..
1 cake ..
0
8
0
8
1 cake ..
0
6
0
6
,
1 cake ..
0
6
0 6
j
Household Cleaners—
Sand Soap .
cake ..
0
6
0
u
£ cake ..
0
6
0
1
4 cake ..
0
44
0 1
Black Lead..
1 oz.
0
H
0
1*
1 oz.
0
U
0
14
1 oz.
0
14
0 14
Floor Polish
4 tin
1
3
0
4
U 7
8
4 tin
1
1
0
3
U 19 0
4 tin
0
10
0 24
J.1 14
8
Metal Polish
I tin
0
11
0
1|
4 tin
0
11
0
14
4 tin
1
0
0 14
I
Phenyle
J bottle..
0
11
0
24
4jpint ..
0
7
0
2
j
4 pint ..
0
6
0 14
J
Household Sundries —•
Boot Polish
1 tin.
0
71
0
74
3 11
6
1 tin
0
7
0
7
I tin
0
7
0 7
Matches
1 doz. ..
0
9
0
9
1 doz. ..
0
n
0
84
V3 11 6
1 doz. ..
0
9
0 9
ll l
8
Salt
,
0
1
0 1
/
Medicines—
Olive Oil
. •'I
1
Castor Oil ..
Sulphate of Soda
0 6
1 6
Pills
. . >
0
6
1 6
0
4
0
6
1 6 0
0
Patent Medicines
" f
Aspros
•b
Tincture of Quinine ,.
••J
• •
Replacements—
r f
6
1 10 0
To be re-
To be re-
13
6
1 10
0
To be re-
13
13 6
1 10
0
Lino . . |
placed
yard
i 1 7
0
placed
yard
1 7 0
placed
yard
}! 7
0
Carpet Runner
every 10
years
every 10
years
every 10
years
Library
0
3
0 13
0
0
3
0 13 0
0 3
0 13
0
Domestic Assistance
4 weeks
per
annum
5 0
0
4 weeks
per
annum
1
5 0 0
4 weeks
per
annum
0 0
0
Miscellaneous— continued.


Item.
Quantity,
Price.
Animal Cost.
Item.
Quantity.
Price.
Annual Cost.
Mes’s Clothing.
£
s.
d.
£
•5.
d.
Boys’ Clothing— continued.
£
s .
d.
£ s.
d.
Suits
ii
6
6
0
9
9
0
Felt Hat
i
0
5
11
0 5
11
Hats
2
0
18
6
1
17
0
Straw Hat
i
0
5
11
0 5
11
So ks
9
0
3
6
1
11
6
Handkerchiefs
6
0
2
11
0 2
11
Ties
4
0
2
6
0
10
0
Braces
1 pair
0
1
9
0 1
9
Braces
2, or 1 and
a belt,
2s. 6d.
0
2
6
0
5
0
Ties
Singlets, wool
Pyjamas
3
3
2
0
0
0
1
4
7
6
11
6
0 4
0 14
0 15
6
9
0
Shirts, working
each
Boots, best
1 pair
0
15
6
0 15
6
5
0
8
6
2
2
6
Boots, school
2 pairs
0
13
9
1 7
6
Shirts, best
3
0
10
6
1
11
6
Repairs ..
6
0
5
6
1 13
0
Flannels ..
3
0
7
0
1
2
6
Collars
6
0
1
0
0 6
0
Underpants
3
0
6
1
5
6
Collars
12
0
i
0
0
12
0
£15 13
11
Pyjamas
2
0
13
6
1
0
Handkerchiefs
9
0
1
0
0
9
0
Gikls’ Clothing.
Studs
6
0
0
3
0
1
6
Singlets, woollen . .
4
0
4
11
0 19
8
Sports Coats
Stays
2
0
5
11
0 11
10
Trousers —
Bloomers, cotton ..
6
0
2
11
0 17
6
Flannel
i pair
0
19
6
0
9
9
Bloomers, woollen
Working
Dungaree
2 trousers,
or 1 pair
0
9
11
0
9
11
Petticoats, Winter
Petticoats, Summer
} 2
0
7
11
0 15
10
and 2
0
10
6
1
1
0
Dress, blue serge : tweed
1 Winter
1
4
6
1 4
6
dungarees
Dress, voile
Overcoat
j
3
15
0
1
5
0
Dress, tobralco
Summer
0
12
6
1 17
6
Umbrella
0
12
6
0
2
6
Dresses, cambric ..
j
Boots, best
i
1
7
6
1
7
0
Woollen Golfer
i
0
19
6
0 19
6
Boots, working
2
0
12
9
1
5
6
f 2 at 10/6)
Shoes, rubber soled
1
0
7
6
0
7
6
Hats —3 and 1 cap
7 1 at 4/6 I
1 8
0
Boot Laces
6 pairs
0
0
4
0
2
0
\ Cap,2/6 I
Repairs, soled and heeled ..
5
0
6
6
1
12
6
Pvjamas
2
0
8
6
0 17
0
Socks
6
0
3
9
1 2
6
Total
30
7
2
Handkerchiefs
6
0
2
a
0 2
11
Top Coat
X
1
15
0
0 17
6
Women’s Clothing.
Sundries — Ribbons,Collars,&c.
Hats
3
0
15
6
2
0
0
Shoes, best
1
0
17
9
0 17
9
Costume, Winter ..
i
4
4
0
2
2
0
Boots, school
2
0
11
11
1 3
10
Costume, Summer
1
2
5
0
2
5
0
Repairs . .
6
0
4
6
1 7
0
Dress, Summer
1
2
2
0
2
2
0
Skirt, blue serge ..
li
1
5
0
1
17
6
£15 2
10
Skirt, tweed
Blouses, silk
1
0
15
6
0
15
0
Blouses, voile
1
0
9
6
0
9
6
Blouses, cambric or winceyette
2
0
7
6
0
15
0
Baby’s Clothing.
Camisoles
4
0
4
11
0
19
8
Singlets ..
4
0
2
0
0 8
0
Combinations, calico
4
0
8
11
1
15
8
Nightdresses, cotton
4
0
3
11
0 15
8
Undervests, woollen
2
0
b
11
0
13
10
Nightdresses, winceyette
Undervests, cotton
2
0
2
11
0
5
10
Bibs
6
0
1
0
0 9
0
Bloomers
1
0
5
11
0
5
11
Napkins ..
3 dozen
0
1
0i
1 17
6
Nightdresses
3
0
7
11
1
3
9
Flannels , .
3
0
5
6
0 16
6
Underskirt, white . .
1
0
9
11
0
9
11
Dresses ..
6
0
5
11
1 15
6
Underskirt, dark moreen
1
0
9
11
0
9
11
Petticoats, winceyette
2
0
3
6
0 7
0
Corsets ..
2
0
12
6
1
5
0
Petticoats, white ..
4
0
3
11
0 15
8
Dressing Gown
i
0
15
11
0
7
11
Outdoor Coat
1
0
8
11
0 8
11
Aprons, white
2
0
4
6
0
9
0
Bonnets ..
4
0
3
11
0 15
8
Aprons, black
2
0
4
6
0
9
0
Shawl
1
1
1
0
1 1
0
Stockings, cashmere
6 pairs
0
3
9
1
2
6
Bootees ..
6
0
1
11
0 11
6
Handkerchiefs
1 dozen
0
0
6
0
6
0
Jackets ..
2
0
3
11
0 7
10
Veils _ ..
I gossamer
0
4
6
0
4
6
Modesties
3
0
3
11
0 11
9
1 veil
0
1
6
0
1
6
Binders . .
2
0
1
6
0 3
0
Gloves
2 pairs
i
0
5
6
0
11
0
Pram
1
6
5
0
Top Coat
3
0
0
1
0
0
Another
1
15
0
Golfer
1
19
11
0
13
3J
Umbrella
1
2
0
10
6
0
5
3
in 10 years
8
0
0
0 16
0
Scarf
Dummies
3
0
0
6
0 1
6
Shoes
2 pairs
1
6
0
2
0
0
Waterproof Sheeting
1 yard
0
4
11
0 4
11
Housesboes (nurse’s)
i
0
10
6
Feeding Bottles
6
0
1
6
0 9
0
Slippers ..
i
0
5
6
0
5
6
Teats
6
0
0
6
0 3
0
Repairs ..
1
8
0
Tins Powder
8
0
1
0
0 8
0
Sundries ..
Pufi
1
0
1
6
0 1
6
Soap and Sponges
0 7
0
Total
29
16
6
Total
j
£13 15
5
Boys’ Clothing.
1
Overcoat
j.
1
10
0
0
15
0
Summary.
Suit
2
1
15
6
3
11
0
Men’s
30 7
2
Pants
3
0
6
6
0
19
6
Women’s
29 16
6
Jersey
X
0
9
6
0
4
9
Boys’
Girls’
15 13
11
Summer Coat
1
0
8
11
0
8
11
15 2
10
Shirts
6
0
4
11
1
9
6
Babv
13 15
5
Stockings
6 pairs
0
11
1
9
6
Caps
2
0
1
6
0
3
0
104 15
10
APPENDIX II.
EMPLOYERS’ COUNTER CLAIM.
Note.— This list has been complied without making any allowance for the following :
(а) Purchasing at sale or bargain prices ;
(б) Purchasing ready-made suits ;
(c) Home sewing and making up : 4 -
(d) Making down portion of parent’s clothes for children.
The discount to be allowed for such economies is impossible of exact calculation, but it is submitted suchthrift is practised in every
well-ordered household, and the money so saved in the above list can be applied in a more lavish expenditure on individual items according
to personal taste and requirement or particular exigency.


APPENDIX III.
SEPTEMBER 24, 1920.
COMMENTS BY THE COMMISSION ON PROFESSOR OSBORNE'S EVIDENCE.
The Chairman. —Tins meeting of the Commission
has been held specially because the Federated Unions
wished an opportunity to he given to Professor Os-
borne to explain what, upon the face of it,
is a serious discrepancy between his printed book,
published after he gave his evidence, and the evi-
dence given here in March. Ido not propose to go at
length into the explanation, further than to say thisj
that this witness says that if he were writing his book
again ho would again put in the figure 3,500 Calories,
and add “ Atwater.” That book would not be merely
used as a substitute for notes handed round to students
—it is published to the world —and if 3,500 is the
Atwater figure, yet it is published with this witness’
authority, and it may be used by medical students in
other Australian universities, and they by following the
authority of Atwater, quoted in this book will, per-
haps, appear before future Royal Commissions, and
commit a very serious error if this witness’s evidence,
given in March, is to be taken as correct. Similarly,
with regard to the figures on page 102, they almost
exactly fit in with the previous statement as to 3,500,
but we are told that they were ruled through. Unfor-
tunately, something happened, either the copy that was
ruled through was not the copy that went to the printer,
or if it was, the printer ignored the erasures and cor-
rections, and after he had ignored them it escaped at-
tention when the proof was read. In regard to that
matter, I do not propose to> go into it at any length.
The Witness. —Is it permissible for me to make a
statement here ?
Bu the Chairman. —Yes?—I have been teaching the
amended figures verbally to my students for a consider-
able number of years.
Then I can only repeat that it is unfortunate that
the book does not correspond with the lectures, because
the book is for the public ?—There are very serious
errors elsewhere in the book which I am sorry to say
escaped my notice.
The Chairman. —The question of the discrepancies
between the book and evidence is a minor matter;
but the way in which the evidence has been given to-
day, and the wav in which every authority who lias been
named is treated with contempt, obliges me to read
what my colleagues and I have agreed upon as com-
ments upon this witness’ evidence given in March,
which would not have been read, though they might
have been put in our Report, had it not been for the
attitude that has been taken up by the witness towards
the main question.
The comments upon which my colleagues and 1 have
agreed are as follows: —That a painful impression was
produced on our minds in March that the witness had
not realized the gravity of the situation, and that his
evidence in March, which put forward a new theory
for our adoption, was not prepared with the care the
Commission was entitled to expect from an expert wit-
ness.
The position pivots round the proper amount
of food for an average workman. that is uni-
versally expressed by scientific authorities in berms
of calories. In every authority published before the
war 3,500 Calories per day was looked upon as ample,
being, in fact, the highest stated by any investigator,
with one ambiguous exception. Whether the average
workman in Australia ought to receive more, in view of
all the evidence, the Commission has not yet deter-
mined. My own mind is still open on the point. The
witness’ evidence in March was directed to showing that
for the Australian home a man-calorie basis ought to be
4,931, to which must be added 109 for the difference
which the witness did not observe in the calorie value
between mutton and beef, bringing the total calorie
basis to 5,040.
If we reported the cost of living in Australia
on that standard, the amount of wages necessary
for the difference between the new standard and the
3,500 would be from £40,000,000 to £50,000,000 per
annum, assuming that our finding was made effec-
tive for all workers in the Commonwealth, both
as to the basic wage and as to the margins, and
applying present prices. The gravity of the conse-
quences does not affect, one way or another, the justice
of the witness’ theory, but when a Commission of lay-
men is asked to subvert the conclusions of recognised
scientific writers, with potential results so serious, the
evidence ought to b© cogent, and put forward on full
and adequate preparation. As a body of laymen this
Commission has the same sort of duty as a Judge has
in a patent case, or in a case of lunacy, or in a case of
lack cf disposing power in a disputed will—that of
weighing and deciding upon the scientific data, oral or
wrtten, or both. So far as deciding what such data
show, the task in this case is a comparative! /
easy one if the data are fully and accurately
produced, but fullness and accuracy of statement
are essential.
The main position taken up by the witness
in March was that the war had dissolved ail
authority. In support of that, the Royal Society
Committee’s Report was put forward to show that
modern investigation had demonstrated 3,500 Calories
to he too low. The witness stated that that investi-
gation showed that 3,800 ca'ories “ wipre being pur-
chased ” per phys’ological man—that is for every man
in England. In point of fact, Professor Thompson’s
results, embodied in that Report, had nothing to do with
what is the proper regimen for an average workman in
England or anywhere else. The figure 3,800 per man
was the amount that would be available for all civilians
after the needs of the Forces were satisfied, assuming
that there was in 1916 the same food as there had been
on the average of 1909-1913. This was a serious mis-
reading of the report. Fortunately, the Commission
had a copy, and found that the witness had overlooked
(or, at least, not quoted until it was quoted to him),
the one passage in which the Committee did deal with
the average workman’s requirements. They sa’d, at
page 3, “A full consideration of the dietary require-
ments of a nation for the most part engaged in active
work has convinced the Committee that these require-
ments cannot be satisfactorily met on a less supply in
the food as nurchased than 100 grammes of protein, 100
grammes cf fat, and 500 grammes of carbo-hydrates,
equal, approximately, to 3,400 Calorics per ‘man’ per
day, a ‘ man ’ being an average workman doing an
average day’s work. The Committee have adopted this
as their minimum standard,” In another part of the
report they show quite clearly that they were pressing
neon the authorities the necessity of providing sufficient
diet to provide for all classes, and to maintain the
working efficiency of the nation.
The witness next put forward a book called
Welfare and Housing, in which it was shown
that male munition workers consumed, in fact,
3.900 calories. The witness was not able to state,
nor indeed to find, a passage in the same volume intro-
ducing this statement, which showed that this was


under circumstances of unrestricted access to food.
Fortunately, again, the book had been passed up to the
Bench, and that cardinal fact had been noted, which
takes the case at once out of the category of demon-
strated requirements, as may be seen by the fact (not
mentioned by the witness), that Dr. Leonard Hill, who
reports the fact in that very same work, reports
also that investigations show that the amount required
by the man engaged in fairly light munition work is
about 3.500 calories food as purchased.
Again, the witness argued that the superior
physique of the Australian soldier showed that
what was ample in other countries would not
be enough in Australia. Yet the witness had
made no inquiries as to their rations here, or while
in England, where they were unable, after a certain
date, to purchase outside of their own rations and
their allowance, all of which came into the diet as
known to ns; and it was loft to (leneral McCay to give
the Comnresion valuable evidence, which includes not
only the scale of ration and allowances, but the very
meals on which the soldiers were severely trained in
England, and sent to France in tip-top physical condi-
tion.
Lastly, it was sought to make up for the absence
of scientific data by .reports of conversations with emi-
nent men in England, Professor Thompson had said
that “ dietetics was in the melting pot.” Professor
Hopkins had said, ‘‘We must review the field again.”
That such generalities did not cover the point at issue
is clear from the fact that both Professor Thompson and
Professor Hopkins were signatories to the Royal
Society Committee’s Report, which contains, as I have
said, the conclusion that 3,400 calories was the minimum
for the average workman doing an average day’s work
The conclusion, in which we all concur, is that this
witness’ evidence ought to be regarded as without any
special scientific value, while points such as any lay wit-
ness, or indeed an advocate without any evidence could
urge, such as the alleged heavier eating of the Austra-
lian, and his proved heavier eating of meat, will be
given their proper attention when the Commission is
coming to its decision.
The witness withdrew.
The Commission adjourned.
REJOINDER BY PROFESSOR OSBORNE ON ABOVE
STATEMENT.
Statement. —“ The witness' evidence in March was directed
to showing that, for the Australian home, a man-calorie basis
ought to be 4,931, to which must be added 109 for the
difference which the witness did not observe in the calorie
value between mutton and beef, bringing the total calorie
basis to 5,040.”
Rejoinder. —“ I am not aware of the grounds for adding
109 calories to my estimate. That this addition was necessary
or proper was never suggested to me, and I do not agree
with it.”
Chairman’s Statement.
“ The main position taken up by the witness in March was
that the war had dissolved all authority. In support of that
the Royal Society Committee’s Report was put forward to
show that modern investigation had demonstrated 3.SCO calories
to be too low. The witness stated that that investigation
showed that 3,800 calories were being purchased per physiolo-
gical man—that is, for every man in England.
“In point of fact Professor Thompson’s results embodied
in that report had nothing to do with wh~t is the proper
regimen for an average workman in England or anywhere
else. The figure 3.800 per man was the amount Hat would
be available for all civilians after the needs of the forces
were satisfied, assuming that there was in 1916 the same food
as there had been on the average of 1909-1913.”
“ This was a serious misreading of the Report.”
I did not lake up the position that “the war had dissolved
all authority.” I took up the position that, as some of tne
highest authorities in Great Britain had stated, pre-war esti-
mates of dietetic needs and values could no longer be
regarded as reliable. Consideration will show that the Com-
mission misapprehended the reference to the Royal Society
Committee’s Report. What 1 called attention to was tne
estimate by Professor Thompson that 3,800 c. lories were being
purchased per “ man ”in the United Kingdom. (Question
-0081.) The. estimate of Professor Thompson appears on
pages 8-9 of the Report. It is the only estimate specifically
made by Professor Thompson, which rppears in tins Report.
(See beading on pages 8-9.) It shows that the calorie value
of the food consumed in the United Kingdom on an average
of the live years 1909-1913 was 3,861 calories—which I referred
lo in round numbers as 3,800 calories. I assumed that “food
consumption” me.nt “food purchased.” (Questhn 20081.)
If it means strictly “ food consumed,” then the figure for
’ food purchased ” should be higher.
The Chairman's remarks concerning “food available”
refers to page 17 of the Report, which has nothing to do
wilh the estimate of Professor Thompson. The calc-latiou
on page 17 deals, as stated, with food available for con-
sumption upon the basis mentioned at that page. This
amount of food would be, in the opinion of the Committee
(page 18), 5 per cent, over “the min.mum necessary for
proper nutrition, and rather more as regards the supply of
energy.” My evidence did not deal with, and did not pro-
fess to deal with, minima. (See my Report, Question 20027
( a ) •)
The Report of the Proceedings of the Royal Academy of
Medicine in Ireland (referred to in Question 20087) shows
that 3,875 calories was the value of the average ration per
“ man ” as purchased in Great Britain in 1908, and that this
was Professor Thompson’s estimate.
Thus my statement was strictly accurate as to calorie value
of food purchased according to Piofessor Thompson’s
estimate. 2
Chairman’s Statement,
■ ■ Fortunately the Commission had a copy, and found that
the witness had overlooked (or at least not quoted until it
w, s quoted to him) the one passage in which the Committee
did deal with the average workman’s requirements. They
said, at page 3 : —‘A full considerat on of the dietary require-
ments of a nation for the most pait engaged in active work
has convinced the Committee that these requirements cannot
be satisfactorily met on a less supply in the food as pur-
chased than 100 grammes of protein, 100 grammes of fat, and
500 grammes of carbohydrates, equal approximately to 3,400
calories per “ man ” per day, a “ man ” being an average
workman doing an average day’s work. The Committee have
adopted this as their minimum standard.’ ”
The Committee was here dealing with the minimum
standard in Great Britain during a period of acute danger
of food shortage. I did not regard this as relevant to the
standard proper to be adopted for Australia. This p ssage
does not deal with the “ average workman’s requirements ”
in any sense that appeared to me to be relevant to Australia
in time of peace. 3
Chairman’s Statement.
“ The witness next put forward a book called Welfare
and Housing, in which it was shown that male munition
workers consumed iu fact 3,900 calories. The witness was
not able to state, nor indeed to find, a passage in the same
volume introductory to this statement which showed that this
was under eireumst uioes of unrestricted access to food.
Fortunately, again, the book had been passed up to the
Bench, and that cardinal fact had been noted, which takes
the ease at once out of the category of demonstrated require-
ments, ns may be seen by the fact (not mentioned by the
witness) that Dr. Leonard Hill, who reports the fact in that
very same work, reports, also that investigations show that
the amount required by the man engaged in fairly light
munition work is about 3,500 calories food as purchased.”
The facts were obvious in the book which I produced,
'these were cited simply as figures of actual consumption
under the conditions which are fully set out in the book,
including “ unrestricted access to food.” This condition is,
fortunately, not uncommon in Australia. (See my answer
to Question 22256.)
It is suggested that if the book had not been passed up to
the Bench the Commission could not have been made aware
of the fact that Dr. Leonard Hill had estimated 3,500
calories as the requirements for certain workers. It is diffi-
cult to understand this suggestion, as my answer to Question
22285 shows that I first mentioned this fact to the Commis-
sion. Incidentally, it may be observed that Dr. Hill’s esti-
mate dealing with munition workers refers (page 56 of
I Velfare and Housing) to—“persons engaged in medium
work ” not to “ men engaged in fairly light munition work.”"*


Chairman’s Statement.
"Again the witness argued that the superior physique of
the Australian soldier showed that what was ample in other
countries would not be enough in Australia. Yet the witness
had made no inquiries as to their rations here or while in
England.”
I had not an opportunity of stating what inquiries I had
made. I had made many inquiries as to rations here and in
the field, though I had not worked out the calorie values for
the reason, stated in my evidence, that my inquiries had
shown that the amounts consumed outside the ration were
considerable, and not capable of accurate calculation.
The answer to Question 22373 is misreported in effect as
the answer to Question 22374 shows in its reference to what
I had said (22358) about the figures which I had, though
not with me.s
Chairman’s Statement.
“ Lastly it was sought to make up for the absence of
scientific data by reports of conversations with eminent men
in England. Professor Thompson had said that—“ Dietetics
was in the melting pot.” Professor Hopkins had said —“We
must review the field again.” That such generalities did not
cover the point at issue is clear from the fact that both
Professor Thompson and Professor Hopkins were signatories
to the Royal Society Commission’s Report, which contains,
as I have said, the conclusion that 3,401) calories was the
minimum for the average workman doing an average day’s
work.”
It is sufficient to say that the statements of Professor
Hopkins and Professor Thompson made to me are obviously
not inconsistent with the Committee’s estimate of the mini-
mum —the lowest possible—standard at a time of critical
stringency in food supplies. 6
NOTES BY COMMISSION.'
1. As to calorie-values. Professor Osborne’s dietary took
beef and mutton each at 1,000. (Question 22807.) No investi-
gator classes these foods as equal. Professor Thompson
(Royal Society’s Food Committee Report, page 8), deriving
his figures from Atwater’s analyses, gives Foreign (which
would include Australian) :—Beef, 1,039;; mutton, J.,251.
Ten pounds of beef, therefore, equal 10,390; 10 lbs. of
mutton equal 12.510. Total for 20 lbs. beet and mutton,
22,900 for tbe week, instead of the witness’ 20,000. (See
appendix .) The difference (2,900) divided by 7 for
the days of the week, and by 3.80 “man-units” (on the
Inter-Allied Pood Commission’s coefficients favoured by the
witness) shows an error of 109 calories per man per day as a
result of erroneously taking beef and mutton at equal calorie
values.
2. In the Report quoted by witness (pages 8-9) Professor
Thompson’s estimate relates to 1909-1913 only. He says
nothing about 1916. The witness treated as facts the two
assumptions (1) that there was, in 1916, as much food as
there had been on the average of 1909-1913; (2) that “avail-
able supply” and" “food purchased” mean the same thing.
There is no evidence of either assumption be ng true. The
Royal Dublin Society’s Report has to do with 1908, not 1910,
and, though it was referred to by the witness, no quotation
was made from it such as the statement now proffered.
3. This grave omission being admitted, no comment is
necessary, except that the relevancy of the passage was for
the Commission; not the witness, to judge.
4. The facts are undisputed as to the witness’ use of the
book in question. Question 22285 shows that the witness
spoke of D'r. Leonard Hill as “putting forward” 3,500
calories. In Question 22294 he spoke of Dr. Hill as having
got this figure from “an old work; this figure has been cir-
culating in ‘ dietetics since I was a child.’ ” Dr. Hill’s own
words are : —“ Numerous investigations have shown . . . .
3,500 calories,” -a very different thing from “putting for-
ward” the figure out of “an old work.” Nor was the fact
mentioned that Dr. Hill’s statement occurs in the very
Report from which the witness quoted 3,900 caloiies.
5. The answer to Question 22373 is not misreported. The
witness had begun, but “ g ven up the invest.gallon ” (Ques-
tion 22353) in view of a difficulty which may have existed
here, but not in England. As to the feeding of the troops
in England, conclusive evidence, such as General MeCay’s,
was all printed in official papers, and could have been ascer-
tained in England or through dig Defence Department here,
even if it had not occurred to the witness to see General
McCay himself either in England or upon his return.
6. The professors in question could not have, simultaneously,
scouted the standard of 3,500 calories as belonging to a
vanished epoch of science, and also announced 3,400 calories
as the right thing even as a “minimum standard,” which
did not in its context mean the “lowest possible standard at
a time of critical stringency.” This latter phrase would mean
the bare amount to keep body and soul together, whereas the
standard was for “ an average workman doing an average
day’s work.”
Printed and Published for the Government, of the Commonwealth of Australia by Albert J. Mullett,
Government Printer for the State of Victoria.
