

ftertt- fPm
/ M *
Lp / O
'Soo*'.
1855.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
CIRCULAR QUAY.
REPORT
FROM
THE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON THE
CIRCULAR QUAY,
WITH
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE.
ORDERED BY THE COUNCIL TO BE PRINTED,
6 December, 1855.
Sptmep :
PRINTED BY WILLIAM HANSON, GOVERNMENT PRINTER,
HYDE PARK.
1855.
324—A


Page.
Mr. Merewether
1
Mr. Doyle
2
Mr. Shaw
5
Mr. Crook
6
Mr. Smith
Mr. Tyre
7
Mr. Dunn
8
Capt. Moriarty
9
Mr. Walcott
11
The Colonial Secretary
20
Capt. Bowntree
21
Captain Bowntree and Capt. Bussell
23
Mr. Storey
Mr. Walcott
28
EXTRACTS FROM THE VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS
OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
No. 67, Tuesday, 16 October, 1855.
Circular Quay:—Mr Parkes moved, pursuant to notice: —
(1.) That a Select Committee be appointed to inquire into all the circumstances con-
nected with the unauthorized expenditure, hy His Excellency the Governor, of the
sum of £14,000, and upwards, in the erection of that portion of the Semi-Circular
Quay extending from the east side of the Tank Stream to Campbell’s Wharf; —and
the stability of the work; and to report thereon to the House.
(2.) That such Committee consist of the following Members:—Mr. Campbell, Mr.
Park, Mr. Bligh, Mr. Wilshire, Mr. Flood, Mr. Martin, Mr. Morris, Captain
Dumaresq, and Captain Ward.
Debate ensued.
Question (1.) —That a Select Committee be appointed to inquire into all the circum-
stances connected with the unauthorized expenditure, by His Excellency the Governor,
of the sum of £14,000, and upwards, in the erection of that portion of the Semi-
Circular Quay extending from the East side of the Tank Stream to Campbell’s
Wharf; —and the stability of the work; and to report thereon to the House—put
and passed.
The Colonial Secretary then required that the Committee be appointed by Ballot;
Whereupon the Council proceeded to the Ballot, and the Speaker declared the
following Members to be, with the Mover, the Committee duly appointed, viz. :
Mr. Bligh, Mr. Flood, Captain Ward, Mr. Park, Captain Dumaresq, Mr. Holroyd,
Mr. G. Macleay, Mr. Martin, and Mr. Morris.
No. 96, Thursday, 6 December, 1855.
Circular Quay:—Mr. Parkes, as Chairman, brought up the Report from, and laid upon
the Table the Evidence taken before, the Select Committee appointed, on the 16th
October last, to inquire into all the circumstances connected with the unauthorized
expenditure, by His Excellency the Governor, of the sum of £14,000, and upwards,
in the erection of that portion of the Semi-Cicular Quay extending from the east
side of the Tank Stream to Campbell’s Wharf, and the stability of the work, and to
report thereon to the House.
Ordered to be printed.
WITNESSES EXAMINED.


1855.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
CIRCULAR QUAY.
REPOET
FROM
THE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON THE
CIRCULAR QUAY.
The Select Committee of the Legislative Council, appointed on the 16th October last,
“ to inquire into all the circumstances connected with the unauthorized expenditure,
“ by His Excellency the Governor, of the sum of £14,000 and upwards, in the erection
“ of that portion of the Semi-Circular Quay extending from the east side of the Tank
“ Stream to Campbell’s Wharf; —and the stability of the work j and to report thereon
“ to the House j” have agreed to the following Report, viz.:—
Your Committee have taken evidence upon, and otherwise investigated, the important
matters referred by your Honorable House for their consideration and report.
The sum of £14,000 placed on the Supplementary Estimates for 1855, for the con-
tinuation of the Semi-Circular Quay, and which constitutes the amount of unauthorized
expenditure, is divided under two heads, as follows :
£ s. d.
Total excess on descriptions of work in Engineer’s original estimate 10,607 4 7|
For works ordered in addition to those included in original estimate 3,392 15 4}
£14,000 0 0
The latter of these divisions includes works which might reasonably be expected to arise in
the progress of an undertaking of such magnitude, and the construction of which, when the
necessity for them became obvious, could not be delayed without injury to the public. In
most of these instances the Engineer submitted his proposals to the Government, and
received directions to proceed with the works under the sanction of a special report from
the Colonial Architect. But, admitting the necessity of these extra works, your Committee
at the same time consider that the Engineer, in his calculations of cost, ought to have con-
templated the probability of such incidental demands, and they cannot regard them as in
any way justifying an excess of the amount voted by the Legislature. One item, involving an
expense of £924 13s. 2d., appears to have been the result of an inexcusable blunder in the
original plan of the superstructure, by which the removing a part of the wood floor, and the
scarfing of 87 piles, were rendered necessary to alter the incline at the junction of the old
and new portions of the wharf.
The other and greater part of the unauthorized expenditure is wholly spread over
articles enumerated in the schedule of prices attached to the contract. This great excess
over the Engineer’s estimate has occurred, notwithstanding that sixty-five piles and a portion
of the lateral and diagonal braces have been omitted from the work as designed and specified
under that estimate. The debt to the contractor appears to have been incurred, however,
in accordance with the terms of his contract, the work having been carried on under a
schedule of prices, with no limit to the total cost, except the control of the Engineer.
Whatever


Whatever blame may justly attach to the Engineer for the glaring want of professional
accuracy or ability which is exhibited by this result, his conduct in neglecting to report to
the Government the circumstances which led to the additional cost, and in the negligence
which has undoubtedly characterized his general supervision of the work, is deserving of
much severer censure.
Your Committee now arrive at the question, whether the Government were justified
in paying this large sum of money, under circumstances so unsatisfactory, without the sanc-
tion of your Honorable House. It can hardly be contended that the urgency of the case
will supply a justification for a step so directly contravening the rights of the Legislature,
for a period of only forty-seven days elapsed from the Governor General’s first intimation,
on the 19th April, that he would authorize the payment, and the assembling of your
Honorable House on the sth June ] and it must be admitted that the Council could have
been convened on an earlier day with much less inconvenience than would result from an
unauthorized expenditure of the public money by the Executive. In pursuing the inquiry,
the adverse reason which first suggests itself, based on the control of the public expenditure
inherent in your Honorable House, derives additional force against the act of the Executive
now under consideration, from the obvious fact that the Government are directly blameable
for not having used greater exertions to secure the services of a more competent person to
superintend a work so important in itself, and so costly to the public. From this cause
your Committee are of opinion, from the evidence before them, that the new portion of the
Semi-Circular Quay is so imperfect in its whole structure that it will, in the course of a very
short time, require extensive repairs. Your Committee cannot, therefore, report that the
Government were justified, under the circumstances, in expending any sum in excess of the
amount voted for this public work by your Honorable House.
It must be borne in mind, that this unauthorized expenditure included a large sum
in the shape of commission to the Engineer for the work thus improperly carried on, and
which appears to have been paid without protest or objection of any kind.
In prosecuting their inquiries as to the stability of the work, your Committee have
caused a personal inspection of it to be made by practical and experienced men. The result
arrived at by this examination will be found in the reports of Mr. Rowntree and Mr. Russell,
appended to the evidence of those gentlemen. According to this evidence, the piles, in
many places, do not support the floor of the wharf, and in other places they are wanting
altogether; their average size is less than is specified in the contract; the metal sheathing, in
many instances, is fastened with iron nails, or not fastened at all, and in some instances hangs
loose in the water j the scarfing of the piles is completed with iron bolts; the floor, for the most
part, is formed of soft planks ] and the whole is constructed in a rough and unprofessional
manner. Though your Committee have taken other evidence, this sweeping condemnation
is not, in their opinion, materially modified.
If this expenditure were to receive the sanction of a simple vote of your
Honorable House, it would establish a precedent highly inimical to the powers of the future
Legislative Assembly; and, to guard against any such mischievous consequences, your Com-
mittee are of opinion that the question ought not to be entertained, except on the introduction
of a Bill of Indemnity by the Government.
Your Committee are further of opinion, that the great and manifest injury sustained
by the public in this instance, by bad work on the part of the Contractor, may render it a
question of grave consideration for the Government, whether this gentleman ought to be
entrusted with the construction of any other of the public works of the Colony.
As the evidence of Mr. Rowntree and Mr. Russell leads to the conclusion that timber
of the size and in the quantities required by the specification, and paid for, has not been
used by the Contractor, and that he has been overpaid, your Committee are of opinion,
that it is the duty of the Government immediately to institute a full inquiry into the facts
of the case, and to direct the Attorney General to take prompt measures for recovering any
sums which may have been improperly overpaid, as well as compensation, by way of
damages, for any work that may have been improperly performed.
HENRY PARKES.
Legislative Council Chambers , CHAIRMAN,
6 December , 1855,
PROCEEDINGS


PROCEEDINGS OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE
CIRCULAR QUAY.
THURSDAY, 25 OCTOBER, 1855.
Urgent
Mr. Parkes, Mr. Bligh,
Mr. Flood, Mr. Holroyd,
Mr. Park, Mr, Gr. Macleay.
Mr. Parkes called to the Chair.
Witnesses examined —Mr. Merewether, Mr. Doyle, Mr. Shaw, Mr. Crook, Mr. Smith,
Mr. Tyre, Mr. Dunn.
THURSDAY, 1 NOVEMBER, 1855
present
Henry Parkes, Esquire, in the Chair.
Captain Ward, | Mr. Par
Mr. Park
Mr. Flood.
Witnesses examined —Capt. Moriarty, Mr. Walcott.
TUESDAY, 13 NOVEMBER, 1855.
present:—
Henry Parkes, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. Bligh, Captain Dumaresq,
Mr. Holroyd, Mr. Park.
Witnesses examined—The Colonial Secretary, Captain Rowntree.
WEDNESDAY, 28 NOVEMBER, 1855.
lament
Henry Parkes, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. Bligh, J Mr, Flood,
Captain Dumaresq, | Mr. Park,
Captain Ward.
Witnesses examined—Captain Rowntree, Captain Russell, Mr. Storey, Mr. Walcott
TUESDAY, 4 DECEMBER, 1855.
present
Henry Parkes, Esq., in the Chair.
Mr. Park, I Mr. Bligh,
Captain Ward, I Mr. Flood,
Mr. Holroyd.
The Chairman read a draft report to the Committee, who deliberated thereupon and
adjourned.
THURSDAY, 6 DECEMBER, 1855.
present
Henry Parkes, Esq., in the Chair.
Captain Ward, Mr. Park,
Mr. Martin, Captain Dumaresq
Mr. Holroyd, Mr. Flood.
The Chairman read a draft Report to the Committee, which having been considered,
and amended, was finally agreed to.




1855.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE
TAKEN BEFORE
THE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON THE
CIRCULAR QUAY.
THURSDAY, 25 OCTOBER, 1855.
Urgent
Mr. BLIGH, Mr. G. MACLEAY,
Mr. FLOOD, Mr. PARK,
Mr. HOLROYD, Mr. PARKES.
HENRY PARKES, Esq., in the Chair.
The Honorable F. L. S. Merewcther, Esquire, M.L. C., Colonial Treasurer, examined : r.l. S. Merc
1. By the Chairman: Will you have the kindness to state to the Committee under what wether, Esq.
circumstances the reported expenditure of £14,000, in excess of the sum voted by the Legis-
lature for the new Circular Quay, took place ? As none of the correspondence has passed 25 0ct -> 1855
through my department, I have no official knowledge of the facts of the case. On the sth
February I reported to the Government that a payment of £1957, which had just been
made to the contractor, had reduced the balance at the credit of the vote to £867; that I
had ascertained from the contractor, Mr. Randle, that his claims would amount to several
thousand pounds beyond that balance, and that the vote would, therefore, be insufficient, by
a very large amount.
2. Had you any subsequent communication with Mr. Randle on the subject? No.
3. Nor any official communication with any other department ? No; but in my letter of
the sth February, I thought it right to bring under notice the objections to the vote for this
work which had been made in Council, and which were mainly owing to doubts, entertained
by some of the Members, as to the stability of the works; and I believe that strict inquiry
was made into the whole of the circumstances which had caused the increased demand, and
that it was satisfactorily shewn, not only that the charges were correct, but that the Govern-
ment was legally, as well as equitably, bound, under the contract, to pay the money.
4. The money was paid? Yes; three payments, amounting to £13,667 7s. Id., were made
to the contractor subsequently to that reported in my letter of the sth February, to which
I have referred.
5. Will you have the goodness to state to the Committee whether any repairs have taken
place, during the last fortnight or three weeks, at the Circular Quay, and, if so, when they
were commenced ? I know that a portion of the wharf has sunk, and that the piles by
which it is supported are to be drawn, and replaced by others. Mr. Randle, the contractor,
has offered to do the work at his own expense, and he has been authorized to commence it
as soon as he may be in a position to do so. Whether he has actually commenced, lam not
aware.
6. By Mr. Flood: How did it come within your knowledge that alterations or repairs were
necessary ? I received a letter from the Colonial Secretary, informing me that such was the
case, and instructing me to make an arrangement with the lessee to enable the contractor,
Mr. Randle, to carry out the work which he had undertaken to execute.
7. That is since the work has been certified to by the Engineer or officer superintending the
works, and has been paid for? Yes; but it is shewn from a report, which was read to the
Council, by me, the other evening, that the sinking of the piles, which renders repair neces-
sary, was entirely owing to an accidental circumstance, and not to any defect in the work.
8. Will you state what that accidental circumstance was ? I understand that the piles were
driven into a portion of an old wreck, which resisted the piles when they were first driven.
The very heavy ram which was used bounded back, and the piles could not be driven any
further under its weight; but lately a heavy cargo was placed on the wharf, the pres-
sure of which caused the piles to sink.
9. Have you heard the name of the ship that was wrecked there? I believe it was the
“ Ann Jamieson.”
324—8


Mr. Charles
Mr. Charles Doyle called in and examined :
Doyle
1. By the Chairman : You are the lessee of the Circular Wharf, or in some way connected
with it ? I manage for the lessee, and I have some interest in it.
2. How long have you been so engaged ? Since the first of January last.
3. Have you paid much attention to the construction of the new portion of the wharf; was
it going on when you first became acquainted with the wharf? It was going on previously.
4. Was it going on when you were first stationed there? Yes, it was.
5. Did you pay particular attention to it ? I did, for some months previously, because we
had made up our minds to have the Circular Quay.
6. Has there been any sinking of any portion of the wharf during the last month or so?
Yes, the sinking is in four or five places.
7 Where is it most visible —on which side ? It is the western side, that is, the new
portion.
8. On which side of the wharf has the sinking taken place, the water side or the land side ?
On the water side, on the front of the wharf, nearly opposite the Ordnance Stores; also on
the land side, adjoining the Ordnance Stores.
9. Were you on the wharf at the time this took place, or did you see it in process of
sinking? I think I saw it a few hours after it commenced.
10. Will you state the whole of the circumstances —what was the immediate cause, and
whether there was any unusual weight upon the wharf? My attention was first drawn to
the sinking by Mr. Champion, who was conducting the works there. He asked me what
quantity of potatoes was on a certain portion of the wharf, and I said there had been sixty
tons shipped, but that there were not more than thirty tons landed. He said, if it stands
that it will stand anything, or words to the same effect. I mentioned that to Mr. Obee the
next day. It was at that part the sinking took place. I saw some flour on the opposite
portion, and I said to him (Mr. Obee) “it is gone there.” At this part and time I think
there were not more than twenty tons.
11. At what time of the day did you point it out to Mr. Obee? It was from half-past ten
to twelve o’clock.
12. You are sure it was early in the day? Yes; lam sure it was before dinner
18. What time do the vessels commence discharging ? Generally at nine o’clock ; but, by
permission of the Collector of Customs, they can commence at six.
14. In this particular instance, at what hour did they commence ? Ido not recollect.
15. Did you take particular notice of the quantity of flour on the wharf? I took particular
notice of it some hours afterwards, when there might have been thirty or even forty tons,
but then it was gone considerably.
16. Will you describe, as nearly as you can, the manner in which the sinking took place ?
I could not see it sinking.
17. You could see the effects of it afterwards; will you describe the appearance of the
wharf, after the sinking had taken place ? There was a ship alongside the wharf above two
hundred feet in length, and they were discharging out of three different portions of the
vessel, covering a space of one hundred and fifty feet. I recollect that flour was being taken
out of the fore-hold. When I noticed it first, there might have been twenty tons on the
wharf, although 1 do not think there could have been so many, for, some time afterwards, I
counted about four hundred bags of flour, and I do not think there were more than two
hundred bags of oats and barley at the same time on the wharf. The cargo was being
Carted away by six horses and drays almost as soon as it came on the wharf. I counted only
four hundred bags, each one hundred weight, and I do not think there were more than two
hundred bags on the wharf at the same time, because they were being carted away almost
as soon as they came out of the vessel.
18. What appearance had the wharf where it sank; did the piles drop away from the beam,
or did the beam go with the piles ? The beam went with the piles, until it could bend no
longer, and then the piles left the beam —I mean the beam on the platform.
19. Did they fall out of the mortice ? No; I think the beams were secured to the piles
with iron bolts or bands.
20. Was there a space between the shoulder of the piles and the beam, after, as you say,
the beam could go no further ? There was a space between the floor of the wharf and the
cross beams, such a space as I could put ray foot in. When the piles sunk they carried
with them the morticed beams, also the platform, and left a space of four or five inches,
which I have frequently put my foot in.
21. Did you notice the steps of the wharf? Ido not think there was one hundred weight
on the steps when they went. I take it that the weight of the step-ladder carried away the
floor that bears it up. There had never been one hundred weight on the steps at one time
previous to their falling. It certainly was carried away, and they had to lift it up with
ropes, and put fresh bolts into it.
22. The portion of the wharf to which you are alluding now is that which sunk beneath
the weight of the flour, not the same portion which gave way to the potatoes? I am not
sure the wharf had not sunk before the potatoes were placed there; if so, the potatoes
certainly increased the sinking considerably; however, the wharf has sunk and canted on
the same side, and above one hundred feet from where the potatoes were, and in consequence
of there being no piles within ten or fifteen feet of the edge of the wharf.
23. You think the weight of the blue metal was sufficient of itself to cause the piles to
sink? Yes. As to the potatoes I alluded to, there were sixty tons shipped but
when they were landed they were in such a state that they sold for Is. Bd. a hundredweight.
I do not suppose there were 20 lbs. weight of good potatoes in a box which should have
contained a hundred weight. Ido not think there were more than twenty or thirty tons of
25 Oct., 1855,
potatoes
2
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFORE THE


potatoes altogether, covering a space of one hundred and thirty feet. I suppose at the place Mr. Charle*
where the wharf actually went, there were not more than two tons of potatoes. It has gone °y '
against the wall of the stores in such a way that the planks have split up.
24. By Mr. Bligh: Then the piles have not sunk, but canted on one side? I believe the 2 ' <s
sinking of the piles, and want of others at the western edge, has caused the wharf to cant
towards the Water Police Office and crush against the Ordnance Store.
25. By Mr. Macleay : The inner piles have gone ? Yes.
26. By Mr. Holroyd: What depth have they sunk where the potatoes were ? lam almost
afraid to give an opinion, for fear I should be wrong. I should say from six to seven inches.
27. Was it not thought that, although there was a supposed sinking in the first instance,
there was in reality no sinking at all where the potatoes were —is that visible ? Yes, it is.
They came to work at it, but I would not let them unless they had an order from the
Government. They got a screw-jack and raised the piles up, but the moment it was taken
away they went again. This is the worst part of the wharf, and would go much farther if
there were no Ordnance Stores to prevent it.
28. By the Chairman: You have particularized two places where there has been a visible
sinking—is there any other place ? Yes; a place went about a month ago.
29. Has it given way in more than one place? Yes; it went the day before yesterday in
another place.
30. That is in a fourth place ? Yes.
31. By Mr. Macleay : At what distance are these various places apart? The place where it
went first must be a hundred or a hundred and twenty feet from where it went about fourteen
days ago; and from the place where it went with the flour to where the potatoes are, I
should call it some fifty or sixty feet.
32. By Mr. Holroyd: Is the part which is now open the place where the flour was? Yes.
83. What depth did it sink there ? From five to ten inches, but nearer ten than five.
34. What depth was the sinking where it went a few days ago ? From four to eight
inches.
35. What depth did it sink the day before yesterday ? Very slightly. It is just perceptible.
I can perceive it, because every day Igo along the wharf. There has never been ten tons
weight on this part.
36. There is a place sunk in the centre? Yes.
37. Is that the place you were speaking of as having sunk fourteen days ago ? Yes.
38. Have you examined it underneath to see how the sinking is effected there ? No; I
have only noticed it at the top.
39. Do you think it has gone down as much as four inches ? Yes. I think it went down
with twenty tons of iron and five tons of salt that were upon it.
40. By Mr. Macleay : Do you know where the wreck of the “ Ann Jamieson” is? I know
where the wreck was , but she has been removed years ago to the east side of the cove, nearly
opposite to where the Custom House now stands.
41. Have any of these sinkings taken place there ? Not within two or three hundred feet
of where she sunk, at the old Kiiig's Wharf.
42. By Mr. Bligh: You say the sinking happened at the time some iron and salt were on
the wharf? Yes.
43. Since the removal of those articles have you observed whether there have been any
other goods deposited on it ? Yes; a cargo of very light goods. I should say there have
never been ten tons on it at a time since that. It was a Boston cargo of all sorts, brooms,
buckets, tubs, and so on.
44. By the Chairman : You have said that all these places are remote from where the
“ Ann Jamieson ” sank some years ago ? They are not within three or four hundred feet
.of it.
45. It has been said, that the first sinking of the piles was in consequence of their having
been driven into an old wreck, and the wreck giving way afterwards; are you aware of the
wreck of any other vessel being in that locality, besides the “ Ann Jamieson ” ? Nearly
forty years ago, and within five hundred yards of the place I was born ; and, although I
have never been long away, I have never heard of any vessel having been sunk there.
46. By Mr. Macleay : There is no tradition of any vessels having been sunk at these spots?
I never heard of any.
47. By the Chairman : You have paid some attention to the construction of the wharf; did
you notice the kind of timber used for piles? lam not a very good judge of timber; I
know they were all either iron or stringybark, or, at least, seven out of ten were so —Iron-
bark.
48. Were the piles properly shod with iron ? Yes, I have noticed it; but it is a thing Ido
not understand; Ido not know whether properly or not.
49. Did you notice what sort of wood was used for the planking of the floor of the wharf ?
Ido not know the proper name of it. I should call it soft deal; by far the greater portion
of the planking was California soft deal, or pine.*
50. Not hardwood ? No; California timber. I remember I made a noise about it, at the
time it was landed, and demanded wharfage for it; there were two cargoes landed; both
California timber.
51. Do you know whether the whole of the wharf is made of deals that came from California ?
Originally, a portion of it was floored with hardwood, but the whole of that was removed,
as the piles had to be scarfed, for, when the tide came up, it come over the wharf; they had
to lift that floor, and then they put other timber on the piles; they lifted only where the
tide came over.
52. They did not put down the old planks again ? They might have put down one or two.
53. Did these soft planks arrive subsequently—do you know ? Yes, subsequent to my con-
nexion with the wharf.
SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE CIRCULAR QUAY.


f 4. By Mr. Made ay: Hardwood became dearer and softwood cheaper, about this time?
I do not know.
55. Did the contractor import this softwood himself ? lam not aware; I only know what
the captain of the vessel told me. I heard that Mr. Randle did import it, and that is my
own opinion.
56. Did the process of driving the piles come under your particular notice ? I have spent
many an hour looking at them driving the piles.
57. In the terms of the contract, there are these words —“ The piles shall be driven by a
II ram, weighing from ten to twelve hundred weight, and they shall not be considered to
“ have found their bearing, till they do not lower an inch after five blows of such a rain,
“ with a fall of seven feet.” In your opinion, were the terms of the contract complied with
in this respect, —were they driven by a ram of the weight of half a ton, —and were they so
driven that they did not lower an inch after five blows ? I am certain I have seen piles
driven that have not received five blows altogether.
58. You feel no doubt about that ? No.
59. Did they go down an inch at each blow ? I have seen the piles run away from the ram,
and, on a particular occasion, I heard Mr. Champion call out “ that will do.”
CO. Was the pile running away from the ram then ? It had not had more than two blows ;
I am certain, if he had struck it again, it would have gone another foot.
61. By Mr. Ilolroyd: What part of the quay was that? A few yards below the Commis-
sariat Stores.
Mr. Charles
Doyle
25 Oct., 1855
62. Towards Dawes’Point ? Yes.
63. By Mr. Flood : Have you noticed more than one occurrence of that kind ? I noticed
one in particular, where Mr. Champion called out as I have said,
64. Did you see any piles driven, so as to fulfil the portion of the contract quoted just now
by the Chairman? Yes, I have seen piles driven that, I think, they could drive no further;
lam sure I have seen a ram used weighing above (half) a ton. They had one very large
ram, which they used for that portion of the wharf which was once the old Queen’s
Wharf.
65. By Mr. Ilolroyd: Did you call the attention of Mr. Champion to those piles that were
not properly driven ? No.
66. How many blows had been given when he called out ? Two blows.
67. Did you speak to Mr. Champion, at any time, about it ? No, I did not say anything to
him; but I spoke about it to some other person near me.
68. Any person connected with the work ? Ido not know who it was. I would have spoken
to Mr. Champion, only that, some days before, he had told us to go off the wharf.
69. Then you and he were not on very good terms? We have been very good friends since
then. I did not at that time even know his name, but he told me his name was Champion,
and he was conducting the works. I spoke to some person, not Champion, and said to him,
“ what is the good of that, it will not bear any weight,” and he said, it would hold until he
got another alongside, and then one would support the other.
70. By Mr. Bligh: Are you aware whether any person was superintending on behalf of the
Government or the Engineer ? I am not aware. The only two persons I knew to be
superintending were, Mr. Champion and a person I believe to have been a clerk of works.
71. Was that clerk of works a Government officer ? I really do not know. I think the
gentleman’s name was Walcott.
72. Was he present at the time ? I have no recollection of having been on the wharf with-
out seeing him, but I could not say whether he was present when this particular pile was
driven.
73. By Mr. Macleay : Mr. Walcott was very frequently in attendance, was he ? Yes; I have
no recollection of having been on the wharf without seeing him ; even when he was lame,
and walking on crutches. I have seen Mr. Walcott on the wharf, walking on crutches,
but not every day. Though I speak of this gentleman as Mr. Walcott, I only think that
was his name.
74. By Mr. Flood: Have you ever seen piles driven below the intended level, and after-
wards lifted? I never saw anything of that kind, but others I believe have. I have been
told so. I understood that it was so, at the particular spot where it sank with the flour.
75. By Mr. Macleay : Have you seen piles driven so low, that they had to cap them ? No,
except at the place where they lifted the floor.
76. By Mr. Flood: Was not the same thing done near the old Water Police Office or Dock-
yard, that is, lifting the platform, and capping the tops of the piles ? I have no recollection
of that.
77.. By Mr. Macleay: Have you had any experience of soft wood when in connexion with
water, and likely to be exposed to moisture ? No; but according to all the opinions I have
heard, that flooring (I mean the wharf flooring) cannot last more than from three to five years.
78. Have you ever seen Mr. Walcott, the gentleman of whom you have spoken, interfere with
the contractor’s people ? I have seen him-very busy moving about, but it appeared to me that
he always left the matter to Mr. Champion. I recollect seeing him taking the line, and
requesting that the piles should be shoved this way, or the other, to bring them in a line
with the others.
79. You never heard him give directions as to the driving of the piles, to test their firmness?
I never saw any one interfere in that way, but Mr. Champion.
80. By Mr. Flood: Can you inform the Committee what distance the platform of the wharf
was from the north end of the building at the old Dockyard, when it was completed ?
About four or five inches. I never measured it, but I have frequently walked round it, and
put my foot between the wharf and the building.
81. What position is it in now ? I should think it is three inches jammed against the wall.
The ends of the planks are crushed by the pressure on the wall.
82.
4
MINUTES OP EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFORE THE


82. By the Chairman: Have any steps been taken as to the repairing of these defects in the Mr. Charles
wharf? Yea. Doyle.
83. When were the first steps taken ? The day before yesterday—Tuesday.
84. Will you state to the Committee what has been done in this respect ? They have 25 oct, » 1855
removed the metal, and then cut away the floor some twenty-five or thirty feet, and they are
now taking the cross pieces off, to get at the heads of the piles.
85. That is in course of being done now ? Yes, as I left the wharf.
86. Of course you have looked at the condition of the piles now they have been opened ?
Yes.
87. Do they appear to have sunk in different places, those that were concealed in the interior
of the structure? Yes, they have all sunk there, and they are visible now. When I say
they are visible, I mean that when the floor is removed you can see the heads of them.
88. By Mr. Flood: Will you inform the Committee whether the piles, as far as you have
been able to judge, from being constantly on the wharf, have been prepared according to the
terms of the specification, which states, that the piles shall be “squared full to the edges,
“ perfectly straight, and sound in heart, free from shakes, wanes, and splits” ? There are
many piles not straight, many also not square.
89. Were they squared ? Many were not squared before being coppered.
90. By the Chairman : Did you notice any that were not sound in the heart? No, I could
not say that I did.
91. By Mr. Macleay: Did any of them appear to have the sap in them ? I could not
answer that question ; I am not sufficiently acquainted with timber,
92. By Mr. Ilolroyd: A great many of the piles are more than fourteen inches square at
the top ? I should not like to say I ever saw them.
93. By Mr. Flood: Are not a great many less than fourteen inches square ? Yes; there
are many under twelve inches square.
Mr. Benjamin Shaw, called in and examined :
1. By the Chaii'man : You are one of the Assistant Harbour Masters ? I am. Mr. Benjamin
2. And have been so during the whole period of the construction of the new portion of the Shaw.
Circular Quay ? Yes. /—>
3. Have you, at different periods, paid any attention to the construction of that wharf? 125 Oct., 1855.
have.
4. Have you, for instance, noticed the manner in which the pile driving was carried on ? Yes.
5. I will read the terms of the contract :—“ The piles shall be driven by a ram weighing
“ from ten to twelve hundred weight, and they shall not be considered to have found their
“ bearing till they do not lower an inch after five blows of such a ram, with a fall of seven
“ feet.”—Do you think the piles were all driven so as to comply with these conditions ? I
have seen many driven in that way ; 1 saw one or two driven near the Old Dockyard, and
a person who was present superintending said, it was quite enough, although they were quite
slack; when the beams were put on, it appeared as if they had got on a rock, and I asked a
man the cause, and he said they had come on a rock.
6. By Mr. Macleay: Did you see the ram fall on the pile, in that instance ? Yes.
7. And the pile did not move ? No; but when the ram came off it appeared quite slack.
8. By the Chairman: The piles are thus described in the specification :—“ The piles to be
“ driven ten feet apart from centre to centre, and to be of iron-bark, or other timber approved
“ by the engineer, squared full to the edges, perfectly straight, and sound in heart, free from
“ shakes, wanes, and splits; they shall be of such a length as the foundation requires; they
“ shall measure, at least, twelve inches square at the lower end, and fourteen inches square
“at the upper; the lower end shall be pointed and shod with the best iron, each shoe
“ weighing, spikes included, about twenty pounds; the heads also to be hooped with the
“ best scrap iron four inches deep, and three-quarters of an inch in thickness, to prevent
“ their splitting under the weight of the ram; such rings to be found by the contractor, at
“ his own expense.”—Do you remember particularly noticing any of these piles that did
not correspond with this description, that were less than fourteen inches at the upper end ?
No, I do not,
9. Or that appeared unsound? No; they all appeared to be sound when they were put in.
10. Were the piles iron-bark ? Yes; they all appeared to be so,
11. And all had rings? Yes.
12. Did you notice any split caused by the ram when driving? Yes; when they were
driving the piles between the Commissariat and the Dockyard.
13. How many did you notice that were split ? I dare say seven or eight.
14. They were covered up with the rest ? lam not sure whether they were or not.
15. You are aware that a portion of the new wharf has sunk? Yes; just off the Colonial
Store.
16. Do you happen to know under what circumstances the sinking took place ? No; I
.cannot say.
17. Have you examined the part of the wharf where the sinking has taken place ? Yes.
18. What appearance does it present; have the piles left the beam? Some of the pile*
have gone farther down in the mud.
19. By their own weight ? Yes, or the weight which has been upon the wharf.
20. Have the piles left the beams in any place ? Ido not know of ray own knowledge; but
the beams were braced to the piles, and bent with them.
21. You have not noticed whether, after this bending of the beams, the piles have left
them ? I have not taken notice. At the time they finished the wharf X was not in Sydney,
but


Mr. Benjamin but went along the coast for the benefit of my health, and when I returned the work was
Shaw. finished.
22. Did you ever hear it stated that the piles were driven into a piece of an old wreck ? I
26 Oct., 1855. bave seen it so reported in the papers.
23. You have long been acquainted with the port? Yes.
24. Do you remember any wreck in that part of the harbour ? No.
25. Do you remember the sinking of the “Ann Jamieson/’ which was burnt? Yes; I was
lying alongside of her at the time.
26. How many years is that ago? I think that was in 1831 or 1832.
27. Do you know the precise spot where she was sunk ? Yes; near the old Queen’s Wharf;
but she was taken up afterwards.
28. That is a considerable distance from where the piles sunk ? Yes; a distance of about
a hundred and fifty fathoms.
29. Have you seen the piles since they have been opened, within the last day or two ? No,
I have not.
30. Did you notice the timber of which the platform is constructed, before the earth and
stone was laid on ? Yes; I saw a good deal of American pine put on, which, in my opinion,
would not last very long.
31. Do you think the whole of the piles were sufficiently and properly coppered? From
one or two that I saw put down, it appeared to me that they were not; there was a portion
of them not covered with copper, and, therefore, exposed to the water.
32. By Mr. Flood: Are they likely to be attacked by the worm? Yes; I think in the
course of eighteen months, or two years, they will be injured by the cobra.
33. By Mr. Holroyd: Are any in that state now ? No.
34. They are all coppered now ? No ; those which were left so, are so exposed still.
35. Whereabouts are they ? Extending from the old Queen’s Wharf to the Dockyard.
36. By Mr. Macleay: From your experience of the action of water upon this light wood,
this pine, do you think there is any chance of that platform lasting five years ? It appeared
to me that, if it were covered with stone, which would be always damp, it would rot away
sooner.
37. The soft rubble stone laid upon it would act as a sponge, and retain the damp ? Yes;
it appears to me that it would do so.
Mr. John Crook called in and examined
I. By the Chairman : You are an Assistant Harbour Master, I believe ? I am.
Mr. John 2, You have been in that situation during the time that the new portion of the Circular
Crook. Quay has been in course of construction ? Yes.
3. You have been daily upon and about the wharf? Every day.
25 Oct., 1855. 4 Have you noticed the manner in which the piles have been driven ? I have seen some
portion of them driven, but I never took particular notice of them.
5. Have you ever seen any driven that it appeared to you might have been driven further ?
Yes. I hare seen a few, between the Commissariat and the Dock Yard. After they discon-
tinued the use of the steam pile driving machine they did not seem to be so well driven
as before.
6. The contractor, according to the terms of his contract, was bound to drive the piles home,
in such a manner that at last they should not go down more than one inch in five blows
from the ram, the ram being half a ton weight ? Some of them at the last blow have gone
down a good, bit. After the steam pile driving machine was taken away I was standing on
the wharf one morning, I heard a man talking to the people connected with the pile driving,
and he said u Now we will see if we cannot drive double the quantity that they can do with
“ the steam machine,” and I think they did not do it properly, for it is that portion which
was done after the machine was removed that has given away.
7. By Mr. Holroyd: Who said this? I think it was Mr. Champion.
8. By the Chairman : You know Mr. Champion, I suppose ? Yes.
9. How are the piles, to which ships are made fast, secured ? They are outside instead of
being built into the wharf. It was considered an extra work, and was not included in the
contract, and, in my opinion, a heavy ship will take them away altogether They are
loose now; they ought to have been built in, and I pointed that out when the Quay was
commenced.
10. Did you point that out to Mr. Walcott ? Yes.
11, Was Captain Moriarty with you at the time? Yes.
12. With regard to this driving of piles, did you never stand to notice the commencement
and finish of any particular pile or number of piles ? No; the only thing I took notice of
was the fastening of the ships, that was my business.
13. By Mr. Macleay: Do you know why this steam driver was discontinued? I saw the
owner, Mr. Storey, at the time, and he said Mr. Randle would not give the price he asked.
14. By the Chairman: Have you noticed where the wharf has given away ? Yes, and I
pointed it out to the Governor myself. One day when I was making a ship fast His Excellency
eame past, and I pointed it out to him.
15. How long is that ago ? It must be two months.
16. By Mr. Flood: Was the work completed then ? Yes, I think it was.
17. Have you seen the portion where the piles have been opened lately ? Yes.
18. Do the piles appear to have given way all through the construction? No, only about
twice the length of this room (about fifty feet ) ; not all the way. Some of them in the
inner part are very well; they have not given away there, but they will give way farther
along eventually.


19. Why do you think so ? I can feel it shake now if any heavy weight goes across.
20. By Mr. Macleay : Then, in your opinion, it is all insecure ? Yes, I think so. I think
no weight should cause it to shake.
21. By the Chairman: Do you know where the wharf has given away until it is brought
up by the Government Store ? Yes.
22. Have you ever attempted there to shake it by your own weight ? No; I think it is firmer
than that.
Mr. John
Crook.
25 Oct., 1850.
Mr. William Smith, called in and examined:—
Mr. William
1. By the Chairman : You are a blacksmith, I believe, and reside in Sussex-street ? Yes.
2. Were you employed by Mr. Randle to make the shoes for any of the piles driven at the
Circular Quay ? Yes.
3. Did you see the specification at the time, or had you any definite instructions given to
you ? When I heard that the contract for the piles had been taken by Mr. Randle, I visited
him at his house, and asked him for an order to make the shoes. He asked me to make a
sample and deliver it at his house, and said that if he got the sanction of the Engineer for
the sample he would give me the order; I did as he directed me, and received an order for
the shoes.
4. How many shoes did you make altogether? I made about 960, more or less,
5. Were they all of one weight and consistency ? They were not all exactly of one weight.
6. Will you state the weight and size of them, generally ? It may be necessary for me to
explain that the first shoes we made, about 70 in number, were weighed, and we afterwards
cut the same amount of iron and took the average; we did not weigh each shoe; one might
be half a pound heavier or lighter than another.
7. You had some given average ? Yes, thirty pounds, including the nails. There was a
difference in them, inasmuch as we could not always get iron of the proper size.
8. By Mr. Holroyd: Did you only find the shoes ? The shoes and hoops also.
9. You say the average was 301bs. instead of 20, as specified in the contract? Yes.
10. What were the rings ? The first rings I made were something like those described in
the contract, but upon driving the piles they found the bottom so hard that they had the
rings three inches by an inch to prevent the piles spitting.
11. It would not be any gain to the contractor, I presume, to substitute these rings for those
described in the contract four inches deep by five-eighths of an inch thick ? No, it would
cost the contractor some shillings additional for each hoop.
12. By the Chairman: You made these shoes and hoops of the best iron ? Yes.
13. You understood that they were to be made of such material before you sent in your
tender ? Yes, there may have been, and, perhaps, were, times when it was impossible to get
the best iron of the size required, and we were then obliged to use other, but that was only
in a case of emergency.
14. By Mr. Holroyd : Did you get the best iron that could be procured for that particular
service? Yes, the best that could be procured in Sydney.
15. By Mr. Flood: Have you never heard that the specification states that the shoes were
to be about twenty pounds weight each ? No; I had nothing to do with specifications.
16. You never were required to make the shoes about twenty pounds weight? No;
Mr. Randle, when the shoe was weighed, expressed his surprize at the weight of it.
17. What did he say about it ? It is a long time since, and I cannot remember exactly
what he said; but I know he said it was heavier than he expected.
18. Did he say it was heavier than the contract specified? I believe not.
19. By Mr. Holroyd: Did you furnish them at so much per pound? Yes; at eight-pence
per pound.
20. That would make a difference of six shillings and eight-pence in each shoe? Yes; but
if the shoes had been lighter, we should have required a higher price; for there would be
the same work in a light as in a heavy shoe; the only difference would be the price of the
material, I had eight-pence till the end of 1854; and he then said he should reduce the
price, and I had a less price afterwards.
21. Did you furnish equally good materials and labour, when you had a less price ? Yes,
just the same.
Smith.
26 Oct., 1865,
THURSDAY, 25 OCTOBER, 1855.
Mr. John Tyre called in and examined: —
Mr. John
1. By the Chairman: You are connected with the Commissariat Department? Yes; lam
in charge of the stores.
2. Then you have had, I presume, good opportunites of observing the construction of the
new portion of the wharf in the vicinity of the Ordnance Stores? Yes, I have seen a good
deal of it.
3. Have you noticed the pile driving at any time ? Yes.
4. Did you pay particular attention to the manner in which those piles were driven ? No,
but I thought they drove them as far as they could.
5. Did you ever see any driven that did not appear to be driven as far as they could be ?
When the piles were driven down, they would sometimes sway to and fro after the driving
had ceased. The parties said it was owing to the large body of water there. I had one
driven
35 Oct., 1855,
7
SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE CIRCULAR QUAY.


Mr. John
driven there for the gudgeon of a crane to go into, and that was quite slack after they left
off driving.
6. Will you have the goodness to read the contract under which the work was executed ?
[ The witness read the same.~\ I never saw fewer than that number of blows given.
7. Do you think, as far as they came under your attention, that the piles did not go down
an inch from five strokes of the ram before they left off driving? I have seen the men put
a chalk mark on the piles, and drive them several times without the chalk mark disappearing.
With respect to the pile which I had driven for the crane —after it was driven until it
could go no lower, it still shook.
8. By Mr. Holroyd : Did it appear as if the pile was on a rock? No; this pile was forty-
five feet long, and it went nearly twenty feet into the mud, but still oscillated. There
is twenty-six feet of water there at high tide.
9. Is it substantial? Yes; five were driven down, and they were banded together, to make
them firm. Ido not think they could be driven any deeper.
10. You noticed that, after the ram went down, the pile remained stationary? Yes; they
continued to drive it half a day ; and after the crane was fixed on it, it did not go down a
bit.
11. What is the weight of that crane? It will take up three tons; Ido not know the
weight.
12. In your opinion, as far as you could see, do you think the piles were driven with care ?
Sometimes; but sometimes, when the overseer was away, I think the men might have
slipped them over.
13. When the overseer was there, you think they were properly driven ? Yes.
14. By the Chairman: Whom do you mean by the overseer? Mr. Champion.
15. By Mr. Holroyd: Was he not generally on the spot? He had different parties at work
at various parts of the wharf, and used to be going round from one place to another.
16. By the Chairman: You have observed cases, when the overseer has been absent, where
the piles have been driven in an improper way ? It appeared to me that they drove them
quicker when the overseer was away; whether they were paid by the number they drove I
do not know.
25 Oct., 1855
17. You are aware that the wharf has sunk in two or three places ? Yes.
18. If the piles had been driven sufficiently, do you think it would have sunk ? I know
the bottom is all rock there, and that they could not have driven the piles much farther.
19. How is it, then, that the piles have sunk there ? Ido not know; but I know that
when, many years ago, I lived at the Old Naval Office, there was a shelving rock there,
beneath which I could go and bathe. This rock has since been taken away; but my
opinion is, there are other rocks similar to that mentioned above, where the piles have been
put.
20. By Mr. Holroyd: Was that near where the piles have now sunk? Yes.
21. You think that the rock might break off at its edge, and the pile would then go down ?
Yes; I saw a case of that kind myself, just by our wharf. A pile was put down, and
appeared to be driven home, when the man superintending the work said, “Give it one
“ more blow.” They did so; the pile went down out of sight, and they nearly lost the
monkey; it went right through a shelf of rock.
22. You saw that yourself ? I was there just after. They had to go down, put a chain
round the pile, and drag it up, and then put in one about as long again.
23. By the Chairman: Did you observe any instances where the piles sunk too low were
taken up, and others substituted for them ? Yes.
24. You noticed several cases ? Yes.
25. Did there appear to be, generally, an exhibition of sufficient care—was there no attempt
to make shift? No; I saw several piles taken up, and longer ones substituted. They
used, in the first instance, to try the depth by means of a long pointed rod, which was
thrust down by two or three men as far as they could, and thus judged of the length of
pile that would be required.
26. Have you any knowledge of different kinds of timber ? No.
27. You know what is called deal, when you see it ? Yes.
28. Of what was the platform of this wharf made? Principally of American pine—the
top part. There is a small portion near our stores which is of hardwood; I wish we had
all like that, for I think it would last longer.
Mr. Michael Dunn, called in and examined :
1. By the Chairman : You have a water tank, I believe, for supplying shipping with water?
I have.
2. In the course of your business with shipping at the Circular Quay, have you noticed the
progress of the wharf during its construction ? Often.
3. Did you ever pay particular attention to the pile driving there ? Not particularly; I
have seen it often.
4. Had you any knowledge of pile driving previously ? No.
5. You have seen the piles driven at the Circular Wharf? I have, but very few.
6. In observing the driving of the piles at the wharf, did you notice that they were insuffi-
ciently driven ? I could not say, but some of them went down a great deal easier than
others.
7. Will you have the goodness to state to the Committee what you have noticed ? I could
not say anything in particular without you asked me the question.
8. Have you ever seen a pile driven so that it would not move more than one inch with five
blows of the ram ? I could not answer the question ; there was always so much confusion
there, and I had to look after my tank.
Mr. M. Dunn
25 Oct., 1865
8
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFORE THE


9. By Mr. TTolroyd : You were attending to your own business ? Yes. ollu
10. By the Chairman : Have you noticed the character of the piles, whether they were sound e ~
or straight ? They appeared to be sound, not altogether straight. _ ,r ~V
11. Have you noticed the wood of which the platform is constructed? It is pine j I took 2 ' ct *>
notice of that. I think it is about four inches thick.
12. You have seen the part of the wharf where it has sunk ? Yes; that is nearly opposite
the Dock yard.
13. That particular portion has gone down since the wharf was finished? Yes.
14. Do you think that would have gone if the piles had been sufficiently driven? I think
not ; perhaps the piles were rather short; certainly if they had a good bottom they would not
have gone as far as they have done.
15. By Mr. Ilolroyd : What were you brought up to? lam a sailor.
16. You do not know much about pile driving ? No.
THURSDAY, 1 NOVEMBER, 1855.
present
The DEPUTY MASTER OF THE Mr. PARK,
MINT, Mr. PARKE S.
Mr. FLOOD,
HENRY PARKES, Esq., in the Chair.
Merion Moriarty, Esq., R.N., called in and examined:- M. Moriarty,
1. By the Chairman: You are Harbour Master of the Colony ? lam Port Master of the Esq., RN.
Colony, Harbour Master of Sydney. . /■“ ——n
2. During the time that the construction of the new portion of the Circular Quay has been 1 Nov., 1855,
going on, you, of course, have bad frequent opportunities of noticing the work ? I certainly
have.
3. Have you, on account of the nature of your office, taken particular interest in the work ? I
should have done so more than I have, had I been at all consulted about it, and had I not a
feeling of delicacy in interfering in a matter which was under the charge of an Engineer, to
whom I was a stranger.
4. Does the Committee understand that you were never introduced to, or had any conver-
sation with, the Engineer during the progress of the work ? I did not know there was such
a gentleman in New South Wales until I saw him at work on the wharf.
5. Did the work proceed for some time before you had any conversation with the Engineer ?
Yes.
6. Until you were introduced to the Engineer did you pay any attention to the work that
was going on ? I did; I paid very particular attention to the greater portion of it.
7. Was your attention called to it in consequence of anything which you thought might be
improved ? Yes, decidedly.
8. Will you have the kindness to state the circumstances that attracted your notice in par-
ticular ? The circumstance that first attracted my notice was, that the piles, on the eastern
side, where it is continuous with the old Circular Wharf, were too short, and I called the
attention of the Colonial Secretary to the fact.
9. Did you write to the Colonial Secretary respecting it? No; I visited him, and stated it
in conversation.
10. That was in the commencement of the work ? Yes; in driving the piles on the southern
side of the Quay.
11. What was the result of your application to the Colonial Secretary? The result was, I
believe, that these piles were removed and others of a greater length substituted. Had not
this been done, the result would have been that the floor of the wharf would have been
covered at high water spring tides, and though, perhaps, it would not be becoming of me to
give a professional opinion, my private opinion is that the rotting of the timber would have
been inevitable.
12. I should infer that the nature of your office takes you frequently about all portions of
the harbour, and on the wharves especially? Yes, all the Government wharves; I do not
visit private wharves,
13. You have, doubtless, been often on the new portion of the Circular Wharf ? Yes.
14. Did you ever notice the manner in which the piles were driven generally ? Yes, I have
seen them occasionally, one or two piles certainly, in my opinion not driven home. But
there was always a Clerk of Works to attend to these matters. In fact, I may say, I knew
nothing whatever of the formation of that work until I saw the people commencing it.
15. Will you have the kindness to look at the portion of the contract which refers to the
driving of the piles, and state whether the conditions there specified were complied with ?
(The Witness referred to the Contract.') I have a recollection that I saw a pile driven
which went down more than that at the last blow before they stopped, but it might have been
driven afterwards.
16. That is not the usual custom to leave off driving a pile, and then afterwards to resume
driving it ? Ido not think it is.
17. Has not the ram machine to be removed to another portion of the wharf in order to
commence driving a pile ? I did not see it removed when they discontinued driving. I was
never on the Quay that I did not see a Clerk of Works there, whose business it was, I
presume, to attend to all these matters.
18. With respect to the wood of which the floor is constructed, did you notice it at all—
is it soft wood ? Some of it is soft. I believe it is American timber.
324—C


M. Moriaity,
Esq.
• 19. Have you noticed the portion of the wharf where the piles have gone since it has been
finished ? Yes, I have.
20. Do you not think if they had been properly driven that would not have taken place ? I
’ have no doubt that if they had been driven down to the rock it would not have taken place
without the piles going, but it struck me there was a tremendous weight upon it; that of
course is only my private opinion.
21. Did you notice what weight must have been upon it? It must have been immense;
there was a coating of rock a foot thick.
22. You think the metalling, as it is termed, upon the wharf is a weight which the wharf
cannot stand ? I think it is quite enough for it without laying down fifty or a hundred
tons in addition on a small portion of it. I must say, however, that it was just about that
spot that I observed the pile did not go home; on or about that spot. I was coming over
from my home in my own boat, and saw them stop driving; I went there afterwards, and the
pile driving machine was not removed; Ido not know that they did not give the pile half a
dozen blows after that.
23. Did you ever notice anything in the construction of the wharf that induced you again
to have an interview with the Colonial Secretary on the subject ? I had a half a dozen con-
versations with the Colonial Secretary upon the subject, at different periods. One was with
reference to the piles, at another time had reference to the piles not being coppered to their
full extent, and, in ray opinion, not being covered with Muntz’s metal.
24. Did any examination take place, in consequence of that representation, that you are
aware of? I think there was; I think the Colonial Secretary himself examined it. My
duty terminated when I gave him the information ; indeed, it was rather a communication
from one gentleman to another in the public service than as an official one.
25. These are two occasions : will you state whether you spoke to the Colonial Secretary at
other times; I think you stated you had done so half a dozen times ? It was with reference
to the same subject. There was a difference of opinion between myself and the Engineer.
I entertained the idea that the piles should be coppered all the way down to the mud; the
Engineer had a different opinion. I therefore thought it my duty to tell the Colonial
Secretary what I thought, and, in fact, I gave evidence to that effect at the bar of the
House.
26. By Mr. Flood: What is your opinion of this paragraph of the contract —“ That the
“ quantity of material actually put into the works shall be alone paid for, and that it shall
be all measured at the specified dimensions, even if the contractor, for his own convenience,
“ should be permitted to use a larger scantling.” —Is it your opinion that if the engineer
used a larger scantling or heavier material in the shape of iron, he should be allowed any-
thing extra, under that clause of the contract ? My opinion is that he should be kept to
the actual words of the contract.
27. It states, ,l if for his own convenience he should be permitted to use a larger scantling ?
My opinion is that he should not be paid for it.
28. You have no doubt of that ? No. It seems to me as clear as possible that this is to
restrict him to materials of certain dimensions, and to prevent a claim for extra payment if
he should use larger material for his own convenience.
29. You see from the proceeding paragraph that the work is to be measured monthly, and
to be paid for as it is measured ; will you favour the Committee with your opinion of that para-
graph ? It appears to me clear enough that the work shall be measured every month by
the Engineer, and that the amount shall be paid, with a reservation of ten per cent., until
the reservation amounts to £lOOO, after which the amount certified is to be paid in full.
30. Do you consider that, if the Engineer had acted according to the directions in that
paragraph, he could have exceeded the contract by £lOOO, much less by £14,000, which is
the excess of the contract, without being aware of the fact ? I suppose the contract would
limit him.
31. But if the work were measured up according to that paragraph, could he exceed any
given sum by a thousand pounds, much less by fourteen thousand ? I apprehend this pro-
vision is that he shall measure the work monthly, and give a certificate for what is performed,
and that the amount shall then be paid, with the reservation alluded to.
32. Supposing the Government had undertaken to expend £32,000 upon this work, could
he have measured it up carefully, according to the spirit and intention of that clause, and
have exceeded that amount by one, much less by fourteen, thousand pounds ? Ido not
know anything of the nature of it at all; I imagine that if the original contract was
£32,000, and it was exceeded by £14,000, there must have been some correspondence with
the Government upon it.
83. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: Have you ever followed the profession of an
Engineer? No.
34. Then your experience does not allow you to decide upon that question ; you cannot give
an engineering opinion upon the subject? lam only giving a common sense view of the
matter, judging from the contracts that have come under my observation, and many have
come before me. If any contracts for nautical matters were to come under my notice I
would not allow them to be exceeded one penny-piece.
35. But you are notan Engineer? No.
36. Bi] Mr. Flood: Suppose the work were estimated, by the Engineer who had to super-
intend the work, to cost £32,000, and he had to pay the contractor by monthly instalments
after measurement, could he exceed that amount by £14,000, without being aware of it, if
he had performed his duty properly ? lam not going to pass an opinion upon the per-
formance of a man’s duty ; but, if it were a matter in my own department, which came under
rne, I should in such a case order the work to be stopped, and report to the Government to
have their authority before proceeding further.
1 Nov., 1866.
10
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFORE THE


37. The last clause of the contract is all follows:—“ In case the Legislative Council should M. Moriarty,
“ refuse to grant sufficient means for carrying out the whole of the work described, it shall s< k* * *
“ be in thep ower of the Government to terminate the works at any point, without incurring
“ any damages for so doing, in case the sum or sums already granted should have been 1 Nov., 1856.
“ expended.”—Now, if the sum originally voted for this particular work had not been
sufficient, do you consider that either the Government or any Officer of Government had
power, under thar, clause, to expend one sixpence more than the sum voted by the Legisla-
ture ? Yes; I think the Governor General had the power; it is for him to come to the
.Legislature afterwards, and if the Council refused the amount, somebody must stand to the
loss.
38. Would not that be a contradiction to the last paragraph you have read ? No doubt, the
Legislative Council are the persons to pay the piper; anything beyond the original contract
must be voted by them.
39. Do you not think that clause was inserted in the contract for the purpose of preventing
the expenditure of a larger sum than that originally voted by the Legislature ? Ido not
know what it was inserted for, but it would seem to sanction some notion of the kind. I
should say it was obviously placed there to prevent the expenditure of a larger amount than
had been voted.
40. Do you think any Officer of the Government would have the power, without the con-
currence of the Governor General, to incur any expense in excess of a vote of the Legislative
Council ? Certainly no subordinate officer has power to expend any sums of money without
the authority from the Government.
41. lam asking you with reference to that clause of the contract ? I have already stated
my opinion that that clause is inserted for the purpose of putting a limit to the expense.
42. Have you noticed the timber used for the piles ? Yes.
43. They were not square to the edges? I never saw the specification, therefore I did not
measure the piles; but I believe the contract in that respect was pretty accurately performed.
44. Will you have the kindness to read that part of the specification which relates to the
piles? {The witness read the same. ) I did not examine them all, but I did not see any
that were not sound. As far as I saw, they seemed to be of good timber. There were some,
that were not good, rejected,
45. Were they “ square to the edges, free from shakes, wanes, and splits ” ? Ido not know
that they were; but I think the timber was very good.
46. Are you prepared to say whether you believe the piles were fourteen inches square ? I
do not know, but my impression is very favourable as to the piles.
47. You say they are not square to the edges, generally? Pardon me, I did not say
generally; generally, I think they are.
48. How long do you think the timber of the platform likely to last ? I cannot say.
49. Will not the timber be likely to decay from the percolation of the damp through the
stone ? There is such a coating over it that I doubt whether the damp will percolate.
50. Will not the rain? No; I think it will run off.
51. Do you not think the rain will run through the coarse blue metal with which the plat-
form is covered ? No, Ido not think it will; for, from the constant traffic over it, it will become
as level as a sheet of glass.
52. Then it will be perfectly impervious ? I think it will; the only danger to the platform
will be from the tides when they rise very high, as they will wet the lower parts of it.
53. Are there proper piles placed for mooring the ships to ? No; they are not put in the
places where I wished them to be. My opinion was that they should be put a few feet from
the edge of the pier. I had a letter from the contractor, asking me to point out the position
in which I wished these piles to be driven, I did so; but they were not placed according to
my direction.
54. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: Who was responsible for their not being in their
proper position ? My opinion is that they were super-added to the original contract I
received a letter from the Engineer, dated 15th January, of this year, enclosing a tracing,
and requesting me to point out where I wished the piles to be placed. {The witness read
the letter.') This letter I answered immediately; but my directions were not acted upon.
55. By the Chairman : And you heard no more about it ? No. I did not like to urge the
matter, because it might have interfered with the original contract, as the most
deviation from a contract enables a contractor to make what charges he pleases.
Edmund Walcott, Esq., called in and examined : B q COttr
1. By the Chairman: You held the appointment of Engineer in the construction of the new _ x _^
portion of the Circular Wharf ? Yes. 1 Nov., 1865.
2. Will you have the goodness to state when you received that appointment ? \_The witness
handed in a letter from the Colonial Secretary, dated 28 November, 1853 ; vide Appendix A.]
3. Did you put yourself in communication with the Colonial Architect as to the selection of
a Foreman of Works ? Yes, I did. The only applicant I had was a gentleman who was
connected with Gabo Island. Previously to seeing him, I had put myself in communication
with Mr. Blacket, and he said he did not know any one to recommend. Subsequently, this
party, who claimed to himself some merit for a design of Gabo Island Lighthouse, (Mr.
Johnson) applied to me. I asked Mr. Blacket his opinion, and he did not recommend me
to take him. The party who was appointed to the office was Mr. William Malbon; he was
recommended to me by the Acting Deputy Surveyor General, Mr. Thompson; and had been
previously employed by the Government to superintend the boring of the Artesian well.;
< Being


Being a man of some property, and Laving Lad some experience in engineering matters, I
recommended Mr. Malbon, and Le continued witL me tLrougLout the works. I liked Lim
tLe better for being an independent person, and should Lave done so even though Le Lad
had no previous knowledge, as I would, in a few weeks, Lave made him an efficient Clerk of
Works.
4. You did not advertise for a Clerk of Works ? No; but I acted in accordance with my
instructions, and put myself in communication with the Colonial Architect. I wanted to
get the best man I could, and I found an honest one, which was what I desired.
5. Could you give this work your uninterrupted supervision? No; I was not bound to
that; I had other matters to attend to. I was always down there once or twice a day.
6. Bid you go there at stated periods ? No, at uncertain times, on purpose. In fact, I
have been in the profession twenty years, and I am perfectly up to the management of such a
work.
7. Had you any written instructions as to how you were to proceed with the work other
than is contained in the contract? Certainly not; I was the hingineer, and drew out the
specification ; I received no instructions except what you have read in the Colonial Secretary a
letter. , '
8. The contract was drawn up by you ? Yes, it was; not to bind me, but the contractor.
9. But it was your duty to see that it was carried out by the contractor ? Yes.
10. The contract, of course, had to be approved by the Government ? Yes.
11. Were any exceptions taken to the terms of the contract as drawn up by you? There
were not; the plans and the specifications were laid before the Executive, and approved of,
as I submitted them.
12. Bid you advertise for tenders for this work? They were advertised for.
13. Will you have the kindness to state what number of applicants there were? Only one,
Mr. Randle.
E. Walcott,
Esq.
1 Nov., 1855,
14. His tender was accepted ? Yes.
15. Without any modification of your contract, or stipulation beyond it? Exactly.
16. When did Mr. Randle enter upon the execution of his work, in pursuance of the con-
tract ? On the 19th June, 1854. There was a great deal of delay in drawing up the deeds.
17. Bid the work progress at a satisfactory rate of speed, and in a satisfactory manner with
regard to its execution ? Certainly, in a satisfactory manner with regard to execution ; but
not according to the specified speed. At the end of the prescribed time there was, I think,
a total of eighty-five piles which had not been driven at the proper period. I did not cause
the penalty to be levied upon Mr. Randle, because there were contra claims which he could
have brought against Government, and which I could not have resisted. By the terms ot
the specification, “ the decision of the Engineer in all cases relating to the contract and
specification” being “ final, and without appeal,” I took upon myself to adjudicate in the
matter. He was delayed in three separate matters : first of ail, by the existence of the Bon
Accord Bridge; in the next place, my plans were taken away, to be shewn to the Council;
and, although I bad a copy of the first portion, and before we could get them back, we were
obliged to go on with the rest, or delay the works.
18. By Mr. Flood: Was he not furnished with a working plan ? He was, with a working
plan as the work progressed; but, after the completion of the first portion of the working
plans, I could not get the originals to give another working plan; therefore, there was a
delay.’
19. Had he not a sketch of the whole of the works, shewing what the wharf would be when
completed ? Only from time to time, as required.
20. Who has the plans you now allude to ? I have given them up, but I have some here.
21. Working plans ? Yes. There was also a delay in securing possession of the Queen’s
Wharf of two weeks. If I had really gone into these matters at the completion of the work,
and Mr. Randle had insisted upon his claim, it would have been attended with much greater
loss to the Government than has resulted from my arrangement. I said to Mr. Randle,
“ If you give up your claim against Government, I will not make a charge against you for
“ this £45.” If I had claimed this sura he would have charged for the time during which
his men were delayed, and Government would have had to pay three or four hundred pounds.
22. You stated that the contractor was delayed in consequence of the plans being in the
hands of the Legislative Council? Yes.
23. Bid you take any steps, or apply to any officer, for the purpose of obtaining possession ?
Yes, I did, frequently.
24. To what officer did you apply, and in what way did you make your application ? I
applied, through a Government Officer, for them.
25. By letter ? I believe so.
26. Through what Office ? The Colonial Secretary’s Office. lam not certain, but I believe
I wrote; at all events; I had several communications with different gentlemen connected
with Government, more especially in the Colonial Secretary’s Office. Eventually, I had
them. One evening I came here and asked for them, and had an order from the Colonial
Secretary to the Clerk of the Council, who gave them to me. But to shew that I did every-
thing I was bound to do, I will now read part of the specification:—“Plan No. 5 is a
“ working drawing.of the first portion of the work across the Tank Stream ; such drawings,
“ and any others which are requisite for the guidance of the contractor, shall be provided
“from time to timehy the Engineer, and the works shall be constructed according to such
“ working drawings, signed by the Engineer.” 1 made out a plan sufficient to last them for
two or three months, and that was completed before I could get the original plan, which
was in this building. But, to strike that out, there was' sufficient delay to counterbalance
the £45.- : ■ --<■< <; • .. ■■ ; • ' ■><: ■ ■ A •.■ » .
27. By the Chairman: With reference to the conditions specified in the; paper before
you, were the works all executed at the prices stated in the schedule ? Yes. .
■ A . '2B
12
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFORE THE


28. It was not begun within fourteen days from the signing of the contract? Yes, it was,
in this way: lam jiot certain that a pile was driven within fourteen days, but the materials
for the work were brought on the ground.
29. Do you consider that all the material used in the construction of this portion of the 1
wharf was of the description stated in this clause; was it “ the best?” Yes, certainly.
30. You satisfied yourself, as a professional man, that it was the best for the work? I did.
31. Had you occasion to complain of any portion of the material ? I believe some few of
the timbers were of smaller scantling; that was the only portion.
32. You did positively object to them ? Yes.
33. Were they immediately carted away ? They were removed.
34. I think you stated that the work did not proceed at the requisite speed ? It did not.
35. And you did not inflict the penalty, for the reasons you have stated ? Yes; it was
better for the Government I should not.
36. The seventh clause of the specification provides, “ That the works shall be measured
41 monthly by the Engineer, and monied out according to schedule of price. The amount
“ of such certificate of the Engineer shall be paid monthly to the contractor, excepting a
<( reservation of 10 per cent., to be deducted monthly, until the amount of reservation shall
“be £l,OOO, after which the amount certified shall be paid in full; and the £l,OOO so
“ reserved as an additional security for the due performance of this contract, shall not be
“ paid to the contractor until he receives his final certificate, and presents a declaration,
“ signed by the Engineer, that all the provisions of the contract have been complied with.”
Was this provision observed ? It was not complied with, excepting in one instance.
37. Were the conditions complied with for any given period of the contract ? For the
greatest portion; we will say six months.
38. Will you have the goodness to state to the Committee what was the reason of the
departure from its conditions, and to what extent they were departed from ? I received a
letter from Mr. Randle requesting to be paid fortnightly instead of monthly, and stating
that it would be a great convenience to him, and benefit to the works, inasmuch as he could
carry them on more rapidly. In consequence of that I wrote a letter, which has not yet
been shewn to the House, but which will be laid upon the Table to-night, to the Colonial
Secretary. In answer to that I received a letter from the Colonial Secretary’s Office, dated
September 18, 1854.
39. Was that the only departure from the contract? Yes; that was the only departure.
40. When was the work finished; when did you give the certificate enabling the contractor
to be settled with for his work? I think it was in May; I know it was after the 10th of
April. ■’
41. At that time was the reserve fund of £l,OOO in the hands of Government? It was;
and on that certificate the contractor received £2,000; £l,OOO being the reservation of ten
per cent., and the £l,OOO bond, which he gave instead of two securities.
42. With respect to the quality of the workmanship, did you take due care, either by your
own constant supervision, or that of a foreman, to see that the piles were properly driven,
in accordance with those directions, which require them to be driven with such force that
they shall not go down an inch after five blows of a ram weighing ten or twelve hundred-
weight ? I did; but I must explain. I say in the specification that the ram shall weigh
between ten and twelve hundred weight, but the actual weight of the ram was twenty.
There, again, Mr. Randle had a claim upon the Government; a ram of the weight specified
could have been worked with three men, but it required five men to work the twenty
hundred weight ram. That claim I would not allow. •
43. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: He got the twenty hundred weight ram for his own
convenience ? No; ho had the ram cast for the purpose.
44. Why did he use a heavier ram than that specified, if it entailed more expense upon
him ? I requested him to do so, because I found that the silt pressed so much against the
sides of the piles as to prevent their going down.
45. And you requested him to bring a fresh ram ; had he not then a fair claim ? Yes; but
I set one thing against another.
46. By the Chairman : Do you consider that a good principle to proceed upon in a public
work of this kind, to give and take? I do; I think that is the only way of going through
the world.
47. Did nothing ever occur to shake your confidence that the piles were all driven suffi-
ciently? Nothing. _ 1 '
48. During the whole progress of the work you never felt the slightest doubt as to their
all being driven sufficiently? No; I have been there often when the men have complained
that they have been driving a quarter of an hour and the pile has not gone down one inch.
I have stopped and watched, and found it did not move. There was one instance of a most
peculiar nature. The people had been driving a pile for a long time without moving it; I
said, “ Give it another blow ;” they gave it another, and it went down right out of sight.
49. How do you account for that ? There was no bottom there, but a sort of shelf of rock,
upon which the pile bad rested, and this broke through, and the pile went down some depth..
50. Did you never recover the pile ? Yes. j / ..
51. By Mr. Flood: Have you ever estimated the weight of the fall of the twenty hundred-
weight ram you speak of? Yes; I can tell you exactly. The fall was thirty feet, which
would be equal to forty-three tons. Each pile has had a blow equal to forty-three tons.
52. What did each pile go down with the last two or three blows ? The last dozen
blows I do not think they went down an inch, or a quarter of an inch, or anything at
all. In fact we smashed the heads of the piles. • ■
53. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: Were all these piles driven under your supervision,
or the. supervision of your foreman ? Yes. ; 1
54. You can guarantee that none ; of the piles Were cut off? None, excepting the heads
which had been smashed by the ram.
55
E. Walcott,
Esq.
Nov., 1855,
13
SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE CIRCULAR QUAY.


E. Walcott,
Esq.
55. By the Chairman : You are aware that a portion of the wharf has sunk ? Yes ; and I
always expected it would.
56. How do you account for that ? I believe there are two reasons for it; one is that there
is a wreck sunk there; and the other, as lam lately informed, is that there is an old sewer
there.
1 Nov., 1855
57. We have already received evidence, from persons whose opinions we value in such
matters, that there can be no wreck there ? There is something there, for when we
drove the pile there the ram rebounded just as if we had been attempting to drive into
India-rubber. In one instance the ram rebounded off the pile, and we had to employ a
diver to get it.
58. What was the extent of the rebound; can you describe it ? It must have been con-
siderable. I was not on the spot when it occurred, but 1 saw the divers going off for it.
After the piles have received a number of blows with the ram, their summits become so
fibrous that they have great elasticity, and we are compelled to cut them off so as to obtain
a solid mass to strike. In this instance perhaps this had not been done, and the ram, falling
upon these fibres, rebounded and fell into the water.
59. With regard to the piles in this part, you were so dissatisfied from the impediments in
the way of finding their bearing, that you expected they would give way ? I always expected
that part of the wharf would settle a little; it was always weak; it settled, in the first
instance, when we began to metal it; we then raised it, and I thought that when the braces
were put in it would not go down again.
60. Do you think it will go down farther ? Not after the repair it has had now.
61. In how many places has the wharf gone ? There is a slight settlement a little more to
the south, but it requires a good eye to see it; and there is a weak place, but it has not gone
down yet, near the Commissariat. There is positively a wreck there. Many parts of the
road appear to have settled, but that is because there is no party to look after the surface of
the wharf.
62. Is there not a portion on the south side which projects? That is not settled; but it
lags a little ; that is because there is not an outside beam. We could not drive any piles
there, and, therefore, the platform overhangs,
63. How many feet does the floor of the wharf project? I should think six.
64. Is that metalled ? Yes.
65. Would that portion be sufficient to sustain the weight of metal ? Yes. When I was
down there yesterday, there was a pair of very heavy locomotive wheels, weighing two tons
each, on that part.
66. But you can stand upon that and shake it with your own weight ? No doubt; and a
few persons acting together could break the very strongest suspension bridge that has ever
been constructed.
67. By Mr. Flood: Why could you not drive the piles at this place? Because of the rock.
68. Was there any expense in framing piles ? I did not go to that expense, because I
recommended in my report that the ground should be reclaimed there.
69 But you could have put piles there ? Yes; but it would have been a great expense,
and I did not think it necessary.
70. What depth of water was there ? It was dry.
71. What length of pile would you have required? Six feet,
72. How many would you have required ? About eleven.
73. That would be sixty-six feet ? Yes.
74. How much does the timber cost ? Four shillings and three-halfpence per foot.
75. Then that would be an expense of less than £2O? It would cost more than that,
because that does not include the beam.
76. By the Chairman : Were the pipes, throughout this construction, driven at the specified
distance ? As near as we could; in some places it was impossible we could place them exactly
in situ, because the bottom was uneven, and the piles would slip off the apex of a rock.
77. As you were down on the wharf two or three times every day, of course you saw the
actual position of all the piles ? Yes.
78. The position of the piles was not left to the discretion or judgment of the foreman?
No; he had a plan to go by. I marked where the piles were to go, and they were put, as
nearly as they could be, in their proper places; but, in some cases, they were not within
six inches.
79. When the wharf was opened, the other day, did you observe whether the piles in the
interior had sunk deeper ? No; they had sunk chiefly in the front row, and it ran off to
nothing at the back.
80. There was no sinking of the inner piles ? There was a gradual sinking; but it ran off
to the fourth row, not counting the first.
81. Were all the piles of the requisite size ? Yes; and most of them were much larger.
82. Would that bo an advantage to the work ? Yes; they were brought down larger, and
we did not oblige the contractor to cut them down to the requisite size.
83. By Mr. Flood: Do you say that all the piles are the specified size? Yes; they are
much larger. I do not know one that is at all smaller; I should be glad to be shewn one
that is. Some of them are of immense size.
84. Have you examined the whole of the piles yourself? I have; and, whenever I was on
the work, I always took out my rule, or tape, and measured them, and, if I found any wrong,
the Clerk of Works very carefully marked them “ rejected.”
85. You are quite certain none of the piles were under fourteen inches square at the top ?
I think not; I could not swear it; but to the best of my belief they were not. I should
be glad, if there are, that any one would point them out; but I feel satisfied that if they
cotild point out one, they could not more.
86. I suppose you would undertake to say that there are none so small as ten inches square ?
I would, certainly.
87
14
MINUTES OP EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFORE THE


87. You are sure of that ? Yes ; I should like you to shew it to me, it would be a curiosity,
88. By the Chairman: With regard to the coppering of the piles, were they all shod with
Muntz’s metal ? In the first instance, owing to my not knowing that Muntz’s metal had a
stamp, I thought the yellow metal was as good; but, as soon as the difference was
pointed out to me, I used nothing but Muntz’s metal.
89. Do you know how many piles were shod with yellow metal ? I should think there were
fifty; but there is very little difference in the price; I think about a penny a pound.
90. Nails were used of the same ? Yes.
91. You paid particular attention to that, I suppose ? Yes, to the best of my judgment.
92. The nails were of copper ? Not copper, but Muntz’s metal.
93. With regard to the metalling of the wharf, do you think that was a wise recommendation ?
I do, on this ground, that the work requires weight. In all such works it is advisable to put
a good weight on the top, because the quay is like this table; if the books were taken off
it could be moved with the slightest touch, but, this weight being on, there is some difficulty
in moving it. I did not expect the piles to enter very far into the rock, and, therefore, I
put a weight upon it to make it steady, and to enable it to resist any force that the vessels
moored to it might exert.
94. That was one advantage, but were there not disadvantages; was it not likely to cause the
floor of the platform to decay much sooner than it otherwise would ? Not at all; I think
quite the reverse.
95. You are of opinion that the wood would not be liable to more rapid decay in consequence
of having this metal upon it ? No.
96. Have not engineers expressed a contrary opinion? No; the wood would have been
likely to split by the action of the sun ; indeed the ends of the beams have split to such an
extent, that, without the covering I gave them, the tenons would be useless.
97. Has the Governor General visited the wharf, to your knowledge ? Yes.
98. Did you accompany him ? Yes, over a small portion.
99. Did he object to this coating upon the wood-work ? Not to my knowledge.
100. He expressed no opinion upon the metalling of the wharf? No.
101. By Mr. Flood: Would not diagonal bracing have been more efficacious than this weight,
in preventing the wharf from moving ? It has braces.
102. If it had been properly braced, do you think it could have moved ? The end of the
Brighton Pier has weights of one ton per superficial yard, and there is no work in the world
more securely braced than that.
103. Is the Circular Quay braced? It is.
104. In what way ? By diagonal and longitudinal braces ; the piles are braced every fourth
set, and the front of the whole work is braced.
105. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: Braced in one direction ? Every fourth set
transversely, and the whole of the front longitudinally.
106. By Mr. Flood: With a cross brace? Yes.
107. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: When you opened the platform did you find any
of the timber affected by the cobra ? No; there is little or no cobra in that part of the
harbour,
108. Was any of the iron-work disturbed ? The iron-work is turned by the action of salt
water; but there is no galvanic action going on. The iron-work has increased in size. The
effect of the action is, that you can cut little pieces of iron off the outside with a penknife.
That is the ordinary action of strong salt water upon iron. I should propose to the Govern-
ment that they should all be painted.
109 You are aware that with iron metal galvanic action will go on ? Yes; but that has
not gone on yet.
110. By the Chairman : Was the iron-work all in accordance with the terms of the contract?
No; some was much heavier, and some was a little lighter. I will explain that; shortly
after the work was commenced, Mr. Randle came to me and said it was impossible to get, in
the Colony, all the iron of the specified size; I said to him, "well, you must send elsewhere
“ for it.” He sent to Melbourne and to Newcastle, and got some of the specified size from
each of those places. When that was used I told him to get some more, as near as he could,
either one-sixteenth over or under; and the majority was over. In England I should not
allow the extra weight; but in this Colony, where iron of the requisite size could not be
obtained, I thought it was only fair to the contractor to allow him the extra weight. If I
had not done so, I might have been considered very clever, or very sharp; but it is not my
ambition to be called either clever or sharp in that sense.
111. By Mr. Flood: Was not that an actual condition of the contract ? Not at all; it is a
specified size.
112. “ That the quantity of material actually put into the works shall be alone paid for,
“ and that it shall be all measured at the specified dimensions, even if the contractor, for his
II own convenience should be permitted to use a larger scantling” ? I grant your point, but
I think I should have been acting very unfairly if I had taken advantage of it. The
Government have the benefit of the additional strength, which 1 am very glad of, considering
the action of saltwater upon the iron ; it is what I always have done, and always will do.
113. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: Did you allow it at the same contract price?
There was no other.
114. Could you not have compounded with him ? I did not think it an exorbitant price.
115. By Mr. Flood: Did you consult the Governor or the Colonial Secretary, with reference
to that departure from the contract ? No; it was left entirely to me; lam not a Govern-
ment Officer.
116. Do you mean to say that that was not a distinct condition made by you with Mr.
Randle, the contractor, for performing the works ? Matters of this sort are left to the
E. Walcott,
Esq.
1 Nov., 1866,
judgment
15
SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE CIRCULAR QUAY,


judgment of the Engineer; I have laid out some three or four millions of money upon the
same system, and have always given satisfaction.
117. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: Did you not consider yourself in all respects, a
Government Officer while you were receiving Government pay ? Not exactly; I was only
employed by Government.
118. You were in Government pay, and were supposed to look after the interests of the
Government? Yes. At home we were always allowed to pay for any extras.
119. By Mr Flood: You have certified to extra work to the amount of about £14,000?
No, not extra work. The contract is not a lump sum; it is a contract and schedule of
prices.
120. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: The estimate was exceeded something like
£14,000 ? Not my estimate; you must deduct about £4,000 for extras.
121. When were you first aware that this excess would occur? In January.
122. Did you represent that to the Government ? Notin writing, but, about a fortnight
before I knew where the excess would be, I met the Colonial Secretary, and he spoke to
me about the metalling. He said he thought it was a great expense; I said, yes, it was; he
asked me if it could not be stopped, and 1 replied, that I did not think it could, because the
contractor had agreed with parties to supply him with metal, and, of course, if he broke his
contract with them, he would have to pay them something, and would be entitled to some-
thing himself, for the loss of his profit.
123. You reported this verbally to the Colonial Secretary ? Yes.
124. You never represented it officially ? No.
125. Did you know the sum voted by the Council for carrying out this work ? Yes.
126. Do you not think you should have represented officially, to the Government, that there
would be this excess? I did so as soon as I could, but I wanted to state the exact sum.
127. When was it you were able to state the exact sum ? On the 16th February last.
128. How much of the sum voted by the Legislative Council to carry on that work was
left at that period ? There was about £2,900 or £3,000 unexpended at that period,
129. What amount was voted by the Legislature ? £31,458.
130. And there was about £3,000 unexpended when you represented to the Government
that the estimate would be exceeded ? Yes. I said there would be an excess, and I was engaged
in ascertaining what it would amount to.
E. Walcott,
Esq.
1 Nov., 1855
181. Did I not understand you to say that, on the 16th February, you represented what
would be the actual amount of excess ? Not the actual amount.
132. When did you communicate that ? On the 31st March.
133. How much was then left unexpended ? £l,OOO.
134. By what amount did you shew that the original estimate would be exceeded?
£14,000, including extras ordered to be done.
135. The Government were then made cognizant of the fact that there was only £l,OOO
to the credit of the work, and that £14,000 more would be required to carry it out as
originally intended ? Yes ; they were cognizant of the fact before, but not of the figure—
(the £14,000.)
136. The Government first became cognizant of the fact on the 16th February ? They were
aware of the fact before that.
137. Not officially ? Not officially.
138. By Mr. Flood: What have the whole works cost? Including the extras ordered over
and above the works originally intended, it has cost £45,500. Everything is completed
now, and, I believe, there is something like £lOO remaining in the hands of Government.
139. What was the original estimate ? £31,450.
140. By Mr. Flood: Is not this, which I hold in my hand, signed by Mr. Fitzpatrick, the
original estimate ? Ido not understand the question.
141. Is not this the original estimate ? Yes; that is my estimate for the whole of the
work.
142. Will you inform the Committee what you stated the work would cost ? According to
my own figures, £28,676 10s. Bd, Mr. Randle’s figures wex-e rather more; five per cent,
above that.
143. Then the cost of that work has exceeded your estimate upwards of £14,000 ? That is
on a different basis. You cannot argue upon that; it is only an approximate estimate.
144. The actual cost of the work has exceeded your estimate of £28,676 10s. Bd. upwards
of £14,000 ? Quite so.
145. If you measured the work once a fortnight, in accordance with the terms of the
contract, did you not ascertain, a considerable time before the work was completed, that it
would exceed your original estimate ? Not a considerable time ; the date I gave was the
31st of March.
146. Had you any authority from the Government to spend the £l,OOO then to the credit
of the work ? I had not expended it at the time; the money was still in their hands.
147. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: Were there not large sums then owing to the
contractor for blue metal, which, although not brought on to the ground, had been purchased ?
No; but there was work going on for which the Government would have to pay. There
might be a thousand pounds owing to the contractor.
148. Could the Government have stopped at that period without exceeding a thousand
pounds ? Yes.
149. What was the state of the Quay at that time ? Unfinished.
150. Could it have been used? Yes, about half.
151. Did you represent that to the Government ? No.
152. Did you recommend them to stop then and there? I neither recommended them to
stop nor to go on. I only asked what source the money was to come from.
153. By Mr. Flood: Do you state that you had authority from Government to expend this
sum of £14.000 ? I was never told to stop the works.
154
16
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFORE THE


155. What is meant by the last clause in the contract? I wrote that paragraph myself, in
the Civil Crown Solicitor’s Office, because, at that period —it was in February, last year
there was only one sura of <£12,000 voted by the Council, which sum would only complete
the work as far as Queen’s Wharf, and it was very uncertain whether the Council would
vote a sufficient sum to complete it.
156. When did you write that ? I think it was in February, 1854. It refers only to the
original £12,000, and was intended to give the Government the power to stop the work if a
further sum to complete it were not voted. I put it in at my own suggestion, to save the -
Government any difficulty.
157. The date of your letter is the 28th January—the date of your contract is the 28th of
April, of the same year? That was sent, with the plans, to the Executive Council. After
some delay it was forwarded to the Civil Crown Solicitors Office, and until the 28th of>
April there was nothing done.
158. Knowing that the Legislature had subsequently voted £31,000, and knowing, also,
that there was such a paragraph in the contract, do you think you were justified in exceeding
that amount, without getting the authority of the Governor General and the Legislature ?
My system, and the system of all engineers, is to carry on every work entrusted us, and
not to find the money. . ;
159. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: Did you not insert this clause for the protection
of Government, and to prevent any claim on the part of the contractor ? Yes.
160. Then, acting for the Government and against the contractor, did you not feel it to Joe
your duty to stop the work ? I should not take the responsibility upon myself of stopping
the work.
161. Does not this specification give you the responsibility ? It does not refer to it.
162. Does it not say “ the decision of the Engineer shall be final ” ? That does not refer to
this matter. I know in my heart that this clause refers only to the £12,000, and it would
be unfair —it would be wrong of me —to make it refer to anything else.
163. Then you think it was not your duty to stop the work ? I do.
164,. 8y Mr. Flood: You state that the paragraph has reference only to the £12,000; now
in your estimate for £28,000, did you not make that for the whole amount, irrespective bt
any estimate that had been made previously ? Of course I made an estimate tor the whole
of the work.
165 Irrespective of the £12,000 ? Of course, that was part of it.
166. How can you satisfy the Committee that this only applied to the £12,000, when you
state that your estimate of £28,000 applied to the whole work ? At tnis time Idid not know
whether the whole work would be done, or whether the Council would grant the money to
complete the work. My estimate was for a probable thing; this had reference only to a
T)OSSIbI6
167. You consider that it was not your duty, the instant you found you would exceed the
£Bl,OOO which was voted by the Legislature, to call the attention of the Governor General
to the matter, and to stop the work? It was not my duty; my duty was, as soon as I
found the money nearly expended, to ascertain how much money was expended, and how
much unexpended; how much of the work was executed, and how much unexecuted.
168. What would have been the consequence, supposing you had been carrying out this
work for a private individual, who had received your estimate of £3.1,000, and you had
inserted this clause to enable him to carry on the works only so far as his means would allow ?
I would have done the same with a private individual as with the Government. There is
no engineering work in the world that has been executed at its estimated cost, and I do not
know°of one, of any size, in this Colony : it is notorious here.
169. Have you had much experience in this Colony in this way ? Three years.
170. As a practising engineer ? As an engineer. _
171. What works have you superintended besides the Circular Quay ? Only that.
172. You have had no practice then ? I have been employed on many works; I have
received as much from private individuals as from Government.
173. Can you refer to any works you have superintended? Ido not say that I have super-
intended other works, but I have been engaged in making plans, reports, taking surveys, and
so on ; I have been twenty years in my profession. ,
174. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: In a letter from the Colonial becretary s Office,
dated 15th February, 1855, Mr Elyard writes : “It having been represented, by the Acting
“ Colonial Treasurer, that between £4,000 and £5,000, beyond the sum of £02,25>5, voted
“ for the extension of the Semicircular Quay, will be required by you to complete the work,”
and three weeks later the amount is increased to £14,000 —was this information, in both
instances, obtained from you ? Not from me. „ ~
175. How could the Colonial Secretary obtain his information ? I believe from Mr. Handle.
I was never applied to. In this country the contractor is always a greater man than the
176. I suppose Mr. Randle was applied to because you did not lay the information before
the Government ? I could have been found; I could have been asked the question.
177. Do you consider it was your duty to wait to be asked the question ? At that time I
was engaged in getting information for the Government.
178. Up to this date there was no official information before the Government ? No; I had
not been asked. . . 0 XT . . . -
179. Had you not thought it your duty to give it ? No. I was engaged in getting infor-
mation. ,
180. By the Chairman : Have you a copy of your letter, dated Ist March, in answer to tbc
letter from the Colonial Secretary’s Office, dated the 15th February ? [The witness handed
in the same , and also a letter dated 24 March, 1855 ; vide Appendices B and 6\]
324 - D 181
E: WaWot
' Es ; j. • ‘
. : u
1 Nov., \2ttJ
17
SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE CIRCULAR QUAY.


181. I think you stated that the tender for this work was in conformity with the schedule
of prices before the Committee? Yes,
182. It does not appear to be so in respect to the metalling? Yes; the metalling is under
two separate heads, the “ stone pitching” and “ blue metalling;” you must add those two
together.
183. Will you have the kindness to state to the Committee how many piles there were, of
the additional length of eight or twelve feet, required, in consequence of there being a
“ second bottom,” as you term it in your letter to the Colonial Secretary ? The greater
portion of them were required to be from eight to twelve feet longer than my sounding of
the harbour shewed.
184. Of this number, was the greater part approximating to twelve or to eight feet? I
cannot say; I took those as the outside figures. I made a list of the actual length of all
the piles, and compared it with my sections. There is that difference. ( Pointing to figures
in letter .)
185. You state in your letter that you are convinced, not only that the excess is excusable,
but that it is one any engineer might have caused in carrying out a work of a similar
character? In deep water it is impossible to find out exactly what expense will be incurred
in such a matter. To shew, too, that, after all, it is a cheap work, I may refer to the eost of a
wharf made to the north of Erskine-street, which, although constructed of round timber,
and having no metal on it, cost five times as much per yard.
186. l)o you not think, when the floor of the wharf decays under this metalling, there will
be danger of its going in altogether. Supposing, six or seven years hence, there should be
placed on the wharf a weight perhaps three times greater than any placed there before, do
you not think there is danger of its going all at once, and sinking it? If it is overweighted,
it will, no doubt.
187. If the frame-work is decayed ? There ought to' be an inspection two or three times a
year.
E. Walcott,
Esq.
1 Nov,, 1856
188. I think you have stated that it is your opinion this coating of metal will not facilitate
the decay of the platform ? I should say there is very little danger of the platform giving
way for the next ten years. Very much inferior wood, used as sleepers, at home, lasts seven.
189. The greater portion of the wood used in the construction of the platform is soft wood,
is it not ? The greater portion is what is called, here, soft wood —Oregon pine.
190. Will you describe the proportions of each as nearly as you can ? It is impossible.
191. Can you not give an approximate estimate ? I should say about fifty planks of Kauri,
that the hardwood is one-third, and the remaining two-thirds of Oregon pine.
192. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: Is there no Baltic pine imported here? There
was not, at that time, any four inches thick.
193. Y- i would have taken that in preference to Oregon pine ? Yes.
194. By Mr. Flood: I perceive, in this statement of the excess, there is a charge for stone
pitching and blue metalling, 8,363 superficial yards, at 6s. 3d. per yard; where is that to be
found ? Underneath the blue metal ; it is the roadway.
195. Is that performed according to the contract and schedule of prices? Yes.
196 I perceive in the contract the price for eight-inch stone pitching was 6s. 3d. per super-
ficial yard ? Yes.
197. Is the stone-work under the metalling eight-inch pitch pavement ? Yes; some is more
than eight inches.
198. Is it not what is called ballast, or rubble stuff shot in ? No; they were all placed by
hand.
199. All squared? No, not squared; if they were perfectly squared, the blue metal would
run off.
200. What is meant by this item in this contract, “ eight-inch stone pitching, per yard
superficial ?” It means what has been done. I drew out that specification from a piece of
road that was then used near the railway. It is stone, eight inches deep, irregular in shape,
put upon the base, as close as possible together, placed by hand to form a substratum for the
blue metal. It is the system adopted by Telford.
201. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: You could not fairly call it pitching? It is not
close pitching.
202. By Mr. Flood; Are the Committee to understand that all the stones are to be eight
inches thick ? It does not state any size in the specification.
203. By the Chairman: With regard to these twelve mooring piles, did you apply to the
Port Master to know where it would be most convenient to have them placed? Yes; but
he differed both from the Colonial Architect and myself, and they were not placed as he
required them to be. He wanted them placed more inside the roadway, and both Mr.
Weaver and myself thought it advisable to put them in front of the work.
204. And they weie eventually placed in front of the work ? Yes; there is a report from
Mr. Weaver respecting it.
205. Is there a gentleman named Champion employed upon the work ? He is Mr. Handle’s
foreman or assistant; he had the management ot the works.
APPENDIX A.
No. 53 332.
Colonial Secretary's Office,
Sidney, 23 November, 1853.
Sir,
The Governor General having transmitted to the Legislative Council the copy
of a letter from the Acting Deputy Surveyor General, submitting a proposal for the com-
pletion of the unfinished portion of the Semi-Circular Quay, at the head of Sydney Cove, by
means
18
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFORE THE


means of timber, instead of masonry, and the Council having communicated to His Excel-
lency a resolution to the effect that it is expedient that the work should be completed, as
recommended by the Acting Deputy Surveyor General, in his letter alluded to, a copy of
which is enclosed; I do myself the honor to inform you, that His Excellency has directed
that the work shall accordingly be proceeded with, as recommended, and has been pleased to
appoint you to conduct the same. You will be remunerated for your services by an allow-
ance of five per cent, on the outlay.
2. The proposed work is of a vc-ry important character, requiring uninterrupted
supervision to ensure its permanency ; it seems desirable, therefore, that you should have
the assistance of a capable foreman, who will be allowed at the rate of £1 per working day.
To secure the appointment of an efficient person of this description, I am directed to recom-
mend you to place yourself in communication with the Colonial Architect on the subject.:. .
3. It is desirable that the work should be entered upon without any delay; you will,
therefore, be pleased to report the measures which you propose for carrying out the under-
taking.
4. For your information, I have the honor to enclose a Report from a Committee of
the Legislative Council, on the proposed Quay, in the Session of 1836, and a Progress Report
from a Select Committee of the Council in the Session of 1852.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) E. DEAS THOMSON.
Edmund Walcott, Esq.
APPENDIX B.
55-4.
321, Casilereagh-street ,
Sydney, 1 March, 1855.
Urgent.
Sir,
I have the honor to forward, for the information of His Excellency the
Governor General, the accompanying estimate of the amount of money required to complete
the works of “ the extension of the Semi-Circular Quay,” and the extras thereon.
The excess in the cost of the work has principally arisen from the extra length of
piles required over what the borings shewed; and, consequently, the extra quantity of
copper required for them, and also the extra cost of Mr. Randle’s tender for the metalling of
the road, beyond my estimate. His Excellency is aware that it was my wish to save a con-
siderable sura by not using copper sheathing to the extent I was ordered to adopt.
I am not aware from what fund the money now required can be taken ; but it is
needful for some provision to be shortly made, as the contractor has now been just his
contract time without a measurement.
I hope to have the honor of an interview with His Excellency, when I shall feel
pleasure in explaining item by item.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) EDMUND WALCOTT.
The Honorable
The Colonial Secretary,
APPENDIX C.
Extension or Semi-Circular Quay.
Sydney, 24 March, 1855.
55-6.
Sir,
I have the honor to enquire whether His Excellency’s Government has made
any provision for meeting the extra cost of the works for the extension of the Semi-Circular
Quay, beyond the sum voted in the last Session of the Legislative Council, as the contract
period for monthly payment has expired, and the contractor informs me he will charge Bank
interest on all vouchers not paid at the specified time.
2. I have the honor to request also, that “ the estimate of the amount of money
“ required to complete,” forwarded to His Excellency with my letter dated March Ist, No.
55-4, may be returned to me; as the work is so far completed, I can now give the actual
quantity and cost of most items, and hope to reduce the amount. I will return an annexed
estimate, with a full report, on or before the 31st instant.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) E. WALCOTT.
TUESDAY
SELECT COMMITTEE ON TIJE CIRCULAR QUAY,


TUESDAY, 13 NOVEMBER, 1855.
Urgent
Mr. BLIGH, Mr. PARK,
Captain BUM ARE SQ, Mr. PARKE S.
Mr. HOLROYD,
H. PARKE S, Esq., in the Chair.
The Honorable Campbell Drummond Riddell, Esq., Colonial Secretar} 7 , examined :
The Hon. !• By the Chairman: Had you any conversation with the Port Master with regard to the
C.J).Riddell, Circular Quay in an early stage after its commencement? Yes, verbal communications; I
Esquire. <jo think there was any written communication.
■— A "n 2. Was this the matter of complaint on the part of the Port Master, that the work was not
13 TSov., 1855. q one as h e w J s hed ? No; he was a little annoyed that he had not been consulted with
regard to the position of the quay and so forth, but the communication related, as far as I
remember, to the metal they were using to cover the piles. (A copy of the correspondence
relating to the Circular Quay was handed to the Witness^
3. Have you any correspondence relating to the excess, not included in the papers laid upon
the table of the House ? I think not; there were some parts of the excess which were
sanctioned by the Governor General. The wharf had been made an inclined plane across
the Tank Stream, to meet the level of the stone pier. This, in the first place, I thought
was a great eye-sore, and, in the next place, at high water, the under-surface of the platform
would be wetted, and be liable to rapid decay, or to be burst up if there were a heavy sea.
That part was raised, under the sanction of the Governor General, and, I think, cost some
fifteen or sixteen hundred pounds.
4. Is that all that lias been sanctioned by the Governor General ? Ido not, at this moment,
remember anything else.
5. Was this inclined plane, which was objected to by the Governor General, in accordance
with the original specification ? lam not aware.
G. In the last letter in the printed correspondence from the Colonial Secretary to Mr.
Walcott, Mr. Walcott’s conduct, in the performance of his engineering duties in connexion
with the Circular Quay, israther severely commented upon? Yes; the Governor General
was convinced that Mr. Walcott had not exercised the care and discretion ho should have
done in forming an estimate for a work of that description.
7. The letter states that, but in severer terms? The letter was written, almost word for word,
from a note sent by the Governor General to my office, and was signed by Mr. Elyard
for me. , .
8. Was Mr. Walcott, a short time subsequently, appointed to a commission of trust to
examine and report upon the stability and soundness of other public works ? He was one of
the members of a Board previously appointed to examine the Railroad, and it was suggested
by the Commissioners that, prior to opening the Railway, the same Commission that had
examined the works previously should go along the rail, and report as to their stability.
Mr. Walcott having been associated with the Commission on the first occasion, his name
was included among the others. That is the only work, so far as lam aware, upon which
be has been employed by the Government. I understand that he was engaged by Mr.
Moriarty to assist him in the execution of some Government work on the River Hunter;
that, however, was not as an officer of Government, but as an assistant of Mi. Moiiarty.
Mr. Walcott brought out with him very good letters, and was introduced to the Governor
General by General Wynyard. With regard to the payment of the £14,000, I would wish
to say, that the Governor conceived, and so did I, that we were bound to pay, tor this reason,
that the bargain into which we had entered with the contractor, was for work according to
a schedule of prices, and although the work had exceeded the estimate ot Mr. Walcott, still
it had been performed by Mr. Randle.
9. It is, however, your opinion, according to this letter, that, as Engineer to the Government,
he acted with great impropriety and negligence ? Yes, I think so, because he led us into
the scrape; if he had stopped in time, we might have arranged with Mr. Randle to have
stopped till we came to the Council, and made other arrangements.
10. You could not have considered his conduct as disqualifying him for future employment,
otherwise he would not have been employed in inspecting the Railway? lhat might have
been an oversight, as the requisition from the Railway Board was to the effect, that the
Board which had before inspected the works should be appointed again, and the same Board
was appointed. . .
11. By Mr. Parle: And Mr, Walcott’s name was not expunged from the original Commis-
sion? No; in fact it was not known, until the Railway Board made this requisition, that
the Commission would ever act again.
12. By the Chairman: As I understand you, the Commissioners of the Railways wished
some party to go over the works before the Railway was formally opened, and they said,
“ Let the Commissioners who examined it before examine it again; and Mr. Walcotts
name being on the Commission, he.went with the other members ? Yes; I told Mr. Wal-
cott that he need not expect any further Government employment.
13. By Mr. Holroyd: After this excess of his original estimate ? Yes.
Captain


Captain Thomas Stevenson K-owntree, called in and examined :
1. By the Chairman : You arc one of the proprietors of the Waterview Bay Dry Dock ? I am.
2. Have you had any experience in the construction of similar works to the dock, prior to
your engagement in that undertaking ? I served six years as apprentice to a shipwright; I
am a shipwright by trade.
3. Have you had much experience in the construction of wooden wharves in any parts of
the world, or wooden docks ? I have.
4. Did you receive notice from the Legislative Council to examine the new portion of the
Circular Quay ? I did,
5. Did you make a personal inspection ? I did.
6. Have you a written report upon that work ? I have. ( The witness handed in the same.
Vide Appendix .)
7. Had you a copy of the contract ? I had not. ( The Chairman read the description of
the work from the contract.')
8. In your report you state that you did not find the piles driven at a distance of ten feet
from each other ? No ; that portion of the contract has not been carried out.
9. Bij Mr. Holroyd: In how many instances did you find that had not been done? I have
been confined to my home, in consequence of an accident by which my foot was injured, and
was unable until yesterday to attend to the notice. The work underneath can be examined
only at low water spring tide, and I have been able to make but one examination ; still, that
was sufficient to justify me in expressing an opinion. I went beneath the wharf in a boat, and
examined the piles.
10. By the Chairman: What distance were the piles apart ? For forty feet, where there
ought to be piles, there are none. The ends of the walings are ten feet apart, and there are
five ends of waling without a pile. In some places there are nineteen feet without a pile; in
other the cills are not upon the pile; I can shove my hand through.
11. What part of the Quay did you examine ? From Campbell’s Wharf right to the Custom
House. I went in a small boat. A great deal of the diagonal bracing is floating on the
water ; the diagonal bracing was never properly put on, it seems as if it had been thrown
on with a shovel; there has been no order observed at all, and the work has, evidently, been
done by no mechanic. The diagonal bracing under water ought to have been coppered and
copper fastened, but it is not. If it were not for the wall of the building which supports it,
the end of the Quay, from the watermen’s stairs to the new Dock Yard, would fall over; it
has settled down fifteen inches.
12. By Mr. Bligh : It is all leaning over ? Yes; if it were not for the wall it would
tumble down altogether, for it has pulled the joints asunder.
13. By the Chairman : Were you on the floor of the wharf yesterday ? Yes.
14. Did you go to that part of the wharf where you say it would give way if it were not
for the building ? Yes.
15. Did you attempt to shake it at all ? Yes; I could shake it with the motion of my body.
Even next the Custom House, the diagonal bracing is dropping off, and I never saw copper
put on so badly, some of the nails are of iron, some of copper, and in some places there are
no nails at all.
16. You say the diagonal bracing is hanging off? Yes, in places; a very little spike
would answer, but it has never been notched into the piles. There seems to have been no
rule in nailing it; they seem to have put a nail here and there, just where they liked. The
rule of coppering is to put a nail at every three inches, if the copper is made to lap diagonally in
a proper manner.
17. I should gather from your statement that the copper has been put on by a person who
did not understand the business ? There has been no order in the coppering ; if the person
did know how to do it, he did not care.
Capt. T. S.
Rowntree.
13 Nov., 1855,
18. Would a great deal of expense be saved by placing the copper on in this improper
manner? Yes.
19. Is it more probable that this has riot been done properly because the person who did the
work did not understand his business, or because the desire was to save expense ? I think
it has been put on by people who could be got cheap, who were not mechanics, and that they
had a view to the saving of nails also, for they just drove a nail where it suited their fancy.
20. Did you examine the portions of the wharf where the repairs have been recently effected ?
Yes. .
21. Did you examine those parts from the top as well as on the under side ? On the top, I
could only see where the stones were laid; from beneath I examined the work, and found I
could get my hand upon the tops of some of the piles.
22. You state that the repairs have been left in a very unsatisfactory state; will you explain
in what respects they have been so left ? The piles are scarfed, and the scarf happens to be
just af the low water’s edge ; they are at present without copper. If these scarfs are fastened
with iron—and I could not see whether they are or not —they will very soon be destroyed
by the copper, and the pile head will tumble off. There were two men doing some work
there, and I asked them if they were going to copper them ; they said they would try to
do it; but I know they cannot, without the driving apparatus. The pile heads are short
of the cill, in some places, and in others they have a wedge put in to sunnort the oill;
that is the way the work is left.
23. By Captain Dumaresq: In uniting the new heads of the piles, have they adopted a
good system ? That work ought to have been taken up, and new piles put down.
24. Even the repairs have not been well done ? They have not gone into it sufficiently to
do it properly. If these scarfs are fastened with iron, in the course of about six months
the work will all be loose.
25. By the Chairman: Had you any opportunity of noticing the work when it was in a
state of progress ? I never saw much of it, neither did I see them effecting these repairs.^
21
SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE CIRCULAR QUAY.


Capt.T. S. 26. What is your impression as to the state of the wharf, where it has been repaired; do
Rowntree. y OU w [}[ g 0 soon ? I do.
27. What weight do you think it would bear? The part I have spoken of, wdiere the piles
UNov., 1855. have se ttled, will hardly bear the weight of the stones upon it.
28. By Mr Holroyd: That is not on the sea side of the wharf? No. The first row of
piles, which connects the wharf with that part which was formerly constructed of stone, is
left in an unsafe state, inasmuch as the piles have settled down, and some parties have put
pieces of wood there, .and propped up the wharf with wedges.
29. In what way ? They have laid a piece of plank on the surface, stuck some props up,
and wedged them, to keep the wharf from coming farther down.
30. By the Chairman : Did you notice the stairs made for the landing of boats ? I did.
31. Did you see the way they are left, by fastenings to the upper part of the wharf? Yes.
32. Did you see any ropes tied to any of them ? No, I did not notice that; but at Queen s
Wharf, the stairs are settled down; they are left in an unfinished state; and as they
naturally become slippery, from the water flowing over them, there is danger of slipping,
when you step on them.
33. From your experience in.similar works, what do you think will be the of putting
down metal and earth on the wood planking ? I think, before long, the metalling will be
through the wood altogether, from drays going over it. They are all American pine planks.
34. Do you consider a work of that kind should be left uncovered ? Yes; cross planks
•could easily be replaced.
35. Would they be better preserved by being exposed to the atmosphere ? Yes; the damp
will cause them to decay very soon.
36. That is your decided opinion ? It is.
37. Will you state the quality of the wood that forms the planking ? It is Oregon pine.
38. Did you notice any hardwood ? Yes, in some places. It is hardwood near Queen’s
Wharf, but all the way from Campbell’s Wharf to near the Queen’s Wharf it is pine.
39. Much the larger portion is pine ? Yes.
40. By Mr. Bliqh: You do not consider that as durable as hardwood? Nothing like it;
it will not stand wet and dry.
41. It soon decays ? Yes.
42. By the Chairman : It has been stated by a former witness that in that part of the wharf
where you say there is a deficiency of piles, the weight of metal is sufficient to act as a lever
upon the platform; it is described as an overhanging shelf, upon which the weight of metal
is sufficient to tear up the planking on the other side ? The reason is that the , scarfs are
badly put together, and one half is drawn from the other.
43. By Mr. Holroyd: How far has it gone over in that way ? Part of the scarf, perhaps
three inches.
44. By the Chairman: Had you any means of judging whether the piles were firmly driven;
could you move any by a touch of the hand—those which were not fastened to the wharf ?
The most of these piles inside are not to the bottom ; they are in the loose mud.
45. Can you shake them ? Yes, most of them.
46. In the contract it is specified that they should be driven “by a ram weighing from
“ ten to twelve cwt., and they shall not be considered to have found their bearing till they do
“ not lower an inch after five blows of such a ram with a fall of seven feet.” Do you think
they were driven in that way ? Ido not believe they were.
47. Had they been so driven could you then have moved them ? No.
48. By Mr. Holroyd: I think you said you had never seen them driven? I never took
notice of one.
49. Supposing that at the depth of a few feet, six or seven, they had come upon rock, and the
piles had been driven home, would not that account for the loosening ? Diagonal braces
would have supported them; they should not have been there without diagonal bracings;
they would have kept the piles plumb.
50. Are you aware that on the side of that bay there are shelving rocks? No, lam not. r
51. How long have you been in the Colony ? Three years.
52. By the Chairman : It has been stated by the Engineer that, in some places, when they
were driving the^piles, they found a false bottom, .and that after driving repeatedly with a
ram, not half a ton but a ton weight, the pile would not move at all, when suddenly it went
down six or eight feet; and he accounts for that by supposing that there was a shelving
rock there, anil that the pile had either slipped off or gone through the rock. Have you had
any opportunity of examining the state of the rock on the shores of the harbour ? In front
of the Dry Dock I fell in with shelves in the same manner, and I drove the piles thirty-six
feet into the mud. They were pine piles, iron shod; and I used a ram weighing fifteen
hundred weight. With a single row of piles I made a dam so tight as to enable me to carry
out the works of the dock. I found that some of these piles had been driven through a
shelving rock.
53. By Mr. Park : That rock you speak of is generally known by the name ot shale rock ?
Soft shale rock. ,
54. By the Chairman : Did you notice whether the piles were coated with Muntz s metal ?
Ido not think it is Muntz’s metal; I did not take a sheet off, but I. could soon have told if
I had. , „ _
55. .By Mr. Holroyd : How long were you engaged in examining the work yesterday.? The
afternoon’s tide.
56. How long would that be ? From three to four hours.
f 57. You never saw the work during the time it was in progress? No; I had no time-to
pay attention to it; Ido not think I was there at all.
58. By the Chairman : Do you know who drove the piles in the first instance at the Circular
Quay ? Ido not: ■ I remember once seeing .the pile driving machine lying there. ,


50. By Mr. llolroyd: In how many places , did you find forty feet space between pile and Capt. T. S.
pile ? In front of the Colonial Storekeeper’s and Police Station. owntree.
GO. That is the only place where you found forty feet between the two piles ? Yes, A
61. By the Chairman: What is your opinion as to the durability of the work ? I think 13 N° v -» 1855.
most of that wharf would want to be repaired within the next three years.
62. By Captain Dumaresq : From actual decay ? Yes.
63. Independently of the bad plan of the construction ? Yes.
64. By the Chairman : Supposing a thousand tons were laid upon the wharf at once, what
would be the effect? Ido not think the wharf is fit to bear a thousand tons.
65. Looking to the magnitude of the shipping interest in Sydney, are you not of opinion
that any wharf ought to be able to bear a thousand tons, which is not more than the burthen
of one large vessel ?. Yes, it ought, in the length of such a vessel; it requires a great deal
more diagonal fastening in the jetty to make it sufficiently strong. The bracing is at every
four bays, at least it has been pretended to be done; but it ought to be at every other bay.
66. B) Mr. Holroyd: Have you ever seen the plan from which this wharf was made ? No.
67. Nor any specification, excepting this which has been handed to you ? No.
68. You are not able to say whether the contractor’s work was done according to the
drawing? No.
69. By Mr. /High : You say it is not according to the description ? Not according to the
description I here see.
70. By the Chairman : Here is a copy of the contract upon which the wharf was constructed ;
will you have the kindness to state in what particulars you found the work as actually
executed at variance with the terras of this contract ? 1. “ Piles to be driven 10 feet apart,
“ of iron-bark or other timber squared full to the edge, clear of wanes and splits.”—Not carried
out. 2. “ Copper to be well fastened with nails.”—Not carried out. 3. “ Well scarfed and
“ hooped together.”—Not carried out.
WED NEED A Y, 28 NO VEMBER, 1855.
present
Mr. BLIGH, Mr. FLOOD,
The DEPUTY MASTER OF Mr. PARK,
THE MINT, Mr. PARKES.
Captain DUMARESQ,
HENRY PARKES, Esq., in the Chair.
Captain Thomas Stevenson Rowntree, and Captain John William Russell, called in and
examined:—
1. The Chairman to Captain Rowntree: Since you were before the Committee before, you Capt. T. S.
have, in association with Captain Russell, made a further examination of the wooden portion Q OW t nt J e^-&
of the Circular Quay recently constructed ? We have. Bussell.
2. When did you commence this second examination ? On Saturday, the 24th instant. x
3. Was Captain Russell with you at that time ? He was. 28 Nov 1855
4. Did you make any further examination after Saturday? On Monday, and on Tuesday. ’’
5. Have you since embodied the results of your examination in a Report ? We have. \_The
witness handed in the same. Vide Appendix .]
6. You had a copy of the specifications with you at the time of examination ? Yes.
7. Had you any plan of the wharf? We bad not.
8. Did you ascertain how many piles there are altogether in this portion of the work ? We
cannot get a boat under the Tank Stream.
9. This Report gives the length of the piles ? No; the number of the piles.
10. In how many rows are they ? We took them in rows. Ninety-six is the number of the
rows.
11. By Mr. Bligh : That is, all except the Tank Stream? Yes, and we cannot get a boat
there.
12. By the Chairman: How many piles should you imagine there are in that portion of
the wharf where you cannot get a boat ? There are a great many; I cannot say how many,
but close upon the same number.
13. The number you have ascertained is about half of the total quantity, as far as you can
form an opinion ? Yes.
14. By Captain Dumaresq : You state that the piles are bound with diagonal braces —will
you state whether they are firm ? No, they are not firm.
15. The Chairman to Gaqttain Russell: You were with Captain Rowntree in this examina-
tion ? Yes; I was with him on Saturday, Monday, and Tuesday.
16. Of course you agree to the written Report that has been handed in, which bears your
signature ? Yes.
17. Do you desire to qualify any of the observations in that Report, in any way ? No ; I
think that is substantially correct, according to my inspection. I was with Captain Rown-
tree, and it was noted down.
18. Did you notice, in any portions of the wharf, when you were under it in a boat, that
the piles did not touch the floor of the wharf? No, they did not touch the wharf, because
there is a girder—a kind of joisting; there are two pieces of wood between the plank and
the pile head ; a scarf or lap rather; it is not a scarf, but a lap ; it cpmes in between the
piles, instead of the planks being on the pile heads; therefore, if a plank got rotten, it
would leave one half to go one way, and half the other, unless all followed the same road.
19


• 19. What is your opinion as to the time this wharf will last without extensive repairs?
: I think you should begin immediately to secure the braces, for some of them have fallen
down. If the copper or metal is to be of any use, it ought all to be done with copper nails;
iron and copper, or Muntz metal, will not agree.
20. You are of opinion that nothing ought to have been required at present? No ; if every
thing had been carried out as it ought to have been, it should have stood twenty years.
21. Supposing this wharf were let alone for twenty years, and nothing done to it, what
would be the result ? I think you would not see anything of it. Oregon pine is a bad
material to be partially covered up. It ought to be either entirely left open or entirely
covered, so as to exclude the wet.
22. What is your opinion of the effect of covering the wharf with earth or metalling ? I
should not do it myself. If I had to put another covering, I would put another thickness of
plank, rather than soil or stone; that would absorb the wet.
23. What do you think will be the effect of this covering with earth and metal ? I think
it will rot the wood much quicker than if it were uncovered.
24. Have you had much experience of work of this description ? I have had a great deal to
do with wood for fifty years.
25. You are a shipwright by trade ? Yes.
26. How long have you been in the Colony ? About twenty-four years.
27. Have you been engaged in ship building during that time ? Yes.
28. You have constructed one or two wharves for yourself? Only for my immediate use.
What I have done in that way, would not be a guide for any body else. I have only made a
wharf to last for a purpose for a short time.
29. By Mr. Flood: You have built several large vessels in the Colony? Yes, and the
dredging vessel.
30. You built a large steamer also, did you not ? No; I lengthened a steamer up to three
hundred and fifty tons.
31. You have been carrying on an extensive shipbuilding yard for many years at Pyrmont ?
Yes, for fourteen years, and I was this side of the water five or six years.
32. By Mr. Bligh : I think you said you did not approve of Oregon pine for flooring at all ?
No.
33. Do you think it is at all equal to the hardwood of this Colony ? No, it is not worth one
fourth as much ; in fact I would not use it at all for such a purpose ; I would sooner take
any kind of hardwood —blue gum, black butt, or any kind.
34. You think either iron or stringy bark or blue gum would have answered the purpose
very much better ? Yes.
35. By Captain Dumaresq: What is the nature of Oregon pine; how does it differ from any
other pine ? I should not think any pine good for the purpose.
36. By Mr. Flood: Is the pine used on the Circular Quay what is known as pitch pine ?
No.
37. It is not anything like as good as pitch pine ? I should think not. I have not had any
experience of it.
38. Is not pitch pine much more heavy than Oregon pine, in consequence of its containing
a large quantity of resin and turpentine ? It is.
39. Would not iron bark, even split rough with a mall and wedges, have made a much more
durable job than the Oregon pine ? Certainly.
40. Without applying the saw to the timber at all ? Yes.
41. Inasmuch as it was to be covered afterwards by stone and metal ? Yes.
42. By the Chairman : Are you aware what the new portion of the Circular Wharf has cost?
I did hear what it cost altogether; I think as much as £46,000.
43. Does that seem to you a moderate sum ? It looks a very large sum to me. It is very
rough; there is no art or science in it, only downright labour ; I never saw such a rough
concern in my life; it is a pity it is not so strong as it is rough.
44. You think if it had been as strong as it is rough, it would have done ? Yes, if it had
some strength in it. There is a little of it that looks rather more decent. As you go from the
Queen’s Wharf towards Campbell’s Wharf, there is a little near the Queen’s Wharf that is
better than the rest, but as you go down it gets very queer.
45. Are the Committee to understand that, in your opinion, £46,000 is a very large sum for
this work ? Yes, considering there is no art or science about it; it is of the plainest and
roughest description; there is nothing but downright labour ; it is neglected; the copper is
off, and the iron is mixed up with the copper.
46. Mr. Flood to Captain Rowntree: I perceive that you state in the first paragraph of your
report, that “ the piles, cills, and beams, are of iron bark, and average scantling, twelve to
“ thirteen inches square,”—does that apply to the piles ? Some are nine inches, and some
fourteen inches square; we took the average from twelve to thirteen inches.
47. Have you acted liberally in averaging the piles? We have.
48. You are sure you are not under the average ? No, not under the average.
49. If the specification stated that the piles should be fourteen inches square, that would
make the difference of 144 to 196, or about one-fourth less than the specified quantity ? I
should think there are some that are not more than eight inches, or from eight to nine
inches. ' -
50. If it has been stated to this Committee that all the piles are fourteen inches, that state-
ment is scarcely correct? It is scarcely correct as to,the squared timber. There is not a
great portion of squared timber at all.
51. Is not the statement absolutely untrue? It is untrue.
52. Any one making that statement, could not have informed himself correctly as to the real
size of the piles ? No.
63. Do you think there will be an average of one-fourth less in the whole of the piles in the
Circular
Captain T. S.
Rowntrec, &
Capt. J. W.
Russell.
28 Nov., 1855,
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFORE THE


Circular Quay ? Taking the whole of the squared timber, that is the cills and beams, in Capt. T. S.
connexion with it, there is as much as that. ' _ # Capt^J^W.
54. Supposing the timber has been charged for according to the sizes you found in the speci- KUsseil.
fication, is the difference so striking that any engineer or surveyor understanding his busi- A _
ness, must have noticed it, if he had paid the least attention to the sizes ? He could not 25 Nov. 1855.
help it, for they are round, many of them 5 they have hardly been touched with the axe.
55. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: Did you notice the bracing at all? Yes.
56. Did you notice whether it was let into the uprights ? It has never gone to the pile ;
they have never taken the pains to chain it to the piles.
57. Did you notice that, in some cases, it was fastened to the side of the pile ? It was just
popped in with an iron nail; not so much as bolted. It ought to have been let in, and
fastened with a composition spike.
58. By Mr. Flood: I suppose your attention was not at all called to the open railing across
the tank stream ? No.
59. By Captain Dumaresq : The beams and braces are not strapped to the piles ? They are
not strapped, or bolted; there are neither hoops nor bolts.
APPENDIX.
Waierview Dry Dock,
12 November , 1855.
Sir,
With reference to your instructions, contained in letter of 7th instant, I have
the honor to inform you that I have this day inspected the New Circular Quay, and find it
as follows :
1. Several of the piles the copper is hanging off under water.
2. A great many piles left out that ought to have been driven, thus leaving the wharf
in places for (40) forty feet without a pile to support it.
3. The whole of the diagonal bracing is badly planned, of very improper lengths, and
bad workmanship.
4. The west side of the wharf, in front of the Colonial Storekeeper's Department, would
all fall down, were it not for this building.
5. The repairs that have recently been effected are left in a very improper state.
6. The first row of piles, from the connection with Circular Stone Wharf, is in an
unsafe state.
7. Most of the fastenings are bad, and have had very little attention paid to them.
I have, &c.,
THOS. S. ROWNTREE.
To the Chairman of the
Select Committee on the Circular Quay
Sydney, 27 November, 1855.
Sir
We have the honor to inform you that, in accordance with your instructions of
the 19th instant, we did, on the 24th, 26th, and 27th inst., make a further inspection of
the new Circular Quay.
1. The piles, cills, and beams, are of iron bark, and average scantling 12 to 18 inches
square.
2. The plank is of Oregon pine, 4 inches thick.
3. The fastenings are of iron throughout.
4. From Campbell’s Wharf to the Queen’s Wharf, the whole of the cills, of which
there are about (70) seventy in number, the scarfs are between the piles, 1 foot long, and
without a bolt or hoop; thus leaving the wharf liable to separate in the centre, were it not
for the plank, or covering of the wharf.
5. The action of the copper on the iron fastenings is a most serious evil, as in about
(6) six months the entire fastening of the wharf will be destroyed.
6. The piles that have been scarfed are fastened with iron and coppered over.
7. ’I he construction of the work from Queen’s Wharf to Circular Stone Wharf, is much
better than the former, but the principle and neglect in fastening is the same throughout;
no care has been taken in connecting the work with Circular Stone Wharf, as there are (18)
eighteen feet without a pile, in consequence of which the wharf is settled.
8. State from Campbell’s Wharf to Queen’s Wharf—number and condition of each
row of piles:—
No. 1. 2 piles, 4 feet overhang, without a pile, 10 feet of copper off 1 pile, 3 feet
off the other
2. 2 „ 4 feet uncoppered, and 1 unnailed.
3. 2 „
4. 1 „ stairs.
5. 2 „ inside cill resting on wall.
6 - 2 « „
7- 2 » >, »
8. 1 „ end on wall.
9. 2 „ 11 feet apart.
10. 2 „ 12 feet apart, inside end on wall.
11. 2 „ 12 „ „
12. 3 „ end on wall.
13. 3 „ and 1 mooring post, not coppered under water.
324—E " No


Capt. T. S.
Rowntree, &
Capt. J. W.
Russell.
28N0y., 1855.
No. 14. 8 „
15. 3 „
16. 3 „ pile 13 feet from wall.
17. 7 „ outside one not coppered under water, 1 diagonal brace off.
18. 8 „ scarf of cill between the piles.
19. 6 „ centre 18 ft. 6 in. between, scarf between piles, 1 strap not nailed,
others partially.
20. 8 „ 1 diagonal brace off, 1 strap unnailed.
2L 8 „
22. 8 „ and 1 mooring-post, copper unnailed.
23. 8 „ scarf in centre or between piles.
24. 8 „ diagonal brace off.
25. 8 „
26. 8 „
27. 8 „
28. 8 „
29. 8 „
30. 8 „ and 1 mooring-post not coppered,
31. 8 „ on 1 pile, copper loose, cill joint 2 in. apart, on account of settling.
32. 8 „
33. 8 „ joint started.
34. 8 „
35. 8 „ inside end settled down.
36. 8 ~ joint parted 3 inches, inside settled
37. 8 ~ ~ ~ })
38 8 piles, and 1 mooring-post, copper off, strap partially fastened.
39. 8 „
40. 7 „
41. 8 „ ) .
42. 8 „ >■ commencement of repairs left in an unfinished state.
43. 8 „ j
44. 8 „ centre-piece of cill 6 feet long, diagonal brace off.
45. 8 „
46. 8 „
47. 8 „ and 1 mooring-post, uncoppered under water.
48. 7 „ 10 feet overhang, without a pile, diagonal brace off.
49. 8 „ wharf settled, outer side.
50. 7 „
51. 8 „
52. 7 „
53. 6 „ end on wall.
54. 6 „
55. 7 „
66. 7 „
57. 7 „ and 1 mooring-post, joints apart.
58. 7 „
59. 7 „
60. 7 „ brace off.
61. 8 „ scarf started.
62. 8 „
63. 8 „
64. 8 „
65*66.8 „ and 1 mooring-post j outer end settled.
67. 7 „ and 1 shore-piece, resting on stone j
68. 7 „ diagonal brace off, 1 pile not coppered at all.
69. 7 „ and 1 shore.
70. 7 „ and 1 „
71. 7 „ and 1 „
72. 7 „ and 1 „
73. 7 „ and 1 „ and 1 mooring-post, uncoppered under water.
74. 7 „
75. 7 „ overhang of between 7to 8 feet.
76. 8 „ (crane)
77. 7 „
78. 6 „ 14 feet apart, and 1 post.
79. 6 „ 1 pile 12 feet opening.
80. 6 „ 1 pile 11 feet „
81. 6 „ 10 feet overhang, only 1 brace to mooring-post, copper off.
82. 6 „ 1 shore or upright post.
83. 6 ~ ~ „
84. 7 „
85. 7 „
86. 3 „ 2 partly uncoppered.
87. 3 „
88. 3 „ 1 uncoppered.
89. 3 „ and 1 mooring-post, 1 pile not coppered.
90. 3 „ 1 diagonal brace loose, and 1 pile uncoppered under water.
91. 3 „
92. 3 „
26
MINUTES OP EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFORE THE


No. 93. 3 „ brace loose,
94.4 „
95. 3 „
96. 4 „ brace loose, Queen’s Wharf stairs.
Capt. T. S.
Rowntrec, &
Capt. J. W.
Russell.
28 Nov., 1855.
We have, &c.,
, a . f THOS. S. ROWNTREE.
(feigned) | JNO w RUSSELL>
The Chairman of
Select Committee on New Circular Quay.
Mr. James Barrow Story, called in and examined: — Mr j
1. By the Chairman: You are the proprietor of a steam driving apparatus, I believe ? Yes. Story.
2. You were employed upon the Circular Wharf? Yes, for a short time. -'v
3. When did you commence working on the new portion of the Circular Wharf ? I have 28 Nov., 1856,
not the precise date with me, but it was in October last year.
4. Was it where the wharf was commenced in the first instance ? No ; it was opposite the
Commissariat Stores.
6. Will you have the goodness to state to the Committee who engaged your services ? Mr.
Randle.
6. How long were you employed in driving the piles ? I think five days.
7. What was the reason of your not continuing it? We did not agree about the price.
8. Was that the only reason ? So far as lam aware; I left for that reason.
9. Did you superintend the working of your steam machine at the time ? Partly, or I may
say entirely.
10. Had you a copy of the contract under which the wharf was being constructed to guide
you in the carrying out of the work ? No.
11. Had you any instructions as to the manner in which you were to drive the piles No.
12. What guided you in driving the piles ? I drove them until I considered them sufficiently
driven, or till Mr. Champion, the foreman at the time, said they were so.
13. By Captain Dumaresq : Mr. Champion was with you ? He was on the works all the
time.
14. By the Chairman: Was he present at the driving of all the piles ? Most of them; I
could not say every one.
15. Have you ever seen the contract between Mr. Randle and the Government for the con-
struction of this wharf? No. {The Chairman here read the portion of the contract referring
to the driving of the piles .)
16. Did you drive the piles you were engaged upon in accordance with the terms of this
contract ? Not literally; but, practically, I think the result was about the same. In the
first place, the monkey, or ram, used was much heavier than is there named, and the fall was
much greater.
17. Were you interrupted in the driving of any of them by Mr. Champion, or any other
agent of Mr. Randle, by being told they were driven sufficiently far, or words to that effect ?
I can hardly tax my memory. It was one.of those things I should leave off when I had
driven it sufficiently, whether he spoke or not. It is very possible he might say (C that is
“ enough,” and I might arrive at the same conclusion at the same instant.
18. The piles driven by you you think were driven home sufficiently as far as your work
was concerned ? Yes. .
19. Were the piles that passed through your hands equal to the description I have just read?
Yes.
20. Were they all shod ? Yes.
21. Were the piles afterwards driven by hand, when you took away your steam apparatus?
Yes.
22. As a practical man, is it within your knowledge that hand driving is cheaper than steam
driving in a work of this kind ? No; lam certain it is not.
23. How could a disagreement as to the price arise ? The price was sixpence a foot run j
which was all he said he would give.
24. Could a person driving by hand drive cheaper than you could ? Certainly not. I
believe Mr. Randle expressed considerable surprise to the foreman when he heard I had
left immediately on being apprised of the price.
25. By Captain Dumaresq: Was Mr. Walcot a good deal present at the driving of the
piles ? I saw him two or three times.
26. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: He had a clerk of works under him, had he not ?
Yes.
27. By Captain Dumaresq : Were the piles measured before they were driven ? I apprehend
so.
28. You do not know it as a fact? No, but I believe they were.
29. By Mr. Flood: With whom did you make your contract for driving the piles ? Mr.
Randle.
30. From whom did you receive payment? Mr. Randle.
31. In what way did you receive payment —was it on an order drawn by Mr. Champion or
any other person ? It was paid at the Pay Office, on the Circular Quay, in cash.
32. Who paid you ? One of Mr. Randle’s clerks; Ido not know his name.
33. Do you know whether the work of the Circular Quay, the whole or any portion of it,
was let by Mr. Randle to Mr. Champion ? I never heard it.
34. What was the weight of the monkey that you used on the occasion of driving the piles ?
Nineteen hundredweight and a quarter.
35. What proportion of the whole number of piles that were driven were driven by you ?
- Between forty and fifty.
27
SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE CIRCULAR QUAY,


Mr. J. E.
86. Altogether ? Altogether. *
37. Do you know the weight of the ram or monkey that was used before and after you
discontinued using your steam pile-driving machine ? I do not know, but I suppose from
about fifteen or sixteen to eighteen hundredweight; there was a difference of between three
and four hundredweight between the lightest and the heaviest used.
38, What pressure do you suppose ten or a dozen of the piles, driven in the way you have
stated to the Committee, would carry before they would give way ? Ten piles ought to carry
two hundred tons.
Story.
2} Nov. 1255
39. With the planking on them ? Yes ; twenty tons a pile.
40. You think it would take at least two hundred tons to cause them to settle, supposing
they were not firmly footed upon rock ? It would require some continuous driving until
there was an amount of friction equal, or nearly so, to the resistance of the rock.
41. Do you think, if the foot of the piles had been struck upon the rock, they would descend
with a pressure of two hundred tons ? If the rock was hard, nothing short of crushing the
timber would send them down.
42. By the Chairman: Will you state to the Committee what portion of the wharf you
drove ? It was coming to and about abreast of the centre of the Commissariat Wharf. That
was where we left off.
43. Did you drive the piles in what is called the old Tank Stream ? No.
44. You commenced where the elbow is ? Some distance away, nearer to the Commissariat
Stores, and we went towards the north about abreast of the middle of the Commissariat Stores.
I drove only about forty or fifty piles altogether.
Edmund Walcot, Esq., C. E., called in and examined:—
1. By the Chairman: You received a summons to bring your measurement book, I believe ?
Not my measurement book, the book belonging to the Clerk of W orks.
2. You have brought it with you ? I have. I had it with me last time, but it was not
asked for. \_The witness produced the samei]
3. By Mr Flood: Can you inform the Committee how the piles and material used in the
Circular Quay were measured from time to time and entered ? I can. They were measured
in this way : the length of the pile was taken when it was lying on the ground, and there
was another column, which I have introduced, for the actual length of the pile when standing.
4. Was there a column for the purpose of inserting the size of the pile ? No; every pile
driven is in excess, or at the actual figure of, the specification.
5. What was that figure, do you recollect ? Fourteen inches at the upper end and twelve
inches at the bottom.
6. And they are all of that size ? Yes, they are.
7. I may inform you, that it has been stated here to-day, by two gentlemen, that the average
size of the piles is from twelve to thirteen inches ? They are more than that, lam certain ;
if you doubt it, the Clerk of Works is to be found, and Mr. Randle is to be found.
8. Are you making this statement from your own knowledge ? Yes, from my own know-
ledge. I stated last time I was examined that I always made it a practice, when on the
work, to take out my rule and check the timber.
9. Have you examined any of the piles since you were last examined? No; I was quite
satisfied.
10. Were the piles measured daily ? Daily.
11. Does that book shew the number of piles driven every day ? Yes; all the particulars.
The work was measured daily as it progressed. At the end of the first week I had a memo-
randum of the work, and for the second, third, and fourth, weeks. When that time had arrived,
the Clerk of Works having sent me a weekly account, I then prepared an abstract, which I
sent in to the Government, and signed my name to it; and the Clerk of W orks compared
my figures with the figures in his book. This is the book which I have produced.
12. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: From what book were the bills made out; was that
the original book from which the bills were made out ? No; a copy of that book was sent
to me, and from it I made out the vouchers. There was a double check. I took the
voucher to the Clerk of Works; he examined it with the.books, and, if correct, he signed it.
13. Where did these copies go ? I have them still. The vouchers are in the Auditor
General’s Office.
14. By Captain Dumaresq : Was the Clerk of Works appointed by you ? He was appointed
by the Government, on my recommendation. I had a correspondence regarding his appoint-
ment.
E, Walcot,
Esq.
28 Nov., 1855,
15. Was he paid by the Government ? Yes.
16. By Mr. Flood: Was this the book that was kept by Mr. Malbon ? It is a copy; he has
the original himself.
17. You state that this is a correct copy of the book kept by Mr. Malbon ? Yes; you can
have the original abstract sent in if you like.
18. Are all the piles coppered ? They are coppered according to the depth shewn.
19. Is that depth shewn from the top of high water to the bed of the harbour ? In most
places I was ordered to do so. However, there is the.actual quantity upon each pile, and
the area in feet, and the number of sheets.
20. Are the whole of the piles coppered between the bed of the river and the top of high
water mark ? Not the whole; the majority of them are.
21. Why were they not ? Because, in accordance with my evidence of last year, I stated
it was not necessary. Up to that time I had not done it. Subsequently they were all
coppered.
22. Did you not drive some piles that were not so coppered ? No. His Excellency agrees
with me as to not coppering further than between high and low water mark.
23
28
MINUTES OP EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFOEE THE


23. The present Governor General ? Yes; I had an interview with him. Walcot,
24. When ? About a fortnight after his arrival. # A _
25. He agreed with you that it was not necessary to copper the piles except between high
and low water mark ? He did. _ . .««oy.,i»»»
26. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: Do I understand that the coppering was saved in
the price of the work ? There was a great quantity saved, because, in the first instance, the
whole of the pile was coppered from the shoe to the top. Subsequently circumstances pre-
vented so much copper being put on.
27. Whatever was prevented from being put on was saved in price to the Government ?
Yes, and there would have been a greater saving, if it had been allowed, besides the loss of
my commission.
28. By Mr. Flood: As the payments were altered from monthly to fortnightly payments,
how comes it that you had so far exceeded the estimate without acquainting the Governor
General ? The Government knew it as well as I did.
29. In what way? They knew from the balance at the bottom of the voucher. They knew
the money expended, and deducting that from the money originally voted, they knew the
amount of the balance.
30. Do you mean to inform the Committee that Mr. Randle was paid up in full every
fortnight, less the ten per cent. ? Yes; that was until the deduction amounted to £l,OOO,
and then he was paid up in full.
31. Do you recollect the balance of the sum he was entitled to at the completion of the
work? There are some six or seven hundred pounds due to him now. At any period, I
stated two or three periods on my last examination, the Government might have stopped,
having at one time £2OO or £3OO in hand.
32. I wish you to answer my question ? I cannot without having the vouchers before me.
33. You state that the Government was aware the cost of the work would exceed the original
estimate ? They could have known as well as I did.
34. In what way did you convey to the Government that the work would cost so much as
£14,000 more than the original estimate, and particularly as Mr. Randle was paid every
fortnight upon the whole amount of the work performed. When was the amount exhausted ?
Not till March.
35. Will you state what steps the Government took after the money voted was exhausted,
and whether Mr. Randle was paid up the full amount every fortnight, according to the terms
of the contract ? He was not; the contract was broken by the Government, but Mr. Randle
did not make any claim.
36. In what way was the contract broken ? He was not paid at the proper period for two
months.
37. When did this occur ? From March to May.
38. When as you state the contract was broken, what amount, or about what amount, had
Mr. Randle received from the Government ? He had not received more than the amount of
the original vote —not that.
39. Then you consider that, after the money that had been voted by the Legislative Council
specially for this purpose was exhausted, the Government broke the contract with Mr.
Randle ? Yes. He engaged to do certain work from Ato B, and Mr. Randle had nothing
to do with their mode of finding the money. _ .
40. That was the first intimation the Government received that the sum voted by the Legis-
lature would not be sufficient to meet the expense of the work ? Yes.
41. And in no other way ? And in no other way, excepting that on the 15th February, as
I stated in my last examination, the Colonial Secretary was informed by somebody, and not
by me. _
42. It is very clear that, if Mr. Randle had received certificates every fortnight from you, as
soon as the money was exhausted, the Colonial Treasurer would have refused to pay any
further sum, unless by additional authority from the Government ? I wrote to ask where the
further moneys were to come from to complete the work, and then I was required to send in
an estimate for the further sum required.
43. I perceive you certify for the cost of railing across the Tank Stream, including painting,
£212? Yes.
44. Do you consider that a reasonable sum ? I do.
45. What is the length ? The length is there.
46. It says, “an open railing across the Tank Stream, including painting” ? The length was
stated in my voucher.
47. Have you any thing about it in that book ? Yes, I think so.
48. There are eighteen panels there, arc there not? I have not got it down in panels.
49. Do you recollect the height of the top of the rail ? It is well morticed together.
50. Can you give the Committee any idea about the length ? I would rather give the exact
length ; I find it is “ 212 feet of open railing for the bridge across the Tank Stream, includ-
“ ing painting, &c.”
51. Can you give the size of the scantling ? No ; it was charged at so much per foot run.
52. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: Did you check the tender ? There was no tender ;
none of these small items where done by tender ; they were done by order, and paid for at
the same prices that Mr. Randle was receiving on the railway.
53. How was the price made out, by so much scantling and so much work upon it ? Yes;
and it was taken out and checked by me. It was first of all gone through by the Clerk of
Works and Mr. Randle’s agent. I believe a higher price was put upon it than is charged
now, and I subsequently saw Mr. Randle about it, and the charge was reduced.
54. Have you the calculations by which you arrived at the conclusion ? No. It is well
worth the money. It is very unusual for small works of that kind to be tendered for yrhen a
contractor is engaged upon a large work with which they are connected.
OD
SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE CIRCULAR QUAY.


55. By Mr. Flood: The Master of the Mint is anxious to know, as well as myself, how you
arrived at the conclusion that that work is worth £212 ? I have not the details; that is the
result.
E. Walcot,
Esq.
28 Nov., 1855.
56. You state that it was charged at so much per foot run ? Yes.
57. Have you any of the particulars in that hook ? No.
58. Nor in any other book ? No; I have not any rough papers at all.
59. What is the size of the scantling used for posts and rails ? I cannot tell
60. Can you tell the height of the top rails—are they about 3 feet 6 inches ? The posts
are higher. If the matter had been referred to arbitration, I believe a larger sum would
have been allowed.
61. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: It would be satisfactory to the Committee if they
were told what you value the timber at ? I cannot say. It is American ash; it is charged
at £1 a foot; that includes the iron-work and a variety of things.
62. By Mr. Flood: What do you call a variety of things ? Painting, iron-work, bolts, and
straps.
63. By Captain Dumaresq: Before you gave a voucher for payment for any part of the
work as completed, had you quite satisfied yourself that it was really completed ? Certainly,
64. Are you aware that many of the beams have not been attached to the piles by straps ?
No; lam aware of one that I saw the other day, but I did not know it at the time; I spoke
to the Clerk of Works about it, but he was not aware of it.
65. Are you aware that that neglect was not confined to one pile ? lam not aware of more.
That was by the Commissariat Store. At all events it was but a small matter; it was care-
lessness.
66. It is an important matter, whether the beams are attached by iron straps or not ? The
straps are on, but the spikes are not in. They have a tenon, but the weight of the road
holds it from shifting. I was not aware there was anything undone, but I discovered that
was the only thing.
67. I suppose you will agree that any work properly done should be in existence now ?
There is no doubt but it was great carelessness that this was not done, but it was a very
small matter.
68. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: Was not the contractor paid for what was not done ?
Perhaps eighteen pence.
69. By the Chairman: When did you make this discovery? In September, after the set-
tlement. It was reported to me as correct by the Clerk of Works. I could not look into
every detail.
70. Does the letter in the printed correspondence, dated March, 1855, explain fully the
circumstances of this excess in the cost of the wharf? Yes.
71. You consider that is quite final as an explanation ? Yes.
72. There is another letter from the Colonial Secretary’s Office, dated 19th April, 1855 ?
Yes.
73. Did you reply to that letter ? No, I did not.
74. Of course you see by that letter, that the Governor General is much dissatisfied with
the manner in which this work has been done ? lam aware of that.
75. Do you consider that you have been unfairly treated ? I do.
76. With regard to coppering the piles, do you know how the copper was fastened? By
nails.
77. What kind of nails? To the best of my knowledge of the same material as Muntz
metal.
78. It has been stated to this Committee as a fact, that the copper is all to be seen fastened
with iron nails ? It is a very strange thing.
79. If it is so, you would think it a very strange thing? Yes; I could not imagine such an
occurrence; I never saw it, and lam certain the Clerk of Works never told me of it.
80. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: Have you personally inspected it to see whether it
is so or not ? I would not believe it is so.
81. Have you looked at any part of this copper so as to be able to tell whether it is put on
with iron nails or not ? It is put on with copper nails.
82. Have you seen them done, and inspected them all ? I believe so.
83. By the Chairman: Are you aware that there is some copper on some of the piles not
nailed at all ? lam not aware of it.
84. Should you feel surprised if that was the case ? I should not be surprised if there were
small portions.
85. Could it be fastened in any other manner without nails ? No. I think there may be
one or two, and I can tell you the reason—it was because they could not drive the nails into
the copper until low water and certain times of the tide, and there may have been one or
two parts overlooked but Ido not know that of my own knowledge. I know the Clerk of
Works told me, before he left, that that was the case, and I gave him instructions about it.
86. It has been given in evidence before the Committee, that some sheets of copper are now
hanging loose in the Avater from the piles ? It might be so where I have stated.
87. You think it possible there may be some such cases ? In deep water there may be.
88. To what extent do you think this may be possible? The Clerk of Works informed me
that there were five or six piles on which the copper was loose, and he had orders to get it
done, and the contractor’s foreman promised to do it; but it is where I have stated, in deep
water.
89. By Captain Dumaresq : During the progress of this work, had it any other Government
supervision ? No other Government supervision. lam in private practice.
90. You have private practice ? Yes.
91. By Mr. Bligh : Had you at that time ? Yes.
92 By Captain Dumaresq : Did .the supervision of this work occupy a great deal of your
s time
30
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFORE THE


time ? I paid a visit to the work twice or so in a day, as I thought needful. After the e. Walcot,
plans were drawn by me, there was very little supervision requii’ed. Esq.
93. By Mr. BUgh: You trusted entirely to the Clerk of Works ? Checked by myself. ,—«—*■—
94. In what way was he checked by yourself? By my visiting the work. 28N0v.; 1855.
95. By your inspecting the work ? Yes; in the same way that every Chief Engineer does
in every work.
96. Bo I understand that you would go and inspect the work once or twice a day ? Yes,
I walked over the work. With regard to coppering the piles, they were always coppered,
with the exception of just below low water in one or two instances, before they were driven ",
but latterly that was not the case, because we had to cut off some of the tops of the piles,
and it was wasting the copper.
97. Bid you observe the nailing of the copper on the piles generally ? Yes, I did.
98. Was it done in a tradesmanlike manner ? Certainly.
99. Because it has been stated that where it is nailed it is nailed in a very clumsy manner ?
It would not be done so neatly as on board a ship.
100. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: Had you any one, besides Mr. Malbon, acting for
you in supervising that work ? Nobody.
101. You had nobody engaged by yourself looking after the work ? No.
102. By the Chairman : Are there a number of piles scarfed, as it is called, that is, with a
piece put on the top ? Yes.
103. How is this piece fastened ? It is bolted with iron,
104. By Mr. BUgh :Is there a brace too ? No. It is only across the Tank Stream.
105. By the Chairman : It is then coppered over ? Yes.
106. Ought the bolt to have been covered; will it not corrode ? Not for a long time. The
ironwork lias undergone chemical action, but not galvanic action.
107. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: You know it is destructive to put iron and copper
together ? No doubt, in the course of years.
108. It never is done in good work ? I believe it is.
109. Would you, as an Engineer, uphold its being done ? On the score of cheapness I
would, certainly.
110. Is it cheap to make it destructive ? It lasts long enough, with proper care and super-
vision, by painting the iron.
111. By Mr BUgh: As I understand, the iron is covered with copper ? Where the piles
are scarfed and bolts put in, they are covered with copper.
112. By the Chairman : The bolt goes through and is overlapped with copper ? Yes.
113. If the copper were not very securely fastened on, would not the water have as free
action upon the copper and iron as if the bolt were not covered at all ? Yes; but it would
take a long period, if the ironwork is properly painted and tar kept on.
114. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: Captain Rowntree has said that some of the cills
are scarfed between the uprights instead of on the top of the post ? I should say certainly
it is scarfed where it ought to be.
115. Bo you not fancy it will tear asunder there ? No. Captain Rowntree is not a person
of great experience.
116. The beams are scarfed between the posts? Ido not think it matters at all.
117. Not to scarf in that position ? No, because the bearing is so short; it is ten feet from
the centre. I think the scarfing in between just as good as on the top.
118. You do not think scarfing on the top would have been stronger ? No.
119. By the Chairman : It has been stated before the Committee, by a practised man ?
May I ask his name ?
120. Mr. Russell, a shipbuilder; that, in his opinion, in much less than ten years the wharf
will disappear, unless some steps are taken to re-construct it. What is your opinion ? With
proper care and supervision it would last an immense number of years.
121. How many years do you suppose ? Wharves of that description, not so strong, have
been erected here something like twenty years, although not so well framed together the
Gas Company’s Wharf, for instance.
122. By Captain Dumarseq: Bo you think a work constructed on such a plan, and with
such means of supervision as this one was, ought to be out of repair now ? That is merely
from having extra weight on it. Those places where it has started were always weak.
123. Ought a work so constructed and so supervised as it has been in the erection, by
yourself as Engineer, as well as by a regularly appointed Clerk of Works, now to require
repair ? No, certainly not; but Ido not know that it is out of repair, except the settlement
which has been reported.
124. Was that repaired under your own supervision ? Yes.
125. Is it completed ? Yes, and properly done. I gave my services without charging
anything, and Mr. Randle also did the work free of expense to the Government.
126. By Mr. BUgh: As you were in the habit of inspecting the work generally every day
some once or twice, are you prepared to say whether the piles were driven to the distance
required by the specification ? Yes, as near as we possibly could. I explained the matter
last time. In some cases, on account of the irregularity of the rock, it was almost impossible
to pitch them.
127. Are you aware that many of these piles are eighteen feet apart ? If they are it is
entirely from that; there may be one or two, but it is entirely on account of the impossi-
bility of pitching them.
128. You were not aware of it before ? I will not say that there were not some, but lam not
aware. The gentleman examined before me was employed to drive them by steam, but we
had to get rid of him because he could not pitch them.
129. By Mi-. FloorI; I think you stated, in answer to a question put by the Master of the
Mint, that with a scarf between the piles, the beam would bo quite as strong as if the scarf
had


had been immediately on the top of the pile—suppose you were to cut the beam at each side
of the scarf and immediately over the top of the piles, would not the beam between the piles
fall into the water ? No; because it would have seven inches bearing.
130. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: It is not a proper place to make a scarf? I think
it is good enough for work of that sort. I think it as good. It is bolted together.
131. By Mr. Bligh: Is it possible that any of these braces can have come off already ? I
think it is possible; I believe one or two of them did, and we have fastened them on again
with copper bolts. But when I understood there were two reports being made I stopped all
further proceedings. It would certainly be advisable to fasten the whole of the braces on
with copper.
132. By the Deputy Master of the Mint: You are not aware that any of the braces are off
now ? No; I never go down to the works.
133. Do you think that in the short time that has elapsed the braces ought to have come
off? Not if put on with copper.
134. Then the inference is that they were not put on with copper ? No. On account of
finding that one or two had fallen off, I was fastening the whole, when, hearing that an
inquiry was going, on I ceased.
135. By Mr. Bligh : Was that after Mr. Randle had given up the work ? Yes; after the
contract work was done, but he was doing other things.
136. Was not that part of the contract ? To fasten with iron bolts, which he did. In some
instances they are very heavy pieces. I think it was more owing to the weight of the wood
than the iron.
137. By the Chairman: If there is anything you wish to add to your evidence, explanatory
of any of the circumstances connected with the work on which you have been engaged, you will
be good enough to do so ? I wish to read two letters to justify the Government in appointing
me to superintend the work. After seven years engagement on the Eastern Counties
Railway, I received a letter from the Directors, which I will read. [ The Witness handed in
two testimonials from the Secretary to the Eastern Counties Railway Company , which were
read. ] I did not bring out any other testimonials, not intending to practise my profession.
138. By Mr. Flood: What appointment does the last letter allude to ? Resident Engineer.
I have had another appointment, and instead of receiving £4OO a year, I received three
guineas a day.
JE. Walcot,
Esq.
28Nova 1855,
32
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFORE THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE CIRCULAR QUAY.
