

AUSTRALIAN TRADE MISSION TO SOUTH-WEST ASIA report
A 382. 0994 AUS
M.V. CHANDPARA
March-April 1962




REPORT
Australian Trade Mission
January February, 1962
M. V.
CHANDPARA
Sponsored by the Australian Manufacturers' Kxport Council,
in association with the Australian Chambers of Commerce Kxport Council
and the British India Steam Navigation Co. Ltd.,
with the assistance of the Commonwealth Department of Trade.


CONTENTS
Page
1 Minister’s Foreword
2 Leader’s Message
•’> Shiping Company's Messages
1 Mission Executive and Members
b Itinerary
8 General Report
1- Country Reports
13 Pakistan
lb Muscat and Oman
lb Trucial States
-1 Qatar
23 Bahrain
-b Saudi Arabia
29 Kuwait
32 Iraq
do Iran
38 Market Prospects
39 Meat
4b Canned Foods
11 Dairy Products
42 Flour
42 Barley
42 Fresh Fruit and Vegetables
13 Woollen and Worsted Cloth
13 Furniture
43 Motor Vehicles and Spares
44 Electrical Equipment
45 P’athroom Equipment and Fittings
45 Medical and Hospital Equipment
lb Commercial Practices and
Procedures
17 Selling to South-West Asia
49 Hints to Exporters
53 Conclusions
53 Recommendations
51 (A) Exhibitors
55 (B) Acknowledgements
55 (C) Trade Statistics.


The Australian pray rant me of Trade Missions and Trade Ships
to the new and expandiny markets of the world in note trell estab-
lished. A particularly encouvayiny feature of this proyram m<
is the continuiny support and enth nsiasm of the business and
commercial sector of the connn n nit p in co-operation noth fht
(ion rururnt.
It is most yrafifpint/ that this Mission mas sponsored bp
pri rate enterprise. The success it attained is the direef result of
the enthusiasm with which the task was undertaken bp the
Australian Manufacturers' Export Council, the co-operation ot
the British India Steam Xa riyation Co. Ltd. in makinp the
"Chand pa ia" arailable, and the association of the Australian
Chambers of Commerci Export Conned as well as the Department
of Trade.
I am confident that the ta con table ai mosphen which it has
created will hare mutual and lastinp benefits for onrselrcs and
the nations of Soulh-W< st Asia.
Australia will undoubtedly benefit considerably from the
"Chandpara" Trade Ship. The sales results achieved demonstrate
that the rentnre was a success com merciallp. Equally important
was the Mission's contribution to the improvement of relation-
ships between Australia and the countries visited. I cony rat ulate
the oryanizers, the jiarticipants, and all who assisted in bvinyiny
this about.
In addition to selliny primary and secondary products, the
Mission, has promoted in these (liras the imaye of Australia as a
derelopiny industrial nation able to supply many industrial
products required by our Asian neiyhbonrs.
Tin relationships established bp the venture will form a firm
basis on which to build closer trade ties with these countries.
Australian businessmen will dud it rewurdiny to capitalize on
the mirk of this yroup by personally visitiny these markets and
personally exam ininy waps to make vs< of the o/y/m tunities
which the Mission has found.
in*. HON. -JOHN McEWKN
The lh/)/i(j / Prime Minister
•■imi Minister for Tniiie.
FOREWORD


Leader’s Message
The visit of the Australian Trade
Mission Shi]) “Chandpara" to Pakistan
and eight countries bordering the Gulf
of South-West Asia demonstrated the
enormous scope which exists for the
development of Australia’s trade with
Asia as a whole.
The peoples of the countries which
were visited expressed their receptive-
ness to Australia as a supplier, not only
of agricultural products but also of the
wide range of manufactures which it
had to offer.
The detailed report of the “Chand-
para’s” progress in the following pages
refers to many opportunities which were
met in the area. The successes which
were achieved by many participants in
the Mission, and the numerous inquiries
which have been received by exhibitors
and others who were not directly
represented on the Mission, have
emphasized the area’s significance as an
export market. There can be no question
that, given adequate follow-up selling
activity by individual exporters, existing
trade can be increased very materially.
The fact that almost every individual
item displayed aboard the “Chandpara”
has attracted interest and inquiry
demonstrates quite clearly the extent of
the opportunities which exist for
manufacturer/exporters. Although
there may be some initial difficulties in
developing these markets, it is not felt
that these are of great significance and
they are certainly not insurmountable.
These markets can well reward any
manufacturer/exporters wh o ar e
prepared to make a worth-while effort.
It must be recognized also that the
rewards for success in exporting to Asia
and elsewhere are in the long term
immeasurably greater than those arising
from further endeavours to exploit the
limited domestic market. A small
population such as Australia’s presents
definite limitations to the quantity of
goods which may be absorbed and this,
coupled with the consequences which
our increasing industrial productivity
implies, must inevitably result in fewer
opportunities in the domestic field.
I). K. TAPUN,
Mn ti<i<fin<i Id rector.,
IK Tapho f’tj/. Ltd.
Conversely, the enormous populations of
Asia, coupled with the great improve-
ment in living standards and other
developments which are rapidly occur-
ring there, offer opportunities which
other countries have been quick to grasp
and which Australian exporters should
not willingly deny themselves.
In general, the impact of Australian
trade missions, and particularly trade
ships, which so dramatically dem-
onstrate our potentialities as a source
of supply, has made a deep impression
upon commercial circles and govern-
ments in the countries visited as well as
upon the peoples who are the ultimate
consumers. However, human memory
is short and our competitors are already
active in their efforts to consolidate
these markets for themselves. Unless,
therefore, we ourselves are active and
persistent in pursuing the opportunities
which our Trade Missions have exposed,
much of the initial advantage may be
lost.
As it is not the purpose of this pre-
face to anticipate the detailed informa-
tion contained in the Report, I conclude
on behalf of the Australian Manufact-
urers’ Export Council by making grate-
ful acknowledgement of the assistance
and co-operation received from all those
organizations and individuals who so
generously assisted the Council in
organizing the “Chandpara” Mission.
In particular, I refer to the Common-
wealth Government, which through the
Department of Trade and its Trade
Commissioners, provided a sound basis
for the successful functioning of the
Mission, and the British India Steam
Navigation Company Ltd., which
generously made M.V. “Chandpara”
available. 8.1.5. N. has for many years
provided a regular monthly general and
refrigerated cargo service, with limited
passenger accommodation from Austra-
lia, and, when required, berthed extra
vessels to the full range of Gulf ports,
via West India and West Pakistan. This
shipping service depends upon maintain-
ing two-way trade between Australia
and South-West Asia.
My personal thanks are extended to
the members and staff of the Mission.
In this regard, I wish to make special
mention of the five bank officers who so
efficiently carried out their duties as
display servicing representatives. 1
would like to thank also Captain J. W. F.
Daly and his officers for their unfailing
support and co-operation.


Shipping Company Messages
Fr„„, MR. E. .1. FAKES, C.8.E..
( ho, nut, n of thr Itrifirh 1,/ilio Straw ,\ ir/,/at,on Co. Ctil. a 'hr,, tlir ,\1 ission br,jr,n :
"The company has had a major part to play in developing trade to and from the Gulf
throughout the years and is delighted to form the vehicle for further development by
Australian exporters.
"B.L would like lo think that closer links between Australia and South-West Asia
will lead not only to exports from Australia but to a two-way traffic of ideas and
material.
“fn the interchange of men and material lies the basis of peaceful development. 8.1.
is well qualified to assist in such development.
"With interlocking passenger/ cargo services operating from the Gulf to Pakistan,
India, Straits and the Far East, and from the Gulf to Africa and Australia, and with
agency arrangements throughout the area, the company hopes that the facilities offered
will assist not only the Mission in its present task but those who follow to take advantage
of contacts which will be made."
F>;„„ MR. K. M. CAMPBELL.
/irrsnit ('hiuniiitn of thr llritirl, linlin Straw Xn rii/nt in,, Co. Lt,l.:
“8.1. are happy to have carried your Mission to an area where it is hoped Australia’s
trading' future will develop extensively. The company feels privileged to have assisted
in this valuable effort to promote both goodwill and commercial development between
Australia and the nine countries visited. We are happy to have had the Mission on board
and look forward with anticipation to carrying the fruits thereof in the years to come.”


executive
members
australian
government
trade
representatives
ship's
captain
LEADER
Mr. D E Tapi■ n
Mcncgmg Director
D. E. Tapi m D ‘v. Ltd
Chairman of the
Australian Manufacturer-
Exoort Council
and Presiaent pt
•he Federal Council c -
Electrical Manufoc'u i e ,c
Assccicf'On o’ Aus'raho
DEPUTY LEADER
Mr. J. McCulloch
expert Manager
<rcff Fccos Lia.
Ccmm ’tec Member o’ *tm
e'er an Mcri’ccocn
SECRETARY-MANAGER
Mr. C. E. SuMivcn
Sectional Secretarv ore
Ter ff Officer v ie’er ic.-
Chornber ct Manufacture-
Mr A. R. Tays o m ,
Australian Government
Trade
Karachi'
DISPLAY SUPERVISOR
Mr. A. 0. Ac: na ns
Ajs’ r a I an Manufacturer’
Doer* Ccuncd
Mr. C N Mclcuchlpn
Comm o n v. e a 11 h Dept, a ‘
Tract'' Me Ibe urn n
Mr. C R. Bunronq
Joint Managing Director
Rum nq Bros P’v. I toi
Mr R. N. Hubbard
Genera I Manager
Wo?r c r n Australian
Ear: Ma'W'rc Rm'd
Mr E. j Button,
Ccmmerc cl Bent
Mr. L. C. Burton,
Secretary, & Export
Manager,
W. Thoma< ana Co
W. A ) L*d.
i opresenl l nq the
Australian Flour Ex p.-t
3 1 on-ct ■ o n Cc m m 1 11 r
Mi D. B . M u 1 1 h t?ck■
Un'tod Kincjaom
Represen tat iva
A mtrni nn Moat 800 1
Mi M. C Jameson
Bonk o’ No-a South Wole:


Mr. T. M. Chambers.
Merchandising Planning
Manager, Consumer
Products Division,
Amalgamated Wiretc"
iA'asia) Ltd
Mr E A. CI at k
Manager,
Overseas Dep‘. Felt- 6,
T e<tiles of A us* Ut c-
Mr. j. 5. Pymble
Sales Representative
Qantas Empire Airv.civ Ltd.
Mi. C W. Rcodman
Oversea'- Ever Officer
Broken HiM
Prnnri e to i - O' I ‘ r '.
Mr G. W. McKenzie
Tommonv/ealth Trading
3ank of Australia.
Mr. G. M. Sonaerv
National Bonk
-A Austroiosio Ltr!
Mir G. B. Ccurrnev
Menacing D'rector
G. B. Ccur f nev
ana Co e-, Ltr;
Mi. A. E . Sage.
General Soles Manager.
f 3 or r. Co-opera live
n ochnq Un'pn Ltd
Mr. M i W 11• o n
Australia & Npv. Zeal ano
Han k Ito
Mr c. J. Cross Ie •
Sarver Officer.
Mr. f . A. Daves.
Mcrager Beirut Office
W. AngUss ana Co
A^s.• ; p*v L*:i
servicing
representatives
Mr. F. Hoe
Vgnoger
Gveensland Branch
S’cnclcrd Telephones
> Cap e< D *\ L*d.


ITINERARY
SEA MISSION
Depart :
Sydney January 27
Melbourne .. .. January 29-
February 3
Adelaide February 5-8
Fremantle . . . . February 12 -20
Karachi March 8 - 12
Muscat March 14
Dubai March 15 -17
Fmm Said .... March 18 -20
Bahrain March 21 - 24
Dammam . . . . March 25
Kuwait March 20 - 28
Basrah March 30 -
April 2
Abadan April 2-11
AIR MISSION
Depart :
Sydney March 8
Karachi March 9-15
Bahrain March 15
Dubai March 15 - 18
Doha
(Fmm Said) .. March 18-20
Bahrain March 20 - 25
Dhahran March 25 - 26
(Dammam)
Kuwait March 26 -
April 2
Abadan April 2 - 6


The Mission scaled from Fremantle on February 20. 19b2, and bequn its tour of
South-West Asia with an off'icial opening of the ship’s displays >n Karachi. Pakistan
by the Pakistan Munster of Commerce, Mr. Hazifur Rahman.
From Karachi, the ship went on to Muscat and Omrm, the Initial State-,. Qatar,
Bahrain Island, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Iraq and Iran. At all pm is except Basrah [lraq],
members of the shipbnrne mission v. err joined by member s of the airborne mission.
SOUTH-WEST ASIA
Air mission
Sea mission _


General Report
of the
Trade Mission
to
South-West Asia
ORGANIZATION OF THE MISSION
Trade Ships and their associated Trade Missions are joint private
enterprise and Government ventures, and have an important role in
Australia’s export promotion activities. They help to project the
image of Australia as an expanding industrial nation and so overcome
to some extent one of the main problems Australia faces in increasing
its exports, particularly of manufactured goods the fact that the
Australian economy is, generally, not well known overseas.
The first Trade Ship was sent to Japan and Asian ports in 1958 and
this was followed by one to South-East Asia in 1961. It was in 1958,
following the success of the first Trade Ship, that sending an Austra-
lian Trade Mission by ship to the oil sheikhdoms and countries of
South-West Asia was considered.
As a result of discussions with the Government, the British India
Steam Navigation Company Ltd. in 1961 offered to provide as a Trade
Ship the M.V. “Chandpara”, one of its 13 “C” type vessels normally
running between Australia, Karachi in Pakistan, and Arabian Gulf
and Iran ports. It agreed to make available, free of charge, space on
the boat deck and ’tween deck to carry displays of Australian primary
and secondary products and also passenger accommodation for mission
members. Other discussions between the Government and the Austra-
lian Manufacturers’ Export Council (a division of The Associated
Chambers of Manufactures of Australia) resulted in A.M.E.C. accept-
ing sponsorship of the Trade Mission.
The actual planning and organization of the Mission was carried
out in Australia by the Victorian Chamber of Manufactures acting as
central office, assisted by the Department of Trade, the 8.1.5. N. Co.
Ltd. and the Australian Chambers of Commerce Export Council. In
Pakistan, the Australian Trade Commissioner, Karachi, was respon-
sible almost entirely for the planning of receptions and viewings and
the issue of invitations, while in the Gulf this work was handled joint-
ly by Gray Mackenzie & Co. Ltd., agents for 8.1.5. N., and the Trade
Commissioner.
COMPOSITION OF MISSION
After a thorough assessment of the markets in Pakistan and the
Gulf, Australian industrialists, business and professional men in
selected fields were invited to join the Mission and their organizations
to participate in the display facilities. In addition, each of the major
banks was invited to nominate a young executive to act as a servicing
representative for displays not represented by a selling member. The
five display servicing representatives who were nominated operated
under a display supervisor appointed by A.M.E.C.
The selling members were reasonably representative of Australian
industry. There were gaps in relation to motor vehicles, fruit-canning,
building materials and jam-making industries, but this deficiency was
to some extent overcome by the work done by the display servicing
personnel.
As passenger accommodation on the ship was limited, virtually only
the executive and display servicing members were carried on the
“Chandpara”. An airborne component of 12 selling members was
formed to meet the ship at Karachi and at most ports in the Gulf
where the ship called.
Qantas Empire Airways handled all these air arrangements and
provided a selling representative. The Australian Trade Commis-
sioner, Karachi, also travelled with the airborne team.
DISPLAYS
Invitations to display were sent to all manufacturing and trading
concerns considered likely to have available for export products with
sales potential in Pakistan and the Gulf.


Deck space was allocated to present a balanced display of primary
and secondary products. This display also had to create an awareness
of our development and technical skill and our ability to assist in the
commercial expansion of other countries now expanding their
economy, raising their standards of living and developing new
industries.
Over all, the display was designed to induce a favourable impression
and show how Australia is willing to extend friendship and goodwill
towards the people in the countries being visited.
Each Australian State was invited to be represented on an equitable
basis and the displays were controlled to present a composite and
balanced picture of Australian production and potential. Most of the
displays were by individual companies and firms and a few by combined
exhibitors, including those of a national character. These combined
displays included such products as flour, meat and dairy products.
All stands were adequately stocked with literature specially pre-
pared by exhibitors to promote their products. This literature was
available to visitors and a large volume of it was distributed during
receptions and viewing sessions.
Altogether, some 1,000 products were displayed by 124 exhibitors
and were serviced by 14 selling members and six display servicing
members.
SAMPLES AND TASTING
As well as literature, some food exhibitors provided samples of meat
cuts and dairy produce for display under refrigeration. Potential
customers were able to see how Australian meat, cheese and butter
should look under normal conditions. The commissary staff at several
of the oil companies in the Gulf had not realized, until they saw the
frozen meat display, that Australia could supply such a wide range of
pre-packed meat cuts. It is expected that a direct result of the ship’s
visit to the Gulf will be an increase in the export of these cuts to the
area.
During viewing sessions, visitors were invited to sample cheeses,
fruit juices and cordials supplied free by exhibitors, as well as biscuits
donated by other Australian producers not displaying. Also, during
the limited number of receptions on board at which alcoholic drinks
were served, donated beer, spirits and wines were used. In addition
to this hospitality, several exhibitors, particularly those with re-
presentatives on the Mission, gave free samples of their products.
HAND-OUT MATERIAL
Visitors to the ship received a copy of the official Mission brochure
printed in English, which contained full details of the Mission member-
ship, their itinerary, exhibitors and products, and an article on
Australia’s development.
Special English and Arabic editions of “Austral News”, the Depart-
ment of Trade export promotion journal, were published to coincide
with the Mission’s arrival in various ports. English editions were
distributed at Karachi and in the Gulf and the Arabic copies to all
Gulf ports, excepting Iran.
Arabic and Persian editions of the booklet “Australia”, which gives
a brief story on Australia, and 7,000 gold-plated kangaroo lapel pins,
were distributed by members to visitors who came on board the
“Chandpara”.
PUBLICITY
The Department of Trade was responsible for all publicity arrange-
ments about the Mission.
In Pakistan, the results achieved were satisfactory. A comprehen-
sive Mission supplement in the newspaper “Dawn” generated a great


deal of pre-Mission interest and this was continued by the local
publicity resulting from press and radio interviews with the Leader.
The whole publicity campaign in the Gulf was arranged by the
Department through Gray Mackenzie & Co. Ltd., Bahrain. Due to
the lack of suitable publicity media in the area, its planning proved
to be extremely difficult daily newspapers are scarce and there is
little local radio and almost no television. Mission supplements
appeared in Iraq and Iran newspapers and achieved significant pre-
Mission interest in those countries.
In spite of lack of media, the publicity achieved much good will for
the Mission and aroused considerable public interest in its visit to
many of the ports. In Bahrain, for example, the publicity impact
made it necessary to declare almost “open house” on the last day of
the visit, to satisfy the many hundreds of potential customers who at
that stage had been unable to see the display.
TRADE INQUIRIES
Nearly 1100 separate trade inquiries were received about the goods
displayed; a written report on each inquiry was forwarded immediately
to the exhibitor in Australia. The products which attracted most
interest were :
Dairg Pi odnets
Eggs
Flour
Meats Frozen X- Canned
Canned Fruit A Vegetables
Fruit Juices
Jams X- Jellies
Hardware Builders &•
Domestic
Fit mi tur<
Motor Cars, Parts &
Accessories
Woollen & Worsted Cloth
Floor Coverings
Electrical Equipment &
Fittings
Medical & Hospital Equipment
Bathroom Equipment & Fittings
Many additional inquiries were received for honey, rice, footwear,
women’s clothing, jewellery, chinaware, plateware, plastics products,
chemicals, pharmaceuticals, telecommunication equipment, and fibre-
board.
Most exhibitors also received written inquiries direct from people
in possession of their literature, but who did not register their require-
ments with the display representative.
In addition to the above, over 100 inquiries were received for
products not exhibited on the ship. Some of the items discussed were
earthmoving and construction equipment, food-processing machinery,
pumps, marine diesel engines, generators, paint, men’s clothing and
glassware.
The range of inquiries received not only for the products exhibited
but also for other items of Australian manufacture, gives an indication
of the market potential in this area and the opportunities which exist
for Australian manufacturers and exporters who are prepared to take
positive action to seek sales.
As a further guide to those contemplating export business, a
summary of market prospects for particular commodities, based to
some extent on the confidential reports of individual members, is
given later in the report.


THE MISSION’S IMPACT
Over 11,500 people came on board the “Chandpara”. Most were
favourably impressed by the high standard of the display and the
range of quality products exhibited. Many visitors in the Gulf ports
were surprised to find that Australia manufactured goods comparable
in quality with those from Britain, the United States, Europe and the
Far East, the present major suppliers to this area.
Previously, Australia was known in the Gulf mainly as a producer
of high-quality foodstuffs. In Karachi, an earlier "trade ship had
demonstrated to Pakistan our ability to supply secondary products.
The activities of the Mission executive and members, and the ship’s
captain, officers and crew, all contributed towards a favourable public
relations atmosphere in the area and enhanced Australia’s prestige
by consolidating our friendship and understanding with the peoples in
the various countries visited.
Development of an Australian atmosphere on board the “Chand-
para” was intensified not only by the exhibits and the Department ot
Trade publications but also by other publications which told of our
national way of life, our achievements and tourist attractions.
This atmosphere added to the impact of the Mission and the keen
desire of many visitors to obtain published material indicated they
were anxious to learn more about Australia.
RESULTS OF THE MISSION
The Mission’s immediate result was the creation in the Gulf of a
greater consciousness of Australia as a rapidly-developing industrial
nation. In addition, it made most countries in the Gulf aware for the
first time of the wide range and quality of goods, particularly
manufactured items, available from here. An appreciation of the
potentiality of Australia as a country to visit was also created.
All Mission members made worthwhile business contacts. Most
also gained first hand business experience in a trading area almost
unknown to them before.
Actual on-the-spot sales by the Mission were limited. They included
such items as eggs, rock-crushing equipment, electric fans, opals,
plastic ware and silver plate. Several members, however, found they
could compete with established suppliers of manufactured products
and began negotiations for selling building materials, telecommunica-
tions equipment, electrical equipment and floor coverings. Some new
and active local agencies were arranged or discussed.
Sales of Australian foodstuffs in the area are expected to increase
as a result of the Mission, and particularly because of the refrigerated
displays on the ship and the sampling and tasting facilities provided.
Over all, the Mission observed opportunities for a big increase in
exports of foodstuffs, and manufactured goods to the area.


COUNTRY REPORTS


Pakistan’s Minister of Commerce, Mr. Hazifur
Rahman, officially opened the display in Karachi
at a ceremony representing the commencement
of the Mission’s tour of South-West Asia.
About 3,000 visitors, including representatives
of Pakistan’s commercial and industrial com-
munity, visited the ship.
GENERAL
Pakistan is divided into two regions over
1,000 miles apart West Pakistan, with an
area of 310,000 square miles, and East Pakistan,
55,000 square miles. The combined population
of the two regions (1961) is about 94 million
of which West Pakistan has about 46 per cent.
Karachi is the largest city of Pakistan,
situated in the Western province on the Arabian
Sea. Formerly, it was also the capital of
Pakistan, but in 1959 it was decided to establish
a national capital to be called Islamabad on an
area on the Potwar plateau near Rawalpindi.
ECONOMY AND DEVELOPMENT
The economy of Pakistan is based on its rural
production, the most important being jute and
jute manufactures which account for over half
of export earnings. The country is far from
being self-sufficient in food production.
Under its second Five Year Plan 1960/65,
Pakistan is aiming to increase food grain
production by over 20 per cent and to expand
secondary industries to achieve a 35 per cent
increase in their contribution to national in-
come. Under the second Plan, £A7IO million
is to be spent on establishing and expanding
secondary industries and improving transport
and communications.
MARKET PROSPECTS
Import licensing in Pakistan is very severe
and licences or permits are required for all
imports, except for direct imports by Govern-
ment departments. All importers must be
registered with the Chief Controller of Imports
and Exports. There are three classes :
Commercial importers
Industrial consumera
Holders of export bonus vouchers.
Australian exporters should ensure that
consignees hold the necessary licences before
orders are booked.
Australia does not enjoy the preferential
rates of duty extended to goods of Britain,
India, Ceylon and British Colony origin but
pays most-favoured-nation rates. High tariffs
apply to luxury and non-essential goods and to
other items such as paints and toilet soap where
it is desired to protect local industry.
For the years 1960 and 1961, the value of
Pakistan’s imports reached nearly £A3OO
million for each year. Of this amount,
about 20 per cent was for food, 30 per cent for
Pakistan


Spinuimj from Australian wool tops, \’alil:a Mills. Karachi.


capital goods and equipment, 30 per cent for industrial raw materials
and 20 per cent for non-food goods. The more important consumer
and industrial market for imported goods is West Pakistan, although
special emphasis is now being given to locating additional new
industries in East Pakistan. Over recent years, the annual value of
imports from Australia has been only about fAS million or less than
two per cent of the total. The main Australian items have been wheat,
wool, tallow', railway sleepers and machinery.
As a result of the visit of the “Chandpara”, and with a more
aggresive sales effort on the part of Australian suppliers, the market
outlook potentially should be more favourable. There are of course,
at present, restrictive factors, such as severe import licensing controls,
high premiums paid for export bonus vouchers and the fact that the
sources of imports of many types of equipment are determined by
tied loans. In spite of this, however, it is felt that those Australian
exporters who take an active interest in the Pakistan market, who
support their agents with a steady flow of information and who are
prepared to send their representative to the country regularly, could
well enjoy continuing sales.
As Pakistan’s industrial progress continues to gain momentum,
there will be a need for a greater volume and variety of imported
development goods. Later, as the standard of living rises, so should
the demand for consumer products from abroad, providing export
surpluses are achieved.
It is recommended that Australian suppliers should continue to
watch closely the field of Government purchasing through a Pakistan
agent who specializes in this activity. The Indus Valley Development
Scheme, in particular, offers possible market opportunities for steel,
timber and industrial and similar equipment. Also, many Pakistani
firms are interested in manufacture under licence or the assembly of
parts imported in C.K.D. condition.
While the “Chandpara” was in Karachi, over 200 inquiries were
received for consumer and industrial goods, including some not dis-
played on board. The diversity of these inquiries indicated that,
subject to the availability of import licences and the extent and
urgency of Government requirements, there were opportunities to
sell a wide range of products. Some of the items inquired for were :
DAIRY PRODUCTS
FLOUR
FRUIT JUICES
CHEMICALS &
PH ARMACEUTICA LS
BUILDERS’ HARDWARE
METAL FURNITURE & FITTINGS
IRON & STEEL SHEETS
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT &
FITTINGS
TELECOM M UNICATION
EQUIPMENT
FOOD PROCESSING MACHINERY
FARM MACHINERY
EARTHMOVING &
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT
TEXTILE MACHINERY.


Among visitors to the “Chandpara” at Muscat
were Mr. J. F. S. Phillips, the British Consul-
General; Major F. C. L. Chauncy, Personal
Adviser to the Sultan of Muscat and Oman;
and Sheikh Sayed Abbas bin Faisal, uncle of
the Sultan. Altogether 58 merchants and 19
officials attended Muscat viewing sessions.
GENERAL
Muscat and Oman is an independent
Sultanate, bound by a Treaty of Friendship
with Britain. Lying in the south-west corner
of the Arabian Peninsula with a long coastline
facing the Arabian Sea, it is mostly
mountainous, but with a few cultivated strips.
The population, mainly Muslim, numbers about
500,000, most of whom are Arabs.
The capital, Muscat (population 5,000), was
once a town of some commercial importance,
but in recent years trade has moved to the
adjacent town of Matrah (population 9,000),
the starting point for interior trade routes.
ECONOMY AND DEVELOPMENT
Oil exploration has not, so far, been very
successful in Muscat and Oman. The Sultanate
has no important industries, and import and
export duties are the chief sources of revenue.
The main agricultural regions, whose import-
ant products are fruit and dates, are near
Batina and Dhofar. The coastal population
subsists on fishing, trade and shipping.
MARKET PROSPECTS
Licences are required to import trucks, lorries
and pick-ups. Other items, with the exception
of arms, ammunition, alcoholic liquors, explo-
sives and dangerous drugs, may be imported
freely. Customs duty is leviable on the market
value of the goods imported and normally
ranges between 5 per cent and 25 per cent.
Exceptions are the duties on drugs (75 per cent)
and alcoholic liquors (100 per cent).
Due to the lack of development and the low
standard of living of the local population, the
market in this sheikhdom is comparatively
limited. The sale of better-quality canned food
and other consumer goods is made only to the
European community, firms, the Army, and
persons who earn reasonable incomes. There
is virtually no market for warm clothing.
Cotton clothing, e.g. shirts, vests, undershorts
and socks, is imported very cheaply from Japan,
Hong Kong and China. Because electricity is
expensive, there is little demand for domestic
appliances and equipment such as washing
machines, stoves, refrigerators and air condi-
tioners. (There is at present no A.C. in Muscat,
although its introduction is planned.)
There are not more than 30 cars in the
country and most of these were purchased
secondhand from Bahrain and Kuwait.
Muscat and Oman


Vehicles of the "jeep” type number about 150, excluding those with
the Sultan’s armed forces.
Although some high-quality English goods are sold, the important
market consideration is price rather than quality. General import
trading is limited to a few merchants who retail to the hundreds of
petty merchants all over the country. Main items handled are low-
priced basic foodstuffs and other essential consumer products. This
demand trend is likely to continue unless oil in commercial quantities
is discovered.
Over 100 inquiries were received as a result of the “Chandpara’s”
visit. Subject to the products being competitive in price, the following
appeared to have the greatest merit :
DAIRY PRODUCTS
CANNED FRUIT & VEGETABLES
FRUIT JUICES
JAMS & JELLIES
MEATS
FLOUR
RICE
FURNITURE
HARDWARE
RUMPS.


Dr. J. Arnovzegar, Iranian Minister of Commerce, rinited the fillip at Abadan.


The official opening of the “Chandpara” dis-
play in the Trucial States was performed in
Dubai by the Ruler, His Highness Sheikh
Rashid Saeed A 1 Nakhtus, and was attended by
50 people. Some 600 visitors viewed the ship
while in Dubai.
GENERAL
The Trucial States along the Trucial Coast,
better known as the Pirate Coast, comprise
seven Sheikhdoms under British protection,
with the rule by Sheikhs assisted by a British
Political Agent.
Most of the area of 6,000 square miles is low-
lying desert with scattered oases. The popula-
tion, about 90,000 and mostly Arab, is
concentrated mainly on the coast.
The largest town, and unrivalled commercial
centre at present, is Dubai (population 40,000).
Sharjah, a much smaller port, is 10 miles north-
east and Abu Dhabi 90 miles south-west of
Dubai.
ECONOMY AM) DEVELOPMENT
There is no industry of importance; little
agriculture is practised and nomads and fisher-
men comprise the bulk of the population. Dubai
conducts an active entrepot trade with Abu
Dhabi, Iran and other countries. A large
proportion of exports is re-exported. The dis-
covery of oil in commercial quantities at Abu
Dhabi and the near off-shore island of Das is
expected to lead to improved conditions general-
ly throughout the Trucial States.
Major development projects in Dubai include
a £1 million port improvement scheme now
almost completed, schemes for supplying water
and electricity and the establishment of cold
stores.
.MARKET PROSPECTS
There are no special invoicing procedures or
other restrictions on trade, except that the
import of firearms, ammunition, dangerous
drugs and alcoholic liquors is permitted only
subject to the approval of the Political Agency.
Customs duty on imports into Dubai is 4.625
per cent ad valorem, except for some special
categories of goods. The duty on goods enter-
ing Sharjah is two per cent and Abu Dhabi 21
per cent, while the transit duty is 1.2 per cent.
The present and potential market in this
territory is larger than the figures for population
suggest. Over recent years, significant develop-
ment has taken place due to the increasing
prosperity of Dubai, and this has led to a fairly
brisk demand for all types of foodstuffs,
consumer products, and building materials and
equipment, for local requirements as well as
entrepot trade. The market is expected to be
strengthened considerably as result of the
anticipated expansion at Abu Dhabi.
Trucial States
SAUDI ARABIA


Customs Wharf at Dubai,
mi active entrepot port.
DAIRY PRODUCTS
FRUIT JUICES
CANNED FRUITS & VEGETABLES
MEATS
FLOUR
The market in the area is virtually free and consequently highly
competitive. The total value of imports from all sources in 1960 was
about £A7.5 million and in 1961, £AB.S million. Reliable figures for
exports are not available as much is re-exported by country craft or by
lorry overland and is not recorded. No figures are available to show
the extent of trade in Abu Dhabi.
Australian exporters wishing to break into this market must be
prepared to quote very competitive prices. In addition, they will
need to be on the alert for re-export opportunities as well as the
requirements of the local market. Although the present purchasing
power of the average worker is low, if development does take place at
the rate anticipated, following the Abu Dhabi oil strike, Australian
concerns which now become soundly established in the territory could
make very considerable sales over the next few years.
About i()0 inquiries were received during the visit of the trade ship.
Particular interest was shown in the following items :
RICE
HARDWARE
KITCHENWARE
PLASTIC PRODUCTS
FURNITURE


The exhibition was officially opened at Umm Said, oil port
of Qatar, by His Excellency Sheikh Nassir bin Khaler Al-
Thani, cousin of the ruler and Chairman of the Doha
Chamber of Commerce. He was accompanied by his brother,
His Excellency Sheikh Jassem bin Khaled Al-Thani, several
other Sheikhs, prominent officials and leading Qatar
businessmen. During the three-day visit, about 1,000 people
attended the viewing sessions.
GENERAL
Qatar is an independent Sheikhdom under British
protection. Except for low, hilly ranges in the south and
west, the 7,700-square mile state is a vast, low-lying desert
with no vegetation.
There is a population of 40,000, including about 1,000
Europeans employed by oil companies. Most people are
concentrated in the main centres of Doha, the capital
(20,000), Dukhan, centre of the oil field and Umm Said,
Qatar’s port, 20 miles from Doha. The people are mostly
Muslims, with a few Lebanese Christians.
ECONOMY AND DEVELOPMENT
Qatar’s economy is based on oil with an output of 8 million
tons annually produced by the concessionaires, Qatar
Petroleum Co. The population not employed by the oil
industry engages mainly in fishing, pearling, rudimentary
agriculture and sheep breeding. Oil revenues are divided
evenly between the oil company and the ruler, each receiving
about £ Stg. 18 million a year. The ruler’s share is partly
used to finance development projects.
Building generally, road construction, sewerage and water
supply schemes are included in Qatar’s development plans;
the main activity is in Doha.
MARKET PROSPECTS
Import licences are required for alcoholic liquor, firearms,
ammunition and dangerous drugs. Cultured pearls are
prohibited. Customs duty on imports is generally 2\ per
cent ad valorem. Important exceptions are cigarettes and
tobacco, 10 per cent; beer, 15 per cent, and wines and spirits,
30 per cent.
Imports have been traditionally through the entrepot of
Bahrain (see section on Bahrain), but most imports are now
made directly into Qatar. The goods are unloaded at the
port at Umm Said and then transferred by lighter to Doha.
There is some entrepot trade with Saudi Arabia but the
vast majority of goods imported are for local use.
The comprehensive development programme which the
Government is undertaking has resulted in an expansion of
demand not only for all types of building supplies and equip-
ment and related items but also for basic foodstuffs and
other consumer products. The oil company organization
also represents a further potential market for Australian
exporters. In general, supplies and materials for the Qatar
Petroleum Company have been obtained through London
purchasing agents, but the company is now purchasing its
requirements, wherever possible, from local merchants who
hold sole agencies. Similarly, the Government has also
Qatar


introduced a system of local purchasing. This change of policy has
given a great stimulus to local trade.
Shell Company of Qatar has the concession for the Qatar sea bed
but is not yet producing oil. It also buys many of its supplies locally.
The annual value of Australia’s exports to Qatar in recent years has
averaged about .£A200,000, the main items being flour, meats, dairy
products, eggs and barley. On the other hand, an analysis of the 200
odd inquiries received on the “Chandpara” showed there was much
greater interest in secondary products than in the foods displayed,
and this would appear to indicate market potential for other than the
items we are traditionally supplying.
Some of the secondary products for which inquiries were received,
were :
BUILDERS’ HARDWARE
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT
FURNITURE
TELECOMMUNICATION-
EQUIPMENT
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
WOOLLEN & WORSTED
CLOTH
FOOTWEAR
PLASTIC PRODUCTS.
The Qatar flat/ then orrr a school for hoi/s in Italia


The Bahrain opening of the “Chandpara”
display was performed by His Excellency
Sheikh Khalifah bin Sulman Alkalifah, brother
of the ruler, and was attended by about 100
people, including Government officials and lead-
ing Bahrain merchants. Another 3,000 people
inspected the ship at later viewing sessions.
GENERAL
Bahrain, an independent Sheikhdom having
special treaty relations with Great Britain,
consists of a group of low-lying islands situated
half-way down the Arabian Gulf, about 20 miles
off the east coast of Arabia. The largest of
these, Bahrain Island, is about 30 miles long
and 10 miles wide at its broadest.
The two most important towns are Manama
and Muhassaq.
Bahrain is comparatively fertile, with
adequate water supplies. The standard of liv-
ing is high among the large and influential
merchant class and steadily rising among the
lower social groups.
The population is about 143,000 (1959), of
whom 3,000 are Europeans and Americans (75
per cent live at the Bahrain Petroleum Company
town of Awali), and 16,000 non-Bahrainis,
mainly Iranians, Indians and Pakistanis.
ECONOMY AND DEVELOPMENT
Until the discovery of oil in 1932, Bahrain’s
income came from the pearl trade, since
considerably declined, and from its position as
entrepot port for the Arabian Gulf.
Although oil resources are limited to about
two million tons a year, production of refined
oil by the Bahrain Petroleum Company in 1960
was more than 10 million tons over 80 per
cent of the oil coming from Saudi Arabia.
Direct oil revenues accruing to the Government
average between £Stg.4 m. to £Stg.s m. a year.
Minor local industries are boat building, weav-
ing and fishing.
Agriculture, a strong factor in the diversifica-
tion of the State’s economy, is practised in
about one twentieth of Bahrain for the produc-
tion mainly of dates, citrus fruits and lucerne.
Considerable research has been done on the
cultivation of cotton, vegetables and other
crops, but the volume of production is unlikely
to have any significant impact on the economy.
Considerable capital has been invested in the
construction of a deep-water shipping terminal
which was opened early in 1962.
MARKET PROSPECTS
Import licences are not required except for
imports of alcoholic liquor, which are strictly
controlled. The import of firearms, ammunition
and dangerous drugs is prohibited except
Bahrain


under licence. The rates of customs duty are five per cent ad valorem
on all foodstuffs and necessities. 10 per cent on non-essentials and 15
per cent on tobacco and liquor. The flat rate of two per cent ad
valorem provided in the customs ordinance on all goods shipped to
Bahrain “in transit’’ has been abolished.
Business in Bahrain is divided into two main categories the
Bahrain Petroleum Company and the general market. The oil company
has a buying office in London, but has recently adopted a policy of
purchasing as many of its requirements as possible locally. The
general market is served by about 250 Bahrain merchants, most of
whom prefer sole agencies.
Bahrain’s most important source of revenue after oil is obtained
from its traditional entrepot trade. The island is conveniently
situated to handle goods in transit and it is estimated that not less
than 70 per cent of the imports unloaded at Bahrain were, up to a few
years ago, destined for onward movement. A decline in this entrepot
trade has occurred, however, because of the growing tendency for
Saudi Arabia, Qatar and other Sheikhdoms to import direct. In 1956,
Bahrain re-exported over 13 per cent of its imports, while in 1961 the
figure was less than 36 per cent. It was to counteract this trend and
to encourage the entrepot trade that free transit facilities were intro-
duced into the port of Bahrain in 1958.
Although Bahrain’s position as the commercial centre of the Gulf
is being seriously challenged by Kuwait, because of its relative
political stability and new wharf facilities it still offers excellent
opportunities for Australian suppliers, both for its entrepot trade and
for the market in the Sheikhdom itself.
In 1960 and 1961, the average annual value of imports from all
sources was about £A2B million. Imported commodities included a
wide variety of foodstuff's, raw materials, plant and equipment and
other manufactured goods, much of which Australia could supply.
Australia’s exports to Bahrain are currently running at less than
£A1,000,000 and. apart from motor cars, comprise mainly footstuffs.
Some of the inquiries received by the Mission in Bahrain were :
FLOUR
MEATS
DAIRY PRODUCTS
EGGS
FRUIT JUICES
JAMS & JELITES
CLOTHING
AUTOMOTIVE PARTS
BUILDERS’ HARDWARE
PLUMBERS’ FITTINGS
FURNITURE
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT &
FITTINGS
SPORTING GOODS
JEWELLERY


Some of the -lOlli)
visitor* to the
shift (tt Bahrain.
Government Wharf
Bahrain Island.


The display was officially opened in Dammam
by His Excellency Sheikh Adul Aziz bin Sa’ud
bin Jiluwi in the presence of other Sheikhs,
Government officials and leading Saudi Arabian
merchants. It is estimated that 80 people
attended the opening ceremony and despite a
stay of only one day in port, 700 visitors
attended later viewing sessions.
GENERAL
In area, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia forms
four-fifths of the Arabian peninsula and covers
some 610,000 square miles.
Its population is estimated at seven million,
the majority being Arab nomads. Main centres
of population are Riyadh, the capital, Mecca
(150,000, increasing to 500,000 at the pilgrim-
age), and Jeddah, the Red Sea port. Dammam,
A 1 Khobar and Ras Tanura are the most
important Gulf coast ports of entry and are
developing as marketing centres.
ECONOMY ANI) DEVELOPMENT
Saudi Arabia’s only industry of significance
is oil. Agriculture is primitive and is hampered
by the water shortage. At present, more
advanced techniques are being applied near
Riyadh.
The current budget provides for the construc-
tion of new roads, dams and mosques and such
municipal projects as street lightning and road
improvement. The Government-owned railways
link the oilfields, the capital and Dammam, and
are being constantly improved. Major recent
projects include a deep-water shipping terminal
near A 1 Khobar and a load network linking the
coastal towns with the capital, Riyadh.
MARKET PROSPECTS
There are no licensing restrictions apart from
the prohibited items firearms, ammunition,
alcoholic liquors and dangerous drugs and
foreign exchange is freely available for imports
from all countries. All essential foodstuffs
enter duty free and canned foodstuffs at varied,
but relatively low, rates of duty. Customs duty
leviable on most other imports is from 15 per
cent to 25 per cent, with luxury manufactured
goods being as high as 40 per cent.
As there is little local manufacturing in
Saudi Arabia, and agricultural production falls
short of domestic requirements, essentially all
fabricated goods and a large portion of staple
foodstuffs must be purchased from abroad. The
country is virtually divided into two marketing
areas, the Western region on the Red Sea,
where Jeddah, the chief commercial centre, is
located, and the Eastern region, which includes
Dammam and A 1 Khobar.
Saudi Arabia


One of (he exhibits of electrical accessories.


A wide variety of goods, including' motor vehicles and parts, build-
ing materials, foodstuffs, textiles, machinery, electrical equipment and
pharmaceuticals, are imported. In recent years, the annual value of
imports has been close to t’AIOO million and the principal supplying
countries have been the United States, Britain, Japan, West Germany,
the Netherlands and Italy. The annual value of imports from Austra-
lia is less than £AI million.
Since there is almost no domestic manufacturing, the Kingdom
represents a market for a wide range of goods. Among the products
for which there is a potential demand are power-generating equip-
ment, air-conditioning and refrigerating equipment, road-building
equipment, equipment for schools and hospitals, pumps and drilling-
equipment, non-alcoholic beverages and fruit juices and canned and
packaged foodstuffs. The United States has for some time been Saudi
Arabia’s leading supplier with about 2o per cent of the market, but
competition from European and Japanese suppliers appears to be
stiffening, especially in the field of inexpensive consumer goods.
The Saudi Arabian market does offer increased export opportunities
for Australian suppliers, but those contemplating selling to the area
must remember that, in general, products are sold on the basis of
price, especially consumer goods. In the case of technical goods, more
attention is paid to quality, but price is still an important factor.
Although there is a luxury market among the very rich, this market
is being overshadowed by a new group of consumers demanding less
elaborate goods.
During the stay of the "Chandpara” at Dammam, inquiries were
received in connection with virtually all the foodstuff's displayed, the
main products being flour, rice, barley, meats, dairy products, canned
fruit and vegetables, fruit juices, jams and honey. Interest was also
shown in the following secondary products :
AIR -C O NI) 1 1 TIO NIN O EQC I I’M ENT
DIESEL MOTORS
ELECTRIC CABLES
MEDICAL EQUIPMENT
(; A I;V A NIZ EI) STK K[, SH EKT
.MOTOR OARS,
ACCESSORIES & PARTS
ANCILLARY RAILWAY
EQUIPMENT.


The display was officially opened in Kuwait by
His Excellency Sheikh .Jabir Al-Alimad A 1
Sabah, Minister of Finance and Economy.
Members of the ruling family, prominent Gov-
ernment officials and leading Kuwaiti merchants
were among the 1,200 visitors who saw the
exhibition.
GENERAL
The independent State of Kuwait lias a coast-
line of about 100 miles on the Arabian Gulf,
much of this seafront being Kuwait Bay on
which the town of Kuwait is built.
Kuwait has a population of about 321,000
(1961), of whom 200,000 live in Ai Kuwait and
A 1 Ahmadi. Most are Muslims, but there is a
large Christian community. About half the
population is foreign : mainly Iranian, Indians,
Pakistanis and Lebanese, with about 3,000
British and Americans.
ECONOMY ANI) DEVELOPMENT
Kuwait has long been an entrepot for trade
with countries at the head of the Gulf and will
continue to be so, particularly with the comple-
tion of the new deep-water harbour at the port
of Kuwait. Entrepot trade, however, plays a
secondary role in Kuwait’s current oil-derived
prosperity.
Kuwait’s extremely stable economy is due to
the large income derived from oil revenues,
currently worth about t'Stg. 180 million annual-
ly, which provide Kuwait with a major part of
its national income. They have been
instrumental in building large reserves of
foreign exchange to finance the economy’s
expansion and to provide a future national
investment income. Revenues are spent on
development works, maintenance, current Gov-
ernment expenditure and investment.
The city of Kuwait has largely been rebuilt
over the last 10 years and capital development
schemes have included a deep-water port, the
power station and distillation plant, roads,
schools, hospitals, Government building and
official housing. Development projects about
to be started, or planned for the near future,
are a new international airport, a sewerage
scheme and a scheme for re-building and
modernising the seafront of Kuwait town.
The heavy Government spending for the
purchase of capital goods in Kuwait’s develop-
ment programme has injected a tremendous
amount of money into the economy. The oil
companies have determined their policy to buy
as many as possible of their needs through local
suppliers. The major portion of their supplies
is already handled in this manner, and their
expenditure, including contracts and services,
now amounts to several million pounds a year.
The trend of retail sales has increased in about
Kuwait




the same proportion as the increase of national income derived from
oil revenue, although the feeling is that the present pace of construc-
tion will slow down when the principal needs of the population have
been met.
The Government is endeavouring to improve the country’s position
and to make the economy less dependent upon the single resource,
oil. Kuwait lacks agricultural and manufacturing industries and it is
felt that the long-term solution may be the development of petro-
chemical, cement, building materials and consumer goods industries.
A petrochemical industry is, in fact, soon to be established in co-
operation with an Italian firm.
MARKET PROSPECTS
No licence or exchange control formalities are required for imports
into Kuwait, with the exception of firearms, ammunition, explosives,
alcoholic liquors and dangerous drugs, all of which are very strictly
controlled. The standard rate of customs duty is four per cent ad
valorem and transit duty is two per cent. Imports of the State and
goods imported by the oil companies for their operations, are duty free.
Certain basic materials and foodstuffs are also duty free. Alcoholic
liquors incur a customs duty of 50 per cent.
Kuwait offers a large market for building and construction materials
and equipment, automotive vehicles and accessories, air-conditioning
equipment, electrical appliances and equipment, foodstuffs and general
consumer goods. The traditional suppliers are Britain, the United
States, West Germany, India and Japan. The purchasing power in
the market is widespread, the income per head of population being one
of the highest in the world. There is a wide gap between the incomes
of rich and poor, but even the poorer classes are generally better off
than their counterparts in neighbouring countries.
Kuwait imports each year goods valued at well over £AIOO million.
The annual value of its imports from Australia averages less than
£AI.S million of which about 90 per cent is for foodstuffs. Although
the market is extremely competitive and existing suppliers are well
entrenched, Australian exporters should be able to expand the existing
trade in foodstuffs and secure the entry of a growing range of second-
ary products.
Intending exporters of foodstuffs to Kuwait should be thoroughly
acquainted with the recently-introduced Kuwait food regulations.
These are entitled “Special Specifications regarding Foodstuffs for
Merchants and Importers in Kuwait’’ and are issued by the Health
Section, Municipality of Kuwait.
During the visit of the “Chandpara”, nearly 150 inquiries were
received. Apart from the foodstuff items displayed, which all attracted
considerable interest, there were also inquiries about the following
products :
BUILDERS’ HARDWARE
FURNITURE
ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES &
EQUIPMENT
MEDICAL & HOSPITAL
EQUIPMENT
BATHROOM EQUIPMENT &
FITTINGS
CHINAWARE & PLATEWARE
PLASTICS PRODUCTS
TELECOMMUNICATION
EQUIPMENT
PHARM A C E U TIC AL S
AUTOMOTIVE PARTS &
ACCESSORIES
CLOTHING
TEXTILES
JEWELLERY.


The official opening - of the “Chandpara” dis-
play in Basrah, performed by His Excellency,
The Deputy Muttassariff, was attended by a
party of government officials and businessmen
from Baghdad and invited dignitaries from
Basrah. Fifty guests attended the official
reception and 600 more came to the general
viewing sessions held the same evening and the
following day.
GENERAL
Situated between the Tigris and Euphrates
Rivers, Iraq has an area of 172,000 square miles,
of which 45 per cent is classified as desert land.
It is bounded on the north by the mountains of
Eastern Turkey, on the east by the chain of
the Zagros mountains through which runs the
Iranian frontier, on the south by the head of the
Arabian Gulf and the desert which is common
to Kuwait, Iraq and Saudi Arabia, and on the
west by the desert frontiers of Jordan and
Syria.
Population is about seven million, comprising
75 per cent Arabs, 15 per cent Kurds and 10
per cent Iranians and Turcomans.
The capital and commercial centre of Iraq is
Baghdad (population 1.4 million) on the Tigris,
about 350 miles north-west of Basrah (popula-
tion 500,000), Iraq’s only port.
ECONOMY AND DEVELOPMENT
Iraq’s economy is based both on agriculture
and income from oil production. A good pro-
portion of the oil revenues is being used on
water conservation and irrigation schemes, as
an estimated 80 per cent of the population lives
on agriculture, although only 14 per cent of the
total area is arable.
Industrially, Iraq has only a few light
industries but plans have been made for their
expansion and for the establishment of a
number of heavy industries.
Under a current economic plan, expenditure
of some £AI2O million a year has been
programmed for agriculture, industry, transport
and communication, housing, public buildings
and public health projects and on public culture.
Many projects under this developmental plan
have been completed or are under way. Iraq is
unusual among under-developed countries for
its ability to employ foreign technicians from
any country without external financial assist-
ance. Since the 1958 revolution, Russia has to
a large extent supplanted the U.S.A. in the
field of technical assistance and United States
aid in this field now consists solely of scholar-
ships.
Iraq


Steam pan'er station , Minn a! Ahmmii,
shotrht<f tea ter <list illation pin nf.


MARKET PROSPECTS
The import of certain goods (mainly those which compete with local
manufactures) is prohibited. All other goods require an import
licence. They are subject to quota and fall into two categories :
(I) Consumer goods and other non-essentials.
(II) Capital goods, raw materials for industry, and other es-
sential goods.
The quotas for items in the second category tend to be nominal in
that they are sufficiently large to allow licences to be issued freely.
Some restrictions are imposed on imports of the first category, al-
though some of the quotas are on a relatively generous scale. New
regulations relating to imports were issued at the beginning of 1962.
Special permits are required from appropriate Government author-
ities for the import of sugar, tobacco, railway equipment and several
other Government monopoly items, also for pharmaceuticals and live-
stock.
Customs duty on imports is levied either on a specific basis, when
they are calculated from the net weight of the goods including pack-
ing, or on an ad valorem basis. Rates vary considerably.
Market conditions generally in Iraq have not been normal since the
formation of the Republic in 1958. Business confidence has fluctuated
with developments in the political situation and purchasing power has
been adversely affected by bad harvests. Next to oil, which earns Iraq
well over £A10() million each year, agricultural products are the
country’s main exports and their annual value could be as high as
£A2O million.
In 1960 (the latest figures available), Iraq imported goods from all
sources to the value of £AI7S million. The bulk of these were
manufactures and included items of possible interest to Australia
such as woollen textiles, iron and steel, vehicles and parts, boilers,
machinery etc., electrical machinery, cement, timber, sugar and
confectionery, chemicals and pharmaceuticals and tanning and dyeing
extracts. The principal supplying countries were Britain, the United
States, West Germany, Japan and Belgium.
Australia’s exports to Iraq for 1959/60 and 1960/61 averaged a
little over £A7 million a year, comprising mainly wheat (in value
about 90 per cent of total), cheese, jams and jellies, jarrah sleepers,
wool and motor cars. For 1961/62, exports were less than £AI.S mil-
lion, due mainly to the reduction in wheat purchases by Iraq.
In view of Iraq’s satisfactory reserves of foreign exchange, its
continuing favourable balance of trade, and the wide range of
manufactures it is importing, this market would appear to offer long-
term export prospects for Australian suppliers, provided they are
competitive.
Although Britain has been the largest supplier to Iraq for many
years, political problems have now resulted in the serious curtailment
of these imports. Therefore, Iraqi merchants and agents are keen to
make new arrangements to obtain from Australia and other countries
goods similar to those previously imported from Britain, and there
exists for Australian manufacturers the opportunity to gain entry
into established markets.
Much will depend on the future progress of agriculture in Iraq
following the recent and continuing agrarian reforms, which include
the large-scale redistribution of land.
Some of the products on display for which inquiries were received
were dairy products, canned meats, fruit juices, rice, plastics products,
iron and steel products, abrasives and locks.


His Excellency Dr. J. Amouzgar, Minister
for Commerce and leader of a contingent of
officials and businessmen from Teheran, official-
ly opened the ship display in Abadan. The
ceremony was attended by members of the
Teheran party, Abadan officials and business-
men, and members of the Khorramshahr
Chamber of Commerce. About 100 guests were
present, while over 400 attended an earlier
viewing session in the morning.
GENERAL
Iran (formerly Persia) comprises an area of
628,000 square miles. It is mostly an arid table-
land encircled, except on the east, by mountains.
The population is estimated at 21 million.
Teheran (population two million), the capital
and commercial centre of Iran, is located on an
inland plateau several thousand feet above sea
level. It is by far the largest city. Abadan
has a population of 250,000.
ECONOMY AND DEVELOPMENT
Primarily an agricultural country, Iran is
almost self-supporting in essential foodstuffs,
with the exception of tea, sugar, wheat and
barley. The cultivation of cotton is important
and various fruits are grown commercially.
Iran’s industries, with the exception of oil,
are as yet small, but they have been growing
steadily. They include textile, cement and
building materials, sugar, edible oil and soap
factories, as well as a wide variety of small
industries. Crude oil production and its refin-
ing is the country’s foremost industry and earns
some i'Al25 million a year in foreign exchange.
In implementing plans to improve agriculture
and establish new industries, Iran has had
financial difficulties, and outside loans from the
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development and from other sources have had
to be obtained.
Development plans are carried out under the
direction of the Plan Organization. The Third
Plan is due to be introduced late in 1962 and its
general aim will be to increase national income
by six per cent a year, with the emphasis on
the development of agriculture, industry and
communications.
MARKET PROSPECTS
The balance of payments situation having
been declining over the past two or three years,
comprehensive import restrictions and a severe
commercial profits tax were introduced in 1960
Iran


Silk factorn. Chains.
Ejrre/it far oil, Iran's
hiilust rii arc small.
and were further intensified at the beginning of the Persian New Year
in March, 1962. Most consumer goods are now prohibited imports.
Imports have greatly declined and are now virtually limited to raw-
materials and essential plant and equipment.
Iran’s imports from all sources during recent years have averaged
over £A2OO million annually. Items of possible interest to Australia
have been wool, motor vehicles and parts, agricultural machinery,
electrical equipment, chemicals, pharmaceuticals and iron and steel.
The main supplying countries have been Britain, the United States,
Western Germany, Japan and the U.S.S.R.
During 1959/60 and 1960/61, the annual value of Australia’s
exports to Iran averaged about t'A2.B million and comprised wheat (in
value about 80 per cent of the total), wool and basic foodstuffs.
Exports in 1960/61 were worth less than tAI.S million, and in view
of the existing severe import restrictions, this downward trend is
likely to continue.
Because of its virtual prohibition upon all imports apart from raw-
materials and essential plant and equipment, and the fact that existing
overseas suppliers of these items are well established in the market,
Iran offers little immediate export potential for Australian suppliers.
Although interest was shown in the trade ship display and visitors
were appreciative of the range and quality of the products exhibited,
no inquiries offering real opportunities for follow-up business were
received.


Abadan, refinery. Oil earn >■ Iran £Al2sm. a year.


MARKET PROSPECTS: General


FROZEN MEAT
The Australian frozen meat trade in the Gulf can be sub-
divided as follows
(a) The oil companies
(b) The European population in the towns
(c) The local or native population.
(a) Australia’s frozen meat trade was developed initially with
the oil companies which demand a high standard of quality
and mostly arrange purchases through their own represent-
atives in Australia. The demand in the main has been for
first-quality primal beefcuts, together with some quarter
beef, first-quality lamb and some mutton.
(b) The European population in the area is served by provision
stores and butchers’ shops. Because of a general absence of
cutting facilities and experienced staff, the demand is almost
entirely for consumer-sized packs. This trade requires about
identical cuts to the oil companies, i.e. quality beef, lamb
and pork with a high degree of trim.
(c) The local or native population has a very definite preference
for fresh-killed mutton or goat. Fresh-killed beef is eaten
but is less preferred to mutton and sells more cheaply.
No real progress has been made in the sale of frozen
mutton other than in Kuwait, where the restaurants and
hotels are now accepting frozen mutton readily, principally
because it is much cheaper than fresh mutton. It is also
delivered daily to them. The two principal items are mutton
legs and cube mutton. The small trade in mutton carcases
is probably for ship’s stores.
COLD STORAGE FACILITIES.
The oil companies all have well equipped and efficient cold
stores, and frozen meat is handled in reefer and insulated trucks
from ship’s side into store and out of store to final destination.
In the towns, however, cold storage facilities are generally
inadequate.
Again, in the retail stores many deep-freeze cabinets lack
subdivision and consequently contain a variety of cuts of meat of
every description, weighing from 1 lb. to 10 lb. In the handling
by customers many of the wraps become torn, the meat dessicated
and freezer-burned; labels come off and meat loses its identity.
The carton box type of pack used by Denmark and Holland
for the smaller-sized consumer packs (such as steaks, chops etc.)
lends itself to stacking much better than does the polyethylene
type of pack used on many of the Australian meats, and is
receiving consumer preference in spite of being more expensive.
CONCLUSION.
It will be interesting to observe whether the growing trade in
live sheep from Australia to Kuwait will affect the demand for
frozen mutton. We have practically no competition in lamb, and
the product is well accepted.
In beef and veal, we once enjoyed a very high percentage of
the trade, but much ground has been lost to Denmark, Holland,
Kenya and Argentina. Denmark and Holland in particular are
putting up attractive consumer pre-cut packs in light cardbox
containers.
The main markets are Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Bahrain, to
which in 1960 Denmark exported 137 tons of frozen meat valued
at £A67,550, and Holland (in 1961) 24 tons worth £A21,525.
Australia’s exports to those markets in 1960/61 totalled
£A390,000.
Meat


LIVE SHEEP
Throughout most of the Gulf area, the demand for live sheep
for slaughter exceeds the supply.
Kuwait is the main market, and has obtained supplies
traditionally from Iraq, Iran, Saudi Arabia and Turkey. Political
difficulties with Iraq have shut off supplies from that source and
Iran is itself running short of sheep.
Kuwait is therefore looking to Australia as the main source of
sheep of acceptable quality, and it would appear that shortly
there will be enough specially-built and converted ships available
to transport up to 200,000 sheep a year from Australia to Kuwait
and other Gulf ports such as Bahrain, Doha and Dammam.
The Trade Mission found wide interest in this development
among merchants in the Sheikhdoms and Saudi Arabia.
CANNED MEAT
The main canned meat sold in the Gulf is bully beef, chiefly
from Tanganyika and Argentina. Australian prices are higher
but some business is done in established brands with the oil
companies.
Holland and Denmark do most of the business in mixed packs,
sausages etc. and offer severe competition. Comparative exports
to the region were
Metric Tons t'A
DENMARK
(I960)
222
99,423
NETHERLANDS
(1961)
~30
15,410
ARGENTINA
(1960)
105
39,300
(Corned Beef)
AUSTRALIA
(1960 61)
132
46,000
Iraq mas the main customrr, imjnirtinq 107 tons from Denmark,
11 tons from Holland and lid tons from Argentina.
FHT ITS, Ik FIT JI'ICKS, VEGETABLES, JAMS AMI JELLIES.
Most of the business in canned fruits, fruit juices and
vegetables is done by United States firms, who offer very
competitive prices, a very wide range of products, and good
presentation.
In the main, United States brands have an advantage as they
have been approved and imported by the oil companies over
many years. As the wives of oil company personnel are used to
buying them in their commissariat stores, the merchants who are
now importing them for the oil companies naturally enough find
them the best brands for the retail trade.
Except for one Australian brand of jam, which has been
established in the area for decades, we have not yet participated
significantly in the supply of these products, the demand for
which seems certain to grow with the rising living standards of
the area.
The size of the market can be gauged from the following-
exports to the region :
Canned Foods
The main markets men - Knmait , Saadi Arabia and Bahrain
1961
1961
1960/61
from I'.S.A.
from U.K.
from Australia
£A
£A
£A
CANNED FRUITS
126,750
11,250
7,700
FRUIT JUICES
131,625
63,750
2,800
VEGETABLES
446,875
225,000
12,960
JAMS AND JELLIES
12,500
27,500
121,100


BUTTER
Australian butter enjoys a good market from Kuwait to Muscat.
There is severe competition from Danish foil-wrapped and Kenya
butter. Partly because of the difficulty of securing freezer space
from Australia, Danish butter dominates the Iraq market. Iran
and Pakistan prohibit the import of butter. There are good
prospects in Dubai and Abu Dhabi, where cold stores are shortly
to be established.
The likelihood of Australia increasing its share of this trade
would appear to depend on its ability to trim prices and to offer
a foil-wrapped pack.
Denmark’s exports of butter to Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and
Bahrain in 1960 totalled 432 tons valued at £A180,750. Austra-
lia’s exports in 1960/61 to Bahrain, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait
were 576 tons valued at £A253,815.
CHEESE
One Australian brand is easily the best selling processed cheese
in the markets along the southern side of the Gulf, from Muscat
to Baghdad. The entry of cheese into Iran and Pakistan is
prohibited.
Processed cheese is a very popular food in the area and its
consumption appears to be rising. At the moment, our major
danger is from cheaper packs from the Continent.
GHEE
One Australian brand is the best known in the Gulf. Samples
handed out from the “Chandpara” proved extremely popular. The
main competition is from Kenya.
As in the case of butter and cheese, Australia’s best way of
gaining more business might be to reduce prices.
The main demand for ghee is from Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and
Qatar.
MILK POWDER
The market for milk powder in retail packs is held almost
entirely by Holland.
In 1961, the Netherlands shipped 9726 tons of milk powder
valued at £A1,717,500 to Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and
Iraq. In 1960/61, Australia’s shipments totalled 383 tons valued
at £A32,285, mostly for Iraq.
While there seems little doubt that the market for milk powder
will expand as populations and living standards grow, it is by no
means clear how we can compete with the Dutch. The market
in general is very brand conscious, and the task of establishing
an Australian brand, in the face of our shipping disadvantage and
the Dutch monopoly, would seem formidable.
EGGS
There is quite a substantial market for imported eggs from
Dubai to Kuwait. Australia’s main customers at present are at
Bahrain and Saudi Arabia.
Each centre requires separate study. For instance, most of
the eggs imported by Dubai come by sea from Kenya, but the
Kuwait market is supplied in the main by road transport from
Beirut. Eggs from Poland enter most of the markets during the
cooler weather from October to March. Danish eggs compete in
Bahrain and Kuwait.
If our various Egg Boards co-operated to evolve a unified
merchandising programme for these markets to avoid price
cutting, and ensure the best use of the available cold storage
facilities, it should be possible to increase our egg business quite
substantially, particularly in Kuwait.
Dairy Products


Flour
Barley
Fresh Fruit
and Vegetables
For many years, Australia has enjoyed a good market for its
Hour from Muscat to Kuwait.
The main competition has been from lower-quality European
atta and from a trend towards the use of more United States
white flour in mixing. United States flour is cheaper in the Gulf
than Australian and the agents handling it are successfully
promoting the idea that as people become more sophisticated,
it is natural for them to use more refined, whiter types of bread.
The following export statistics indicate the size of the market
and the nature of the competition
Kuwait has decided to put up its own flour mill. A Govern-
ment-backed company has been formed and the capital subscribed.
While the mill may not begin to operate for a couple of years, its
existence will mean the loss of the valuable Kuwait market, and
the possibility of competition from the mill in the other Gulf
centres.
Although Australia may well sell wheat to the Kuwait mill, the
fact that it will be in business there could be serious for our flour
trade in that area.
Comparative C.I.F. prices prevailing in the Gulf during the
Mission’s visit were :
Australian barley is much favoured as sheep food in Kuwait
and eastern Saudi Arabia, but sales will be more difficult if Iraq
barley again becomes freely available regularly.
The region is supplied mainly overland from Beirut. The
Albert Abela firm also runs an air freight service two or three
times a week from Beirut to the Sheikhdoms. This service to a
degree obviates the need for holding stocks in cold store, and
could well increase in efficiency as the use of air transport grows
and the Albert Abela organization expands.
The latest available statistics on exports from the Lebanon and
Italy are :
Exports by
I'.S.A.
Germany
France
Australia
1961
1961
1961
1960/61
(Metric
Tons)
IRAQ
45
99
—
—
KUWAIT
11,011
2,709
553
17,831
SAUDI ARABIA
64,382
—
1,196
4,347
ARABIA: OTHER
2,866
296
4,911
* 15,090
BAHRAIN
8,963
1,830
—
8,417
TOTAL Metric tons
87,267
4,934
6,660
45,685
VALUES £A
2,643,000
138,900
163,100
1,434,238
Metric Tons
* Muscat 11,907
Qatar
3,183
15,090
Australian Atta
f Stg.
£36/17/- to £37.
German
£29
American No. 1
£27 to £35/14/-.
Flour freights to the
Gulf were —
Australia
— 220/- Stg. a long ton.
Europe
— 132/6 Stg. a long ton.
F.S.A.
less 10 // Deferred Rebate.
— 263,-4 Stg. a long ton.


The value of Australian exports of fruit and vegetables (fresh,
frozen and preserved) to the region in 1960/61 totalled £A70,870.
Exports
to the Gulf
Metric 'Polls
LEBANON (I960)
VEGETABLES
23,034
791,500
FRUIT
28,865
1,748,730
ITALY (1959)
VEGETABLES
740
26,640
FRUIT
2,036
113,070
Woollen and
Worsted Cloth
The Gulf is a traditional market for British cloth. Japan
competes to some extent in lighter-weight suitings.
In 1960, British exports of woollen and worsted cloth to Iraq,
Kuwait and Bahrain totalled £A2,132,500. Japan’s exports were
£A482,900. Iraq (£AI ,375,000) and Kuwait (£A1,005,000) w*ere
the main markets.
Due to the great heat in the area during many months of the
year, suits are seldom worn as everyday articles of clothing. As
more and more of the Arab peoples travel abroad, however,
lengths of medium to heavy-weight material are being increasing-
ly taken out of the country to be made up overseas, or given away
as presents. Thus the market for the heavier suitings is a good
deal greater than would appear at first sight.
Government tenders are called from time to time, mainly by
Kuwait, for fairly substantial quantities of cloth for uniforms
for school children, who receive them free.
Inquiries for furniture were received by the Trade Mission
when visiting Muscat. There is a fairly active demand for
domestic and office furniture from the Trucial States as well,
mainly as a result of the rapid expansion of Dubai and Abu
Dhabi.
The discovery of rich oil fields in Abu Dhabi territory is
attracting quite substantial numbers of immigrants from nearby
countries, Europeans and new firms to Abu Dhabi and Dubai,
and furnishing standards are rising.
Furniture is imported from Britain, Europe and India.
Competition is keen and prices low.
While there is as yet little demand for luxury furniture, this
will undoubtedly change when oil royalties begin to be paid in
Abu Dhabi.
Furniture
Motor Vehicles
and Spares
At present, Iran virtually prohibits the entry of motor vehicles.
Pakistan and Iraq have licensing systems based on past perform-
ance during a base period. Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar and Saudi
Arabia have no import restrictions and offer good, though
competitive markets. Dubai is as yet a four-wheel-drive vehicle
country.
One Australian-made motor vehicle is selling in Iraq, Kuwait,
Bahrain and Doha, and is preparing the way for Australian
spares and accessories.


As petrol is so cheap, and import duties for the most part
nominal, there is a high rate of usage of cars.
The large showy American car is still the great favourite, but
as the lower income groups become car owners, and as parking
problems grow, the demand for smaller cars increases.
The average Arab car owner is not mechanically-minded and
the turnover in spare parts is correspondingly high.
The following statistics of registered vehicles were obtained
from the American magazine “Automobile International”:
Cars
Trucks
Buses
Total
ARABIAN STATES
1961
69,200
52,300
8,000
129,500
1962
73,000
54,000
8,000
135,000
IRAQ
1961
39,400
15,800
5,000
60,200
1962
40,000
16,000
5,000
61,000
IRAN
1961
90,000
44,200
7,300
141,500
1962
96,000
50,000
9,000
155,000
As many of the car agencies are held by firms who may have
100 or more other agencies as well, the choice of an agent is often
not easy and requires on the spot investigation by the manufact-
urer or exporter.
These statistics indicate the size of the market
Main suppliers of Motor Vehicles
£A
U.S.A. (1961) 15,137,000
German v (1961) 6,480,000
Britain' (1960) 6,159,000
In 1960/61, Australia shipped 234 motor cars valued at
£198,565 to Iraq. Kuwait and Bahrain.
AIR CONDITIONERS
Particularly from Kuwait to Dubai, where there are no import
restrictions, the demand for window air conditioners of 1 h.p. to
11 h.p. for offices and private homes is substantial and continues
to grow. American equipment is the most popular because of its
robustness and reliability.
FANS
The demand for fans in offices and houses continues to be large.
Except for the occasional new fully air-conditioned hotel, all new
buildings are fitted with ceiling fans, the most popular size being
the 56 in. Britain is the main supplier.
The demand for fans is not being affected by the increasing
use of air conditioning as fans are much cheaper to run and can
be used during most of the year.
REFRIGERATORS ANI) DEEP FREEZERS
Due to the extreme heat, domestic refrigerators are very widely
used, large sizes being preferred. Deep freezers are also becom-
ing popular in the larger centres, Kuwait and Bahrain.
Main suppliers are the U.S.A., Britain and Germany. Price is
the principal consideration.
WASHING MACHINES
Even in Kuwait, the market for washing machines is not large,
probably because of the many laundries there and the old system
of having washing done by hand by servants. Elsewhere in the
Sheikhdoms, the demand, though increasing, is small.
Electrical
Equipment


Medical and
Hospital
Equipment
TOASTERS, KETTLES
Electric kitchen appliances, such as toasters, kettles, food-
mixers and coffee percolators, are gradually becoming more
accepted by the Arab community, but their main users are the
Europeans in the area.
The principal suppliers are Britain and Japan.
LIGHT FITTINGS
As most Arabs like many ornate lights on their walls and
tables, the demand for metal-based light fittings of modern design
is quite good in Kuwait and is supplied mostly by Germany.
This pattern is almost certain to repeat itself in the Abu
Dhabi, Dubai area when oil revenues begin to flow in.
TELEVISION SETS, RADIOS, RADIOGRAMS, TAPE RECORDERS
There is quite a large demand for equipment of this type, both
from the shore, and also from ships’ crews and passengers visit-
ing the area. Dubai is probably the cheapest port as customs
duty there is only 4.625 per cent and business overheads are
generally low.
Television programmes are supplied from Dhahran (Saudi
Arabia) and Kuwait. Germany, Britain and Holland are the
main suppliers of sets.
Radios remain very popular, the most widelv-used sets can
receive short-wave stations in Cairo, Baghdad, Dhahran, Teheran,
etc. Principal suppliers are Germany, Holland and Britain.
Japan leads in portable transistor sets.
The demand for radiograms, record players and tape recorders
derives mainly from the non-Arab population and is supplied by
Britain. Germany and Holland.
As there is no production of this type of equipment in the
area, the expansion of the various Sheikhdoms has created an
extensive demand for baths, basins, toilets, showers and
associated fittings.
Probably the best market is still Kuwait, where many better-
class homes are being constructed. It would seem, however, that
before very long the main activity will be taking place in the
Abu Dhabi/Dubai area.
The market was virtually monopolised by Britain until fairly
recently, when European and .Japanese products began to
compete. The value of exports to Iraq and Kuwait from Britain
in 1960 totalled £A196,000.
Very careful attention must be paid to packing, particularly
when shipping to Muscat, Dubai or Doha, as at these ports the
cargo must be lightered by coolie labour from ships standing a
mile or more off-shore.
Kuwait has a free hospital scheme which admits patients from
the entire region and is understood to be very efficient. The
progressive development of the State medical services in Kuwait
has resulted in the following :
1949
1959
Patients admitted to hospital
424
22,881
Medical Officers
4
213
Hospital beds
no
1,878
During 1959, the value of pharmaceuticals imported by Kuwait
was £A504,000, of which £A160,000 worth was re-exported,
largely to Saudi Arabia. Britain supplied 65 per cent of these.
Bathroom
Equipment
and Fittings


Exporters wishing to compete for tenders called by the Public
Health Department must first appoint as agents a Kuwaiti firm
registered with the Kuwait Commercial Register and the
Chamber of Commerce. This Department maintains a list of
approved suppliers.
A similar pattern is beginning to appear also in the less wealthy
Sheikhdoms, such as Bahrain and Doha. Already, the
programmes are helping the general health and well being of the
people.
COMMERCIAL
PROCEDURES
AND
PRACTICES
SELLING TO SOUTH-WEST ASIA : HINTS TO EXPORTERS
The following information has been eonipiled as a
guide to manufacturers and/or exporters who may be
contemplating business with Pakistan or the Gulf or
who may propose sending a representative to the area.
Full details of any specific aspects of Selling to South-
West Asia or in relation to Hints to Exporters, as they
apply to any particular country in the area, are obtain-
able from the Regional Offices of the Department of
Trade in any of the capital cities.


APPOINTMENT OF AGENTS
The appointment of a separate local agent for each country or
Sheikhdom is considered desirable. In Pakistan and throughout the
Gulf, import business is now handled almost exclusively by local
agents in the country or Sheikhdom concerned. Representation from
outside is usually not advisable.
The finding of a suitable agent will, of course, present problems,
as in many of the countries the best-known firms may have a full
range of agencies already and new firms may not have sufficient
technical knowledge or technical facilities.
In view of the widely differing- conditions of trading in the area
and types of business being handled consumer market, oil company
or Government Australian exporters should thoroughly investigate
the financial resources and distribution arrangements of potential
agents before making a decision. The Department of Trade and the
exporter’s bank will be able to assist in this regard.
After appointing an agent, it is essential for the Australian exporter
to make regular visits to the territory. This not only helps to keep
the agent interested but enhances his reputation and also enables the
exporter to study local conditions and to see for himself' how he can
assist the agent in furthering business.
TRADE MARKS
In Pakistan, the first user of a trade mark is entitled to registration
and a person other than the proprietor of it may be approved as a
registered user. The initial term of registration is seven years,
renewable for a further 15 years.
Facilities are available for the registration of trade marks in Saudi
Arabia, Kuwait, Iraq and Iran, and Australian exporters who desire
to protect trade marks used by them in connection with the sale of
goods in these countries should register them as quickly as possible.
The registration procedure does not differ markedly from that in
Australia; intending applicants should make necessary arrangements
through a qualified trade mark agent. Trade marks in these countries
are registered for 10-15 years, with renewal for like periods.
There is no provision for the registration of trade marks in Muscat
and Oman, and Trucial States or Qatar, but “locally” used trade marks
may be registered in Bahrain. This system of registration of “local”
trade marks applies to marks affixed to goods manufactured, worked
or sold in Bahrain, provided such marks are not used or registered
outside the territories of Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, the Trucial States
and Muscat and Oman.
In addition, the owner of a registered British trade mark may apply
at any time during the existence of such registration for registration
in Bahrain. Registration in Bahrain based upon British registration
lasts initially for five years and may be renewed for each succeeding
period of five years.
QUOTATIONS
Careful costing to arrive at an export pi ice is essential if Australian
products are to sell in this highly-competitive market. Australian
exporters should bear in mind when preparing quotations the fact that
some of the agents they appoint may be comparatively new firms with
little experience in import business from Australia and frequently
unable to calculate for themselves the cost of freight and insurance.
It is desirable therefore that exporters should invoice on a c. & f.
sterling basis for Pakistan or c. & f. or c.i f. sterling basis for all
countries in the Gulf except Kuwait, where the quotation should be in
Kuwaiti dinars e. & f. or c.i.f.
TERMS OF PAYMENT
The selling policies of major competitors may finally determine
terms of payment which Australian exporters will be required to
accept. Although letter of credit business is normally adopted in
Muscat and Oman, Qatar, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, and is
generally acceptable in the remaining countries in the area, consider-
able business is being done on documents against acceptance basis
outside letter of credit.
In order to compete in these markets, Australian exporters may
have to accept the risk involved in this method of payment. It may
be that they will be able to do business on irrevocable letter of credit
Selling to
South-West ASIA
QUOTATIONS


basis until relations with the importing firm are well established, when
the procedure might be cash against documents. If trade is conducted
on a c.a.d. basis, documents should preferably be sent to a bank for
presentation and not direct to the importers.
In the event that the Australian exporter is unable to arrange letter
of credit for initial shipments, effective cover against the risk may be
obtained from the Export Payments Insurance Corporation.
DOCUMENTATION
Australian exporters should ensure they comply with the regula-
tions of the import licensing and customs authorities in each country,
otherwise delays in the clearance of consignments are likely to occur.
Where import licences are required, shippers should satisfy them-
selves before making shipment that consignees have secured import
licences and that shipment can be made within the period of validity
of the licence.
In the case of Pakistan, should a quantity be shipped in excess of
the figure covered by the licence, it maj prove impossible for the
importer to obtain the excess quantity, or to arrange its re-export.
In order to comply with local customs regulations, every set of
documents must be accompanied by a detailed and signed invoice
showing particulars of packing, specifications, weights and measure-
ments of individual packages, as and where necessary.
Certificates of origin in triplicate must be signed by a chamber of
commerce, an industrial association, or an Arab Embassy or Consulate
in Australia. The Regional Offices of the Department of Trade will
advise what form these certificates and other documents should take.
PACKAGING, PRESENTATION AND DELIVERY
The importance of adequate packaging and presentation of Austra-
lian products cannot be overstressed. In most markets, and particular-
ly in Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar and the Trueial States, the proper
presentation of goods could mean the difference between success or
failure.
Eye appeal, adequate brand recognition and sufficient instructions
for use are necessary to move the product into the customer’s hand
and make him repeat the purchase. In order to obtain full consumer
impact, all labelling, instructions and related sales literature should
he in local language as well as English, or where required, in the local
language only.
An examination of local preferences as to size of product and
quantities to be packed in outer containers is also necessary, while a
further limiting factor in the Gulf is the maximum size of packages
which can be handled at Muscat and Matrah (Muscat and Oman),
Dubai (Trueial States) and Umm Said (Qatar) where there are no
berthing facilities and cargo is discharged into lighters. The maximum
lifting capacity in these ports is seven tons.
Goods likely to be seriously affected by the conditions of extreme
temperature and high humidity during summer months should be
packed in hermetically-sealed containers. In addition, in view of
frequent rough handling, packing should be solid and markings plain
and distinctive.
Australian firms which wish to enjoy continuing export business
must try to match the delivery times of their major overseas
competitors. In the event that they are unable to do this by normal
shipment from Australia as orders are placed, they may have to
consider maintaining reasonable stockholdings at main centres
throughout the area.
ADVERTISING
Expert knowledge of the market is essential before undertaking an
advertising campaign and for that reason, it is normally the
responsibility of the local agent. The agent is probably acquainted
personally with the majority of the trading community and should
know the best methods of reaching his market.
It must be realized that serious buyers in any country will only
be really impressed if they can read about the products in their own
language.
The scope for press advertising is largely confined to daily news-
papers where they exist, there being only a small commercial press
and a few specialized trade journals. The problem of press advertis-
ing is complicated by the fact that only a comparatively small
percentage of the total population is literate and not all of these
speak English.


Other possible advertising- media are cinemas, commercial radio
and television, and general printed publicity material.
Newspapers and Magazines : In Pakistan, there are five English
language and eight Urdu daily newspapers circulated on a semi-
national basis and two Bengali newspapers, both published in Dacca.
It is estimated that English-language newspapers are lead by .'lOO,OOO
people daily and the Urdu and Bengali dailies by two to five million
people daily. On the average, each copy of the English-language
newspaper is read by three to five people and each copy of the Urdu
and Bengali by up to 80 people.
There are about 20 newspapers, 10 magazines and a trade directory
published, which circulate in the Gulf and accept commercial advertise-
ments. Some of the more important arc as follows :
TRUCIAL Dubai Official Gazette (fortnightly) —in English and
STATES : Arabic.
QATAR : The Doha News Letter (fortnightly) in English.
BAHRAIN : The Gulf Advertiser (quarterly) in English and
Arabic.
Bahrain Trade Directory (annually) in English and
Arabic.
KUWAIT : A 1 Arabi (monthly) Kuwait Government also three
weekly newspapers in Arabic and one daily newspaper
in English.
IRAQ : A 1 Aswaq al Gujjariya (weekly) in Arabic. Iraq
Times (daily) English, and four other daily news-
papers in Arabic.
IRAN : Teheran-e-Mossavar (weekly) in Farsi. Sepid-o-Siah
(weekly) in Farsi, and three other magazines of
importance and three daily newspapers.
In addition, the monthly publication Al Aalam (“The World”)
circulates in the Gulf States, while the magazine Anglo-Arab Trade
also has wide circulation.
Cinema : Boih Slides and short films are used for advertising in
virtually all cinemas. The shorts are very effective, particularly
when (nibbed in the local language. This can normally be done quite
cheaply in the country concerned. Cinema advertising is possible in
Pakistan, the Trucial States, Bahrain, Kuwait, Iraq and Iran. Cinemas
are one of the few attractions available for the public in the evening
in these countries and the high attendance figures make it an effective
and inexpensive advertising medium.
Commercial Radio and 'j elevixiou : Iran is the only country in the
area which has commercial radio and television, although in Iraq the
Government television service accepts advertisements. In Kuwait,
the radio station and embryonic television station are non-commercial.
Commercial broadcasts are made from Radio Iran for two 15-
minute and four 2-minute periods daily. Due to the poor communica-
tions and high illiteracy rate, radio is a very important advertising
medium. The two commercial television stations in Teheran and
Abadan have been in operation only for a short time and still have a
novelty impact as an advertising medium.
Other Media : Hoardings and posters are a common form of
advertising in Pakistan and throughout most of the Gulf. In the case
of common consumer goods, display placards, small samples, handbills
and similar literature are suitable, while for goods of a more bulky
nature, calendars, desk requisites and the general type of advertising
gifts, such as inscribed knives or ashtrays, are effective.
All catalogues, pamphlets and eye-catching publicity mateiial should
be issued to agents on a generous scale. As the majority of buyers
of widely-distributed consumer goods are il 1 iterate, all publicity
material should contain a picture of either the goods or the trade
mark.
Generally, direct mail advertising is not effective and is not
recom mended.
SHIPPING SERVICES AND PORT FACILITIES
The British India Steam Navigation Co. Ltd. operates a regular
monthly general and refrigerated cargo service, with limited passenger
accommodation, between Australia and West Pakistan and Arabian
Gulf and Iran ports, also a similar service to East Pakistan, with
direct, calls, subject to inducement, otherwise transhipment at
Singapore.
Subject to inducement, the Royal Interoeean Lines offers general
and refrigerated space on its ships to Karachi in West Pakistan.
The Shipping Corporation of India formerly known as the East-
ern Shipping Corporation operates a monthly service to Chittagong
Hints to
Exporters


direct and Chalna, subject to inducement, in East Pakistan, carrying
general and refrigerated cargo. Some of the vessels accommodate
a limited number of passengers.
At Pakistan’s three ports, Karachi in West Pakistan and Chittagong
and Chalna in East Pakistan, and at all ports in the Gulf, apart from
Muscat and Matrah (Muscat and Oman), Dubai (Trucial States), and
Umm Said (Qatar), ships are able to berth at wharves and adequate
unloading facilities are available. At ports where berthing is not
possible, ships must anchor two to three miles off-shore and discharge
into lighters.
ROADS, RAILWAYS AND AIRWAYS
Roads are available throughout most of Pakistan and in most
countries in the Guif between the ports and commercial centres. In
the Trucial States, there is no made road between Dubai and Abu
Dhabi and as an alternative to air transport, travel is by jeep-type
vehicles. In Muscat and Oman, however, which is the least developed
Sheikhdom, there is a motorable track between its principal towns of
Muscat and Matrah. As a general rule, there are no road links with
bordering countries.
Railways carry passengers and goods in West and East Pakistan and
Saudi Arabia, Iraq and Iran.
Karachi is an important terminal for international air services such
as Qantas, 13.0.A.C. and K.L.M. Pakistan International Airlines, in
addition to operating an overseas service, maintains an internal service
connecting most of the major cities.
In the Gulf, Gulf Aviation Ltd., with headquarters in Bahrain,
operates regular services with all countries except Iraq and Iran.
Internal services are also operated by Saudi Arabia, Iraq and Iran.
International airlines including Qantas and 8.0.A.C. call at Baghdad
and Basrah (Iraq) and Teheran (Iran). 8.0.A.C. operate regular
services to Bahrain and Kuwait and in addition, Iraqi Airways, Middle
East Airlines and Cyprus Airways maintain services.
POSTAL, TELEGRAPH AND TELEPHONE FACILITIES
Postal, telegraph and telephone facilities are available in Pakistan
and throughout the Gulf, although letters and telegrams may be
delayed and the telephone service is not always effective.
LANGUAGE, RELIGION AND LOCAL CUSTOMS
Urdu is the main language of West Pakistan and Bengali is the
common tongue of East Pakistan. English is spoken commercially.
Except in Iran, Arabic is spoken universally throughout the Gulf,
although English is understood by many of the merchants and the
official community. Most merchants have their own interpreters.
In Iran, Persian (Farsi) is the most widely-spoken. Turkish is
commoner in the north-west around Tabriz anil Arabic is spoken in
Khuzistan in the south-west. A great many businessmen and Govern-
ment officials speak English or French and some speak German; a
knowledge of these three languages should enable a visitor to conduct
most of his business satisfactorily.
The Gulf is surrounded by Muslim States and Sheikhdoms. Muslims
do not eat pork in any form, and orthodox Muslims do not drink
alcohol. Particularly in Muscat, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Kuwait, the
consumption of alcohol is expressly forbidden.
Visitors should not carry alcohol in their luggage as it will be
confiscated and they may be fined, or in Saudi Arabia, even im-
prisoned. Where non-Muslims are allowed to drink alcohol, permits
are generally required.
In Muscat, smoking in public is not allowed.
Throughout the region, a great many Muslim women are in purdah,
and wear a heavy veil in public. Visitors should not attempt to
photograph them unless assured that no objection would be raised.
It should be noted that merchants in the Gulf Sheikhdoms generally
dislike the expression “Persian Gulf” in conversation, correspondence
and shipping documents, and prefer “Arabian Gulf”.
BANKING, CURRENCY, WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
The following are the banks and authorized dealers in foreign
exchange which have branches or offices in many countries in the
area :
THE BRITISH BANK OF THE throughout the Gulf
MIDDLE EAST
THE EASTERN BANK LTD. Pakistan, Trucial States, Qatar,
Bahrain and Iraq
THE ARAB BANK LTD. Qatar, Bahrain and Saudi
Arabia.


In Pakistan, many large and internationally recognized banks
operate, in addition to the Eastern Bank Ltd. In the Gulf, as well as
the British Bank of the Middle East, the Eastern Bank Ltd. and the
Arab Bank Ltd., several other local banks are established, such as :
I:\TRA BANK Qatar
THE BANK OF BAHRAIN Bahrain
THE NATIONAL COMMERCIAL BANK Saudi Arabia
THE COMMERCIAL BANK OF KUWAIT Kuwait
THE NATIONAL BANK OF KUWAIT Kuwait
THE GULF BANK Kuwait
THE OTTOMAN BANK Iraq.
In Iran, the Central Bank of Iran (Bank Markazi Iran) is the bank
of issue and exercises general control and supervision over the
country’s banking and monetary affairs. There are several com-
mercial banks, both private and government-owned, the most import-
ant of which is the Bank of Mel 1 i (National Bank) which has branches
in most provincial centres.
The official units of currency in the area and their approximate
Australian equivalents are set out below :
PAKISTAN Rupee (1/1(0).
MUSCAT AND OMAN / Gulf Rupee (l/10i) The Maria Theresa
TRUCIAL STATES i Dollar (6/9) also circulates.
QATAR Gulf Rupee (l/10i).
BAHRAIN Indian Rupee (l/IO’Q.
SAUDI ARABIA Rial (2/-).
KUWAIT Dinar (£1.5.0).
IRAN Rials (168 rials = t‘1.0.0).
The British system of weights and measures generally is used in
Pakistan for all commercial transactions, although local standards are
still practised in certain areas and in different commodities.
In the Gulf, British and metric systems are used. Both are accept-
able in most of the countries, but as a result of the recommendation
of the Arab League for the adoption of the metric system, many are
showing a preference for this. Some American standards are' also
adopted, particularly in Bahrain and Kuwait. The use of local weights
and measures is declining.
PUBLIC HOLIDAYS AND HOURS OF BUSINESS
The main public holidays observed ir, the area are of religious
nature. They are common to most countries and particularly those
in the Arabian Gulf. Some of the more important are :
AUGUST, 1968 The Prophet’s Birthday.
In some countries, bank holidays are observed over the Christmas
and Easter periods, while all countries have their own local holidays.
In Pakistan, Sunday is the official holiday. Banks close also on
Friday afternoons and Government offices on Friday and Saturday
afternoons. Pakistan commercial houses tend to observe Friday
afternoon as a half-holiday and European firms, Saturdays. The
hours of business worked vary. Government offices close at 1.30 p.m.
in summer and 2.00 n.m. in winter. Banks close at 1.30 0.m.. while
European and large Pakistani business establishments nearly all work
normal morning and afternoon hours in the cold weather but close for
a period in the afternoon in the hot weather.
In the Gulf, the week-end is not Saturday afternoon and Sunday
but Thursday afternoon and Friday. Most Government, oil company
offices and other business establishments work from 8 00 or 8 30 a.rri.
until 130 or 2.00 p.m. The practice among merchants in the bazaars
varies but the majority open at 9.00 a m., close for two or three hours
in the afternoon, re-opening about 4.00 p.m. and continuing until sun-
set. Some shops also open for a few hours on Friday mornings.
CLIMATE, CLOTHING AND HEALTH
The climate in Pakistan is tropical for much of the year; the
temperatures in West Pakistan, particularly in the Indus Valley, 7’each
FEBRUARY/MAIiCH,
Id ul Fitr — three days holiday at end of
1963
Ramadan, the month of fast-
ing between sunrise and sun-
MAY, 1963
set-
id ul Dhuha — three days holiday on 10th,
11th and 12th of Arabic
month of Dhul Hajj, (end
of annual pilgrimage to
Mecca).
MAY, 1963
New Hijra Year
JUNE, 1963
9th and 10th Muharram (days of mourning
for the Shia community).
JUNE, 1963
A1 Ashura


125°F. The climate in the Gulf has a hot summer and mild winter.
Summer begins in iVlay and lasts until September; the spring and
autumn periods are very short. July, August and September are
normally the worst months, with high temperatures and high humidity.
It is recommended that visits to Pakistan and the Gulf should, if
possible, be made between November and March. During most of
this period, normal European clothes may be worn with comfort, al-
though in the transition periods, November-December and March-
April, light suits, i.e. palm beach, linen or drill, may be found neces-
sary. A lightweight dinner jacket will also be useful. Black trousers
and cummerbunds are a popular form of evening wear.
In the hottest months, open-necked cotton shirts and slacks or shorts
are worn. (Nylon garments, being non-absorbent, are considered less
satisfactory). Hats are seldom worn at any season.
Visitors to Pakistan and the Gulf should be extremely careful about
food and drink and as a general rule should take meals only in leading
hotels, clubs and the houses of friends. Restaurants should be avoided.
Vegetables, salads, damaged fruit, unboiled water or milk are notable
trouble-bringers. Only water from the special flask provided in hotel
rooms should be used for drinking and mushing teeth. In the event
of any ailment, a doctor should be called in early.
Visitors should be vaccinated against smallpox and inoculated
against typhoid and cholera. Saudi Arabia also insists upon inocula-
tion for yellow fever, even though the visitor has not passed through
an infected area.
PERSONAL DOCUMENTS, LOCAL TRAVEL, ACCOMMODATION
Australian travellers must have a valid passport endorsed for the
countries being visited and containing entry visas for each. Exit
visas also are required for Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Iraq and Iran. No
visas are required for Pakistan. An international Certificate of
Vaccination should also be carried.
In Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and Iran, it is often necessary to
travel relatively long distances to commercial centres. In these
countries, suitable air and rail services are available. Throughout
the area generally, however, the distances required to be travelled are
not great and adeouate taxi services are provided in all countries.
These are often quite expensive and it may be advisable to hire one
for the day or the half day at a negotiated price.
A reasonably good standard of accommodation is available in
Karachi. The principal hotels include :
BEACH LUXURY HOTEL,
METROPOLE HOTEL,
PALACE HOTEL.
All have a number of air-conditioned rooms.
Accommodation is also available in the precincts of Karachi Airport
for business visitors at three hotels operated by 8.0.A.C. (Speedbird
House), K.L.M. (Midway Rest House) and Air France (Hostellerie
de France).
The main hotels in the other important cities in Pakistan include :
LAHORE Faletti’s, Waldorf and Zanobis
RAWALPINDI Flashman’s
QUETTA Chilton
DACCA Shahbagh.
Suitable accommodation is not easy to find in Chittagong. The
Chittagong Club Ltd. is frequently fully booked.
In the Gulf also, accommodation generally is of a high standard,
although none is available in Muscat or Dubai. The following are the
principal hotels; many have air-conditioned rooms.
TRUCIAL STATES Intel-national Aeradio Ltd., guest house at
Sharjah, generally known as “The Fort”,
some 12 miles from Dubai.
QATAR The Oasis, at Doha.
BAHRAIN 8.0.A.C. Guest House (Speedbird Hotel).
Bahrain Hotel at Manama.
SAUDI ARABIA The Airport Hotel at Dhahran.
KUWAIT The Carlton
The Golden Beach
The Ambassador
Grand Gulf Hotel
Orient Palace Hotel.
IRAQ - Shatt-el-Arab Hotel Basrah
Baghdad Hotel Baghdad
The Ambassador Baghdad
Khayam Hotel Baghdad.
TRAN International Hotel Abadan
Teheran Palace Hotel Teheran
Park Hotel Teheran
Plaza Hotel Teheran.


The Mission’s
Conclusions
The Mission
Recommends
The tariff charged by hotels in the Gulf varies considerably accord-
ing to the standard of accommodation and amenities. Full board
with an air-conditioned room at times costs as much as £A10.0.0 a
day.
Apart from cabaret shows at one or two of the leading hotels in
Pakistan, Iraq and Iran, and some cinema showings, there is no public
entertainment of any consequence throughout the area. Visitors
generally are dependent upon entertainment in private homes or at
the limited number of European-type clubs which are still operating.
OFFICIAL REPRESEXTATION
The Australian Commercial Counsellor, Australian High Commission,
9 Kutchery Road, Karachi, covers the whole of Pakistan and all
countries in the Gulf, in his territory.
Particularly from Kuwait to Dubai, the Arabian Gulf area is
becoming increasingly wealthy from oil levenues. Living standards
and the demand for a wide variety of consumer goods are continuing
to rise.
If eastern Saudi Arabia is included, there are perhaps a million
consumers in this area and there are no import restrictions.
The Gulf is becoming progressively more accessible as airports,
hotels and air services improve.
Competition from Britain, the United States, Europe and Japan is
extremely keen but in some respects not unbeatable.
As most of our competitors enjoy more frequent shipping services
and lower freight rates on some commodities, Australian exporters
should give particular attention to pricing and to personal visits to
the area.
The Gulf is not a single market, but a number of separate and
distinct ones, comprising West Pakistan, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Bahrain,
eastern Saudi Arabia, Qatar, the Trucial States, and Muscat and
Oman. In most cases, it is advisable to appoint a separate agent in
each country or Sheikhdom.
This is largely because of regional rivalries and Arab nationalism.
For instance, in Pakistan a foreign firm may not now set up in
import/export business; in Iraq, only Iraqi firms may hold import/
export agencies and engage in internal distribution; in Kuwait,
Government and oil company tenders may be submitted only by local
Kuwaiti registered firms.
In the oil Sheikhdoms such as Kuwait, Bahrain and Qatar, the main
buyers are the Governments and oil companies. Because of the surplus
of crude oil on world markets, the oil companies have for some time
been limiting the scale of their operations.
Personal visits are essential. Particularly in the Sheikhdoms, where
many merchants are more familiar with Arabic than English,
correspondence is no substitute for personal contact.
There is valuable tender’ business to be won in Pakistan. Much
depends on the wise choice of agents experienced in handling tender
business. As East Pakistan is now making rapid industrial progress,
it is sometimes preferable to appoint separate agents for West and
East Pakistan.
Severe import restrictions virtually exclude consumer- goods from
entry into Iran; licences are at present being issued only for essential
plant and equipment and raw materials.
Iraq remains a promising market for Australian foodstuffs and
secondary products. The leading importers are in Baghdad.
THAT THE AUSTRALIAN* MANUFACTURERS’ EXPORT
COUNCIL endeavours to arrange for an unofficial party of
interested exporters to make a follow-up visit to the Sheikhdoms
during November, 1962.
THAT AUSTRALIA’S TRADE COMMISSIONER REPRESENTA-
TION cannot be really effective unless a new post is created at a
convenient place amid the Arab markets of South-West Asia. To
service the area from Karachi is not practical and Bahrain would
appear to be a better place for such a post.
THAT THE CIRCULATION of “Austral News” in the region,
particularly of the Arabic edition, be substantially increased.
THAT EVERY ENDEAVOUR be made by all persons concerned to
encourage businessmen from the region to visit Australia and to
see that they are looked after during such visits.


EXHIBITORS
ADVANCE CONTAINERS LTD. -- Plastic Cups.
ALBANY WOOLLEN MILLS Blankets and Rugs.
AMALGAMATED WIRELESS Domestic and Commercial Radio
(AUSTRALASIA) LIMITED and Television Equipment
W. ANGUSS & CO (AUST.) Meat and Dairy Produce
PTY. LTD.
N, V. APPLETON PTY. LTD. - Louvre Window Fromes.
ART CRAFT ENGINEERING PTY. LTD. —• Kerosene and Electronic Road
Lamps.
AUSTRAL BRONZE CO PTY. LTD. —• Copper Shapes. Strips, Sheets.
and Wires.
AUSTRALIA & NEW ZEALAND BANK _ Banking
LTD.
AUSTRALIAN DAIRY PRODUCE Dairy Produce
BOARD
AUSTRALIAN ELECTRIC CO. LTD. Electric Motors, Switchgear,
Welders ana Irrigation Pumps.
THE AUSTRALIAN FLOUR EXPORT Flour.
PROMOTION COMMITTEE
AUSTRALIAN INHIBITOR PAPER Ant i-corrosion Paper.
PTY. LTD.
AUSTRALIAN MEDiCAL EXPORT CO. Medical Equipment.
PTY. LTD.
AUSTRALIAN PAPER MANUFACTURERS Paper and Carton Boords.
LTD
BALLANTYNE EXPORT COMPANY Canned Butter, Jams and Other
PTY. LTD. Foodstuffs
BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES Banking.
BEHR-MANNING (AUSTRALIA) Adhesive Tapes and Abrasives
PTY. LTD.
BERR! CO-OPERATIVE PACKING Canned Fruits and Juices,
UNION LTD.
THOS. BORTHWICK & SONS Meats and Smallgoodv
(A ASIA) LTD
BOSTON CANNING COMPANY --•• Meat, Vegetables and Cond.-
PTY. LTD. menfs.
BRADFORD INSULATION INDUSTRIES Budding and Industrial Insula-
PTY. LTD. tion Materials.
BRITISH INDIA STEAM NAVIGATION Shipping.
CO. LTD.
BRITISH PLASTICS PTY, LTD. -- Domestic Ware and Toys.
BRITISH UNITED DAIRIES PTY. LTD. Butter and Cheese.
THE BROKEN HILL PROPRIETARY Steel.
COMPANY LTD.
E. T. BROWN LIMITED -- Steel Furniture. Shelving and
Roof Decking.
BUNGE (AUSTRALIA) PTY. LTD. Flour and Canned Foods.
BUNNING BROS. PTY LTD. -• T.mber, Plywood and Hard-
ware, Precut Buildings.
BURNIE BOARD 8. TIMBER PTY. LTD. -■ Hardboards.
THE BUTTER MARKETING BOARD Butter ond Ghee
CAMBRIDGE LABORATORIES -- Pharmaceuticals.
PTY. LTD.
CAMFLEC LTD. Electrical Cables.
CENTOR PRODUCTS -- Sliding Door Hardware.
CHROME CHEMICAL (AUST ) Inaustnal Chemicals.
PTY. LTD.
COMFORTWEAR Footwear.
COMMERCIAL BANK OF AUSTRALIA _ Banking
LTD.
COMMONWEALTH SERUM Serums etc. for Human and
LABORATORIES Veterinary Use.
COMMONWEALTH TRADING BANK Banking.
OF AUSTRALIA
CO-OPERATED DRIED FRUITS SALES - Dried Fruits.
PTY. LTD.
CO-OPERATIVE FARMERS & Meat and Tallow.
GRAZIERS DIRECT MEAT SUPPLY
LTD.
G. B. COURTNEY & CO. PTY. LTD. Export Consultants.
CROMMEUN CHEMICALS --- Cement and Concrete Additives.
DIAMOND FROZEN FOODS PTY. LTD. Meat, Poultry, Rabbits, and
Vegetables.
DULMISON PREFORMED LINE • Cable Repom Equipment ond
PRODUCTS Line and Pole Hardware.
DUNLOP RUBBER AUSTRALIA LTD. Automotive Batteries.
THE EFCO MANUFACTURING CO. Door Hardware.
PTY. LTD.
EGG MARKETING BOARD OF Eggs and Egg Pulp.
NEW SOUTH WALES
FALKINER CHAINS PTY. LTD. - Chains.
FELT & TEXTILES OF AUSTRALIA —• Clothing, Footwear, Floor
LTD. Coverings.
FRIGRITE LTD. -- Commercial and Industrial
Refrigeration Equipment.
GENERAL MOTORS-HOLDEN S Cars and Spare Ports.
PTY. LTD.
GENERAL TUBING PTY. LTD. Metal Tubing.
GRIMWOOD ELECTRICAL PRODUCTS -- Heating Elements.
PTY. LTD.
HADFIELDS (W.A.) 1934 LIMITED -- Electric Steel Castings.
HALL-THERMOTANK (AUSTRALIA) Fans ond Air Distribution.
PTY. LTD.
HANIMEX PTY. LTD. —■ Photographic, Fans and
Electrical Equipment.
J. HARGREAVES & SONS PTY. LTD. Conned Fruit, Juices and
Vegetables.
HILLS HOISTS LIMITED Tubing, Clothes Hoists, Ploy-
ground Equipment.
F. L. HUDSON 8. CO. LTD. - Refrigeration and Air Condi-
tioning Accessories and Repeti-
tion Engineering,
INDUSTRIAL EXTRACTS LTD. -- Wood Extracts for Tanning ana
Inaustnal Uses
INSTRUMENT ENGINEERING Safety Masks.
SERVICE PTY. LTD.
JACKSON'S [COR lOJ MEAT PACKING Frozen and Canned Meat.
CO. PTY. LTD. & KEIDON MEAT
PACKING CO. PTY. LTD.
JAQUIS BROS. LIMITED Rock Crushers.
KAURI TIMBER CO. LIMITED - Timber.
KELSO MANUFACTURING CO. Wheelbarrows and Hand
PTY. LTD. Trucks.
KEMPTHORNE PTY. LTD. Light Fittings.
KRAFT FODDS LTD. —■ Cheese and Extracts.
LEETON CO-OPERATIVE CANNERY —. Fruit, Vegetables, Jams.
LTD.
LIGHTBURN CO. LTD. Washing Machines, Concrete
Mixers, Power Boats, Power
Tools.
LLOYD MACKENNAL —■ Cereals Fruit and Jams.
INTERNATIONAL CO. PTY, LTD.
LUSTRE JEWELLERY LTD. Jewellery and Silver Plate.
JOHN LYSAGHT (AUSTRALIA) Sheet Steel.
LIMITED
MALCO INDUSTRIES LTD. Hand Pumps, Rope Grips, Iron
Pipe Fittings, Hand Tools.
MASSEY FERGUSON (AUSTRALIA) Farming Equipment.
LTD.
MASTERS DAIRY LTD. —• Dairy Products.
MOTE LADDERS PTY. LTD. Ladders and Trestles.
MURPHY LIEBERT PTY. LTD. Toiletries.
THE NATIONAL BANK OF Banking.
AUSTRALASIA LTD.
NATIONAL INSTRUMENT CO. —■ Gauges and Thermometers.
PTY. LTD.
NATIONAL MOTOR SPRINGS Motor Springs.
PTY. LTD.
OLIVER J. NILSEN (AUST.) LTD. Electrical Fuses, Switches and
Switchboards, Porcelain.
OGDEN INDUSTRIES PTY. LTD. Locks and Door Hardware.
OSBORNE METAL INDUSTRIES Metals.
PTY. LTD.
PATIENCE & NICOLSON LTD. Tool Manufacturers.
D EARSE BROS. PTY. LIMITED Footwear.
PLAIMAR LTD. Flavours and Essences.
PRASBY KNITTING MILLS PTY. LTD. —• Women's and Children's Cotton
Underwear, Sleeping Attire.
PRECISION SPRINGS PTY. LTD, Springs and Separators.
PROTECTOR INTERNATIONAL Safety Equipment.
PTY. LTD.
PYE INDUSTRIES LTD. —• Radios, Household Electrical
Appliances, Welders etc.
QANTAS EMPIRE AIRWAYS LIMITED Air Transportation.
RADIO AUSTRALIA Overseas Radio Programmes.
F. E. & J. RANDALL PTY. LTD. Shoe Lasts and Heels, Spirit
Levels.
REPCO LTD. —■ Automotive Components, Tools
and Testing Equipment.
RICE GROWERS CO-OPERATIVE Rice.
MILLS LTD.
RICHMOND ENGINEERING CO. Stacking Machines and Trucks.
PTY. LTD.
ROBERN EXPORTS LTD. Glace Fruit.
LYALI ROBERTSON PTY. LTD. leathergoods.
SAE INTERNATIONAI Electric Motors and Equipment,
Fluorescent and Incandescent
Lighting.
SANKEY BENSON WHEELS PTY. LTD. Wheels.
SEAR & GUNN PTY. LTD. —■ Tape and Plumbing Hardware.
H. 8. SELBY & COMPANY PTY. LTD. —■ School and Laboratory
Apparatus.
SIGMA CO. LTD. Ethical Chemicals and Patent
Medicines, Veterinary Drugs.
THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN HONEY _ Honey.
BOARD
SPORTSCRAFT PTY. LTD. Ladies Skirts and Slacks.
STANDARD BRANDS INC. PTY. LTD. Confectionery.
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES Telephone and 2-way Radio
PTY. LTD. Equipment.
A, E. STANSEN (RESEARCH) Eucalyptus Oils.
PTY. LTD.
STOKES & SONS PTY. LTD. Electrical Heating Elements,
Aluminium Household Ware.
STRAMIT BOARDS (W.A.) PTY. LTD. —. Building and Insulation Boords.
SUPA-FURN LIMITED Aluminium Tubular Furniture.
TILT-A-DOR PTY. LTD —• Overhead and Sliding Metal
Door Hordware.
TONKS (AUSTRALIA) PTY. LTD. Door Hardware
TRUSTEES OF THE WHEAT POOL OF Barley
WESERN AUSTRALIA
J. G. VAN BRUGGE & SONS Opals.
JAMES WATT CONSTRUCTIONS Sectional Steel Columns.
PTY, LTD.
THE WESTERN AUSTRALIAN HONEY Honey.
POOL
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN EGG Egg* and Egg Pulp.
MARKETING BOARD
WESTERN DISTRICT CO-OPERATIVE Dairy Products.
CO. LTD.
WESTMINSTER CHINA PTY. LTD. Fine China Ware.
WESTRALIAN FARMERS Flour and Oats.
CO-OPERATIVE LIMITED
WHOLESALERS (AUSTRALIA) Meats and Small Goods.
PTY. LTD.
WILSON BROS. PTY. LTD. Tinware and Plastic Kitchen-
ware .
WOOLCOMBERS (W A.) PTY. LTD. -- Wool Tops.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
ADVANCE CONTAINERS PTY. LTD. Plastic Cups.
AMALGAMATED WIRELESS (A ‘AS IA) Public Address System.
LTD.
AMOR PTY. LTD. Badges.
ANGLISS, W., & CO. (AUST.) Hors doeuvres.
PTY. LTD.
ART CRAFT ENGINEERING PTY. LTD. Flashing Indicators.
AUSTRAL BRONZE CO. PTY. LTD. Presentation Asn Trays.
AUSTRALIAN DAIRY PRODUCE - Dairy Products.
BOARD
AUSTRALIAN INHIBITOR PAPER Rust-inhibiting Paper.
PTY. LTD.
BAITZ, C. & E., PTY. LTD. Liqueurs.
BALLANTYNE EXPORT CO. PTY. LTD. Butter.
BERRI CO-OPERATIVE PACKING Fruit Juices.
UNION LTD.
BORTHWICK, THOS., & SONS Hors d oeuvres.
(A'ASIA) LTD.
BOSTON CANNING CO. PTY. LTD. Hors d oeuvres
BROCKHOFFS BISCUITS PTY. LTD. Biscuits.
BROWN, E. T., LTD. Office Fittings.
BURKE, FRANCES, FABRIC PTY. LTD. Soft Furnishings.
BURNIE BOARD & TIMBER PTY. LTD. Burme Board.
CARLTON & UNITED BREWERIES Beer.
LTD.
COMMITTEE OF DIRECTION OF Pineapple Juice.
FRUIT MARKETING
CONDITIONAL Air Curtains.
COOPER & SONS LTD. Beer.
CO-OPERATED DRIED FRUITS SALES Dried Fruits.
PTY. LTD.
CRAIG MOSTYN & CO. PTY. LTD. Lobster Tails.
EDGELL, GORDON, & SONS LTD. Canned Foodstuffs.
EMAIL LTD. Electric Fans.
EXPORT PUBLICATIONS PTY. LTD. - Publications.
FRIGRITE LTD. Display Refrigeration.
GILBEYS LTD. Gm & Whisky.
H. HALFORD PTY. LTD. —■ Customs and Shipping Agents.
KAYSER STUHL Wines.
KEMPTHORNE PTY. LTD. Light Fittings.
KRAFT FOODS LTD. Cheese.
LEETON CO-OPERATIVE CANNERY Canned Foodstuffs.
LTD.
LEWIS, HENRY, & SONS PTY. LTD. Soup.
MILDURA WINERY PTY. LTD. Wines and Brandy.
MONBULK PRESERVES LTD. Canned Foodstuffs.
PHILIP MORRIS (AUST.) LTD. Cigarettes.
GODFREY PHILLIPS INTERNATIONAL Cigarettes.
PTY. LTD.
ROBERN EXPORTS LTD. Glace Fruits.
ROBERTSON, LYALL PTY. LTD. Leothercraft.
SEABROOK, W. J., & SON PTY. LTD. Wines.
SEPPELT, 8., & SONS LTD. Wines and Brondy.
S.A. GRAPE GROWERS Wines.
CO-OPERATIVE LTD.
STANDARD BRANDS INC. PTY. LTD. "TwistiesV
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES Telephone System.
PTY. LTD.
SUPA-FURN PTY. LTD. Deck Furniture.
TAHBILK PTY. LTD. Wines.
TASMANIAN BREWERIES PTY. LTD. Beer and Fruit Juice.
TOLLEY, SCOTT & TOLLEY LTD. Wines and Brandy.
UNITED DISTILLERS PTY. LTD. Whisky and Gin.
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN EGG Eggs.
MARKETING BOARD
WEST AUSTRALIAN HARDWOODS Timber.
EXPORT ASSOC.
WILLS, W.D. AND H. 0., (AUST.I Cigarettes.
PTY. LTD.
WILSON BROS. PTY. LTD. Ice Boxes.


TRADE STATISTICS
PAKISTAN
A. WORLD TRADE
(a) Balance of
Trade with
the World
£A
million
Year
Imports
Exports
Balance of
Trade
1958
178
134
44
; 1959
159
1 44
15
; I960
294
1 77
117
1961
287
177
108
Source l-h
.F 1 ntemal iora
/ Financial Sialni
June 196?
(b) Main Imports
£A million
Commodity Description
1958
1959 i 1960
, (Jan. to Aug.)
Total Imports
178 |
>58 188
of which —
; Machinery
30
31 49
i Grain, Pulse & Flour
46
26 j 33 *
1 Oils
10
20 j 19
Iron & Steel Manufactures
23
16 ! 16
Vehicles
13
10 11
: Drugs & Chemicals
9
8 | 13
Source Fore/an
Trade Sfct/str'c? 0* Pofc.'sfon
* Jan
July only
B. TRADE WITH AUSTRALIA
(a) Australia’s Balance
of Trade with
Pakistan
Year
Imports
£A '000
Exports
Balance
1958/59
2,094
1,532
— 562
1959/60
3,380
5,027
-r 1,647
1960/61
5,502
4,921
- 578
1961 162
5,661
3,329
- 2,332
(b) Australia’s Main Exports to Pakistan
£A '000
Commodity Description 1959/60
1960/61
1961/62
! Total Exports 5,027
4,921
3,329
I of which —
| Foodstuffs of animat origin ! 81
82
133
! Wheat, grain 2,653
2,668
16
! Wool 442
514
520
; Tallow ' 292
445
341
j Iron & Steel 1 354
27
1,016
Dynamo Electnca. Machinery | 113
175
31
i Machinery not Dynamo j 284
57
185
Electrical
Railway Sleepers (timber) ■ 334
26
120
1 Hardwoods (Jarrah) —
78
95
(0
Australia’s
Main
Imports from
Pakistan
£A
000
Commodity
Description
1959/60
1960/61
1961/62
Total Imports
of which —
3,380
5,502
5,661
Fibres : Jute
581
1 ,061
362
Cotton
134
145
132
Wool
63
71
14
Goat Hoir
188
141
34
Bags and Socks
2,196
3,666
4,722
Source
Commo
nweo/ft> Statistician


MUSCAT AND OMAN
A. WORLD TRADE
No statistics are available showing Muscat and Oman's trade
with the world.
B. TRADE WITH AUSTRALIA
Australia's trade with Muscat and Oman is not shown separately
by the Commonwealth Statistician but is included in the figures
for Arabian States (other than Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia
and Yemen). *
(b) Australia's Exports to Arabian States other than
those named *
Source Commonweo/th Statistician.
* These figures also include Australia's trade with the Trucial States.
(a)
Australia’s
Balance of
Trade with
Arabian States
£A ’OOO
Period
Imports
Exports
Balance
1958/59
2
342
+ 340
1959/60
128
399
+ 271
1 1960/61
7
506
4- 499
1961 162
262
435
— 173
Commodity Description
1960/61
£A
1961/62
£A
Total Exports
506,364
! 434,786
of which —
Beef or Veal — canned
797
926
Mutton — canned
520
348
Butter
4,031
11,473
Cheese processed
10,600
10,361
Wheat
74,288
61,089
Barley
19,332
4,566
Wheat Flour, plain
376,959
317,338
Grapes, fresh
1,431
116
Jams and Jellies
8,648
1,237
Iron and Steel Plate, galvanized flat
658
__
Motive Power Machinery n.e.i.
548
__
Rubber Tyres and Tubes
1,178
—
THE TRUCIAL STATES
A. WORLD TRADE
(a) Balance of Trade with the World
(b) Main Supplying Countries
£A 000
Period
imports
* Exports
(including
re-exports)
Balance
1958
5,897
3,530
— 2,367
1959
6,179
4,126
— 2,053
1960
7,679
N.A.
N.A,
1961 (First eight
months)
5,702
N, A.
N.A.
£A ’000
Country
1958
1959 i
1960
1961
Japan
1,973 1
1,289 1
N.A.
! N.A.
India
781 !
1,110 !
N.A.
N.A.
Britain
863 i
1,580 ;
2,931
4,569
Other Countries
' 2,280 :
2,200 |
N.A.
N.A. ,
Total
5,897
6,179
7,679
8,553 j
(approx.)
Source Pub//cof('ons o i British Board of Trade.
* Reliable export figures are not always available, as much is re-
exported by country craft or by truck overland and is un-
recorded.
B. TRADE WITH AUSTRALIA
See the statistics provided for Muscat ond Oman.


QATAR
A. TRADE WITH THE WORLD
No statistics are avoilable showing Qatar' trade with the world.
B. TRADE WITH AUSTRALIA
(a) Australia’s Balance of Trade with Qatar
£A 000
Period
Imports 1
Exports
Balance
1958/59
15,981 i
157
— 15,824
1959/60
19,237
163
— 19,074
1960/61
14,497
249
— 14,248
1961/62
5,460
250
— 5,210
A. TRADE WITH THE WORLD
(a) Balance of Trade with the World
£A ’OOO
1
Year j
(0
Imports
(ID
Exports
Balance
1958
23,109
8,501 ;
— 14,608
1959 ;
24,576
10,221 ;
— 14,355
1960 1
27,359
9,973 |
— 17,386
1961
(Jan. to Aug.] 1
18,428
6,150
— 12,278
(b) Main Imports (I)
£A ’OOO
Commodity Description
1959
1960
Total Imports (1)
24,576
27,359
of which —
Other building materials
710
971
Rice
1,154
1,097
Spices :
574
851
Provisions j
2,330
2,359
Wearing apparel
1,834
1,536
Cotton piece goods
1,325
1,075
Silk piece goods
661
841
Hardware and cutlery !
675
1,076
Machinery spares and parts, oli well |
1,238
1,559
supplies | :
Household goods {
4,003
4,227
Cigarettes j
690
956
Motor cars, lorries and tractors j
965
1,057
(b) Australia’s Main Exports to Qatar
£A 'OOO
Commodity Description
1959/60
1960/61
1961/62
Total Exports
of which —
163
250
250
Flour — wheaten
62
98
88
Meats
28
46
50
Butter
13
16
9
Cheese
14
17
16
Eggs m shell
21
30
43
Barley
3 1
12
5
(c) Australia’s Main Imports from Qatar
EA 000
Commodity Description
1959/60
1960/61
1961/62
Total Imports
19,237
14,497
5,460
of which —
Crude Petroleum
19,237
14,497
5,460
Source : Commonwea/fh Statistician.
B. TRADE WITH AUSTRALIA
(a) Australia's Balance of Trade with Bahrain
£A ’OOO
Year j
Imports
Exports
Balance
1958/59 i
2,691
489
— 2,202
1959/60
3,746
450
— 3,296
1960/61 '
2,909
776
— 2,133
1961/62 |
429
429
(b) Australia’s Main Exports to Bahrain
£A ’OOO
Commodity description
1959/60
1960/61
1961/62
Total Exports
of which —
450
776
429
Meats
66
no
64
Butter
67
127
37
Cheese
26
60
50
Eggs in shell
30
48
42
Flour — wheaten
159
266
111
Fruits — fresh
26
34
28
Jams and Jellies
26
1
4
Complete Motor Cars
—
21
23
(c) Australia’s Imports from Bahrain
£A ’OOO
Commodity description
1959/60
| 1960/61
1961/62
Total Imports
3,746
2,909
429
of which —
Crude Petroleum
374
: —
123
Petroleum Spirit
2,402
! 1,863
59
Power Kerosene
902
i 772
205
Kerosene, Burning Oils
9
j 264
48
Source : Commonwea/th Statistician
BAHRAIN


SAUDI ARABIA
A. WORLD TRADE
(a) Balance of Trade with the World
£A Million
Source U.N. Direction of International 7rode, 1959.
(b) Main Imports
£A ’OOO
(c) Main Supplying Countries
Year
Imports
Exports
Balance
1957
104
412
308
1958
99
401
302
1959
88
374
286
1960
96
N. A.
N.A.
Commodity Description
1959
1960
Total Imports
j of which — ;
87,798
96,471
! Livestock and animal products
3,884
4,554
1 Plant products
13,975
19,007
: Fats, tallow and oils
i food manufacturing products, beverages,
884
1,466
vinegar and tobacco
7,255
6,672
Mineral products
6,312
4,087
! Chemical products
3,567
; 5,704
i Resins, plastics and allied manufactures j
1,692
2,556
Timber and manufactures thereof
3,050
1,906
; Textiles materials & manufactures thereof
11,067
1 10,580
Metals & metal manufactures
Instruments, tools, electrical equiDment
11,679
i 7,586
and parts
8,781
1,552
Transport equipment
9,635
10,094
Country
1959
£A million
1960
£A million
Total Imports
of which percentages of main countries
87.8
96.5
were : —
%
%
Rank
1960
1 United States of Americo
18.0
27.1
2 Britain
8.5
7.2
3 West Germany
i 1.0
6.2
4 Italy
5.9
5.9
5 Japan
4.9
5.7
6 Bahrain
5.9
5.5
Source Saudi Arabian Cus/orns House Statistics.
B. TRADE WITH AUSTRALIA
(a) Australia’s Balance of Trade with Saudi Arabia
£A ’OOO
Period
Imports
Exports
Balance
1958/59
4,546
954
— 3,592
1959/60
6,243
868
— 5,375
1960/61
10,879
873
: — 10,006
1961 162
11,774
1,144
: — 10,630
(b) Australia’s Main Exports to Saudi Arabia
£A 000
Commodity Description
1959/60
1960/61
1961/62
Total Exports
of which —
868
873
1,144
Meats
218
149
165
Butter
73
72
69
Ghee
12
36
11
Cheese
134
257
194
Eggs in she/I
89
42
63
Wheat
104
81
239
Barley
66
41
5
Flour — wheaten
104
132
341
(c) Australia’s Imports from Saudi Arabia
£A *OOO
Commodity Description
1959/60
1960/61
1961/62 |
Total Imports
6,243
10,879
11,774
of which —
Crude Petroleum
6,241
9,607
8,880 ■
Petroleum Spirit
_
1 ,147
2,162 |
Source r Commonv/ea/fh SfaHsHc/an.


KUWAIT
A. TRADE WITH THE WORLD
(a) Balance of Trade with the World
£A Million
Year
Exports *
Imports *
Balance
1958
592.1
82.8
-t- 509:3
1959
567.3
117.4
-i- 449.9
• Nofe These figure s ore partly estimated
Source U.N. Direction of Trode 1959
(b) Main Imports
£A ’OOO
Commodity Description
1959
Total Imports
117,380
of which —
Foodstuffs
15,151
Cement
5,555
Iron & Steel Products
, 4,091
Timber
; 2,944
Bathroom Equipment & Fittings
: 4,009
Construction Equipment
1,462
Household Equipment
6,183
Textiles & Clothing
13,842
Motor Cars & Spares
, 16,777
Machine Tools
6,324
Electrical Equipment
3,835
Chemicals, Pharmaceuticols & Medicines
| 1,960
(c) Main Supplying Countries
Country
1958
£A million
1959
£A million
Total Imports
82.8
117.4
! of which percentages of moin countn
es %
%
were —
1
1 Britain
31
27
2 U.S.A
21
17
3 Germany
10
9
i 4 Japan
? ;
8
Source Kuwait Custom* Department
19 59
B. TRADE WITH AUSTRALIA
(a) Australia's Balance of Trade with Kuwait
£A ’OOO
Year
Imports
Exports
Balance
1958/59
6,234
905
— 5,329
1959/60
7,118
701
— 6,417
1960/61
7,220
1,354
— 5,866
1961/62
11,217
1,234
— 9,983
(b) Australia's Main Exports to Kuwait
£A '000
Commodity Description
1959/60
1960/61
1961/62
Total Exports
701
1,354
1,234
of which —
Meats
113
173
337
Butter
54
55
32
Cheese
137
252
190
Barley Gram
43
no
—
Flour
268
562
370
Jams and Jellies
35
49
70
Motor Cars complete
—
73
25
(c) Australia's Imports from Kuwait
£A 'OOO
Commodity Description
1959/60
1960/61
1961/62
Total Imports
of which —
7,118
7,220
11,217
Crude Petroleum
7,116
7,178
10,792


IRAQ
A. TRADE WITH THE WORLD
(a) Balance of Trade with the World
£A Million
Year
Imports
Exports
Balance
1958
138
254
H- 116
1959
146
272
+ 126
1960
175
293
+ 118
* 1961
175
298
4- 123
* Partly estimated.
Source : I M.F International Finance Statistics June 7962
(b) Main Imports
£A ’OOO
Commodity Description
1958
1959
1960
Total Imports
of which —
137,900
146,200
175,135
Tea
6,499
8,673
10,316
Cereals
293
7,452
N.A.
Sugar
9,957
8,346
10,474
Artificial Silk Piecegoods
6,684
6,168
N.A.
Cotton Piecegoods
Iron & Steel — Bars, Rods,
3,499
4,466
5,723
Angles
— Pipes and
Tu bes of .
4,433
5,357
N.A
Cast Iron :
— Structures,
complete
or parts '
8,211
11,205
N.A.
therefor
Internal Combustion Piston
2,344
2,947
N.A.
Engines
Excavating, Levelling, Bor-
2,646
3,038
N.A
ing Machinery
Electrical Motors and Gen-
2,034
2,893
N.A.
erators
3,001
3,389
N.A.
Motor Vehicles j
6,877
4,716
N.A.
(c) Main Supplying Countries
Country
1958
£A million
1959
£A million
1960
£A million
Total Imports
of which percentages of
mam countries were :
1959
Rank
137.9
146.2
175.1
1 Britain -»
28
31
19
2 U.5.A.
14
10
9
3 West Germany
12
9
7
4 Japan
8
7
4
5 Ceylon
5
6
4
6 Belg ium • Luxembourg
6
5
5
7 Netherlands
3
3
2
8 Australia
1
3
3
B. TRADE WITH AUSTRALIA
(a) Australia’s Balance of Trade with Iraq
£A 000
Yeor
Imports
Exports
Balance
1958/59
209
1,187
- 1 - 978
1959/60
286
6,810
-T- 6,524
1960/61
4,554
7,728
-t- 3,174
(b) Australia’s Main Exports to Iraq
£A 000
Commodity Description
1959/60
1960/61
1961/62
Total Exports
of which —
6,810
7,974
1,308
Wheot — gram
6,366
7,111
549
. Cheese
124
213
120
Wool
97
106
171
; Jams and Jellies
129
45
34
; Sleepers — Jarrah
27
263
249
j Meats
6
11
6
j Milk and Cream
12
26
4
! Cattle Hides
15
4
3
| Iron and Steel
16
16
22
j Motor Cars
—
104
11 1
(c) Australia’s Imports from Iraq
£A ’OOO
Commodity Description 1959/60 1960/61 1961/62
Total Imports
286
4,554
4,210
of which —
Crude Petroleum
4,310
4,022
Dates
: 241
203
161


IRAN
A. TRADE WITH THE WORLD
(a) Balance of Trade
£A Million
* Estima*ed. The figure for oil is not available.
B. TRADE WITH AUSTRALIA
(a) Australia’s Balance of Trade with Iran
£A ’OOO
| Year (1) j
Imports
Exports
Balance
| 1957/58
148
162
+ 14
{ 1958/59
196
18!
— 15
1 1959/60
246
205 *
— 41
! 1960/6!
258
N.A.
N.A.
(b) Main Imports
£A ’OOO
Commodity description
(1)
1957/58
(1)
1958/59
(1)
1959/60
Total Imports
of which —
147,884
196,119
246,450
Sugar
12,667
12,669
13,498
Tea
9,692
8,741
7,365
Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals
5,496
8,219
10,205
Rubber Tyres & Tubes
5,314
6,804
7,540
Fabrics of Synthetic Fibre
7,310
8,833
N.A.
Woollen Fabrics
4,276
4,671
N. A.
Cotton Fabrics—plain, dyed
Iron & Steel —wire, bars,
6,055
6,536
N.A.
girders, beams etc.
Iron & Steei — other than
8,299
9,236
N.A.
furniture, sheets & pipes
6,263
7,709
N.A.
Motor Cars : Possenger
6,509
8,510
,, ,, Commercial
,, ,, Chassis, Bod ies
3,433
5,676
& Parts
Electrical Apparatus includ-
4,577
6,314
9,348*
ing Radios
7,275
14,624
19,769
* Includes lornes and buses.
(c) Main Supplying Countries
Country
1957/58
£A'000
1958/59
£A '000
Total Imports
of which percentages of main countries
147,884
196,119
were :
1958/59
Rank
%
%
1 West Germany
20
22
2 U.5.A.
15
17
3 Britain
13
15
4 Japan
8
10
5 U.S.S.R.
9
6
Year
Imports
Exports
j Balance
1958/59
20,666 :
753
1 — 19,913
1959/60 ;
12,666
3,620
| — 9,046
1960/61 1
18,213
2,191
— 16,032
1961/62
20,966 i
1,473
— 19,493
(b) Australia’s Main Exports to Iran
£A ’OOO
Commodity Description
1959/60
1960/61
1961/62
Total Exports
of which —
3,620
2,191
1/473
Wheat — grain
3,196
1,336
435
Wool
311
751
949
Meats
20
12
12
Butter
10
10
6
Cheese
10
8
—
Ghee
9
2
3
Eggs in shell
11
neg.
5
Storage Batteries
18
11
—
Sleepers — Jarrah ,
7
neg.
1
Complete Motor Cars i
~
39
—
(c) Australia’s Main Imports from Iran
£A '000
Commodity Description
1959/60
1960/61
1961/62 |
, Total Imports
! of which —
12,666
18,213
20,966 '
Crude Petroleum
10,340
14,136
16,190 !
Petroleum Spirit
1,333
3,237
2,901
1 Power Kerosene
617
431
849 :
Kerosene Burning Oils
296
295
634 |
Source • Commonwea/fh Staf/sh'c/'on.


