

REPORT
OF THE
TRIAL OF SAMUEL JOHN THORNE
FOR THE MURDER OF
, ’■ V:,'': :~ r , . .. • -
MR. SxDNEY SEYMOUR EYRE,
A Farmer at Pukekawa, in the Auckland District,
on 25th August. 1920.
HELD BEFORE
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE F. R. CHAPMAN.
At Auckland on the
29th and 30th November, and the Ist, 2nd, and 3rd
December, 1920.
WELLINGTON.
W. A. G. SKINNER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1925,
Published by the Direction of the Minister of Justice.


REPORT
OF THE
TRIAL OF SAMUEL JOHN THORNE
FOR THE MURDER OF
MR. SYDNEY SEYMOUR EYRE,
A Farmer at Pukekawa, in the Auckland District,
on 25th August, 1920.
HELD BEFORE
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE F. R. CHAPMAN,
At Auckland on the
29th and 30th November, and the Ist, 2nd, and 3rd
December, 1920.
WELLINGTON.
W. A. G. SKINNER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1925-
Published by the Direction of the Minister of Justice.


Note.—lt. is considered that this publication will prove valuable in the
training of police officers, as it emphasizes the importance of prompt action,
close attention to detail, and the necessity in cases where the evidence is
circumstantial of eliminating the possibility or probability of any one but the
accused being the offender.


PREFACE.
An accurate report of this trial is published by the Minister, as was the
recent trial of Dennis Gunn, so that it may serve as an. object-lesson
in connection with the training of young police officers. It teaches,
above all things, the value of immediate action ; a few hours’ delay
would have left the main piece of evidence unavailable. It gives
other examples of the fruits of prompt and thorough detective work.
When presented to the Court the evidence was relevant and con-
vincing, but in order that there should be no room for doubt many
weeks had to be spent by officers of the highest intelligence investi-
gating the facts and many collateral matters. Examples of this
exhaustive work are found in the fact that the feet of 1,303 horses
were examined, and the further fact that 176 houses were visited in
the search for cartridges like the one used.
The report of the evidence here reproduced illustrates the method
in use in New Zealand. It was taken down from the lips of the
witnesses by Mr. K. C. Aekins, Associate to Mr. Justice Chapman.
This method has long been in use in New Zealand. A trained
typewriting expert follows the witness without difficulty, and
copies of the evidence can be handed sheet by sheet to the Judge,
who may revise and adopt it as his note; copies may similarly be
handed to counsel.




INTRODUCTION.
A glance at the map of the Auckland District shows that at Mercer
the Waikato River turns sharply to the east, and thence runs to the
sea. This bend encloses a stretch of valuable rolling country held in
rather widely scattered farms. In the midst of these was the late Mr.
S. S. Eyre’s highly improved farm. Pukekawa is typical of the smallest
kind of place that can be called a township, consisting, as it does,
of a store, which is also a post and telegraph office, and a few
scattered buildings. It is fifty-four miles from Auckland. Into
the block of country referred to and beyond this point the Main
Road leads out to Glen Murray, where one Granville held a farm
about eighteen miles from Pukekawa. This farm is in a rough and
relatively unimproved district, and is divided into very large
paddocks, a fact which will be found to be of some importance.
Tuakau, about eight miles from Pukekawa, is a township on the
Auckland side of the Waikato. Here is stationed one policeman.
The nearest town is Pukekohe, nearer to Auckland, where there is
a police-station in charge of Sergeant Cowan with two subordinates.
It must be borne in mind that, although there are farms and houses
scattered round about, Eyre’s place is a lonely place in a thinly
inhabited district in which after the usual bedtime very few people
would be seen on the roads. The evidence hereafter set out as to
the search for cartridges gives a fair idea as to how few are the farms
and dwellings in a wide district. Eyre had taken the land up many
years before when it was a mass of scrub and rough growth, and had
by hard work brought it to the condition of improved pasture,
making it a very valuable property ; he was a man worth £17,000.
The house was, considering Eyre’s wealth, a very poor one. It was
merely a typical pioneer’s five-roomed cottage, and Eyre seems never
to have had the ambition or the desire for comfort which usually
impels a man of his means to build an improved dwelling as his
family grows up.
The situation of the farm may be thus described : From the
Main Read at a right angle runs eastward a road called Eyre’s Road.
From this road Eyre’s house stands some way back in the paddocks.
Some way beyond the entrance-gate which leads to the house Eyre’s
Road crosses a bridge over a small creek. This bridge is approached
by a cutting, leaving a high bank on the right-hand side. Near this
bridge on the right-hand side is a straining-post in Eyre’s fence 150
yards from the house. This is on a small piece of land a considerable
height above the road-cutting. A growth of fern helps to conceal
the post from the road. Some distance beyond this the road turns
to the right at about a right angle. This part, still called Eyre’s
Road but sometimes referred to as Tippins’s Road, is, therefore,
approximately parallel with the Main Road. Before reaching this


point it passes Logan’s house, which was unoccupied. Then it passes
on the left Tippins’s house ; then beyond this, also on the left, close
to Tippins’s is McNeill’s house, and beyond this Morrison’s. Near
to these houses it reaches a point called Tippins’s Corner, where it
is the practice of the dairy-farmers to deposit their cream-cans to
be picked up by Stuart, the driver of the cream-cart. From this
corner a road, officially called Waihihi Road but locally known as
Punga Road, runs up 10 or 11 chains until it reaches the Main Road.
The roads thus described completely enclose a block in which Goode’s
and Eyre’s are the only houses. From here the Main Road con-
tinues to Glen Murray, eighteen miles from Pukekawa, passing
Vincent’s and Sharpe’s a mile or so from the corner. The Punga
Road is a new road. All the roads except the Main Road are
unmetalled, or nearly so. Punga Road is merely a stretch of bare
soil, formed as a road, very little used save by the driver of the
cream-cart. A person coming from Glen Murray in the ordinary
way to visit Eyre’s house would travel along the Main Road towards
Pukekawa, turn down Eyre’s Road and pull up at Eyre’s gate ; a
person desiring to take precautions against being seen might turn
down Punga Road, pass Tippins’s Corner, ride round by Eyre’s Road
to a convenient point, tie up his horse where it was not likely to be
seen, and after his visit return the same way. The case for the
Crown was that this is what was done. The block of land enclosed
as described did not all belong to Eyre, though his land extended
beyond it on both sides. On the Main Road the house standing
at the corner of the block in which Goode lived —sometimes called
Barton’s, really belonging to Geddis —is nearer to Pukekawa than
Eyre’s. This house has a telephone. It is convenient here, as at
the trial, to refer to it as Goode’s.
Eyre’s house is surrounded by a dense wide hedge of elseagnus.
This has in it one small gate looking towards Punga Road. The
evidence showed that this was closed by the boys that night, but
was found open in the morning. A person wishing to make a hasty
escape might, in an emergency, go out that way and, running round
two sides of the enclosure, get to the corner-post near the bridge,
or he might run across the fields to Punga Road if he had his horse
there. There is another exit from the enclosure which was, no
doubt, used on this occasion. A person escaping that way would
run round past the corner of Eyre’s bedroom, pass through a small
gate in a low picket-fence, and into the path leading from the
kitchen to the back gate, and go out that way, turning to the right
and making for the corner-post. As footsteps were heard going
that way there is little doubt that the murderer escaped by this
route across the paddocks to the vicinity of the bridge. It is the
shortest and easiest route for any one with an intimate knowledge
of the place.
Looking at the front view of the house, Eyre and his wife slept
in the front room to the right, he occupying a small bed under the


window, and his wife a double bed on the other side of the room.
Behind this room is a sitting-room. The eldest daughter and another
child slept in the other front room, and two sons in the room behind
that. Beyond the sitting-room was the kitchen.
Eyre had gone abroad to visit relations in California in 1917, and
leaving there had entered the Canadian Army during the war. It
was said that he had served in Siberia. In these northern regions
he had acquired a habit of sleeping as nearly as could be in the open
air. Thorne was in Mrs. Eyre’s service for a considerable time before
Eyre’s return, and remained in Eyre’s service for a year, sleeping in
the back room with the boys. He had left only about five weeks
before the murder, and had entered the service of Granville. He
knew of Eyre’s habit, and had assisted him to place the small bed
under the window. He must also be taken to nave known that a
board was missing from the space below the weatherboarding of the
house, and that this left a gap which might be used as a step and was
essential to the design. Thorne had a dog called “ Bob.” When he
left he took this dog to Granville’s, but it came back to Eyre’s, and
took up its abode with other dogs under the boys’ room. Mrs. Eyre
says that it always barked at any one approaching the house, even
at her, until it ascertained that it was one of the inmates, when it
stopped barking.
On the night of the 25th August, 1920, Mrs. Eyre was awakened
by hearing this dog barking under the boys’ room. Attaching no
importance to this event she went to sleep again. Later the household
was awakened by a loud explosion in the Eyres’ bedroom. The clock
stopped a few minutes past 11 p.m., and this probably fixes the hour.
The children heard their mother cry out, “ Dad ! Dad ! ” and then
heard her light a match. She then found that her husband had been
killed. He lay in the bed with his head shattered —he had never
moved. Mrs. Eyre states that she heard a man run past the side of
the house by the route described as the most suitable way to escape
from the garden. Soon afterwards both she and her daughter heard a
horse canter across the bridge 150 yards from the house. Mrs. Eyre at
once sent the two boys across the paddocks to the house where Goode
lived. There, however, they failed to get into communication with
Auckland. Going on to the post-office at Pukekawa, a mile away,
they were more successful in getting into touch with Auckland and
Pukekohe. By 1 a.m. the message with some details of the murder
reached Mr. Wright, the Superintendent of the Police at Auckland,
and by 1.30 or soon after the police motor containing Detective-
Sergeant Cummings and Sergeant Fox was on its way to the scene.
Eapid progress could not be made, as in the month of August towards
the end of winter long stretches of imperfectly metalled road call for
cautious driving. This motor arrived at about 7 a.m., but the police
under Sergeant Cowan, of Pukekohe, had already arrived before
dawn, and had taken charge of the house. The two parties met at
Eyre’s house. Mr. Superintendent Wright {now Commissioner of


Police for the Dominion) came out by the Rotorua express train,
which was specially stopped at Tuakau for the purpose, and was
brought on by motor, arriving at Eyre’s at 11.30 a.m. The Super-
intendent then undertook the direction of further investigations.
Mrs. Eyre was spoken to by Detective-Sergeant Cummings, who,
finding her prostrated by the shock, refrained from interrogating
her. A fact that could not be given in evidence was that one of the
police recalled the circumstance of Thorne having formerly lived there,
whereupon one of the neighbours disclosed in very explicit terms
what he knew or suspected of the relations between this man and
Mrs. Eyre. “ Look out for a man named Sam Thorne ” was his advice
to the assembled police. Other information on this subject was
readily picked up, giving a clue in the shape of a motive, and it was
decided that Thorne, who was known to be in the employ of Granville
eighteen miles away, should be visited.
Before this Sergeant Cowan had as early as possible set his men
to work to search the premises, including the thick elaeagnus hedges
surrounding the garden, for any suitable weapon ; but nothing was
found by way of firearms, save an old damaged rifle not capable of
use, and young Eyre’s gun, which had not been fired for some time,
so that it showed signs of rust. Then the road was carefully examined.
About four tracks of horses and light traps were found to have been
made on Eyre’s Road since the last heavy rain. These were all in
due course identified. They were such tracks as are made by the
light ponies used by the settlers in light traps fit to carry cream and
for personal use.
One set of tracks was, however, found which was of quite a different
character. This was a heavy track made by a large horse. It was
evident that this horse had been led up to the straining-post in Eyre’s
fence situate on the high bank already described. The peculiar hoof-
prints, here very well defined, were found going up the slope to the
post and coming down again. Then Sergeant Cowan got Tippins
out to join in examining the tracks. These were then followed round
Tippins’s Corner, thence by the Punga Road to the Main Road, and
thence out towards Glen Murray. They were found on both sides
of the Punga Road, showing the same horse coming and going by
the same route. After reaching the Main Road they were followed
past Vincent’s to Sharp’s, two miles along the Main Road towards
Glen Murray. In all they could be traced for about four miles. As
the examination proceeded other settlers were got out to assist. They
expressed the unanimous opinion, repeated at the trial, that the
large shoe-prints were the tracks of a strange horse not belonging to
any one in that neighbourhood. There was no work for a horse of
the kind there, and nobody possessed one. As to this horse, it was
noticed that it was an overstepping horse which persistently bored
to the right so that the tracks both ways on the Punga Road were
on the off or right-hand side. Superintendent Wright gave directions
to have the best of these preserved against rain by covering them


with boards. The general condition of the ground was that rain on
the previous day had obliterated old tracks and left the soil in a
condition to receive new ones, then the 25th was fine. On the
afternoon of the 26th wet weather set in again. Heavy rain during
the night of the murder would have rendered identification of the
footprints impossible. Detective-Sergeant Cummings and others
then proceeded to Glen Murray, arriving there at close of day.
From Granville they ascertained that Thorne was in charge of a
ploughing-camp two miles away. Thither they went, the condi-
tions being very trying, as it was now raining heavily, and they
had to push over fallen timber, through branches, rushes, .and
morasses. Thorne was at once interviewed by Cummings and
Sergeant Cowan and Constable Thompson in his tent. This interview
took place about 8 p.m., twenty-one hours after the murder. Without
the assistance of telegraph and motor-car this result could never have
been achieved. If in connection with the training of young policemen
any outstanding lessons are given by this case the first is the supreme
value of promptitude in action. Thorne expressed no real surprise
when told of the murder, the evidence as to this is very significant.
Possession was taken of his gun and cartridges, and a receipt showing
a payment for No. 7 Peters’s Ballistite cartridges. At Granville’s
house Detective-Sergeant Cummings took down a statement from
Thorne in which he failed to give an explicit answer to the question
where he was last night. In the morning the police, accompanied
by Granville and Thorne, went over to the ploughing-camp, where
all the horses were got in. Then a series of experiments was con-
ducted. There were only two large horses, called “ Dick ” and
“ Mickey ” respectively. Granville and Thorne stood together.
Granville thought that the detectives would take one called “ Dick.”
After noting their steps upon a piece of bare ground, however,
Cummings remarked, “ ‘ Mickey ’ will do ; take off his front shoes.”
Granville states that Thorne was visibly disturbed. He was then
told that “ Mickey’s ” footmarks corresponded with those found on
the roads. Cummings says that he turned pale when this was
announced. The shoes when carried back to Eyre’s Road were found
exactly to fit the hoofprints which had been carefully preserved.
“ Mickey ” when ridden over the same ground by Mounted Constable
Wolfendale persistently bored to his off side. Ho further exhibited
the overstepping movement noticed in the tracks. Each horse at
the camp had its own cover with its name written on it by Thorne.
“ Mickey’s ” cover had on it the wet mark that would be made by a
saddle worn over the cloth while the horse was ridden, or while still
sweating. Thorne’s saddle exactly fitted that mark. When the
police were fitting this on Granville called Thorne’s attention to this
fact, but Thorne turned away. As the witnesses agreed that to ride
thirty-six miles with a cover on like that would give the horse a cold
it was somewhat difficult to attach a meaning to it. It may be that
Thorne put it on, rode a short distance in this way and picked it up


on his return, the object being that if the horse was seen it should not
be recognized. There were, however, farmers on the jury who may
have seen some importance in the fact. No witness could be found
who had seen Thorne on this ride, but round about Eyre’s the dogs
were alarmed and barked at several farms, and one man looking out
thought he had seen something like a horse passing. This man,
Vincent, living on the Main Road, described what he saw as coming
from the direction of Glen Murray some time after 9 p.m. Later,
about 12 p.m., he was again disturbed by the dogs, and heard a horse
cantering in the opposite direction. The wide and exhaustive search
for horses that might compete with “ Mickey ” lasted some time;
no horse with feet and shoes resembling his was found. As an
exhaustive operation by way of elimination this takes a high place in
the annals of detective work. It suffices here to say that Detective
McHugh, to whom this branch of the investigation was entrusted,
searched the whole country beyond the Waikato to a distance of
twenty miles from Pukekawa, examining 1,303 horses, of which 418
were shod and the rest unshod, with the negative result stated.
Then as to the cartridges, the result of careful search was to find
pellets in the room consistent with a Peters’s No. 7 cartridge having
been used, while the wads found were such as made up such a cartridge.
Detective O’Brien on this quest visited sixty farms and collected
seventy cartridges. Only one Peters’s No. 7 was found, and this
was accounted for. Sergeant Fox over the same area visited 116
dwellings and found no No. 7 of any kind. Briefly stated, the
peculiarity w T hich gave a value to such a cartridge was this ; In this
particular type of cartridge ballistite is used in place of gunpowder,
the explosive used in ordinary sporting-cartridges. Ballistite being a
more violent explosive, a smaller quantity is used, but as the cartridge-
cases are always of the same height the extra space has to be filled.
This is effected by means of an extra thick wad, two such wads being
sufficient for an English sporting-cartridge, while three are required
for this type of ballistite-cartridge. Three of these thick wads were
recovered from Eyre’s room, while further proof was derived from
the fact that the other thinner wads were of American material.
Cartridges of this type were in the possession of Thorne and of young
Eyre, whose gun had not been fired. Again, the wide and exhaustive
search over the same district, as in the case of the horses, for such
cartridges resulting in the exclusion of the suggestion that they were
in general use was a piece of eliminative work of the most exhaustive
kind. Though it might not of itself have been sufficiently conclusive
to have brought about a conviction, it lent powerful support to the
main evidence. The number of farms visited gives a good idea of
the sparsely inhabited district in which the events occurred.
There were several minor matters which acquire importance when
treated cumulatively. Such, for instance, as the mode in which
Thorne met the inquiries of the detectives as to where he was on the
previous night, and his general demeanour when it became evident


that he was under suspicion. For these matters, which are such
as to call for the closest attention of a detective, the reader is referred
to the evidence. Further, it is not necessary here to refer to subse-
quent matters, such as Thorne’s conversations with several of the
witnesses. These matters are referred to in the Judge’s summing-up
and all helped more or less to support the case for the Crown. The
result of this assemblage of data was to produce one of the most
remarkable criminal trials based on circumstantial evidence anywhere
recorded. In Deacon Brodie’s case in Edinburgh in 1788 the identifi-
cation of a dog aided in the detection of a notable crime ; here we
have a horse performing the same office, while the voice of a dog
followed by its silence afforded matter for consideration. Without a
feeling of certainty that “ Mickey ” had travelled from Granville’s to
Eyre’s, and that he could have been taken out of the paddock by
Thorne alone, the jury would not have convicted Thorne. Two
important factors were supplied by Thorne himself—namely, that the
murder at Eyre’s house was the work of no stranger, and that it
would have been almost impossible for a stranger to have come in
the night and got the horse “ Mickey ” out of Granville’s large pad-
dock. Further, the evidence showed that up to this point Thorne
had been occupying the hut or whare in which another man also slept.
The night of the murder was the first night on which he was alone.
It has already been stated that the object of publishing this report
is that it may serve as an example of expert detection of crime. What,
then, is detection ? It really consists of narrowing down the possible
competitors for a given position until but one remains. In its
simplest form detection is practised every day by Postal officials
where the delivery of a letter involves the finding of one person to
the exclusion of the rest of the inhabitants of the globe. A corre-
spondent here wishes to write to a person abroad. He accordingly
addresses a letter to “ John Brookes, Junior, 13 Gale Street, London
N.W. 6, England.” The officials in New Zealand take the first step
by putting the letter into an English mail-bag. That eliminates the
rest of the world. The London officials see that it is a London letter,
which reduces the possible recipients in England by five-sixths. Then
the district, the subdistrict, the street, and the number carry on the
process of elimination until a house, possibly inhabited by a number
of persons, is reached. Then a man, not a woman, is required, and
it is seen that if there are two men named John Brookes it is the
younger who is found to bear all these descriptive marks. Here
everything is made smooth for the Postal agents, but this is not always
so. A letter posted in Germany addressed to Wellington has been
known to pass two places in England of that name before being sent
to New Zealand, where it was found that, after all, it was intended to
reach some one at Wellington in Australia. This was addressed to
“ Mr. C. F. ——, Wellington, Somersetshire, Australia,” which was
calculated to puzzle the Post Office detectives, but not to baffle
them. Some real detective work was however, called for Where


however, a planned crime has been committed the difficulties may be
very great. If a clear finger-print made by a stranger is found on a
cash-box in a house robbed by somebody, that reduces the problem
to that of finding the man who impressed it there. A case like this
is more complex. Prompt and sustained activity was required to
detect and preserve such marks as were left, and to sift a vast amount
of information so as to reduce it to what was relevant, and eliminate
elements that might be relied on as creating uncertainty. When
the matter came before the jury, who were acting as the Postal officials
acted in the simpler case of the letter, the question of tracing the
author of the crime arose somewhat in this shape : What are you
looking for ?
(1.) A man who knew the place intimately and who knew the
family habits.
(2.) A man with a motive.
(3.) A man who possesses and can use a shot-gun.
(4.) A man possessed of this rare type of ammunition.
(5.) A man who was known to and who could silence the dog
“ Bob.”
(6.) A man against whom the wife of the deceased might be
disinclined voluntarily to give information and on whose silence he
might think he could rely.
The first of these is most important, as it involves finding a man
who has (a) a knowledge of the exact spot where Eyre slept, (b) a
knowledge of the step left by the missing board, (c) a knowledge that
the window would be open and that the step could be used and the
gun passed through into position, ( d ) a knowledge of the exits from
the garden, and (e) a knowledge of a place where a horse might be
concealed to aid escape.
Thorne by a process equivalent to demonstration was shown to
possess all these items of knowledge save the last; no doubt really
remained that he also knew that.
Then, beyond these facts 'were those relating to the horse “ Mickey,”
thus :
(1.) A hard-fed horse such as “Mickey” was when employed in
ploughing had been tied to the post.
(2.) The footmarks for four miles along the roads were exactly
like those of “ Mickey,” and the most diligent search failed to reveal
a horse with shoes resembling his within twenty miles.
(3.) “ Mickey ” was under Thorne’s control, and he should have
been in a position to account for the horse leaving the paddock if
he left it.
(4.) The wet marks on the cover were evidence that “ Mickey ”
had been taken out that night. The silence of Thorne as to this
added to its importance.
(5.) In rough country like that, divided into large paddocks, it
would be most difficult for a stranger to come and get that horse out
even if he wanted to steal it. For a stranger to take it out and


ride it eighteen miles and back and replace it in the paddock was in
Thorne’s own opinion unthinkable.
And beyond these data was the history of the cartridge, which
need not be further referred to than to point out that it would be
an amazing thing if a stranger had been found to have used such a
cartridge when there was not the slighest ground for pointing to
any one under suspicion, while such cartridges were found in the
possession of the man with a motive and practically in no other
hands. Mrs. Eyre’s cross-examination shows that an attempt was
made to show that possibly the gun was fired from within the room;
as the evidence negativing this was overwhelming the subject does
not call for further discussion.
Treating this as it really should be treated, as a scientific inquiry
involving the ordinary law of chances as tending to eliminate coin-
cidences, the inquirer feels inclined again to put the question with
which we started, What are you looking for 1 and to put the further
question, Is it reasonable to suppose that any other person than
Thorne is pointed to by this evidence ? Can any other competitor
for the place be reasonably suggested ?
To arrive at the point at which the last question can only be
answered in the negative is the aim of the detective; a candid
detective who is satisfied that he cannot arrive at that point gives
up the pursuit. To put this same test after using his judgment in
eliminating all irrelevant matter is the function of the juryman. If
he then is unable to find anything but a negative answer, it is his
duty to treat the charge as proved beyond reasonable doubt. He
is not bound by any stated rules, but he cannot ignore the dictates
of his conscience or of his judgment.
The late Mr. Justice Johnston more than once remarked that
there was no hard-and-fast line to be drawn between the methods of
investigation used by the detective and those of the Court, save that
the former is at liberty to pursue irrelevant inquiries as far as he likes,
while the latter is restricted to the inquiries allowed by the law of
evidence. We see the learned Judge’s remark pointedly illustrated
when we read the report of a trial held in France or some other
country where there is less restraint as to the kind of fact that may
be treated as evidence.
This trial is put forward as one in which the proceedings of the
police were as fair as those of a Court could be, though, of course,
they had to follow many misleading sidetracks to the end, mainly
that it might not be suggested that they had failed to do so. These
futile clues being dropped, the matter came before the Court as it
is here presented to the reader —a masterpiece of detective work.
One further remark is due to the unfortunate wife of the deceased.
After the close of the trial the presiding Judge expressed the opinion
that she had given absolutely truthful evidence. A critical examina-
tion of the whole evidence completely bears out this conclusion.
Whatever her faults may have been she has done all that lay in her
power to atone for them by her honourable conduct.


IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW ZEALAND, NORTHERN DISTRICT.-
CRIMINAL SESSONS.
HIS MAJESTY THE KING V. SAMUEL JOHN THORNE.
MURDER.
Mr. J. C. Martin’s Speech for the Crown.
In opening, Mr. Martin pointed out to the jury that the case was
one of circumstantial evidence. A large number of perfectly inde-
pendent circumstances would be placed before them. Each of these
circumstances was in itself very small, but the strength of the case
lay in that all of them pointed in one direction only. Counsel
explained that the accused man had worked on Mr. Eyre’s farm for
some time, and in August was working on Mr. Granville’s farm some
eighteen miles away. The accused’s dog remained with the Eyres.
It invariably barked when any one approached, even although a
friend, until he scented the person. On the night of the murder the
dog barked once some time before Mrs. Eyre heard the fatal shot
fired. Why did it not bark just prior to the shot ? So far as was
known, neither robbery nor revenge was the motive for the murder.
It could be taken that Mr. Eyre’s children, fourteen and sixteen years
of age, did not commit the crime. Regarding Mrs. Eyre, after the
gunshot she was heard to cry, “ Dad ! Dad ! ” and to get out of bed
and strike a light. Later the police found that her bedclothes, which
she had thrown over when rising, were covered with blood in such
a way as to indicate they had been in ordinary use when the shot was
fired. There were only two known persons who were aware of the
habits of the Eyre family and how Mr. Eyre slept. One was a man
who once went to the house on County Council business and spoke to
Eyre through the open window. The other was the accused, who
had helped to put the bed up.
Mr. Martin then touched on the suggestion that the fatal shot
might have been fired inside the room. To obtain the angle at which
the gun would have to be fired inside the room the bed containing
the sleeping man would require to be moved. It would be shown,
however, that the blood-stains on the floor did not indicate that the
bed had been moved, and the suggestion that after the murder the bed
had been rearranged could not be supported. So the jury must find
that the murder was committed from the outside.
An unpleasant feature in the case, continued counsel, was the
relationship which existed between Mrs. Eyre and Thorne, the accused
man. Practically the only value of Mrs. Eyre’s evidence was that it
supplied a motive. Thorne probably became filled with a desire to
possess the. woman, and thus the motive of jealousy was supplied,


“ Don’t you wish he were dead ? ” or “ Would you be happy if he
were dead ? ” were questions which counsel said had been put by
the accused to Mrs. Byre when discussing her husband with her on
the 15th August. Thorne was then on a visit to the house. In
further conversation with Mrs. Eyre Thorne again referred to her
husband in a certain connection, adding, “ I felt as if I could kill
him.” He left that house, commented Mr. Martin, with an idea of
death in his mind. Thorne’s conduct when the police visited him on
the 25th August, and subsequently, was described, reference being
made to his several attempts to see Mrs. Eyre, which it was suggested
were made for the purpose of ascertaining what she was going to say
to the police. When he learned what she had told the police he did
not deny the statements. There was also Thorne’s assertion, “If
they get me I will pull some one else in.” That meant he must have
known something about the murder, hut he had not suggested any
guilty person. In regard to the prints of a horse’s shoes, discovered
on the road afterwards, if'these were made by “ Mickey,” one of the
horses at the farm where Thorne worked, was it possible that any other
person than the accused could have got the horse out of the paddock,
ridden it to Byre’s house, murdered Eyre, and would then have taken
the trouble to take the horse all the way hack, put its cover on the
animal, and turn it out in the paddock ?
Counsel dealt with the type of cartridge used by the accused, and
said the wads found near the murdered man were similar to those in
Thorne’s cartridges. Several other points were elaborated by counsel,
and reference was made to conversations between Thorne and Mrs.
Eyre and with others before he was arrested. |||


INDEX TO WITNESSES.
Page
Newton, Alexander Davis .. 17
Kelly, Thomas .. 18
Eyre, Milliceut ~ 18
Eyre, Philip Sydney ~ 37, 51, 75
Eyre, Dora Millicent .. 42
Eox, John .. .. .43
Wake, Charles Hereward .. 45
Campbell-Smith, Alexander .. 46
Johnstone, Henry .. 47
Eyre, William Theodore .. 47
O’Brien, Edward Francis .. 48
Marshall, Frederick George .. 48
Monokton, Owen Martin .. 49
Brook, Henry .. 49
Ross, William .. 50
Morrison, George Henry .. 50
Cheesman, Horace Archer .. 51
Hazard, William Henry .. 52
Black, James .. 58
Lucas, Edward Mathias .. 59
Page
Beloe, Donald Cameron .. 59
Vincent, Charles .. .. 60
McNeill, William Smith .. 61
Morrison, Eric George .. 61
Bell, Joseph .. .. .. 62
Granville, James .. 63
Tippins, Benjamin .. .. 69
Sharp, Herman Henry .. 73
Stuart, John McPherson .. 76
McCutchen, Henry .. .. 78
Taylor, William James .. 79
Shugar, Andrew Matthew .. 80
Hallamore, John Edwin .. 81
Spilsbury, John .. 82
McHugh, Andrew Gilbride .. 82
Wolfendale, Thomas .. .. 84
Sweeney, John Henry .. 85
Cowan, John Thomas .. 85
Cummings, James .. .. 89


IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW ZEALAND, NORTHERN DISTRCT.-
CRIMINAL SESSIONS.
HIS MAJESTY THE KING v. SAMUEL JOHN THORNE.
MURDER—SECOND TRIAL.
NOTES OF EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFORE THE HON.
MR. JUSTICE CHAPMAN.
FIRST DAY: MONDAY, THE 29TH NOVEMBER, 1920.
J. C. Martin and R. P. Hunt for the Crown.
R. A. Singer, O. E. Stout, and W. J. Gatenby for the prisoner.
F. D. McLiver to watch proceedings on behalf of Mrs. Eyre.
Mr. Martin opens for the Crown, and calls :
Alexander Davis Newton.
Examined by Mr. Martin.- —I am G-overnment Staff Surveyor.
I have made a drawing of Eyre’s house, which I now produce. [Put
in.] The scale is 4 ft. to an inch. That shows the house and the
position of the two beds in Eyre’s bedroom and the chest of drawers
and also the box. Underneath the ground plan of the house I have
shown an elevation of the doorway leading from the passage into
Eyre’s bedroom, and also showing a hole in the wall from the passage
into Eyre’s bedroom. I looked through that hole, and from it could
see the double bed and a portion of the single bed. The plan also
shows the elevation of Eyre’s bedroom-window and the weather-
boarding and other boarding in front of the house. I have marked
in the actual heights. From the top of the rough board to the top
of the window-sill is 4 ft. 1 in. That opening between the rough
board and the bottom weatherboard is 6 in. I have made a per-
spective drawing of the inside of the bedroom, and it shows some red
dots on the chest of drawers, the end wall, and the wall opposite the
window. Those red dots signify the brain-matter. It is slightly
out of perspective. The jury may disregard anything shown on the
right-hand side of the box in the drawing.
I believe the country is all under the Land Transfer Act. I have
also prepared a tracing showing Eyre’s farm and different roads. I
don’t know the district myself. I don’t know the different names
given locally to the roads, &c. That tracing shows the house, fences ;


posts,, and creeks. [Tracing put in, Exhibit E.] I made the per-
spective diagram from observations on the spot.
To Judge. —The pink marks indicate the scattering of the brain-
matter, which I took myself from my own observations.
To Mr. Martin. —I produce an ordinary lithograph map of the
district. [Exhibit F put in.] That is the ordinary county map. The
scale on the tracing is 10 chains to the inch.
The distance from the post to Eyre’s house is 154 yards.
Not cross-examined.
Thomas Kelly.
Examined hy Mr. Martin. —I am a police constable stationed at
Auckland, and I do the photographic work for the police when it is
wanted. I took the photographs of Eyre’s house, both the external
portion of the front of the house and the interior of Eyre’s bedroom,
which I now produce. The fence on the front and both sides and
portion of the back of the house is an elaeagnus fence. In that fence
is shown a gate on the right of the house. I also show a fuller view
of the house with Byre’s bedroom-window. Then there is a photo-
graph of the window of Eyre’s room with the weatherboarding under-
neath. The next is a photograph of Eyre’s bedroom showing window,
chest of drawers, Eyre’s bed, and Mrs. Eyre’s bed. The spotty
matter shown on the wall, chest of drawers, and the wall at the side
of Mrs. Eyre’s bed is brain-matter. It also shows brain-matter oh
the floor as well.
The bottom photograph shows the dead man lying in his bed, and
shows the injury to his head. On the side of the pillow—extending
from the head to the edge of the pillow —is brain-matter-—a portion
of his brains.
I arrived at the house at about half past 9 or a quarter to 10 on
the morning of the 26th August.
In the bottom photograph of Eyre it shows the same position of
the body as it was when I arrived, with the exception of the hand.
When I saw the deceased first his hands were across his chest. I
couldn’t say who moved the hand. The clothes when I first saw
deceased were right over the top of the frame of the bed so as to
cover the dead man’s face. Later, when I took the photograph one
hand had been moved out.
Thorne’s height is 5 ft. 2f in. in his stocking feet and 5 ft. in-
in light slippers.
I received the single-barrelled shot-gun which has been produced
from Sergeant Fox at the house of deceased on the 26th August. I
brought it to Auckland and handed it to Mr. Hazard for examination.
Not cross-examined.
Millicent Eyee.
Examined by Mr. Martin. —l am the widow of the late Mr. Eyre
and lived with him on his farm at Pukekawa. That is about eight


or ten miles beyond Tnakau. He bad taken up the farm before I
bad married bim. I have five children, the eldest being Philip, aged
about sixteen. My daughter Dora is fourteen years old.
From the time of our marriage I resided on that farm practically
continuously and worked on that farm with my husband. I did
manual labour on the farm. I had a dwellinghouse there —a five-
roomed house. 1 have seen the plan produced of the house before.
That shows the position of my bed and my husband’s bed, my
daughter’s bed, and two beds in the boys’ room. The photographs
are of my home, which I recognize.
The house was surrounded by a big eheagnus fence. There was a
gate leading through that fence as shown in the photograph. There
was also a, gate leading from the back door, but no other gates in the
elasagnus fence. There were some gaps in the fence. One of them
is shown in the second picture as being blocked up with boards.
There were no other gaps, I think. The ground up there is volcanic
ground, and at the time of my husband’s death it had been dug.
That ground had been dug within a few feet of the house. The
ground had been dug, but not all of it —on the right-hand side of
the photq to the fence was in oats. It had not been dug along the
front underneath the bedroom-window. There were weeds and
flowers growing there. The weeds were in among the flowers. At
the right-hand side of the house was a path, but the weeds were
growing on it. The oats were tramped down.
To Judge. —The ground in the second photograph was in that
condition as shown in the photograph.
To Mr. Martin. —The house is rough-lined inside, and is neither
scrimmed nor papered. The boards are rough lining-boards and do
not all fit closely, some having cracks between them. I remember
the wall between my room and the passage. At the doorway there
was a hole in the wall. That hole is shown on the plan prepared by
Mr. Newton. Our bedroom was furnished with a double bed which
I occupied, a chest of drawers, and a smaller bed which stood under
the window, which latter bed was occupied by my husband. These
photographs and plan show a box standing beside my husband’s bed.
That was not there in the daytime, and I generally place it there at
night-time with a glass of water for my husband’s use. The box
had four sides, a top, and a botton. The opening was at the side,
generally towards the bed, when I put it by my husband’s bed.
The front door could not be opened from the outside of the house,
as it had no handle on it. From the inside it could only be opened
with difficulty, because it stuck. It made a rattle when it was opened.
The door leading from the living-room into the kitchen had a
chair against it each night. I put the chair there. The doorway
leading out of the kitchen towards the backyard was just closed.
That was the position of things on the night my husband was
murdered. The front door was closed and couldn’t he opened except


from the inside, and then only with difficulty and a noise. People
living in the country are not so particular about locking their doors
as people living in the cities.
My husband was in the habit of sleeping with the window open
in fine weather, but it was closed in wet weather. On the night of
my husband’s murder that window was open when we went to bed.
Early in 1917, on the advice of his doctor —Dr. Mackenzie—my
husband went to California, where he had relatives. I know that
afterwards he left California and went to Canada, where he enlisted
and served abroad, returned to Canada and got his discharge. During
his absence I had been on the farm and with Mr. McLiver had
managed the property, holding a joint power of attorney from my
husband. When my husband went away a man named Wilkes was
working on the place. He died as the result of an accident, then I
had a Maori named Oti working there. He died in the influenza
epidemic. Then a man named "Ross came. He is still alive and is
one of the witnesses who give evidence. Then came a man named
McAuley, who also died in the influenza epidemic. Then I engaged
the accused Thorne to come and work on the place.
Thorne had previously worked on the place for a few weeks.
Thorne came to me about 21st October, 1918, and remained there
until July, 1920. During the time he was on my husband’s property
he occupied a bed in the boys’ bedroom, which bed is shown on the
plan as being nearest to the outside wall. He lived while he was
with us as one of the family, having his meals in the house with us.
After my husband returned his health was not good, and the
accused remained on in his employ.
My husband occupied the small bed in our room. I had been
ill, and my mother came and stayed with me, and she had a small
bed in that room in 1918, but that is not the small bed my husband
had. That small bed my mother occupied was removed when she
left the place. After my husband’s return he had this small bed
put up in that room, and he occupied the bed. I think accused
helped my husband to put up that bed —I wasn’t there myself.
I knew before my husband’s death that he had made a will, which
was kept in the middle top drawer of the chest of drawers. That
drawer had no lock on it, nor was it locked. Papers and documents
were also kept in that drawer. That drawer was available to
inspection by anybody who went into our room to look at it. The
drawer with the papers in it had often been taken out to the dining-
room table by me while accused was with me and in his presence.
I knew the contents of my husband’s will. lam not in a position
to say whether accused did or did not know the contents of the will.
Practically from the beginning of 1919 improper relations existed
between accused and myself until my husband’s return. These
relations continued after my husband’s return, practically until the
accused left. Accused is a married man. He married my cousin.


He is separated from his wife. The improper relations were con-
tinued after my husband’s return, as accused threatened to expose
me to my husband and get me divorced. He said to me several
times he could easily get a divorce, and I said I didn’t think so ; he
knew her condition when he married her and knew it wasn’t her
fault. She had something the matter with her nerves. If he could
get a divorce he wanted me to leave my husband and go away with
him.
Unless some one spoke very loudly in our bedroom you could
not hear a conversation carried on there if in the boys’ bedroom.
I had conversations with accused about what happened in our
bedroom more than once. I accused the prisoner of listening, and
he did not deny it, and he could tell me of conversations that took
place between my husband and myself, although we had spoken in
a very low tone.
Although my husband occupied a separate bed to me ordinary
marital intercourse took place between my husband and I. He used
to come to my bed and stay there and then go back to his own.
Accused said he could hear this taking place between my husband
and I. He said, “ When I heard you at it I felt like killing him.”
If I had a joke or fun with my husband accused would get very angry
and threaten me. He took notice of it and got in a temper and
appeared to be very jealous. That was whenever he saw me talking
and laughing or taking any notice of my husband.
When accused was with me he had the gun and gun-case now
in Court. I got some cartridges for accused from Hazard. Accused
sent for them himself, and I simply wrote out the cheque. When
the cartridges came I bought one packet from accused for my son
Philip. When accused was with me he had a sheep-dog called
“ Bob.” He would work either sheep or cattle. That dog would
work for me. He worked for me as well as he would work for
accused. The dog was there with us over a year, but I don’t know
exactly how long. He was a good watch-dog. When anybody
approached the house the dog would bark savagely until, if he knew
them, he would stop barking; but if he did not know them he would
still continue barking. If I approached, the dog would bark until
I got close enough for him to smell, then he would stop.
On the night of the murder there were in our house a single-
barrelled shot-gun and a rifle, which are now in Court. The shot-
gun belonged to my boy Philip, and the rifle was out of order and
could not be used. Those guns were kept in the boys’ room.
My husband gave notice to Thorne to leave. When he left they
appeared to be good friends, but Thorne was very angry when he
knew he had to go. My. husband told him not to be in a hurry but
to wait until he got a job to suit him. Then Thorne got a job with
Mr. Granville and he left. He took the dog “ Bob ” away, and it
came back to our place. So he left the dog with us. I think he


took him away twice and the dog came back. The last time
accused was at our house was on Sunday, the 15th August last. He
had a meal with us that day. My husband was there. I think
they all had dinner together. I was not present at dinner. I came
out just as they were finishing. I had some conversation with
Thorne on that Sunday when the children were some little distance
away, but I don’t think they heard what was said. Thorne asked
how we were getting on on the farm with things, and I said they
were at a standstill. I said my husband had hurt himself and was
laid up with a sore leg, and there was nothing done but what Phil
and I did. Accused said, “ Don’t you wish he were dead ? ” or
“ Wouldn’t you be happier if he were dead ? ” He said, “ Where
does he sleep now ? ” I said, “In his own little bed.” I didn’t
see the accused again after that until after the murder.
On the night of the murder we all went to bed somewhere about
9 o’clock or a little later. Phil had been away to get a telegram.
My husband and I talked for a time, and then we each went to our
beds. I slept in my own double bed and my husband in the single
bed. One dog was tied up in the shed, and “ Bob ” was loose under
the house, and I think the other dog was away hunting. I went
to sleep. Before I went to sleep I followed my usual custom of
putting the box by the side of my husband with the cup of water
on it. I then went to sleep. The next thing that disturbed me was
the dog barking —that is, Thome’s dog ; it was under the boys’
bedroom under the house. I called out to the dog to lie down and
be quiet. He stopped barking. I don’t know if the barking dis-
turbed my husband —he never spoke. I then went to sleep again.
I had on a nightdress and a vest. I had nothing on my feet. The
bedclothes were pulled right up round my chin. The next thing I
knew of I was awakened by the report of a gun. I sat up in the bed
and said, “ What’s that ? ” I called to my husband, but he didn’t
answer. I got out of bed and went over and put my hand on him
and called out again. I struck a light and lit the candle and saw
that he had the top of his head blown off. When I called to him
I called out “ Dad ! ”
When I saw my husband was in this state I went to the boys’
room still just in my nightdress. The boys were awake, Phil being just
in the act of getting out of bed. I told Philip something and went
back into my own bedroom. Philip went with me as well as the little
boy Jock into the bedroom. The next thing I did was to go out
and shut the bedroom door. I went into Dora’s room and told
her to get up and dress herself. She was awake. The little one
with her was not awake. I then sent off the big boys to the nearest
neighbour’s house—Mr. Goode’s. This is about a quarter of a mile
from our house. I recognize the locality shown on the tracing.
I now identify the place where Mr. Goode’s house is.
To Judge. —The boys would not cross a road to go to Mr. Goode’s.


To Mr. Martin. —There are paddocks between our place and Mr.
Goode’s in a straight line. While the boys were away —I was still
in my nightdress when they left —I got dressed. The boys later
on returned with a young man named Brook. Until the time the
boys returned I never left the house. During their absence I was
not left alone at all. My daughter and other children were there
all the time.
Later on Sergeant Cowan arrived and afterwards Detective-Sergeant
Cummings.
After the shot woke me I heard some one going up the side of
the house—the side where my head was —towards the back gate.
That is the side where the head of my bed was—that is the same
side where I said before that there was a path trodden through the
oats. I thought the footsteps were like accused’s steps —they were
short, quick, heavy steps. About five or ten minutes after the boys
left I heard a horse going across the bridge ; it seemed to be going
fast; it was going towards Tippins’s.
To Judge. —The boys had been gone between five and ten minutes
when I heard the horse. The boys left the house somewhere between
five and ten minutes after the shot was fired. It was some minutes
before the boys got away from the house and some minutes after
that that I heard the horse on the bridge.
To Mr. Martin. —The plan shows a creek crossing the road with
a bridge over the creek. That is the bridge I meant.
To Judge. —There is nothing to prevent a man going straight to
the bridge across the fields once he was outside the ekeagnus fence.
It depends which side of the house he went out. If he got outside
the elseagnus fence having gone out by the track side of the house
he would have a clear run. The other side he would have to climb
a fence. If he was near the house when the boys came out he could
have got underneath the overhanging hedge and no one could have
seen him—that is, being outside the hedge he could have got under-
neath it. It is a thick hedge all round excepting where the gates
are.
To Mr. Martin. —l don’t think it would be possible for any one
to have entered our house without waking me at night. Nothing
was missed from our place at all —nothing was stolen. j
The head of my husband’s bed was close up to the edge of the
window. The foot of his bed is close to the wall. The space
between the foot of his bed and the wall had a trunk there, also a
kit-bag, some painted panels, and a small handbag, and there was
also a suit hanging on a coat-hanger right over all this.
When the police came they interviewed me. I was very flurried
and excited and upset at that time. I started to make a statement
to the poh’ce. The detective officer wrote down what I said. The
detective officer asked me questions and I gave answers. I did not
complete the statement, as I wasn’t in a fit state to give a clear and


truthful statement. He left off asking me and said lie would come
again when I was more composed. I had been crying and my head
was aching. Detective-Sergeant Cummings left my place, and after
he had gone I went over to my brother’s place in Onewhero. He
is Mr. Hallamore. At a later date I went to the Tuakau Police-
station at the request of the police and saw the accused there. I know
Detective-Sergeant Cummings and Sergeant Cowan. They were both
there.
I had a conversation with accused. I don’t remember the date
—it was some time in September. I said to him, “ Good evening,
Sam,” and he said, “ Good evening, Mrs. Eyre.” He said he had
always found me a truthful woman. I don’t know whether at that
time he had read anything or not. He said he believed that the
boys Phil and John were truthful, and said he had nothing against
me or my late husband. He said he had always got on well with us,
and that we had all been good to him. He said he didn’t mean to
suggest that I or any of my family had anything to do with the death
of my late husband. He asked me what made me think he had
killed my husband. I said, “ The circumstances.” He said, “ What
circumstances ? ” and I said, “ The person who did it must have
known the position of the bed and the run of the place.” He said,
“As true as lam here I never did it.” I said, “If you are innocent
I feel very sorry for you.” He said, “Is that all your statement
that you gave to the police,” and I said, “ Yes, and you know it is
true.” He said, “ What would be my object in doing it ? ” or “ What
would I gain ? ” and I said, “ That is best known to yourself.” He
said, “ Would that dog have barked at me ? ” and I said, “ He would
when he heard you coming, but when you got close enough for him
to smell he would stop.” He said, “ Your statement has put me
in a tight corner, and I will have a hard job to get out of it. Do the
police object to me seeing you ? ” I said, ‘‘ I will not answer that
question.” That is all I can remember.
To Judge. —The statement he referred to had been read by accused.
I know he had read it by what he said—he referred to it. It was a
statement in writing I had signed. He read it before the police went
out.
To Mr. Martin. —When I went into the room where Thorne was
I don’t know where the statement was. I don’t know whether he had
seen it before or not. Whilst I was there he saw the statement. He
read the statement while I was there. It was given to him to read.
Except my clothing which I put on, nothing was touched in the
room from the time I went to call my son until the time the police
arrived. The floor, walls, and bed were all in the same state as when
I got my clothing. I remember my daughter getting up after I had
called her. She said she saw a substance in my hair. She drew
my attention to it. I couldn’t see what the substance was.


Cross-examined hy Mr. Singer. Before my husband went away
we used to take a stretcher into our room, and when he wasn’t feeling
well he used to sleep by himself. It was only when he was ill —that
would be only occasionally —that he used to occupy a separate bed.
1 don’t remember how often that was. He slept by himself when he
wasn’t well, but how often I couldn’t say. The stretcher was folded
up and put in Dora’s room when it wasn’t being used. That is the
other front bedroom opposite ours. The stretcher is still up there.
I don’t know what the period of his illness was. lam not certain of
the date, but am aware he wasn’t well for a year or more prior to his
going away. He gradually got worse before he left.
Ours was a very happy household. My husband was exceedingly
fond of me, and I was exceedingly fond of him. He was very fond of
his children, and his children were all very fond of him. My husband’s
preference was for the boys.
My husband went to California early in February, 1917. At that
time our affections for one another had not changed in any respect.
When my husband went away my son Phil was the only one of the
family who went to see him off. That was, Phil went to Tuakau,
ten miles away. When my husband left New Zealand he left from
Wellington, embarking there. Phil rode with him so as to bring the
hack back that my husband rode to the Tuakau Station. At that
time it was expected that my husband would not in all probability
return to New Zealand alive. While my husband was away corre-
spondence passed between us —from him to me and from myself to
him. I possess some of his letters which I gave to the police. [Five
letters.] The letters extend from August, 1918, to May, 1919.
I didn’t hand the letters to the police ; they got them. They are
the only letters of my husband that I possess. I read those letters
or had them read to me in the Lower Court at Pukekohe. Four
of them were written while he was away, and one on his return to
New Zealand. Those letters are written in the usual way in which
my husband wrote. I have not now any letters in which my husband
went to the extent of sending his love to myself and the children.
During my husband’s absence from New Zealand my son Philip
never on any occasion wrote to his father. I sent messages
to his father in my letters, but I just forget whether Phil told
me to send them or not. I said I had sent messages to his
father from Phil, but am not sure whether he told me to send them or
not. I said I wasn’t sure whether Phil had given me the messages
to his father. I forget whether Phil has said that he never on any
occasion gave me a message to his father. I have read some of the
newspaper reports on this case. I was there part of the time in the
Lower Court when my son was giving evidence. I won’t swear that
I never heard my son say he had never given me any messages to
send to his father at any time. I was in Court part of the time when
my son gave evidence at Pukekohe.


I heard Philip Eyre give his evidence in the Supreme Court a
few days ago [at the first trial], but I don’t remember hearing him
say it. I don’t remember his saying, “While my father was away
I did not write to him myself, and I did not send any message to him.”
I think I remember hearing him say, “ While my father was away
we were all very happy at the farm. Thorne was very good to us,
and I liked him very much.” I say I don’t remember his saying
about not sending a message to his father.
My husband came back in the month of August, 1919 —the sth
or 6th August. He just walked up on to the farm without any warning
to anybody. He had not cabled me from his place of leaving, nor
telegraphed from the town he landed in in New Zealand. The only
intimation he had given to me as to when he intended to arrive was,
as I think I stated at the last hearing, I received a letter from my
husband dated November, 1918, and I stated in the witness-box that
he said in that letter that he would be back in April, May, or June.
I stated that that was the only news I had as to when my husband
was coming home.
My husband told me he was going away to California for his
health. He told me that some time before he left, but how long before
I can’t remember. I don’t remember if it was the same year ; it may
have been the year before. I don’t remember how long before he went
away that he told me he had decided to go away ; it may have been
a few weeks or it may have been a few months before. I couldn’t
tell how long before he went that I knew the date of his departure.
I was on the farm continuously except when I was away sick.
I may have been away a week or ten days. I was not away from
the farm sick while my husband was away from New Zealand.
I think it was in October, 1918, that Thorne came to work at our
place. I don’t remember the date. I can’t remember all these
dates. I think it was in the month of October, 1918. Between
the date of his arrival and the end of the year I don’t remember any-
thing happening. I remember I was laid up with pneumonia. My
mother nursed me, she having come to my place from Auckland to
nurse me. Between the date of his starting to work for us and the
end of the year Thorne was laid up. I was sick before Thorne came
out of Tuakau Hospital, I was in bed a week or two, but don’t just
remember how long. It was a short time after Thorne arrived that
I took ill. It would be correct to say that Thorne came to us on
the 21st October, 1918. I was taken ill a week or two afterwards,
and then I was in bed a week or two, and then Thorne was taken ill
with the epidemic and was taken to the Tuakau Hospital, where he
may have been in bed a fortnight. I think he was only off work for
two weeks, as far as I can remember. Between the 31st October
and the end of the year either he or I was pretty seriously ill at some
period.
Improper relations between Thorne and myself started on the
Ist January, 1919. When my husband went away the baby was in
the bedroom with me. That was in the early part of 1917.


To Judge. —The baby was a yeaf old when my husband went
away.
To Mr. Singer. —I don’t remember when I ceased having the
baby in my room. I think it was when I had influenza. It was
then put in the girl’s room. lam not sure if the child was moved
when I had the influenza—that was when I had pneumonia at the
end of 1918. I did not have the child back again. I was recovered
in November, but did not have the child back again.
The improper relations commenced in my own room, which room
my husband and I had previously and subsequently occupied. At
that time there were two beds in that room —I think, but I am not
sure. It was Thorne’s own suggestion that he should come to my
room. I never suggested it at all. He came in. It was not at my
suggestion that Thorne came in. I deliberately say it was not at
my suggestion that Thorne came in. On the 25th August I made my
first statement to the police, and I did not make another statement
to the police until the 29th August —a Sunday. I made the second
statement then. I don’t remember in that statement saying to the
police, in effect, that the suggestion came from me. I stated that
on the Ist January accused commenced to put his arms round me
and kiss me and [witness referred to an act of indecency], I said,
“ Don’t do that here.” I believe I did say that. I believe I made
that statement.
To Judge. —l used the expression “ here.”
To Mr. Singer. —l think I made the statement. “He then came
into my room. That was about 10 p.m.” I used that expression I
think. I didn’t expect him to come in. I thought very likely he
would come in. Thorne had been very kind to me. I said on the
last occasion, “ He had been very kind to me, and I felt very grateful
to him, as he had helped me out of a lot of difficulties on the farm
and had been very kind to the children.” Thorne had only been
out of work two weeks ill. At that time I thought Thorne was a
very decent fellow. My opinion of him began to change when I
found out what he was when he started threatening me. That was
a short time after the Ist January. I just don’t remember how long
after the Ist January. It wasn’t six months after ; it was within a
month or two. I don’t remember exactly. I am not certain and
can give nothing more definite than that. I think I told you last
time Thorne threatened me twice. I said on a former occasion that
Thorne had only threatened me once between the Ist December and
my husband’s return. I have remembered the other time since then.
I think I said in the Magistrate’s Court that Thorne only threatened
me on one occasion before my husband came home.
Q. “ Did Thorne ever use any phrase of that nature prior to your
husband’s return ? ” Were you asked that question in the Supreme
Court, and didn’t you answer, “ I am not sure and I couldn’t be
positive ” — A. Yes, I think I answered that way. The expression


accused used was, “ You had better be on your best behaviour as I
have you in my power.” That expression was used before my
husband came home. I don’t know the date he used that expression
to me. I have no idea of the date.
His intimacy and threats turned me against him. I wouldn’t
say what the date of his threat was. When Thorne came to me in
1918 he said he would leave when my husband came back, as he
didn’t like him and never did like him. I think it was twice he
threatened me before my husband returned. He did not say the
same as on the previous occasion. He said on the second occasion,
“If ever I leave here I can make it hot for you.” I can’t remember
when he said that. I don’t know when it was that he said that. I
wouldn’t be sure that it was about the same time as the other threat.
I don’t know when the second threat was made.
Thorne and I were sworn to secrecy. That oath of secrecy was
made immediately after the Ist January, 1919, as far as I can
remember. It was made within a very short time of the Ist January,
1919. I am not sure and could not say whether that was made
before the threats. I wouldn’t be sure about it whether it was Thorne
who bound me to secrecy before I bound him. I know my own
signature. That is my signature and the statement I made on 29th
August. I said in the Supreme Court the other day that we had
promised one another not to say anything. So far as 1 knew, nobody
but ourselves knew about this up to the 24th August. So far as I
knew, my husband didn’t know, neither did any of my children.
After my husband’s return and before the 24th August on several
occasions while my husband was away from the farm Thorne packed
his things and said he was going. I think he did it once or twice. I
made the statement “ Sam bound me to confidence and I bound him.”
I don’t think there is any doubt about it being my statement. I
don’t suggest that Detective-Sergeant Cummings is lying when he
puts something down on paper. Thorne told me after my husband
came home that he had been asked by my husband to stay. Ido not
remember that I asked Thorne to stay. When he told me my husband
had asked him to stay he said he was unhappy, and I told him to go,
and he said if he did he would commit suicide. I advised him to go.
He said he had had a row with my husband and had given my husband
notice. That was while my husband was on the farm and not while
my husband was away. I told him if he was unhappy to go.
Q. At the last Supreme Court did you not use this expression :
“ I did not ask him to stay. I advised him to go ? ” — A. I remember
saying “ I advised him to go.”
After my husband’s return I had contempt for Thorne. I don’t
say my feeling was almost unbearable. I never said that I had an
absolute abhorrance of him. The words read to me now were your
words and not mine. “ I began to dislike Thorne when he said he
had me in his power. The more I saw of him the more I disliked


him. When my husband came home I disliked him more, as I got
to know him better. I had an absolute contempt for him by the
time he came to leave us in July this year—an absolute abhorrance.”
Those were your words. I said I disliked him. I refuse to answer
whether I agreed with that statement or not.
I remember when Thorne packed his things and wanted to go, and
demanded his wages. When my husband was in New Zealand but
away from the farm Thorne would pack his things and demand his
wages. I asked him why he was going, and he would say “ Just to
leave him in a hole.” I said, “ Why are you going ? What’s the
matter ? ” and he answered, “It is just to put him (meaning my
husband) in a hole.” I said he would have to wait till my husband
came home to give him notice, as I never paid any cheques without
my husband’s authority.
SECOND DAY.
TUESDAY, THE 30TH NOVEMBER, 1920.
To Mr. Singer. —I remember you put a certain statement to me
last night which you said I had made at the last hearing. I think
I did agree with that statement.
To Judge. —Mr. Singer make that statement he has just read
out. As far as I can remember I agreed with that statement.
To Mr. Singer. —If 1 agreed with it it is correct.
When he (Thorne) said he was going I asked him, “ What is the
matter 1 What are you leaving for % ”
I am not sure when the binding to secrecy occurred between
Thorne and I. I think it was after he threatened me—I am not
sure.
After my husband’s return from Canada he was a good many
times away from the farm. He was away several times. I couldn’t
say how many. I don’t think he was away every month. Besides
that he would go to bed when he wasn’t well. That might be when
he would lay in bed for a day or two, and other times he would go
for weeks without going to bed. He was still being attended by
the same doctor after his return from Canada. He was taking
medicine for his complaint. He was suffering from diabetes. When
he first came home he didn’t sleep well. Some six weeks before his
death he had some injection administered by the doctor owing to
my husband being such a bad sleeper. After that injection he slept
well. Perhaps “ soundly ” was the expression. After the injection
he used to say that he would go to bed at night and not waken until
the morning.
I have seen the piece of paper [produced] before. So far as I
remember that is what the words of the advertisement I saw were.


I saw that advertisement when I was in Tuakau in the Star news-
paper. Having seen the advertisement I brought the paper home
and showed the paper to my husband. That would be about eleven
days after my husband’s return, so far as I can remember. When
I showed it to him I don’t remember asking my husband anything
about the advertisement. I have no recollection of asking him
when I showed it to him who it was that was advertising. I have
no recollection of it. I gave him the paper and said, “ Somebody
is advertising for you.” I didn’t know who was advertising for him.
I do not remember drawing his attention- to any particular part of
the advertisement. I had no curiosity as to who it was —none
whatever. He did not attempt to explain to me who it was that
was advertising for him. So far as I knew, at no time during his life
had he ever been advertised for before. Ido not now know anything
about the advertisement. I have not been told about it. I have
not discussed the advertisement with my children that I remember,
nor with Thorne. Thorne may have been with me in Tuakau when
this advertisement was seen in the Star. Somebody else in the
store at Tuakau told me about it. I don’t remember showing it
to Thorne when I got it in the store.
After his return from Canada my husband was accustomed to
receive letters. Those letters were from abroad. I don’t know
whether any of them were in women’s handwriting. I don’t know
where they came from. I didn’t examine the post-marks that I
can remember. The children used to bring the mail home and put
the letters on the mantelpiece. I may have glanced at the addresses,
but I didn’t examine them. My husband was in the habit of reading
these letters and destroying or burning them immediately. He
never showed me the contents of any of them, nor so far as I know
the contents of them to any one else. He never discussed the
contents of any of them with me, nor did I ask him about the contents
of any of them. I had no curiosity about that. It didn’t seem
strange to me that some one was advertising for him. It didn’t
seem strange that people should be writing to him whom I didn’t
know. Shortly after the advertisement was seen by my husband
he went away from the farm. After his return from Canada my
husband may have at one period been away from the farm for about
three weeks; that was the longest period. I know what you mean
by cypher. I don’t remember my husband receiving a letter in
cypher after his return from Canada. I never discussed such a letter
with my husband. I never discussed it that I remember. If I
had known of its existence I may have bothered about it. I don’t
know.
When Thorne left in July all parties were on quite good terms.
Between the date of his leaving and the 24th August he was three
times at our farm, the last date being the 15th August.
To Judge. —My husband on these occasions spoke to him and was
apparently on ordinary terms with Thorne.


To Mr. Singer. —On the 15th Thorne had dinner with the rest
of the family, and I came in almost when the dinner was finished.
While Thorne was at Granville’s he wrote a letter to me, to which
I replied. I have stated that, as far as I can remember, his letter
merely asked me to forward his letters to an address he gave. I
think he said he had hurt himself or something. I have stated that
I replied to that letter. I said that Syd had been thrown off his
horse and had hurt his knee and had gone to town to get advice about
it. I said the children were having a social in the schoolroom, and
were very excited about it. I asked him if he had met with an
accident, as he had said in his letter that he was just getting about.
On the 15th Thorne said to me something about where my
husband slept, and on the same date he said, “ Wouldn’t you be
happier if he were dead,” or something like that. I didn’t reply.
I didn’t understand what he meant. The question puzzled me.
On the night of the 24th August I went to bed about 9 o’clock.
After going to bed I heard Thorne’s dog barking furiously for about
ten minutes.
After my husband returned it was the habit for Thorne and I to
have relationship in the living-room after my husband had retired.
After that I would go into my husband’s room and have relations
with him there.
On the night of the 24th I heard the dog bark furiously under
the house and under the boys’ room. I said the other dog was away
hunting. I never heard the other dog’s bark. I knew the bark
of Thorne’s dog “ Bob.” There were three dogs altogether on our
place. I cannot tell the time when that dog barked. I said
before that it may probably have been the time I gave to the police,
I wasn’t sure. I made a statement to the police on Wednesday,
the 25th August, in which I said that somewhere about 11 p.m. I
heard a dog bark. I said it may have been that time. I wasn’t
sure.
To Judge. —l had been asleep and the dog awakened me. I
wasn’t sure what time it was. lam sure I then went to sleep again
after that.
To Mr. Singer. —The handwriting on the statement produced is
my writing. I may have said to the police on the 25th August that
I put the candle out at a quarter past 9. I don’t know who put
the candle out, but think it must have been me, as I was last into
bed. It was generally kept on the box, but I don’t remember where
it was the night of the murder. I suppose I did tell the police that
I put the candle out. About 9.15 p.m. I put the candle out. I
suppose I told the police I put the candle out at 9.15 p.m. I
suppose I did put the candle out at 9.15 p.m., as I was last into bed.
I didn’t look at the clock before doing so. I said it may have been
II that I heard a dog bark. If I said to the police that I heard it
I didn’t mean it that wav. I wasn’t sure of the time.


I had a second interview with the police on Sunday, the 29th
August, when I made a further statement to them. I said I wasn’t
sure what time I heard the dog barking. It is wrong the way the
police have got it in the statement of 25th that I said I heard the
dog bark. I didn’t mean it that way. I signed my statement on
the 29th August in which I stated that somewhere between 10 and
11 p.m. I heard a dog bark. I did that in error. He barked
somewhere between a quarter to 10 and a quarter past 11, but what
time I don’t know. I told you on the last occasion that I didn’t
know what time the dog barked. If I said that I couldn’t tell
within a period of two hours when the dog barked I made another
mistake. The dog would bark savagely when any one approached.
We were not accustomed to have any one approach the house between
a quarter to 10 and a quarter past 11. I thought very likely that
there was some one about. I didn’t call my husband to get up to
have a look and see what it was, and my husband did not waken up
that I know of. I told the dog to lie down and keep quiet, and it
did so.
The next thing I heard was a shot. That shot woke me up. As
soon as I heard that shot the report was like Thorne’s gun. I said
to myself when I heard the gun that the report resembled the sound
of Thorne’s gun. It might have been two months before since I
had heard Thorne’s gun. I did not go out shooting with him, but
had heard his gun several times. I had heard it two or three
times this year. When I was awakened by this sound I said to
myself that it was Thorne’s gun going off. Immediately after my
waking I heard footsteps going up to the back gate round the side
by my room. I immediately realized that those footsteps were
similar to Thorne’s. I believed they were Thorne’s —they were
similar to Thorne’s I said. I believed then that they were Thorne’s.
I had the two incidents—the report of the gun and the sound of the
steps that led me to the conclusion that it was Thorne who was there.
They were short, quick, heavy steps. I couldn’t say how long before
that it was I had heard Thorne run. It wasn’t as long as twelve
months. I had seen Thorne racing with the boys. I heard him
running after sheep, and had heard him running after horses. I thought
it was very likely Thorne, but I thought I might be mistaken. By the
time the police came I wasn’t in a condition to think things out
clearly. I don’t remember saying at the last hearing, “By the
time the police came I had thought the matter over carefully and had
come to the conclusion that Thorne was the only person I could think
of who had committed the murder.” If I said that it was said in
error. I may have said that. I was so upset I couldn’t think clearly.
I didn’t tell my son, “ Don’t tell the police about Thorne and I being
familiar.” I told them that the day I went to my brother’s place.
I don’t think I told the children that before the police came at 4 a.m.
I didn’t know that my son knew that there was any misconduct


between us. I did not know then that he knew that there was any
misconduct. I didn’t know that my son or any one else knew about
that until after my son Philip had given evidence in the Magistrate’s
Court at Pukekohe. My husband didn’t know. I never spoke to my
son about my relationship with Thorne.
Q. Did I ask you the question, “ If Phil says that you spoke to
him about your relationship with Thorne on the morning of the 25th
will he be telling the truth ? ” — A. I did not know that Phil knew
anything about my relationship with Thorne until after he had given
his evidence in the Magistrate’s Court at Pukekohe. You asked me,
did I speak to any of my children about my relationship with Thorne
and I said No. You then asked me the question that if Phil says
I did will he be telling the truth. I said that I did not speak to him,
about being familiar with Thorne, on the morning of the 25th.
Q. Did I ask you the question, “ If Phil says you spoke to him,”
&c. t—A. Yes.
I said in answer to you, “ I did not speak to him about misconduct.
I told him to be careful what he said. I said to him, ‘ Don’t tell the
police about Sam and me being familiar, because it may be the cause
of hanging an innocent man. We think he is guilty, but we may be
mistaken.” I did not understand your term “ familiar ”as meaning
sexual connection. Then you ask me what I meant by the term
“ familiar,” and I said Thorne and I were very good friends.
What I said to Phil meant that we were not familiar —that is,
Thorne and I —Phil had seen Thorne kissing me and I did not want
that told. I knew that at the time. lam not sure that I said this
on the 25th August to Phil. I think I said it on the 26th before I went
over to my brother’s place. It was the 27th I went to my brother’s
place. I think it was on the Thursday that I went to my brother’s
place. If I said before at the previous trial that I said this to Phil
before the police came I said it in error. I wouldn’t be positive about
it being the morning of the 26th. lam not sure about it. I didn’t
hear Phil say that. I don’t remember Phil saying it was on the
morning of the 25th. I don’t remember hearing him say it. I haven’t
seen that where he told the police and signed his name to it. I don’t
know that my son has so stated it, and I have never heard him say it
—not that I remember.
I don’t remember telling Phil on the morning of the 25th that I
thought the police were going to arrest Thorne. I don’t think I said
to Phil on the morning of the 25th, “If he is guilty the police will
find him out, and he will hang.” I didn’t say this on the morning
of the 25th. It was the 26th. I think I said last time I was here
that it was after the 25th. I think I said it was after I gave my first
statement to the police.
I made a statement to the police on the afternoon of the 25th.
It has been produced to me and has a statement at the end in my own
handwriting. I went over the incidents of the 24th then from the
2—Thorne.


time of going to bed until the time the police arrived. In that state-
ment I never said about the shot being Thorne’s or the steps being
his—l don’t remember —I wouldn’t be positive.
I stated on Friday, the 27th August, that I had said up to then
nothing to lead the police to suspect Thorne. I said on that date
that none of the children, so far as I knew, had said anything which
might lead the police to suspect Thorne. I did not make a statement
to the police again until the 29th. If I had said to the police on the
25th that I recognized the sound of the gun as being Thorne’s,
and also the footsteps as being his, that would lead the police to
suspect Thorne. lam not certain about saying anything to the police
on the 25th about footsteps being heard by me. I have read the
statement I made to the police on the 25th August and I don’t see it
there. Having seen that statement I may have said it to the police
about my hearing footsteps, but don’t remember. I don’t remember
if I told the police on the 25th. I don’t remember if I told the nolice
prior to the 29th that I thought I recognized the sound of Thorne’s
gun. I don’t remember if I told the police that on the 25th. I don’t
remember when it was I told the police I believed it was Thorne.
I made that remark in a statement to the police on the 29th. I may
have said to the other police that I believed it was Thorne, or that I
recognized the footsteps as his or recognized his gun.
To Judge. —The police were at my place all the time —they were
coming and going all the time.
To Mr. Singer. —lt was Mr. Cummings who took my statement
on the afternoon of the 25th August. I don’t remember how long
that took to write down.
To Judge. —He appeared to be in a hurry to get to Granville’s. He
left that afternoon. I did not see where he went. I was not out of
the house.
To Mr. Singer. —l may have mentioned to Cummings on the 25th,
but am not sure, that I heard the steps and recognized them as
Thorne’s, or that I recognized the sound of the gun as Thorne’s.
I believe comment was made on the fact that I had made no mention
of the footsteps or sound of the gun to the police until the 29th.
I had a conversation with accused in the Tuakau Police-station
early in September. On the last occasion I stated that up till the
27th August I had said nothing to lead the police to suspect Thorne.
I don’t know if that is true. I don’t remember as a fact whether I
had said anything by the 27th to lead the police to suspect Thorne.
At the Tuakau Police-station accused said, “ Mrs. Eyre, as true
as I’m here I did not do it.” I said to him, “If you are innocent
lam sorry for you.” He said to me, “ What made you think I
did it ? ” I said, “ The circumstances.” To which he replied,
“ What circumstances ? ” I said, “ The person who killed Mr.
Eyre must have known the run of the place and the position of the
bed.” I said, “At first I did not say anything about you, but when


I had thought it over thoroughly and tried you in my own mind I
could not think of anybody but you that would do it.” I didn’t
say anything about Thorne at first. The above was the part of
the conversation that I didn’t remember yesterday, nor did T
remember it on the last occasion until I was reminded of it.
I first of all, after hearing the shot, sat up in bed and said, “ What’s
that ? ” and then I went over and put my hand on my husband and
called to him. Then I struck a light. I don’t remember where
the matches were or where the candlestick was. It was probably
on the box ; they were generally there, but I can’t remember. I
then saw my husband lying on the bed with his brains blown out.
I then took the candlestick and shut the door and went to my sons’
room and said something to them and came back with them. We
came back to my room. I think I had the candle. I wouldn’t be
certain. The room was full of smoke like a thick fog. I saw the
open space by the window. I couldn’t see distinctly, on account
of the thick fog, until I struck a light. I told the police on the 29th
that it was a bright moonlight night. I was feeling well enough on
the 29th to make a statement and had got my mind clear. I didn’t
want to make any mistakes. I judged that Cummings didn’t want
me to make any mistake. I said, “It was a clear moonlight night.
I could see his head was shattered when I looked over after the
shot.” That latter sentence was an error, as I pointed out in the
Supreme Court. I see by the statement produced “ I could see his
head was shattered when I looked over after the report.” I signed
that statement. I couldn’t see until I got to the bedside, and then
I wasn’t certain until I lit the candle. I have never seen a night
as clear as day. It was a bright moonlight night. I don’t think
I used the expression “as clear as day.” I think I said “it was a
bright moonlight night.” I have never seen a night as clear as day.
I said in the Magistrate’s Court, “ I went out and closed the door
to keep the children out, and then rushed back to get my clothes.”
That is not correct. I corrected it last time. I went out and closed
the door and went to the boys’ room, and after the boys went I went
in quickly, got my clothes, and came out again. My daughter "Was
there. I walked in quickly. The words “ rushed back ” came
from my own lips in the Magistrate’s Court unsuggested by anybody.
The two boys went out of the house. Phil went out to the back
door. That would be the natural and easiest way for any one to
leave the house if they wanted to go either on to the road or on to
Mr. Goode’s. I told the boys to go out through the front because
I had heard somebody going up the back. I may have said to the
jury in the last trial, “ I do not think I said anything to the police
on the 25th about hearing footsteps.” I said that by the 27th I
had said nothing to lead the police to suspect Thorne.
On the morning of the 25th, after the boys had gone and before
the police came, I noticed the marks of blood and brain-matter round
2*


the room —on the wail, on the bed, on the chest of drawers, on my
bed, and on the wall at the side of the bed. I said that last time here.
On my bed I noticed four different sets of marks, as shown approxi-
mately on the photograph. I said to the police on the 29th, “ I only
saw one small stain of brain on my bed.” That was on the bottom
of the bed. I also said, “ I only saw one small stain of brain on my
bed. All the substance was on deceased’s bed, chest of drawers,
and wall next chest of drawers, or between my bed and the window.”
After the 24th I went to my brother’s place at Onewhero, and
was in the habit of coming back to the farm with the children two
or three times a week, and used to have lunch there. We had it
inside the house. We went backwards and forwards to the room
I had occupied to get things. My brother cleaned up the matter
in the room. I don’t think the children went in and out of the
room. They went in and out of the house.
I couldn’t tell exactly when it was I heard Thorne running with
the boys. It may have been two months or it may have been three
months ; it was while he was working on the farm.
The gun produced was my son’s gun. I had an idea how my
husband was shot. I said it could have been held up as I now
illustrate, but in doing so the person doing it couldn’t have taken
aim. I said that in the police-station to the police and Thorne.
I don’t think I had anything in my hand when I gave that demon-
stration.
Re-examined by Mr. Martin. —I went back to the house frequently
to help the children to milk and separate and to look after the stock
and sheep, and feed the horses.
Detective-Sergeant Cummings took the first statement on the
25th, and I left the house on the 26th. I went back after that on
the following Sunday, the 29th August. That is the day Detective-
Sergeant Cummings took my second statement. I left the house,
and the police were then in charge, Sergeant Fox being the officer
in charge. I was not there again till Sunday, the 19th. When I
went there on the 29th I didn’t know whether the house had been
cleaned. lam not sure whether I was in that room or not. I think
I was in the other room. I don’t know whether our bedroom had
then been cleaned or not.
When the moon rises it shines on the front part of the house, but
when it gets low it shines on the back of the house. I think the
moon had gone over to the back when I woke up and found my
husband shot.
My husband never showed me any of the correspondence from
relatives or friends unless I asked him to show me any letter, and
then he would show it to me. He burnt all letters he received, unless
it was one that he wanted to keep for reference. My husband had
relatives in California—two sisters and nieces and nephews.


My husband would go away from time to time from the farm,
going as far as Taranaki, New Plymouth. I think he was away
about two weeks. That would be the longest I think. Shortly
after handing him that advertisement he went to town, but I don’t
remember if that was a week after or later. He was away all night
and led me to understand he was going down on business. Dr.
Mackenzie was my husband’s doctor. I was not present at any
examination made by Dr. Mackenzie. All I know is what my
husband told me. He told me Dr. Mackenzie’s treatment was some
injection. My husband never injected anything himself, nor did we
have any apparatus for injection or anything to inject. I never saw
anything to inject.
Thorne said that he would never tell anybody that there was
anything between us, and I said that I would never tell anybody
that there was anything between us.
It was over three years ago that my husband said he was going
away. I can’t remember the date he said he was going away.
The letters the police had were not the only letters I had from
my husband. There were others which were burnt or destroyed.
The police searched my house and found these letters.
When my husband went away I had a man named Wilkes
working on the farm. My place is about ten miles from Tuakau.
Phil went with my husband when he went away, to bring the horses
back. I have five children, of which Phil is the eldest. All of them
were then residing home. We have a buggy, which seats three com-
fortably. That was the only means we had of getting to the station
apart either from walking or riding.
To Judge. —I know most of the houses about where I live. I have
been to most of them. Mr. Goode’s house is larger than ours. Mr.
Tippins’s would be about the same size I should think. Logan’s
house is about the same size as ours, but there is seldom any one
living in it.
Philip Sydney Eyre.
Examined ' hy Mr. Martin. —I am the son of the last witness and of
the late Mr. Eyre. I am sixteen years old now. At the time of
my father’s death and all my life I had been living with my parents.
I remember my father going away to California. That was in 1917,
the beginning of the year. A man named Wilkes was working on the
farm then. He is now dead. Then came a, Maori named Oti, who
is now dead, too. Then Ross was there, then McAuley, who is dead,
and then Thorne came there. Thorne occupied the same bedroom as
I did, having his bed next to the outside wall, and I had the one next
the inside wall. Thorne had the gun and gun-case produced in Court.
I had the gun now in Court. I have never at any time seen any other
weapons in our house. I have been out shooting with Thorne. He is
■a good shot. He always fires from the left shoulder. I have seen


him shearing. He ruses always the left hand. lam prepared to call
him a left-handed man. I recollect my father returning home.
I noticed something of my mother’s conduct and Thorne’s conduct.
In consequence of that I watched them and saw things which con-
firmed my suspicions that there was impropriety going on between
them.
To Judge. —l noticed that first about a year after my father left.
To Mr. Martin. —It was a long time before my father returned.
Lying in my bed I could hear my parents talking in their room,
but could not hear the words they said. After my father returned
the accused did not remain in his bed when everybody went to bed.
He did not remain in the room. Accused went towards the dining-
room or the passage. That happened many times. My father and
Thorne did not like each other. That was a dislike on the part of both
of them. I know that by the expressions the accused used to use.
He used to say that my father was mad and the things he used to do
were wrong.
I remember the Sunday, 15th August, after Thorne had left our
place when he came back and had dinner at our place. Mother was
not present at that meal. My father said he was going to sell the
farm and buy another one up north. That was on the Sunday in
Thorne’s presence. He was speaking to Thorne.
Prior to the murder I had used my gun about a month before.
I cleaned it afterwards and oiled it. The police took charge of it
after the murder.
I remember my father going away. I went with him to the
railway-station. I don’t remember whether we drove or rode. He
took his luggage with him. I don’t remember what it was.
I had been sent a message to the telegraph-office on the night
of the murder, and when I got back the children were in bed ; my
father and mother were not. We sat chatting for a while, and then
went to bed about half past nine. I w r ent to sleep. I slept soundly.
I was working all day on the farm. I was first awakened by the
sound of the discharge of the gun. There was one brother with me —
a younger one —and the other one in another bed. The brother
who was in the same bed with me was not wakened by the discharge.
After the discharge the next thing I heard was my mother calling out.
She said, “ What’s that ? ” I heard her call out, “ Dad ! Dad ! ”
The next thing I heard was my mother coming towards my room
I heard her coming along to my room and I was nearly out of bed
when she arrived in my room. When she came into my room she had
on a nightgown. I went with her and went into the front room and
saw my father dead. I also saw the result of the shot'on the walls
and on the floor. I went away to Mr. Goode’s, the nearest neighbour.
That would be about half a mile away. I left our house by the front
door. You cannot open that door easily, as it is hard to open ; it
jambs on the bottom and makes a noise when you open it. It has no


knob on the outside and cannot be opened from the outside. Before
I went to the front door I went to the back door, the door leading
from the kitchen to the outside. The door was shut. The door
leading from the living-room to the kitchen was shut and had a chair
up against it. I did not go out through the back door. I came
back and went out by the front door. My younger brother was with
me. I have seen the photographs produced. When we came out
of the front door we turned to the right and went through the gate
shown in the photograph on the top left-hand side of the card.
When we got to the gate we went through and turned to the left and
then round past the pig-paddock, got over by the fence down below
the pig-paddock, and then up by the hedge by the house, and then
went across the paddocks to Mr. Goode’s. The pig-paddock is just
round the corner. When we went to Mr. Goode’s we never saw any-
body on the road up to Mr. Ggode’s. After hearing the shot fired
it, would be about a quarter of an hour that we left for Mr. Goode’s.
Up to the time of our leaving the house my mother had not got any
clothes on. She was still in her nightdress. I saw a box in my
father’s room by the side of his bed with a cup of water on. The
gate we went out of was open when we went through it. I knew it
was shut the night before, as at night we put the cows in that paddock
and shut the gate so that they won’t get into the garden. It would
be about 6 o’clock when I put the cows in and made sure the gate
was shut.
When I came back to the house we did not come back that way.
We came straight to the back door. Coming from Goode’s we came
back the same way across the paddocks. We passed through two gates
on the way to the back door. The first one was one leading into
the paddock near the road. That opens into a little paddock into
the back of the house. That ‘gate was shut. The next gate was
the gate by the dairy —a little gate. I don’t remember now whether
that gate was shut or open. They were the only gates we passed.
We went over to Mr. Goode’s and roused them, and tried to telephone
and found we couldn’t, and then went on to the Pukekawa Post-office,
which is a mile farther on. There I got into communication with
the police on their telephone. It was then about half past 12.
I then went home. Brooks went back with me. He lives at
Mr. Goode’s. We remained there until the police came. I know
the dog “ Bob ” belonging to Thorne. The dog was left behind
when Thorne left our place. The dog would work sheep and cattle
for myself and my mother, and knew the members of our family as
well as he knew accused. He had been with us many months. He
Was a good watch-dog. The dog would always bark if any of the
family came to the house, and would bark just the same if a stranger
came. He would continue barking until we got near him so that
he would be able to recognize us.
Cross-examined by Mr. Singer. —The arguments between Thorne
and my father were about work on the place. That was all the real


trouble between them —they used to argue about the work on the
place. Thorne was a particularly keen and hard worker. My
father’s ideas and his as to what should be done and how it should
be done differed. My father used to suffer from weakness and could
not work as hard as Thorne, and used to go to bed.
I thought I last used my gun about a month before the 24th
August. I did not tell the police on the Saturday that I had not
used it for a fortnight. That was the 28th. I don’t remember telling
the police that I had not used the gun for two weeks.
To Judge. —I generally get Saturdays for shooting—the end of
the week.
To Mr. Singer. —I cannot bring my mind back to remember the
statement you are putting to me. I went to bed about 9 o’clock,,
and the next thing I heard was the report of the gun. After the
sound of the gun my mother called out first and then came into my
room. I don’t remember if I heard my mother’s door open after
the shot. I remember giving evidence here before, but don’t remember’
saying that I heard her open her door after the shot. After the shot
I listened for a while, and then nearly went to sleep again. I heard
my mother coming to my room. I said in my statement, “ Between
the time I heard the gun and my mother coming to my room was
only a minute or two, and I had nearly went to sleep again.”
To Judge. —I heard the report of the gun, but could not tell where
it came from. I was very sleepy.
To Mr. Singer. —My mother didn’t speak to me till she got into
my room. I was partly up out of the bed before my mother got
into the room. I told the police on the 28th that I got up when
mother told me Dad had been shot. I was partly out of bed, and
when she told me I got out then.
I kept oil in the house for cleaning" the gun —“ 3in 1 ” oil.
The dog would not always run out into the paddock if it heard
any one coming ; it would sometimes stay by the house. The dog’
wouldn’t work for my father. It was very fond of Thorne and
worked for him better than any one. It would sometimes run out
into the paddock if it heard any one coming, but not out into the
road. When I said that I meant nearly always it would run out
into the paddock. It would follow Thorne in preference to anybody
else.
On the 15th August, when Thorne was over on a visit, I was going
up among the sheep at the time he was going away, and I wanted
the dog to work the sheep with. I usually took him round the
sheep with me. I was going round the sheep that day. We had
no other sheep-dog. I wanted the dog to go round the sheep with me.
Thorne was leaving the house as I went out. Thorne warned me
to look out for the dog or he would follow him (Thorne).
I had a number of these No. 6 and No. 7 Peters’s cartridges in
the house, and a number of the empty shell-cases, which I had kept
for the purpose of refilling.


When my father was away I never wrote to him at all and never
-even sent him any message. While my father was away we were
all very happy at the farm. Thorne was very good to us all, and
we all liked him very much.
I remember when the police came on the morning of the 25th ;
they came before daylight. My mother called me into the back
room on the afternoon of the 25th. That was when Mr. Cummings
left—after he had left. I gave evidence in this Court a fortnight
ago. I know what it is you are going to refer to. I have never
been asked a question on this by you. I have read some of the
papers in connection with this case. What you are going to speak
■of is what my mother told me. I have not read in the papers anything
about what my mother told me. I have never spoken to my mother
nor has she spoken to me about what she told me since the last
hearing, nor has any one spoken to me since the last hearing about
it. I said on the 28th, “We all remained in the house until the
police arrived.” I wasn’t allowed to see my mother all that morning.
It was Mr. Cummings who took the statement.
To Judge. —Mr. Cummings got me into his presence and took a
statement, and that was the first time he had questioned me. That
was the 28th —the Saturday.
To Mr. Singer. —Mr. Cummings was in our house until late in the
afternoon of the 25th. He left about 2or 3 that afternoon. On the
28th I made a statement to Mr. Cummings. He told me he wanted
me to tell him the truth. We were on the statement up till 11
o’clock that night and finished it the next day.
Q. Did you not tell Detective-Sergeant Cummings it was just
after the police arrived that your mother called you out into the
back room ?— A. It was in the afternoon that she called me out
into the back room.
What is written in the statement is what I told the police, I
suppose. She said to me, “ Don’t tell the police about Sam and I
being familiar.” It would be after the police left that she would
tell me that the police were going to arrest Thorne. She said,
“ They may arrest Sam for it.” She was of the opinion that they
would arrest Sam for it. I went as far as the back door, and then
came back and went out by the front door on the morning of the
murder. I was not prompted by anybody to do that. I have so stated
all through these proceedings. I just looked out and did not go
out by the back door. I was not stopped by anybody from going
out the back door, and it was entirely my own idea that I should
go out the front door. No dog went with me to Goode’s.
To Judge. —When I went out the back gate there was a dog tied
up at the potato-house. I didn’t see any dog loose when I went
out. I saw a dog in the dairy when I came back. It was “ Bob.”
He was in the dairy, and the door was open.


Re-examinea by Mr. Martin. —“ Bob ” was very frightened of a
shot and would clear for his life. I didn’t see “ Bob ” about when
I went out of the house, and when I came back I saw him in the
dairy.
To Judge. —l didn’t pass the dairy going out and wouldn’t have
seen him if he had been there.
To Mr. Martin. —The conversation with my mother took place
after Detective-Sergeant Cummings had left for Granville’s. If it is
taken down that it was immediately after the police arrived in the
morning that must be a mistake.
When I last used my gun it was on the dogs who had got after
the horses and wouldn’t come behind. I went out and fired a shot
to frighten them, and then came back again. Just one shot was
fired then.
To Judge. —l cleaned and oiled the gun then.
To Mr. Martin. —That was a month before my father’s murder.
At the time I fired that shot my father was in bed with a bad leg.
I think it was a month before the murder.
Doba Millicent Eyee.
Examined, by Mr. Martin. —I am about fourteen years old and
lived with my parents on their farm. I remember the night my
father was shot. My little sister and I had gone to bed as usual
in the front room. I was awakened by the explosion. After the
explosion I heard my mother call out, “ What’s that ? ” and then
“ Dad ! Dad! ” Then I heard her get out of bed, and then I
heard her strike a light. By the sound of her voice I think she was
in her bedroom. The next thing I heard was that she went into
the boys’ bedroom. Then they —mother and Phil—came into my
bedroom. I got up when my mother told me something. My
mother was then dressed in her nightgown. The boys then went
away to Mr. Goode’s to telephone. At the time the boys left
I think she was dressed in her nightgown. I think she put on her
other clothes after the boys left. She put her clothes on in my
room. From the time the boys left until they returned no one
either came to or went away from our house. There were my
mother, myself, and the young children.
To J'lidge. The boys went away. They were a considerable
time away —perhaps about an hour and a half. Some of the time
I was in with my mother in the bedroom and some of the time in
the dining-room. I was the rest of the time in my bedroom with
her. The only time she was away from me was when she went
into her room to get her clothes —that was very shortly after the
boys went away. There was no one else at the house besides the
little children while the boys were away.
To Mr. Martin. —l didn’t go into my mother’s bedroom at all.


Shortly after the boys left I heard a horse cross the bridge outside
our fence. I think the horse was going at a canter.
I remember Thome being over at our place on a Sunday before my
father’s death. Thorne then said it took him about three hours to
come from Granville’s. He was riding.
When we were in the dining-room after the boys had gone I
noticed my mother’s head. After the boys had gone I noticed some
brain-matter on my mother’s hair. It was on the left side of my
mother’s head.
Cross-examined by Mr. Singer. —There was blood and white stuff.
I presume it was brain-matter.
To Judge. —lt seemed to be moist.
To Mr. Singer. —l may have said in the Supreme Court the other
day that when I was in the dining-room with my mother I noticed
a piece of brain-matter on her hair —a piece of white stuff.
I heard my mother coming out of her bedroom into Phil’s room.
I didn’t know if she closed the door before going into Phil’s room.
I didn’t hear it.
I have been living with my mother since the last trial. My
brother hasn’t been living with us. He has seen both my mother
and I often. We three have talked about this case. My mother
has not talked about her not telling the police anything about Thorne
on the 25th August. It may have been discussed, but not in front
of me. The case and some of my mother’s evidence was discussed
in front of me. I think my mother has discussed Phil’s evidence.
After my father returned from Canada he was advertised for.
I saw the advertisement. I didn’t discuss it with my mother.
I remember my father, getting letters after that from abroad —some of
them from Canada. I don’t know if some of them were in women’s
handwriting. I don’t know anything about his receiving a cypher
letter on one occasion. I don’t know what you mean by a cypher
letter. I don’t think I understand what you mean now by a cypher
letter. I never handled a letter addressed to my father the meaning
of which I did not understand. I have never handled a letter of
my father’s that has been opened. He was very secretive about
his letters.
John Fox.
Examined by Mr. Martin. —l am a sergeant of police stationed
at Auckland, and went out to Eyre’s place on the morning of 25th
August last in company with Detective-Sergeant Cummings. We
arrived there somewhere about or shortly after 7 o’clock. We found
the country police and doctors there when we arrived.
It was my business to search the room of the deceased for
cartridges and shot. I searched immediately after we arrived there
and found some shot. I found that morning a total of twenty-five
pellets—twenty-one on the floor under the edge and near the head of
the double bed, two of them were on the pillow in the double bed,


two on the pillow near deceased’s head —also two cartridge-wads,
one of them on the floor under the edge of the double bed, the other
one on the pillow near deceased’s head. I have the shot and wads
here in Court and now produce them. There are only twenty-four
pellets now in Court, one of them went missing. I saw the brain-
matter that was about the place. Most of the shot were amongst the
brain-matter that was on the floor.
I was present the next day when the post mortem examination
was made by Drs. Wake and Campbell-Smith. Dr. Gampbell-Smith
handed me certain shot that he found in the course of that examina-
tion —here were forty of the pellets. There are thirty-nine of the
forty now in Court, one of them is missing. They are not in the
shape of shot now —not one of them. They are all flattened.
After the body had been removed I found a total of twenty-nine
pellets. Some of deceased’s relatives were in the room with me at
the time, and one of them, Mr. Johnstone, picked up a few of the pellets
and also two other cartridge-wads that were in the corner of the
bedroom at the head of the bed where deceased had been. I took
possession of these and now produce them. Constable Thompson
later picked up eleven pellets, making a total of 105 pellets.
T assisted in searching the place, and the garden, and fence, and
round about. A thorough search was made —a very thorough search.
No firearms but the two produced in Court were found on the place.
No cartridge-cases or cartridges were found by me. Some had
previously been found by some one else. I remained in charge of the
house. I never left it until after the inquest had been opened on
the 26th. The room in which the body was was left in the same
state until the inquest. I locked the door and kept the key. Con-
stable Wolfendale relieved me and took the key at these times. The
room was left in the same state as we found it till the inquest. The
inquest was opened on the 26th and wasn’t resumed until several
weeks later. The body was viewed to allow it to be removed for
burial.
On the 30th August I received from Constable Johnstone accused’s
gun-case and gun, two cartridges, and fifty-five cartridges in the
gun-case, also a box containing six cartridges and sixteen cartridge-
shells. I understood those belonged to Philip. Detective Lambert
and I took those to Mr. Hazard in Auckland.
Between the time of the murder and the 17th September I was
engaged partly in searching the district for cartridges. I went
twenty-one miles in one direction from Eyre’s house and searched
for No. 7 Peters’s ballistite cartridges. I inquired for any kind of
cartridges that might be on hand. I found no No. 7 of any kind.
I visited 116 dwellings altogether.
I also took possession of the single-barrelled gun belonging to Philip
Eyre, and this gun I gave to Constable Kelly on the 26th August.
Not cross-examined.


Charles Herewaed Wake.
Examined by Mr. Martin. —I am a duly qualified medical practi-
tioner practising in Pukekohe and surrounding district. In consequence
of a message I received I went out to the late Mr. Eyre’s house on the
morning of the 25th August last, accompanied by Sergeant Cowan
of the Pukekohe police. The bottom photograph correctly represents
the body of deceased as I found it on arrival. The arm is against
the window in the photograph. I moved the arm. The arms were
crossed across the chest when I got there. The clothes were up to
the neck when I got there. The photograph also shows a mass of
substance on the pillow —that is brain-matter.
The top and the back of deceased’s head had been blown off, and
the contents of the skull had been blown on to the bed and floor.
Death must have been instantaneous.
Later on I made a post mortem examination and found the cause
of the man’s death was gunshot wound in the head.
I examined the wall and the chest of drawers, and found blood
and brain-matter on them to the far corner of the room. I noticed
that the brain-matter was on the other bed, but the clothes were already
turned down on it, and I did not disturb it. I noticed the brain
matter on either side. A certain area wars turned down which might
conceal two surfaces, but outside that I saw brain-matter. The
wound from the deceased’s head had fluid blood coming from it in the
cavity of the skull, but it was not actually bleeding.
Taking the wound and the brain-matter on the wall I estimated
that the shot had been fired from outside the window : obliquely
from the corner of the window —the left-hand corner —so as to miss
the larger bed. Standing on the outside of the window you could not
see sufficiently into the room to see deceased lying on his bed—l
could not do so.
The illustration shown in the second photograph shows a part of the
foundation of the house which could be used to put your foot on, and
that was the impression that was left in my mind—that the foot was
rested on the board. It would have been necessary to have held on
to the sill by his hand. He would have to raise himself right up
to that level, and in that case would stand on either one or two feet.
1 assume that the man had raised himself —that he couldn’t see in at
the window from the ground. I conclude that the shot was fired
from outside. He must have gained height, as it were, by raising
himself on that board. That would be more easy for a left-handed
man to do. I examined the skin on the dead man’s face, and under-
neath the left orbit was a black discoloration about an inch wide —
somewhere about an inch wide. I formed the opinion that that was
caused by the discharge of the gun—powder-stain.
Cross-examined by Mr. Singer. —The statement I make was that
it would have been easier to have been fired by a left-handed man.
I couldn’t say if it could have been fired by a right-handed man, but


I will say that it could have been fired by a left-handed man. I could
not say it was possible for a right-handed man to fire it. I don’t say
a right-handed man could not or could have done it. I am not a
shooting-man myself. It was not in my mind that this shot was fired
from the shoulder. I based my opinion that it was fired by a left-
handed man owing to the position of the angle. I tried it and found
I couldn't do it with my right. Some other man might have been able
to do it. lam not an expert in guns myself. When I took the gun
up I tried to fire from the shoulder. I never tried to fire from the
hip. I know the Crown made a great point about the probability of
this being a left handed man. At the time I was trying to form this
opinion of mine I did not know that Thorne was a left-handed shot.
I questioned how a man was going to hold on while he fired. It
struck me as exceedingly difficult. I did not examine the contents
of the stomach, nor, as far as I know, did Dr. Campbell-Smith.
Re-examined by Mr. Marlin. —The only thing to hold on there is
the window-sill. I can’t see how a man could hold on with his left
hand and fire the gun with his right hand and scatter the contents
of the brain about in the manner they were found.
Alexander Campbell-Smith.
Examined by Mr. Martin. —I am a duly qualified medical practi-
tioner practising at Pukekohe. I have seen a good deal of gunshot
wounds in the Boer War and the last war. On the 26th August I
went to Eyre’s house and found the body as shown in the photograph.
The top of the head had been blown ofl and the contents scattered.
I went through deceased’s brain and found a certain number of shot,
which I handed to Sergeant Fox. The cause of death was gunshot
wound in the head.
I saw the direction in which the contents of the skull were
scattered. I am supposed to be 6 ft. high in my boots. Standing
on the ground outside the window —but not up against the window-
sill —I could not see deceased. I was trying to aim the gun, but not
from the shoulder. I could not see deceased’s head.
Judging from the whole of the circumstances I saw I formed the
opinion that the shot was fired from outside the- window and not from
the inside. I was of opinion that the direction was from the left-hand
side of the window as you face the window’, from the outside of the
house. The only position I could get at was the rift in the boarding
which is about 1 ft. 3 in. from the ground. It is 4 ft. 1 in. from the
top of that board to the window-sill. I consider that any one would
pull himself up with his right hand and shoot from the left shoulder.
If a gun were used I do not think that it would have been possible
to have fired the gun from inside the room with the bed in that posi-
tion. I noticed the brain-matter that was on the pillow and the floor.
The brains fell through the back of the iron of the bed, and the brains
were scattered up on the wall to the left of the chest of drawers
right across the head of the large bed.


To Judge. —The whole cerebellum fell out through the head of
the bed, part of it going along the wall above Mrs. Eyre’s bed and
the chest of drawers.
To Mr. Martin. —lt was a practical cone from where the shot
was fired. The bed could not have been moved. The bed must
certainly have been in that position when the shot was fired.
I observed Mrs. Eyre’s bed. That showed signs of having been
slept in. There was an impression of a head on the pillow, and
there was brain-matter and blood on the pillow, and a couple of
pellets that I took off.
Cross-examined hy Mr. Singer. —l said I wasn’t going to put myself
in the position of saying that a right-handed man could not have
fired that shot, but in my mind it was very much more possible for
a left-handed man to have fired that shot. A left-handed man
would have an advantage over a right-handed man in firing the shot.
Re-examined hy Mr. Martin. —I noticed a powder-stain on the
left eye, showing that the gun was fired about a foot or two away.
Henry Johnstone.
Examined hy Mr. Hunt. —I am a labourer living at Auckland.
I was in the house of the late Mr. Eyre at Pukekawa on the 26th
August last, and I was in the room in which the dead body of
deceased was lying. While I was there I saw the police officers
searching and picking up wads. I picked up two wads. They were
a black one and a white one. I identify the black wad now. I picked
up one wad slightly under the chest of drawers at the head of
deceased’s bed. That was the white one. The black one I picked
up in the right-hand corner of the room at the head of deceased’s
bed. I also picked up four pellets and handed them to the sergeant
of police.
Not cross-examined.
William Theodore Eyre.
Examined hy Mr. Hunt. —I live at Mount Eden and am a nephew
of the late Sydney Seymour Eyre. I was at Pukekawa on the 27th
August last. I helped to clear up the room in which my late uncle
was murdered. I found a wad in the room underneath the chest
of drawers at the left-hand far corner that is to say, the corner
farthest from the window as you go in the room. I can identify
that wad. I had a look at it and put it in the basin of water and
emptied the basin in the drain outside the back door. That drain
is simply a shallow drain alongside the house. Some time later I
went back to Pukekawa to look for that wad. With a number of
other people I searched for it and found it where I had thrown it.
I now identify the wad in Court as the one I found. [Produced.]
Cross-examined hy Mr. Singer. —That is the one I found under-
neath the chest of drawers. lam prepared to pledge my oath that


that is the one. It was thrown away by me. It was in water
from the 27th August lor some weeks. I still say I can identify it.
The drain was empty when I found the wad. It was not full of
water. The drain was approximately 2 ft.' deep. The wad is of
the same thickness, covered in the same way, and in the same
condition as when I found it on the 27th August. The police were
in the house on the 27th August and in charge of the house. They
were not in the room when I found this wad. I was not alone when
I found this wad. Mr. Ansley Eyre, deceased's younger brother,
was with me. I did not show it to Mr. A. Eyre. The basin of
water was on the floor when I threw the wad into it. I took the
basin and threw the water outside. The drain is not shown on the
photograph. It was on the gate side of the house. I was not in
the house a couple of days before the murder. I was up there about
a week or fortnight before Thorne left the place. I was not there
after Thorne had left.
Re-examined by Mr. Hunt. —When I found the wad in the drain
Detective-Sergeant Cummings and about three others were there.
I handed it straight over to Detective-Sergeant Cummings, and he
took charge of it. I was helping to clear up the place on the first
occasion.
Edward Francis O’Brien.
Examined by Mr. Hunt. —I am an acting detective stationed at
Auckland. I was engaged from the 26th August till 13th September
in connection with the murder of Eyre. My special work was making
a search of the district looking for cartridges. I took a radius of
twenty miles from the Eyre’s house. I went twenty miles in three
directions and right down the Waikato Eiver on the fourth side.
I did part of the Onewhero district up to Mercer, there linking up
with Sergeant Fox. I visited a total of sixty farms and collected
a total of seventy cartridges therefrom ; taking one of every different
sort, or make, or size of shot or cartridges that I could get. In parti-
cular I was looking for No. 7 Peters’s High Gun Ballistite 12-bore,
and found only one in the possession of Mr. Marshall, farmer,
Onewhero. This was the only cartridge of that brand and number
that he had in his possession.
I not only interviewed any one in the district, but every one we
met on the road, and took statements from them. We also called
at all the houses. To the best of my belief we interviewed and
accounted for everybody that was in the district at the time.
Cross-examined by Mr. Singer. —All the cartridges that I collected
are at the Court. There are all kinds of cartridges. We examined
guns too. We in some places found guns with no cartridges.
Frederick George Marshall.
Examined by Mr. Hunt. —l am a farmer at Onewhero. I was
formerly working for Mr. Monckton at Te Akau. I went to live


in the Onewhero district last July. I remember Detective O’Brien
calling on me towards the end of August. He was inquiring what
cartridges I had, and I gave him a sample of each different brand
of cartridge I had. I gave him eleven cartridges altogether, no two
of those being alike. Amongst them was one Peters’s No. 7 ballistite
cartridge. This cartridge I got from Mr. Monckton, who gave it to
me when I was working for him at Te Akau. He used to keep me
supplied with all the cartridges I wanted for shooting on his property.
I only brought two of Peters’s High Gun cartridges to Onewhero.
One was a No. 7 and the other was a No. 8. I handed both of those
to the police. lam quite certain I have not used any Peters’s High
Gun cartridges since I came to that district. I did not know the
late Mr. Eyre, and had never seen him. I did not know then 'where
he lived.
Not cross-examined.
Owen Martin Monckton.
Examined by Mr. Hunt. —I am a sheep-farmer residing at Hamilton.
I have a run out at Te Akau. Up till last July I employed Frederick
George Marshall as my manager there. He left me at the beginning
of Judy last in order to commence farming on his own account. 1
know he took up a farm at Onewhero. While he was on my place
at Te Akau I used to keep him supplied in cartridges to shoot rabbits
—all sorts and brands of cartridges. I remember having and giving
to him some Peters’s High Gun No. 7 cartridges. I think it is nearly
three years since I bought any cartridges of that brand and size.
I got about five hundred at that time. It is a very uncommon
cartridge I should say. I simply happened to get the case of five
hundred and took it. I have never given any of them to anybody
at any time excepting those I gave Marshall. I should say that
Marshall was a very even-tempered man, most honest and reliable.
Not cross-examined.
Henry Brook.
Examined by Mr. Hunt. —I am a farm labourer working for Mr.
Henry Goode at Pukekawa. Mr. Goode’s property is situate on the
main Pukekawa Hoad and the road leading down to Eyre’s place.
It is marked on the tracing now produced. It is there called
“ Barton’s.” The house is situated quite near to that corner.
I remember the night of Mr. Eyre’s murder. At that time Mr.
Goode was Eyre’s nearest neighbour. There is a nearer house to
Eyre’s—Logan’s —but it was not then occupied. Across the paddocks
from Mr. Goode’s place to Eyre's would be less than half a mile —
somewhere between a quarter and half a mile.
I remember being awakened on the night of the murder. The
dogs barking awoke me first. Immediately after that Philip and
Johnny Eyre came to the door of my whare and called me. The


wdiare I occupy is just away from the back of Mr. Goode's house.
It was then ten minutes to 12. My watch registered twenty minutes
past twelve, but it was half an hour fast.
I got up and got dressed, and with the Eyre boys tried to telephone
from Mr. Goode’s place, but we were not successful, and then I went
with them up to the Pukekawa Post-office, about a mile from Mr.
Goode’s place on the way to Tuakau. I went into the post-office
and Philip Eyre rang up. It was about half past 12 when we were
there. I looked at the clock in the post-office. Then I went back
to Eyre’s place with Philip and John Eyre and stayed with them
until the police arrived about 4 o'clock. It was a moonlight night
with passing clouds.
Not cross-examined.
William Ross.
Examined by Mr. Hunt. —I am a labourer residing at Papatoetoe
and live there with my parents. I was formerly employed on the
late Mr. Byre's farm at Pukekawa, from January, 1918, to the be-
ginning of May, 1918. Mr. Eyre was not there then. He was away
from New Zealand. I lived as a member of the family in the house
and occupied the left-hand front room as you go in the front door.
I shared that with the two eldest boys of the Eyre family —Philip
and John. Mrs. Eyre occupied the opposite front room —the right-
hand one as you go in the front door. The other children occupied
the back bedroom, which opens off the living-room. I have not
been on the property since I left it in May, 1918, and I did not know
the late Mr. Eyre. I have never seen him, so far as I know.
On the night of the 24th August I was at home in Papatoetoe.
I was not out all that night.
Not cross-examined.
George Henry Morrison.
Examined by Mr. Hunt. —l am a farmer living at Clevedon. I have
been there since about the 7th June last. Before that time I was
for a number of years farming at Pukekawa. Clevedon is about
forty miles from Pukekawa. At Pukekawa my place was about
three-quarters of a mile from Tippins’s. It was about a mile and a
quarter from Eyre’s. I knew the late Mr. Eyre very well, and also
his family. I knew Mr. Eyre for upwards of twenty years. I was
not a frequent visitor to his house, but I have been there to see him.
I had not been in the house any time recently before his death. It
was a long time since I was there. When I was last there he enter-
tained me in the living-room—the kitchen at the back. I have not
of the last few years been in either of the front bedrooms.
Since I gave up my farm at Pukekawa I was there on the sth,
6th, and 7th August, paying a visit to my son. That was the last
time I was back in Pukekawa up to the date of the murder. Since


I left the district I have not been to the Eyre’s place. It was about
the month of January, 1920, that I last saw Mr. Eyre at his house.
I went there to discuss some county work with him. I was a member
of the County Council. It was after dusk in the evening when I went
to see him. I saw him looking out of the front window of the house.
I did not go inside. I just stayed a few minutes. I arranged to see
him on a subsequent occasion and discuss the matter with him. That
was the last occasion that I saw him at his own place. I had a
clearing sale on the Ist June at Pukekawa, and that was the last
time I saw Eyre. I was at Clevedon on the 24th August during the
whole of that day and the whole of that night. I went to bed at about
10 o’clock that night—the usual time—and did not get up till the
following morning.
Not cross-examined.
THIRD DAY.
WEDNESDAY, THE 1ST DECEMBER, 1920.
SYDNEY PHILIP EYRE (recalled).
Cross-examined by Mr. Singer. —It is not a fact that Thorne used
to take “Bob” with him when he went shooting.
To Judge. —The shooting is rabbits and hares only.
To Mr. Singer. —I don’t remember an occasion when Thome and
I were together shooting rabbits in Mr. Goode’s paddock.
Horace Archer Cheesman.
Examined by Mr. Hunt. —I am the manager of the Farmer’s
Union store at Onewhero. That is the only store in the Onewhero
district and the only place where cartridges are sold in that district.
My company took over that store last April. In the stock taken over
there were several boxes of cartridges. There were no cartridges
containing No. 7 shot. Since we have been there- that is, since
April—we have sold no cartridges containing No. 7 shot. I have
made no attempt to get any cartridges containing No. 7 shot. There
have been none while I have been there. I found none in the place
when we took over, and we have ordered none. We stock cartridges
containing No. 3 and No. 4 shot, and sometimes No. 5. That is for
ducks and rabbits. I remember the police coming and overhauling
our stock.
Cross-examined by Mr. Singer.— Our store is nine or ten miles
from Pukekawa, just the same distance as Tuakau is from Pukekawa.
There is a fair demand for cartridges in our district.
Re-examined by Mr. Hunt. —There have never been any inquiries
for No. 7 shot in our district.


William Henry Hazard.
Examined by Mr. Marlin. —I carry on business in Auckland as a.
gun-merchant and a dealer in firearms and ammunition, and have been
doing so for the last thirty-five years, and in addition I held a
commission in the Garrison Artillery, and have had considerable
experience in examining firearms.
I remember Constable Kelly bringing me a gun on the 27th
August. It was a single-barrelled breach-loading 12-gauge gun.
To Judge. —Nearly all sporting-guns are now 12-gauge,
To Mr. Martin. — The barrel of the gun showed signs of rust;
there were numerous rust-spots. It had evidently been cleaned at
some time or other, and there was oil in the barrel. The oil had a
stale smell; it was dry. There was no sign of any fouling or smell
of powder in the barrel. It was rusty —red rust. You could see
the red-rust spots. That is rust coming through from the metal
of the barrel. The gun showed no sign whatever of having been
recently fired, and in my opinion had not been fired for fully a month
or more.
Later, on the 30th August, I examined the double-barrelled gun
now in Court, which was brought me by the police. It is a double-
barrelled 12-gauge choke-bore in both barrels. I examined this gun.
I found that it had been recently cleaned and oiled—slightly oiled. The
left barrel showed distinct signs of fouling, the powder residue having
worked up through the oil. I placed my finger in the right barrel
and then in the left to see if I could detect any fouling in the barrel,
and in the right there was no distinct signs of fouling ; in the left
my finger came out quite black. From the appearance of the fouling
which had worked up I came to the conclusion that the gun had been
fired within a week or ten days prior to the date of rny examination
of the gun. I couldn’t say when the right barrel had been fired ;
it had been fired some time previously, but it had been apparently
cleaned some time again. There were some slight signs of fouling
in the right barrel. The gun was brought to me in the gun-case
produced, and that case had cartridges in it. Those cartridges are
Peters’s Ballistite cartridges, Some of them were loaded
with No. 6 shot and others with No. 7. My firm, are the agents for
those Peters’s cartridges. The No. 7 cartridges are very seldom
used. It is a most unusual size for game-shooting. Some time
previously I had supplied Thorne with 100 of those cartridges, and
Mrs. Eyre’s cheque was sent in payment.
I examined some shot that was handed to me by the police.
They were badly battered out. Apparently it was soft shot that the
cartridge had been loaded with, not chilled as is usually used. Sergeant
Fox also showed me some wads. In a Peters’s Ballistite cartridge
there are five wads. Sergeant Fox handed me four wads, and later
on I received another from Detective-Sergeant Cummings. ,1 do not
know of any other cartridge or cartridges that is built up in the same


way as Peters’s Ballistite. Witt regard to the size of the wads, Ido
not know any other cartridge that uses the same size and combina-
tion of wads as Peters’s does. I have a diagram drawn showing
how the different cartridges are built up —it is drawn double the size
—and shows the place and sizes of the shot and wads.
In a Peters’s the top shot-wad is -jJ-in. thick. That is made of
cardboard or what is known as wood-pulp. Then comes the shot;
then a in. black-edge wad —felt wad ; then another -fg in. black
felt wad ; then a J in. black-edge felt wad ; then a black card wad,
| in. thick ; then below that comes the powder. The next diagram
is a cartridge of the IJ.M.C. —the Union Metallic Cartridge ; it is
known as the Nitro Club. It is not a common cartridge. Very
few of them are sold. There is a top shot-wad made of similar
material to the Peters’s. The blue wad is lighter in colour than the
Peters’s. It is about the same size, about in. or in. Sometimes
they vary in thickness. Then comes the shot and J in. black-edge
felt wad. Another Jin. black-edge felt wad, and then a Jin. black
card wad. The next cartridge I have is one of our own local ones.
We use in this one kind of American wad only. There is a top shot-
wad —an English wad made of strawboard ; then comes the shot;
and then two J in. black-edge felt wads ; then a in. white card
wad. At times we generally put in a white, but sometimes we
have not a white. That is not ballistite ; it is not loaded in the
colonies.
The next cartridge I have sketched is an English type. There
is a in. or 3*5 in. strawboard-oard wad ; then comes the shot ;
then comes a in. or 2 Vj in. strawboard-card wad, a , 7 (i in. white
or brown felt wad, and then another in. white or black card
wad. The English loading is quite distinct from the other loading.
I examined the five wads handed me by Sergeant Fox and
Detective-Sergeant Cummings, and in my opinion those wads had
come from a Peters’s Ballistite cartridge. They are called smokeless
cartridges. There is no such thing as smokeless powder. Some
powder makes less smoke than others. The amount of smoke that
is visible would entirely depend on atmospheric conditions —tem-
perature, moisture, &c. Assuming the weather to be wet —not
continuous wet weather —assuming the month to be August and
night-time and one of those cartridges were fired in a room 11 ft.
6 in. or 12 ft. square, I think there would be an appreciable amount
of smoke. Assuming that a person were on the one side of the
muzzle of the gun when it was discharged and a window showing
the bright moonlight outside, I think the smoke would be clearly
visible to the person in the room.
I fired a number of Peters’s Ballistite No. 1 cartridges at varying
distances on a sheet of cartridge cardboard to see what stain would
be left. I fired these from 3 in. to 3 ft. away. Every shot being
for the first time. I have marked the distances away on the card-
itself now produced.


I went out to the late Mr. Eyre's house on Wednesday, the 15th
September. I was shown the room in which it was stated his body
had been. The iron bedstead and double bed were still both there.
Except that Eyre’s body was not there the photograph [produced]
shows the room I saw. It also shows the general view of the outside
of the house.
Assuming that the bedsteads and furniture were in the same
position as on the night of the murder, and that Eyre’s body was
lying on the bed where the photographs show, and the brain-matter
was on the floor, in my opinion it was not possible for the shot to
be fired from any other place than from the outside of the house.
It was fired from the left-hand corner of the window from the outside.
The top of the window-sill is a considerable height from the ground.
Standing on the outside on the ground I could not see any one lying
on the bed. The height from the ground to the top of the window-
sill is 5 ft. in. It would be possible to fire that shot from outside
the window by standing on a broken batten-board below the weather-
board. You could stand on that board and hold yourself up by the
right hand on the window-sill and use the gun with the left hand.
I tried it myself and held a gun in that position, and it was quite
easy to handle a gun in the left-hand position, and to fire the gun,
provided you used the left barrel; it would be much harder to fire
with the right barrel, because the trigger is so much farther away
from the grip. It would not be necessary for the man to place the
gun to his shoulder to fire using that pistol-grip on the gun. lam
5 ft. 7 in. high. That is in my boots. Ido not think there would
be any difficulty for a man 5 ft. 3f in. high in his boots firing from
the position I have described.
To Judge. —-At the moment of firing the stock would be under
the man’s arm. You have a good grip then and the left-hand trigger
being close to you, you have free control.
Cross-examined by Mr. Singer. —l examined the gun on the 30th
August. The pellets were given to me on that date, and they were
weighed on that date. On that date there was also given to me
the remains of a blue-top shot-wad. That is the wad now produced.
When I saw that top shot-wad I was convinced that it was a Peters’s
Ballistite cartridge. I based that opinion on my opinion and experi-
ence that I did not know of any other cartridge with a blue-top
shot-wad except an English cartridge. There is an English cartridge
with a blue-top shot-wad, but not of wood-pulp. That is a straw-
board—the English one —instead of a wood-pulp. I did not know
of any cartridge with a blue-top shot-wad of that nature —by which
I meant a blue-top shot-wad made of wood-pulp. Manufacturers
vary from time to time the colour of their top shot-wads.
I weighed the pellets and gave a record in the Magistrate’s Court
and again in the Supreme Court of their weights. The other
gentleman who had weighed the pellets had disagreed with my


weights. There was a fraction of a grain difference between the
weights we obtained, but the comparative weights were exactly the
same. That is to say, the weight of the shots found on the floor
and in the body and in the cartridge were practically the same in
our result. The difference in weight was a difference as a whole,
not the difference between one set of shot and another.
I stated that in my opinion the wads had come from a Peters’s
Ballistite cartridge. I don’t recollect making the distinct statement
that the shot came from a No. 7 Peters’s Ballistite. What Ido say
is that the shot agree with a No. 7 Peters’s Ballistite cartridge shot.
I stated in the previous trial, “ I weighed the pellets in connection
with this case some time after the murder, and weighed them again
a week ago.” I didn’t add to that. In the meantime I found
that another expert for the Crown had disagreed with my weights.”
I did not mention him as an expert. I said that somebody had
weighed the pellets and I discovered that his weighing disagreed
with mine. In consequence of that I weighed the pellets again.
I discovered that my weighing on the first occasion was slightly
incorrect. The position was this : When I weighed the pellets I
took the weight to the nearest grain—which was 34 grains. When
I came to weigh them closely I got it down to a tenth of a grain, but
the difference could easily be accounted for in my weights and the
weight made by any one else by not taking exactly the same shot
out of the lot. I weighed twenty-one pellets out of twenty-nine.
That would mean I left eight behind, and I might in the next
weighing put in those eight and leave out some I had already
weighed. Shot is only approximately weighed in any case. There
is no exact weight for shot; it all goes through sieves. Some shot
may be smaller than others, but it all averages up; there are so-many
pellets to the ounce. It would only be a fraction of a grain out when
weighed.
To Judge. —Shot that has hit something hard may lose a trifle
in weight.
To Mr. Singer. —l said that the shot would lose very little weight
through firing, I think that No. 6 English shot would be indis-
tinguishable in weight from No. 7 American ; that is, taking a small
number of pellets. Approximately there is l-J- oz. of shot in a Peters’s
No. 7. Some of them have IJoz. There are two different sizes
of Peters’s No. 7 cartridges. One cartridge is longer than the other.
To Judge. —In filling cartridges the shot is measured out and not
weighed out. There may be some slight variation in two fillings.
To Mr. Singer. —l did not make an error in my evidence and
have to come back and correct it. I wanted to clear up a certain
matter. In describing the wads we loaded with I did not make it
clear that we loaded with two J in. black-edge felt wads. I thought
I had probably conveyed the impression that we loaded two kinds
of Peters’s wads, whereas we only loaded one. I merely wanted to


clear that up. That was not an error. I did not say that I had
made an error in the number of wads we used in our own cartridges.
If I did that was a mistake. I think my words were these : “ That
we did not use three of Peters’s wads which left two unaccounted-
for.” What I meant was that we didn’t load three of the Peters’s
wads. I said, “ I use Peters’s wads for making cartridges filled by
ourselves.” I don’t remember saying, “ Only the two sorts of wads
I have mentioned—not a black one.” “ Only J in. in a wad.” I say
now that there is only J in. in a wad.
You produced a cartridge which I took to be a No. 12 Nitro Club.
I couldn’t say if that is the same one that you produced to me before.
You produced a cartridge with a case made by the U.M.C. Company
and apparently a U.M.C. blue-top shot-wad. It appeared to be
a U.M.C. cartridge, and it appeared to have a U.M.C. blue-top shot-
wad. I had no doubts at the time that it was a genuine U.M.C.
cartridge, but I have now. This wad is not as blue as the Peters’s
wad. I have my doubts as to that cartridge being a genuine cart-
ridge. I couldn’t say whether it is a genuine cartridge. I now
produce a dummy cartridge. That has not been forged. It does
not mean that it is a cartridge ; it is a cartridge-case. It appears
to be a U.M.C. top shot-wad. I wouldn’t be certain of it. I couldn’t
be certain that it is a genuine one.
I stated at the last hearing, “ I have now seen a U.M.C. cartridge
with a blue-top shot-wad.” I did not know at that time that there
were dummy U.M.C. cartridges with a blue-top shot-wad. I couldn’t
say whether the one you produce now is the same one that you
produced last week. When I speak of a dummy cartridge I mean
that it is not a genuine cartridge ; it hasn’t a live cap, and it hasn’t
real powder. It is not a cartridge that has been cut down. I
couldn’t form any opinion as to whether the powder you produce
is genuine ballistite powder. You can’t tell merely by looking at
it. I did not say that the U.M.C. cartridge was a common American
cartridge at the last hearing. The Nitro Club is not a common
cartridge —the U.M.C. Certain brands of the U.M.C. are fairly
common, but not the Nitro Club. I have been right through the
town and I have only found one place where I could get these
There are a fair quantity imported to New Zealand of the Dominion
Montreal cartridges. In some makes the Winchester are common,
but in others they are not so common. I have never seen the Win-
chester cartridges with blue-top shot-wads. All the American cart-
ridges I know are made of wood-pulp as far as I know.
We are the agents for Peters’s. These Peters’s cartridges are
supplied by us to the members of the Auckland Gun Club. Two of
the members of that institution have the distribution of those cart-
ridges. We have supplied No. 7 Peters’s Ballistite to the Auckland
Gun Club.


The firing of a No. 7 Peters’s would produce a light fog if fired
in a room. If you were to fire off a Peters’s No. 7 here and now, there
would be smoke and you could see it. It would not disappear at once.
I know of no powder that is more smokeless than ballistite. I don’t
think there would be a thick fog in the room at Pukekawa as a result
of the shot being fired that night of the murder. I am giving my
opinion from firing a shot off a fortnight ago. That was before 9
in the morning at the police-station here. It is now rather dryer
than it was then. I do not think the experiment of firing one now
would be of any value.
. I have examined the “ Dominion ” catalogues. I know of cart-
ridges that are made by the Dominion Company which are not exactly
the same as the Peters’s. I have examined the catalogue this
morning. There are cartridges filled by the Dominion Company
very similarly filled to the Peters's, but I have never seen them with
those particular wads in. The cartridges are filled with three black-
edge felt wads. Porter and Co. import the Dominion cartridge.
I supply a J in. Peters’s wad to the public for filling.
I have examined the three wads. We load our cartridges differ-
ently according to the powder and weight of shot used. If a man
had a cut-down barrel that would make no difference to it being
easier to use either hand. It would be a very awkward thing to get
the direction to fire with the right hand. If I were a right-handed man
I would still fire with the left hand even though I had the whole
barrel on the gun. I have heard of a gun being sawn off, but it is not
common. The American Forces had a short-barrelled gun at the
front for shooting short distances loaded with buck-shot.
I couldn’t remember whether I gave any further evidence as to
the condition of the barrel or gun beyond stating that the left
barrel was fouled and the right was not. I did not mention before
with regard to the single-barrelled gun that there was a stale, rancid
smell. I said there was a smell of dried oil. I thought I explained
here before that I smelt dry oil. I may not have mentioned it before
I don’t remember. Possibly I did not say anything about there being
a stale, rancid smell. I was not asked the question.
I mentioned about the rust being red for a reason. I couldn’t
say whether I have stated it before. To-day may be the first time
that I have stated that there was a stale, rancid smell in the gun.
I can’t remember. That statement is correct anyhow. I couldn’t
say if this is the first time that I have stated that there was no sign of
fouling in the single-barrelled gun. I stated before that when I went
to examine the house I had heard that Thorne was a left-handed shot.
At the time I was given the double-barrelled gun to examine I was
also shown the cartridges in the gun-case.
I know of no other cartridge that is built up in the same way as
the Peters’s Ballistite. I still say that, having examined the catalogue
shown this morning. There are other cartridges with a top shot-wad,.


three other wads, and a black-edge wad, but not of the same thicknesses
as the Peters’s. There are Regal cartridges with three wads in, but
they are all the same thickness. All those I have seen are of the same
thickness. In the catalogue produced the bottom felt wad is thicker
than the other two. The thickness of those wads is different to the
Peters’s. That illustration may be incorrect. I am referring to the
general loading of the English cartridges in my diagram. I got the
measurements from the wads themselves. That is done from the
recollection I have of what is inside the English cartridges. I load
that cartridge every day. Those illustrations in that catalogue you
have don’t mean anything. They don’t load cartridges according
to the illustration. They don’t make a claim that they load according
to the catalogue. That is—the Regal cartridge I now produce —the
only kind of ballistite cartridge I now can find in town.
The Peters’s blue-top shot-wad is somewhat injured. I split a
new wad at the last trial, but not the wad found in the body. I don’t
think there is a difference between the thickness of the wads. The
difference which is apparent in the size is due to the rammer when
the cartridges are loaded. That rammer flattens out the wad and
makes it thinner.
Re-examined by Mr. Martin. —l remember the date the blue-top
shot-wad was handed to me. I opened it up a bit with my penknife
to see that the material was the same in it.
Of all the blue-top shot-wads I do not know of any that has the
same colour as the Peters's—not even among the samples. We
supplied No. 7 to the Auckland Gun Club, probably six months ago.
We load our cartridges differently according to the powder and shot
—that is, the number of wads differ, and the thicknesses also differ.
Under no circumstances do we load with the same number of wads
that appear in Peters’s. We couldn’t get the powder in.
To Judge. —The powder is still underneath the wad in the cart-
ridge that I have cut up.
To Mr. Singer. —We do not get ballistite, and don’t load with it.
James Black.
Examined by Mr. Martin. —l am a farmer living at Matamata.
Previous to going there I was manager for a farmer named Coughlan
at Pukekohe. I know a colt that he had called “ Drover Colt.”
I broke him in. He had some trotting blood in him. He was about
16-2 hands high. He was afterwards bought by Mr. Granville, of
Glen Murray, at Coughlan’s sale. A man named Lucas took posses-
sion of him at the sale. He had a very free stride —a long stride.
He overstepped. By that I mean his kind hoofs overstepped the
marks of his fore hoofs. That was so in all paces. It all depended on
the paces how far he reached over. He was a very good oonstitutioned
strong horse. If he had been properly fed he would have no difficulty
in making long journeys.


Cross-examined by Mr. Singer. —lt is not an unusual thing when
you want a light draught horse to use trotting strain. It is not an
uncommon thing for horses to overstep like that.
Edward Mathias Lucas.
Examined by Mr. Martin.—l am a farmer residing at Puni.
I remember Goughian's sale. I remember Granville buying a horse
there. I took charge of the horse for Mr. Granville and broke it
into harness. The horse had no shoes on when I got it. I had him
shod by Blake Bros., Cambridge. Beloe was the smith who did it. It
was a good-constitutioned horse. It was a good worker, and seemed as
though he could make a long journey and could stand plenty of work.
I have ridden him. I rode him twice at night. He had been in
the wagon during the day on both occasions prior to my riding him
at night. He was not distressed at my doing that. He was a long
striding horse. He was rough, with big long strides. He spread
out in the hind feet.
Not cross-examined.
Donald Cameron Beloe.
Examined by Mr. Martin. —I am a blacksmith employed by Blake
Bros, at Pukekohe. I remember the last witness, Lucas, bringing
in a young horse to me to be shod about the 26th July last. I shod
the horse. I used hand-made shoes on him. I now identify the
four shoes [produced] I made and put on that horse. They were
made from iron 1 in. by \ in. That is the ordinary-sized iron to
use for a horse of that size. These shoes were exceptionally wide
for the size of iron used—that is, in the length of iron used. That
is, the horse had a foot that was wider than is usual in a horse of
that size.
The shoe I now hold in my hand is the near fore-foot shoe.
I can tell which is the near-foot shoe and which is the off-foot shoe.
It has no mark on it. My experience as a smith enables me to tell
that very well. I know they are my make of shoe by the marks
inside the shoe behind the clip which was caused by bending by an
ordinary blacksmith’s hammer and. not a round-faced shoemaker’s
hammer. They were clipped with a ball pein hammer. That is a
hammer with a round head on it. Also by the finish-off of the heels.
They are not concaved on the inner flat surface —the surface that
comes in contact with the sole of the foot. I can recognize them
by the marks inside the clip. Those marks were caused by a little
chip out of the gavel of the anvil. I can also recognize them by the
fullering. Those marks were made by irregular striking. I have
not the slightest doubt about those being the shoes I made.
With regard to the off fore shoe, it is practically the same as the
near fore shoe, the same marks are on that and are made in the same
manner.


With regard to the hind shoes, the marks are all the same.
Taking the four shoes I have no doubt whatever that they are the
shoes I made for that horse.
That was not a common type of horse so far as shoeing was
concerned. I have been just on twenty-one years at the trade.
So far as I can recollect I have never prior to that occasion nor since
ever shod a horse like this one. I saw the horse moving. I watched
him carefully. He is a clean - gaited horse, a good active mover.
I should say he was a horse who would do a long journey easily
without distress.
I have not noticed the tracks the shoes made on the road. I did
not notice them after I shod him.
Cross-examined hy Mr. Singer. —-Fore feet of horses are practi-
cally common in being of varying widths if they are bare before
being shod. I will say it is a very common thing. So is front
clipping. I have used ball pein hammers on previous occasions.
The shoe you now produce I am unable to tell whether it has had a
ball pein hammer used on it—-the shoe is too disfigured. I wouldn’t
say the shoe you now produce has had a ball pein hammer on it.
I have not seen other blacksmiths with a ball pein hammer.
Charles Vincent.
Examined hy Mr. Martin. —l am a farmer living at Pukekawa.
The place I occupy is on the main road between Tuakau and Glen
Murray. I know where Eyre lived. My place would be somewhere
along about three miles from Eyre’s place, between Glen Murray
and his place. I remember the night of the 24th August when
Eyre was shot. I went to bed as usual about 9 o’clock. A young
fellow that was milking for me was with me at the time. My house
stands away from the road—about 100 yards or somewhere there-
abouts. It is higher than the road —a bit higher.
After I had gone to bed the dogs disturbed me by barking very
severely. I got up and looked out, and there was a horse coming
this way—coming along from Glen Murray towards Pukekohe—-and
that would be towards Byre’s. He was coming on the road towards
Eyre’s place. That would also be towards Tuakau. I couldn’t
see anybody on the beast, but I could see that it was a horse coming
down. I couldn’t see if any one was on the horse or not. The
country there is a bit hilly, and you would see the, road in some places
much better than in others owing to the rise and fall of the ground.
When I saw this horse coming along I went outside the house, but
not outside the garden-fence. I then went to bed again, and a little
after 12 o’clock the dogs started to bark again, and I went outside the
fence to see what the dogs were barking so fiercely at. I didn’t see
any beast at that time, but I heard a horse on the road travelling
back towards Glen Murray. I could tell from the sound that it
was cantering. When I heard him on the first occasion the beast
■was trotting.


Cross-examined by Mr. Singer. —I couldn’t tell what sort of a beast
it was at that distance —no more than it was a horse. I could tell
it was a horse by it cantering. I live on the main Glen Murray -
Tuakau Road. My property fronts on that road. I live beyond
the junction of the Punga and Tuakau Roads. Whatever I heard
was going towards Tuakau. I couldn’t see it when it got to the
junction by Eyre’s. On the first occasion I saw the beast going
along the road, but I did not see it on the second occasion. I said
that I saw the beast, but did not see the rider on the beast.
I remember giving evidence at the Magistrate’s Court at Puke-
kohe. The signature attached to the deposition produced is mine.
I don’t know whether my evidence was read over to me in the
Magistrate’s Court. I went into the witness-box at Pukekohe and
was sworn before giving my evidence, and gave my evidence. I
signed that evidence. I don’t think it was read over to me before
I signed it.
Q. Did you not say in the Magistrate’s Court that you saw
nothing, but heard a horse galloping ? — A. I think I said I saw a beast,
but did not see a rider on it.
I saw no rider on it. I can’t say that I said I saw nothing. I
saw the animal on the road, but saw no rider on it.
I gave evidence here in the Supreme Court not long ago. You
asked me the same question as you now ask. I gave evidence in
the Supreme Court about a fortnight ago. You asked me the same
question then about what evidence I gave in the Magistrate’s Court.
I then said that I believed then that that was what I had said in
the Magistrate’s Court. I couldn’t see any rider on it.
William Smith McNeill.
Examined by Mr. Hunt. —I am a farmer living at Pukekawa.
I live quite close to what is called locally Tippins’s Corner. I have
the next place to Mr. Tippins. I heard of the murder of Mr. Eyre
on the Wednesday afternoon, the 25th. At that time I had an
engagement to come to Auckland. I left on Wednesday morning
at a quarter to 5. I had not at that time heard of the murder.
I left home at a quarter to 5 to catch the train at Tuakau at 7 o’clock.
I was riding a pony into Tuakau. The hoofs were very small; the
pony was shod. The shoes would be very much smaller than any
of the shoes now shown me in Court. Shortly after the murder of
the late Mr. Eyre the police followed the tracks of my pony and
examined the shoes.
Not cross-examined.
Eric George Morrison.
Examined by Mr. Hunt. —I am a farmer living at Pukekawa. I
live along the road that goes past Eyre’s and past Tippins’s. lam


next McNeill’s place —past his place. On 24th August last I was
at Onewhero attending a sale there. I left home fairly early that
morning to go to that sale. I left home about 10 a.m. and was at
the sale all day. I got back home at about half past 10 that night.
I was riding that day. I was riding a roan hack —« medium hack,
not very heavy. On 25th August the police came and saw that
horse and measured its shoes. The police had followed the tracks
of that horse from Geddis’s Corner to my place. That is Mr. Goode’s
corner. The shoes of my horse were much smaller than the four
now in Court, and my shoes were cogged.
Not cross-examined.
Joseph Belt..
Examined hy Mr. Hunt. —l am a farm hand living at Pukekawa.
In the beginning of July last I was working for Mr. Granville near
Glen Murray. I remained with him until the 23rd August. It was
a Monday morning. I know the accused Thorne. He went to work
at Mr. Granville’s place while I was there. He came there on the
11th July last. He and I occupied the same whare some little way
from Mr. Granville’s house. We slept in the same room, but in
different beds. He did not have a gun when he first went to
Granville’s, but he brought a gun out there about a week afterwards.
The gun-case is the one now in Court. I remember, while I was
there, him being out shooting. On the second of these occasions
he brought home two rabbits. On the first time he never brought
home any. While he was there he had some cartridges in his
possession. I remember seeing them when he first went there. I
last saw them when he was out shooting. Those cartridges were
kept in the gun-case.
I decided to leave there on the Saturday night. That was about
the 22nd. I told accused I was leaving. I told him that on the
Saturday night. I told him I was going on the Monday morning.
I told Mr. Granville I was leaving, too.
On the day I left accused was shifting over to the camp to start
ploughing. That camp was about a mile and a half from the
homestead. On the morning I left accused had the horses in the
sledge already harnessed up and ready to leave. He had a steel-grey
horse of his own there. I saw Granville’s horses. One of his horses
was called “ Mickey.” That was the last horse he got. “ Mickey ”
was a bay horse —a medium draught horse. It was what I called a
light horse ; it was all right for a spring-cart. I never rode “ Mickey.”
While I was in the whare with accused he generally slept in his under-
trousers, singlet, and sox.
Accused had between fifty-one and fifty-seven cartridges there with
him. He was counting them there one Saturday night. He counted
them over, and I asked him how many he had there. That was on
the Saturday night before I left. On the Monday morning I left and


went off to Sharp’s place. I worked for Bill McNeill straight away.
Cross-examined by Mr. Singer. —l told Thorne on the Saturday
that I was going on the Monday. I made up my mind to leave on the
Saturday night. I told Granville on the Sunday afternoon I was
going on the Monday morning—l was doing no more work. I didn’t
care much for the treatment Granville gave me.
Jambs Granville.
Examined by Mr. Martin. —I am a farmer living at Glen Murray.
I did not know prior to Eyre’s death where Eyre lived. I know now.
My place is about eighteen miles from the Pukekawa Post-office. About
the 11th July last the accused Thorne came to work for me. Whilst
he was with me he occupied a whare at my homestead with the last
witness, Bell. Part of his work was to look after the horses. After
he had been with me a short time he went into Tuakau. He came
on the Sunday afternoon, and the following Wednesday he went to
Tuakau and took four horses with him. He wasn’t back by the
following Monday, and on the Tuesday I went to see what was keeping
him and missed him on the road. I kept on the Main Road all the
way. He was home on Wednesday.
About Sunday, the 15th August, he left me to go to Eyre’s place.
He said he was going up to get a dog. He had a horse of his own.
That horse was a very hard one to catch. I had to help him to get
it in and catch it every time he wanted to go out on it. Later on I
wanted some ploughing done and determined to send Thorne off to
do it. It was Monday, the 22nd. We started on fixing up the camp
on Thursday, and shifted over there on the Monday. It was intended
that Bell was to stay in the camp until the Tuesday night. The
camp is about two miles, I reckon, from my homestead. Bell was
to leave on Wednesday morning and come back to the whare. Bell
gave me notice on the Sunday afternoon and left on the Monday.
Accused came and told me first that Bell was clearing out on Monday
morning. That would leave accused to go by himself to the camp.
There was a boy coming to be brought up to the camp on Tuesday ;
that is, he was to arrive at the house—my homestead —on Tuesday
afternoon. Monday night I got a wire from the boy saying he was
sorry he couldn’t come. Before accused left I told him Bell could
stay in the camp till Tuesday night, and that I would take the boy
over on Wednesday morning. Bell left and did not stay. Nobody
went over with accused to the camp to stop there. I went over to
the camp on the Monday, and went over again on the Tuesday
morning. We were fixing the camp up all day Monday. On Tuesday
Thorne started to do a bit of ploughing. He did a bit of ploughing
on the Monday. He started ploughing after dinner. I left him on
Tuesday between 6 and half past. It was quite dark when I got
home. I did not know anything about the murder until the police
arrived.


To Judge. —I expected him to sleep in the camp on the Monday
and Tuesday night and until he got his job done.
To Mr. Martin. —The police arrived at the house. I went back
to Thorne on the Wednesday afternoon to tell him to bring over the
horses next morning to get a plough I was borrowing. When I went
back Detective-Sergeant Cummings, Sergeant Cowan, and Constable
Thompson were sitting down there. That would be about 5 o’clock.
I knocked off on Tuesday about 5 or half past.
Accused took “ Major,” “ King,” “ Dick,” “ Mickey,” and “ Polly ”
to the camp with him. His own horse was in a paddock very nearly
a mile off. When they were not worked we used to turn them out
in a big paddock at the back of the camp. It was not fenced. It
contained 250 or 300 acres —that means the place I was ploughing
and the place that was in grass. All the country is undulating.
It has been bush country with the exception of this piece I am
ploughing, which is heavy fern. My country has not been cleared.
The stumps and logs are still there, and 97 acres of standing bush.
The bush in the other part has been out down and grassed. The
country is well fenced and divided into fourteen paddocks. I have
1,000 acres, all ring-fenced. I don’t think it would be easy for a
stranger to get in or out of at night. It would be very difficult for a
stranger to get into it. It takes us all our time to get the horses
into it at morning, let alone night.
I bought “ Mickey ” at Coughlan’s sale at Puni. I told Lucas
to take delivery of the horse, and he broke him to harness and had
him shod and delivered him to me. The other horses at the camp
were shod with the heels of the shoes turned up. “ Mickey ” was
shod plain. He was the only horse there with plain shoes. I know
that of my own knowledge. I had another horse that was shod
plain, but he wasn’t on the farm at the time. While “ Mickey ”
was with me he was hard-fed the same as the other horses. I leave
it to the man that is looking after the horses as to how much feed
he gives the horses. That was Thorne. All the horses had been
clipped a little above the trace-line.
I remember Constable Wolfendale taking “ Mickey ” away. On
that day “ Mickey ” had been to the landing —himself and “ Dick.”
Some reckon it eight and a half miles and some ten miles. I reckon
it is close on nine miles away. He and “ Dick ” took an empty
wagon over to the landing which is on the river. They brought back
close on a ton of chaff in the wagon. Brown Tommy brought a
horse that he operated on, and it wasn’t quite well, and it was more
of a nuisance to the other horses coming along the road. It was of
no practical assistance to the others in bringing the load. The
country from the landing to my place is all up the hill until you
come to Bothwell’s Hill, and then you have 90 chains downhill, and
then the balance is all uphill again for more than a mile. When
the horses came back with the load of chaff Detective-Sergeant


Cummings, Sergeant Cowan, and Constable Wolfendale were waiting
at the house for me. The horse “ Mickey ” had a feed, and then
they took charge of him, and Wolfendale rode him away. When I
got back from Thorne’s camp on the Wednesday I found the police
there. It was then raining very heavily. They had some conversa-
tion with me, and some time after that —after they had tea —they
went over to Thorne’s camp. I couldn’t say whether they went
straight to Thorne’s camp. I did not go with them. They came
back later on in the evening—late in the evening—with Thorne.
I waited up for them. It was still raining very heavily. They came
in to stay all night, and they had a drink of whisky, with the exception
of Cummings. I went to bed about 2 o’clock. I took the whisky
away.
Thorne and Cummings were talking. They were together. I made
the men as comfortable as I could, leaving Cummings and Thorne
in the sitting-room. There was a couple of sofas there. I offered
them some blankets, and Cummings said they didn’t require the
blankets, they would manage all right.
Next morning Cummings, Thorne, and Thompson went away to
the camp together after breakfast. I went over to the camp after
them. When I got there the horses were not in. Cummings said
something to me. In consequence of what he said to me —Thorne
was quite close when I answered —I spoke to Thorne. I said to him,
“ Here you are, Sam. You take the pony and get the horses.” He
got on the pony and went straight away for them, and the horses
were got in. That is the whole of the horses I have mentioned. That
did not include the accused’s horse. They were then tied up, and
Cummings started to examine them. Thorne was standing on my
right, and Thompson was behind me, and Cummings was looking
for the horse’s footprints—he was looking at the ground. I may
be mistaken in believing he was looking for the horse’s footprints.
After Cummings had finished looking on the ground he did nothing
for a bit. He then took “ Mickey ” away. He never examined any
horses’ feet or any part of them then. I don’t think he examined
any horses’ feet afterwards. I don’t remember seeing him raising
any of the horses’ feet to examine them. Cummings was walking round
the horses looking from one place to another. While Cummings
was doing this accused said to me, “ Which horse do you think they
want ? ” and I said, “T think it is ‘ Dick.’ ” Thorne said, “ They’re
Detective-Sergeant Cummings said, “ Well, Sam, me and
you will agree in everything yet.” Cummings said to Thompson,
“ I think ' Mickey ’ will do.” That was in Thorne’s hearing. When
Cummings said that accused gave a bit of a shiver and said, “ Oh ! ”
Thompson then led “ Mickey ” away to about the distance away the
door of the Court is, and then asked Cummings, “ Can I have a word
with Sam \ ” and Cummings said, “ Oh, yes, he is not under arrest.
lam only making inquiries to find out about the murder. I’ll accuse
3—Thorne.


no man or make no arrest until I know I have the right man,” or
words to that effect. That was in Thorne’s hearing. Cummings
then took hold of the horse “ Mickey ” by the head, and I gave
Thompson the gear for taking off the shoes, and he started to take off
the front shoes. I got accused to one side and told him that things
looked very serious, and that if he would like to take a couple of days
•off and get in to the inquest. I told him that was in case anything
might be said there about him.
After the shoes were taken off “ Mickey ” by Thompson, Detective-
Sergeant Cummings started measuring the shoes. Cummings said,
■“ Those correspond with the marks of the horse on the road.” Thorne
didn’t reply to that. I never heard him say anything about it.
Cummings offered him a ride in in the motor-car, and Thompson
said he would get him a hack to go back. All my horses had covers
—every one. They were wearing them when the police took the
shoes off “ Mickey.” Thorne had a saddle there. After Cummings
got the shoes that Thompson took off “ Mickey,” Cummings led
“ Mickey ” up to the door of the tent, and I followed him up.
Thompson and accused stood behind us. Detective-Sergeant Cum-
mings opened the cover of the horse “ Mickey ” and rolled it back.
He asked me to hold the horse whilst he was doing this, and he went
into the tent and brought out the accused’s saddle and put it on
“ Mickey.” He said, “ This saddle fits ‘ Mickey.’ ” I said, “ That
saddle was on ‘ Dick ’ yesterday.” There is not much difference
between the girth of “ Mickey ” and “ Dick,” but they are both
larger than accused’s horse. Cummings then took the saddle off
again and laid it on the ground beside him. He got hold of “ Mickey’s ”
cover and rolled it up again and put it on him and buckled it up.
He looked at the cover and said, “ This is a print of a saddle on the
cover.” Cummings drew my attention to it. Cummings said,
■“ Your evidence and mine will be sufficient on that I ” I said,
“ Christchurch ! ” —or something like that —“ Sam Thorne is in
■charge of those horses, not me.” I turned round then and tapped
Thorne on the shoulder and told him it was better for him to have
a look at the cover and have a look at the print of the saddle on it.
Thorne made no reply; he turned his back. Detective-Sergeant
Cummings then took up the saddle and placed it on the mark that
was left. After that Thorne went to get his own hack. Later they
all left after having lunch. Thorne has not been back since then
to my place. Next day he sent me a wire for some of his wages,
and I sent them to him. Thorne used his discretion as to how much
feed he gave the horses. Over at the camp the horse-feed was kept
inside the tent. That was the only shelter there, and all the feed
and gear was kept there.
I never caught “ Mickey ” myself. I tried to catch him. You
couldn’t catch any of the horses in the paddock—we generally drove
them into camp —except you got them into a corner between two
logs—you might get them like that.


Cross-examined hy Mr. Singer. —Thorne’s horse was called “ Dandy.”
I only just heard the name of the horse when the police were inspecting
the horses. I helped Thorne to catch the horse. It is usual then
to use a horse’s name. I may have heard Thorne using the horse’s
name then. I certainly heard it on my farm when the police were
there. I think I have a fair enough memory. I remember now
that I heard the name of that horse on my farm when the police were
there. I would not swear to it. They inquired the names of all
the horses. His horse’s name would be bound to be mentioned.
I remember giving evidence here before. That was the first question
you asked me. I said I couldn’t remember. I wouldn’t like to
say that I said, “ I don’t know the name of Thorne’s own hack. I
don’t think I have ever heard it.” I did not say that. I will swear
that I did not say that. If I did there is a big error in that. You
may be right when you say that you drew my attention to it hy
saying I had used the name of the horse in the Magistrate’s Court.
“ Mickey ” had been suffering very badly from lampers —a disease
of the gums. The gums come from the top over the top of the
upper teeth. I had had “ Mickey ” operated on for lampers some
time in that month —August. I left the horse at Brown Tonga’s,
and went over on the Sunday with accused to help to throw the horse
for the purpose of operating on it for lampers. Some of the horses
get it very bad. The effect of the disease makes the mouth
exceedingly sore to chew with. It might take a couple of days to
get over the operation. I had the horse fed by accused that night
with mash and bran. I saw him fed. That operation might have
been on the Bth August. The horse was turned out next morning
for about three days. It was sore in the mouth for a few days after
that. I don’t profess to be a judge of horses. lam no judge nor
do I profess to be a judge of horses. I have stated and now state
that lam a very poor hand at horses. While Thorne was there
with me he and I expressed our preferences for the horses that were
there. I looked on Thorne, so far as I could see, as a very good
judge. My preference among the horses was “ Mickey,” and Thorne’s
was “ Dick.” He wouldn’t have “ Mickey ”on his mind.
The day before the police inspected the horses—Wednesday—
Thorne had ridden “ Dick.” He had had the saddle on “ Major ”
on Saturday. “ Major ”is a bigger horse than “ Dandy ” ; so is
“ Dick ” a bigger horse than “ Dandy.” On the Saturday accused
had ridden “ King.” On Wednesday he rode “ Dick ” over.
Between “ King,” “ Dick,” and “Mickey” there is not a couple of
inches difference in girth. The cover on “Mickey ” has straps round
the hind legs of the horse and round the breast where it is buckled.
I had a look at the mark on the cover. I didn’t trouble any more
after I had looked at it. I didn’t see the mark made. The mark
was a complete mark of accused’s saddle when Detective-Sergeant
Cummings put the saddle on. He drew the pencil right round.
3*


The mark was a wet mark. It wouldn’t be a black mark. I say
it fitted right round the saddle. I call the top of the inside of the
saddle the felt-lined part [Witness points to it]. In the Lower Court
and the last hearing I think I stated in my evidence that there was
the print of the saddle on the cover. I did not describe it then as
I did now. I said in the Supreme Court that it fitted the print.
If I said the mark fitted just the top it is wrong. I said it fitted
the print of the saddle. I won’t swear that I said it fitted just the
top. If it is there it is taken down wrong or I might have made a
mistake. It fitted the print of the saddle.
On the night of the 25th August the police came back to my
place about 10 or 11. I waited up for them. Thorne went into
the front room with Detective-Sergeant Cummings. I would not
like to say they started straight away. Thorne had one whisky.
I wouldn’t like to say whether the other whisky was before or after
the cup of tea. There were Cummings, Cowan, Thompson, and
myself. When I went to bed Cummings and Thorne were up, and
accused and Cummings were then writing something.
The next morning I followed the police over to the camp. It
was about 2 o’clock or after when I left them. I told the Magistrate
that Thorne was up all night. That was because it was after 2
o’clock when I left them. I never said here before that accused
“ was tired with the horses, as he had been up all night.” I couldn’t
say that. I never asked next day whether he and Cummings had
been up all night. I had never seen accused since then. I was
never told and I couldn’t swear after I left them whether they went
to sleep or not. When the horses were brought in in the morning
“ Dick ” was in the paddock with the other horses—a bit away.
Accused brought the horses in by himself. “ Dick ” was not tied
up when I went over to the camp. None of the horses were then tied
up. They were all subsequently tied up. When Thorne asked me
what horse I thought they wanted I said I thought it was " Dick,”
as Thorne had always such a fancy for ” Dick.” They were all
tied up. Thorne always had “ Dick ”as his fancy, and he used to
keep “ Dick ” tied up at night. That was my reason for telling
Thorne that I thought the police were going to look at “ Dick.”
“ Dick ” was a horse that wouldn’t keep with the others, and Thorne
was always disputing that “ Dick ” was the best horse.
To Judge. —When I left the camp on Tuesday the work was over.
Dick ” was tied up then to the tent. “ Major ” and “ King ” were
worked first, and then “ Major ” got tired and accused put Mickey ”
in.
To Mr. Singer. —l remember giving evidence here at this Court
the other day. I then said that I thought it was “ Dick ” they
wanted because the accused had such a fancy for “ Dick ’’ and that
that was the reason I had always given. I said that it was an error
in the Magistrate’s Court —in taking the evidence down. You drew


my attention to my statement last time—the statement I had made
in the Magistrate’s Court : “ Accused asked me what horse they
were after, and I said I thought it was ‘ Dick,’ as he was tied up to
a tree.” You showed me my signature to that evidence, and you
asked me if my evidence had been read over to me ; it was read
over to me. I said in the Supreme Court that I had the same reason
as I gave in the Magistrate’s Court—as the accused had a fancy for
“ Dick.” I said in the Supreme Court that I may have said in the
Lower Court what appears in the Lower Court notes, but it was an
error. It was not an error on my part. It was an error in taking
down the notes.
I remember Sergeant Cummings saying “ • Mickey ’ will do.”
When he said that the shoes had not been taken off “ Mickey,” nor
were they being taken off when Cummings said that. When accused
asked me what horse I thought they were after I said “ Dick,” and
the shoes had not been taken off nor were they being taken off
“ Mickey.” It was when Cummings said “ ‘ Mickey ’ will do ” that
accused gave this shiver. Accused was a man of cheerful tempera-
ment and a good worker. I have given the words that Thorne used.
When he asked me what horse I thought they were after and I said
I thought it was “ Dick,” he said, “ Oh, well, they’re .”
I never heard him say, “ Oh, well.” I have a good memory. I am
positive he never said “ I’ll be ” or something like that.
It had been raining all that day Wednesday.
Re-examined by Mr. Martin. —I liked “ Mickey ” the best, and
accused liked “ Dick ” the best. My pick as a best hack was “ Mickey,”
and accused’s was “ Dick.”
The day I went over to the camp after the police I went over
there on my own hack. I got off the hack and gave it to accused,
and he got the horses on that.
FOURTH DAY: THURSDAY, 2ND DECEMBER, 1920.
BENJAMIN TIPPINS.
Examined by Mr. Martin, — I am a farmer residing at Pukekawa.
I know the plan produced. It shows Mr. Eyre’s house, and also
the Punga Road, which is the local name for it. I now point to
where McNeill lives, and also where I live and my property. Goode
is right out on the corner of the Main Road and the side road.
Goode’s is also what is called Geddis’s. The road that runs in front
of my place is now called Tippins’s Road ; it was called Morrison’s.
The road that leads to Morrison’s and McNeill’s is a blind road leading
to a swamp. A man travelling from Eyre’s to Glen Murray would
ordinarily go up to the Main Road. If he did not want to go up the
Main Road he would come down past my place and go up the


Punga Road. The comer where the cream is collected by the cream-
cart is known as Tippins’s Corner. If I were going from my place
to Glen Murray I would go up the Punga Road, but any one from
Eyre's would have the choice of going by the Punga Road or by the
Main Road. On the Punga Creek there is an island on which Natives
live.
1 knew the late Mr. Eyre. On the 24th August I had been to a
clearing-sale at Onewhero, and went back to my own place in the
evening, arriving home about half past ten. I came down the road,
known as Eyre’s Road to my own place. I know the road outside
Eyre's place —Eyre’s Road. There is a creek in it with a bridge
over it. That road, is a chain wide. It is not formed for the full
width —only about 12 ft. or 13 ft., somewhere about the centre.
On the plan produced there is marked a post —on the angle. I know
that post. Some little distance from that post in the opposite
direction to my place there is a stump. On the left-hand side driving
towards my place just before you come to the stump and from thence
on till you get to the creek there is a bit of a sideling going down.
To Judge. —That is to say, there is a cutting on one side and
nothing on the other. The bluff starts at about 2 ft. and runs up
to something like 6 ft. just before you approach the bridge. The
cutting slopes up a good height towards the angle-post. The bottom
of the angle-post is from 8 ft. to 10 ft. above the level of the road.
The cutting is about 5 ft. or 6 ft. high at the creek, then it slopes
down to the creek. There is a big drop on the other side. The
stump is from 3 ft. to 4 ft. from the edge of the cutting. It might not
be that ; it might be more. It is' quite close to the edge of the
cutting. The post is about 7 yards back from the edge of the
cutting —that is, the angle-post. On the top of this bank there is
a lot of high fern growing. Between the post and the edge of the
bank is where the fern is growing. Between the stump and the
bridge it is fairly smooth on the surface of the road for about 30
yards —I am not sure of the distance —but with a good slope —
downhill grade —and then you come to big boulders in the road. They
are not boulders put on in the form of road-metal. Some of them
would weigh half a ton if brought out. The road was graded down
there, and the boulders were left there, and the rain has washed in
between them and left them standing out of the road. You have
to drive carefully to avoid the boulders. You have to drive over
them, or between them. After that there is a little bit of a flat
going down on to the narrow bridge.
To Mr. Martin. —On the night of the 24th when I was coining,
home I was driving a gig which was in good order except that it had
a broken shaft which was tied up with a piece of plough-line and
made good. I was driving a very old and very quiet mare. On
reaching opposite the stump the mare shied and ran off the side of
the road and went into a gallop. She went down amongst the fern.


She was off the made road altogether and on to the side where the
fern is. I got her back on to the road and into a trot just as I got
to the stones. I negotiated the stones all right and got a bit of a
shaking up and then got on to the bridge. I don’t know what made
the mare shy. I did not see anything to make the horse shy. It
took me all my time to watch myself. Just at the cutting the creek
winds into the road a bit under the fence on the left-hand side and
then goes back into Eyre’s. There is a big hole there. It takes
you all your time to look after yourself.
I went home and got to bed at about 11 o’clock. After I had
gone to bed I was wakened by the dogs barking. I think I had just
got into a bit of a dose —I can’t say how long—l have no idea —when
the dogs woke me by their barking. I heard a horse going by at a
good “ bat ” —he was travelling. He was going down past my place
towards the Punga Road. I could tell that by the sound.
The next morning Sergeant Cowan of the police was at my place
just as it broke daylight. I went with him to examine some horse-
tracks that were on the road. I have been all my life with horses,
from the time I was ten years old. We started outside my gate on
the road. There were several horse-tracks there. They were just
freshly made you could see —quite fresh. We followed them up on
to the Punga Road —down to Tippins’s Corner, and then up on to
the Punga Road. There were tracks of other horses —different horses ;
the others were only ponies. We noticed when we got to Tippins’a
Corner that one big track went up the Punga Road and had been
both up and down the road. That was the only track on that road.
It had rained either two days or one day before that. The track
was as plain as could be. It wouldn’t be the day before, as I went
to the sale that day. It was the day before the sale that it rained.
There were no other tracks visible on the Punga Road but the one
there shown. We followed the tracks nearly to the bridge on the
Punga Road. I never went over the bridge. We picked those tracks
on both sides and in the centre. Going past my place they were on
the wrong side —the right-hand side—but in the Punga Road we
found them on to the middle and over on to the left-hand side.
Leading away from my house on my road the tracks were on the
right-hand side of the formed road going down. When we got to the
Punga Road they crossed over on to the left. They did not go any
great distance on the right-hand side going down the Punga Road ;
they went on the right-hand side in the Punga Road for a little way
and then crossed over and went over to the left-hand side.
To Judge. —I saw them on my road. There were tracks of smaller
horses, but not on the same side. The track on the Punga Road
was identical with the one on the wrong side of my road. It was a
big track, and there was no mistake about it being the same track.
To Mr. Martin. —The same track went up and down my road
on both sides of my road. It went up past my place and back again.


The track leading up my road past my place to Eyre’s was on the same
side as the other outside my gate. We went from the gate and started
from there. I never followed the tracks from my place towards
Eyre’s. We tracked the tracks back to my place. I saw them both
at the same point when I broke off to attend to my cows. On my
road they were on the same side, and they were both on the same
side on the Punga Road as far as we could track them. The horse
had a big, long, swinging stride and overlapping about 8 in. or 9 in.
in his stride ; he was trotting. That attracted my attention. There
is no horse there that I know of that could do that down there.
I would call that a peculiar track, in my opinion. We followed the
small tracks down to Tippins’s Corner. I knew who the horses were.
I made an examination of the tracks, which were quite distinct.
On the right fore shoe you could see the two nitches in the fullering
on the inside towards the back of the fullering. You could see the
grooving in the fullering quite plain. You could see the toe-clip
up the front from the shoe. That shoe was wider at the heel than
the left fore shoe. They were very round shoes—very wide across
the centre. The left front shoe was not so wide across the heel —
about I in. difference —and was very wide across the centre. There
was also the grooving showing very plain in that shoe ; they were
hand-made shoes. I now hold up the left front shoe. I measured
it by the width of my hand. The print in places was an inch deep.
I measured the track on the road that morning with my hand.
I ascertained on the road from the tracks that one shoe was wider
than another. That shoe is not a machine-made shoe without it
has been altered and heated up again with a new fullering put in.
I have never seen shoes with similar marks on to those in the fullering
on these shoes. The fullering on these shoes comes well back to the
heels, and that was what we noticed too.
Some days later than this I was present when the police were
giving a horse a trial. I had never seen the horse before. I believe
they call it “ Mickey.” I saw the horse’s action, and at my request
they took him on to the clay road. I examined the tracks that he
made on the road, and I was satisfied that the front-feet tracks that
he made on that day were not similar to the tracks which I saw on
the Punga Road on the morning of the 25th. The hind-feet tracks
were the same. That is, the same as those I had seen on the Punga
Road. That is, the hind-feet tracks I saw when the police gave
this horse the trial were similar to those I had seen on the Punga
Road on the 25th August. Looking at the tracks that I saw when the
police called me out on the road and the tracks made on the Punga
Road I could state that the action of the horse was exactly the
same in each case. He was overlapping Bin. or 9 in. with a long
stride.
Cross-examined hy Mr. Singer. —When I got home on the night
of the 24th August I had some supper and went to bed. I have not


had too much experience of horse-shoes. I have never seen faulty
striking before. I have looked for it before —when I have been
getting horses ready for a show. A nick in the horse’s shoe would
not detract from the value of a horse. I have examined shoes,
looking to see how the horse is shod. If I saw those shoes I might
overlook them and I might not. It would depend what I was
looking for. On this occasion on the road I would look for every-
thing. If I was turning up a horse’s shoes I don’t know that I
wouldn’t take notice of those nicks. You might see the nicks. I
expect before they are shod all horses’ feet differ in size. I don’t
think it is common for horses to have fore feet of different shapes
and sizes. I would not contradict the blacksmith if he says they
do differ. The fore shoe is not a bad made shoe. It is just an
ordinary hand-made shoe, I should say. I wouldn’t say the fore
shoe I now hold was a particularly-well-made shoe.
On different parts of the road I saw the marks going on both
sides of the road and in the middle. That was not so in my road;
they were all on the one side on my road. I have never seen a shoe
like that before —not to my knowledge. I have never troubled to
examine other horses.
Herman Henry Sharp.
Examined by Mr. Martin. —l am a farmer residing in Pukekawa
district. My property is on the road that runs from Tuakau to
Glen Murray —about four miles from Eyre’s place to the best of my
knowledge. I have seen the plan produced before. My place is
beyond the limits of that plan on the Glen Murray Road. I had
been away on active service and returned about February, 1917.
I know accused Thorne was working at Eyre’s and afterwards went
to Granville’s.
I heard of Eyre’s murder. While Thorne was working at Gran-
ville’s he was at my place. He came about a wagon break-down
on the road. Before that I had seen him on the road with four
horses. He was then going in the direction of Tuakau. On the
15th August he was at my place and had tea with me. That was
Sunday. He was then riding a small grey horse.
I remember the night of the 24th August. The night was one
with clouds in the sky. The day had been fine. The previous
day it had been raining. I went to bed as usual at about 9 o’clock
on the night of the 24th August. I never got any sleep. I was
disturbed by my dogs. That would be from a quarter to twenty
past 9at night. My house is over 300 yards from the road, I should
say. I have never measured it. My doorway does not face the
road. It faces away from the road. I went out to my dog when
it was barking, but not to the front of the house. I didn’t look up
or down the road. '


The next morning I went off with my cream to Tippins’s Corner
somewhere about half past 8. I went along the Main Road until
I came to the Punga Road and would follow along that to Tippins’s
Corner. The cream is collected by Jock Stuart. There is no metal on
the Punga Road. It is a clay road. When I went into Punga Road I
had not heard of Eyre’s murder. I noticed a horse’s track first on
the back—Punga —road. They were on my right-hand side of the
road going down. They were pointing down as if going to Tippins’s.
There were no other tracks visible on the road. I got to Tippins’s
Corner and deposited my cream and there heard of Eyre’s murder.
When I went back home I returned the same way by the Punga and
Main Roads. Going back again I traced the horse’s tracks, going
back, still on my right-hand side of the road —the opposite side to
the other tracks. I traced those tracks to just past my gate along
the Main Road. When they passed my gate they were pointing
towards Glen Murray. On the Punga Road I traced them in both
directions —going towards Tippins’s Corner and coming away from
Tippins’s Corner —and the same on the Main Road. You could
follow them there. They varied in places according to the surface,
but were quite sufficient for me to trace them.
I have had over twenty years’ experience with horses. I have
constantly handled them and have been in charge of ln the
Expeditionary Force I was at the horse-depot at Egypt where there
were twenty thousand horses.
I noticed that the right front foot was a very broad shoe and
made out of heavy iron, which I consider was a hand-made shoe by
the marks on the fullering. There were three marks on the fullering
of the right front shoe. The right front-foot shoe was wider in the
heel than the left shoe. The left front-foot shoe was narrower than
the right. The right hind-foot shoe had a little curve on it —half-
way down it. The left front-foot shoe was wider in the centre than
the right front-foot shoe. There was nothing remarkable about the
hind feet.
The shoe I hold in my hand, the right front-foot shoe, compares
exactly with the tracks I saw in the road. By the marks on it I
should say it was the shoe that made the impression on the road.
I can swear to that one. I couldn’t really swear to the left front
shoe. The right hind shoe has a curve on it similar to the curve I
observed in the horse-tracks.
I was present with Tippins when the police tried the horse
“ Mickey ” on the 11th September. By the tracks on the road I
could form an opinion of the action of the horse; it was very long
and very free, and the horse was overstepping anywhere I saw him,
nothing under 9 in. The amount would depend on the pace the
horse was going. I saw that on the 11th September. The tracks
I saw on the 25th August showed signs of overstepping to about 9 in,
in places where I saw he had been trotting.


I saw “ Mickey ” tried on the 11th September when a police officer
rode him both on the grass and on the road. I watched his action
and examined the tracks he made afterwards. Two of the tracks
he then made were the same as those I saW on the 25th August, and
two were not the same. The two hind feet were the same and the
two fore feet were not. The horse was shod on all four feet. The
action of the horse I saw on the 11th September was, I should say,
the same action of the horse that made the tracks I saw on the road
on the 25th August.
I would describe “ Mickey ” as a first-class artillery-horse and
one that could do long journeys without distress. He was in good
hard condition. I never remember seeing shoes similar to those
fore-feet shoes that are in the witness-box. I think I have seen
shoes like the hind-feet shoes with the bend like these. I have never
seen any like the fore-feet shoes. I have never seen a horse that I
recollect which those shoes would fit.
Cross-examined by Mr. Singer. —My observations were not made
by me until after I had heard of the murder of Mr. Eyre. The
remarkable thing to me about these shoes was the iron they were
made of. I said I had never seen shoes made out of heavy iron
before. That was what made those shoes to me so remarkable.
My house is 300 yards or over back from the road. I have never
measured it. It may be 400 or 500 yards back. I gave evidence
in the Magistrate’s Court in Pukekohe. I don’t remember saying
that my house was 300 yards from the road. I must have said it if
it is down in the depositions. I said in the Supreme Court that it was
400 or 500 yards from the road. I have never paced it or tested it.
I said when I was shown that deposition that I said I did not remember
what I had said in the Magistrate’s Court. I said in the Supreme
Court: “ I had heard the dogs barking the night before. If I had
gone to the side of my house I could have seen any one on the road,
if I had looked.” I said in the Magistrate’s Court that I did not look
along the road, and therefore I did not see any one on the road. I
did not say that I could not see any one passing along the road by
the light of the moon —in the Magistrate’s Court. According to
those papers I have done so. Ido not remember what I said.
Philip Sydney Eyre (recalled).
Cross-examined by Mr. Singer. —There are a couple of gates on
our property on to the Punga Road. They allow persons to come
from the Punga Road on to our property. There are gates in the
paddocks which allow any one to come from the Punga Road up to
the house.
To Judge. —There is a creek to cross before he got to the house,
with a stone crossing.
To Mr. Singer. —Over the other side of the creek is a fence with
a gate in. Counting the Punga Road gate, Thorne would pass


through three gates, which would bring him to the hedge. Taking
the other gate on the Punga Road that is the same. Thorne knew
every inch of the place. Through the gates from the Punga Road
would be far the quickest way for him to come if he was coming to
the house.
To Judge. —lf he left his horse at the Punga Road it would take
twenty minutes to walk over. If he rode up it would take about
five minutes.
To Mr. Singer. —The Punga Road way is the way he left on
Sunday, the 15th. I saw him go. I didn’t see him arriving. It
was in the afternoon when he left. I went with him. I was riding,
too. I don’t know which of us opened and shut the three gates.
They were opened and shut —the three gates. One of the two of us
did that.
We have property the other side of the Punga Road.
Any one standing at the house would not be able to see a person
all the way to the Punga Road from the house. After you get away
about 10 chains from the house the ground slopes —he would be
hidden in some parts and visible in others. He would be seen at
the Punga Road. There is bush there, but he would not pass
through the bush. The bush would not cut off the view of him, as
he would be on the side. Any one standing at the house —outside
the hedge —would not be able to see him all the way. In the rolling
ground the man would be in the dips. You could not see down to
the Punga Road. You could only see the top part, not the sloping
part.
Re-examined hy Mr. Martin. —You couldn’t see the bottom part
of the Punga Road from the house, but you could see from the house
to the Punga Road at the top gate. You couldn’t see the bottom
gate, but the top one you could.
To Judge. —If a man was riding away from the hedge you would
see him the first part for some distance.
John McPherson Stuart.
Examined hy Mr. Marlin. —I am the cream-carrier at Pukekawa
and knew the accused Thorne and the late Mr. Eyre. I consider
the accused an expert rider. He is a real good shot. I have seen
him shooting. I wasn’t sure which shoulder he fired from.
I recollect the 25th August. I heard of Eyre’s murder before
I started in’ the morning. My round takes me round past Eyre’s
house, along Eyre’s Road to Tippins’s house, thence to Tippins’s
Corner. Going along Eyre’s Road I kept a sharp lookout going
right round Eyre’s farm —all four roads. When I was going down
Eyre’s Road—l had not heard anything of shoe-prints or tracks —I
saw the footprint of a horse going down to the bridge. He was
coming over the bridge to a straining-post towards Eyre’s house.
The straining-post is about 160 yards from Eyre’s house and is on


the side of the road at the top of the bank. The post is marked on
the plan now shown me. That is up the bank where the straining-
post is and where the track went to. The horse had been tied up
at the post, and then the marks went back the same way they had
come. Where the post was the horse had eaten the grass right round
it. There were good footprints of the horse there. I was driving on
the wagon and saw the footprints ahead of me and stopped before I
drove over them. I traced them round Tippins’s Corner, up the
Punga Road, and right to where that road junctions with the Glen
Murray Road. There were a few marks on Eyre’s Road that looked
like ponies’ marks, also on Tippins’s Road, but not on the Punga
Road. Coming down the Punga Road there were other marks where
a horse and a cart had come down. I got to the bridge there at
about 8 o’clock, and I lost a lot of time examining the prints. It
would be about 9 o’clock when I was at Tippins’s Corner. I met
Sharp there. He had a cart there. I met him at Tippins’s Corner,
where he was before I got there. I took the tracks with the trap
to be Sharp’s. Those were the only others besides the horse I have
mentioned. The horse seemed to be inclined to keep to the wrong
side of the road. At times he might come over on to the centre to
cross a bridge. Speaking generally, the prints were on the wrong
side of the road. I paid particular attention to the marks at
Eyre’s. They came in to Eyre’s on the wrong side of the road, and
went back from there on the wrong side of the road. I followed
those tracks to the Glen Murray junction —the four sets. They were
very distinct.
The marks had a toe-clip, and the fullering-mark extended from
practically the toe to the heel. That is a very peculiar thing in a
horse-shoe. I have never seen it before. It is a hand-made shoe
that made the marks on the road. The off front shoe was wider at
the heel than the near front shoe. I haven’t the slightest hesitation
in saying that the fore-feet shoes I now hold were the shoes that
made those tracks on the road. I could tell they were hand made
by the heavy iron. You never get a machine-made shoe with the
bend in the fullering as is shown in these shoes.
The horse overstepped with his hind feet over his front ones
I never followed any other tracks on Tippins’s Road. The ones I
followed were the ones that went to Eyre’s.
Cross-examined by Mr. Singer. —I didn’t pay a great lot of
attention to the hind shoes. It was the front shoes that took my
attention. The marks of the horse were on the extreme right both
going and coming, excepting where he had bobbed over to cross a
bridge or so. He had been ridden on the wrong side of the road
each way. When I get to the junction of the Tuakau and Punga
Roads I go straight down Tuakau Road, down Eyre’s Road, past
Tippins’s, then up the Punga Road to the Tuakau Road at the
junction. It was at the junction of the Punga and Tuakau Roads


that my observations ceased. I was never asked before whether
I noticed anything else on the road. I noticed the marks of Sharp’s
cart-wheels on the Punga Road. I suppose I was never asked that
before. That is why I never said it before.
I remember giving evidence at the Magistrate’s Court at Puke-
kohe about the 24th September. I had previous to that date never
seen those shoes now in Court. I was not shown those shoes while
I was in the witness-box. I did not examine the shoes in the
witness-box nor afterwards. You were holding them in your hand.
I was not close enough to examine them on that date.
I gave evidence in the Supreme Court about a fortnight ago and
was shown these shoes here. That was the first time I had handled
them. Mr. Martin produced the shoes to me, and I was then giving
evidence. I said in the Supreme Court, “ Those are the marks that
were in the impression in the road —something similar to that.”
I suppose I said that if it is down there. I said, “ These shoes would
make exactly the same impressions as the impressions I saw on the
road.” I have not seen those shoes from the last time here until
to-day. I have only handled those shoes twice in my life. Before
here in the Supreme Court and also here to-day.
It was the peculiar mark of the shoe on the road that took my
attention —when I got off the wagon. I couldn’t tell what class of
shoe it was until I got off the wagon. I did not notice the peculiarities
on the road before I got off my wagon. I got off my wagon and ex-
amined them, and then followed the marks up to the post. I was
anxious to know who had committed the murder. I had heard of
the murder about an hour previous.
Henry McCutchen.
Examined hy Mr. Martin. —I am a farm hand employed at Puke-
kawa about three miles from Eyre’s place. The 24th August was
when Eyre was murdered. That night I had gone to bed, read a
while, and then went to sleep. I went to sleep about half past ten.
I went to sleep, and the dogs woke me up. My house is 139 yards
from the road. I got up when my dogs woke me and went and
looked out. I have a gateway on to the road and a letter-box up
on top of the gate-post. When I looked out I saw an object coming
forward about half a chain from the gate —coming towards the gate.
I could not distinguish then what it was. His head would be
towards the gate and I wouldn’t be able to tell what it was ; it was
face on. I could hear a man talking to the horse —very loudly.
I couldn't hear what he said. I could just hear the sound. Later
on when he left the gate —about 2 chains from the gate —and went
up the road on the rise I saw what I took to be a man on a horse.
He was going towards Glen Murray. The next morning at about
7 a.m. I went down to my gate. The soil is all yellow clay about
my gate. I saw some horse-tracks there. They had come from


Pukekawa and were going on towards Glen Murray. I did not follow
them any distance. I saw them where they had come off the road
up to my gate and then where they had gone on to.the road again.
I could see them distinctly at the gate. I had not then heard any-
thing of the murder. I heard of it some time during the 25th
August. It was either that day or the next morning. After that
I examined the footprints at my gate particularly. I have been
amongst horses all my life.
From an inspection of the tracks I thought it was a well-made
shoe —it was a tradesman who had made it. I saw the marks in
the yellow clay as clearly as could be. I saw that the shoe had a
very large toe-clip. Then I noticed that the grooves of the shoe
were very deep and came right back to the heels. On the inside of
the heel it was nearly as broad again as on the outside. It looked
like a shoe that might be made to fit a horse that might have a bad
foot. The groove came back nearly to the heel —not right back to
the heel. I now pick out the shoe which I consider made the track
I saw. That is the near fore-foot shoe.
Cross-examined by Mr. Singer. —It was the near fore-foot shoe
that I observed. That was on August the 25th at about 7 o’clock
in the morning. I was expecting Mr. Foley, the owner of the farm
there, and that is why I had a look at the shoe. 1 gave the answer
right when asked this before. I looked because Foley generally
rides a hack and that was no hack-shoe. I said in the Magistrate’s
Court that I had a good look at them, as I seldom had seen shoes
so well finished by hand. I say that now, too. I never said anything
about Mr. Foley in the Magistrate’s Court as I was not asked. The
real reason I looked at the tracks was because it was such a well-
made shoe.
I can’t say if it was the next day or the day after that I first
heard of the murder.
I never said in the Lower Court that when I went outside I could
see a man on a horse. I could only see an object. I saw him when
he went away from the gate —when he turned his horse. I could
see the objects, and I took it to be a man on a horse. I would not
swear that it was a horse. It was too far away for me to tell that.
lam sure he wasn’t driving. He was riding the horse. I don’t think
I said in the Lower Court that when I went out to the outside I saw
a man with a horse. I think I said I saw an object but couldn’t see
what it was. That is my signature on the deposition. I said what
is shown there.
William James Taylor.
Examined by Mr. Marlin. —I am the licensee of the Tuakau
Hotel. I know Thorne, and I remember hearing of the murder of
Byre. I know a man named Shugar as well. I remember a con-
versation which took place at my hotel between Shugar, Thorne,
and mvself. I cannot fix the date. It was after the murder and


before Thorne’s arrest. Thorne and I had been having some con-
versation and Shugar joined us. I introduced Shugar to Thorne,
and told Thorne Shugar was a Herald reporter and he was out
looking for news for his paper for which he was paid, or words to that
effect. I introduced him as the Herald, reporter, and Thorne said
something about there being so many strangers about one had to be
careful. I never took much notice about it. Shugar said, “ Oh,
I am a Herald reporter all right,” and at the same time drew
Thorne’s attention to a badge that he (Shugar) had on his chain, which
indicated that Shugar was a member of the Journalists’ Association.
The three of us then went into a room and sat down and had drinks.
I went into the bar to cash a cheque. We were discussing farms,
&c. When I came back out of the bar into the tap-room Sam —
accused —said, “ Well, Bill, what’s your opinion ? ” or “ What do
you think will happen ? ” or words to that effect. I can’t remember
the exact words. I said, “ I don’t know, Sam. I am satisfied the
police will get you or some one in over it.” He said, “If they drag
me in I’ll drag some other or into it. There is
some one nearer the end of the rope than what they think.” I said,
“ I don’t know whether you are in it or not and don’t want to know.
You are foolish to talk like that,” or “ You are a fool to talk like
that.”
I know that country pretty well. Bothwell is twenty-six miles
from Tuakau. Bothwell is two miles nearer to Tuakau than is
Granville’s. I have done from Bothwell into my place in three and
a half hours on a fair horse. I mean an ordinary riding-hack. I used
to set it going and let her make her own pace. I know Eyre’s house.
It is about eight miles from Tuakau to Eyre’s.
Cross-examined by Mr. Singer. —My hack is a fairly decent hack.
On this trip from Bothwell to Tuakau the hack was on its way home.
Just prior to this interview there bad been a paragraph in the
paper stating that Thorne had been arrested, which paragraph was
untrue. He was not arrested until the 11th September. The matter
of the accusations against Thorne was common talk. I couldn’t say
if Shugar had stated that Thorne would have a nice fat action for
damages against the newspaper for stating Thorne had been arrested.
I remember Shugar speaking about it. I don’t know if it was the
same day that Thorne was there or not.
Andrew Matthew Shugar.
Examined by Mr. Martin. —l am on the staff of the Auckland
Herald as a reporter. 1 went down to Tuakau on the 28th August
to get what news I could about the murder for my paper. I stayed
at the Tuakau Hotel. I remember the incident of my paying an
account at the bar for some taxi-hire, or some such thing. I remember
the landlord coming into the room after J had paid the account.
He came in with Thorne. Taylor introduced me to Thorne. Taylor


said, “ This is Mr. Thorne, Mr. Shugar.” I said, “ How do you
do ? ” Taylor said, “He won’t believe that you are a reporter.”
I said, “ I’m a reporter all right,” at the same time showing him my
Journalists’ Association membership badge. Thorne took hold of
it and after looking at it said, “ I can see that now,” and after a
slight pause he said, “You never know what strangers are at a time
like this.” He said, “ Have a drink,” and I said, “No ; have one
with me.” The drinks were ordered, and we three sat down at the
table. I remarked on the nature of the country out there, and
then there was another drink. Just after the second drink was got
Thorne sat down and said to Taylor, “ What do you think is going to
happen, Bill ? ” and Taylor replied, ‘'l am damned if I know, Sam,
but I think the police are bound to get some one over it.” Thorne
said, “ By if they get me I’ll drag some other
into it. There is some one nearer the rope’s end than they think
they are.” Taylor said, “ I wouldn’t say that if I were you, Sam.
You know if you are innocent or guilty. But you want to be very
careful what you say.” Shortly after that the pair went outside,
and I went, too.
Not cross-examined.
John Edwin Hallamoue.
Examined hy Mr. Hunt. —I am a farmer at Onewhero. I live
about six miles, or thereabouts, from the Pukekawa Post-office.
Mrs. Eyre is my sister. I remember that Thorne, the accused, used
to work at Byre’s place, and I remember when he was working there.
I don’t think I was there more than three times while Thorne was
working there. I went over to Eyre’s place on the afternoon of the
25th August after I had heard about the murder, and arrived there
about 5 o’clock in the afternoon. I found Sergeant Fox there when
I got there and .Mrs. Eyre, but wouldn’t be sure as to the family
being there. My sister was shedding tears and sobbing when I got
there. I stayed there until the following morning, and then went
into Tuakau to make arrangements for the funeral, and after that
came back to Eyre’s place. Mrs. Eyre went over with my wife and 1
to my place at Onewhero to stay. She remained with us until the
Sunday after the Magistrate’s Court hearing at Pukekohe. During
that time she occasionally went over to her own farm during the day.
I know a man named Jack Spilsbury who lives quite close to me.
He is Thorne’s brother-in-law. I remember seeing Spilsbury soon
after the murder on the Friday, the day of the funeral. He came
to my house to the front door and saw my wife and myself there.
Mrs. Eyre was at my house at that time. Spilsbury did not see her.
He simply saw my wife and I. Mrs. Byre was in bed at that time.
I know Mrs. Rogers. She is accused’s mother-in-law. I remember
her being at my place a day or two after Spilsbury was there —she
came on the following Sunday. She saw Miss Murray, Mr. and Mrs.


Tunnell, my wife, and I. Mrs. Eyre was not there that day.
I believe she had gone towards Pukekawa with one of the police.
A few days later I saw Thorne. I was on my farm and Thorne was
on the road. I was in a paddock near the road. Thorne asked me
if he might speak to me. I said, “ Speak from where you are.” He
asked if Mrs. Eyre or my wife were at home. I told him No. He
asked how long they had gone. I told him I thought they had gone
perhaps an hour or an hour and a quarter. He made some remarks
about a statement, but I cannot remember what it was.
Cross-examined hy Mr. Singer. —Mrs. Rogers is the mother of
Thorne’s wife, and is my aunt and Mrs. Eyre’s aunt.
John Spilsbuey.
Examined hy Mr. Hurd. —l am a flax-cutter living at Onewhero.
My wife is Mrs. Thorne’s sister. I saw Thorne shortly after I heard of
the murder of the late Mr. Eyre. I saw him at my own house. That
was on the day of Eyre’s funeral. It was a good few weeks before
that that I had seen Thorne previously. I don’t know why he came
to my place that day. He asked me to deliver a message to Halla-
more’s to Mrs. Eyre. The message was that Thorne was over at
my place and would like to see Mrs. Eyre. I delivered that message
to Mrs. and Mr. Hallamore. I did not see Mrs. Eyre herself. I went
back and told Thorne that I had not seen Mrs. Eyre, and told him
that she was not well and in bed.
I next saw him after that on the following Sunday at my place
again. Mrs. Rogers was with Thorne then. Mrs. Rogers went out.
I couldn’t say where to. I was down in the bush then. Thorne
stayed at my place while Mrs. Rogers went away. I saw Thorne
and Mrs. Rogers leaving my place after that when I was down in
the bush. They drove away in a gig together.
Cross-examined hy Mr. Singer. —My wife and Mrs. Thorne are
sisters. I couldn’t say what relation Mrs. Rogers is to me. She is
not my wife’s mother.
Andeew Gilbeide McHugh.
Examined hy Mr. Martin. —I am a detective police officer stationed
at Auckland. Before I joined the Police Force I was a blacksmith,
at which I became a qualified journeyman and worked at that trade
for some eight years.
After Eyre’s murder I examined the horses within a radius of
twenty miles on three sides and on the fourth side bounded by the
Waikato River. In the whole I examined some 1,303 horses, of which
418 were shod and the remainder were not shod. I have examined
the shoes now in Court—examined and measured them. That was
prior to making the search of the horses. I did not find any horse-
shoes in the district at all corresponding to the shoes now in Court.


I measured these shoes carefully. Standing them on a straight
edge —that is, to get the measurement from the toe to the heel:
From inside the heel they are in. inside measurement —that is,
the off front shoe (the right-hand shoe); in. from the toe to the
heel, inside measurement; and 4- 3 s - in. between the two last nails—
that is, in a direct line between the two fourth nails : and | in. from
the end of the fullering to the heel on the inside of the shoe, and | in.
from the end of the fullering to the heel on the outside part of the
shoe. There is 2 in. from the end of the fullering across the toe.
There is f in. between the first and second nails on the outside of the
shoe, in. between the second and third nails, and || in. between
the third and fourth nails on the outside of the shoe ; in. between
the first and second nails on the inside of the shoe, in. between the
second and third nails on the inside of the shoe, and | in. between
the third and fourth.
The peculiarities are : On the inside of the right shoe —now produced
—there are two distinct fullering-marks—that is, in the fullering;
and the shoe is not concaved inside, which front shoes usually are,
and these have two bulges at the toe, each side of the clip (one each
side), caused by the fullering. Then, they have also a bulge at the
side of the clip —a peculiar bulge —on the right side. 1 understand
it is caused by a little hole in the anvil. Each of the clips have the
same peculiar little bulge.
Taking the near front shoe ; there is in. between the heels,
inside measurement; in. between the toe and heel, inside measure-
ment, in a direct line ; 4 3 K - in. between the last nails across the shoe,
inside measurement; in. between the end of fullering and the heel
outside of the shoe, and in. on the inside of the shoe between the
end of the fullering and the heel; in. between the fullering at the
toe —that is, across the toe ; | in. between the first and second nails,
outside measurement; in. between the second and third nails ;
-li in. between the third and fourth nails ; | in. between the first
and second nails on the inside of the shoe ; I in. between the second
and third nails ; and f in. between the third and fourth nails.
The peculiarities of the near front shoe are : The shoe is not
concaved on the inside ; it has the fullering-bulge each side of the
clip at the toe; and it has a bulge on the right side of the clip the
same as the previous shoe.
The off hind shoe : It is in. between the heels, inside measure-
ment ; 5| in. from the toe to the heel, inside measurement; in.
between the last two nails across the shoe ; 1-|- in. from the end of
the fullering to the end of the heel on the inside of the shoe ; in.
from the end of the fullering to the end of the heel on the outside ;
2£ in. between the fullering at the toe —across the toe ; | in. between
the first and second nails on the inside of the shoe. The shoe is
slightly turned out on the outside of the heel, which is not unusual
on hind shoes. There are toe-clips on all the shoes. They are just


the ordinary toe - clips ; they are made rather large. The bulge
mentioned on the fore-feet is also in the hind clip, showing that the
shoes had all been made on the same tool.
The near hind shoe : There is 3-JJ- in. between the heels, inside
measurements ; 4 in. between the last nails on the inside of the
shoe—across the shoe ; in. from the toe to the heel on the inside ;
1 y (i - in. from the end of fullering to the end of the heel on the outside;
and 1 in. from the end of the fullering to the end of the heel on inside ;
1| in. between the fullering at the toe —across the toe. The shoe
is also slightly turned out at the heel on the outside of the shoe, and
has the same peculiar bulge at the clip.
In the course of my experience I have never before seen shoes
exhibiting those peculiarities.
Not cross-examined.
Thomas Woleendale.
Examined by Mr. Martin. —l am a mounted constable stationed
at Pukekohe. On the 25th August last I went with Sergeant Cowan,
Constable Thompson, and Dr. Wake to Eyre’s house. I was one of
the party that made a search of the premises for firearms. A thorough
search of the place was made —house, outbuildings, garden, creek,,
water-tank, were all searched. A thorough search was made. The
only firearms found were the gun in Court and the Snider rifle. The
only ammunition was that which young Eyre had. That is as far
as I know.
We arrived at the house before daylight. I have had a good
deal of experience in horses. I had twelve years in the Imperial
Cavalry in India and South Africa. I have been a mounted constable
for nine years in New Zealand.
As soon as it was daylight I accompanied Sergeant Cowan on to
the road, and we discovered fresh horse-tracks. I know the little
bridge on Eyre’s front road. Those horse-tracks were at the rear
of the farm on the Punga Road. Sergeant Cowan and I were alone.
Tippins was not with us. The tracks were going and coming on
the right-hand side of the road —according to the rule of the road
they were on the wrong side both coming and going. The tracks
indicated that they were made by a good-sized hack bordering on a
medium draught horse. He was a horse that overstepped consider-
ably and had a free stride. The tracks were distinct and clear.
You could see the form of the shoe from the tracks. The shoes now
produced are something similar to the tracks.
On the 10th September I was out at Mr. Granville’s place at Glen
Murray. I rode “ Mickey ” away after he had had a feed on his
return from the landing, whither he went to get a load of chaff with
another horse. I rode to Eyre’s house. I left Granville’s at 5.40
p.m. and arrived at Eyre’s at 8.20 p.m. The horse was not distressed
at all; he was quite dry. I did not travel fast; it was too dark.


and I did not know the country. I lifted the saddle when 1 got
to Eyre’s, and he was quite dry under the saddle. Cummings and
Cowan examined him, too.
He was an exceptionally-long-striding horse, had a free action,,
and he used to overstep himself. He was pretty rough to ride. He
bored to the right-hand side of the road all the way coming in. He
was a horse that bored to the right.
The following day I rode “Mickey” into Tuakau and had the
hind shoes taken off him. They are the shoes now in Court. That
was the 11th September. The fore shoes had been taken off pre-
viously. He had old slippers on. I exercised the horse on the
road and on the grass before having the hind shoes taken off in the
presence of Tippins, Sharp, and police officers.
Not cross-examined.
John Henry Sweeney.
Examined by Mr. Martin. —I am a detective stationed at Hamilton,
but was formerly stationed at Auckland. On the 26th August I
went to Eyre’s house. I went along the back road —the Punga
Road. Cummings was with me and drew my attention to some horse-
tracks. Each impression was covered with a board. On the right-
hand side going to Glen Murray there were two impressions, and on
the other side there was one. The two on the right-hand side were
in good condition, and the one on the other side was damaged by
rain. Cummings had the two front shoes now in Court in his
possession then. He compared them with the impressions in the
road. The off shoe produced fitted in the first impression on the
right. He caught the shoo by the clip and dropped it into the
impression and it fitted exactly into the impression. The same
thing applied to the near fore shoe with the other impression on the
right-hand side of the road.
The marks in the fullering of these shoes were quite visible in
the track coming well down to the heel of the shoe. The near shoe
would not fit into the off track, nor the off shoe into the near track.
The off shoe was wider at the heels.
Not cross-examined.
John Thomas Cowan.
Examined by Mr. Martin. —I am a sergeant of police stationed in
Pukekohe. I have been in the Force twenty-four years, fifteen of
which have been spent on mounted work. On the 25th August last
at about 12.45 a.m. I received a call from Pukekawa. That was
the time I got the call. In consequence of that I went with
Constables Wolfendale and Thompson and Dr. Wake to Eyre’s house.
We found Mrs. Eyre there. We entered by the back door and saw
Mrs. Byre and one of the children in the living or dining room.
Mrs. Eyre had a very frightened appearance and seemed to be
half-demented.


I saw the photographs produced since Kelly took them. The
body and everything else was in the same position when we got
there with the exception of the deceased’s hand. The bed-clothes
were up to the chin. Everything was allowed to remain as it was
until Detective - Sergeant Cummings arrived. A thorough search
was made of the place both inside and out, including the elseagnus
fence. Afterwards part of the elaeagnus fence was cut away by us.
the creek was searched, and underneath the house and outbuildings,
and the scrub all round for some considerable distance.
Just after daylight I left Wolfendale and Thompson searching
and went down on to the road —Eyre’s Road —to the bridge, and
I found a number of horses’ shoe-marks across the bridge, and one
lot leading back towards Tuakau and three other lots leading in the
direction of Tippins’s. That was at the bridge. I followed these
tracks up towards Tippins’s, and one set of tracks led into Tippins’s
gate. There were wheel-marks on that track. I went in to Tippins’s
and woke him up, and brought him out to have a look at the horse-
tracks leading towards the Punga Road. We followed these tracks
up and found one large set leading round into the Punga Road.
They were the marks of a very large horse’s feet and were on the
right-hand side of the road. These tracks were followed by me for
some distance down the Punga Road towards Glen Murray, and then
I came back and crossed over the paddocks to Eyre’s. There was
only one set of horse’s tracks leading up the Punga Road, and
similar tracks coming down the road. The Punga Road was other-
wise clear of fresh tracks. I went back just after daylight. I went
back until the arrival of Cummings at Eyre’s house. They got there
about 7 o’clock. Later on Cummings and I went down on to the
road —Eyre’s Road —to the bridge, and at a large post on Eyre’s
fence-line close to the road we found marks of a horse’s feet, and
also horse-droppings showing signs that the horse had been hard-fed.
These tracks led down to the bridge and were similar. I followed
those to the bridge. Those going down to the bridge and those
leading up from the bridge to the post were the only ones there and
were similar. They were measured by Detective-Sergeant Cummings.
The off fore shoe was 3A in. at the heel, and the near fore shoe was
31 in.
We followed these tracks right round past Tippins’s place and on
up to the gate in the Punga Road fence of Eyre’s property. Close
to Eyre’s back gate Cummings again took measurements, and also
made a sketch. We made some effort to try and preserve them by
covering them with boards —three impressions. I left Detective-
Sergeant Cummings and followed these tracks along the Punga Road
towards the Main Road. I followed them into the Glen Murray-Puke-
kawa Road. They turned down towards Pukekawa and then turned
back towards Glen Murray. They had gone along the road about a
chain towards Pukekawa and turned back. There were similar


tracks coming from Glen Murray and down the Punga Road on the
right-hand side ; they were in both the Main and the Punga Road.
They were just round the corner on the Main Road.
Later on on the same day I went to Granville’s farm with
Cummings and Thompson, arriving there at about 5 p.m., and then
went on to Thorne’s whare and arrived there at about a quarter
to 9, We found him asleep, apparently, with a candle burning along-
side *he head of the bed. Cummings woke him up. I had known
Thorne before. Thorne said, “ Good evening, Mr. Cowan.” He
recognized me. Cummings spoke to him and said, “ Mr. Eyre, for
whom you were working, was shot with a shot-gun by some person
last night.” Thorne said, “ Yes.” Cummings said, “ The top of his
head was blown right off with the shot,” and Thorne said, “ Yes.”
Cummings said, “ We have come over to see you to see if you can
assist us in our inquiries. When were you last at Eyre’s ? ” Thorne
replied, '* Last Sunday week.” Cummings said, “ Who did you see
there ? ” Thorne said, “ All the family.” Cummings said, “ How
did you get on with the Eyre family ? ” Thorne replied, “ I got on
well with them, but Syd and I did not get on too well. We had our
differences.”
I noticed the gun-case in Court now under the bed, and it was
got out and found to be locked. The case was opened by Cummings,
and the double-barrelled shot-gun produced was surrendered and
fifty-five cartridges. It was in two pieces. There were No. 6 and
No. 7 Peters’s High cartridges. Cummings examined the gun and
said, “ This gun has keen recently cleaned.” Thorne replied, “ I
cleaned it yesterday or to-day.” Cummings said, “ When did you
clean it ? You ought to know.” Thorne replied, “ Yesterday or
to-day.” The gun was handed to me by Cummings, and I examined
it and found both barrels clean, the left barrel being particularly so.
I smelt the breach of the gun and smelt powder. I said to Cummings,
“ Smell the powder.” Cummings said, “ When did you use this gun
last ? ” and Thorne said, “ I may have used it since I came over
here, or I may no". I have used it at the whare near the house
shooting rabbits. I have fired it twice.” The whare was at the
homestead, two miles away.
Then Cummings, Thompson, Thorne, and myself went over to
Granville’s house, taking the gun and cartridges. It was raining,
and we got wet. My health is not too good at times, and next
morning I stopped at Granville’s. I did not go back.
Later on that morning I saw accused coming to Granville’s driving
some horses into the yard, amongst them was the horse “ Mickey.”
Accused said to me, “ They have taken the shoes off ‘ Mickey.’
Do you go anything on horse-shoe marks, sergeant ? ” I said, “ Yes,
certainly, combined with other circumstances.” The horse “ Dandy ”
was brought into the yard and examined, and his shoes were very
small and would make nothing like the marks which we found in


the road. The following day I went down with Cummings to the
tracks by the bridge at Eyre’s, and we took the shoes that were
taken off “ Mickey ” —the fore shoes only—and these were fitted
into the marks of the tracks. The off fore shoe fitted the off fore-shoe
mark and the near fore shoe the near fore-shoe mark. The near fore
shoe wouldn’t fit into the off fore-shoe mark.
Cross-examined hy Mr. Singer. —l saw the marks of the horse
from the post to the bridge on Eyre’s Road. The horse-shoe
leading towards Tuakau I found on Eyre’s side of the bridge, and
were on the opposite side of the bridge. They had apparently come
across the bridge towards Tuakau. They were not the marks of
“ Mickey.” There were three other lots of tracks leading towards
Tippins’s. Those came from Tuakau towards Tippins’s. These three
sets were on both sides of the bridge, with the exception of the large
prints which I found first on the further side of the bridge. They
were afterwards found by Cummings and I on this side of the bridge.
The marks I saw going towards Tuakau were not identical with any
of the marks leading from Tuakau. The horse-marks leading towards
Tuakau were very fresh.
To Judge. —That would be McNeill’s horse. Those tracks were
followed down by some of the other police to McNeill’s.
To Mr. Singer. —l examined the marks that morning just at
daylight. That would be just on 6 o’clock.
The tracks I saw from Punga Road to Glen Murray Road. I saw
them going down just a chain towards Pukekawa and then turned
back again and went on the Main Glen Murray Road. They followed
on on the right-hand side of the road. The reason I turned back
there was because I saw it was coming on heavy weather.
I had a look at the cleaning-rod of the gun. I looked at it and
saw it was bright on the outside. There are three joints. The brush
is of fine wire. I did not examine the breach-cleaner.
The Waikato River Bridge is between Pukekawa and Tuakau.
Motor-cars passed over that bridge that night before midnight.
I have not been able to identify them. I am satisfied that none
of the cars coming over there could have had anything to do with
that murder.
I did not examine any of the empty shells in the gun-case. After
Thorne was awakened he was awake all night. Thorne came in
in the oar with me from Glen Murray as far as Eyre’s house. Before
we reached Eyre’s house we met Mrs. Eyre in a gig with Mrs. Halla-
more going to Onewhero to Hallamore’s. That was on the 26th
August. I got off at Eyre’s and went into the house. Thorne got
out of the car and walked back towards Tuakau. He came alongside
the house —into the paddock —in the motor, and then left and went
up towards Goode’s Corner. As we came down from Goode’s Corner
we passed Mrs. Eyre with Mrs. Hallarnore in the gig. I was in the front
seat, and Thorne was in the back seat.


Re-examined by Mr. Martin. —1 came in in the motor with
Thompson, Cummings, and Thorne from Granville's. We came
down the Main Road and turned Goode’s Corner. We passed Mrs.
Eyre about half-way up that road. She was in a trap. The hood
was down. I don’t know if Thorne saw her.
James Cummings.
Emmined by Mr. Martin. —I am a detective-sergeant of police
at Auckland. I received word of the murder of Mr. Eyre, and was
sent to Pukekawa to make inquiries. I left shortly after 2 a.m. on
the morning of the 25th August and arrived somewhere at about
7 a.m. I found Sergeant Cowan and his men there before I arrived,
and was met there by them. I went into the house by the back door,
and then proceeded into deceased’s room, which is the front room
on the left-hand side of the passage going from the back door. Dr..
Wake was there, too. On entering the room deceased was lying on
a single iron bed under the window, the head of the bed being in line
with the edge of the window farthest from the door. The window was
open from the bottom a distance of 2 ft. 3 in. I marked the window.
Deceased was covered to the neck, with his hand across his chest
and the top partly blown off his head. His nose was 12 in. from the
inside of the wall—inside the window. He was 5 in. below the top
of the window-sill on the inside. On the opposite side of the room
there was a double wooden bed with bedding on it. There were
indications of the bed having been occupied by one person only.
The bed-clothing had been turned back as if some one had got out of
bed —that is, folded over. Underneath the flap of the quilt were
two blood-stains or substance which appeared to come from the
brain, as well as other moisture.
To Judge. —l saw other marks ; they were of blood or brain-matter.
To Mr. Martin. —That is on the underneath side of the flap which
was turned back.
To Judge.-- Where the flap of the quilt was turned over there
was a double mark. The quilt was turned down, and there were
two large stains on it of blood substance. Where it was doubled over
there were marks also, and these were in underneath the corner.
[Witness illustrates with quilt to jury how clothes were placed.]
To Mr. Martin. —Those are the clothes I saw, and I have arranged
them as I saw them, and I have also marked the hollow in the pillow
with the pencil. I saw Mrs. Eyre, and had some short conversation
with her, and then in consequence of what Cowan said to me I went
to the bridge at Eyre's Road, which is about 150 yards from the
house. This post was the nearest point to Eyre’s house. That
post is marked on the map. In a straight line from the stump that
post is a distance of 40 yards, and 27 ft. from the bank to the post ;
it is 75 ft. from the bridge to the stones, and 33 ft. of the road is covered
by the stones. The bridge is 10 ft. 3 in. wide.


At the post near the bridge —the post with the stay on it —there
were indications of recent horse-prints there, and the grass was eaten
for 2 ft. round the outside of the post, and there were fresh horse-
droppings 6 ft. or 7 ft. back from the post which showed the horse
had been fed on hard feed. I measured the shoe-impressions which
led up from the bridge and back to the bridge, and the measure-
ments corresponded in each case. On the road at the bridge
there were four distinct horse - shoe marks showing that four
horses had been on the road. The more recent one was the
one going in the direction of Tuakau, and the other three were
going in the direction of Tippins’s. I measured the four im-
pressions, and we followed them round the road. We found that
one of them went into Tippins’s. The next turned up the Punga
Road, and the other two went on. These latter two were respec-
tively traced to McNeill and Morrison. The ones going towards
Tuakau came out of McNeill’s gate. The other set was the only
one not traced. In the Punga Road with Sergeant Cowan I took a
rough sketch and measured the shoe-impression not traced. These
corresponded with the measurements at the bridge and the measure-
ments leading up to the post. I produce the sketch. It is a rough
sketch and is not drawn to scale. I was measuring the impressions
in the clay and took inside measurements in all cases. I did not have
calipers. I had an ordinary rule —not a very good one —which I
had to borrow from a farmer. The fullering in the shoes extended
from near the toe-clip to within 1 in. of the heel in each case. The
off fore shoe on the inside had two distinct fullering-marks. In some
places it could be observed that there were four nails on each side of
the shoe, but not in all impressions ; it depended on the moisture
of the gound. After taking the sketch and various measurements
I returned to Eyre’s house and left Cowan in the road. Cowan
initialled the sketch before I left.
The impressions showed that the animal overstepped considerably
and that the hind shoes were spread. The animal was a long-striding
one.
I returned to the house, where I saw the Superintendent and Chief
Detective, they having arrived from Auckland. I marked the position
of the bed and the chest of drawers. On the end of the chest of
drawers near the head of the double bed there was a mass of brain-
matter as well as blood substance, and on the chest of drawers, as
well as a mass of substance between the head of deceased’s bed and the
recess between the double bed and the chest of drawers. On deceased’s
pillow there was a large amount of brain-matter, as indicated in the
photograph. At the head of the deceased’s bed, right against one of
the legs at the head of the bed, was brain-matter. The bleeding from
the skull was dropping down from deceased’s head, in the centre of
the bed, on to the floor. The brain-matter and substance showed no
signs of having come from anywhere else, and the bed showed no
signs of having been moved.


To Judge. —There was substance on about one-third of the chest
of drawers, in the recess between the chest of drawers and the double
bed; the right-hand side was partly protected by the chest of
drawers. There was some at the head of the double bed, on the wall
and bedding.
To Mr. Martin. —It was not very much. At the foot of the bed
it was 8 in. from the wall —that is, the small bed. In that recess
was a wooden box on an angle, a soldier’s kit-bag, two wooden
panels, and a small suit-case, as well as wearing-apparel being hung
on the wall on the angle, the iron single bed being against the wall
under the window.
I went outside and looked through the open window and could
not see deceased lying on the bed through the open window. lam
5 ft. 111 in. high in my stocking feet. The only firearms found in
the house were the single-barrelled gun and the Snider. A complete
and thorough search was made of the house and outside, including
the elseagnus fence. Some cartridges were delivered to me —four
No. 6, two No. 7, and sixteen empty shell-cases. Those empty shells
were dusty with household dust. Whilst I was making my in-
vestigation I spoke to Mrs. Eyre, Dora, Phil., and John on more than
one occasion. Mrs. Eyre was crying bitterly and showing signs of'
distress. She complained of having a very severe headache. I took
a statement from her, but did not complete it owing to her condition.
I questioned the persons from whom I took the statement, and then
reduced their answers to narrative form, giving as much detail as
I could.
Sergeants Cowan, Thompson, and I went to Glen Murray. Prior
to going we covered three impressions on the Punga Road with
boards —two on the right and one on the left. On arrival at Glen
Murray we went to Mr. Granville, and then went to Thorne’s camp.
It had been raining most of that afternoon.
There was one set of wheel-marks on the bridge, which led round
and went into Tippins’s gate. I got to accused’s camp with the
others. We found accused in bed, and I woke him up. Accused
was fully dressed except for coat, hat, and boots. He had his vest
on him. There was a book alongside the bed and a candle burning.
It is only a temporary camp, and he had the feed and harness there.
When he sat up in bed I told him who we were, and accused evidently
knew Sergeant Cowan, because he said, “Good evening, Mr. Cowan.”
I told him that Mr. Eyre, whom he had been working for, had been
shot about midnight the previous night, and that we were making
inquiries, and Thorne replied, “ Yes.” I asked him if he could assist
us in our inquiries, and I told Thorne that the top was blown off
Eyre’s head with the shot, and Thorne replied, “ Yes.” I asked him
when he last visited Eyre’s, and he replied, “ Sunday week.” I asked
him whom he saw there, and he said, “ All the Eyre family.” I asked
him how he got on with the Eyre family, and he said that Syd. and
he didn’t get on too well, but he got on all right with the rest, but


that Syd. and he had their differences. He said that while Mr. Eyre
was out of New Zealand he had managed the farm. I asked him why
he had left there, and he said Eyre had given him notice, as Phil, had
left school and was now able to work on the farm. I asked him what
correspondence he had in the whare, and asked him had he corres-
ponded with Mrs. Eyre, and he said he had never written to her in
his life, nor she to him. I asked him what correspondence he had
in the whare, and he said, “ Look for yourself.” I did not take that
as an offensive remark. I commenced to have a look round, and
under his bed was the gun-case produced. It was locked. I asked
him for the key, and he got it from the wall and handed it to me.
and I opened the gun-case. The gun produced was in the gun-case
in two pieces—stock and barrel—as well as No. 6 and No. 7 cartridges,
which are the ones that have been produced. I examined the gun
and found the left barrel was shining, and the right barrel was dull.
I said to accused, “ This gun has been recently cleaned.” He said
that he had cleaned it yesterday or to-day, pointing to the cleaning-
rod in the case. I said to him, “ Which day ? You should be able
to say,” and he replied, “ Yesterday or to-day.” I smelt the gun,
and there were indications of a smell of powder, which appeared to
come from the left barrel. I asked him when he last used the gun,
and he said he may have used it since he came over there and he
may not. I asked him again, and he said “ I may have used it since
I came over here and I may not.” I asked him how many times he
had used the gun since he had been at Granville’s and he replied,
“ Only once.” He said he had used it shooting rabbits at the whare
near the house. There is a whare close to the homestead. Owing
to him only having a candle there and no material to take a statement
I asked him would he come across to the house. I told him that as
he had an intimate knowledge of the working of Eyre's place he
would be almost certain to be called at the inquest, and that any-
thing he told me he may be cross-examined on or examined from
that, and he replied, “ I understand.” I asked him if any one else
besides he knew the position Mr. Eyre slept in, and he told me that
Mrs. Eyre had told him, and Mr. Morrison knew. He told me that
Mr. Morrison was the member for the district and had gone down to
Papakura. I asked him if he thought that Mr. Morrison would do
it, and Thome said he didn’t think so, as Syd. and Morrison were
good friends. He said, “ Whoever shot Mr. Eyre must have known
where he slept and the run of the place.” He didn’t think any
outsider could have done it. Later we went over to the homestead.
He told me that he he’ped Mr. Eyre to put a single iron bed in
Eyre’s room. He said that Mr. Eyre had been in Siberia, and that
he slept with his window open. He put on his canvas coat, and w r e
went to the homestead. I took a statement from accused there.
Before we left the whare his relations with Mrs. Evre were
mentioned. I told him that it had been reported to us that
Mrs. Eyre and he had been intimate. Thorne replied, “ Have we ?


Who told you ? ” I then said to him, “ Where were you last
night ? ” and he said, “ Oh, well, I am going to say I was not out.”
I said, “ The position is what we want to know is were you in or
out 1 ” and he said, “ Did any one see me out ? ” and I told him
that it had been reported to us that he had been out, but this has
never been confirmed. I did not tell him that it had not been con-
firmed. It has not been confirmed since. He said, “ Were they
talking to me ? ” and I replied, “ I don’t know.” I asked him if
he could prove where he was that night, and he said that Mr. Gran-
ville had left him shortly after 5 p.m., and that no one else had been
to see him. I went over to the homestead and took the gnu and
cartridges with me. I was wet through. Accused had a canvas
■coat on.
The others had some whisky and some tea. I had some tea but
no whisky, and stayed at Granville’s all night. It was then 11 o'clock.
I then took Thorne’s statement. [Statement produced and put in.
Statement by Thorne, of the 25th August, 1920.] I asked him
questions and wrote it all down. In that he deals with his move-
ments on the Monday night, and I told him he had not dealt with
his movements on the Tuesday night, and that was what was con-
cerning me more. He said, “ Oh, well, lam going to say I was not
out.” I then said to him, “ You tell me how to put it down.”
I told him that I was now speaking to him in my official capacity,
and that I did not want him to give me anything in confidence, and
he said, “ I say I was not out.” Before he said that he asked me,
“ Need I answer that 1 ” I said, “ Just please yourself.” Then I
embodied in the statement what Thorne told me. When complete,
Thorne read it over, made alterations, and added words, and
initialled the alterations. He said that it was true, and added a
certificate at the bottom to that effect and signed it, as appears on
the statement.
The following morning he told me that it was the Pukekohe
Bank that he had his money in, and not the Papakura. That might
have been a mistake on my part, taking the word “ Papakura ”
instead of “ Pukekohe.” The next morning he altered the mistake
and initialled it, and said the rest of it was true.
Next morning I went to accused’s camp with Thorne and
Thompson. The horses were in the same paddock, as the camp is.
about a mile away; they were up the hill. I asked the accused if
he was going to bring the horses in this morning, and he replied
“I am not going to feed them this morning.” Mr. Granville came
over later and instructed accused to bring the horses in, and Granville
let accused have his pony to go and get them. The horses were
brought down to the camp. I commenced to examine the foot-
prints on the ground—which ground was soft —with the measure-
ments I had. I first measured the horse whose name I understand
is “ Dick.” The horses were shod all round except “ Major,” who had
two slippers only on his hind feet. All the horses had heels on their


shoes except one known as “ Mickey.” We caught “ Mickey,” and Con-
stable Thompson and I took him over a few yards, and I held him
while Thompson took off the front shoes. We had some difficulty in
getting them off owing to the implements we had. After the shoes,
were removed accused and Mr. Granville were alongside of us. I put
the rule on the shoes and said to accused, “ These shoes correspond
with the prints in the road leading past Eyre’s place and over the
bridge.” Accused turned very pale and did not reply. Whilst
Thompson and I were taking the shoes off Granville and Thorne
went over towards the tent. Granville asked me if he could speak
to Thorne, and I said he could, that Thorne was not under arrest.
After telling accused that the marks corresponded I led “ Mickey ”
up to the tent. “ Mickey ” was wearing a newish cover with the
name “ Mickey ” on it, and accused told me he had put that name
on it. At the tent Granville held “ Mickey ” while I went in and
got the saddle. Accused claimed it as his, and it was there the
previous night when we were at the camp. I brought it out and
undid the cover at the front and rolled it back. I fitted the saddle
and it fitted “ Mickey.” There would have been no need to alter
the girth. I took the saddle off and buckled up the cover and drew
Granville’s attention to a saddle-mark on the cover. Granville said
to the accused, “ Sam, you had better come and have a look at thia
for yourself.” Accused turned his back on us. I placed the saddle
over the cover and it corresponded with the mark on the cover..
I then said to him, “ Do you think any person could get this horse
out of here unknown to you ? ” and Thorne said, “ No, I don’t think
so. It is a very hard place to get out of unless you know it.” There
is some of the country bush country, and there are a lot of logs and
stumps.
Thorne got a ride in in the car. I ofiered it to him, and he came
in with us. The shoes we took off “ Mickey ” that day were only
the two fore feet. I now identify the shoes in Court as those.
They were later replaced with a pair of slippers. They were the
best we could get out there. “ Mickey ” was wearing those slippers
when Wolfendale rode him in, and later when Wolfendale rode him
in front of Tippins, Sharp, and myself.
He is a young horse with a heavy body, clean legs, and stands.
.16-2 hands high. I examined all the horse-tracks while we were
there. I had a look at a horse called “ Dick,” and he has heels
on his shoes. They have been taken off “ Dick ” and are now in
Court. When we drove from Granville’s to Eyre’s, Cowan was in
front, and Thompson, Thorne, and I at the back, and the hood and
curtains were up. I never saw anything of Mrs. Eyre. Cowan
may have seen her. We got out of the car at Eyre’s house, and
Thorne asked me if Mrs. Eyre was inside, and I said she was not,
and he said that he was not coming in, but would go on to Tuakau.
He said that he was coming out on Friday, and that any assistance-
he could give us he would be glad to give.


FIFTH DAY; Friday, 3rd December, 1920.
Accused walked over the hill, and was later picked up by the
police car and given a ride over to Tuakau. That would be the
Thursday night.
On the next day —the Friday —I went to the Punga Road and
took the two front shoes that had been taken off “ Mickey ” with
me. I had left certain marks there covered with boards. Since
then heavy rain had fallen. The two on the right-hand side of the
road were still in good condition when I got there, and the other one
was washed away by the rain. I removed the boards and had a look
at the prints on the road, and satisfied myself that they were the same
prints I had left there, and satisfied myself that the fullering was still
distinct in the ground. With Detective Sweeney I fitted the shoes.
The right front shoe fitted into the right impression exactly, and the
toe-clip corresponded. The left front shoe was too narrow at the
heel for the right front-shoe impression. We then went to the next
impression, and the left front shoe fitted into that impression. The
right front shoe was too wide at the heel for that left front-shoe
impression.
Later the same day I went with Sergeant Cowan to the bridge
■on Eyre’s Road and there fitted the shoes with the impressions and
had the same result.
I went to McNeill’s and Morrison’s, and the shoe-marks on the
road corresponded with their horses’ shoes —that is, the other shoe-
marks, not “ Mickey’s.”
To Judge. —When I went to Eyre’s Road I went to the place
by the bridge. The shoe-marks were well preserved, there being no
traffic there, as the impressions were in off the road.
To Mr. Martin. —We met Mr. Granville on the road when “ Mickey ”
was taken for the chaff. Wolfendale rode “ Mickey ” off. I was
at Granville’s when he started. I went in the motor, and was at
Eyre’s before Wolfendale arrived. I had seen him start off from
Granville’s. I saw him arrive at Eyre’s. “ Mickey ” showed no
signs of distress, and was quite dry as regards sweat. We took the
saddle off “ Mickey.” He is a horse that is in good hard condition.
The next day we had a trial of “ Mickey ” in the presence of the
witnesses Sharp and Tippins on the grass in the paddock and in the
road between the bridge and Eyre’s gate up and down the hill. At
that time I had his fore shoes, and he had slippers on his front feet,
and his hind shoes were then on “ Mickey,” they being removed that
day after the trial. The ground would be moist when he did this
trial. The shoes left a good impression. It was raining practically
the whole time we were up there. The hind shoes left impressions
on that occasion similar to the tracks we had previously found. He
overstepped from 9 in. to 18 in., varying according to the pace he was
going at. The overstepping was similar to the tracks we had pre-
viously seen on Tippins’s Road and the Punga Road.


Accused had said he would come over on Friday and if there- was
any assistance he could give us he would. He did not come over,
but I saw him at the Tuakau Police-station on the 2nd September.
He was not arrested then. He was arrested on the 11th September.
I interviewed him at the station and told him that Mrs. Eyre and
Phil and John had made statements. He said, “ What does Mrs.
Eyre say about me 1 ” I had the statements with me, and I asked
him to read them for himself. He then said, “ What does Phil
say ? ” Ho said that before he read the statements. I then read
the statements to him. The two statements produced are the ones
I refer to. [Put in.] There is a paragraph taken out of Mrs. Eyre’s
statement which was done at the last trial. [Mr. Singer objects to-
Mrs. Eyre’s and Philip Eyre’s statements being put in.] There was
only one statement by Mrs. Eyre at the time, the one of the 29th
August. Philip Eyre’s is dated the 28th August.
I then read the statements to him. Between the time he asked
me what Phil said and my reading the statements to him Thorne
said he wished to assist the police all he could with inquiries into the
death of Mr. Eyre. I then read the statements to him, and in reply
he made a statement, which I have here now dated the 2nd September,
1920. [Put in.] He signed it after reading it over and initialling
alterations. He added a certificate at the bottom and signed it.
In consequence of information which reached me I saw Thorne
again on the 4th September at the Tuakau Police-station. I told him
that it had come to our knowledge that he had stated to two men in
Tuakau that if he were arrested for the murder of Mr. Eyre that he
would pull some one else into it. I asked him if he was prepared to
tell us who this person was. He said, “ No, I won’t tell you who it
is.” I told him that he had invited us to come and see him and that
he would give us any assistance he could, and why wouldn’t he reply,
and he said, " No, I won’t say.” Later he said that he didn’t suggest
that Mrs. Eyre or any of her family had anything to do with it, and
no stranger could have done it, and it must have been done by some
one having knowledge.
I had received statements from Mrs. Eyre, from various other
people, and from the accused. Mrs. Eyre was confronted with the
prisoner, and there was a conversation between them, and I took the
conversation in question and answer form in full, I now produce
the statement. I took it down word for word, but am not prepared
to try and remember it. [Statement read to jury.] That statement
was initialled by Sergeant Cowan. That conversation took place
after I had told him of the conversation he (Thorne) was reported to
have had with two men at Tuakau. After this conversation when
I took these notes Thorne asked for a private interview with Mrs.
Eyre, and I told him I had no objections provided he would do her
no bodily injuries, and he consented to be searched. I stepped to the
far side of the room, and he said, “ I thought this was to be a private


interview ? I want you to go out.” I went outside and could not
catch the conversation. They had some conversation, and then
Mrs. Eyre left. After she had gone accused said that if he could
give us any assistance he would be pleased to do so. I said what
was the good of coming to him, as he refused to tell us the name of
the man he was going to drag in if he was arrested, and he said,
“ No, I won’t say.” Before that prisoner said he understood that
two shots were fired. I said, “ Only one as far as I know.” He then
gave a demonstration showing if two shots were fired the person would
have his arm grazed from the edge of the window. He said that no
stranger had done it; it must have been done by some one who had
knowledge, and he said he didn’t suggest that Mrs. Eyre had anything
to do with it. On the 11th September I arrested accused and charged
him with murder, and he replied, “ Right-oh.”
I brought him to town, and I told him that if he wasn’t in a position
to get a solicitor he had better apply to the president of the Law
Society, who would see that he was properly represented, and that
we were applying for the adjourment the following morning. I offered
him a pencil and paper to write to the president of the Law Society
asking for a solicitor, and Thorne said, “ What good can a solicitor
do me now ? ” Later he said, “ Don’t be too hard on me now, a
man doesn’t want to be too callous.” The following morning he
asked for Mr. Singer, and I delivered his message, and Mr. Singer
consulted with him.
I know the witness Eyre, who was deceased’s nephew. Later
on I went with him to Eyre’s house at Pukekawa. He took me to a
drain, and the drain was searched, and a wad was found which has
already been produced. I was present when it was lifted out of the
drain. This drain is a small ditch to take away the surface water
and house-drainage.
After the Court adjourned last night and in the presence of the
Kegistrar of this Court I spread out the quilt and made a thorough
examination of it. I found the stains as I have stated, both stains.
One portion is broken off. This quilt had been handled a good deal.
It was produced in the Magistrate’s Court and in the Supreme Court.
The solid substance would break off. In the meantime it has been
packed up in a sack.
When I went to Eyre’s house on the first morning after the
murder, under Eyre’s window there was some grass and flowers growing,
as indicated in the photograph. I stood on it and no impressions
■yere left. Nor would any impressions be left on the soil opposite
the house —that is, in the garden inside the elseagnus fence. That
is a volcanic soil. Mr. Singer and I walked over it when he came
up.
If you are driving along the Punga Road you can see Eyre’s
house. There is a creek lies between Eyre’s house and the Punga
Road. The whole surface is not visible from Eyre’s house on the
4—Thome.


Punga Road. The ground falls away to the creek from the house
and from the Punga Road. A person going from Eyre’s house would
disappear from view and would then come into view when he crossed
the creek. A person would be visible from Eyre’s house going to
the Punga Road and would remain visible for a distance of from
20 to 30 chains from Eyre’s house. That is the whole length over
which he would be visible if watched from the house. There are
two gates on the Punga Road. The gate leading from the paddock
on to the road is quite visible from Eyre’s house, but I am not sure
of the other. That gate is almost in a direct line with Eyre’s house
—the one that is visible. Before covering the prints that morning
I came across to the house that way, and have been across and
back on many occasions.
Going towards Eyre’s Road on the other side there is a creek
crossing that road. The ground falls from Eyre’s gate to the bridge,
and also from the house to the bridge. If a person were going from
Eyre’s house from the elaeagnus fence he would be lost from view
about 50 yards from the fence. You can’t see the post at the bridge
at all from the elseagnus fence. The post is 5 ft. 7 in. high.
Thorne was put into the witness-box at the inquest. Being a
Coroner’s inquiry he was entitled to be called. He declined to
answer any questions under the advice of his solicitor. He said,
in answer to his solicitor, that he was not guilty of the murder.
After making the minute examination of Eyre’s body and the
state of the room —I was in the permanent Artillery and have had a
good deal of experience with firearms —and taking into consideration
where the brain and other substance was, I was of the opinion that
the shot was fired from outside the window at the corner nearest
the front door.
To Judge. —I couldn’t do it'standing. The man would be standing
on the cross-bar under the window. I couldn’t do it from the
shoulder. I couldn’t see his head from the ground.
Cross-examined by Mr. Singer. —A person leaving the house and
going towards Eyre’s Road would be only visible for about 50 yards.
If you go 50 yards from the house the post and bridge are visible.
The bridge and post are then approximately 100 yards distant.
The mark on the counterpane was on the same side of the
counterpane —on the top —as it was folded —as the mark shown
in Court yesterday, and about the same distance from the edge as the
other mark.
The accused’s saddle is an ordinary riding-saddle.
I came back from Granville’s to Eyre’s in the car on the night
of the 26th August. I got out at the gate in Eyre’s Road, and it was
at the gate at the house that Thorne asked me if Mrs. Eyre was in.
I got out of the car and went to the dairy, and it was when I came
back that Thorne asked me if Mrs. Eyre was in there. I went to the
dairy then to see if the Superintendent was there and found he had
not gone.


In the Magistrate’s Court I said, “ The quilt had been turned
back, and under the top edge there was a large and small stain, and
also some moisture.”
I asked Thorne how many times he had fired the gun.
On the night of the 25th August I said to Thorne that Mr. Eyre,
whom he had been working for, had been shot with a shot-gun last
night, and that we had come over to see if he could assist us in our
inquiries. It was then he made the first answer, “ Yes.” On the
night of the 25th Thorne was up all night. We were offered a bed
by Granville, and accused said he preferred to go on with the statement.
I don’t think the horse “ Mickey ” would be ridden all the
thirty-six miles with the cover on. He might have been chafed if
the straps were tight. I didn’t look to see if the straps were tight.
The ground is very hilly and had stumps on it, and a man would
likely take the cover off. The horse would then very probably have
got a cold. I said last time he was sure to have got a cold.
With regard to the second statement, I told accused that I
would require him to put a certificate at the end of it. When I took
the saddle to put on “ Mickey ” I never heard Granville say it had
been used on “ Dick ” the day before. He may have said it. I
never heard him.
At the gate at the back there is a hollow. There is very heavy
loose soil there too.
After Mrs. Eyre left the room at the Tuakau Police-station accused
said, “ I don’t care about discussing it with her. I heard there
were two shots fired.”
Re-examined by Mr. Martin. —You cannot see the back gate which
Mr. Singer has asked me about in the photograph. It is the gate
that leads from the back door to the dairy. It is shown on the
plan. There is a netting fence on each side of the pathway between
the back door and the back gate, but not very high. Between the
kitchen and the post where the netting is nailed on to there is room
for a person to pass through. I can pass through it. There is a
gap between the kitchen and the post. It is 2 ft. at the top and about
1 ft. at the bottom. To get over the netting you must step over,
but that is not necessary in going through the gap.
In the photograph shown there is a gap in the elseagnus fence which
is boarded, but a man could get over it. Those are the two means
of exit by the back way supposing that Mrs. Eyre’s evidence is true
that she heard a man running past the side of the house. He could
either get through the gap in the netting fence, or over the netting
fence, or over the boards of the gap in the eleeagnus fence. The
height of the boards in the gap in the elacagnus fence is about 4 ft.
to 5 ft.
To the jury. —The ground outside the gap blocked up with boards
is grass, and the ground outside the back gate is grass, too.


To Mr. Martin. —-The pathway from the back door to the back
gate is stone or brick —-that only runs to the back gate —to the
elseagnus fence.
To the jury. —When he was first informed by me of the murder
I told Thorne of the murder, and he replied, “ Yes ” in a medium-
toned voice—a matter-of-fact style. He did not say it in a surprised
way.
To Judge. —l made a second remark to him about the top of Eyre’s
head being blown off, and received a similar reply in a similar tone.
Mr. Martin formally produces all exhibits that were produced
during the evidence and closes the case for the Crown.
(Close of case for the Crown.)
(Close of evidence.)
Mr. Singer opens for the defence, and does not call evidence.


Mr. Singer’s Speech for the Defence.
Mr. Singer, addressing the jury, pointed out that if a verdict of
guilty was returned a sentence of death must be passed. If there
was any doubt in their minds it was their duty to return a verdict of
“ Not guilty.” Had the Crown proved that the accused committed
the crime ? Secondly, was it possible some one else committed the
crime ? Though they felt that the accused committed it, was it
possible some one else committed the murder ? If the possibility
existed, then they must give effect to that possibility. He would show
it was not a remote possibility. Circumstantial evidence was open to
to the greatest errors. Mr. Singer quoted from various authorities
showing certain pitfalls to be avoided by the jury in drawing con-
clusions, and cited a case where a man was executed for murder, and
two years afterwards two other men admitted the crime and were also
executed. Suspicion and probability were not sufficient. Even accept-
ing the evidence as to the horse and everything else, even supposing
“ Mickey ” the horse was there, with the accused upon it, still was
there a possibility that some one else committed the crime ? “No
man dare say it is impossible,” continued counsel, “ that some one
else but the accused committed this crime. Upon that matter I
challenge you, and say not one of you dare on your oath and con-
science say, even assuming what I have assumed for the purpose of
these remarks, that you are going to consign that man to his doom,
knowing that no one else but he could have committed this crime.”
When he addressed the jury on the subject of who might have
committed the crime, continued Mr. Singer, it was not for them to
say that the persons he pointed out were guilty. But if there was a
possibility of any one of them having committed the crime it was the
jury’s duty to acquit the accused. Was there a doubt that Thorne
rode “ Mickey ” that night ? Was there a doubt about that gun
being used ? Was there a doubt whether a No. 7 Peters's cartridge
was used ? Assuming the accused rode “ Mickey,” and came to within
150 yards of the house, yet the Crown had not established to the proper
satisfaction of the jury the case they set out to make.
Mr. Singer dealt exhaustively with the horse-shoe prints on the
ground. These, he said, were not like finger-prints, which had a
large number of similarities. In the present case the only similarities
here were the width and the nicks. He commented on the fact that no
suggestion had been made of a mark being found nearer than fourteen
miles from Granville’s farm, where the accused worked. Had not the
wish been father of the thought, and had not some of the witnesses
allowed their zeal to overrun itself, and their desire to overrun their
knowledge and observation ? Was it possible the shoe-prints were
made on the night of the 23rd August ? If so, then the accused
was relieved of the charge against him.


Commenting on the fact that despite a rigorous search at Eyre’s
house the police failed to find a cartridge-wad which was later
discovered in the dead man’s room, Mr. Singer asked if there was not
a possibility that they had also missed the murderer. It was an
outstanding fact that Thorne had not been seen by anybody over
the whole eighteen miles of ground.
Objection was taken by Mr. Singer to the jury accepting the
evidence of Mr. Hazard as that of an expert, because, said counsel,
that witness was not a scientist. Counsel then made several demon-
strations with the accused’s gun.
His Honour suggested that at least one inspection should be made
to see that the weapon was not loaded, a hint which was taken by Mr.
Singer, who, after inspection, assured the Court that the gun was
empty. Continuing, he contended that a left-handed shot would
strike the sleeping man in the right eye, whereas the actual shot
struck him in the left eye
“ We have heard rather strange evidence of Mr. Eyre being a
heavy sleeper during the last three weeks of his life,” said Mr.
Singer, turning to another point. “ The doctor had given him an
injection, and he was taking medicine. None of the medicine has
been produced. What was in the medicine ? It may be a person
inside the room took the risk—it may have been quite an easy risk
for a person knowing the conditions under which Eyre slept. A
person could take the foot of the bed, move it 18 in., and then take
the gun. The movement of the foot of the bed would not move
his head from its former position more than the slightest degree.”
Mr. Singer then explained that the blood-stains would appear in
the same position as if the bed had not been moved. The suggestion
was by no means an impossibility. He believed the jury must say
there was that possibility, and he believed it must decide them in
favour of the accused. In view of the relationship between the
parties, Thorne might have been there and still be innocent of the
charge against him.
Even although Thorne had said he did not blame Mrs. Eyre, said
Mr. Singer, there was not enough to justify the jury in saying that
she was not in the tragedy somewhere. When the accused said,
“ I will drag some one else in,” he must have had somebody in his
mind, but he had refused to say who was in his mind. “ May he
not have believed, as may not you gentlemen to-day believe, that
the person who committed that crime may have been Mrs. Eyre ? ”
asked counsel. “We have known other cases of similar tragedies,”
he added. “We cannot mince matters, and we cannot be mealy-
mouthed. A murder has been committed; this man has been
charged. May it not have been Mrs. Eyre ? It may have been
somebody other than Mrs. Eyre or Thorne, but we cannot get away
from the grave possibility that it was Mrs. Eyre. It is no part of
my duty to show that it was Mrs. Eyre or any other particular


person. You are asked to say that that question is free from doubt.
It is that proposition that I challenge. Unless you can say that
it is free from doubt you ought not to convict the accused.”
Counsel then further criticized the evidence on other points.
Mr. Singer to jury : 11.10 a.m. to 3 p.m.
Judge’s Summing up.
Mr. Justice Chapman. —Gentlemen of the jury, the question you
have to consider and determine is whether the Crown has fulfilled
the task it undertook of proving to your satisfaction and beyond
all reasonable doubt that the accused is the person who murdered
Mr. Eyre. What I have to say as to that is this: that you must
be satisfied that the evidence is in a reasonable sense conclusive,
that it points definitely to the accused and to no other. If there
is any serious flaw in it you cannot convict the accused, but if the
evidence points to him and to no other in such a way that the only
reasonable and proper conclusion from that evidence is that he is
the man who committed this crime, then you will have to do your
duty accordingly.
Now, the first fact which became apparent when this murder
came under investigation, and it is a fact which has been apparent
throughout this history, is that the murder was committed by some
one who knew the place, knew all the details about the place and the
access to it and to parts of it, knew the habits of the family, knew
Mr. Eyre’s habits down to such minutiae as knowing the exact place
in which he slept and where his head lay ; in other words, 'that the
crime was committed by one who knew the outside of the house and
its surroundings, knew the inside of the house and its arrangements,
including the arrangement of Eyre’s bed, which had been placed there
since his return from Canada or Europe, and including the facilities
for rising up to that window. The process of detection consists in
all cases of narrowing down the possibilities and getting rid of this,
that, and the other suggestion until you have narrowed the matter
under investigation so that, so to speak, you get it as if into the
focus of a microscope. The process so far has been such that I take
it to be common ground now that you are narrowed down to some
person who knew that place and knew the arrangements of that
family as intimately as I have suggested. The suggestion does no t
come from me. It is an obvious, outstanding fact, and it has never
been put more clearly than ■ it was put by the accused at the outset
of the investigation and again by him in one of the last conversations.
“ This was not the work of a stranger,” he said. He added, “ Mrs.
Eyre is a truthful woman. This is not the work of a stranger. It
has been done by some one who knew the house and knew the run
of the place.” He said something of that sort to Detective-Sergeant
Cummings the day after the murder when Mr. Cummings visited


the ploughing-camp ; and he said something of that sort to Mr.
Cummings and Mrs. Eyre, or to one or other of them, on the last
occasion when he was interviewed at the Tuakau Police-station on
the 4th September. It was scarcely necessary for him to say it,
gentlemen, because after all you have heard it is the outstanding
fact of this case. Wherever the gun was fired from —from inside
the house or from outside the house—that is the outstanding fact
of the case.
The case for the Crown is that the front door would not open
without a great deal of trouble and noise. There was no handle
outside. There was no other way of getting into the house without
making a noise. No one according to the evidence entered the house.
No one could have entered the house without wakening Mrs. Eyre,
or the boys, or some one. The Crown therefore put it to you that
the shot was fired from outside. That is the basis of the Crown’s
case. The Crown proceeds to show how the shot was fired from
outside. When a shot is fired it is fired with an object. Wherever
this shot was fired—from inside or outside —it could only be fired
with one object, and that is the very object achieved. It was no
use firing at Eyre’s feet, at his knees, or even at his body. The
point was to know where the head of his bed was and to fire at his
head.
It happened to be a moonlight night when, presumably, a man
climbed up to the window, hung on to the window-sill with his right
hand —he must have been a man with the ability to use a gun,
balancing it under his left arm—knowing the exact position where
Eyre slept and exactly where his head was, in order to carry out
his object. The same certainly may be said of the inside of the
house. If there was a person in the inside of the house bent on
killing Eyre, or if there was a person having a loaded gun who got
into that room or resided in that room, and who was determined
to fire that gun point-blank from a foot distance or thereabouts at
Eyre’s head, that I presume would not be impossible. Detective-
Sergeant Cummings said it was not impossible ; but he treated it
as a matter so far impossible as to be utterly improbable, because
Eyre’s bed reached very near to the partition wall, so that a person
could not get to the very foot of the bed. To fire that shot a
person would have to get the gun well over Eyre’s bed and put it
somewhat in that position [demonstrating] and fire in such a way
as to carry the brain-matter inwards into the room ; in other words,
to fire that gun so cunningly and carefully as to carry the suggestion
that it was fired from outside. It would have been a very simple
matter if Eyre and Mrs. Eyre were asleep for any one —or Mrs.
Eyre, if she were doing the act —to shoot Eyre through the head
from the inner side of the bed and send the brain-matter up against
the wall to the right. But that is not what was done. We know
it was sent to the left.


These circumstances accentuate what the accused said all along,
that the murder was committed by some one who know the place
intimately. You may add that it was done by some one who knew
Eyre was there in that bed with his head in that direction. How
many competitors, so to speak, are there, then, for this qualification ?
How many persons are there in the list ? To whom, in any reason-
able sense, can that act be attributed ? Counsel for the defence
boldly put it that the murder was committed by Mrs. Eyre, ge
puts it so, but he is not bound to prove it. He makes the assertion
that the murder was committed from inside the house and was com-
mitted by Mrs. Eyre.
Mr. Singer. —May have been.
Mr. Justice Chapman. —Yes, “ was ” qualified by a “ may.” It is
not necessary for him to say it was if there is room for it to have
been committed by Mrs. Eyre ; and you are asked to say that that
is so. No other person has been pointed out. It is true Mr. Singer
has repeatedly put it to you that he is not the person who has to
find the murderer. He can only suggest a possibility. But through-
out this trial no person has been put forward as having grounds for
enmity or other motive for murdering Eyre, save the accused or
Mrs. Eyre. Robbery is out of the question ; lust solely is apparently
in question. No other question or attitude has been suggested.
You may take it that no other person has been suggested from first
to last than either the accused or Mrs. Byre. That is not in itself
final, but it is significant in connection with the history of this case.
Here was this solitary cottage where the Eyre family was living in
a poor way, although perfectly well off. Neighbours were scattered
at a distance around, and there is no suggestion that the Eyres
entertained guests or had many friends or acquaintances. There is
no evidence about that. This man was murdered in bed by some
one who was well acquainted with the place. Leave aside the
children. No suggestion whatever has been made in regard to them
—in fact, no other names than those two have been mentioned.
Now, gentlemen, what have we ? This murder was committed, as
I have said, by a person who knew the house and the run of the
house. Mrs. Eyre knew all that, of course. Mrs. Eyre tells you she
has never fired a gun in her life.
Mr. Singer. Not in the evidence, Your Honour. It was
mentioned by her at the first trial.
Mr. Justice Chapman. —My impression is that she, said so some-
where.
Mr. Singer. —l am satisfied that is not in the evidence, and it
was not borne out by the way she held the gun. It was not in the
evidence.
Mr. Justice Chapman. —I thought I had read it, but it is not import-
ant. Is there the slightest evidence that Mrs. Eyre ever used a
gun ? The boy Philip had that cheap single-barrelled gun. Is


there the slightest evidence that Mrs. Eyre used that or any gun,
or knew anything about using it ? The boy had that gun, and he
also had these cartridges. There is no suggestion as to the boy
being the murderer. No doubt Mrs. Eyre is in a very singular
position, and you have to consider whether she is telling the truth
in her part of the story. It is suggested that she did not tell the
true story when Detective-Sergeant Cummings first interviewed her
the day after the murder. She was weeping and sobbing, and said
she had a headache, and so on, and she did not tell the police
anything about her relationship with Thorne. But, gentlemen, the
main question for your consideration is, Has she told you the truth
here, to her shame, and did she tell it to Mr. Cummings in the full
statement she made on the 29th August ? Can you wonder that
she was reluctant —to use a common phrase —to give herself away
and throw away her reputation until she found it necessary ? Why
has she done so now ? Has she told the hideous story about the
illicit connection with her husband’s servant, commencing two months
after he came there and continuing for seven months after that, until
the husband’s return, and, worse than that, continuing after the
husband’s return for twelve months—has she told you that for any
other reason than that she thought it necessary and right to tell the
truth ? Has she invented all that ? When that statement was
handed to Thorne he read it. He said he had no remarks to make
upon it, and, further than that, he told the police that she was a
truthful woman, and that he had not a word to say against her ;
and from that he has never receded. He read Philip Eyre’s state-
ment in which Philip discloses something, and he had no remark to
make against Philip. On the contrary, he said they both spoke the
truth. You can understand Mrs. Eyre’s position to be one of
extraordinary difficulty. She gives away her whole reputation.
Has she told the truth or an untruth ? If she has spoken untruth-
fully, why ? Is it to get this man into trouble or to save some one
else ? Is there any hint of any one else on the scene whom she might
desire to save ? Is there a suggestion of any other illicit relation-
ship than that with Thorne ? Thorne has not in so many words
himself repeated the story of the illicit connection, but he read her
statement, and immediately after reading he said she is a truthful
woman, and he has not a word to say against her. That is in the
evidence of what happened on the 4th September. Has this woman
concealed anything and fallen under censure, or has she, to the loss
of her own reputation, after thinking the matter over for three or
four days, told the whole truth so far as she knows it ?
The Crown professes to put the case before you in a way that is
not entirely dependent on her evidence, but only dependent on that
evidence for some minor details otherwise deposed to and for the.
central fact of this illicit connection and consequent motive. That
connection is not now denied; it was not denied, at any rate, on


the 4th September. Thorne has never said that the woman is a
liar. He never said a word to that eiiect to the police ; he never
suggested that she was untruthful; he never suggested that the police
were not to accept her statements as truthful. But when this matter
comes before the jury you are told by his counsel to treat her as a
liar—a wicked, lying woman who has come here not to give away
her own character in the interests of truth, but to give away her
character in order to trump up something for the purpose of bringing
about the condemnation of this man.
But, as I have said, the case for the Crown, put forward by Mr.
Martin, is only in a minor degree dependent upon her evidence. It
is dependent on her evidence to rebut any suggestion that she
committed the murder, and it is in part only dependent on her
evidence to the extent that she heard a horse passing across that
bridge. It is dependent on her evidence to the extent of showing
that “ Bob,” the dog, barked at first, as he had barked at her
sometimes, inviting you no doubt to infer that the dog became silent
when it identified its owner. It is not wholly dependent on her
evidence as to her conduct in her room, because the girl, against
whom not a. word has been said, tells you that she was awakened by
the noise of the gun, that she heard her mother get up out of bed—
it was a wooden bed and wooden beds are generally somewhat creaky
—that she heard her mother light a match, and then heard her
mother come out of the room. That is the girl’s statement. It is
partly borne out by one of the boys. The boy heard his mother
call out, “ Dad! Dad ! ” He may not have heard everything, because
his room was farther away. But he heard her come out. Is the
girl telling the truth ? Is the boy telling the truth ? Her evidence
has never been attacked. His evidence has never been attacked.
Then you are naturally asked to consider what has become of the
gun with which Mrs. Eyre is supposed with much ingenuity to have
shot her husband at such an angle as to leave the impression that
he was shot from outside ? What has she done with it ? The boy
tells you there were only two guns in the house—the damaged Snider,
which was out of the question, and the single-barrelled gun, which,
no doubt, was just as capable of being fired with effect at short range
as the double-barrelled gun. The boy said that gun had not been
fired for a fortnight or a month; —it was not absolutely certain how
long. The girl says her mother was with her in a state of distress
all the time till the police came. How far would the mother have
to run to hide a gun the existence of which was unproved ; remember
the boy says there was no other gun there than his ? The police
were anxious to find a gun on the spot. They searched the thick
elreagnus hedge; they searched the grass and the weeds ; they
searched every shed and every place inside the house and outside
the house, and they never found a gun except the son’s gun and the
old carbine, nor a spent cartridge, nor anything else about the place


excepting the wads, inside the room, and these pellets which you
have seen here.
Now, gentlemen, it is a matter for your determination. Please
do not take anything from me. It is, however, essential for you to
consider whether there is anything to support the suggestion that the
gun was fired inside the room —a suggestion directly negatived by the
evidence of Mrs. Eyre. Again I ask, Do you think she is truthful 1
Negatived by the evidence of the girl as to the lighting of the match,
and so on ; and negatived by the evidence that the boy’s gun had not
been recently fired or recently cleaned ; that is, so far as this evidence
goes, the only gun in the house which could be used in committing
such an act. • I do not propose to carry discussion further on that
question. If Mrs. Eyre murdered her husband, did she do it alone
or did she do it with some assistance ? Did she do it from inside
the house or from the outside ? It is not suggested that she did it
from the outside. I really do not know whether it is suggested that
she had some one, some intimate, whom she got to shoot Mr. Eyre
from the outside. That, so far as I follow the matter, has never been
suggested. What is apparent is that she was carrying on this
intimacy with Thorne down to six weeks before the murder. The
police naturally looked for a man with a motive, and they ask you
to say on this evidence that Thorne is a man with a motive. No
other has been mentioned or hinted at as having a motive.
The local police got out there very early, and the Auckland police,
although the distance is some hours by motor, were there by 7 o’clock
in the morning. Detective-Sergeant Cummings says he found Mrs.
Eyre in a most distressed condition. He got something from her,
but he did not get a full statement. She tells us that she complained
that she was suffering horribly from headache and the shook of the
incident. When interviewed she did not tell the police about her
relationship with Thorne. But it is the duty of detectives to follow
every scent, and only to discard it when it is found to be a false scent.
They were following something because Detective-Sergeant Cummings
mentioned the subject of that relationship to Thorne on the same day
or the next day —T am not sure which ; but that does not matter.
At Granville’s place he said, “ It is reported that you were intimate
with Mrs. Eyre.” It may be assumed that at this early period the
police had picked up some rumour and that it was this that induced
them to go out to Granville’s. The detectives Were thus looking for
a man with a motive, and at an early stage in the proceedings they
were found to be looking for the means by which such a man could
have got to Eyre’s. It is quite evident that at an early hour they
attached significance to the fact that a horse had been tied to that
corner-post, and that they attached significance to the fact that on
the road between that post and the Punga Road, and beyond, they
found continuous tracks of a horse—a large horse with a large hoof
and with a long stride —an overstepping trotter, and a horse that


had some peculiarities about his shoes —peculiarities about which you
have heard. They followed that horse, or they endeavoured to follow
it. Its tracks had been laid down for several miles from the Eyre’s
place —across the bridge, along Eyre’s Road past Tippins’s Corner,
up the Punga Road, and a distance along the Main Road, in all over
four miles. On the very day on which these tracks came under
observation and were thought worth reserving for future observation
Detective-Sergeant Cummings and the other police were endeavouring
to find that horse, and promptly looked for it at the place where the
man lived, as to whom I presume they had heard rumours that he
was intimate with Mrs. Eyre. They knew there was no robbery at
that house. They knew no one would want to commit robbery there.
They knew the murder had been committed from some motive, and
they were following a horse right back to a place where a man lived
who was believed, at that stage at any rate, to have a motive. Their
suspicions are no guide to you unless leading to proof.
Gentlemen, there now arises a most important question : Did the
horse “ Mickey ” come from Granville’s place to that corner-post ?
Has “ Mickey ” been traced to your satisfaction ? You have had a
large amount of evidence on the subject. There were the tracks of
four horses on the road beyond the bridge towards Tippins’s Corner,
and of one of these only on the Punga Road. All of these were small
horse-tracks save one. That was a large horse’s tracks. “ Mickey’s ”
track is a large horse’s track. You remember what occurred when
the police went over to Granville’s. By this time it had become wet.
When they found Thorne at the ploughing-camp he was apparently
asleep, although his light was burning and a book was by his side.
He was nearly dressed, just as a man would be, sleeping in a tent
or whare. He was told that Mr. Eyre had been murdered. I shall
not attempt to imitate Detective-Sergeant Cummings’s attempt to
reproduce the tone in which the answer was given. But there was
no such expression as “ Good God ! You don’t say so ! ” Nothing
of that sort. When Thorne was told “He had the top of his head
blown off by a gunshot ” there was no aghast expression such as you
sometimes hear from a man who is horrified. That may be quite
unimportant. Some men take those things very placidly. The value
of that is for you to judge. Then they went back to the house, and
a statement was taken. Thereafter, in the morning, they went down
again to the camp to see the horses. Apparently it was pretty well
known by this time that they were looking for a horse that had made
marks on the road. I suppose it was common talk among those
now gathered about the place, and many people knew of it. Gran-
ville certainly knew it, because he says he thought they were looking
for “Dick,” the other large horse. They .were moving round about
looking at the tracks, moving horses and following tracks. I think
Thome has stated that they were not looking at the horses’ feet,
but looking where the horses were moving. No doubt they were


looking at the tracks they made. If the case against Thorne is true,
then what ensued is, humanly speaking, natural, at any rate. They
were looking at “ Dick ” and “ Dick’s ” tracks, and he made no
observation. But of a sudden Detective-Sergeant Cummings called
out “‘Mickey’ will do,” and said he wanted his shoes off. Granville
says there was a change, a start, and altered expression on the part
of Thome. You may not attach much importance to that. You may
not attach any importance to it, but it has to be considered. If the
man as long as they were looking at “ Dick’s ” tracks did not show
perturbation, but showed some perturbation when Detective-Sergeant
Cummings came upon the very thing he was looking out for, that
which, in his eyes at any rate, coincided with the prints on the road,
or, at least, when he. announced that he was going to take the shoes
for future use, that gives something further for your consideration.
That is the situation at Granville’s.
You will remember the evidence of the various people who heard
a horse pass their houses. One man said he thought he saw a horse.
Mrs. Eyre heard a horse go across the bridge. Dora Eyre heard a horse
go across the bridge —I do not suppose she knew which way. She
heard it canter across the bridge, and we know a horse was tied to the
corner-post. Its droppings were there, showing that it was a hard-fed
horse, such as might have been in use for ploughing. It had cropped
the grass all round the post. A horse was tracked, like from here
up a slope to the door [indicating]; from near the end of the bridge
where the post is, up a narrow track leading up the bank, there and
back. Detective-Sergeant Cummings says there was a track in the
clay which enabled him and several other people to see the track
both ways; and it was upon seeing a similar track in the mud at
Granville’s that Detective-Sergeant Cummings said, “ ‘ Mickey ’ will
do.” That track has been described to you over and over again.
It was seen by several people. It was seen by Stuart, the cream-
carrier, who went right up the Punga Road and about a mile along
the Main Road towards Glen Murray as far as Sharpe’s farm. You
may or may not accept the evidence that that is the same mark and
that the other tracks were excluded, but there is the evidence, given
with great particularity, and there are the shoes, described as heelless
shoes, identified by the man who made them. He said there was the
peculiarity in that the fullering was carried right out to near the end
of the bars, which had no heels, and various other peculiarities some
of which could, be seen to coincide with the tracks. The shoes were
brought back from Granville’s, and on that same day were tried in
the hoof-prints at various points, including those which had been
protected from the rain near Tippins’s Corner, and also including
those in the little track within 150 yards of the Eyre’s place leading
up to the post. According to Detective-Sergeant Cummings they
coincided, and his evidence has not been seriously challenged They
coincided with the peculiarities appearing in the various hoof-prints.


What, then, did Thorne say when he was asked where he was
that night ? He asked if he was obliged to answer. So he was asked
again, and he said, “ Well, I shall say I was never out.” Detective-
Sergeant Cummings asked him what he meant him to take dowm—
what he meant to say —and Thorne replied, “ Oh, well, I am going to
say I was not out.” That is all that was said. Is that a way of
disposing of so serious a matter ? He apparently realized that he was
under suspicion. Why should he be under suspicion if he knew he
never was on the spot ? What would you expect his answer to be if
wholly ignorant of the matter ? Supposing anybody had pounced
on one of you and said, “You are living eighteen miles from the
place, and I have come around to see where you were that night.”
I do not ask you to attach crucial importance to this, but it is one of the
instances of demeanour and action on which the prosecution necessarily
relies, and as to which the prosecution puts it to you that there was
no straight-out denial by the accused that he was in the direction of
Eyre’s farm that night. There was no straight-out assertion that he
did not leave his room that night. “ I shall say I was not out,” or
something like that, was the expression. Well, gentlemen, you will
make what you can of that. Please do not take the interpretation
of the evidence from me. Interpret it for yourself. Interpret it
according to your good sense and your consciences, and in doing so
consider all these circumstances that are put before you.
If it was “ Mickey ” that made these tracks at the post, across
the bridge, and along Eyre’s Road, past Tippins’s Corner, up the
Punga Road, up which there was only one horse’s tracks seen, and that
on the right-hand side both ways, and thence in the direction of Glen
Murray as far as Sharpe’s, how did “ Mickey ” get there ? There
were pony-tracks on Eyre’s Road, but witnesses tell you that there
was only the one large horse’s tracks, which those witnesses say are
identical with the track going right down to the bridge, and they
turned round the corner, made a short sweep to the right on the
Main Road, and then went to the left, and went in the direction of
Glen Murray, where Thorne lived. Are you satisfied that was
“Mickey’s” track covering those four miles, and that Detective-
Sergeant Cummings was right in fixing on these shoes and saying,
“ Take off those shoes ” —that his judgment was proved to be sound
in bringing these shoes and fitting them into the tracks at different
points up to the post there ? Was that “ Mickey ” ? No other horse
has been suggested. Horses evidently were not numerous on those
roads on that night. There were three small horses’ tracks which
the settler-witnesses profess to identify on Eyre’s Road —not on the
Punga Road. What does that mean ? If it was “ Mickey,” who
brought “ Mickey ” out of Granville’s paddock ? That is an important
question. It has been suggested that “ Mickey ” might have been
got out. But the paddock was a large one —some hundreds of acres ;
the horses were not easily caught. Even Thorne’s own cob had to


bo caught with assistance when he wanted it. He himself says
practically the horse could not have been caught. Do you suppose
that some intruder was there with some motive for taking that horse
over to Eyre’s, that he made his way to Granville’s, got in in some
way, rounded up Granville’s horse “ Mickey,” rode him eighteen
miles there and eighteen miles back, without anybody at Granville’s
being a bit the wiser ? Is it likely ? Thorne says it is not likely ;
he cannot imagine such a thing happening, and you will remember
what Granville says as to this. If a stranger wanted to commit that
murder or go to Eyre’s for any purpose by means of a horse, why
should he take this particular horse, eighteen miles away, ride it there
and then ride it back at least on a four-mile stretch of the road ?
These are questions for you, gentlemen. They are very weighty
questions. The case for the Crown, which you are asked to test,
is that “ Mickey ” was brought out of that paddock. What is put
before you is that there was really only one person who could get
“ Mickey ” out of that paddock —the one person who was sleeping at
the ploughing-camp that night and could have kept the horse in ;
that that person had a strong motive for riding over to Eyre’s and for
committing the act which you have under investigation. I have
dealt with this question at length and perhaps have repeated myself,
as it really is the most vital question in this case.
When I speak of a person having a motive I must explain this :
A murder might be committed without a motive, but a motive is always
the strongest lead to the identification of the perpetrator when there
might be several capable of committing the murder. What appears
to be a motive in the mind of a man capable of committing a crime
can never be a sufficient motive in the eyes of ordinarily constituted
citizens. You can only imagine yourself killing a man to save your
own life or to save a member of your family from some disaster.
But we know that men commit murder on less grounds than that,
and when we speak of an adequate motive for a murder we mean
that kind of a motive which, with our ordinary knowledge of social
history, we know has proved sufficient in cases. We know when
one man wants to get possession of another man’s wife that that has
sometimes been found to be sufficient motive for committing murder.
That has been suggested to be the motive here. This connection had
gone on for eighteen months. If we believe the woman’s story, as
told in her narrative, confirmed by Thorne in the manner you have
heard, there is that kind of motive for getting rid of her husband.
You have the evidence as to the horse, and you have this : According
to Mrs. Eyre, after Thorne left he revisited her and said, “ Would
you sooner be rid of Syd. ? ” And she turned away and did not reply
to the suggestion. If that is true, it may be of some assistance in
weighing whether the motive of getting rid of him was sufficient.
You are not wholly dependent on “ Mickey,” as it were, but I must
point out to you that if you do not consider that “ Mickey ” is proved


to have been there, then what may be called the mainstay of the case
is gone. But if you consider that the evidence shows that “ Mickey ”
did go over there, then there are certain other facts which may be
important as supporting the case for the Crown.
There is, for example, that conversation with Taylor and Shugar.
It may not amount to very much. Some men say things recklessly
or in a merely braggart spirit. You must remember, however, that
at that time the air was full of talk about Thorne in connection with
the murder, and he knew that the reporter was busy getting something
for his paper. Taylor, who seems to have been on fairly intimate
terms with Thorne —they called each other by their Christian names
—knew that, and a discussion arose, to the edification of the reporter,
as to what would probably happen if Thorne was likely to be arrested
or should actually be arrested. In the course of that discussion,
when manifestly the possibility of Thorne being arrested came up
as a branch of the topic, was there any repudiation by him of any
ground for arresting him ? Apparently he said to this man, “If
they arrest me I will drag some other b into it. There is
some one who is nearer the rope’s end than they think they are.”
I do not know whether that was a suggestion pointing to Mrs. Eyre,
or whether it was a purely empty suggestion. The peculiar vulgar
epithet points rather to a man than to a woman. It may have been
merely an empty remark; but why should a man say that ? If he
was wholly unconnected with the murder it would have been much
simpler to say, “ If they are thinking of arresting me it is all rubbish ;
I was not there, and did not do it.” You may not attach much im-
portance to it, and certainly I would not ask you to attach supreme
importance to it; but it is a curious conversation, at a time when
Thorne evidently had in his mind some prospect of arrest. “If they
arrest me I will pull some one else into it.” It is not a statement
like, “ I am innocent and will tell them of some one else.” It was
a statement somewhat suggestive of an accomplice, but hardly a
repudiation of the idea of his having any part in the matter.
There are other trifles —they are certainly not very strong circum-
stances —they are trifles bearing in the same direction, such, for
instance, as his desire to see Mrs. Eyre. There is his sending in one
of the relations to see if he could see Mrs. Eyre, and saying some-
thing about “ the statement,” presumably the statements she had
made, thus showing at various points his anxiety in connection with
the matter. They may not amount to much, but you are asked
naturally to attach some importance to them, because, if they have
any value, they give support to the suggestion that the man who
took “ Mickey ” out of the paddock, if he was taken out, was a man
who had some motive in connection with getting rid of Mr. Eyre.
You have thus up to this point the sum of various circumstances so
often referred to. You have the marks of the horse if you think they
are identified; you have the saddle-mark —I do not know whether
s—Thorne,


you attach any significance to that. Some of you from the country
may attach some importance to it. Granville apparently attached
some importance to it, because he said to Thorne, “ You had better
look at it, Sam.” But, Thorne turned his back and looked in the
other direction. Then, there is the further circumstance of the
quieting of the dog. You may or may not accept Mrs. Eyre’s
evidence that the dog barked at her till he sniffed and found she was
one of the household. Her suggestion evidently is that the dog
barked at Thorne until he got a sniff of him and was quiet. Some
observation was made about the children not hearing the dog, but
their own dog barking under the house might be a fairly frequent
occurrence, and it might not make any impression, or they might be
too sleepy to waken. The children say they were asleep when the
dog barked. All these circumstances have to be taken together in
order to see whether they are contradictory or confirmatory of each
other.
Then, another circumstance relied on as connecting Thorne with
the murder is the history of the cartridges. As to this you must
remember that all these separate clues, if worthy of consideration,
operate cumulatively to negative the idea of pure coincidence. That
is the very essence of what is called circumstantial evidence. I need
not go into details over this ; but this is the fact; there were these
cartridges of a special type in the house, and there were these
cartridges of the same type in Thorne’s possession. If you believe
the shot was fired in the house —well, you have the cartridges there.
The whole district was searched for many miles round for that
particular kind of cartridge, and the only one outside these two lots
was found in the possession of the man who was called and accounted
for it. It has been said that that type of cartridge is comparatively
rare on the market. Ido not know that you can make very much
of the difference between the pellets of an English No. 6 and those
of a Peters’s No. 7. The pellets all look battered. After hitting a
hard skull they may also have lost a little weight. It is not clear
whether they were chilled or soft shot, and it may not be certain
whether they are English No. 6 or Peters’s No. 7, so there is room
for discussion in regard to the pellets. All that can be said is that
they are of a size and weight consistent with their being those of a
No. 7 Peters’s cartridge. Much more reliance is placed on the
character and the material of the wads in the cartridge. Certainly,
one of these wads was not found by the police in the room, but was
found later on. One of the Eyre’s relations says that he found that
wad in the room, attached no importance to it, and threw it out.
When the police heard about it they searched for it and found it in
a place pointed out by him as the place where he had thrown it, and,
according to Mr. Hazard, when they got it they had the complete
number that go to make up a Peters’s No. 7 cartridge. I shall ask
you to look at the diagram, and at the cartridge that was cut open


in Court. Its importance is this; If you look at the relative
make up of the cartridges in the diagram, there is a difference
in the height of the explosive in a ballistite-cartridge as com-
pared with that of the charge in a gunpowder-cartridge. That
is to say, the height of the explosive in the Peters’s is lower
than in the cartridges loaded with sporting powder. The word
“ Ballistite ” is derived from the Latin word “ Ballista,” referring
to the Roman mode of shooting projectiles. That is not important.
The patentee looks for a name, and the name “ ballistite ” means
a powerful thing. If you look at that sketch you will see there is less
ballistite in height than there is of sporting-powder in the other
cartridges. It is desirable to have the whole of the cartridge-cases
as nearly as possible of the same height, because there are so many
shells sold that are sold not loaded to sportsmen who fill their own
cartridges, and they are conveniently made of a uniform size or
length. Therefore the difference has to be made up. It is not desir-
able to make it up with shot, or you may have too large a charge
of shot for the explosive. In the ballistite-cartridge the difference
is made up by means of an additional wad. There is one more of
the thick flannelly wads. There are three of these in Peters’s No. 7
and only two in an English cartridge. Then comes the charge of shot
and the closing-wad at the top. There is a difference, too, in the
material, according to Mr. Hazard, from the English cartridges in
the closing-wad at the top, which in a Peters’s cartridge is of
American material; and he says that the five wads you see exactly
making up the Peters’s cartridge loaded with ballistite are all now
recovered from Mr. Eyre’s room, including the one from the drain.
That is what Mr. Hazard says, and you can make what you like of
it, examining the material for yourselves. That is his explanation of
the extra wad. Shortly put, ballistite is stronger than powder and
takes up less space, so that the height of the column has to be made
up in this way. If this satisfactory evidence that the wads now
produced form part of the cartridge which was used for that murder,
and on carefully examining these wads you find that a blue top-wad
with Peters’s brand on it formed part of the cartridge used, and
supposing as a result you come to the conclusion that a Peters’s
ballistite sporting-cartridge was used on that occasion, with shot of
the size which is consistent with being a No. 7, then you are naturally
asked by the prosecution to attach great importance to that result,
because Thorne was possessed of these cartridges. It is true young
Eyre was possessed of them, but Thorne had such cartridges also,
and, with the exception of the one found and fully accounted for by
the owner, no other was found in the district. It is true some one
may have been overlooked, but that is the result of the widely
extended search. The police looked through scores and scores of
samples of many brands, but got none of Peters’s. That is a circum-
stance you must consider. You have heard what counsel has said —


challenging Mr. Hazard and his evidence, endeavouring to show that
he is not to be relied on. But there you have the make-up of Peters’s
No. 7 cartridge, and there you have the wads that were recovered
from the floor, and one recovered from a drain in the circumstances
narrated by a nephew of Eyre.
These circumstances are naturally relied upon by the Crown as
cumulative circumstances, rendering it difficult to treat them as
mere coincidences ; that is to say, the identification of the horse-
tracks, the identification of the cartridge, and the finding of a man
with a motive. Various expressions have been used'as to circum-
stantial evidence. You sometimes hear people talk about a chain
of evidence, and the criticism of a chain of evidence is that it is not
stronger than its weakest link. It has been put to you by Mr.
Martin that it is rather like a rope of evidence—so-many strands—
and that you need not fear the breaking of the weakest, because
the many are still left. I remember Mr. Justice Williams, one of
the most distinguished of our Judges, putting it that it was rather
like a number of indications —like arrows—pointed towards the same
object, some might be weak indications, some might be strong.
But when you have got a number of them, and they are consistent
and point in the same direction, and unmistakably and persistently
point to the accused, then you may treat their value as cumulative,
and the more numerous the arrows pointing to the accused, the more
sure, the more potent, the evidence operating cumulatively to negative
mere chance. And that is what you are asked to look for when
you are called on to rely on circumstantial evidence. This sort of
thing comes up constantly in this and other Courts. To illustrate
this I refer to actual cases : A child asserted that a man took her
into a field and assaulted her there. It was in a suburb of Auckland.
She said that the man was tall, and had a bowler hat and a dark
suit with a patch on his right knee of his trousers, and some other
indications. A patch on the right knee reduces the search very
much if the search is made the same day. A man is found with a
patch on the right knee, and happens to be tall, wears dark clothes
and a bowler hat. The little girl says, “ Yes, that is the man.”
These circumstances —so many arrows —the patch, the bowler hat, a
tall man —all pointing, so to speak, towards the identification of the
man—were all circumstances which excluded a great number of
people. A bowler hat would exclude a large part of the population.
A tall man would exclude a considerable portion. Dark clothes
would exclude a proportion, and a patch on the trousers was more
cogent. There are not so very many people with trousers with a large
patch on the right knee. But when it was proved by an acquaintance
of that man that he had seen him within ten minutes of the
committing of the crime at a spot a few yards from where the girl
said he walked away, then you have a case of a man proved to be near
the spot, and you naturally proceed to accumulate all these circum


stances. In the same way, in another case of the same kind, a man
was described by a girl whom he had assaulted as a tall, elderly man
with a grey suit. He offered her a penny. He took that penny
out of a brown purse with a yellow lining, which she misdescribed as
a yellow purse with a brown lining. The two colours had caught
her eye. He offered her a mouth-trumpet, which was a peculiar
thing for an elderly man to have in his pocket. Next day a man
was arrested. He had a brown purse with a yellow lining ; he had
a mouth-trumpet, and he answered the description—tall, elderly,
and with a grey suit. These were so many arrows pointing to that
man. There were so many of them that the jury could not escape
the conclusion. In other words, the odds against accidental repeti-
tion of all these factors were too great. What are the arrows relied
on here as pointing to this man ? The most direct of them is this
illicit connection with Mrs. Eyre, which you are asked to accept as
proved by her. Then what kind of man are you looking for ?
A man who knew the place and knew the habits of the people, the
rooms and their disposal; knew exactly how Eyre slept and knew
how to raise himself up to that window ; a man who was used to
being about the place ; a man possessed of this rare ammunition;
a man who had a gun which had been recently fired; a man who
could manage to silence that dog. And Thorne now tells you that
that murder must have been committed by some one who knew the
place. Only two people have been suggested so far, although you
are asked to say it may have been some wholly unknown person.
This man, we are told, answers to these points of identification.
If that is what you are looking for and this man answers to these
descriptive indications, the arrows are said to be pointing to him.
That is the kind of evidence you are asked to weigh ; it is of the kind
commonly called circumstantial evidence.
As to “ Mickey,” was “ Mickey ” there 1 A hard-fed horse was
there. An overstepping, trotting-horse was found to have passed
up and down to the post and along the road—a horse which has a
habit of boring .to the right. It is for you to test the value of that
evidence and say whether you can rely on the testimony of those
people who saw the tracks. If you cannot, very well then, you
cannot rely upon the tracks. The men who knew about horses,
and there were several of them, say that that horse had a build which
they gathered from his overstepping, which was somewhat peculiar,
although not uncommon, » hard-going, overstepping, trotting-horse,
and with a peculiarity of boring to the right. They found the tracks
over a considerable part of the road on the right going both ways,
and the constable says that when he rode “Mickey” the horse
bored to the right. Was that horse at Eyre’s ? If it was there,
who rode it ? Was it the man with the motive ? The man who
possessed these cartridges ? The man who did not say where he
was that night ? The man who showed an intense desire to see
6—Thorne.


Mrs. Eyre ? And why did he show uneasiness when he found that
Mrs. Eyre had made a confession of her illicit relations with him,
and nevertheless said she was a truthful woman, that he had always
found her so, and told the police so ?
Gentlemen, nothing in this case should be taken from me. You
need not, moreover, take any of the suggestions from counsel. A
peculiarity of the case is that so little of the evidence is attempted
to be falsified. Mr. Hazard has been attacked, with what effect it
is for you to say. Mrs. Eyre has been attacked —I might almost say
villified—by counsel; and what was that for ? She has given
herself away. We know that a woman will sometimes lie to any
extent in defending her character. She has never defended her
character; she has never attempted to do so beyond explaining the
origin and continuance of the connection. Had she any motive for
getting Thorne into trouble ? Has any been suggested ? These
are the only two witnesses who have been seriously attacked. It is
for you to consider whether there was any meaning in the attack
on Mrs. Eyre. It was not made by Thorne. He says she is a truthful
woman. Was it or was it not a vain attempt to set up something
which had no real foundation ? What is to be got by discarding
Mrs. Eyre’s evidence ? The evidence only relates to the question
whether she got out of bed after hearing the shot, or whether she
was up and about and doing the shooting herself or combining with
some other person. That is all. If you think she was utterly
incapable of committing the murder, morally, physically, and in every
other way, and that the girl Dora disposes of the suggestion of hearing
the match struck, and that it is disposed of by the total inability to
find a gun with which the act was done, then for what object was
the questioning ?
The case very largely depends on the question whether the horse
“ Mickey ” was brought over, and who brought it over. If the
horse “ Mickey ” brought the murderer over, then, as has been
repeatedly pointed out, it brought over somebody who, according to
Thorne, knew the place and knew the run of the place.
Now, gentlemen, I have really done with the matter. A Judge
sometimes goes over the evidence and puts it together, and may in
a sense be too logical, or may put it too strongly, and I certainly must
admit having repeated myself with reference to some of the salient
facts. Fortunately, there are always twelve men who analyse the
evidence and estimate it at its true value, men who are not bound
by the arguments of counsel or the summing-up of the evidence by the
Judge. There is no question of law here as to which you have to
depend on me. You are not bound by the arguments of counsel or
by my summing-up, but you are bound by your own consciences to
put a true and just interpretation on the evidence. If, on taking
this whole mass of evidence, you think the Crown has failed to prove
the case, that there is a serious flaw in it at some point or other, then


you are obliged to give the accused the benefit of any doubt that may
arise from the existence of such a flaw. But if you think, taking
this body of evidence, that there is no getting-away from it that Mrs.
Eyre did not commit this murder and was quite incapable of it, and
especially if you think that Mrs. Eyre, after throwing her character
to the winds, has been willing to tell the whole shameful story and has
told here the whole truth about her knowledge of the matter, then
you will take that into consideration with the rest of the evidence.
And if the result of the whole of the evidence is that you can see no
suggestion capable of affecting anybody but Thorne, that Thorne
brought. “ Mickey ” over, and that all the circumstances support
that and point in the same direction, and that no serious flaw has been
found in the case —if that is the end to which the evidence would
normally bring you as men of reason and men of conscience, relying
on that evidence and relying on that alone, relying on the numerous
circumstances put before you from first to last —if that is the effect of
the evidence, then, however painful it may be, and it must be a painful
thing, you must give effect to that evidence by your verdict.
In conclusion, gentlemen, all I ask you to do is this : Rely on your
judgment. Rely on your consciences. Rely on a proper apprecia-
tion of the true effect of this cumulative evidence, and determine
accordingly whether or not the Crown has proved its case. With
these observations I ask you to consider your verdict.
His Honour summed up from 3 p.m. to 4.20 p.m., when jury
retired.
The jury retired at 4.23 p.m. and returned at 8.18 p.m.
The Registrar. —Gentlemen of the jury, have you agreed upon
your verdict ?
The Foreman of the Jury. —Yes.
The Registrar. —How say you ? Do you find the prisoner guilty
or not guilty.
The Foreman of the Jury. —Guilty.
The Registrar. —And so say you all ?
The Foreman of the Jury. —Yes.
The Registrar. —Samuel John Thorne, prisoner at the bar, you
have been found guilty of murder. Have you anything to say why
sentence of death should not be passed upon you ?
Mr. Singer. —In view of the penalty that Your Honour is bound
by law to inflict, it seems to me there is nothing that counsel can
say on behalf of the accused. Whatever may be said or done can only
be left to higher authorities than ourselves.
Mr. Justice Chapman. —Prisoner at the bar, you have been found
guilty by a jury of your countrymen of the crime of wilful murder.
The law prescribes my duty in such a case in the words of the
sentence which I intend to pass. It is quite unnecessary that I


should address you further than to say this : You have been tried by
a jury which has devoted its most careful attention to the evidence
in this case. That that evidence proves your guilt most absolutely
is my firm conviction. On that I have no doubt. I wish to add
further that you have been defended with exceptional ability.
Further, I have to say that throughout these proceedings the police
and the authorities generally ha ve acted with the utmost considera-
tion for you. The sentence of the Court is that you be taken to the
place of execution and there hanged by the neck until you are dead.
The prisoner was then removed.
Mr. Justice Chapman. —Gentlemen of the jury, I have to thank
you for your most careful attention to this case. I am quite sure
that the time you have devoted to the consideration of the verdict
means that you have most scrupulously and carefully weighed every
item of the evidence. It may be some satisfaction to you that I
should tell you that I absolutely and entirely approve of your verdict.
To my min'd, the guilt of the prisoner was absolutely demonstrated —
as absolutely as any case I have ever tried since I have had the honour
to sit upon this bench. I have now to thank you for the long service
that you have rendered this week. And I think it only right that I
should take the course I have taken in other cases, to exempt you
for five years —if you choose to claim that exemption —from further
service on juries.
I shall add a very few words as to this case. I should say that the
country stands greatly indebted to the police, who have carried through
the arduous task of investigating this case and bringing the offender
to justice. Those who have followed the case in this Court can
probably only faintly realize the amount of work, the amount of
intelligence and industry, that must have been applied to the elucida-
tion of the facts of the case. I feel myself under an obligation specially
to mention the name of Detective-Sergeant Cummings not only for
his work in investigating the facts of this case, but for his scrupulous
fairness to the accused throughout the proceedings. Ido not think it
necessary to go over the names of the other police officers who have
rendered great service in connection with this investigation. All 1
wisn to say is that one and all of these officers —not merely those
called here as witnesses, but also the others who have devoted their
intelligence and industry to assist in bringing the offender to justice—
are deserving of all credit and praise.
There is one observation I wish to make further: I wish
publicly to say that whatever may be the faults of that unfortunate
woman, Mrs. Eyre, I am perfectly satisfied that she appeared here
as an unbiased and truthful witness, and gave her evidence with
absolute sincerity.
Thank you, gentlemen, you are discharged.
Mr. Singer. —Would your Honour allow me to say on behalf of
the defence, the conduct of which your Honour knows had been


arduous, that from start to finish we have received the utmost fairness
not only from the police, including particularly Detective-Sergeant
Cummings, but also from Mr. J. C. Martin ? May I add, with regard
to your Honour’s last remarks, that, whatever may be the general
opinion one way or the other, I believe your Honour would feel that
in conducting the defence in this case —and I believe my friends believe
with me —I have not in any respect gone beyond the duty I owed —
and the only duty I owed —to my client.
Mr. Justice, Chapman. —I have no criticism to make upon the
manner in which the defence was conducted. Counsel is bound to
do his best for his client. So long as he acts conscientiously no one
can complain of that. I entirely agree with Mr. Singer that the
prosecution has been conducted in a way that leaves him and his
client nothing to complain of.


Copy of Statement of Conversation between Mrs. Eyre and
Thorne at Tuakau on 4th September, 1920.
Tuakau, 4th September, 1920.
Mrs. Eyre : “ Good evening, Sam.”
Thorne : “ Good evening, Mrs. Eyre. Have you told the police
all ? ”
Mrs. Eyre: “ I have told the police everything in my statement.
You know, Sam, my husband was murdered in cold blood.”
Thorne : “ You should be careful what you say, Mrs. Eyre.”
Mrs. Eyre : “ I have told the police the truth.”
Thorne, on reading statement, first three-quarter page, said,
“ Was it in October or November your mother came up ? ”
Mrs. Eyre : “I think it was November.”
Thorne : “ Did you tell the police this ? ”
Mrs. Eyre: “ I did, and it is true, and you know it, Sam.”
Thorne : “ Did you say I went three times with you to Auckland ? ”
Mrs. Eyre : “ I did, Sam, and all that is in that statement is
true.”
Thorne : “You say I hated Syd ? ”
Mrs. Eyre : “ You have said it more than once.”
Thorne: “ How could I expose you, Mrs. Eyre ? ”
Mrs. Eyre : “ You would tell my husband that you were intimate
with me, and he would shoot you.”
Thorne: “It would have been a good thing if he had ” —added
later, “ if it were true.”
Thorne : “ Do the boys say I got up at night-time ? ”
Cummings : “ They do. Phil is here if you want to see him.”
Thorne : “I do not want to see him. Why did you not tell your
husband the truth ? ”
Mrs. Eyre: “He would have shot you, Sam, and you said you
would commit suicide.”
Thorne: “ You know, Mrs. Byre, this is a pretty hard statement,
and it has got me in a corner.”
Mrs. Eyre : “ It is true, and you know it, Sam.”
Thorne: “ I know you are a truthful woman, Mrs. Eyre, and I
always admire you, and I cannot say anything against you.”
Thorne : “ Did Mrs. Hallamore tell you this in this statement ? ”
Mrs. Eyre : “ She did.”
Thorne: “We will see about it. I always got on well with you,
Mrs. Eyre ? ”
Mrs. Eyre : “ You did, Sam.”
Thorne : “ What do you mean by ‘ expose ’ ? ”
Mrs. Eyre: “ I was afraid you would speak of our intimacy.”
Thorne: “ Where was ‘ Bob ’ (dog) on this night ? ”


Mrs. Eyre : “ Under the boys’ room.”
Thorne: “ Don’t you think he would not bark if I came to your
place ? ”
Mrs. Eyre : “He would bark until he smelt you.”
Thorne : “ Did Mr. Morrison know the position of the bed ? ”
Mrs. Eyre: “He was to him once from outside the
window, when he was laid up. Apart from our own family you are
the only person that has been in that room.”
Thorne: “ You could not see his head from outside the window.”
Mrs. Eyre : “ No ; it was below the window-sill.”
Thorne : “ What do you mean by ‘ high horse ’ ? ”
Mrs. Eyre : “ That is what Mr. Eyre said.”
Thorne : “ What were the heated arguments we had ? ”
Mrs. Eyre: “ You were often on the edge with him and had dis-
putes on the farm.”
Thorne : “ Why do you think I shot your husband ? ”
Mrs. Eyre : “ To get him out of the way.”
Thorne : “ When did you try the gun ? You could not see his
head ? ”
Mrs. Eyre : “ On Sunday.”
Thorne gave demonstration with stick.
Mrs. Eyre : “He could not be shot from the shoulder.”
Thorne: “ But he could be shot like this ” [holding gun at angle].
“ I won’t say anything about you or your family, Mrs. Eyre. You
have always been a good friend to me. I don’t suggest you or your
family were in this.”
Above statement was taken down by Detective-Sergeant James
Cummings, and was afterwards initialled by Sergeant Cowan.
It was admitted : That Eyre’s property is estimated at the net
value of £17,200 after payment of debts and duty. The will directs
that the estate is to be realized ; one-third of the capital put on one
side ; half the income from that third to be paid to Mrs. Eyre for
life, the remaining half-income from the one-third to be paid to her
for the maintenance of the children until they reach the age of
seventeen years, and on their reaching that age to be paid to her
for her life, with a provision that if she \does not properly maintain
them the trustees are to apply that part of the income for the
children’s benefit until they reach seventeen and then pay it to Mrs.
Eyre.
Bv Authority : W. A. 6. Skinner, Government Printer, Wellington.
[5OO/4/25 —10247




ORDINARY MACHINE-MADE HORSE-SHOE.
HORSE "MICKEY'S" NEAR (OR LEFT) FRONT-FOOT SHOE-
7—Thome.


HORSE "MICKEY'S" OFF (OR RIGHT) FRONT-FOOT SHOE.
S. S. EYRE'S RESIDENCE, PUKEKAWA.
The window on the right is the window through which Eyre was shot.
