

THE ASSOCIATION TO
PROTEST AGAINST THE
DUPLICATION OF INCOME
TAX WITHIN THE EMPIRE
REPORT OF THE
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE WITH
APPENDICES
OCTOBER 31st, 1917, to DECEMBER 31st, 1918.
Published by the Association to Protest against the duplication of Income Tax
within the Empire.
Office of the Association, 27 Clement’s Lane,
LONDON, E.C.
JAS. TRUSCOTT & SON, LTD., London.


MEMBERS OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
OF
THE ASSOCIATION
TO PROTEST AGAINST THE DUPLICATION OF
INCOME TAX WITHIN THE EMPIRE.
Since the 31st December, 1918, up to which date the enclosed
Report deals, it is to be regretted that Frederick Dutton, Esq.,
who had been Chairman of the Committee from the date of the
formation of the Association, has been reluctantly compelled to
retire owing to ill health.
♦SIR F. W. YOUNG, M.P., Chairman.
♦SIR CHARLES C. MCLEOD, Deputy Chairman.
♦HENRY BULL, ESQ., Honorary Treasurer.
Percy Arnold, Esq.
J. B. Braithwaite, Esq.
C. Cambie, Esq.
Neville D. Cohen, Esq.
Frederick Dyer, Esq.
W. H. Gardiner, Esq.
W. E. Hearson, Esq.
W. E. Lane, Esq.
P. D. Leake, Esq.
Hon. H. S. Littleton
Ernest Makower, Esq.
Hon. M. L. Moss
E. R. Peacock, Esq.
Sir Cornthwaite H. Rason.
Robert Reid, Esq.
George Scales, Esq.
George Slade, Esq.
♦Andrew Williamson, Esq.
♦Hon. J. G. Jenkins, Secretary , 27 Clement’s Lane, E.C.
* Members of Sub-Committee.


The Association to Protest Against the Duplication
of Income Tax within the Empire.
REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
Postponement
Meeting**
Copies Last
Annual
Report and
Report of
Meeting sent
to Members of
Parliament.
Communica-
Chancellor
of the
Exchequer
See Appendix
No - 1*
Application of
Section 43 of
Finance Act
of 1916, to
increased
Income Tax
under Act
of 1918.
Your Committee submit herewith for the consideration of
the Members of the Association their Third Report and State-
ment of Accounts for the period from 31st October, 191 T, to 31st
December, 1918.
It was considered advisable, owing to the disturbed state
of affairs and to the General Election, not to hold the Annual
Meeting in November last, especially as there was to be a
new Parliament and some changes in the Government, but to
postpone it until the New Year.
A full report of the Annual Meeting held on the
29th November, 1917, was published in “ Tbe Times,” and
copies of the Annual Report and the Report of the Meeting
were sent to every Member of the Government and to all the
Members of the House of Commons.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer was communicated with
prior to his preparation of the Budget for 1918 and urged to
give further consideration to the question of abolishing Double
Income Tax within the Empire. He consented to receive a
Deputation on the subject, and the Members of your Sub-Com-
mittee waited upon him on sth April, 1918. A full report of
the discussion on that occasion is added to this Report as
Appendix No. 1.
It will be noticed in such Report that although refusing to
make any further concession for the time being towards
abolition, the Chancellor of the Exchequer promised to give
careful consideration to the point strongly pressed upon him
by your Sub-Committee, viz., that in the event of the rate of In-
come Tax being increased that year, effect should be given to
the promise made in Parliament by Mr. McKenna, when Chan-
cellor of the Exchequer, that the burden of the Double Income
Tax payer should not be increased. Consequently your Com-
mittee were glad to see that although the general rate of Income
Tax was raised from ss. to 6s. in the <£, Section 43 of the
Finance Act of 1916 was reintroduced in the Bill of 1918 with-
out any alteration of wording, which had the effect of extending
the maximum limit of concession under that clause from Is. 6d.
to 2s. 6d. in the £, and in that form passed into law. While
appreciating that action on the part of the Government, your


in
.^Parliament.
Chancellor
of the
Exchequer’s
.Statement.
.See Appendix
JTo. 11.
9nperial War
Conference.
'Resolution
passed by
War
Conference.
Committee considered it again advisable that an Amendment
should be moved in the Committee stage of the Bill, similar in
effect to that which was moved and pressed to a Division
in 1917.
The matter was discussed by your Sub-Committee with
several Members of the House of Commons on 7th May, when
Sir Clement Kinloch Cooke, M.P., presided, and it was decided
to move such amendment, and the same was accordingly moved
in the House of Commons by Brig.-Gen. H. Page Croft,
C.M.G., M.P., and an interesting Debate took place upon it,
during which the Chancellor of the Exchequer made the follow-
ing statement:
“ I quite admit that this double Income Tax system
ought not to continue an hour longer than the end of
the War. We ought to put an end to it as soon as we
possibly can; but I do not accept, and I am quite sure
that the Dominion Prime Ministers would not accept, the
principle of this Amendment as a right one. That
principle is that in doing away with this double Income
Tax the whole burden is to fall on the British Exchequer.
I do not think that is right. It ought to be a question
of adjustment, and the two countries should decide between
themselves in w T hat way the giving up of taxation is to
be borne. I know, as a matter of fact, that this is the
view taken by the Dominion Prime Ministers themselves.
They feel it is a question for proper adjustment.”
The Hansard Report of the Debate is added to this Report
as Appendix No. 11., but on the advice of the Mover and
Seconder the Amendment was not pressed to a Division.
The question of the abolition of Double Income Tax was
again discussed at the Imperial War Conference last year,
on the 10th July, 1918, and it was decided to re-affirm the
Resolution passed the previous year that the matter should
be dealt with immediately after the close of the War.
“The present system of Double Income Taxation
within the Empire calls for review in relation (i) to
firms in the United Kingdom doing business with the
Oversea Dominions, India, and the Colonies; (ii) to
private individuals resident in the United Kingdom who
have capital invested elsewhere in the Empire, or who
depend upon remittances from elsewhere within the
Empire; and (iii) to its influence on the investment of
capital in the United Kingdom, the Dominions and
India, and to the effect of any change on the position of
British capital invested abroad. The Conference, there-
fore, urges that this matter should be taken in hand
immediatelv after the conclusion of the War, and that
an amendment of the law should be made which will
remedy the present unsatisfactory position.”


The Chan-
cellor of the
Exchequer
urged to give
Return of
Amount
allowed under
Concession of
Sec. 43, Oct.
1916.
Letter to
Chancellor
of the
Exchequer
urgiqg the
Settlement of
Double
Income Tax
immediately
after end of
War, as
promised.
Letters and
Papers to
Members of
Imperial War
Conference.
British
Imperial
Council of
Commerce,
Resolutions
passed.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer attended ‘the Conference
and made an interesting speech in which he stated that the
policy of the Imperial Government was pledged to the terms
of this Resolution.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer has been urged to furnish
a Return showing the amount in money allowed under the
concession granted under Section 43 of the Finance Act, 1916,
for the year ending sth April, 1917, and far the year ending
sth April, 1918, and he has replied stating that it would involve
the expenditure of considerable time and labour; and that while
this in itself would not render it impossible to provide the de-
sired information, he felt that he would not be justified in ask-
ing the Board of Inland Revenue to undertake this task at a
time when their depleted staff was overburdened with work
arising out of the War, unless the figures, when obtained,
were likely to give a true idea of the extent of the concession.
From this reply he evidently thought that present statistics
would only be misleading.
On the 19th November, 1918, a letter was written to the
Chancellor of the Exchequer urging that as the War was
practically over it was hoped that action would be immediately
taken when the new Parliament met to consider seriously
the settlement of the whole question of Double Income Tax,
your Committee being strongly of opinion, from an Imperial
point of view, the longer the matter was delayed the greater the
injury to Imperial sentiment and Imperial trade. Only a
formal acknowledgment was given to this letter, as
the Rt. Hon. A. Bonar Law was relinquishing the office
of Chancellor of the Exchequer. The matter will, however,
be taken up with his successor in office, as your Committee feel
that it is necessary to urge upon the Government to lose no time
in giving effect to the Imperial Conference Resolution that the
law should be amended immediately after the conclusion of the
War.
Prior to the Meeting of the Imperial War Conference in
June, 1918, copies of Hansard, with the Chancellor of the
Exchequer’s reply in the House of Commons, together with
the Memorandum on Double Income Tax published by this
Association, were sent to all the Dominion Members who were
attending that Conference in order that they might be fully
conversant with the subject.
At the Annual Meeting of the British Imperial Council of
Commerce held on sth June, 1918, your Secretary again took
the opportunity of bringing the question of Double Income
Tax before the Meeting, and, after reporting the progress that
had been made since the previous Meeting of the Council
in 1916, he moved that the Council should re-affirm the follow-
ing Resolution;


Additiona
Members of
Executive
Committee.
Income Tax
Act, New-
foundland.
List of
Subscriptions
and Audited
Report. —See
Appendix 111.
Meetings of
Committees.
Compli-
mentary
References
to work of
the Associa-
tion.
Office Work,
Corre-
spondence,
interviews.
“ While recognising that the Chancellor of the
Exchequer has admitted the injustice of the Double
Income Tax on the same income within the Empire, and
has offered slight relief in the Finance Bill now before
the British Parliament, this Conference strongly urges
that further relief to those suffering from these heavy
and unjust burdens should be immediately granted by
His Majesty’s Government/’
This was unanimously carried.
Sir Frederick Young, M.P., having retired from the
position of Agent-General for South Australia, has been
elected to your Committee as Deputy-Chairman, and, as he
has been returned to the new Parliament as Member for
Swindon, your Committee are glad to know that one so con-
versant with the subject will be able as an Officer of this
Association to assist in the House of Commons when the
matter comes up again. The Executive Committee has
also been added to during the year by the election of
C. Cambie, Esq., and E. R. Peacock, Esq., representing
Canadian interests, as the Double Income Tax now affects
Canada as well as the other Dominions. Owing to military
duties, Mr. Leslie Harris resigned from the Committee.
An Income Tax Act has also been passed in Newfoundland,
and communications on the subject of Companies connected
with Newfoundland have been under consideration by your,
Committee.
During the year many new Members and Subscribers have
been added to the list. A complete list of the subscriptions
received since the last Annual Meeting and the Audited Report
is added to this Report as Appendix No. 111.
Frequent Meetings of the Committee have been held during
the year and the Sub-Committee has met on numerous occasions
while officers of the Association have regularly conferred on
matters as the necessity arose.
Complimentary references to the work of the Association
have appeared in the Annual Reports of the Royal Colonial
Institute, British Imperial Council of Commerce, the London
Chamber of Commerce, the Australasian Chamber of Commerce
in London, and several other publications, as well as a large
number of notices in the daily and weekly press, while the
Chairmen of Companies interested in overseas trade have in
many instances spoken strongly on the subject at their Annual
Meetings.
Since the Association was formed in December, 1915,
upwards of 3,500 letters have been received on the subject
by the Secretary, and upwards of 25,500 letters and com-


No charge for
Membership,
thanks to
generous
Subscribers.
Gratitude to
those who
have given
valuable
assistance.
Urgent
Necessity for
Continued
Activity until
the injustice
is removed.
munications liave been forwarded from the office, while
hundreds of interviews have taken place between the Secretary
and those Who are suffering from the injustice of Double Income
Tax. Copies of letters as well as replies are filed in the office.
As mentioned in our previous Reports, no charge is made
for becoming a Member of this Association, the funds necessary
for carrying on the work being provided voluntarily by a
number of subscribers. Your Committee are gratified to report
that all necessary provision has been made up to the present
time, and desire to place .on record their thanks to those who
have so generously subscribed. They would suggest, however,
that in order to enable the work to be continued, those who have
benefited by the concessions granted by the Chancellor of the
Exchequer through the exertions of this Association, and who
liave not yet contributed towards its expenses, should now do so.
Your Committee wish again to express their gratitude to
those Members of the House of Commons who have rendered
such valuable assistance, and they also wish to place on record
their appreciation of the continued courtesy of the Directors
of the Bank of Adelaide in granting the use of their Bank
Committee Room for the frequent Meetings of your Executive
Committee.
While the Association is to be congratulated on having ob-
tained the concession in the Finance Act of 1916 and the addi-
tional concession in the Finance Act of 1918, your Committee
feel that it is necessary that further exertion should now be
made to press upon the Government to take the necessary steps
to have legislative effect given to the Imperial Conference
Resolution that the question of Double Income Tax shall be
dealt with immediately after the close of the war, and for
this reason it is important that the Association should not
only continue its active work, but that it should be strengthened
in every possible way. The great monetary sacrifices inflicted
on Double Income Tax payers, especially during the last four
years, and the injury to Imperial Trade and Commerce which
is being caused thereby, cannot too often or too forcibly be
placed before the public and the Government.


APPENDIX No. I.
Deputation
from the
Association to Protest Against the
Duplication of Income Tax
Within the Empire
to
THE CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER
(The Rt. Hon. A. BOXAR LAW, M.P.),
APRIL sth, 1918.
Mr. Bonar Law was accompanied by:
Mr. Stanley Baldwin, M.P.
Sir E. E. Xott-Bower, K.C.B. (Bond of Inland
Revenue).
Mr. Percy Thompson, C.B. (Bond of Inland
Revenue).
Mr. H. P. Hamilton, C.B. (Private Secretary to the
Chancellor of the Exchequer).
The Deputation consisted of:
Mr. Frederick Dutton.
Mr. Henry Bull.
The Hon. -I. G. Jenkins.
Sir Charles McLeod,
Mr. Andrew Williamson.


Mr. JENKINS: Mr. Chancellor of the
Exchequer, we are, as I pointed out in my
letter, simply the representatives chosen
by our Association, only five of us, instead
of coming to you as a very large deputa-
tion. Our Association really represents
Chambers of Commerce, large companies,
and some thousands of people. We have
come by ourselves in order to have a pri-
vate talk with you in connection with the
letter we have already forwarded to you,
and to discuss the points we put in that
letter. I will ask Mr. Dutton to address
you first of all.
Mr. FREDERICK DUTTON: We have
not come here, Mr. Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer, to make speeches. This letter no
doubt has received your consideration, and
what we really rather wanted was to dis-
cuss the points that we have brought for-
ward in this letter and to know whether
there is any and what prospect of these
points being dealt with. There are only
three of them. The first is the suggestion
which we made that the analogy of Section
23 of last year’s Act in regard to Excess
Profits might very well be applied to In-
come Tax. We have been considering the
whole matter since the debates that took
place in the House of Commons last year,
and this question of the analogy of Section
23 being applicable ro Double Income Tax
has been a good deal discussed. It was,
as a matter of fact, incidentally referred
to when we had the pleasure of coming be-
fore you last year. And it was a good deal
discussed at our Annual Meeting, a copy
of the proceedings of which I think Mr.
-Jenkins has sent to you.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER: Yes.
Mr. FREDERICK DUTTON: It has
been discussed a good deal at the Annual
Meetings since then of a good many large
and influential companies, and it has been,
to our knowledge, the subject of a good
deal of discussion amongst Members of
Parliament who have been interesting
themselves in this question. It seemed to
us that in principle it was very difficult to
see what actual difference there was be-
tween Excess Profits Tax and Double In-
come Tax. The one as much as the other
seems to be a tax upon income. The Ex-
cess Profits Tax may not be a tax upon
all income, but it is a tax upon.income de-
rived from certain sources oy certain
bodies, and it is a tax upon income just as
much as Income Tax is.
Of course, what we have been striving
for all through in this matter —as the very
name of the Association shows, namely, to
protest against the duplication of Income
Tax—is that there should be some means
found of arriving at one Income Tax
within the Empire and that there should
be only one tax. We have never shirked
I think, as an Association, so far as work-
ing at the thing over here is concerned and
as regards the taxpayer in this country,
the question /that there was no object or
endeavour, as far as I am aware, to bring
about any condition of things in which any-
body who was liable to pay Income Tax
because he was resident here and subject
to the Income Tax Law here, should pay
at any less rate than any other person get-
ting Income which might be derived from
other sources, where this Double Income
Tax question does not arise. That would
be entirely met by any adjustment of this
question, which was involved in the prin-
ciple of there being only one Income Tax
payable at whatever might,happen to be
the higher rate, because, whatever the
higher rate was in this country, it would
then be equally paid on income derived
from any Dominion.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER : How do you suggest it
should be divided between the two Govern-
ments —the Government here and the
Government in the Dominion 1
Mr. FREDERICK DUTTON; The
question of adjustment between the two
Governments is a matter which we did dis-
cuss last year. I am afraid I was myself
rather responsible for the suggestion that
perhaps it was not a matter in which at
that time the Dominion Governments
could be asked to give up any portion of
their Income Tax. But you told us then
that they quite agreed themselves that it
would have to be a matter of adjustment,
and I think that was accepted at the dis-
cussion whicli took place on this very point
last year. We accept the idea that the
Dominions accept the principle, and if
there is to be one Income Tax—
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER; I am afraid I have not
made plain to you what I meant. You
have suggested that there is an analogy
between the two —Excess Profits Duty and
Income Tax—but there is not, because
under the Excess Profits Duty it says ex-
actly what is to be paid.


Mr. FREDERICK DUTTON: Is it not
rather a question for the Government 1 ? Is
it not very difficult for us as an outside
body to suggest anything to the Govern-
ments in that regard?
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER : Now about the difficulties of
the question. First of all the House of
Commons would never agree to that, be-
cause all the taxation which they authorise
the Government to raise must be definite.
There is no definition here and we do not
know what we are to raise. But apart
from that, you make the suggestion that
we should make an adjustment between
all the Dominion Governments. They
have different rates of taxation and differ-
ent bases, and it would be exceedingly
difficult to co-ordinate the lot in order to
get at any general system. If we cannot
make any arrangements with them, does
that mean that they would have to have
their different rates ?
Mr. JENKINS: We should have to pay
the double tax if no general arrangement
could be made and if any Government
would not arrange with the others.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER : But the proper thing would
be for us to say how much we could keep
and for them to be prepared to fall into
line with it. But that is not the proposal.
Mr. FREDERICK DUTTON: The pro-
posal was that the question of the adjust-
ments to be made should be a matter that,
on an agreement being come to in regard
to this clause, should be arranged between
the Governments. The holding of the
Imperial Conference this year would seem
to afford an opportunity of arranging that,
provided there was the intention before-
hand of making use of the oportunity.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER: No doubt that will be dis-
cussed.
Mr. FREDERICK DUTTON; But it
must be prepared for. It is an extraordi-
narily difficult thing for the Representa-
tives of the Dominions to come over here
and for a question of that kind to be raised
at the Conference unless they have been
prepared for it beforehand. That is why
we have suggested that it should be com-
municated to them before the Conference
is held.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER : But you do not suggest
there is not sufficient interest in the ques-
tion in the different Dominions not to make
them take it up on their own initiative, do
you
Mr. FREDERICK DUTTON: But you
will have the Prime Minister of a Dominion
coming here: he has not his Treasurer with
him. When the question is raised they
have to consider how it affects their own
.Revenue. If that question has not been
thought out beforehand it would have to
be discussed by the Conference and, if it
was a feasible idea, it would have to be
adjourned for discussion at another Con-
ference, and nothing would be done. That
is not what we want.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER: What I want you to realise
is this. All the arguments that were
urgent last year against this are still
stronger now, because we want the
Revenue more than ever. Unless you have
something new to put forward in support
of what you want, it does not seem that I
can say anything different to what I said
then.
Mr. JENKINS: The argument last year
in favour of leaving the matter until the
end of the war was based on the supposi-
tion that the war would be over in anqther
twelve months. But there is no knowing
now when it will be over, and the matter
is becoming much more troublesome and
burdensome to people as time goes on.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER: But they have very con-
siderable relief, have they not, up to now 1
Mr. JENKINS: But even with the l/t>
reduction, some of them are paying 12/-
as against 5/-.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER ; But some people are paying
12/- who have not any relief.
Mr. JENKINS: But they are the ones
who have very big incomes.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER : As I put it to you last year,
it all comes down to this: You have to con-
sider not the equity of the tax but the fact
that those who are paying 12/- are getting
a greater advantage than those who are
paying the single Income Tax, because
they are getting a better return in the in-
creased rates of interest on their capital
than they used to do.
Mr. FREDERICK DUTTON: I would
very much like to have some practical


illustration of that beyond the mere sug-
gestion. It is very difficult to follow the
suggestion that if you are paying two lots
of Income Tax on the same income, you
are likely, under any circumstances, to get
a better return on your money than if you
are only paying one.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER : But that is common-sense if
you are getting a higher interest on your
investments.
Mr. HENRY BULL: You are simply
arguing on the fact, are you not, that
people have their money invested in Aus-
tralia and the money comes to this coun-
try ? I am an Australian and the income
I have has all been made in Australia.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER: I quite feel that fact. Al-
though I still take the view I took last
year, that it is quite impossible to make
the change now, I am in sympathy with
the idea. It is much harder on an Aus-
tralian who has come here to live than on
an Englishman who chooses to invest his
money in Australia, and gets a better in-
terest on it. But that does not touch the
point that we want all the Revenue we can
get and that this is not the time for making
changes.
Mr. JENKINS; You said just now that
the increased rate of interest a man re-
ceived on his investments in the Dominions
would give him an advantage. But may j
I point out that those investments were
made years ago at different rates of in-
terest, which have not been changed for
years, so that there is no advantage, and
your argument does not apply.
Mr. FREDERICK DUTTON; There
are several other matters —
Mr. HENRY BULL: I would like to
finish my argument, if I may, before we go
into these other matters at all, because we
Australians have not come over here sim-
ply to live here. We have come over here
for the benefit of this country, and we are
not only conferring an enormous advan-
tage on this country but are taxed for com-
ing here. For instance, how can you
justify the fact of a man, an Australian,
making money in Australia and leaving it |
there, not bringing it to this country, and I
your compelling him to pay Income Tax on |
that money in this country although it is j
left in Australia. I think it is monstrous, j
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER: It is a hardship, but it is
equally true of an Englishman, if he makes
his money in Australia and leaves it there.
Mr. FREDERICK DUTTON: There
are a great many business houses who are
leaving because of the double taxation.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER: Where are they going?
Mr. FREDERICK DUTTON; That is
their affair; but the fact remains that in a
good many instances —and the Treasury
must be perfectly conscious of it —very
large sums in income tax have been lost
owing to the removal of businesses from
this country simply on account of this
double income tax. We thought an argu-
ment that would recommend our proposal
to you would be that it would remove that
tendency if there were only one income tax
applicable throughout the Empire, and it
would obviously not matter where the
business was carried on.
Mr. HENRY BULL: There would be no
difficulty in repealing the Act of 1914 for
taxing money that is made in Australia
and left there. Whatever the tax is,
whether it is 5/- or whatever it may be,
there is no difficulty in halving it, which
would be much easier. There is no more
difficulty in deducting 2/6 than 1/6.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER: Not the least, except that
you get less money.
Mr. HENRY BULL: But then you
would be on a fair basis. You are not on a
fair basis now.
Mr. ANDREW WILLIAMSON: The
argument at the Conference in May that
caused the Colonial representatives to
withdraw the pressure was the argument
that was put so strongly to them, that it
was unfair to the Treasury at the present
moment to press it on account of the addi-
tional work it would impose upon a de-
pleted staff. It is hard for a business man
to see that there is any more additional
work in deducting 2/6 than there is in de-
ducting 3/6. There is less work, if one
divides it by 1 /Bth. Speaking colloquially,
that argument seems to us to be flap-
doodle. The figure is nothing but a matter
of clerical work.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER : Was that argument used?


Mr. JENKINS: That argument was
used.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER : At all events, as far as I
it, whether that argument was used or not,
there is nothing in it. But there is a great
deal in it the moment you attempt to do
anything with the Dominions on the lines
suggested by your Clause. lam afraid it
would be quite unworkable, as proved by
the difficulties we have had in regard to
Excess Profits Duty. We have not suc-
ceeded in doing anything yet. But the
difficulty in regard to treating Income Tax
in the same way as Excess Profits Duty,
as suggested in your letter, is this: If you
attempt to deal with Income Tax in the
same way as Excess Profits Duty it cannot
be done. Our experience of the difficulty
with Excess Profits Duty shows that it
would be impossible to work the Income
tax on that basis, because there are differ-
ent methods of assessing Income Tax in
each of the Colonies, and different bases,
quite different from ours. All that has to
be adjusted, and the thing simply means
an amount of detail in regard to almost
every taxpayer which would be unwork-
able. It could not be done on this basis.
Mr. ANDREW WILLIAMSON: You
mean that there would have to be a pre-
vious clearing up and assimilation of the
bases!
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER; Yes.
Mr. FREDERICK DUTTON: Then we
come back to the other point which was
raised in the Amendment last year, of hav-
ing the concession under section 43 en-
larged on the ground that the Double War
Tax, which is practically involved now in
the large Income Tax which is payable on
both sides, is double taxation for the same
war, and consequently it should be paid
in one country or the other down to the
level of the ante-war taxation, so that we
should not have double war taxation. The
idea of the Amendment last year was to
bring us down to the level of the Income
Tax people paid in this country before the
war.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER: I am afraid we will not get
any further however long we discuss it,
because all the arguments that influenced
me against it last year are stronger this
year.
Mr. JEN KI NiS :: There is j ust one point
that I should like to raise while we are
here, in regard to the provision that was
made for the 1/6 reduction. In case you
increase the ordinary Income Tax, of
course any increase would naturally make
an increase on that 1/6, and we would not
be placed in any worse position! Because
your predecessor pointed that out in the
House of Commons.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER : You mentioned that in your
letter.
Mr. JENKINS: Yes.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER: I cannot say anything, of
course, definitely about that. lam not
prejudging the thing, but I wanted to be
sure whether you were quite right or not,
so I looked up his words, and I do not
think you are. He says: “at present.” I
am looking merely at the actual pledge.
Mr. FREDERICK DUTTON: He said
their position should not be any worse.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER: Yes, “at present” he said.
He was referring to the then Budget. I
am not prejudging the thing in any way,
but I will make you this promise, that if
the Income Tax is reduced I will not re-
duce your allowance (laughter). I can
tell you that my inclination is to give you
the full allowance if there is any increase,
but I do not give any pledge.
Mr. ANDREW WILLIAMSON: Refer-
ring to what Mr. Dutton said about the
withdrawal of businesses, it is not only of
course, as you will appreciate, the loss of
taxation that ensues there but all the con-
sequential loss of business to this country.
When the headquarters of a business are in
London, as you know, all the business goes
through London. But if the headquarters
are removed, as has happened in the case
of one or two large businesses, to New
York, the business goes there; the supply
and the whole drift goes there.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER: You are quite right.
Mr. ANDREW WILLIAMSON : I men-
tioned that because, while you may be giv-
ing up at the moment a certain amount in
the direction of the actual taxation, you
may be conserving, and you will be con-
serving, a certain proportion in another
direction actually to the Treasury itself.


Mr. FREDERICK DUTTON: I should
like to say this, as confirming what Mr.
Williamson has said. At the Imperial
Conference there was more than one of the
representatives who said, quite broadly
and plainly, that the continuance of the
present system was leading and would
lead to a great deal of evasion. There is
no doubt that where people are themselves
possessed of a sense of the extreme in-
justice of taxation in any particular form,
the consequence is that it invariably does
lead to evasion.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER: Undoubedly,
Mr. FREDERICK DUTTON: We al-
ways have believed, and we still believe
that the Treasury, and the Revenue as a
matter of fact, are probably losers of as
much money by the continuation of the
present system as they gain by it.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER: I quite recognise the force
of what you say, and it is a question of cal-
culation. But I may tell you that at pre-
sent I look forward to the after-the-war
position with the greatest fear, for this
reason. If we have to continue, as appa-
rently we shall have to do, .a very high In-
come Tax, it will have the effect of driving
all the Companies where the Income Tax
is paid at the source, out of this country to
an extent which I am afraid to look for-
ward to. It is exactly the same kind of
thing.
Mr. HENRY BULL; There is no doubt
about it.
Sir CHARLES McLEOD : I should like,
on behalf of India, to confirm all that has
been said in regard to the removal of 'Com-
panies because of this Double Income Tax.
It is probably known to you, sir, that seve-
ral large Companies have removed their
headquarters from London to Bombay and
Calcutta.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER: I thought the Income Tax
in India was very small.
Sir CHARLES McLEOD : It is not very
large.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER; Then there seems to be no
reason for their doing that.
Sir CHARLES McLEOD: But they
have imposed a Super Tax there of 6d.
to l/3d.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER: And they have imposed it
on the profits of the business instead of on
the individual. I think it is Income Tax
taken at the source which is the cause of
that.
Well, Mr. Jenkins and gentlemen, I am
really sorry again, as I was last year, to be
against your views, and still more sorry
because I really have great sympathy with
you. There is hardly any form of taxation
in regard to which —though the people as
a whole have paid with extraordinarily
little grumbling—people do not come to me
and say:—“ In any particular case it hits
us very hardly.”
Mr. JENKINS: We thank you very
much; Mr. Chancellor, for receiving us.
The CHANCELLOR of the EX-
CHEQUER: lam very sorry I cannbt
meet you.
Mr. JENKINS: And we are sorry too.
The Deputation then withdrew.


APPENDIX No. II.
Brigadier - General CROFT; 1 beg to
move, at the end to insert the words:
“ Provided also that the said Section forty-
three shall have effect as if the words ‘ three
shillings and sixpence’ were omitted and the
words ‘ one shilling and sixpence ’ were sub-
stituted therefor.’
I think the House is so well informed
with regard to what I call this scandal
of a double Income Tax that I do not
intend to speak for more than one or two
minutes on this subject. I would like to
inform hon. Members who have not fol-
lowed the matter very carefully that this
is no longer a question affecting simply
Australia and New Zealand, but it also
affects those in South Africa and in
Canada. The Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer at the beginning of the War
again and again pointed out that this
matter was going to be adjusted by a
conference of representatives from all
parts of the Empire, and that conference
was to be held immediately after the War.
That was all very well for one year, and
it was not such a great burden for two
years, but as the War has gone on there
is hardly a single hon. Member who does
not now feel that the prolongation of this
agony of confiscatory taxation has been
really one we ought not to have permitted
for our kinsmen in the Dominion over- i
seas.
I am going to ask the Chancellor of the
Exchequer to once more consider this
question, and if I do not make a long
speech it is because I want the Chan-
cellor of the Exchequer to get some
dinner. He knows full w T ell the justice
of this case. We have his own words on
many occasions in which he has told us
that he admits this grievance, and I hope
he will now make a clean cut on this
question. We have put down the same
Amendment as last year, because the
position has not really altered. As a
matter of fact, with regard to Dominion
residents who are taxed in the Dominions,
the general effect is that they are worse
off this year than last year. I want to
read a letter which I have received from
a large Australian merchant, who writes
as follows:
“I have to-day leceived an urgent request
from my managing director in Australia for my
company to put in an application for Australian
War Loan, to which 1 regret I have had to
reply in the negative, merely because the
English taxation makes this impossible.
“ This company is an Australian company,
registered in New South Wales. All its assets
are in Australia, the business is carried on in
Australia, and all the profits are made there;
vet on account of the control being in London,
it is treated for the purpose of English Income
Tax as if it were an English company, and it
therefore pays English tax on its entire profits
irrespective of the fact that a large proportion
of them never come to this country, and never
will. The bearing of this on investments in
Australian War Loan is as follows : The
Australian Loan is issued at 4| per cent, free of
Australian tax. and is therefore undoubtedly a
favourable investment for companies situated in
Australia as ours is situated, provided they are
not subject to English tax. In our case, when
this 4£ per cent, was brought into our profit
and loss account, we should pay English tax on
the income from this Australian Loan, which
would stay in Australia, thus making it appear
obviously unfavourable compared with an
English Loan realising per cent, interest. As
a matter of fact, we, an Australian company,
have invested large amounts in English War-
Loan, the interest on which, when transmitted
to Australia is not subject to Australian Income
Tax, as thus part of income has been earned out-
side Australia. When, however, this Australian
company properly desires to invest similarly in
Australian War Loan, the English tax autho-
rities make it impossible for it to do so.”
That is the whole point. The House is
well aware of the arguments. I hope the
right hon. Gentleman will remember that
in the case of Australia and New Zea-
land, at any rate, they do not .collect
Income Tax on money which has been
earned in this country, yet where people
from the Dominions are resident here and
have their businesses in the Dominions
we 'here charge the double duty upon
them. If an Australian is resident in
this country and he is a man of wealth
he pays a tax of 10s. 2d. here in addition
to one of Os. 6d. in Australia, and he
pays the latter purely and simply in
order to provide the Australian Armies
which are fighting for us in France. The
same argument applies in a lesser degree
to the other Dominions which I have
mentioned. It has been admitted that
this tax is unfair, and the Chancellor of
the Exchequer has told us that the only
possible reason for such a grave, and
speaking disinterestedly as I do on this
subject, such a wicked injustice continu-


ing, is that this is not the time when he
can afford to give up any Revenue which
is coming in. It comes to this, that in
order to get a certain amount —I do not
know the exact figures, but I am told
it represents about nine hours’ cost of
this War —we are placing this huge
burden on our kinsmen with the inevit-
able result —and I know it has occurred
in three cases recently—that Dominion
citizens have had to go back to Australia
because they cannot afford to remain
here and pay these higher taxes. I sub-
mit that in this case the needs of the
Mother Country ought not to be adduced
as a reason why we should penalise the
very men who are paying twice over for
the Armies of the British Empire.
Heaven knows, if we do not realise now
what the Dominions have done for us, we
never shall. Remember the original Expe-
ditionary Force we sent out to France. It
consisted of four divisions. But the
Dominions before very long provided
nearly 1,000,000 men to fight under the
British Flag for the Sovereign who is
collecting this tax. I hope most sincerely
the Chancellor of the Exchequer will
realise the desirability of granting this
concession, and that at the end of four
years we shall cease practically con-
fiscating the incomes of those people
whose only crime is that they have come
here to this country to live among us, and
in many cases, it may be, in order to be
nearer their relatives who are fighting
on our behalf. I hope the Chancellor
of the Exchequer will see his way to make
this concession.
Sir J. D. REES: My hon. and gallant
Friend has been commendably brief. I will
try to follow his example. Indeed, it is
with some compunction that I rise at all to
speak on this matter, not because I have
not an exceedingly good case, but because
of the fact that I have for some twelve
years been chosen to make representations
on this very question A great many
people from Australia are paying no less
than 16s. 9d. in the £ Income' Tax. That
is a crushing burden, and I know various
companies that are leaving this country,
taking themselves away bag and baggage,
because of that burden. This is a matter
for serious consideration by the Chancellor
of the Exchequer, especially bearing in
mind the admirable service which has been
done by the Colonies throughout this War.
As regards the Indian side of the question,
I confess that the Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer has taken some wind out of my
sails by announcing that the extra Is. will
not be paid where the combined tax in
any part of the Empire is as much as 65.,
and then the tax will remain at 3s. 6d. in
the £.
It must not be supposed that this is a
question which merely affects rich men.
No man can long remain rich if he is called
upon to pay 16s. 9d. in the £ as Income
Tax. But the Indian people affected are
those who often really have no income out
of which to pay this double Income Tax.
Take the case of an Indian Civil servant
who retires on a pension of £l,ooo. He
has paid for £SOO of that out of the Provi-
dent Fund. His income is really reduced
when he gets home to £750. The only
additional income he probably has may
be some small investment in a tea garden
in India. That man is exceedingly hard
hit by this tax, and he is totally unable,
I suggest, to pay such a heavy Income Tax.
I know that the Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer is acquainted with these casea
inside and out. I understand his position
is that, as far as he is concerned, he can-
not remit anything he has got hold of at
the present time. Such a position is per-
fectly intelligible, and one can see that
it is hard for the Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer to let any money go at a time like:
this. I will not trouble the right hon.
Gentleman, therefore, by repeating the
arguments I have raised on many previous
occasions. I will only beg of him, as soon
as he ipossibly can, to remedy this injustice,
and in the meantime, perhaps, he will con-
sider whether, from a revenue point of
view, he is not losing more than he is gain-
ing by driving capital out of the Empire
by the enforcement of this double Income
Tax.
Mr. P. A. HARRIS:! do not think hon.
Members who are pressing this matter are
serving their cause well by moving an
Amendment in this extreme form. The
concession which has Been made on two
cohsecutive Budgets is a recognition of a
sound principle on which the Government
have agreed, and, as I understand it, they
are prepared after the War to reconsider
the whole problem from the Imperial point-
of view. Practically the whole of my
income comes from the Colonies, and I
shoaild be loth, as ,one deriving his income
from Colonial sources, to feel that I wa»*


being placed in an exceptionally privileged
position. The concession made this year
is a very considerable one, because,
although the Income Tax has been raised
to 65., the incomes derived from oversea
sources are only to be called upon to pay
the same tax as last year. I think that is
a very generous proposal, and if it were to
be suggested that in a time of war, when
the needs of the Empire are so great and
the necessities of the Exchequer so excep-
tional, special privileges should be given
to Colonials, the result .might be to weaken
rather than to strengthen the Imperial
bond, and it might cause hostility on the
part of the working classes and amongst
business men who derive their incomes
from home sources. I think it is only fair
that the Government and the English
Treasury should get credit for what, all
things considered, is a step in the right
direction, and a step taken during the
War. It is a generous step made more
generous by the fact, and it should be
recognised by those affected by it.
Mr. MACMASTER : I shall also
endeavour to imitate the example of
brevity which preceding speakers have
set, and make my remarks as few as pos-
sible. With regard to taxation, I think
the general underlying principle is that it
should be fair and equal all round, but in
the case of this double tax some incomes
are made to pay twice over, often for the
very same purpose. Take the present
War. Australia and other Dominions are
contributing of their money to carry on
the War just the same as the United
Kingdom. But incomes earned in Aus-
tralia and New Zealand are made liable to
Income Tax twice over when they are for-
warded to this country, and that I submit
is grossly unfair. With regard to the
remedy, I am not hopeful that we shall get
it at this moment, although I do not take
that view for the reason which was
advanced by the last speaker, the burden
of whose song was that this was a time of
emergency and difficulty, and those who
received their incomes from abroad ought
not to desire to be put in a privileged
position by seeking exemption from the
tax. Personally I do not take the view
that they are asking to be put in a privi-
leged position. All they ask for is to be
put in a position of equality with others.
They want equality of position all round.
What they contend is that the imposition
of this double tax is nothing more or less
than legalised robbery. I understand that
the Chancellor of the Exchequer has got
all the money 'he really wants this year,
or is in the way to get it. It should be
remembered that at the last Conference
it was placed on record by the Government
that this was a very unjust and unfair
tax, and that being so, It does seem to me
we are entitled to look forward to be
relieved of it at the earliest possible
moment. No doubt any Government that
may be in power in this country when the
War ends will take the proper steps to
rectify this outrageous injustice. But I
want to recall the attention of the Com-
mittee to the fact that a good deal of dis-
cussion took place at the Conference, and
the resolution which was carried unani-
mously was to the effect that the present
imposition of the double duty is unsatis-
factory and that, at the conclusion of the
War, immediate steps should be taken in
order to rectify the injustice. I am pre-
pared to rely on that.
Mr. J. MASON: I have no personal ex-
perience of the effect of the double Income
Tax within the Empire, and if I intervene
for a moment It is because I
8.0 p.m. feel that the continuation of
a grievance of this kind —and
1 think it is very properly looked on by
a great many people as an unjust arrange-
ment —is a very serious matter, even in
time of war. I cannot help feeling that,
although the Chancellor of the Exchequer
cannot go all the way, this question really
ought not to be left very much longer.
According to the figures, I am told that in
Australia the Estate Tax and the Common-
wealth Tax added here amount in the
maximum to 6s. 3d., and if you add on the
English tax as it remains in this Budget,
3s. 6d., that makes 11s. 9d. without the
Super-tax, which, of course, is a very
severe burden compared with what we
have to pay in this country. The point I
want to make is that it seems to me the
Australians’ position is clearly worsened
by the fact that they have a very heavy
Excess Profits Tax as well, and the effect
of the Excess Profits Tax, added to the
Income Tax, is to make the position of
these people almost impossible. lam told
that the Excess Profits Tax in Australia
is 75 per cent., so that out of a given
private income in Australia 75 per cent,
is deducted,, and then the other 25 per
cent, has deducted from It here 80 per


cent, for Excess Profits Tax, and the i
remainder is subject to this Income Tax. |
That seems to be a position so intolerable
that it ought to be dealt with, and not left
until after the War.
Sir C. KINLOCH-COOKE : I should like
to support the Amendment, because 1
have taxon an interest in this .matter for
many years, and because 1 think it is time
something should be done to improve the
position. I will ask the Chancellor of the
Exchequer whether he cannot see his way
to remit the tax in the case of persons
whose money is earned in the Dominions,
and whose profits are invested in the
Dominions, in cases where no money
whatever comes to the country. That is a
very small matter. I have been into the
case very carefully with those persons
who have come over here, and who have
asked me if I would make that suggestion
to the Chancellor of the Exchequer. I
do not think I am asking a very great
thing. I also think that it is perfectly true,
as many Members have said, that there are
people who wish to stay in this country,
but who have been obliged to go back to
Australia and Canada owing to this ques-
tion of double Income Tax. Another
matter which has been pointed out to me
on more than one occasion is that trade
itself is leaving the for the
same reason. I think that in these days,
when we are called upon to do as much
as we can to bring together the Dominions
and the Motherland, it is most un-
fortunate that we should continue double
Income Tax, which cannot do anything
other than fend to separate the two.
Mr. BONAR LAW : All my hon. Friends
who have spoken on this Amendment have
been so brief that I feel the least I can do
is to make a very short speech in reply,
and I am sure they will not think that the
brevity of my remarks now is any indica
tion that I do not realise the seriousness of
this problem. Although my hon. and
gallant Friend the Member for Christ-
church (General Croft) is right in saying
that I thoroughly sympathise with the pur-
pose of this Amendment, it is not the fact
that I should be ready to adopt an Amend-
ment of this kind. I quite recognise that
one of the greatest needs from a financial
point of view, and one of the things at
Which we should aim most strongly, is that
when the time comes for sending money
abroad again every inducement should be
given to investors in the Empire, so as to
strengthen the Empire with the money
that goes there rather than that it should
go to foreign countries. That is one reason
why I have always been in favour of doing
something with regard to double Income
Tax. There are two considerations, and
they are the only two 1 am going to put
before the Committee, which should make
one hesitate on an Amendment of this
kind. The first is that there is a great
deal to be said from the point of view of an
Australian who comes to reside in England
and who has to pay not only on the money
spent here but on the money made in
Australia, and which never comes home to
him at all. But there is another case
where I am not at all sure the claim is
equally good. Take any individual,
myself or anyone else. An investment is
held out to us in some Dominion; In
deciding whether we will accept that offer
we look in the main, if we are not influ-
enced by patriotic considerations, to two
things—the net return to us, and the
safety of the investment we are making.
As a matter of fact, in spite of the Income
Tax in these Dominions, in many cases it
is true, 1 am informed, that the actual
return which I would receive, in spite of
this double Income Tax, on money invested
in the Colonies is higher than the return
I would receive from money invested in
this country at the present time. You
have, therefore, to put that particular
aspect of it out of your mind in discussing
this question. In other words, you have
to look at the big issue, which is strength-
ening the Empire by investing money in
it. In looking at the unfairness of making
an Australian who chooses to come -to
London and reside here pay in all cases
full double Income Tax you must put that
on one side, and you not to treat
in the same way the individual who simply
has an investment and sends his money
to the Colonies. You have to consider,
therefore, whether, taking all the facts into
account, he gets a fair and reasonable
return for his money in spite of the taxa-
tion to which he is subjected. There is
one other consideration, but one which is
very important.
I quite admit that this double Income
Tax system ought not to continue an hour
longer than the end of the War. We ought
to put an end to it as soon as we possibly
can; but 1 do not accept, and I am quite
i sure that the Dominion Prime Ministers


would not accept, the principle of this
Amendment as a right one. That principle
is that in doing away with this double
Income Tax the whole burden is to fall on
the British Exchequer. 1 do not think
that is right. It ought to be a question of
adjustment, and the two counries should
decide between themselves in what way
the giving up of taxation is to be borne. I
know, as a matter of fact, that that is the
view taken by the Dominion Prime
Ministers themselves. They feel it is a
question for proper adjustment. It is
quite true, as my hon. and gallant Friend
the Member for Christchurch said, that
whether money is raised by an Income
Tax in Australia or in Great Britain it is
equally spent on the War. That is quite
true, but we have to consider the burden
that is laid on the different parts of the
Empire as the result of the War. I would
not yield to anyone in my admiration of
what the Dominions have done, though
what has been done by this country is
worthy of admiration too. There is this
difference: They are far away and we are
the centre, and I feel the part they have
taken in the War is such as would never
have been anticipated. I recognise that
fully, but you have to think of the position
after the War. This War is laying on all
belligerents a financial burden which is
terrible in its intensity. I do not wish to
exaggerate it. I never have—indeed, I ■
have always felt that the want of money j
would never stop the War before we had
achieved our object; but do not let us
make any mistake. It is going to leave i
a very heavy burden, however it is
adjusted, for many generations as a result
of this War. I am, therefore, quite sure
my hon. Friends will agree that from that
point of view what you have to consider,
treating the Empire as a whole, as we all
wish to do, is how each partner is best
able to bear the burden which falls after
the War, and from that point of view I do
not think anyone has* any doubt that when
you consider the , immense natural
resources of our Dominions they will be
able to bear their share at least quite as
well as the Mother Country will bear her
share. There is one other consideration
that I would put to my hon. and gallant
Friend who moved this Amendment —and
I feel sure he will not press it to a Division
as he did last year —and that is that we
are putting on additional taxation to the
extent of a full year of 114 millions. W f e
■are not asking anyone who pays double
Income Tax to pay any part of this
additional Income Tax. I really tnink
that as Chancellor of the Exchequer 1
would not be justified in going further
than in relieving them of all this addi-
tional taxation, and I hope that my non.
Friends who feel strongly on this point
will agree ‘that I have done as much as
j I can.
I General CROFT; With every desire to
try to meet my right hon. Friend’s view,
may I ask if he will give us any under-
taking that the matter will once more be
placed before the Imperial Conference;
and will the Chancellor himself undertake
to see that there is an opportunity given
to the Prime Ministers to reconsider the
question, at any rate, so that when the
I Budget comes round next year the Chan-
cellor will not have to tell us, “ In another
year’s time”?
Mr. BONAR LAW: I think that is
asking a great deal. I will undertake to
say that the subject will be discussed by
the Prime Ministers; hut what my hon.
and gallant Friend really asks is that 1
should invite them to deprive me of the
argument that I have used from year to
year.
Mr. BRyCE: I think we are all
grateful to the Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer tor not having increased the
burden under this Clause this year, but I'
do not think he was very fortunate in his
answer to the arguments which have been
adduced, because the main part of them
does not affect this question at all. The
relative powers of this country, and of
the Colonies, to bear taxation after the
War does not affect the demand for a
modification of this particular tax at this
particular moment. I would like very
much to ask whether the Treasury is
taking particulars now of the amount of
Revenue they are likely to lose by driving
the concerns which are now conducted in
this country, and are liable to double
taxation, out of the country. I believe
they will find that a great deal will be
lost to the counry by reason of the fact
that concerns hitherto managed in this
country, and which deal with Colonial
money earned in the Colonies, are largely
leaving this country, owing to the burden
of this taxation, and getting themselves
managed abroad, where they are doing
their business ? It seems to me we have


never been able to find out exactly how
much money is being earned by these
taxes. I have asked several times, and
we have always been told that it was not
possible to obtain the figure. I suppose
the adjustment is very slow, as it was a
new thing on the present scale, and there
must have been great difficulties in realis-
ing exactly how the incidence of the tax
would operate, but day this time, as the
tax has been running for two years, I
think some knowledge ought to have been
obtained, and we ought to 'Be able to know
exactly what is being realised by it. I
think the hon. and gallant Member for
Christchurch said that he thought it would
amount to sonneting like nine hours of
the War. I should have thought it was
less, but the Treasury ought by this tune
to be able to tell us something about What
it is, and it seems to me that they ought
to be making inquiries with regard to
the amount of money which is likely to be
lost by driving out of this country busi-
nesses hitherto managed here.
Amendment, by leave, withdrawn.


IReceipts.
£
s.
d.
Balance brought forward from
last Account —
On Deposit ... ... £600 0
0
On Current Account ... 283 19
2*
883
19
2
Subscriptions received to date ...
... 1,281
16
0
Interest on Deposit
22
1
5
£2,187
16
7
payments.
£
s.
d.
Printing and Stationery
20
4
0
Advertising
365
1
9
Typing, etc.
4
15
9
Office, Secretarial and Clerical Expenses
(Including Bank Charges)
517
14
1
Postages and Incidentials
41
15
9
Balance at Bank —
On Deposit
i—■
o
o
o
o
o
On Current Account ...
... 238 5 3
1,238
o.
£2,187
16
7
APPENDIX NO. III.
The Association to Protest against the Duplication of Income Tax within the Empire.
Receipts and Expenditure Account for the period from the Ist November, 1917 to the 31st December, 1918.
Audited and found correct,
FULLER, WISE, KIRBY & FISHER, Chartered Accountants ,
Bassishaw House, Basingliall Street, E.C. 2.
HENRY BULL, Honorary Treasurer. oOth January , 1919.


LIST OF SUBSCRIPTIONS
from November 1st, 1918, to December 31st, 1919.
£ s. d.
Austin, Miss Mary E. ... ... 110
Austin, Miss Ada A. 110
Amalgamated Zinc (de Bavay’s), Ltd. 10 10 0
Anderson, Sir John ... 2 2 0
Air, David 2 2 0
Air, David, Jr. 2 2 0
Aoton-Adams, W., J.P. 2 2 0
Australian Agricultural Co., Ltd.... 5 0 0
Australian Mercantile Land &
Finance Co., Ltd ... 10 10 0
Anderson, Duncan S. ... ... 2 2 0
Australian Pastoral Co., Ltd. ... 21 0 0
Adelaide Electric Supply Co., Ltd. 5 5 0
Auckland Electric Tramway Co.,
Ltd 10 10 0
Australian Estates & Mortgage Co.,
Ltd 21 0 0
African City Properties Trust, Ltd. 110
Addams, Mrs. Frances M 5 0
Associated Gold Mines of Western
Australia, Ltd. 3 3 0
Associated Northern Blocks (W.A.),
Ltd 5 5 0
African Banking Corporation, Ltd. 10 10 0
Air, David 2 2 0
British Australasian Society ... 10 10 0
Bray, Mrs. A. A. ... 110
Burrows, Mrs. S. Montagu 10 0
Braund, Fredk 5 5 0
Burns, Philp & Co., Ltd. ... ... 10 10 0
Bostock, E. & Co., Ltd. 5 5 0
Browne, Leonard G 110
Birch, George ... 2 2 0
Buchanan, George 110
Buchanan, Mrs. G. ... ... ... 110
Bolus, W., & Co., Ltd 5 5 0
Bray, Mrs. Rachel ... ... ... 110
Blondel, Mrs. F. M 110
Brown Bros., Ltd. ... 2 2 0
Bank of Australasia ... 10 10 0
Briscoe & Co., Ltd 10 10 0
Borthwick, Thos., i& Sons, Ltd. ... 21 0 0
Bridge, Mrs. Violet 2 2 0
Bullivant & Co., Ltd. 1 1 1 0
Bull, H. & Co., Ltd. 10 10 0
Broken Hill Proprietary Co., Ltd.... 10 10 0
Barsi Light Railway Co., Ltd. ... 5 6 0
Bush, R. E ’. 2 2 0
Bayne, W. P 110
Bergl Australia, Ltd. 3 3 0
Bright, Major R. G. T 10 0
Binnie, Herbert 5 0 0
Brown, Brough & Co. 2 2 0
Brooks. Robert & Co., Ltd. • ... 6 5 0
Bryant & May, Ltd 6 5 0
Bank of Adelaide 10 10 0
Brooks, H., & Co. ... ... ... 5 5 0
Curtis, H. ... 2 2 0
Caldwell, Mrs. Gordon 110
Connell, J., & Co., Ltd 2 2 0
Cohen, D., & Co., Ltd 10 10 0
Crombie, Charles H. 110
Cauter, Mrs. J. 10 0
Chartered Bank of India, Australia
& China 10 10 0
Cook, Thos. & Son 110
Carried forward ... 308 6 0
£ s. d.
Brought forward ... 308 6 0
Chamber of Shipping of the United
Kingdom 2 2 0
Cape Electric Tramways, Ltd. ... 3 3 0
Courtis, E. 3 3 0
Colonial Ammunition Co., Ltd. ... 10 10 0
Collins, Sons & Co., Ltd 1 1 0
Dixon Investment Co., Ltd. ... 5 5 0
Dyer & Dyer ... ... ... ... 10 10 0
Donaldson, Mrs. Blanch L. ... 10 0
Dutton, Frank M ... 3 0 0
Dawson, H. & Co 110
Dalgety & Co., Ltd ... 21 0 0
Davis, Moss 5 6 0
Dreyfus & Co., Ltd. ... 10 10 0
Dismoir, J. S. ... ... ... ... 2 2 0
Duff, Thos., & Co., Ltd 5 5 0
Duncan, Walter & Co. 10 10 0
Dickinson & Co., Ltd. 10 0 0
Dunn, Wm., & Co., Ltd 10 10 0
Ellis, A. F. G. 10 0
English, Scottish & Australian Bank,
Ltd 10 10 0
Eastern Extension, Australasian &
China Telegraph Co., Ltd. ... 15 15 0
Emanuel, I. S 10 0 0
Emanuel, S. P. 10 0 0
Electric Supply Co, of Victoria,
Ltd 3 3 0
Fooks, D. W 2 2 0
Finlay, James, & Co., Ltd., ... 10 0 0
Fowler, D. & J., Ltd. ... .. 5 5 0
Fraser, J. C 2 2 0
Falk, P., & Co., Ltd. 3 3 0
Fooks, D. W. ... ... 220
Fowlie & Boden 2 2 0
Fink, Mrs. B. J. 2 2 0
Gray, Melville 2 0 0
Gardiner, W., & Co., Ltd. .. ... 21 0 0
Graham, W. E. 110
Goode, Durrant & Co., Ltd 15 0 0
Gibbs, Antony, & Sons 21 0 0
Glass, Miss Rachel P. 110
Grahams & Co. 2 2 0
Gee, G. F. ... ... ... ... 1 1 o
Gollin & Co. Proprietary, Ltd. ... 10 10 0
Gordon, Hamilton ... ' 5 5 0
Great Boulder Proprietary Gold
Mines, Ltd 5 5 0
Glass, Miss Kate V 110
Goldsbrouch, Mort & Co., Ltd. ... 10 10 0
General Electric Co., Ltd 5 5 0
Game, J. A 2 2 0
Hall, Capt. H. W 5 0 0
Hill, Geo. 110
Hall, Capt. W. D 5 5 0
Howard, Walter 110
Hawley, F. A 10 10 0
Holt, Alfred, & Co 2 2 0
Hoffnung, S., & Co., Ltd 10 10 0
Hawley, Arthur 5 5 0
Hays, Akers & Hays ... 550
Hall, Capt. H. W 5 0 0
Hicks, H. G !. 110
Hall, Mrs. Jane 5 0 0
Henderson, Adm. J. M 10 0
Carried forward ... 665 12 0


£ b. d.
Brought forward ... 665 12 0
Horton, R. C 2 0 0
Harris, Wolf ... ... ... ••• 5 5 0
Ingold, J. 1 110
Industrial & General Trust, Ltd. ... 5 6 0
Ivanhoe Gold Corporation, Ltd. ... 10 10 0
Joshua, A. 5 0 0
Jones, Miss E. 110
Joensson, A. ... ... ... ••• 3 3 0
Jonas, H. N 6 5 0
Kingsley, Mrs. M. Bell 110
Kelly, Mrs. J. D 2 0 0
Kitchin, J. 10 10 0
Keymer, D. T 2 2 0
Kiore Sheep Farming Co., Ltd. ... 5 0 0
Kimberley Waterworks Co., Ltd.... 5 5 0
King, Mrs. H. D. 110
Little, H. F. de 2 2 0
Littleton, Hon. H. S. 5 0 0
Lockwood, T ... 110
Lewis, Miss M. A. ... 1 0 0
Laughland, Mackay & Co., Ltd. ... 2 2 0
Laing, Montagu 110
Lever Bros., Ltd. ’ 10 10 0
Lawrie, Alex., & Co 5 50
Leuchars, J. W. 10 10 0
Lake View & Oraya Exploration,
Ltd 10 10 0
Melbourne Electric Supply Co., Ltd. 10 10 0
Mackenzie, H. P., R.N 5 5 0
Mosenthal, Sons, & Co., Ltd. ... 21 0 0
Murray, Wm 5 5 0
McLeod, Sir Charles C 10 10 0
Macdonald, Claude A. 110
Morton Bros 110
McMorran, T 3 3 0
Melbourne Trust, Ltd. 5 5 0
MacDonald, E. 2 2 0
Markwald, H. H., & Co., Ltd. ... 2 2 0
Makower, E. M. 10 10 0
Mt. Boppy Gold Mining Co., Ltd. 2 2 0
MacGregor, R. D 3 3 0
Millars Timber and Trading Co.,
Ltd 10 10 0
Micklem, Lionel 0 3 3 0
Michaelis, Hallenstein & Co., Pro-
prietary, Ltd. 10 0 0
McArthur, W. & A., Ltd 10 10 0
Mitchell, Cotts & Co. 5 5 0
McDonald, Scales & Co 110
Menzies Consolidated Gold Mines,
Ltd 2 2 0
Nicholas, Mrs. A. M. 110
Nathan, J. (& Co., Ltd. •* 5 5 0
New Zealand Loan & Mercantile
Agency. Ltd. 10 10 0
National Bank of New Zealand, Ltd. 15 15 0
Natal Land & Colonisation Co., Ltd. 5 5 0
Niven, Geo 110
Nimmo, J. D 3 3 0
North Queensland Mortgage & In-
vestment Co., Ltd. 3 3 0
New Zealand Shipping Co., Ltd. ... 10 10 0
North British & Hawkes Bay
Freezing Co., Ltd. 5 5 0
New Zealand & Australian Land
Co -> Lt' 3 21 0 0
Carried forward ... 987 10 0
£ s. d.
Brought forward ... 987 10 0
N. Z. Farmers Co-operative Asscn.
of Canterbury, Ltd. 6 0 0
Owen, Genl. Sir John F., K.C.B. ... 110
Oetzes & Gerritsen 2 2 0
Peel, C. 3 0
Paterson, Laing & Bruce, Ltd. ... 10 10 0
Porch, A. E. E. ... ... ••• 110
Queensland National Bank, Ltd. ... 5 5 0
Rogers, E. P. ... ... ••• ••• 2 2 0
Reid Bros. (Johannesburg), Ltd. ... 5 5 0
Roberts, Rev. Arthur C 110
Raw, Geo. H. ... ... ••• 3 3 0
Reid, Robert, & Co., Ltd 10 10 0
Renton, J. H ... 2 2 0
Stephen, Thos. 2 2 0
Sargood, Lady ... ... ••• 22 0
Sargood, Miss J. C. ... 2 2 0
Smith, Mrs. W. ... 22 0
Shirres, Charles 2 2 0
Samnuggur Jute Factory Co., Ltd. 5 5 0
Sytner, A. H 110
South Australian Land, Mortgage
& Agency Co. 5 0 0
South African Breweries, Ltd. ... 10 10 0
Sulphide Corporation, Ltd 21 0 0
Scott, E. 2 2 0
Selwyn, Mrs 110
South Australian Co 5 5 0
Standard Bank of South Africa, Ltd. 21 0 0
Spicer Bros., Ltd 55 0
Tennent, Mrs. D. ... ... ... 2 2 0
Townend, G. & W 5 5 0
Titaghur Jute Factory Co., Ltd. ... 5 5 0
Trustees Corporation, Ltd. ... ... 5 5 0
Taylor, A. W. Forbes 110
Tucker, R., i& Co. (Australia), Ltd. 5 5 0
Transvaal Estates and Development
Co., Ltd 5 50
Truscott, Sir G. Wyatt, Bart. ... 5 5 0
Terry, E. W., & Co. Ltd. ... ... 5 5 0
Union Bank of Australia, Ltd. ... 10 10 0
Victoria Falls and Transvaal Power
Co., Ltd 5 50
Victoria Jute Co., Ltd. 3 3 0
Wills, G. T 5 5 0
Wallace, Peter B. ... 110
Woods, Wm. E. ... ... ... 3 3 0
Walker, F. J., & Co 5 5 0
Wills, C. P 6 0 0
Wylde, Lieut.-Gen. E. A 110
Wise, G. T 110
Weddel, W., & Co., Ltd 5 5 0
Western Australian Insurance Co.,
Ltd 10 10 0
Wills, J. H.* 5 5 0
White’s South African Cement Co.,
Ltd 3 3 0
Watt, Gilchrist & Co. 10 10 0
Whitney, E 110
Walker, Munsie £ Co. 5 5 0
Wellsbach Light Co. of Australasia,
Ltd 5 5 0
Williams, Wm. T 110
Yule, G. & Co. 5 5 0
Yuills, Ltd. ... 10 10 0
Zinc Corporation, Ltd. 10 10 0
1281 16 0


