







COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
ADVISORY COUNCIL OF SCIENCE AND INDUSTRY.
REPORT
OF THE
EXECUTIVE COMMITTE
OF THE
COMMONWEALTH ADVISORY COUNCIL OF SCIENCE
AND INDUSTRY,
COVERING THE PERIOD FROM THE DATE OF THE APPOINTMENT OF THE EXECUTIVE
COMMITTEE (14th APRIL, 1916) TO THE 30th JUNE, 1917.
Prepared under the Authority of
THE RIGHT HON. W. M. HUGHES, P.C., M.P. PRIME MINISTER
(CHAIRMAN OF THE ADVISORY COUNCIL).
Melbourne, 2nd July, 1917.
By Authority
ALBERT J. MULLETT, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
C. 7963.




COMMONWEALTH ADVISORY COUNCIL OF SCIENCE AND INDUSTRY.
REPORT OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE, 1916-17.
CONTENTS.
PART I.—INTRODUCTION.
PAGI
1. General .. .. .. •• •• •• •• •• •• *• ®
2. The Executive Commit tee
3. The State Committees .. .. .. .. • • • • • • • • • • • • ®
PART lI.—THE POLICY AND NATURE OF THE WORK OF THE EXECUTIVE
COMMITTEE.
1. Collection of Information.. .. .. .. •• •• •• •• •• •* 'I
2. Establishment of Relations with other Authorities
3. Encouragement and Co-ordination of Researches already in Progress
4. Initiation of New Researches
PART lII.—COLLECTION OF INFORMATION.
1. The Problem Census .. .. • • • • • • • • • • * * ’ * * • ®
2. The Industrial Census .. .. • • • • • • • • • • • • • * " !:
3. Laboratories for Scientific Research and their Personnel .. .. .. •• •• ••
4. The Training and Supply of future Scientific Investigators .. .. • • • • • • • • ly
5. Technical Education and the Training of Artisans .. .. .. •• •• •• ••
" f . Register of Research Work in Progress in Laboratories .. .. • • • • • • J*
7. Register of Experimental Work in Progress at Government Experimental Farms .. • • • • *2
8. Miscellaneous Matters .. .. • • • • • • • • • • • • * * * *
PART IV.—INVESTIGATIONAL WORK.
A.—SPECIAL COMMITTEES.
1. Procedure followed .. • • • • • • • • • • • • •• * * " , „
2. Special Committees appointed .. .. • • • • • • • * * * * *
3. General Progress of Work
B.—AGRICULTURAL AND PASTORAL INDUSTRIES.
1. The Control and Eradication of Pests and Diseases of Stock and of Crops .. .. • • • • I*>
(i) Tick Pest .. .. • • • • • • • • • * " *' ' * 1 „
(ii) Worm Nodules in Cattle .. .. •• •• •• •• •• •• *' _
(iii) Tubercu’osis in Stock .. .. .. • • • • • • • • * * * * , g
(iv) Sparrows .. .. • • • • • • • • • • • * * ’ ’ * ",
(v) Insects damaging Grain in Store .. .. • • • • • • • • • • ” rj:
2. The Control and Eradication of Weed Pests .. .. • • • • • • • • * * P:
(i) Prickly Pear .. .. • • • • • • * • * • •' * * * * 21
3. The Cultivation of New or Improved Crops .. • • • • • • • • • • * * Zz
(i) Cotton .. . • • • • • • • • ■ • • • • ' ‘ ‘ ” 23
4. Miscellaneous .. . • • • • • • • • • * • " " ” 2 .
(i) Soil Survey of Australia .. .. • • .«• • • * * ’' " ’ * 2 4
(ii) Branding of Cattle
C—FOREST AND VEGETABLE PRODUCTS.
1. The Utilization of Native Vegetable Products • • • • • • " * *
2. Timber and Timber Products .. • • • • • • • * • • " *' ”
(i) Wood Pulp .. .. .. • • • • • • • • • • • ‘ ‘' 2 g
(ii) Destructive Distillation .. • • • • • • • • * • * * ‘' 2 g
(iii) Utilization of Waste Timber .. • • • • • • • • * * * * " 2 g
3. Sources of Tannin .. .. • • • • • • • • * • " ’ ‘ *' 2^
(i) Mangroves .. .. • • • • • • * • * * ' * ” " 2 ?
(ii) Redgum .. .. • • • • • • • • • * * • ' ’ ” ' ’ 2 g
4. Other Vegetable Extracts.. .. . • • • • • • • • • * * * * * * 2g
(i) D y eB •• •• •' *• '• •' “ " “ ” “ 28
(ii) Camphor .. . • . • • • • • • • ' * * * * 2 g
(iii) Grass-tree..
D.—FISHERIES.
1. General .. • • • • • • • • • • • * ' * * * ’ ‘ ” 2 g
2. Tropical Fisheries .. .. • • • • • • • • * * ’ * ’ * *' 2 g
(i) Pearling .. • • • • • • * * ’ * ’ * ’' *29
(ii) B§che*de-mer •. • • • • • • • • * * ’ * “ " 2 9
(iii) Trochus .. • • • • • • • • • • * * * * ’ * " ’ * 2 g
(iv) Sponges ..
1 2


E.—MINING AND METALLURGY.
1. Metals
(i) Ferro-Alloys .. .. .. * ” ’' ' ’ " * * ‘
(ii) Occurrence of Gold in Quartz .. “ “ ‘ ’ ” " " 01
2. Non-metals .. ~ ' ‘ *' " ” * *
*T» - •• • ••
F.—CHEMICAL INDUSTRY.
1. General „ 9
2. Fertilizers .. .. .. * ’ “ * ’ * * *" ‘' ’ * * * „ 9
(il Alunite .. .. ’* *’ ** ” ’* *’ " " o.
3. Other Chemicals .. .. *' ” " ’' * * ' * ’ *
G—OTHER SECONDARY INDUSTRIES.
1. Leather and Tanning .. „„
2. Food supply .. .. .. ;; ;; ; ;
(i) Electrical Sterilization of Milk .. .. .. ' ’ ’ ’ ’' 07
(ii) Yeasts and Bread-making .. ' ’ * ‘' „ s
3. Pottery .. .. . * " " ” ” *’ ’* f
4. Paper-making .. .. * * ” *' ‘ * ” “ * *
(i) Marram Grass ;, .. * ’ “ ” ' ‘ * * * * * ’ " f
5. Textiles ~ ~ ’ * “ ” * * * ’ * * * * * *
(i) Posidonia ~ .. ’' ‘' “ ’ ’ " “ ’ ’ * * “9
6. Engineering .. .. .. ’ ’ “ " * * ** * * * * * *
(i) The Design and Manufacture of Alcohol Engines a 1
(“) The Supply of Alcohol .. ~ .. " * ‘ ‘ ....
(iii) The Denaturation Problem .. .. .. . , '" ' '' A 9
7. Miscellaneous .. .. .. ’ * ’ ’ * * * * ’ * * * * *
(i) Feathers .. ~ .. ’’ ’ ’ ‘ * * ’ * * ‘ * " ’ •
(ii) Pith Cane.. .. .. " ' " *’ ■’ ** **
H.—STANDARDIZATION.
1. General ......
2. Analytical Methods in Chemical Industry .. ' ’ f.
3. Design of Scientific Apparatus .. .. ’ ’ ’' * ‘ *' ’ ’ * * ’' V"
4. Appraisement of Alcohol in Spirituous Liquors * ’’ ’’ . n
5. Metric System .. .. .. ‘' *’ ** * ‘ * * • • * •
6. Standardization in Electrical Industry ~ .. '' "" * *
»
PART V.—-THE BUREAU OF INFORMATION.
1. General
2. Commonwealth Catalogue of Scientific Periodicals .. ’ ‘ ‘
Preparation of Abstracts and Bibliographies .... ....
4. Index of Scientific Journals .. .. ' ’ "" * ’ ' * ' aL
5. Publication of Bulletins .. .. ’ ’ " ‘' ’ * * * " * * * • 48
•• •• •• .. •• . . 4:8
PART VI.—THE STATE COMMITTEES.
1. New South Wales ....
2. Victoria .. .. .. ’ " ' * * * ’ * * * ’ • • • 48
3. Queensland .. .. .. ” ” ’ * " " • • 49
4. South Australia .. .. .. '' * ’ " ' * * ’ * * * •
5. Western Australia ~ ~ ] ’ * ” * ’ * * * * " • • ®2
6. Tasmania .. ” ‘' ’ * * ‘ " • • .. 53
63
PART VII.—FINANCE.
1. General ......
2. Expenditure .. .. .. .. * * * ’ * ’ ‘ * • * • • 54
PART VIII.—CONCLUSION.
1. The Organization and Work of the Permanent Institute
2. Staff .. .. ~ .. '‘ * * •• • • • • • • 55
3. Acknowledgment ~ .. .. " * * * ‘ * • • • • • 56
CONTENTS— continued.
PART IV.—INVESTIGATIONAL WORK — continued.


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
ADVISORY COUNCIL OF SCIENCE AND INDUSTRY.
REPORT OE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE FOR THE YEAR
1916-17.
PART I.—INTRODUCTION.
1. General.— The Advisory Council was originally appointed by order of the
Governor-General in Council on the 16th March, 1916. Since that date certain
additional appointments have been made, so that the Council now consists of 35 members
representative of both Science and Industry, and includes members from all the
Australian States. It is a temporary body, designed to prepare the ground for a proposed
permanent Institute of Science and Industry, and to exercise in a preliminary way e
functions that will in future belong to the Institute. {See Report of the Drafting
Committee of the Conference convened by the Prime Minister m January, 191 b.) the
chief of these functions are —
“ (i) To consider and initiate scientific researches in connexion with, or for
the promotion of, primary or secondary industries in the Common-
wealth ” ; and “ (ii) the collection of industrial scientific information
and the formation of a Bureau for its dissemination amongst those
engaged in industry.”
The Advisory Council itself has held only two meetings, viz., the inaugural
meeting on the 14th and 15th April, 1916, and one called on the 4th August, 1916, for
the reception of reports. Its work has been done by means of Committees.
Two reports have already been presented by the Executive Committee. The
former of these, dated the 21st June, 1916, was issued in pursuance of the resolution
passed on the 15th April, 1916, at the first meeting of the Advisory Council to the
effect that the Executive should prepare a Report on proposed organization and future
procedure. By the time the second meeting of the Advisory Council was held (4th
August 1916), considerable progress had been made since the date of the first Report.
A further Report, dated the Ist August, 1916, was accordingly presented at the second
meeting. #
The obiects for which the temporary organization was established, pending the
organization of the proposed permanent Institute of Science and Industry, have now
been largely carried out, and as the 30th June, 1917, marks the termination of the
first complete financial year for which the Executive Committee has been in existence,
the present Report, which surveys the work carried out since its inception, is
furnished.
2. The Executive Committee. —In accordance with instructions given by the
then Acting Prime Minister, the Advisory Council at its first meeting elected an Executive
Committee of six members.’ It was decided that the Prime Minister, or m his absence
the Vice-President of the Executive Council, should be Chairman of the Executive
Committee. In addition, it was decided that the Chairman of each State Committee
should be ex officio a member of the Executive in order to keep the various Committees
in touch with one another. Such ex officio members were to receive copies of the
Executive’s minutes, and to keep in touch with it by correspondence, but were not
expected to attend its ordinary meetings except when they happened to visit Melbourne.
Similarly, the Executive receives copies of the minutes of each State Committee.


The members of the Executive Committee are as follow, viz. :
Members of Executive Committee, 30th June, 1917.
Chairman: The Rt. Hon. W. M. Hughes, P.C., M.P., Prime Minister; or,
in his absence, Senator the Hon. E. D. Millen, Vice-President of the
Executive Council.
Deputy Chairman : Professor D. Orme Masson, M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S,
G. D. Delprat. E. A. Mann, F.I.C.
Professor T. R. Lyle, M.A., Sc.D., A. B. Piddington, K.C.
™^Professor R. D. Watt, M.A., B.Sc.
Ex Officio Members {Chairmen of State Committees) .
New South Wales : F. Leverrier, K.C.
Victoria : Professor T. R. Lyle, M.A., Sc.D., F.R.S.
Queensland : Major Alex. J. Gibson, A.M.I.G.E.*
South Australia : Professor E. Rennie, M.A., D.Sc.
Western Australia : Professor J. W. Paterson, B.Sc., Ph.D.
Tasmania ; Captain J. H, Butters.
* Mr. J. B. Henderson, F.1.C., is Acting Chairman during Major Gibson’s absence in England.
Up to the 30th June, 1917, the Executive Committee had held altogether 92
meetings, its rule being to meet on one or two evenings of each week. Each meeting
has occupied, on the average, 2J hours. The nature of the business transacted will
appear below.
, .. , ] 3 :. Tlle ,, St , at ® Com mittees.- At the first meeting of the Advisory Council it was
decided that all of its members resident in any one State should form a local Committee
to co-operate with the Central Executive, especially in relation to questions involving
local industries By arrangement with the Commonwealth Government, certain
additional members of the Advisory Council were added to the original list, so as to
nsure that there should be at least three such members available for the formation
of each State Committee and it was decided that the chairman of each of these should
be ex offieio a member of the Executive, as explained above. Further procedure was
ormu ated whereby any State Committee could be strengthened by the appointment of
ssociate Members, representative of particular branches of Science or Industry. The
Associate Members of the State Committees are not members of the Advisory Council.
„„ ai j Commltte « ha - s been established in each State. Considerable delay
occurred before some of them were constituted and put in a position to begin work"
but such delay was due to causes beyond the control of the Advisory Comicil or its
ecutave Committee. In each case economical arrangements have been made for the
use of an office and for an honorary secretary or the part-time services of a paid secretary •
St^r^vernmeutf 6 AdvlSoly Counoil is indebted in tb ese matters to the favour of the
, if I!' to . be notcd f hat tbes ? so-called State Committees are really local Committees
ii p Federal organization, their members and associate members being appointed by
the Commonwealth Government. They must be clearly distinguished from certain
New Industries and “ Research ” Committees, which have oSated as
organizations in some of the States. ouginarea as separate
The chief functions of the State Committees are to collect locally such information
as may be required by the Executive and to forward to the Executive such recommenda
tions as local knowledge or local inquiries may suggest. They have no independent
cutive or financial powers, but they are an extremely important part of the business
machinery. The Executive Committee already has had ample proof of this and is
onvmced that, in the absence of some such organizations, no central body located in
The State Committees, as at present constituted, are as follow : ‘
Members and Associate Members op State Committees, 30th June, 1917.
New South Wales.
Professor C.E. Fawsitt, D.Sc., Ph.D. D ' W&tt ’ M ' A "’ B ' Sc ‘
F.- L 6 (ChLman). (-f*)-
A. B. Piddington, K.C.
Member).


Victoria.
W. T. Appleton. Professor D. Orme Masson, M.A., D.Sc.,
D. Clark, B.C.E. F.R.S.
G. D. Delprat. Hon. G. Swinburne.
W. Russell Grimwade, B.Sc. W. P. Wilkinson, F.I.C.
J. M. Higgins. Minister for Agriculture {ex officio),
Professor T. H. Laby, M.A. Hon. F. W. Hagelthorn, M.L.C.
Professor T. R. Lyle (Chairman), A. M. Laughton, F.I.A. (Assoc. Member).
M.A., Sc.D., F.R.S. A. E. V. Richardson, B.Sc., M.A. (Assoc.
Member).
Queensland.
G. Banning. N. Bell, A.M.I.C.E. (Assoc. Member).
Major Alex. J. Gibson, A.M.I.C.E. W. R. Crampton (Assoc. Member).
(Chairman). A. V Gibson, D.Sc. (Assoc. Member).
J. B. Henderson, F.I.C. (Acting Chairman). J. Gibson (Assoc. Member).
Minister for Agriculture {ex officio), H. C. Richards, D.Sc. (Assoc. Member,
Hon. W. Lennon, M.L.A. Hon. Sec.)
South Australia.
G. Brookman. Professor E. Rennie, M.A., D.Sc. (Chair-
W. W. Forwood. man).
W. A. Hargreaves, M.A., D.Sc., B.C.E. Minister for Agriculture {ex officio),
Hon. Sir C. Goode, M.H.A.
Western Australia.
E. A. Mann, F.I.C. C. E. Lane-Poole (Assoc. Member).
Professor J. W. Paterson, B.Sc., Ph.D. A. Gibb-Maitland, F.G.S, (Assoc.
(Chairman). Member).
J. W. Sutherland. A. Montgomery, M.A., F.G.S. (Assoc.
Minister for Agriculture {ex officio), Member).
Hon. H. B. Lefroy, M.L.A., C.M.G. G. L. Sutton (Assoc. Member).
M. Fraser (Assoc. Member).
Tasmania.
Captain J. H. Butters (Chairman). Professor J. H. Mackay, M.C.E. (Assoc,
J. L. Glasson, M.A., D.Sc. Member).
H. W. Gepp. H. M. Nicholls (Assoc. Member).
Minister for Agriculture {ex officio), L. Rodway, C.M.G. (Assoc. Member).
Hon. J. B. Hayes, M.H.A. C. H. Slaytor (Assoc. Member).
H. J. Colbourn (Assoc. Member). W. H. Twelvetrees, F.G.S. (Assoc.
Member).
PART II.—THE POLICY AND NATURE OF THE WORK OF THE
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
The nature of the chief work carried out by the Executive Committee and the
general policy which has guided it may be sumrnarized under the heads specified below.
1. Collection of Information for Use of Committees and of Permanent
Institute. —Information has been collected regarding Australian industries and
their distribution, problems connected with them, the equipment and personnel of
laboratories available for industrial scientific research in all its branches, research work
in actual progress in laboratories and experimental work in progress at Government
experimental farms, and the facilities available for the proper training of future scientific
investigators. The results of these inquiries have been analyzed and summarized
in tabular form so far as practicable. Information regarding each of these inquiries,
which will form the basis for future activities of the proposed permanent Institute, is
given in greater detail hereinafter.
2. Establishment of Relations with other Authorities. —These include
State Governments, Scientific and Technical Departments, Universities, Technical
Colleges, Scientific Societies, and Associations and Committees representing the pastoral,


agricultural, manufacturing, and other industries. The policy of the Executive in this
matter is in accordance with the Report of the original Committee of Conference, which
defined the functions of the Commonwealth Institute and included the following among
them ;
(ix) To keep in close touch with, and seek the aid of, all Commonwealth
and State Government Departments, learned and professional societies,
and private enterprises concerned with, or interested in, scientific
industrial research/'
Much still remains to be done in this direction, but much has been done already
(b) by correspondence; (c) by personal interviews between the Executive and various
representatives of Government Departments, Universities, and industrial organizations,
who have by invitation attended meetings in Melbourne; ( d ) by visits which the
Executive has paid to Sydney and Brisbane. During these visits the Committee met
members of the State Governments, as well as many others interested in the Science
and Industry movement, and was able to explain its policy and to elicit cordial approval
and promises of active support. These visits were so helpful in every wav that the
Committee is convinced that similar visits should be paid periodically to the chief
centres in turn.
3. Encouragement and Co-ordination of Researches already in Progress.—
One of the functions of the Institute specified in the Report of the Committee of Conference
(ix) The co-ordination and direction of scientific investigation and of
research and experimental work, with a view to the prevention of
undesirable overlapping of effort/'
In this connexion the following quotation from the speech of the Acting Prime Minister
(senator Pearce) at the first meeting of the Advisory Council may also be given
. Each of the States pursued to some extent research and inquiries into
various questions, and the data they have collected will be available for us ;
and of the things towards which you will naturally first turn your attention'
one of the most important is to ascertain what data are available, so that
ere shal be no overlapping. . . . . Then, again, there are certain bodies
m Commonwealth «£hat have facilities for investigation and scientific
research and we assume that you will take full advantage of the resources of
investigations utl 128 t^iem as as 7 0u can in pursuance of your
Much of the work of the Executive has been of the kind thus indicated. Among the
many problems m industrial science which have come under the notice of the Executive
Committee, probably none are more important to the future of Australia than the
prob ems of increasing the yield of wheat per acre and extending the zone of wheat
/U/Ul fU n T conslder e d too dry. Intimately associated with the latter
he problem of the cultivation of fodder plants in arid regions, with a view to the
? f ”?J ed f f r ™ n ß- f These Problems have received, and are receiving, much
attention in different States from specialists in the employ of the Departments of
Agriculture. Considerable sums are, spent annually on the investigations and much
exce lent work is being done There is, however, a lack of co-ordination andk considerable
IsTbV some ofth e e X/U't haS been — d that th“he
Victoria S Sourt § 7w & e ® Xp ! a ? d otber a gr ioul tural authorities of
ona, New South Wales, and Western Australia, who welcomed the proposal of the
Executive to call a conference in Melbourne for the discussion of wheat selection and
Mhdfe of'l/kdture 01 fodder plants, and allied questions.
cap.* «lkr to give l.rtb.. vlv„ Mom.'Z'X °d


future research or to carry out actual experimental investigations. In the latter case,
the Executive has selected the locality and the institution in which the research shall
be conducted, and has appointed a salaried investigator to assist the Special Committee,
and has voted a reasonable sum for expenses. In this way the Executive believes that
it is adopting the best means to give effect to the wishes of the Government and the
policy of the Committee of Conference, as expressed in its Report to the Prime Minister.
Not only does the course adopted offer a good prospect of the solution, within a reasonable
time and at a comparatively small cost, of problems which are important in connexion
with existing industries or which may lead to the establishment of new ones, but it
affords the best possible means of securing the sympathies of the leading scientists
and industrialists and of the scientific institutions in all parts of Australia, these
being gradually enlisted in the work of the Commonwealth Institute. , Further, the
appointment of young scientists as salaried investigators cannot fail to stimulate the
training of such men and to increase the supply ; and it is obvious that the future
success of the attempt to wed science to industry in Australia must ultimately depend
largely upon that supply.
PART III.—COLLECTION OF INFORMATION FOR USE OF EXECUTIVE
AND STATE COMMITTEES AND OF PERMANENT INSTITUTE.
1. The Problem Census. — One of the purposes for which the Advisory Council
was appointed was to invite certain classes of institutions and organizations, as well as
private enterprises, “to suggest branches of industrial scientific research in which
investigation would be of immediate practical use to producers and manufacturers.”
{See Report of Drafting Committee, paragraph 7 (ii).)
It was considered that the respective State Committees, having special local
knowledge, would be in a better position than the Executive Committee to secure the
information desired in regard to the above matter. A circular letter was accordingly
issued to the State Committees asking for information regarding technical and manu-
facturing problems to be collected under the following heads, viz.;—
(а) General difficulties or disabilities which affect the development and
progress of any existing industry as a whole.
(б) Any such difficulties which may have been encountered by particular
firms engaged in a given industry.
(c) A return showing opportunities which exist for the establishment of
hitherto undeveloped industries, either primary or secondary.
(i d ) A statement of national problems deserving the attention of the
Committee.
A certain amount of valuable information, which has since been collated,
was received in response to these inquiries. Owing, however, to the delay in
the appointment of some of the State Committees, the information is not yet quite
complete. The matter is further referred to in the reports on the work of the State
Committees given in Part VI. of this Report.
2. The Industrial Census. — In conjunction with the above inquiry into
technical and manufacturing problems, the State Committees were asked to furnish
information as to the distribution, extent, and relative importance of both primary
and secondary industries. The ordinary returns published by the Commonwealth and
State Statisticians include many industries of such a nature that they are not likely to
require immediate assistance from the Advisory Council, and it was felt that the special
knowledge of the State Committees would be of value in expunging from the complete
lists those branches of industry which need not be considered.
The particular headings under which it was desired that the information should
be set forth were as follow, viz. :
(a) Nature of industry.
(b) Distribution (localities).
(c) Names and addresses of principal firms in each industry included in the
return.
(d) Capital invested.
(e) Amount of wages paid.
(/) Number of employees, male and female.


A large amount of information, partly of a confidential nature, has been received
by the Executive as a result of these inquiries. It is believed that the detailed
particulars furnished in response to the inquiries relating to the problem and the
industrial censuses will be of considerable value, and that they, together with the other
information collected by the Executive Committee, will largely clear the way for the
work of the permanent Institute.
3. Laboratories for Scientific Research and their Personnel. —lt has already
been pointed out [see Part 11., paragraph 2, above) that it is the policy of the Executive
Committee to seek the co-operation of existing Australian institutions equipped for
scientific research, and to utilize, as far as is consistent with economy and efficiency,
the of the skilled investigators attached to such institutions. In order to aid
the Executive Committee in its work of initiating and co-ordinating scientific investi-
gations into problems connected with Australian industries, and in order to pave the
way m this direction for the work of the permanent Institute, the Executive has collected
from Universities, Higher Technical Schools, and Technical and Scientific Government
Departments throughout the Commonwealth, particulars of the branches of science for
which researcn laboratories are provided, and of the personnel of the staffs.
The results of this inquiry have been collated and analyzed, and are of considerable
the Executive Committee. They are being kept up to date and
will be available for the information and guidance of the Directors of the permanent
Institute.
Research work is not, of course, carried on with any regularity in all the
laboratories, for which the particulars referred to above have been collected. Manv
Government laboratories are devoted largely to work of a routine nature, while the
staffs of University and Technical School laboratories are ordinarily occupied too much
with instruction and <c pure ” scientific research to devote any considerable part of their
time to industrial work. It should also be mentioned that existing laboratories are
not ordinarily equipped with apparatus for conducting the “ large scale ” experiments
which are often necessary as an intermediate step between the solution of a problem in
the laboratory and the profitable application of the laboratory results on a commercial
basis, further the Executive Committee has ascertained that the accommodation
available in and the staff and equipment of, existing laboratories in Australia are
insufficient for the carrying out of the fundamental work which must be done before
many pressing problems can be solved.
f t'- The fining and Supply of Future Scientific Investigators.— Among
t e functions of the proposed Institute of Science and Industry, as specified in the Report
of the origma Drafting Committee of the Conference convened by the Prime Ministo
the following is included, viz.' minister,
“ (xi) To advise the several authorities as to the steps which should be taken
research ” Smg SUPply ° f workers competent to undertake scientific
,it r ln f-h° ° f th ® Executive Committee, one of the most important functions
°* ““'f be t 0 encourage higher scientific training, and thus increase the outnnt
of ski led specialists available for the development of the primary and secondary
industries of Australia. It is hoped to achieve this result by both direct and indirect
means; directly by the employment of salaried investigators toTssist fti
researches, as well as by financial grants to institutions for improved equipment-
indirectly, by proving to the public the value of industrial scientifo reseamh thus
csss iar&fcr?-
Committee obtained from the Universities and Higher Technical ScWk ; ? cutlve
relating to the following matters, viz. g leclmioaj Schools information
(a) Degrees or diplomas granted in Pure or Applied Science
M -fb 6 ! PPr “ te nUmt f ° f SUch Satiates or diplomates annually
(C) Th 'VmTo“ptr S d:nc n e Umber ° f search students in


(i d ) The inducements offered to such post-graduate research students by
Research Scholarships or otherwise.
(e) The more pressing requirements for the further encouragement of the
higher scientific training, e.g., (1) increase of teaching staff ; (2) addi-
tional laboratories ; (3) apparatus and equipment; (4) undergraduate
bursaries; (5) post-graduate resident or travelling scholarships;
(6) fuller acceptance of degrees or diplomas by outside examining or
appointing bodies, such as Government Departments or outside
corporate institutions.
The information collected by the Executive in regard to the abov§ matters has
been summarized. The results show that the annual number of students graduating
in Australian Universities in the pure and applied sciences is only about 110. Of that
number a very large proportion are absorbed by the professions, and only a very few
receive any proper training in research. The returns received from the Universities and
Technical Schools show that the immediately pressing requirements for the proper
encouragement of higher scientific training are extensive in regard both to increased
teaching staff and additional laboratories, apparatus, and equipment. The output of
Australian Universities is insufficient to meet even present demands for research workers.
In some branches of science, e.g., Chemistry, the existing shortage is almost entirely
due to the fact that a large number of chemists have gone to Great Britain on war
work, but this is not the case in other branches of science, especially perhaps in economic
biology. The Executive Committee considers that it is a matter of paramount import-
ance that steps should be taken to insure a supply of scientific investigators at least
adequate to enable effect to be given to the scheme for industrial scientific research
outlined by the Prime Minister in January, 1916. No doubt the demand for
research workers will to some extent create a supply, and the Executive Committee
has already been able to do something in this direction by the appointment of salaried
investigators, while the permanent Institute, when established, will be able to do a
good deal more in the same direction. But it is also true that a supply will create a
demand.
It is probable that the next few years will see an increasing demand for research
workers in Australia, and the responsibility for supplying this demand, and, consequently,
the responsibility for the scientific development of the resources and industries of the
Commonwealth, must rest largely with authorities other than the Advisory Council or
the permanent Institute.
In the Report of the British Committee for Scientific and Industrial Research
for the year 1915-16 (p. 40), it is pointed out that one of the primary conditions essential
to the success of the movement for the application of science to industry is a largely
increased supply of competent researchers. The Executive Committee entirely concurs
in that view as far as Australia is concerned.
5. Technical Education and the Training of Artisans.—ln addition to the
subject of the supply of scientific investigators, the Executive Committee has given
attention to the question of technical education and the training of artisans. A large
amount of information has been collected from Reports issued by the several Departments
of Education and by Royal Commissions, and through personal interviews with experts
on the subject.
Underlying the whole question of the scientific development of Australian
industries is the training of artisans, and the Executive Committee considers that any
efforts made for the application of science to industry will be, to some extent, frustrated
unless there is an adequate number of scientifically trained workers. The movement
for the application of science to industry is a measure arising out of the war, and it is of
urgency that steps should now be taken to meet the conditions that will prevail when
peace is declares.
The Committee is of the opinion that the first step towards the improvement of
technical education and the training of artisans is an Inter-State Conference of experts,
and, having ascertained that the proposal to hold such a conference met with the
personal approval of the Directors of Education in all the States, the Committee
recommended the Commonwealth Government to take the lead in bringing together
the experts in the several States. It is proposed that the personnel of the Conference
should comprise the Director of Education in each State and an expert in technical
education to be selected by each State Government, together with, probably, one or


more representatives of the industrial and business world to be appointed by the
Commonwealth Government. The Government has informed the Committee that it
does not think it desirable that the action suggested should be taken at present.
6. Register of Research Work in Progress in Laboratories. —The Executive
Committee has obtained from Universities, Higher Technical Schools, and departmental
scientific and technical laboratories throughout the Commonwealth particulars of
experimental research work in progress. The particulars comprise in each case the
names of the principal investigators, the subject and object of the research, the date of
its commencement, co-operation (if any) with outside bodies ( e.g ., scientific societies,
manufacturers’ or trade associations), observations as to any impediments to the work
{e.g., the inVestigator too much occupied with instructional work or other duties, lack of
funds, of equipment, or of assistance), and if the research has been suspended, the
reasons for its discontinuance.
The information thus obtained has been summarized in tabular form. The
results show that in a great number of cases the work has either been suspended or
seriously impeded owing to pressure of instructional, routine, and other duties.
The register will be of considerable valut in enabling expert assistance or advice
to be obtained by the Executive Committee or by the permanent Institute when
inquiries have to be made in connexion with any of the problems concerned. Moreover,
a survey of the directions in which research work is proceeding is likely to lead to the
interchange of helpful suggestions and information from time to time between individual
workers, while it will assist in obviating unnecessary duplication of effort and in pointing
to the directions in which further researches are, or may become, necessary.
7. Register of Experimental Work in Progress at Government Experimental
Farms. The Executive Committee has asked the Government authorities in
each State and in the Northern Territory to furnish information regarding experimental
work in progress at Experimental Farms, so as to enable them to compile a register of
such work on similar lines to those on which the register of research work in progress in
laboratories has been compiled. The information asked for has not yet been received
from several of the States and from the Northern Territory.
The experience of the Executive Committee leads them to believe that a large
amount of the work of the permanent Institute will be in connexion with the agricultural
and pastoral industries, and especially with the more fundamental work relating to such
matters as plant genetics, plant pathology, mycology, soil fertility, bio-chemistry, animal
husbandry and pathology, economic entomology, and agricultural economics. It is
believed, therefore, that this register of experimental work at Government farms will
be of great assistance and value in the formulation and initiation of the work of the
future Institute and in the co-ordination and development of experimental work in
connexion with the agricultural industry.
8. Miscellaneous Matters. —With a view to facilitating the initiation of the work
of the permanent Institute, the Executive Committee has also collected and classified
information both from abroad and in Australia relating to various other matters, such
for example, as (a) the procedure adopted in regard to new discoveries and processes
made or invented by scientific and technical employees of Government Departments *
(' b ) possibilities of training, and the prospects for the encouragement and advancement
of scientific and technical officers in Government Departments ; (c) a classified list of
chemical manufactures in the Commonwealth ; ( d ) the organization and work of research
institutions in other parts of the world.
. In connexion with the last matter the Executive Committee has either established
relations of a co-operative nature, or is in close touch with various institutions and
authorities m other countries, such as-the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research, London ; the Royal Society, London ; the Imperial Motor Transport Council
scientific Government Departments and other Institutions in the
United States of America ; the Advisory Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
Canada; the Royal Society of Canada ; and the Industrial Efficiency Board, New
ZieaJßncu
The Committee also taken action in regard to various other matters of
importance in connexion with the application of science to industry, such, for example
as—(u) the admission under the Tariff Acts of scientific apparatus for researcli or
educational purposes ; _ and ( b ) the admission (with suitable precautions) into Australia
of scientific and techmcal literature published in enemy countries.


PARTICULARS OF SPECIAL COMMITTEES APPOINTED BY THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE UP TO THE
30th JUNE, 1917.
Subject.
Date of Appointment.
Personnel.
Grants.
1. Chemicals
30th May, 1916
Prof. Masson (Chairman), and Messrs.
V. G. Anderson and E. A. Mann, and
Dr. F. H. Campbell
£10 for apparatus in con-
nexion with cream of
tartar investigations
2. Ferro-Alloys
15th June, 1916
Messrs. A. J. Higgin (Chairman) and W.
N. Kernot
£150 for working expenses,
and £30 a month for
three months for em-
ployment of assistant
3. Standardization of Designs
for Scientific Apparatus
11th July, 1916
Profs. Laby (Chairman), A. J. Gibson,
Kerr-Grant, and Wilsmore, and Messrs.
D. Clark, W. A. Holmes, W. N. Kernot,
and F. Nangle
For salary of draftsman
for one year, at rate in
Commonwealth Public
Service (£275)
4. Mode of Occurrence of Gold
in Quartz
15th July, 1916
Prof. Skeats (Chairman), and Messrs. E.
C. Dyason, H. Herman, and Dr. F. L.
Stillwell
£400 for one year for em-
ployment of investigator
5. Tick Pest
21st July, 1916
Major J. D. Stewart (Chairman), Drs. S.
Dodd, T. Harvey Johnston, and J. A.
Gilruth, and Messrs. G. E. Bunning,
A. H. Cory, D. J. Kerr, J. Kidd, C. J.
Pound, W. A. N. Robertson, and S. T.
D. Symons
£100 for travelling and
out-of-pocket expenses,
in addition to cost of
reporting and typing
PART IV.—INVESTIGATIONAL WORK.
A.—SPECIAL COMMITTEES.
1. Procedure followed. —As explained in Part 11., paragraph 4, above, these
Committees are appointed by the Executive to report on special problems. They
consist in each case of the best experts available, both on the scientific and industrial
side, whether members of the Advisory Council or not. In this way the Executive is
able to obtain the advice and assistance on any particular problem of the leading minds
throughout the Commonwealth. Particular attention has been paid by the Executive
to securing adequate representation on these Committees of manufacturers and other
persons engaged in industry, both primary and secondary, and much benefit has been
derived from this combination of the scientific and industrial points of view.
The Special Committees may be divided into two classes, viz. : — (a) those
appointed to carry out actual experimental work; and (6) those appointed to review
existing information and to report as to the best lines of future investigation. In the
former class are, for instance, the Special Committees on the extraction of potash and
alumina from alunite, the production of ferro-alloys suitable for the manufacture of
high-speed tool steels, the tanning properties of Queensland mangroves and of redgum
in Western Australia, the electrical sterilization of milk, the means of transmission of
the worm-nodule parasite in cattle, and the chemical constitution of posidonia fibre.
In the latter class are, for instance, the two Committees which met to report upon the
important problems of the tick-pest and the worm-nodule parasite, and the Committees
on marine biological economics of tropical Australia and the damage done by insects
to grain in store.
There are, of course, no hard and fast lines of distinction between these two
classes of Committees. In some cases a Special Committee, e.g., the Committee on
Chemicals, may be appointed to carry on both classes of work, while in others, a
Committee in class ( b ) having made its report may then proceed to carry out experimental
work under a grant made by the Executive. The Special Committees report directly
to the Executive, to whom they are responsible. Progress reports are received, ordinarily
every two or three months.
The members of the Special Committees act in a purely honorary capacity.
Only out-of-pocket and travelling expenses are paid, and then only in the case of members
attending from a distance the meetings of their respective Committees. The Executive
Committee desire to express their cordial thanks to the members of the Special
Committees for the valuable services they have rendered. Without their assistance
it would have been impracticable for the Executive to have carried on their
investigational work efficiently.
2. Special Committees Appointed. —Particulars of the Special Committees
appointed up to the 30th June, 1917, are given in the following tabular Statement.
The total number of Committees appointed is 20. The total amount of the grants
is £3,435, but no grant has been made to four of the Committees (Marine Biological
Economics of Tropical Australia, Damage by Insects to Grain in Store, Control of
Sparrow Pest, and Classification of Imports of Chemicals).


Subject.
Date of Appointment.
Personnel.
Grants.
6. Alunite
1st August, 1916
Mr. A. J. Higgin (Chairman), Prof.
Masson, and Mr. V. G. Anderson
£100 for working expenses.
£30 per month for
twelve months for em-
7. Yeasts and Bread-making
ployment of assistant
2nd August, 1916
Dr. H. G. Chapman (Chairman) and Mr.
£200 for equipment and
8. Nodule Disease in Cattle
J. Nangle
working expenses
2nd August, 1916
Drs. S. Dodd (Chairman), A. Breinl, J.
B. Cleland, J. A. Gilruth, T. H. John-
£100 for travelling and
out-of-pocket expenses.
ston, S. J. Johnston, D. J. Kerr, W.
Nicoll, and G. Sweet, and Messrs. G. E.
in addition to cost of
reporting and typing
9. Marine Biological Economics
Bunning and T. A. Field
1st November, 1916
Messrs. C. Hedlev (Chairman), E. J.
Nil
of Tropical Australia
Banfield, and A*. R. McCulloch, Prof.
Dakin and Dr. R. H. Harris
10. Damage by Insects to Grain
14th December,
Messrs. L.Rossell (Chairman) and W- W.
Nil
in Store
1916
Froggatt and Prof. Haswell
11. Electrical Sterilization of
21st December,
Dr. J. B. Cleland (Chairman) and Mr.
£100 for apparatus and
Milk
12, Tanning Properties of
1916
13th February,
W. H. Myers
Messrs. J. Gibson (Chairman), L. S.
working expenses
£200 for apparatus and
Queensland Mangroves
1917
Bayster, and J. B. Henderson
working expenses
13. Tanning Properties of Red-
20th February,
Messrs. B. Rosenstamm (Chairman), I.
£300 for employment of
gum in Western Australia
1917
H. Boas, C. E. Lane-Poole, and C. E.
Stacey
assistant and working
expenses (not yet ap-
14. Means of Transmission of
27th February,
Drs. S. J. Johnston (Chairman) and J. B.
proved)*
£150 for travelling and
Worm-Nodule Parasite
1917
Cleland
out-of-pocket expenses
and payment of assist-
ant
Nil
15. Control of Sparrow Pest..
1st March, 1917
Captain S. A. White
16. Alcohol Fuel and Engines
8th March, 1917
Prof. Lyle (Chairman) and Messrs. W.
R. Gximwade, W. N. Kemot, and H.
£250 for working expenses
up to the 30th June,
17. Classification of Imports
19th April, 1917
V. McKay
Mr. W. R. Grimwade (Chairman), Dr. F.
1917
Nil
of Chemicals
H. Campbell, and Mr. E. T. McPhee
18. Tanning Methods of New
24th April, 1917
Prof. Fawsitt (Chairman), and Messrs.
£450 for equipment, work-
South Wales
B. Bailey, F. A. Coombs, F. B.
ing expenses, and em-
19. Posidonia Fibre
22nd May, 1917
Guthrie, and H. G. Smith
Prof. J. Read and Mr. H. G. Smith ..
ployment of assistant
£150 for working expenses
and employment of as-
sistant (not yet ap-
20. Grass-tree
19th June, 1917
Prof. Rennie (Chairman), Dr. Cook, and
proved)
£50 for purchase of chemi-
•
Messrs. Finlayson and Hurst
cals (not yet approved)
• Recommendation for grant of £25 already approved.
Of the total sum mentioned., the proposed grunts to the Special Committees
on the tanning properties of redgum in Western Australia (£300), on the chemical
constitution of posidonia fibre (£150), and on grass-tree (£SO), had not been approved
•at the end of June, 1917.
• T n 6 Executlve Committee has under consideration the appointment of other
Special Committees at an early date to deal with important problems to which it
has already given attention.
3. General Progress of Work of Special Committees.—As will appear from
the more detailed information furmshed hereinafter regarding the various investigations
initiated and undertaken by the Executive Committee, considerable progress has been
made in the work of many of the above Special Committees, some of which are approaching
the completion of their investigations. °
As regards the Committees on the tick-pest and the nodule disease in cattle
full reports have been received by the Executive based on the information available
as the result of the various investigations already carried out by other authorities
Lines of further action for attacking the problems and for the control and eradication
of the pests have also been formulated by these Committees. The Executive has
concluded that the questions involved in the control and eradication of these pests are
too large and complex to enable them to be dealt with efficiently under the' existing
temporary organization with its limited financial resources and executive powerf
Moreover, any action with a view to the control of these pests can be carried out by the
Federal Government only with the co-operation of State authorities, so that the
relations between the proposed permanent Institute and these authorities must be
determined before any comprehensive lines for action can be adopted. So far
practicable the Executive Committee has, however, arranged for further necessary
Pabticttlabs of Special Committees appointed by the Executive Committee — continued.


investigational work to be carried out in connexion with these problems. Thus the
Special Committee on the means of transmission of the worm-nodule parasite is
conducting fundamental investigations into matters that must be cleared up before a
complete scheme for control can be brought into force.
It will be found in a later part of this Report that the above remarks apply equally
to certain large problems to which the Executive Committee have given full consideration,
but for which they have not thought it desirable to appoint Special Committees. For
example, the whole question of the utilization of forest products involves issues that are
too large and complex to enable the existing temporary organization to deal with it
in the comprehensive manner which its importance and magnitude demand. Though
it would probably have been practicable for the Executive Committee to tackle one or
more of these large problems on a limited scale in particular States, the Committee holds
the view that they are essentially problems that should be viewed from a Federal stand-
point and dealt with, as far as practicable, on Inter-State lines of action.
B.—AGRICULTURAL AND PASTORAL INDUSTRIES.
1. The Control and Eradication of Pests and Diseases of Stock and of
Crops. —The loss caused, directly and indirectly, to the agricultural and pastoral
industries of Australia, and the secondary industries dependent on them, by the attacks
of pests, parasites, and organisms causing disease amounts to millions of pounds per
annum. Nearly all the most serious pests in Australia have been introduced from other
countries, and it is therefore probable that the introduction of many of them could
have been prevented by rigid measures of quarantine. Such pests as were introduced
in spite of the quarantine could probably have been easily exterminated if they had been
attacked in a scientific manner as soon as their presence and injurious nature were
notified in any locality. Now that many of them have become diffused over the whole
or a great part of Australia, the work of eradication would be costly and take a number of
years, but there is little doubt that properly organized campaigns conducted with the
active assistance of the industries concerned would ultimately be successful.
Before an efficient campaign against any of these pests can be organized, it is
necessary that the life-histories of the pests and the methods by which the parasites are
transmitted from one host to another should be fully understood, and the Committee
considers that investigations of this kind should form an important part of the functions
of the proposed permanent Institute. In the past and at the present time much valuable
work of this nature has been and is being performed by Government entomologists and
other State officers, as well as by the members of the staffs of Universities and Agricul-
tural Colleges, but most of these researchers can only give part of their time to such
work. Moreover, there is a considerable amount of overlapping and repetition which
should be avoided when the central Institute comes into existence.
Whilst investigating the life-histories of the pests the Institute’s biologists would
also carry on such further experiments as may be necessary into the best methods for
their eradication. In the fight of their experience it would then be possible to formulate
proposals for an organized campaign against them, and it is obvious that such a
campaign would have a better chance of success if planned by a central organization.
At present, when one State organizes such a campaign, it is not always easy to arouse
the enthusiasm of the community, without whose assistance any such campaign must be
a failure, for there is always a probability that, in spite of any measures taken within one
particular State, the pest may be re-introduced from a neighbouring State. The first
step in such a campaign is obviously to prevent the spread of the pest. When once
this has been accomplished it becomes possible to work backwards towards the centre
of- the affected area. In this connexion the Committee is taking action with a view
to preventing the spread of sparrows into Western Australia. {See paragraph (iv)
below.)
Of the pests and diseases injurious to stock in Australia the principal are the
cattle-tick, the worm (Onchocerca gibsoni) which produces nodules in beef, the sheep
blow-fly, and the tubercle bacillus. As a result of their preliminary inquiries, the
Committee learnt that the cattle-tick and the nodule-worm had engaged the attention
of numerous workers, and that various papers on different aspects of the subject had
been published. It was therefore decided to appoint Special Committees to review the
results of past scientific work, to suggest what further work should be undertaken, and


to make recommendations as to the best means for the control and eradication of the
parasites. These Committees met at Sydney in September, 1916, and it is hoped shortly
to publish their reports. {See paragraphs (i) and (ii) below.) After considering their
recommendations the Executive Committee decided that the suggested campaign for
the eradication of cattle-ticks was too large a matter to be undertaken by the present
temporary body. In the case of the nodule-worm the means of transmission of the
parasite from one host to another are still unknown, and the Committee have given a
grant to Drs. J. B. Cleland and S. J, Johnston, who are engaged in an investigation of
this problem. 6 ' 8
The subject of tuberculosis in stock was investigated by a sub-committee of the
Queensland State Committee, and its report has been published by the Queensland
Government. {See paragraph (iii) below.)
-ur 16 s^ee P blow-fly pest is being investigated by a joint committee of the New
South Wales Government and the Pastoralists Association, which began work in 1914.
The members of the Executive met this Committee when they visited Sydney, in August,
1916, and assured it of their cordial support. They have since kept in touch with the
work of the Pastoralists Committee.
The ravages caused by various insect pests have been brought before the Com-
mittee on different occasions, and a considerable amount of information on this subject
has been collected. In September, 1916, the Committee received a request from the
Koyal Society, through the Commonwealth Government, asking them to co-operate in
an investigation which that society was undertaking at the request of the Imperial
Government as to the damage caused by insects to stored grain throughout the Empire.
Ihe Committee, after obtaining reports on the subject from the Government Ento-
mologists of the various States, decided to appoint a Special Committee in Sydney to
investigate the matter, which is evidently of great importance at present in view of the
fact that for the first time in Australian experience large quantities of grain are being
stored in the Commonwealth owing to the shortage of shipping. An interim report
PfPar 0 d by this Committee has been circulated to the Ministers for Agriculture, Chairmen
of Wheat Boards, and Government Entomologists of all the States. {See paragraph
(v) below.) r & i
* s P ro^a^e the unprecedented amount of grain stored in Australia was
responsible also for the serious plague of mice which occurred in New South Wales
Victoria, and South Australia in the early months of 1917. The Executive is in
communication with Professor Splendore, of Rome, regarding a bacillus discovered by
him, which is stated to have proved successful in coping with a plague of rodents in
Italy.
The following sub-sections in small type give more detailed information regarding
matters referred to above. The same course is followed in succeeding parts of this
(i) Tick Pest.— The cattle tick (Boophilus australis) was probably introduced into Australia from
Java with cattle imported in 1872, and is now distributed throughout the coastal areas of Northern Australia
from Western Australia through the Northern Territory and Queensland to northern New South Wales.
In addition to the damage done by the tick itself, it is the means of spreading the organism which
Cause ® n tlC +- °f Texas fever - Tlie Special Committee state in their report that the loss from mortality
caused by tick fever in Queensland alone is estimated at seven million pounds sterling. Cattle which
survive the fever suffer from loss of condition and diminution of milk yield, but this loss cannot be
estimated Apart from the fever, the presence of ticks on the cattle causes serious loss of condition and a
considerable mortality from _ tick worry ” and “ tick poverty,” also a diminution in milk yield and an
interference with the natural increase of the herds. Hnfesfrom tick-infested animals are of much less value
tor leather, the loss from this cause in Queensland alone amounting to about £114,000 per annum If
the collective losses oyer the series of years since the advent of the pest, from the varied causes directly
attributable to it, could be enumerated, they would amount to many millions of pounds. 7 ,
Apart from the direct losses referred to, the expenditure occasioned in connexion with the erection
2 °/ d + ? plr ! g T atS ’lan? 1 an ? general disturbance of stock business, is also very considerable. As
the effects of loss to the stock industry ramify through commerce in an extensive manner the secondary
industries also pay their toll to the pest. Further, the restrictive measures various States have been
compelled to put into operation have led to considerable expenditure. For instance, the cost to New South
Wales alone has amounted to £123,480 during the past five years.
Loss is also occasioned to owners of stock within quarantined areas, by the annlication of th P
restrictive measures imposed not only in connexion with treatment enforced, but in and
curtailment of their businesses, and deterioration of their herds. Moreover, the value of land in infested
and adjoining areas has depreciated even up to 40 per cent. When the extent of acreage invoked
is considered, this loss alone becomes stupendous. am cage involved


The life-history of the Australian cattle-tick, which is closely similar to the American cattle-tick
{BoofTiilus annulatus), is briefly as follows :
When the female tick becomes fully matured, she drops off the cow on to the ground, and after
a few days commences to lay eggs. The number laid varies from about 2,000 to 5,000,
the average being about 3,000. The eggs are very resistant to external conditions, being
able to withstand severe frosts"and heavy rain. After a period, which varies according to
conditions, the young “ seed-ticks ” hatch out and ascend the bushes, fences, &c., collecting
in masses ready to swarm upon any object that brushes past. They are very tenacious
of life, and it is not improbable that under Australian conditions they may be able to survive
for a year awaiting a suitable host, though this has not been determined by research.
When a cow comes within reach the seed-tick crawls over its skin till it finds a soft part,
and there attaches itself and commences its parasitic life by sucking blood from its host.
If infected it may cause fever, although so small as to be difficult to detect with the unaided
eye. After two moults it assumes the adult form, and the life-cycle is thus completed.
The parasitic existence lasts for about three weeks.
The eradication of the tick is of primary importance, for without the tick there can be no tick-fever-
The tick may be attacked either during its existence on the pastures or during its parasitic development
on its host. In freeing pastures the plan usually followed is called the “ starving-out ” method, and consists
in excluding all possible hosts of the tick from the pastures until sufficient time has elapsed for the tick to
die out and the eggs to perish. Upon removal of the cattle the land is in America usually placed under
cultivation, and it is not re-stocked until sufficient time has elapsed to assure death of the progeny of the
ticks that were dropped there. There exist no reliable data as to the safe limit of this period in Australia,
though field observations in the North Coast districts of New South Wales indicate that it exceeds one
year. The success of this system depends on a more efficient control of stock than exists in this country,
and as a method for general adoption in Australia, it does not commend itself to the Committee, but it may
be applicable in isolated cases.
It is considered that the most efficacious method of controlling the pest is to attack the tick during
its parasitic existence.
The methods employed are —
(1) Hand-picking and grooming of small herds of cattle and stabled horses undertaken daily.
(2) Hand-dressing and spraying of small lots of quiet cattle and horses and of pregnant and
injured animals every seventh day.
(3) Dipping, by causing the animals to plunge into a tick-destroying solution contained in a
narrow tank, so as to become completely submerged, and on rising to the surface to swim
for a short distance. Experience to date indicates that arsenic is the only reliable tick-
destroying agent at our disposal. This process has to be repeated about every fifteenth
day for a considerable period.
In the United States systematic effort for the eradication of the tick commenced in 1906. The
territory south of “Salmon’s line,” comprising 741,515 square miles, was placed under quarantine
restrictions. According to the latest returns a total of 262,469 square miles have been freed from ticks
and released from quarantine.
The State Departments co-operate with the Federal officials of the Bureau of Animal Industry, and
before work is commenced the co-operation of stock-owners and local authorities is enlisted by means of
an educational campaign in which illustrated pamphlets and literature of various kinds advocating that
“it pays to eradicate the tick ” are distributed. The annual amount contributed by the States interested
is about £lOO,OOO, while the Federal Government contributes about £60,000.
The Special Committee recommended —
(1) As the matter is of national importance, and vital to the prosperity of the Commonwealth,
the Federal Government should undertake the work of eradicating the pest. For this
purpose a special appropriation would be necessary, but even if it amounted to £50,000
per year, it would but represent a moderate premium for assurance of the safety of the
cattle and dairying and allied industries, and would be more than repaid in a brief time
by the benefits derived from its judicious expenditure.
(2) Investigations of the biology of the cattle-tick in Australia.
(3) Investigations of the life-cycle of the causal organism of tick fever [Babesia bigeminal) within
the cattle-tick.
(4) Researches on the nature of protective inoculation.
(5) Curative treatment of tick fever.
(6) Research as to the cause of the natural resistance to tick of some cattle and as to whether
it is hereditary or transmissible.
(7) Researches as to the best composition of tick-destroying medicaments in different climates
and conditions.
(ii) Worm Nodules in Cattle.— Cattle in the Northern Territory, Queensland, Western Australia,
and parts of New South Wales are parasitized by a species of nematode worm ( Onchocerca gibsoni), which
leads to the formation of fibrous nodules, or worm nests, in certain parts of the body of the animal. The
nodules enclose one or more tightly-coiled worms, and vary in size from a split-pea a walnut oi larger.
There may be only one or two, but there may be 50 in a single animal, and they are almost always confined
to two regions, the brisket and the flanks, being most numerous in the former position. The parasite is
not known to occur outside Australia, but as cattle are not indigenous to this country it is almost certain
that it must have been introduced from some other country. The presence of the nodules was first observed
in 1880.
0.7963.—2


Up to the present, in spite of many independent investigations by different scientists, the method
by which the parasite is transmitted from one beast to another has not been discovered, but from our
knowledge of the life-histories of related parasites in other animals, it is almost certain that it must be
spread by an intermediary host, probably some biting insect.
In the year 1910 the discovery of nodules in Australian beef by the British authorities led to an
agreement under which the Commonwealth guaranteed that portions of carcasses containing nodules would
not be shipped to Great Britain.
At that time the British authorities maintained that the nodules exerted a deleterious effect on the
beef, though such beef had been consumed for a number of years both in Australia and in Great Britain
without any harmful results being observed. Nevertheless, the appearance of the nodules on section is
uninviting ; while old degenerated nodules not infrequently present an appearance suggestive of a tubercular
lesion, hence it is not surprising that their presence should be objected to.
In order to carry out their agreement the Commonwealth Government framed regulations specifying
that certain portions of the brisket must be removed from carcasses of beef before exportation to Great
Britain, and that the hindquarters should be opened for examination.
Ihese regulations result in serious loss to the exporter, and thus, indirectly, to the Commonwealth—
(l) By the actual loss of weight resulting from the removal of the brisket from a carcass, and the
extra cost of handling entailed by this treatment. (Part of this loss is, however,
apparently recovered by separate sale of such briskets locally or to other countries.)
(2) By the depreciation in value of the carcass due to the mutilation. A carcass that has been
mutilated by cutting will not bring so high a price as one that has been untouched.
Two independent estimates made by meat exporters, one in Sydney, the other in Brisbane, place the
loss per carcass at 18s. 3d. and 18s. lid. respectively, without reckoning loss due to the mutilation of the
ln the three years 1913 to 1915, the number of carcasses exported from Queensland was
,40p,000, which, on the lower estimate, means a loss of £1,310,000 for the three years, or an annual loss of
£436,000. It is probably well within the mark to state that the nodule disease results in an annual loss
to the Commonwealth of over half a million pounds. The Special Committee, after full consideration,
nnds no evidence that nodule-infested meat is in any way unfit for human food. It considers that
the present regulations result in an unnecessary amount of loss, and that the matter should be discussed
y t le British and Australian authorities, with a view to arriving at some means whereby the British consumer
may be insured against having nodules served at his table, without so much loss being caused. It is important
to realize that while the loss falls on the producer, the consuming public in Great Britain is affected also
owing to the diminution of the amount of beef imported into that country from Australia. In view of the
recent diminution of the world’s live-stock and the increased demand for beef, such a factor is by no means
negligible. J
i Special Committee also recommends that a zoological survey of various areas should be under-
taken, with a view to ascertaining the presence and extent of worm infection, and that research as to the *
means ox transmission of the parasite should be continued.
The Executive has made a grant to Drs. J. B. Cleland and S. J. Johnston to assist them in their
researches on the latter problem. Up to the present they have devoted most of their attention to March-
flies, which they consider the most probable intermediary host, but the larval nematodes have not yet been
found in the alimentary canal of these insects. They have also examined freshwater Crustacea from the
drinking places of the cattle, as well as cattle-lice, but so far with negative results.
. „ T ™ bercul °MS *n Stock. -The Sub-Committee appointed by the Queensland State Committee
to consider this matter prepared a Report, which was published by the Queensland Government early in
1917. Basing their estimate on very conservative figures, the Committee came to the conclusion that the
annua irect and indirect loss to the State of Queensland due to tuberculosis amounts to nearly £420 000
Quite apart from any loss of wealth, however, is the greater loss due to the infection of members of the'
community from animal sources. Tuberculosis is a preventive disease, but the problem of human and
animal tuberculosis must together, and the Committee recommends that the Commonwealth
Government should be urged to establish one central authority to deal with the whole matted
, w fl^ hey al3 ° recomme » d ttat the Acts and regulations at present in force should be properly applied so
that the consumers may be safeguarded against infection from milk, beef, or pork contamfng tubercle
ff 1 ' , f ll order that such measures should be efficiently carried out it is essential that the publi/should be
thoroughly informed as to the necessity of the various measures. A further aid towards the co-operation
by the public with the authorities will be obtained by establishing compensation for animals ordered to be
destroyed, and by the adjustment of equitable conditions in relation to burdens imposed public
welfare upon the producers or people immediately concerned. P ror me puPlic
(iv) Sparrows. —The attention of the Executive was drawn to the ±
the Transcontinental Railway was likely to result in the spread nf rVsp i completion of
to Western Australia, in whid. State a "not at preset found As ° f
Ze Une engthened ’ “* “ L ‘ —^ ad aireTdy
offered t^^C^m^^t^ e^at^^mslyto S inveLl^ateth^matt«• U pro^idM 1 th^F* ;^^ o^0 f^ S Tl>^ l^ < ■ n,
would give him the necessary facilitiel for travelling on therailway Thk T a 7“ auth ? rltles
made his first special trip to the head of the line nf.May 1917 He reoorts twTT d ’ T' Ca P tam , Wlllte
miles along the line,,and he collected evidence which pobls to both sparrows and st t 'i aced , s P arro '™ for 2( »
further west, though it is probable that they came inland from tl,» . and starlings having been seen
and not along the Railway Lite. He 0 Bay
see if the sparrows have progressed, and he expects then to be in a position to male a« “ July 01 Au f ust u >
as to methods of checking their progress. P Ito ma^e definite recommendations


(v) Insects damaging Grain 'in Store. —A number of insects have been reported from time to time as
damaging stored grain in Australia, but all of tbem have been introduced from other countries, and most o
them have a world-wide range. The most serious pests in every State are the Grain-weevils ( Calandra
granaria and C. oryzce)’, in the warmer States the Grain-moth [Gdechia cereallda) is regarded as the next
most destructive insect, whilst in New South Wales and Victoria the Grain-beetle {Silvanus surinamensis ) is
placed third on the list.
In October, 1916, the Executive Committee received through the Prime Minister s Department a
communication from the Royal Society, London, asking that a Committee should be appointed in Austra la
to inquire, in co-operation with similar committees in England and Canada, into the damage done by
insects to grain in store. A Special Committee was duly appointed, and presented a Progress Report
in May, 1917, dealing with the Grain-weevils, which they find are the only insects attacking stored grain
whose destructive effects are serious enough to demand special measures.
The Report points out that wheat when bagged in the paddock has no weevil in it, but subsequently
becomes infested by being placed in old bags, or in granaries, stores, trucks, &c., infested by weevils, or in
contact with infested grain. The various methods of destroying weevils by poisonous gases cannot be
applied to bagged grain except at prohibitive cost, though applicable to grain stored in bulk. The most
effective gas is carbon-dioxide.
Study of the life-history of the weevil shows that it is dependent on certain conditions of temperature
and moisture. Weevils do not multiply in wheat unless it contains 10 per cent, of moisture. Wheat from
threshers contains from 6*7 per cent, to 7’2 percent, of moisture, and is therefore weevil-pioof unless
moisture is actually added from without. At the present time in Australia hardly any stacks are rain-proof,
many of them are placed on the ground so that moisture can penetrate them from below, and most of them
are in close proximity to the sea, and are thus constantly in a moist atmosphere. It is probable, therefore,
that the depredations of weevils are likely to be extremely serious, since, under favorable conditions, in one
experiment 40 weevils in three months produced 3,000 descendants.
2. The Control and Eradication of Weed Pests.— lt is impossible to estimate
the loss caused to Australia by various introduced plants which have established them-
selves in this continent, and in some cases occupied large tracts of country. Of the
hundreds of weeds which have been recorded from the different States, almost all are
aliens. Almost the only native plants which come under this category are the
Bracken-fern and the various Poison-plants, dhe introduction of weed-seeds with
imported grain is inevitable, though adequate inspection reduces the danger from this
source to a minimum, but many of our worst pests are plants which have escaped from
cultivation in gardens, and it is obvious that useful or ornamental plants cannot be
excluded from Australia on the ground that they might at some future date become
pests.
At the present time, when a new weed is notified in any district the Department
of Agriculture of the State gives advice as to the methods by which it is most likely
to be' eradicated, and it is the business of the individual on whose land the pest has
appeared, or of the District Council or other local body, to take means to deal with the
weed if they see fit. If the weed appears on Crown land or along the roadsides, it is
usually neglected altogether, with the result that a plant whicn might easily have been
stamped out if proper means to control it had been taken at the outset becomes a menace
to agriculture over a large district, and the values of all land in the district are depreciated.
An important part of the work of the Institute of Science and Industry would
be the study of weed-pests, and the best means of controlling them, and it is obvious
that it would be desirable that the directors should be informed by the State Departments
when any new weed appeared, in order that a comprehensive study of the best means
of eradicating it might be undertaken. This would involve, at any rate in some cases,
a study of the plant in its native country in order that the natural enemies which kept
it in control in that country might be ascertained. The Institute would then be in a
position to report as to the best means of dealing with the pest with a view to its
complete eradication.
In considering the problem of the eradication of some of our weed-pests, the
Executive have had various suggestions for the utilization of these plants placed before
them, but have come to the conclusion that, though this consideration should not be
neglected, its chief importance lies in the possibility that the industrial utilization of
some products of a plant-pest may serve to lessen the cost of eiadication. The proper
course of action is to aim primarily at control and eradication, industrial utilization
being an important, but a secondary, consideration.
The most serious weed-pest in Australia is the Prickly Pear (Opuntia inermis),
which occupies some 20 million acres of land in Queensland, and million acres in
New South Wales, and is estimated to be spreading in Queensland at the rate of a
million acres a year. The Executive Committee, after informing itself fully of the
22


research work on methods of eradication carried out in Queensland by the State
(government s Board of Advice on Prickly Pear Eradication, drew up a Report on the
subject, with recommendations as to further work. This Report was presented to the
Commonwealth Government in December, 1916. (See paragraph (i) below.)
Another weed which threatens to become a very serious pest in the temperate
parts of Australia is the St. John’s Wort (Hypericum 'perforatum). Starting frdm Bright,
vu Pas k een carried in various directions by stock, and it is estimated
that 104,UU0 acres are now occupied by it in Victoria, whilst it has also appeared in
various localities in South Australia and New South Wales. Experiments conducted
some years ago on behalf of the Victorian Department of Agriculture indicated that the
best method of treatment was to cover the land with salt, but no treatment of this
nature is applicable to the hilly country, which forms the stronghold of the plant, and
rom which it constantly spreads on to the cultivated land in the valleys. The Committee
came to the conclusion that a possible solution of the problem would be the introduction
of some insect which would feed only on St. John’s Wort, and they have written to
England to ascertain if any such insects are known in that country, of which St John’s
Wort is a native. J
The Queensland Department of Agriculture has recently introduced from Hawaii
a fly whose larva feeds on the seed of the lantana, and which has been found effective
m keeping down this pest in the Hawaiian Islands, Eiji, and New Caledonia. This
method of dealing witn weeds—the introduction of the insect foes which keep them
within bounds m their native countries—is obviously the most scientific, and, provided
B X?T TntS ar ° &st made t 0 insure that the insects introduced
are not likely to attack useful plants, and become pests in their turn, should be much
the most economical method of solving the problem. A notable example of the success
? H 18 plan was ttle mt r°<inction from India of a cochineal insect (Coccus indicus), which
edb on one species of Prickly Pear ( Opuntia monacantha). This particular Pricklv
Pear has been almost exterminated in localities in Queensland where the insect has been
liberated but unfortunately the insect .will not attack the pest pear (0 inermis) for
which other insect foes must be found. P P [ merrms), tor
it • A 1 ? 61 W ?? ds for wllich rerQe dies remain to be provided are the Whiter
Hyacinth, the African Box-thorn, the Bramble, the Sweet-briar, and the Bracken-fern
as well as such weeds of cultivation as the Stinkwort, Charlock, Thistles, &c The
Committee has collected a good deal of information as to the methods adopted for dealing
with So . m< V°i these plants in other countries, but much research requires to be done to
=2= ssssftiftas
attention from the Executive since the commencement of inactivities 8 Sp6Cla 7 Ulgent ’ has received close
carriedtutfn * Tf 7 ***
Executive has also interviewed members of the Stale r nm >. + c A n knckly Pear Destruction. The
and ascertained the attitude of these Governments towards Wal ® S and Queensland >
presen Anfeated 1 antAt is ““A™ aore3 in New South Wales are at
of one million acres a year. Prickly Pears have also established the 18 t prea : clm S 10 Queensland at the rate
South Australia, and Western Australia but are no? f th ? mse1 ™’ “ varrous localities in Victoria,
species of Pxicldy Pear have ZAZS “ ****** Eleven
spread has been so serious and which occupies the great bulk h the pC-WeXd”knd Bp6 ° ieB Wl “ 8e
i. The only practicable means of dealing with the plague appear to be
(Ij chemical (by poisoning).
(2) Biological (by introducing insects or fumn which act . not i t
Various proposals have been made to deal with the Pricklv Pear h 3 ° ®® k ° n lts Sr° wtll )-
rolling it down. These have not, however, been found practicable ‘ me chamcal means by cutting or
dispose of the pear by utilizing it for certain purposes But even if a nmfit r l ° P ° Sa S been made to
discovered, it would be quite impracticable to establish in Australia' m ® anS of utilizati on were
to deal with any substantial proportion of the pear. The most like! toU f es °? a sufficiently large scale
but all the cattle in Australia could not keep pace with the rate at which ° r • n ® k 7 Pear is for fodder,
alone. It is necessary first to find some means of controlling and eradmatiw/ 3 eXt ! ndu ? in Queensland
made with a view to the discovery of some practicable use for the Pc. ? g u® P ® St ‘ experiments
belief that they can lead to its control. th ® Peai should not be conducted in the


5. An elaborate series of investigations on the effect of all known plant poisons on the Prickly Pear
was carried out by Dr. Jean White,'for the Queensland Government, at Dulacca. These investigations have
shown that the cheapest and most efficient means of destroying Prickly Pear are by the injection or spraying
of the plants with arsenic acid or by gassing it with the fumes of arsenic trichloride. The quantities of
these substances required and the seasons when they can be used to most advantage have also been
ascertained. The Dulacca Experiment Station was closed on 30th June, 1916, and the Queensland
Government have offered to hand it over to the Commonwealth for the use of the Advisory Council in any
further researches it may undertake.
6. Chemical poisoning will only pay on agricultural land, which is but a small proportion of the
infested area. The pear on grazing land of low value can only be kept in check by biological means, and
meanwhile these lands act as sources from which the land already cleared is in perpetual danger of
re-infestation.
7. The first part of the necessary biological investigation was carried out by a Travelling Commission
consisting of Dr. T. H. Johnston and Mr. H. Tryon, appointed by the Queensland Government. These
gentlemen spent nearly two years visiting almost all the countries of the world where prickly pears are
found, either native or acclimatised, and investigating the natural enemies of the plants.
8. The Commission introduced a species of Cochineal Insect which feeds on Opuntia monacantha.
and after careful tests at Dulacca had shown that it would not attack cereals or fruits of any kind, it was
liberated at Bowen and Charters Towers, with the result that Opuntia monacantha in those localities has
been largely destroyed. Unfortunately, this insect will not feed on any other species 5f Prickly Pear.
9. The Commission prepared a list of a number of other insects which live entirely on Prickly Pear
in America and are not known to feed on any other type of vegetation, and which they recommend should •
be introduced to Australia with proper safeguards. They also made tentative arrangements with the
United States Bureau of Entomology for the collection and despatch of these insects. They further
recommend that two fungi which cause diseases of Prickly Pear in South America should be introduced
and investigated. These suggestions have not been acted upon up to the present.
10. As the result of an interview which the Committee had with members of the Government of New
South Wales, the Minister for Agriculture announced that £2,000 had been placed on the Estimates to be
at the disposal of the Advisory Council for research work on the Prickly Pear problem, provided that the
money is spent in the State. He also indicated that this sum would be continued for five years. The
Committee also interviewed members of the Queensland Government, and it is practically certain that the
Government of that State will be willing to contribute the same amount as New South Wales (£2,000).
Recommendations .
The Executive Committee therefore recommends : ■ ,
(а) That investigations should be carried out as to the suitability of insects and fungi known to
be inimical to Prickly Pear for acclimatisation in Australia, as to the method of action
of such insects or fungi on the pear, and as to such other matters as may arise in connexion
with any biological or chemical researches found necessary.
(б) (That the work should be placed under the authority of a biological expert, who shall be
responsible to the Executive Committee of the Advisory Council of Science and Industry,
and who should receive a salary of £1,200 per annum.
(c) That three laboratories, comprising one central laboratory and two subsidiary laboratories,
should be established and maintained in Queensland and New South Wales.
(d) That the central laboratory should be established at Brisbane, where the insects would be
received immediately they reached Australia, and where the staff would have access to
literature and facilities for the use for special investigations of University and Government
laboratories. .
(«) That the two subsidiary laboratories should be established in country infected with Prickly
Pear. One of these should be in New South Wales, whilst, for the other, the Queensland
Government’s offer of the Dulacca Experiment Station should be accepted. Ihese
stations would carry out the work of breeding and testing the introduced insects, and
should be in charge of thoroughly qualified entomologists, at salaries of £750 per annum.
(/) That field laboratories should be established, at such places and at such times as may be
deemed necessary by the biologist in charge, for the purpose of introducing such insects
as are found suitable into particular areas, or for other special purposes.
(g) That the sum of £B,OOO per annum for a period of five years should be made available for this
work, of which sum £4,000 should be contributed by the Commonwealth Government,
and £2,000 each by the Governments of New South Wales and Queensland.
It is regarded as important that provision should be made that such amount as may remain
unexpended at the expiration of any one year should not lapse, but should be carried forward to the next
year. Owing to the nature of the inquiry, the fact that the insects will have to be bred to some extent in
America, and the dependence of the insects on seasonal factors, it seems probable that part of the sum
allotted for this purpose in the first year will remain unexpended, and that correspondingly this item will be
increased in the second year.
3. The Cultivation of New or Improved Crops.— The Executive Committee
has received numerous suggestions as to the desirability of cultivating in Australia crops
which produce raw materials at present imported or whose products are imported.
In connexion with these proposals it has been necessary to consider the reasons why
these crops are not at present cultivated to any considerable extent in Australia, and in
the cases of two of the most important, viz., Cotton and Elax, it has been found that the


main reason is economic and not climatic. The great importance from the Imperial
point of view of an increase in the cultivation of cotton in the Empire has recently been
emphasized in the Report of the Dominions Royal Commission. ( See paragraph (i) (b)
below.)
There seems no reason to doubt that cotton will grow as luxuriantly in Northern
Australia as in any other part of the world. Indeed, during the American Civil War
a considerable quantity of high-grade cotton was produced in Queensland. In normal
times, however, the high cost of picking cotton by hand is the main reason why Australia
has been unable to compete with other countries where the cost of labour is much less.
In the case of flax also, the great amount of labour required in retting, breaking, and
scutching the fibre militates against the cultivation of this crop for fibre on a large
scale, though this does not appear to be the reason for the small cultivation of flax
for linseed in Australia. The most hopeful method of solving these problems is, in the
case of cotton, by the introduction of a mechanical picker which would obviate the
necessity of hand-picking, and, in the case of flax, by the discovery of some chemical
method of retting the fibre. A large number of machines for picking cotton has been
patented in the United States of America, but it does not appear that any of these
machines has proved really successful. The Committee has made inquiries from numerous
sources in the United States, and has obtained a good deal of information on the subject.
Several Australian inventors have devoted attention to the problem, and the Committee
has received in confidence particulars of their inventions, which in no case are at present
very complete. The difficulties in the way are great, but should not be insuperable,
and the whole problem might well be undertaken by the staff of the future Institute,
especially as it seems not improbable that one element in the case is the production of
a vanety of cotton specially suited for mechanical picking. It seems therefore possible
that the plant-breeder of the Biological department co-operating with the mechanical
engineer of the Physical department might ultimately solve the problem. (See para-
graph (i) (a) below.) v r
~ , * n . cas ? of a f > Executive had brought to its notice a patent process for
the chemical retting of the fibre by means of an extract of linseed. If the process is as
satisfactory as appears probable from the accounts received by the Committee it should
be of great service in leading to a greatly increased cultivation of flax in Australia, and
scaU ° mmittee are C ° nSldermg a P ro P° sal t 0 have the process tested on a considerable
.* n al ™ ost aU th ® St f tes experiments are being conducted in wheat-breeding
especially with a view to the production of drought-resistant varieties which would
enable settlement and cultivation to be pushed into the drier areas of Australia A
part of the problem which has not been so fully considered is the breeding and selection
of fodder-plants suitable for rotation crops in dry areas. For this purpose a more
extended study of our native salt-bushes and the grasses of the interior is desirable
together with experimental breeding of these plants. It is also important that the useful
o er plants of other parts of the world should be introduced, acclimatised, and studied
under Australian conditions. With a view to the formulation of a definite scheme
for the furtherance of these objects and the co-ordination of the work on these lines
at present being conducted independently in the different States, the Committee with
the approval of the Ministers of Agriculture in all the States, proposed to the Common
wealth Government in August 1916, that a conference of experts from all theTates
“SSSZff“ y “- Th “ ™ i“5
(i) Cotton. — (a) Cotton Growing in Australia —A verv atpa in ni . .
has a climate suitable for the growth of cotton, indeed it has Wn
greater than that suitable for cotton in the United States whe-p at iated hy ex P erts that this area is
world’s supply is produced. That high-class cottoncan in Opp T'f “ lds ° f the
at the time of the American Civil War, when owing to the indncamp ? nS f^ d \ as conclusively proved
that State exported 26 million pounds of ginned cotton, worth £I3OOOOO P rice of cotton >
—“t d o r " °“ the esteb ““ o f ’ a -u arterr^revt
industry has been the high cost ofpicking'the cottonbTAustralia eS { ablishn f nt of the
there being no skilled body of pickers familiar with the crop hence'the nici? 8 ' P ? H r ™ inexperience,
prevailing in Australia were, however, the chief factor In ?ks respect ifia ? T wa ß es
in the United States are steadily rising, whilst at the same time kLv 1 I t remembered that wages
cotton-fields. The disparity between the cost of ptXXnT


tending to disappear. Authorities in Queensland consider that the best way to overcome the labour
difficulty is to encourage farmers to grow small crops, say 10 acres, of cotton in addition to their other
crops. It is calculated that a family of four persons could easily pick the cotton produced on this area
without extra help. It has also been suggested that if the Government intend to provide ready-made
farms for settlers in Queensland after the war, cotton would be a suitable crop with which to start.
Cotton-waste, a by-product of the spinning mills, is one of the chief raw materials used in the present
manufacture of cordite. As the result of an article by Mr. G. S. Hart entitled “No Cotton, No Shells,
published in the Rockhampton Daily Record, a meeting was held at Mount Morgan, presided over by the
Mayor. This meeting resolved —“That a Munitions Cotton League be now formed to press forward the
production of cotton in Australia, so that it may be available for the manufacture of munitions. The
meeting was widely advertised in Queensland papers, and the Department of Agriculture undertook to
deliver free seed to the nearest railway station. The Queensland Government also guaranteed to purchase
seed cotton at Ifd. per lb. About 300 growers obtained seed and about 800 acres were planted.
Unfortunately the season was unfavorable, and some of the seed available was not of very good quality,
nevertheless a considerable number of the crops gave high yields.
Though the annual peace time requirement of prepared cotton-waste for the manufacture of cordite
in Australia is only 60 tons, yet it is obviously of great importance that Australia should be self-contained
in the matter of the production of munitions. In England the cotton-waste is specially treated in
Government works, and is supplied as a product of exceeding uniformity. Before Australian-grown cotton
could be used for the manufacture of service cordite it would have to undergo similar treatment, and the
cordite produced would require to be submitted to exhaustive tests, both in respect to its stability and its
ballistics. Stability tests to be satisfactory would extend over a number of years. Arrangements have been
made for the experimental manufacture of a fairly large sample of cordite from Australian cotton. I his
will then be tested, and it is hoped that the results will be satisfactory.
The introduction of a mechanical cotton-picker is the most hopeful method of overcoming the
difficulty due to the high cost of labour. Many machines for this purpose have been patented, but none
have come into use, in spite of the fact that the invention of a simple contrivance which would enable the
cotton to be picked twice as fast would make a fortune for its inventor. It is stated that the United States
Department of Agriculture has spent £50,000 in experimenting with cotton-picking machines, and one
American firm spent £5,000 and at last gave up experimenting. Several machines have also been invented
in Australia. The American inventors have mostly produced machines which pick the cotton by means
of a number of arms bearing spikes which pass over the plant. These, however, damage the plant and spoil
much of the cotton which is not yet ripe, and unlesl a variety of cotton could be produced which xipened
all its seed at once, they are not likely to prove satisfactory. The machines invented in Australia are on
the suction principle, familiar in the vacuum cleaner, and to allow them to achieve their best effect it would
be necessary to grow a variety of cotton in which the valves of the cotton-bolls open wide, so as to expose
the cotton fully.
Australia is fortunate in that the only two cotton-pests at present established in this country are rust
and the boll-worm—a species of cut-worm. The cotton-worm, cotton-stainer, and dreaded boll-weevil of
the United States are unknown, and it is important that imported seed and raw-cotton should undergo
rigid inspection to prevent the chance introduction of these pests.
(b) Recommendations of the Dominions Royal Commission .*—The following extracts from the Final
Report of the Dominions Royal Commission are of interest and importance
§362. “ The dependence of the Empire, and indeed of the world, on the United States of
America for the bulk of its supplies of raw cotton is too well known to need detailed comment.
The United States provide, approximately, 70 per cent, of the cotton crop of the world, and the
dependence of the United Kingdom upon the supplies from this source is enhanced by the fact
that the major portion of British spinning machinery is specially adapted to the spinning of cotton
of the American type. Moreover, there is already, generally speaking, a deficiency in the world s
annual cotton crop, as compared with the world’s demand, and it may be that, unless special
steps are taken, this deficiency will tend to increase in the near future. The need for increasing
the supplies of cotton within the Empire is therefore urgent.”
§363. “It is clearly desirable that immediately circumstances permit, each of these
Dominions (Australia and Union of South Africa) should proceed further with the local investi-
gations already promised or undertaken, and in particular we urge
(a) That expert advice should be sought by the Commonwealth and Queensland
Governments.
(b) That further inquiries should be made, if possible by the Commonwealth and Union
Governments conjointly, into the possibilities of a mechanical picker.
( c ) That the British Cotton Growing Association should continue to afford to both
Governments the measures of co-operation already agreed.”
4. Miscellaneous. —Several other matters connected with the agricultural and
pastoral industries have also engaged the attention of the Committee, amongst which
may be mentioned the suggestion to conduct a Soil Survey of Australia (see
paragraph (i) below); the investigation of the stomach contents of birds, with a view
to ascertaining the food of each species, thus determining whether the bird is injurious or
beneficial; and the best method of branding stock to prevent the damage done to the
hides by the present system of branding with hot irons (see paragraph (ii) below).
In addition, certain questions referred'to in other sections of this Report also have an
♦Dominions Royal Commission. Final Report [Cd. 8462], page 72, 1917.


important bearing on the agricultural industry. Chief of these are the efforts made
oy the tommrttee towards increasing the supply of fertilizers. These are dealt with
in section h, Chemical Industry, hereinafter.
V' ' f Jla ocipal objects of a soil survey are to collect such scientific
vet occupied OTw,inesS to hC S “ “° f as ® IU P ermit and encourage settlement upon areas not
hive u d increased yield of produce from lands already settled. Such soil surveys
States of Amorim TJ 7 var . laus European countries, and with particular thoroughness by the United
naZl lcts^ l, 01 the , sur Y e l ° { aa T district are embodied in maps accompanied by
3 stm eSLt t r 1 ol i em,cal and PVeieal analyses of the soils, the nature of the
contour drafna» and rlil 1 ?s ’ *lf geol ° g ‘ Cal ,° f the » outcropping rocks, the surface
of cultivation and flic Wn ’ t wel * a an account of the areas devoted to various crops, the local methods
7 , i the history of settlement in the locality. The initiation of a soil survey in Australia
e U A Ve '7 itS formation ’ but before taking action it was decided to
general consensus of oJfJ fW tm f Apartments on the matter. It appeared that there was a
of the nature of that Outlined 1° P resen t was not a suitable time to embark on a comprehensive survey
be r Wa^ tlloUgh J t that an important preliminary step which might well
Departments & ° 6O 10n an< * co ' or(^lna t lo n of information already existing in various State
it. The Committee We d “ idad to proceed with this work if they can find a suitable man to undertake
branding of cattle Tnfnrm!fS \ Association to the loss caused to hides by the careless and excessive
a prehminary step to taking furttokctilL“obvLte b fhe t toss EXeCUtITe Committee from ™ rious 80ur o es as
C.—FOREST AND VEGETABLE PRODUCTS.
•, • , Tii e "Utilization of Native Vegetable Products.— The vegetation of Australia
f f rf 1 y cur ’ a . & reat . number of the commonest and most widely distributed plants
of the continent being quite distinct from those of other countries
aS® *^ hich deludes most of our -forest tre£, a?e
essential that for °i of peculiarity in our flora renders it
experiments were made, and the useful properties of some AmtrnU sett |
More recently definite chemical researcLs\ave been carried 'out pl^ nts dlscovered-
various States, but especially at the Technological Museum SvrWv i en^ ldc imes ln
information obtained. Nevertheless the work is still onlv ifTi-f-o U ir^P or^an^
S’.zrz^jz^zz£.t “r*.
tainty as to the exact source of the material empToyed & * ****-
systematic botany must precede chemical research 7 Tn A thls type of work
has advanced sufficiently to allow of the proper identifier syste,liatlc botany
comparison with specimens in the herbaria of the by
means the case with the Territory of Papua Before tW t v , t , thls 18 b T no
can be scientifically developed it is urgently desirable ierntor y 8 P lant resources
gation of the flora" of the Territory made The
therefore recommended to the Commonwealth Government Commlttee ba s
for the 'ooUectiorf of
ss.se - cnasat af srs
timbers which urgency Anstra,ian
great deal of information on these problems has been collected “fecutivt


Committee, and it is proposed shortly to publish a summary of them in the form of a
Bulletin. The matter was also urged on the Advisory Council by the Forestry Conference
held in Adelaide in May, 1916. Whilst the Committee fully agree that this matter is
one of great importance to Australia, they have decided that most of the researches
required could only be undertaken efficiently in a properly equipped Forests Products
Laboratory, and that the establishment of such a laboratory is too large an undertaking
for the present body with its limited powers, but should receive consideration as soon as
the permanent Institute is established.
The chief problems connected with timber which should be investigated in such
a laboratory are :
(1) The physical characteristics of each species of Australian timber, with a
view to insuring its utilization for those purposes for which it is best
adapted.
(2) The best means of seasoning each timber in relation to the specific
purpose for which it is to be used.
(3) The best preservatives for Australian timbers to prevent decay and
attacks of white ant, teredo, and other timber pests.
(4) The investigation of local timbers, with a view to the discovery of species
suitable for the manufacture of wood-pulp. {See paragraph (i) below.)
(5) Investigation of the products derived from local timbers by the process
of dry distillation, and the relationship of the products obtained to
the temperature and pressure conditions of the distillation process.
{See paragraph (ii) below.)
(6) The best means of utilizing the waste from the timber mills. {See
paragraph (iii) below.) This last inquiry would probably involve
some of the foregoing, as it is possible that the best use for the waste
from some species of timber might be by distillation, of others by
pulping, and of others by utilization of the shorts for cabinet-making,
manufacture of chairs, brush-handles, &c. The best means of utilizing
sawdust would also require consideration.
(i) Wood-pulp. —As far as the Committee have been able to ascertain the only plant erected in
Australia for the manufacture of wood-pulp is that belonging to the Queensland Pine Co. Ltd., at Yarraman
Creek. At this mill hoop pine {Aruacaria cunninghami) and bunya bunya {A. hidwilli) were treated
by the sulphate process, and a good type of wood-pulp prepared, which obtained a ready sale. The mill
had to close down in 1916 owing to lack of water, and has not been re-opened. The company state that
some form of assistance to the enterprise by the Federal Government would be necessary to induce them to
restart operations.
In 1915, Mr. H. E. Surface, Consulting Engineer in Forest Products, Madison, Wisconsin, U.S.A.,
visited Tasmania at the request of the Tasmanian Government to investigate the possibility of establishing
the wood-pulp industry in that island. From considerations as to relative quantities available, accessibility,
&c., the inquiry was limited to four species, viz.: —Myrtle or beech {Fagus cunninghami), swamp-gum
(Eucalyptus regnans ), bluegum ( E. globulus), and stringybark {E. ohliqua). Mr. Surface reported* that
the utilization of these four timbers for the manufacture of wood-pulp and paper products is not a feasible
business proposition. Mr. Surface has since informed the Executive Committee that he considers that
there is quite a possibility of building up the wood-pulp industry through the use of native woods other
than those reported on by him, and he urges that the matter is of sufficient importance to warrant a thorough
survey of Australia’s paper-making resources. If suitable native woods are not forthcoming he considers
that careful attention should be given to the question of planting suitable trees. He adds—“ Even in this
country (America), with its former wealth of timber, we see the planting of lands to pulp-wood species in
the eastern and the older or more settled regions. Forty or fifty years from now, when pulp-wood species
planted now would first be harvested, may be a time when the need for paper-making supplies is indeed
very acute. When Australia looks ahead for forty or fifty years, doubtless it will see a very great increase
in population and a shortage in paper-making materials in other parts of the world from which it formerly
drew its supplies.”
The Committee has been informed that some years ago the Australian Paper Mills Co. prepared
some excellent wood-pulp, utilizing the filamentary waste of the mountain-ash {Eucalyptus regnans).
[N.B. —This was one of the timbers on which Mr. Surface reported adversely.] Other timbers which have
been suggested to the Committee as likely to be suitable for pulping are the celery-top pine {Phyllocladus
rhomboidalis) and huon pine ( Dacrydium FranUini) of Tasmania, and the candlenut {Aleurites moluccana)
of Queensland. It has also been suggested that if any hardwoods are suitable the most likely are those
which readily split into palings, such as the messmate and the silky oaks {Grevillea). The Queensland
Pine Co. experimented with ironbark, spotted-gum, crowfoot, and yellow-wood, and found them
unsuitable.
The Executive is collecting through the State Committees information regarding native trees that
offer a primd facie case for investigation for pulping qualities.
* Parliament No. B.—B. 64115.


, , destructive Distillation. —ln Europe and America a large amount of hardwood timber is utilized
or e pro uc lon 0 charcoal by dry distillation, the other products obtained in the process being wood
spin (methyl alcohol), acetic acid, tar, and inflammable gases. There is no reason to suppose that the
hardwoods of Australia are in any way inferior in their yield of these products compared with the hardwoods
of other countries, and tests made at the Forest Products Laboratory, Madison, Wisconsin, U.S.A., with
bluegum (Eucalyptus globulus) grown in California showed that it compared favorably with the standard
American species beech, birch, and maple. Details as to tests of some New South Wales timbers made by
• ‘ * u # jr 6 4.m er ® publlsbed m the Agricultural Gazette of New South Wales, in October, 1898, and
i° f dl ® tdlatlon of B S m^ bark > yellow-box, peppermint, messmate, brittle-gum, spotted-gum,
and blu egum. , Mr - , C - Gadcke has supplied the Executive with particulars of experiments
whdpi 0 by + fJ m ? Vlctorl f n timbers in 1896-7, showing the yields obtained from messmate, sheoak,
white-gum, waUe, stringybark, peppermint, ironbark, box, blackbutt, and blackwood.
WvPP C f^r n t Smith ’ and Co -’ s ™ks at Yarra Junction, Victoria, and Mr. J. V. Vale’s works at
can TW 6S ’ ? reSBn ! t f ° nly works in Australia distilling timber as far as the Committee
have f ? r r firrx J s f orks have been in operation for a number of years, during which they
s h I eucalpytus timbers, and they report that the yield from all the species is very
SZln iT’ cert difficulties in treating eucaljpts wbich are not pregent P the cage £
of , ncan bardwoods > and a serious obstacle to the development of the industry is the lack
demand W ° f chemical products of distillation and the comparatively small
deMt witl .wp V 6 S W /° rkS N ha T e ° D y recentl y commenced operations, and have at present
P - ° ak ( Casuanna glauca ), the yield from which is satisfactory. The New South Wales
timbers 7 Mr ; Va !f 1 1° lia T e r tests made on 1-ton samples of about 30 other
e II T exper ™ ents Wlil be pubbsbed * Mr. Surface has drawn special attention
true beech closelv akin f n myrtle /^' s ounnmgJiam) of Tasmania and Victoria, Australia possesses a
S Amenca ’ wW timW is «“ of * he ““
C F Tane Poo£ W< f 6 T j r f er ~ The Executive has received two reports on this subject from Mr.
i ° ’ Conservator of Forests in Western Australia, which indicate that the waste in karri
m jer amounts to 67 per cent, and in jarrah to 53 per cent, of the sawn timber, whilst the remaining portions
o the trees-crown and limbs-ure also wasted. In the year 1913, for instance, 218,908,000 super feet
of sawn timber were produced in Western Australia out of 562,594,000 super, feet felled. Apfrt from
rotten hearts, &c useless for any purpose, and timber used as fuel for boilers, 240,580,200 super feet of
potentially va uable timber were entirely wasted, and in order to consume this waste expensive P fire-shoots
are maintained by the timber mills. Though the waste in other States is not so large as in Western
it is evident that means for utilizing this waste urgently require investigation. It is not likely as alreadv
"^ou^h^asPointed b ® pro^^ utilized by pulping; the possibilities of distillation are
more favorable, though, as pointed out above, the market in Australia for the products of distillation is
not very large. Attention should be given to the utilisation of shorts for the manufacture of small wooden
bobbins lofthreld™ 6 Cha ‘ lS ’ h™ B * l handle8 ’ lnsu,ator pins and brackets, floor blocks, and reels and
. a t J- Sourees of Tannin.--Tl,e supply of tan-bark for use in Australian tanneries
vi /V “ lan y/ ears P ast bee n obtained mainly from two species of wattle—the Golden
Wattle (Acacm pycnantha) of South Australia, and the Black or Green Wattle (Acacia
decurrens) and its varieties. As a result of the gradual destruction of wattle-trees the
Australian supply has become inadequate, and has been largely supplemented bv
wattle-bark imported from Natal, where plantations have been formed b/the utilization
r ’[ Australian seed. Owing to the cheap labour available in South Africa and the fact
that the wood from the wattles is in demand for firewood in that country, where
is scarce, there seems little chance of Australia being able to compete with Natal “the
production of wattk-bark. In addition to the wattles, a valuable tan-bark is yielded
by Mallet (Eucalyptus occvlentahs) of Western Australia, but though the useful
properties of this bark were only discovered in 1903, its exploitation was so rapid that
only comparatively small quantities now remain. * p
r f obvio fJy a matter of great importance to insure a local supply of tannin
for the future, and four possible means of doing this have been suggested, viz. :
(1) Regulation of bark collecting to prevent the destruction of young trees
and thus secure the maximum amount of bark. This matter has
already been considered in most of the States, and regulations are in
exis ence but are very difficult to enforce owing to the great areas
Departments^ 8 trBBS Spr6ad SmaU stafEs of tbe forestry
(2) Plantation of wattles for the production of bark. Many such plantations
were formed some 30 years ago, when estimates of prospective returns
were published which made the industry look attractive, but experience
has shown that owing to the slow growth of the trees and the great
A™tralia fr ° m bush ‘ fireS are not successful in


(3) Discovery of new sources of tannin. The Executive has collected infor-
mation from all the States as to analyses of barks, from which it
appears that barks of about 150 species of Australian trees have been
analyzed as to their tannin content, and fifteen have been found to
average over 20 per cent, of tannin. Of these, nine are wattles, but,
except for the two species already mentioned, they are not very
abundant trees, though some of them are utilized locally to some
extent. Two are Cypress-pines, and one of these (Callitris calcarata )
is a plentiful tree in Eastern Australia, and is utilized to some extent.
Three are Mangroves, but the bark from these trees has hitherto not
been utilized to any extent in Australia, owing to the fact that
mangrove-bark contains a dye which gives a red colour to the leather.
In view of the great area of coastline in Northern Australia and New
Guinea on which mangrove swamps occur, the Executive has appointed
a Special Committee to consider the best means of utilizing the bark
and possible methods for decolourizing the tan-liquors obtained from
it. (See paragraph (i) below.) The remaining species is the Mallet,
already referred to. In addition, the kino (gum) produced by the
Redgum of Western Australia {Eucalyptus calophylla ) contains a
high percentage of tannin, which is also present in the kino-saturated
portions of the bark. As in the case of the mangrove, a dye is also
present which stains the leather a red colour, and largely prevents the
use of this bark for tanning purposes. The Redgum is a very abundant
tree in Western Australia, and the Executive has appointed a Special
Committee to investigate the whole question. {See paragraph (ii)
below.)
(4) Manufacture of tannin extracts. This is perhaps the most promising
solution of the shortage of tanning materials, as it allows of the
utilization of leaves, twigs, &c., as well as of barks containing too little
tannin to be used directly. It would be a means of avoiding the great
amount of waste involved in the present methods of collecting wattle-
bark, in which the tree is cut down and the bark stripped from the
trunk whilst the smaller branches and twigs are not utilized. Extracts
have been prepared from wattle-twigs, &c., by several Australian
firms, but one of the difficulties is that gums and dyes are also extracted
in the process, and the extracts have to be decolourized, whilst the
presence of the gums is detrimental. Before the war large quantities
of Australian barks, including those of wattle, mallet, and mangrove,
were utilized in Germany for the production of extracts, and these
German extracts were imported into Australia. Chemical research
in Germany had solved the problems of decolounzation and of the
removal of undesirable gummy matter, and these problems should
be investigated in Australia.
An inquiry as to methods of tanning, which is being undertaken by a Special
Committee appointed by the Executive, is referred to in section “ G ” of this Report.
(i) Mangroves. —This name is given to those trees which grow in salt water on the coasts of tropical
and sub-tropical countries. They are very plentiful on a great extent of the northern coastline of Australia,
as well as on the coasts of Papua. The commonest species are members of the family Rhizophoracea, and
the bark of several of these has a high tannin content. Mangrove bark, however, suffers under the
disadvantages of producing too red a colour, a disagreeable odour, and inferior leather, and it is liable to
contain an excess of salt. The statements received by the Executive on these points are, however,
conflicting, and it is possible that the different reports are due to differences between the barks of different
species. Large quantities of mangrove-bark were formerly shipped to Germany from West Africa, Burma,
New Guinea, and other countries, and a widely-used tannin extract was prepared from it. ihe Executive
therefore appointed a Special Committee to investigate the tannin contents of the different mangrove
barks available in Queensland, the extent and accessibility of suitable mangroves, the best methods of
extracting the tannin, including methods of bleaching, the tanning qualities of extracts, and the costs and
commercial prospects of the industry.
(ii) Western Australian Redgum— This species of Eucalyptus {E. calophylla) is very plentiful in
Western Australia, to which State it is peculiar. The kino (or gum), which exudes from the tree in considerable
quantities is very rich in tannin, and bark saturated with kino is a valuable tanning material. The collectors
do not strip the bark from the tree, but scrape it, so that the tree is not killed in the process, but may be
scraped and again. It may be found possible to increase the yield of tannin by perforating the bark
or resorting to some similar operation to promote the flow of kino. A serious objection to the utilization


trying for Xt c l ° lour f tbe leather red. Mr. B. Rosenstamm, of the Perth Tanneries, has been
appointed a 8 t0 > f ° lv ! problem of decolourizing it, without success. The Executive has
appointed a Special Committee to investigate all aspects of the problem.
otiier Vegetable Extracts.—The Executive Committee has received numerous
substances t 0 P ° SSlble metbods of utilizing several native Australian vegetable
prepared dyes of brown and khaki shades from
barks The CntZm been from the resin of the grass-tree and from eucalyptus
Plants Jgf m hir .TP** ** &PPO “ ° f & Special to investigate nat^e
of New South^ wle had V T? ™ SOmCeS ° f when were informed tbat the Government
Sydney, with the special
?;Er^
chiefly lts° utiHza^on S source a rf 6 £ A Tf*
to the oreseTif ImwpvAr xr,. .-■l * t . . -P tor the m&nux&cture of Vciriiish, TJo
and the Committee considers that'‘rftKSS Arable “Teyhaf deter^ ne , d '
stem forTe^duction'"h^wVl ° f ° U " r ° f “* ** t! l e of the
scientific investigation. ° r P a P er ‘ ma kuig, an d these possibilities also require
D.—FISHERIES.
s&r ,i“t -■£ S7£vSZSS/X
°n otSrSuntri ““ ll “ “ “‘ i " l^, ' "“ «™ “’»%«”>< >» l«8> muobm of SS
iS£ E„'=,?£,-“!,-■■ *- <! r-
plentiful in some areas than they were formerly Fishery Wkbhi ’ + are 12111I 21110 * 1 . ess
empirical, as practically nothing is known ™ •+ n +h gelation at present is entirely
growth, and other imjLantS TIZJ repro “V ate °f
obtain this knowledge the establishment of a marine biolomlS Tst™” lll^^ 63 ’ T °
aquarium has been suggested to the Committee which if h a pr ° per
subjects from Professors W. A. Haswell and Sir Baldwin Spencer g ° n 6
2. Tropical Fisheries.—A number of fisheries for
carried on in the northern waters of Australia. Of these much' S
pearling (see paragraph (i) below), but minor fisheries eist or mishit j
for beche-de-mer (paragraph (ii)), trochus fnaraeranb (u\\\ g / b establlsbed >
turtles, and whilsf thV.Lt
fishes so that they could be utilized as an addition to the food 'Lf f lan tro P loal
cities is worthy of careful consideration. The Executive Wf f P f W 0” southern
connected with the marine biological ecolmSTht ilf
Corresponding Committee consisting of marine biolomV £ wT ? Speclal


amount of information as to the industries concerned, but most of the necessary
researches will involve special visits to suitable northern localities, and it is not likely
that biologists capable of undertaking the work will be available till after the war.
(i) Pearling. —This important industry is in a constantly fluctuating state, and several reports on it
have been made by Committees and Commissions. Most of these agree that legislation has been applied
erratically and unfavorably to the industry, and this seems inevitable until expert investigation on the life-
history of the Australian pearl oysters and the modes of formation of pearls have been undertaken. This
has been realized in Japan, where a large amount of work on this subject is being carried on, as well as in
Ceylon. In the latter case inquiry was only begun when a sudden disappearance of the oysters led to a
collapse of the industry. Expert opinion was then called in, but as research on these subjects is bound to
be long and arduous, and the experts had to familiarize themselves with the local conditions, it was too late
for anything to be done. With the experience of Ceylon as a warning, it is obviously highly desirable that
Australia should investigate the conditions prevailing on the pearl banks in order that scientific advice
may be available if any similar catastrophe should threaten the Australian industry. Money spent on such
investigations should be regarded as expenditure on insurance.
Investigations should aim at gaining some knowledge of — •
(1) The conditions under which the pearl oysters live and flourish—could they be transplanted
to shallow wafer ; could they be transplanted to special “ parks ” and cultivated ?
(2) Reproduction and life-history of the pearl oyster.
(3) Deposition of spat, and part played by ocean currents in distribution of spat.
(4) Methods of formation of pearls and possibility of artificial stimulation of pearl-production.
Should cultivation of pearl oysters be found possible, it might provide subsistence for a large and
permanent fishing population, whereas diving by licence attracts a nomad population only. Professor
W. J. Dakin, of the University of Western Australia, who was formerly connected with inquiries into the
Ceylon Pearl-fisheries, has been asked to undertake researches in North-western Australia on these
problems.
(ii) Beche-de-mer. —This is the name commonly applied to certain species of Holothurians or Sea-
cucumbers, which are found in warm seas, and, when dried, are known as trepang, and utilized, chiefly in
China, for the production of soup.
On certain parts of the northern coasts of Australia these animals are plentiful, and they were fished
for by Malays on the Australian coast before the European settlement of the continent. The fishery for these
animals is not regulated, and after a locality has been fished it is some years before it can be fished again.
The Special Committee suggest that a trained zoologist should be engaged to study the reproduction
and early life-history of the animals, points which are at present almost unknown.
(iii) Trochus. —This is a sea-snail coloured red and white, whose shell is the size and shape of a top.
The shells are gathered on the reefs at low tide by Japanese, and exported for the manufacture of buttons.
Naturally, the Japanese take every shell when and where they find it, and it is a question whether the shell
may not thus be exterminated. The Special Committee has received a series of Trochus shells, and much
valuable information from a number of localities. This material is being studied by Mr. C. Hedley,
of the Australian Museum, and promises results of interest. Mr. E. J. Banfield has arranged to
keep living Trochus on his coral reef at Dunk Island, and to ascertain their rate of growth by observation.
(iv) Sponges. —It is known that the Australian coast is very rich in sponges, yet Australia is entirely
dependent on the Mediterranean, West Indian, and Bahaman fisheries for her supply of sponges for
domestic and commercial purposes. It is not at present known whether, amongst our local sponges,
varieties of economic importance are present in any quantity, and this is the first point to merit investi-
gation. As a result of preliminary inquiries by the Special Committee, samples were forwarded by the
Cooktown Chamber of Commerce of a sponge found in considerable numbers in shallow water on the
Great Barrier Reef. This was identified as the “ Hardhead ” sponge of Cuba and the Bahamas, and is a
variety in much demand for industrial purposes, such as cleaning motors. It is hoped that this may
replace lower-grade sponges now imported. Should it prove on investigation that commercial sponges do
not occur on the Australian coast in sufficient quantities to enable a profitable fishery to be established, the
question of introducing valuable varieties of sponges from other countries will demand consideration.
Another question for inquiry will be the prospects of cultivating either indigenous or introduced
sponge species in Australia. Particulars as to sponge-culture in other countries are being collected
to serve as a foundation for this inquiry.
E.—MINING AND METALLURGY.
1. Metals. —The immediate need for researches on problems connected with
mining and treatment of metals does not appear to be so great as in the case of other
primary industries. This is doubtless due to the fact that a large proportion of Australia’s
metal output is produced by companies with a large capital, which has enabled them to
maintain their own research laboratories and staffs of qualified chemists and metallurgists.
Nevertheless, there is wide scope in Australia for investigational work, with a view to
developing new or improved processes, especially for the treatment of low-grade ores,
and determining the properties of various alloys.
One of the matters originally suggested to the Committee as requiring immediate
consideration was the question of the best means of extraction of zinc from its ores,
with special reference to the electrolytic process. Since the Committee was formed,


however, it has become common knowledge that the Amalgamated Zinc Co. have taken
up the problem of the electrolytic extraction of zinc, and that, as a result, the Electrolytic
Zinc Co, has been formed and has made arrangements for carrying it out on a large
scale. The Committee, therefore, came to the conclusion that no action was necessary
in this matter.
Another matter suggested for the early consideration of the Executive was the
production of ferro-alloys for high-speed steel. It was ascertained that research on this
problem had already been begun by Messrs. A. J. Higgin and E. B. Brown (Lecturers
on Metallurgy and Electrical Engineering respectively at Melbourne University) under
the auspices of the Federal Munitions Committee, and a request was received from
that body that further financial assistance for this work might be given by the Advisory
Council. This was granted, and the work has since proceeded as a research by a Special
Committee of the Advisory Council. Towards the end of the year Mr. Brown left for
England to undertake munition work, and Mr. W. N. Kernot, of the Melbourne
University Engineering School, took his place as an associate with Air. Higgin in the
inquiry.
Up to the present the work has been confined to investigations of the manufacture
of ferro-chrome and ferro-tungsten, the most important alloys in the manufacture of
high-speed steel. The experiments on the manufacture of ferro-chrome prove that there
is no difficulty in manufacturing this alloy at a reasonable cost, providing a sufficiently
cheap source of electric supply is available. Ferro-tungsten has presented more
difficulties, and the Committee is not yet able to give final conclusions as to the best
method to adopt in its manufacture, but hopes to complete this portion of its inquiry
within a few weeks. {See paragraph (i) below.)
Another question referred to at the initiation of the work of the Advisory Council
was the production of aluminium in Australia. The Committee has made some inquiries
on this matter, but owing to the classification adopted by the Customs Department, it
has been unable to obtain any information as to the amounts of aluminium or aluminium
ware imported into Australia, aluminium being grouped in the returns with a large number
of other metals. A profitable source of aluminium is the mineral alunite, which has hitherto
been utilized for the production of alum. The best methods of utilizing this mineral
for the extraction of potash and alumina have formed the subject of the investigations
of a Special Committee (see page 34). Other questions connected with aluminium
have been referred to the Special Committee on Chemicals.
As the result of an interview with Professor E. W. Skeats, Professor of Geology
in Melbourne University, the Executive decided'to appoint a Special Committee to
investigate the mode of occurrence of gold in quartz in Australia, with a view to
determining the principles which have led to the localization of payable gold, and thus,
among other things, cheapen the cost of deep prospecting. It was decided to commence
operations by the study of the Bendigo Gold-field, and Dr. F. L. Stillwell was appointed
secretary and salaried officer of the Committee to devote his whole time to the work.
Dr. Stillwell commenced work on 2nd August, 1916, and has visited nearly all the active
mines on the field, making altogether 118 inspections. He has also carried out a large
amount of microscopical work and consultation of literature in relation to the work.
Members of the Special Committee have also visited Bendigo three times during the year
and together inspected eight mines. The tentative conclusions at present reached as
to the origin of the gold deposits indicate the possibility of yielding some assistance to
prospecting in the future. {See paragraph (ii) below.)
(i) Manufacture of Ferro-Alloys. —Ferro-clirome is made by smelting chrome iron ore with an excess
of carbon in an electric furnace. This produces crude metal, containing about 10 per cent, of carbon. The
crude alloy is then refined by smelting in the electric furnace with chrome iron ore. This brings about
the oxidation of the carbon, and yields an alloy suitable for the manufacture of “ high-speed ” steel The
experiments on the manufacture of ferro-chome prove that there is no difficulty in the production of this
alloy at a reasonable cost, providing a sufficiently cheap source of electric supply is available.
Ferro-tungsten is made by the reduction of sufficiently pure wolfram, which is the principal tungsten
ore, with carbon, or of tungstic oxide mixed with pure haematite or metallic iron and carbon in the electric
furnace.
A very pure alloy has been made by the reduction of wolfram ore with carbon in the electric furnace
but the yield was very low, owing to the fact that the ore contains manganese, and that a prolonged treatment
was necessary in order to volatilize that impurity.
A number of experiments have been made with charges of wolfram ore and carbon, with a view to
ascertaining whether it would be possible to produce a pure alloy direct from the ore without an excessive
loss of tungsten.


The Committee has succeeded in reducing the loss of tungsten to 1 per cent., but the alloy produced
was very impure, containing too much manganese, silicon, and carbon. Some of this alloy was refined
by smelting in the electric furnace with haematite iron ore, lime, and fluor spar, but the refined metal was
still too impure for use.
As the ores of tungsten are liable to contain impurities which become reduced together with the
iron and tungsten in the electric furnace, thus rendering the alloy impure, it was thought that more satis-
factory results would be obtained by the use of pure tungstic oxide instead of wolfram ore. A number of
experiments have been made with pure tungstic oxide, and so far the results obtained confirm this opinion.
The pure tungstic oxide was made by fusing the wolfram ore with sodium carbonate, extracting the sodium
tungstate with water, filtering and decomposing the sodium tungstate with hydrochloric acid, ihe tungstic
oxide thus produced was washed till free from salt, and dried. A small charge of the tungstic oxide was
then mixed with carbon and iron, and the mixture reduced in the electric furnace. The alloy produced was
very pure, much purer than that last made by the direct reduction of wolfram ore, but it is more expensive
to produce, owing to tire cost of preparing the pure tungstic oxide. The Committee is now making experi-
ments on a large scale, and hopes in the course of the next few days to arrive at a comparison of the cost
of production by the two methods mentioned. It is not possible in this short summary to give any details
concerning the construction of the electric furnaces which have been used in carrying out these investigations,
but it may be mentioned that many difficulties were met with and had to be overcome before getting them
to work in a satisfactory manner.
(ii) Occurrence of Gold in Quartz. —Problems of the Bendigo Gold-field.- —The ultimate problem whose
solution is sought is the reason or explanation of the modes of occurrence of gold ‘ shoots ’ in quartz bodies,
so that the most economical methods for prospecting such shoots may be determined. Tnis question is
bound up with the origin of the quartz veins and of the mineralized solutions from which the veins were
formed. It is also concerned with the structure of the rocks of the area, the structure of the veins, and the
effects produced by faulting. As a result of the detailed studies of structure by the officers of the Geological
Survey and others, a great amount of structural information has been collected. It was therefore recognised
that results of economic value would be most likely to arise only after the problems presented in structural
geology had been carefully considered and discussed in combination with the chemical, mineralogical, and
petrological aspects of the problem. While no opportunity has been missed by Dr. Stillwell in studying
each relatively rich occurrence of gold that has been worked in Bendigo during the last year, and its possible
relations to adjoining rocks, to fault planes and to associated minerals, much of his time has necessarily
been spent in getting a general grasp of the field and in forming a scientific conception of the modes of origin
of the veins.
The following tentative conclusions have been reached by the Special Com-
mittee :
The mineralizing solutions are believed to be derived from a granitic magma, and to have
traversed the fault planes or slides chiefly in a vertical direction, and the reef channels chiefly
in a lateral direction. The legs of the saddle reefs are regarded as fracture zones, in which the
veins are formed mainly by the replacement of country rock by the solution migrating from the
slides. The caps of the saddles and most spurs are believed to be mainly cavity fillings, and only to
a limited extent to be due to replacement. Hitherto no satisfactory evidence of replacement has been
recorded in the Bendigo gold-field. The laminated stone in the “ legs,” which is frequently the quartz
of highest gold value, appears to be formed, not by the scaling of laminae of slate from the walls of a fissure,
as previously suggested, but the laminae represent the insoluble and largely carbonaceous residue of a bea
of slate remaining after replacement. The frequent occurrence of gold on the laminae is thus attributed
to the precipitating effect of a carbonaceous material. Bands of carbonates, largely ankerite, a carbonate
of iron, magnesium, and lime, frequently occur associated with the laminae or airt lines in the
and there is some evidence of a causal connexion between such occurrences of gold, ankerite, and dirt
lines.” Twenty-six assays of “ pug ” from the fault planes or slides show that every sample assayed contains
some gold, usually a few grains per ton, but ranging up to 2 ozs. in one assay. This occurrence is suggestive,
and leads to the tentative conclusion that the slides are the channels along which mineralizing solutions
travelled.
These tentative conclusions indicate the possibility of yielding in the future some assistance to
prospecting, and are sufficiently encouraging to warrant the much more extended work which will be
necessary before positive conclusions can be expected.
2. Non-metals.—Two main lines of inquiry have occupied the attention of the
Committee in connexion with minerals other than metals and metallic ores. One of
these is the possibility of stimulating prospecting for minerals hitherto not found or only
found in small quantities in Australia, but whose products are at present imported from
other countries. In this connexion the Committee has made inquiries as to the probability
of finding rock phosphates {see page 34) and mineral oils in Australia. The other
series of problems are those connected with the utilization of materials of which large
deposits are known to occur in Australia, but which have not hitherto been fully utilized.
Under this heading information has been collected in connexion with brown coal, iron,
and aluminium phosphates, alunite, and clays.
The scientific problems connected with the utilization of these minerals are mainly
chemical, and the work on alunite and phosphates is dealt with in the chemical section
of this Report (page 34). Clays are dealt with in connexion with the pottery
industry on page 38. In regard to brown coal, the Committee collected a large amount


of information, but had not taken further action when it was learnt that the Victorian
New Industries Committee and the State Government were taking active steps to promote
its utilization. All the information collected by the Executive was handed over to the
New Industries Committee.
An inquiry was received by the Committee from Queensland as to the possibility
of ascertaining the presence of opal in matrix without breaking the latter, a process
which often results in spoiling the enclosed opal. It was suggested that X-rays might
solve the problem, and Professor T. H. Laby, of Melbourne University, undertook to
conduct experiments on the subject. Up to the present, however, owing to the practical
cessation of opal-mining in Queensland, no matrix has been obtained.
F. —CHEMICAL INDUSTRY.
1. General. A large number of chemical questions have come before the
Executive, and it was thought desirable at an early stage of the work to appoint a Special
Committee to investigate and report on the possibilities of local manufacture of
chemicals now imported. In many cases this has further involved the collection of
information as to possible Australian sources of supply of the necessary raw materials.
Since the Special Committee on Chemicals was first formed, several further questions
have been referred to it by the Executive, and it has thus become in fact, if not in
name, a Standing Committee.
While concerned with the manufacture of chemicals generally, the Committee
C °iij i I^S ln^uiries * n instance to the possibility of producing locally the so-
called heavy chemicals. It was thought that the inquiries into the fine chemical business
could be dealt with at a later date. At the outset of its work the Committee found it
necessary _ to consult frequently the Customs reports, and it soon became clear that
owing to injudicious grouping of statistics relating to chemical imports, the information
required was often not available, and it was considered that steps should be taken to
make the reports more useful. Quite recently the Committee recommended to the
Executive that a Special Committee be appointed to report on the matter, and the
recommendation was carried into effect. After careful consideration the Committee
drew up a revised list, a copy of which has been sent to the Comptroller of Customs with
a request that he will meet the Committee, with a view to discussing the revised list
? 18 ac £P ted ’ Rawing up the necessary book of instructions for the guidance of
the Customs officers. &
Many of the questions referred to the Chemical Committee have been found to
present no unsolved scientific or technical problems, the difficulties being alleged to be
mainly fiscal or economic. ® &
Numerous inquiries have been made in regard to the establishment of alkali
works here. Caustic soda and soda ash are necessary mfrery many chemical processes
and this country must have an abundant and relatively cheap supply of these if chemical
industries are to be established and maintained. The methods of producing these
substances are well known, but in order to produce them at a price comparable to pre-war
European prices works would have to be established on a very large scale, and the output
of such works would be equal to the amount consumed in Australia. It is obvious that
if more than one company undertakes the manufacture of alkali here the chances of making
the enterprise a success are considerably reduced, owing to the very limited market in
Australia. This applies not only to the alkali industry but to many other chemical
industries. The Committee has been informed that a large chemical company is seriously
considering the establishment of an alkali works in Australia. * 7
2. Fertilizers.— Australia is largely dependent on outside sources for the raw
material of artificial fertilizers, and the Executive Committee have devoted much
attention to the consideration of possible local sources of phosphates potash
Wth a t 0 duping dependence
Of most pressing importance is the need for developing local sources of potash
since Australia in common with the rest of the world, wfs before the war dLendent
on the potash deposits of Stassfurt, Germany, for her supply of this chemical Besides
the use of potash for fertilizers, it is required in various secondary industries smch as
the-manufacture of soap, cyamdes, explosives, and fireworks. The problem is not
peculiar to Australia, and the Committee have obtained reports and other information


as to the inquiries into new sources of potash which have been conducted in the United
Kingdom and the United States of America. The sources of potash which have been
suggested are—(a) alunite-; (6) kelp ; (c)suint; (d) molasses ; (e) wood-ashes ; (/) ground
igneous rocks ; ( g) saline deposits.
{a) Alunite mineral consisting of the sulphates of potassium and aluminium,
of which there is a very large deposit at Bullahdelah, in New South Wales, and smaller
though purer deposits in South Australia. The Bullahdelah deposit was formerly mined
and shipped to England for the manufacture of alum, but this industry is now at a
stand-still. A Special Committee was appointed by the Executive to consider the best
means for utilizing alunite, of which the Australian deposits are the most extensive in
the w r orld, specially with a view to ascertaining the best treatment for the extraction of
the potash. This Committee has almost completed its labours, and a comprehensive
report on alunite will be ready for publication in a few months. {See paragraph (i)
below.)
{b) The large brown seaweeds known as kelp contain a considerable quantity
of potash, but species from different localities vary considerably in their content, and
few investigations appear to have been made as to the composition of Australian sea-
weeds. _ It is understood that kelp is regarded in the United States as one of the most
promising sources of potash, and that large plants are being established on the Pacific
Coast for its treatment. The kelp of the Atlantic Coast, however, is not nearly so
favorable owing to its lower yield. From press reports it appears that a small plant
for treating kelp has been established in Tasmania, and is producing potassium chloride.
The Committee are making further inquiries on this subject.
(c) Suint, or wool-grease, contains a certain amount of potash, and if the whole
Australian wool clip were scoured in Australia and the potash extracted, this would
probably suffice for local needs. Various methods of wool-washing are in use in different
countries ; in some cases the potash is first washed out with water, the fats being subse-
quently removed ; in other processes the grease and potash are removed together
and the potash subsequently recovered. The recovery of potash in wool-scouring must
be considered in connexion with the production of lanoline (page 35).
(d) The recovery of potash from molasses has been considered by a sub-committee
of the Queensland State Committee appointed to review the possible means of utilizing
molasses. They had before them details of a proposed method, which had been brought
before the Executive Committee, for absorbing the molasses with megass, producing
charcoal and gas therefrom, and then burning the charcoal to an ash from which the
potash could be recovered. They reported that all methods hitherto tried for recovery
of potash from molasses have led to only small proportions being finally recovered,
and that the prospect of burning to ash with megass did not appear at all promising,
even in war-time.
(e) The extraction of potash from the wood ashes of saw-mills and of eucalyptus
distillation plants has been suggested, and the Executive Committee has collected
evidence on the subject which points to the conclusion that the amount of potash is too
small to render this a commercially profitable source. It is understood that experiments
are being conducted as to the feasibility of extracting the potash from the ash left when
prickly pear is burnt.
(0 The utilization of ground igneous rocks as potash fertilizers has often been
discussed, particularly in the United States. These discussions have related chiefly
to orthoclase felspars or orthoclase-bearing rocks, but it was suggested to the Committee
that leucite-bearing rocks might be more suitable from this point of view. The subject
was referred to the Chemical Committee, which came to the conclusion that these rocks
were unlikely to be able to compete with alunite as a source of potash.
( g ) The most satisfactory solution of the potash difficulty would be the discovery
of a saline deposit in Australia rich in potash salts. It seems not improbable that such
a deposit might exist in some of the lake-basins of Central Australia, and it is worth
consideration whether an investigation of the deposits in the beds of the salt-lakes of
the Commonwealth should be undertaken.
The possibility of increasing the local supply of phosphatic fertilizers depends on
either {a) the discovery locally of rock phosphates suitable for the manufacture of
superphosphates, or ( h ) the discovery of means whereby the phosphates of iron and
aluminium, of which there are considerable deposits in Australia, can be made available
as sources of phosphorus to crops.
C. 7963, —3


The Executive Committee has made inquiries in all the States as to the likelihood
of discoveries of rock phosphates, but the replies received are not very encouraging.
Islands off the coasts of North-western Australia and Queensland are regarded as the
most probable localities to search, and prospecting in these localities should be encouraged.
The known deposits of calcium phosphate on the mainland are small. Experiments as
to the fertilizer value of. iron and aluminium phosphates under different conditions are
in progress in Victoria and Western Australia, and the Committee is considering the
appointment of a Special Committee to co-ordinate these researches.
The question of the production of nitrates from atmospheric nitrogen has also
been considered. It is well known that large plants have been established in Germany
for the utilization of atmospheric nitrogen, -without which the manufacture of explosives
would be impossible in that country, owing to the British blockade having cut off the
supply of Chili saltpetre. The utilization of atmospheric nitrogen, to be commercially
successful, depends on the presence of a of power, and it seems possible
that ultimately theJTasmanian hydro-electric scheme may be utilized for this purpose.
Three different processes are at present in operation in other countries, but tinder present
conditions it is impossible to obtain evidence as to which of these should be established
in Australia, and it is certain that an expert familiar with them would need to be
employed in the establishment of plant for the purpose in Australia. The Committee
have come to the conclusion that, as there is no immediate prospect of Australia being
cut off from the supply of Chili saltpetre, the matter should be left until the conclusion
of the war.
(i) Alunite. Alunite is a mineral occurring in large quantities in several of the Australian States,
but principally in New South Wales and South Australia, In South Australia there are two important
eposits ox high-grade mineral, namely, at Carrickalinga and Warnertown, the former consisting of
considerable masses, remarkably pure and uniform in character. There exists in New South Wales,
namely, at Bullahdelah, a small mountain range which consists for the most part of impure alunite. In
this mountain relatively rich patches of mineral have been mined for export to England for many years
past, Alunite is important because it contains potash and alumina in a readily accessible form. It may
be described as a basic sulphate of alumina and potash, A perfectly pure specimen should contain 11
per cent, of potash, and 37 per cent, of alumina. Alunite from Carrickalinga, South Australia, contains
slightly more than 10 per cent, of potash, and nearly 36 per cent, of alumina. The composition of the
mineral mined at Bullahdelah, New South Wales, varies somewhat, but the better grades average 8 per
cent, of potash, and 35 per cent, of alumina. 6 1
Both potash and alumina play important parts in modern chemical industry. Potash compounds
are used largely as fertilizers and also in manufacturing processes. The present price of commercial
sulphate of potash on the London market is £65 per ton, having since the outbreak of war steadily risen
from £lO a ton in consequence of the failure of German supplies. Alumina is used for making special
furnace linings ; it also forms the raw material from which the metal aluminium is manufactured.
Alumina also forms a convenient starting-point for the preparation of aluminium salts, alums, and the
like, which are extensively used in the tanning and dyeing industries. Hitherto no source of potash or
alumina so readily accessible as alunite has been discovered in Australia.
iindpr ) V ' J r B . WaS w? pomt ! d 5 W w a Sal f ry ’ t 0 deVote llis wllole time to experimental work
under the direction of a Special Committee. The work of the Committee, since its appointment, has gone on
continuously, and much valuable information is now available to manufacturers and others. The^xperi-
mental work is being carried out in the metallurgical laboratories of the University of Melbourne repre-
able to V I*'T g , been , ob f tai^ e d tom each of the important fields; and the Committee was
bl to conduct not only laboratory tests but technical experiments upon parcels of 56 lbs. and upwards
of the mineral at a time. A progress report of work done during last year was presented to the Executive
mmittee in January last; a further report on the results of more recent work is in course of preparation.
U was found that a comparatively simple process, i.e., that of heating alunite to bright redness for
a short period, is the most satisfactory method of treating the mineral. A full investigation has been ™dc
ZTJ/Tr egood r uli ’ and the
ommittee s reports, A furnace of the reverberatory type is required. The calcined mnterifll
contams nearly 30 per cent, of sulphate of potash, and about 60 per cent, of alumina and may be emoloved
as a potash fertilizer without further treatment. In this case" however, no Te Vuld made of Se
alumina. By treatment of the calcined material with hot water the potassium snlnWp j- i T A A
may be separated from the alumina, which remains undissolved.’ The solution, when evaporated without
• Uft^f r treatmeri j’ yields sulphate of the usual commercial grade. The Committee was fortunate
rX"u g oh^L empl ° yed “ has recently
stand in the“ 6 ny ZaXZ VTf
and the Committee, haying regard to the nature of theCSioMtavdvedZm aI “ m * e ’
to the marketing of the product, is of opinion that the manufacture of sulphat^o?™^ lllB & *“*s
on with profit if done on a sufficiently large scale by means of modern ami,! ! fP i * h could . be . c f ied
local market for the output of the plant could be obtained • in other words fS'f? provided that a
way of developing the alunite industry are now lf


3. Other Chemicals.— The production of a number of other chemicals in Australia
has been considered by the Executive and the Chemical Committee, Amongst these
may be mentioned lanoline, cream of tartar, copper sulphate, casein, pepsin, rennet,
and other by-products of the meat industry, starch, glucose, and industrial alcohol.
The latter is dealt with with alcohol engines in the section on Engineering
(pages 41 and 42.)
Lanoline is a substance closely related in composition to the waxes. In
admixture with various fatty bodies it constitutes the yolk of wook In Australia there
is as yet no recovery of this and the other valuable by-products of wool scouring. In
England it has been the custom to add acid to waste scour liquids in order to recover the
wool-grease. Such treatment results in the formation of an inferior product containing,
in addition to the lanoline, the fatty acids of the wool, and of any soap used in the
washing process. To recover pure lanoline from the scour liquors it is necessary to use
other methods of treatment. The purified product is used in making up pharmaceutical
preparations, and large quantities are absorbed by the soap-making industry.
Information regarding certain new processes has been brought before the Chemical
Committee, which has also interviewed representatives of the wool and wool-scouring
industries on the subject. Hitherto only a very small proportion of the wool exported
from Australia has been scoured before shipment, but it is thought that in the future
a much greater proportion will be treated here. The Committee has, therefore, taken
steps to bring together possible users and producers of lanoline, and are making available
to the latter all the information in their possession on the treatment of the scour liquors.
During the year 1914-15 the value of the cream of tartar and tartaric acid
imported into Australia was over a quarter million sterling. These materials, which
are used almost exclusively in the manufacture of baking powders and self-raising
flours, are by-products of the wine industry. On making inquiries it was found that
only a very small proportion of the crude cream of tartar was recovered in the wine-
producing States of Australia—that is, South Australia, Victoria, and New South
Wales. Although the estimated production of cream of tartar in Australia, if recovered,
would not equal the amount imported, it seemed desirable to take steps to make use of
this by-product. Accordingly, the Chemical Committee recommended that co-ordinating
committees be appointed in each of the wine-producing States for the purpose of investi-
gating the matter. These committees have been appointed, and the work is pro-
ceeding.
The Chemical Committee is able to report that the production of copper sulphate
is now being carried on on a considerable scale ; also that extensive establishments for the
manufacture of electrolytic zinc and calcium carbide respectively are under construction
in Tasmania. That the production of white lead in Australia is not equal to the demand
does not appear to the Committee to be a very satisfactory state of affairs in a lead-
exporting country. The Committee has been informed that a factory capable of
producing 5,000 tons of white lead per annum will be in operation before the end of this
year.
The question of the production of casein was investigated by the Executive
Committee, and the evidence obtained showed that the small local demand was already
met. Figures placed before the Committee showed that in normal conditions the
largest gross return was obtained from milk by using it for the manufacture of cheese,
the smallest by producing butter and casein, an intermediate return being given by
butter factories which only take cream from the farmer and leave him the skim milk
for raising stock. Under these circumstances the manufacture of casein, beyond that
required to satisfy local demands, is not likely to be undertaken permanently in Australia,
though under present war conditions it would B probably be more profitable than cheese-
making.
Owing to the prohibition of the export of rennet from England as a war regulation,
the price of this substance in Australia rose enormously, and cheese-makers were unable
for a time to secure at any price as much as they desired. The question of the local
manufacture of rennet was, therefore, investigated by the Committee and information
obtained from various sources. Largely as a result of this information, which was
distributed to firms interested in the meat industry, at least one firm has undertaken the
manufacture of rennet on a commercial scale. At the same time it was pointed out to
cheese-makers that pepsin is almost, if not quite, as useful as rennet in the process.
(Many physiologists regard the ferments rennin and pepsin as identical.) Experiments
were undertaken by the Agricultural Department of Victoria to investigate the matter,
32


and some excellent samples of cheese were produced with pepsin. It was urged further
that the local manufacture of pepsin was more worthy of encouragement than that of
rennet, since, apart from its use in cheese-making, it could be utilized in the manufacture
of peptonized foods. The production of various other by-products of the meat industry,
including glue, gelatine, tallow, and medical extracts, was also fully considered by the
Executive. The conclusion was reached that most of the waste of these substances
which was alleged to occur in meat-works was due to the economic conditions under
which such works are conducted in Australia, rather than to lack of knowledge of the
value of the products wasted. In many cases, moreover, the market for special products
in Australia is too small to make manufacture remunerative.
The question of the local production of glucose was also investigated by the
Committee, in view of the large quantities of this substance imported from the United
States. Inquiry, however, showed that a factory for the production of starch and glucose
from maize had recently been established in Victoria, so no further action was taken.
G.—OTHER SECONDARY INDUSTRIES.
1. Leather and Tanning.— The leather industry is one of the most important
secondary industries in Australia, yet it seems probable that it will become even more
important when tanning is placed on a more scientific basis. The Executive Committee
were strongly impressed with this fact as the result of a report prepared by a Sub-
Committee of the New South Wales State Committee which visited several tanneries
in Sydney. It was found among other things that no attempt was made at these
tanneries to determine the amount of tannin, or even of extract, in the tan liquors
prepared, and no analyses were made of the original bark nor of the spent bark. The
proportion of bark and water used was not weighed or measured, and the water was
m s °m e cases used cold, in others hot, whilst in the latter the exact temperature was
not determined. The tanners rely on the appearance and taste of the liquid, with the
result that a great deal of time and material is often wasted before the required liquor
is obtained.
It is true that in some few tanneries in Australia chemists are employed to
analyze the barks, and, to some extent, to control the tanning process, but in the great
majority conditions are as above described. The tanners interviewed admitted that
t eir methods left much to be desired, and that they would welcome any scientificallv
worked-out method of procedure which would enable them to obtain extracts of definite
and uniform strength.
The Executive decided, therefore, to appoint a Special Committee to investigate
processes of extraction of tannin from wattle-bark with a view to the determination
ot a standard and scientific method of procedure under practical conditions This
Committee has commenced operations at the Sydney Technical College. It had been
hoped by the Executive that the tanners would be willing to assist this inquirv bv
the provision of a portion of the necessary funds. The New South Wales Master
banners Association was approched, and, while in sympathy with the aims and obiect
of the investigation, expressed the view that all the tanners in Australia should be
asked to contribute. It was thought that negotiations with the tanners in al the
States would take too long, and the investigation has, therefore, been begun without
waiting lor financial assistance from the industry.
Australia’s increasing dependence on South Africa for wattle-bark has been
referred to above p 26), and the inquiry just mentioned should help to reduce the
imports of the bark by leading to its more economical utilization. The Special Com
mittees appointed in Queensland and Western Australia to investigate mangrove and
red-gum bark lespectively, and find means, if possible, for removing the disabilities
Product“t I?! “tw tb b f n , refeired to when discussing Forest
.Products (p. 27). These three Committees dealing with allied subiects are in
communication with one another, so that all possibility of unnecessary duplication of
work is removed. Other inquiries undertaken by the Committee which have a dose
bearing 011 tjie leather industry are the subjects of tick eradication and the branding
(ppAe tnd T 24) Se matt6rS W been dISCUSsed when dealin § witt <*e pastoral industry
b^^^fttlormef£“*£ T
Victorian Branch of the Meat Industry Employees Union that the meft wraks in


Australia were conducted on a wasteful system, whereby a large amount of good food,
such as sheep’s heads and fries, was boiled down for fertilizers. On inquiry the Com-
mittee learnt that the managers of most of the meat-works were anxious to utilize these
portions of carcasses if possible, but that the local demand was very small, and it did
not pay to export them owing to the small prices realized in proportion to the bulk.
In regard to milk, the Committee received an application from Dr. J. B. Cleland
and Mr. W. H. Myers, of Sydney, for assistance in their research on the electrical
sterilization of milk. Work already carried out at Liverpool, England, has proved that
electrical sterilization of milk may be conducted on a large scale, and that it has certain
advantages over any other system. No complete scientific investigation of the process
has yet been made, however, and the exact means by which the electric current destroys
the bacteria in the milk is not known. Further, the best and most economical conditions
of working have not been ascertained. A recommendation for a grant of £IOO for the
purchase of apparatus and other expenses connected with this research was approved,
and, as far as their other duties have allowed, the Special Committee have pressed on
with the experiments (see paragraph (i) below).
A research which may have an important bearing on the solution of the day-
baking trouble is being conducted at the Sydney Technical College by Dr. H, G.
Chapman, under a grant from the Executive. The investigations are being carried
out primarily with the object of discovering “ races ” of yeasts which will produce more
rapid ripening of doughs in the manufacture of bread, and already Dr. Chapman has
succeeded in reducing the time of the dough in the trough from eight to five hours.
This has been done by improving the fermenting power of the yeast, and not by
increasing the quantity used. The ability to ferment at any particular rate does not
appear now to be a property of the cells of each 4 4 race ” of yeast, but can be changed
readily by suitable culture through successive generations. Dr. Chapman expects to
diminish still further the time of ripening, and is now experimenting with four-hour
doughs [see paragraph (ii) below).
(i) Electrical Sterilization of Milk. —The milk supplies of the large centres of population in Australia
are of great importance both from the public health and the economic aspects. An abundant supply of
pure, sound, fresh milk is essential for the successful up-bringing of children, and is of great importance
as one of the principal food supplies of the adult population. In all large cities the milk supply must
be derived in greater or less amount from some distance from such centres of population. In cold climates
the transit of milk over long distances does not lead to such rapid deterioration in quality as occurs in warm
climates when the germs can increase with greater rapidity. Already the milk supplies of Australian
cities have to be derived in most instances from a very considerable distance. Whilst in cold winter weather
such transit leads to little deterioration, in summer time changes rapidly occur, so that a considerable
amount of milk may be lost to consumption in consequence, and the balance be decidedly deteriorated. If
means can be devised for insuring a decided lessening of these bacterial changes during transit, not only will
the supply of food to the public be improved, but the economic loss to the producer will be lessened ; whilst
if the distance from which the milk can be successfully brought is increased, a wider field of supply will
follow with an increase in size of the industry. At present the chief means of retarding bacterial changes
in milk during transit —when any attempt at all is made—is by reducing the temperature of the milk to
one at or little above 40° F. In many instances no special attempt is made to prevent bacterial growth
during transit, but the milk on arrival is subjected to a form, more or less imperfect, of pasteurization.
The experiments of Dr. Beattie and F. C. Lewis at Liverpool, on the electrical sterilization of milk
by means of alternating currents, called the attention of the Committee to the value such a process might
present if it could be practically and economically applied to Australian conditions. The Liverpool
investigators have applied the principle commercially on a small scale for certain purposes. Can the
method be applied to Australian conditions at a reasonable cost ? It seemeid to the Committee that the
importance of the matter well warranted a thorough investigation. In the first, case the Committee set
themselves to endeavour to ascertain on what principle the sterilization of the milk depended. Before a
practical commercial scheme could be presented it seemed essential that this point should be determined.
The Committee were of opinion that the sterilization probably depended on one or other, or more than
one, of the following factors :
(a) That it might be due to transitory heating of the milk.
(h) That it might be due to electrical shock—whatever such shock may be considered to be
as applicable to living bacteria.
(c) That it might be due to chemical changes brought about by electrolytic means, the chemical
bodies perhaps produced temporarily combining with and destroying the bacteria.
As a side issue to the first of these, i.e., sterilization by heat, it occurred to the Committee that it might
be of value to investigate the effect on milk of keeping it for lengthy periods of time at a temperature some
degrees above that at which the bacteria which usually gain entrance can multiply. It seemed that it
might be practicable in a hot climate like that of Australia to convey milk from the producer to the cities
at a temperature sufficiently above that at which the organisms in the milk can multiply, and yet not
sufficiently high to cause chemical changes in the milk, or perhaps to destroy the ferments contained in it.
It seemed, therefore, that it might perhaps be cheaper to thus convey milk at a slightly raised temperature,
at any rate in hot weather, rather than at a decidedly reduced temperature. The committee in consequence
undertook some preliminary experiments, which consisted of maintaining at a temperature of 50° to 55° C.


for a period of several days some ordinary domestic milk as delivered by tbe dairyman. Unfortunately
these experiments in this particular instance have shown that even at a temperature maintained at this
height, certain thermophilic spore-bearing organisms not only survived, but multiplied. These organisms
which gained access to the milk were probably derived from cow-dung. The changes they produced in
the milk were slight and progressed slowly, but the presence of a number of organisms was revealed on
culture As tar as the Committee have therefore gone at present, it seems doubtful whether milk, unless
o amed with much greater care than is usually bestowed upon it, can be kept in an unchanged state, from
a bacterial point of view, tor a period of several days at a temperature of from 50° to 55° C. This matter
requires further investigation, as it may well be that though milk cannot be thus well preserved for a few days
the principle may nevertheless be applicable for the transit of milk when the period is measured in hours. 3
nnn-ontrt Committee have also carried out a preliminary experiment in which they passed an alternating
nnent through agar jelly seeded with coliform organisms, from the point of view of endeavouring to ascertain
St if n Wl / C} ! re j ults the Passage of such current is due to electrolytic dissociation in
f f ec f tr ° de . s \ In tlie Preliminary experiments thus far carried out no evidence
•I du ® to electrolysis is apparent, the growth of the organisms being apparently as abundant
_p3® ?“ dl f ate P ro . xl “jty of the electrodes as at a distance from them, which should not be the case if the
setting free of ions in the neighbourhood of the electrodes leads to sterilization in this position.
of milk hi ;°n m X ' !!f- S engaged f/ urth T ex P eriments on the principles governing the electrical sterilization
to “hfbes 7 t aoJ ZZ T* Cmren i fr ° u the &T nt °* Vi6w ° f ascertaining the electrical variations leading
o°J^J n*- d -i n X eco I nomi « al re , sulte - Through the kindness of Assistant Professor Madsen, of the
y> Key haVe be6n 6nt a m ° tor generator h y means of whic]l these experiments are being
the J Bre f-l mhin 9--^9 ort °f S P ecial Committee. —Study has so far been confined to
aotivTtWn 7 r St ead f g - t0 r fP id ri P ening of d ™g k - The yeast has been tested by its
Thrdn^L d wS k h h have een “ to bread at the Scb ° ol of Baker y> Technical College, Sydney.
160 ThTpvpf pare - 1 70 al' fl °. Ur ’ including tbe wei g kt of flour used on the table, and
doughs have usuallv ° f - br ®f d bas been 175 loaves > sighing, approximately, 355 lbs. The
Sg Z at a temperature of 830 F - For time doagbs
of wort Th e vf. b f aS l!i een det f mined countin g the number of yeast cells in a given amount
ascertained The g ii iV obtamed . fr + om a containing a given number of yeast cells has been
_ \ w ® l §“t of yeast used m the doughs has varied from to 5 ounces The aciditv of the
X rt °r-.T°r ia “ ° Cm - eTSed bySn with
sometimes ! br f a . d bas bee “ made T re ß“ larl 7 commercial conditions, bread
£ Z figure Sin ■ rl gher J n * he P re P aration of yeast it has been found
Xch the Sf Standi ? Wtb ° f the yeast should be ,ess than th ° temperature at
The nreaenca ef fl Abundant oxygenation favours the development of yeast fermenting rapidly
The presence of flour m the wort prevents any check to fermentation when the yeast is mixed in thJ dough
h IZTI r °°l amed about 13 P er <**• “« d m atter, of which one-half s „3s'
F ”f nt e .l th \ d rlT ° ! h Ta to Which and «™ d -SX
Uquor The wort is boiled and d W^ le °P be lar°s1 ar °s dlsa PP ears - The mash is strained from the
sSzed hvbTmL w,? d “ft 6d r ?P ldl 7- I* 13 P lac cd in a large flat enamel pan, which has been
inocnla ted b bv *l, 8 for som f tlme ' Tte wort is b «rten with a whisk to aerate the liquid and is
b 7 considerable amount of stock from the previous brew The yeast grows
tor sixteen hours The multiplication of yeast cells in this time is about fen times but'varies Seatl?
eh i, Mucb a ; s3ls^ anoe ba s been rendered by Miss M. M. Lilley at the University and bv Mr F°A Fflintt
“ruix^ra'd 0011686 - who has spared “
referred ® erba i^' cot^y lr ocatious relating' to the clay industries were
h representatives of the principal pottery compames'andj others have shown that—
(“) Australia f possesses an abundance of clay and kaolin suitable for the
manufacture of bricks, tiles, stoneware, and various grades of
porcelain ware, but that deposits of “ ball ” clay-the white burning,
lugh.y plastic clay—are rare. A certain proportion of “ ball ” clay
import from°Engknd WOrk ' neCeSSar y to
(b) In the manufacture of certain grades of stoneware, Australian potteries
■“? ° ther cou . nbries ’ and stoneware pipes have been
exported in large quantities to eastern countries, notably the
f f 6Ce J,f y ’ b “ wever > bhe exports have ceased through
/\ rm x 1 • rates of frei^llt an d increased cost of labour.
° Tha fl * m ; “f ard bett ? r ades of cla y products the industries here
are in a very backward state.
(d) That the backward state of the industry is due, not so much to the lack
of sk lied clay workers, as to the need of trained technologists capable
of directing operations and of scientifically blending the various
producT CeSSary t 0 produce tbe re T u i red properties in the finished


(e) That any attempts to assist the industry by encouraging the establish-
ment of schools of potteries and ceramic research laboratories would
receive the support of the companies communicated with.
(f) That it is desirable to make a systematic examination of Australian
clays, and search especially for “ ball ” clays. The Committee
is strongly of opinion that active measures should be taken
(1) To collect and co-ordinate the data on clays published by
the various State Geological Departments, and to continue
the work they have begun;
(2) to encourage the establishment of schools of pottery;
(3) to assist competent research chemists and physicists in carrying
on, ceramic investigations ;
(4) to induce manufacturers to produce the higher grades of
porcelain ware, including domestic porcelain.
An allied question to which the attention of the Executive Committee has been
drawn is the unsatisfactory nature of the enamels, glazes, and pottery colours used in
Australia. The matter was referred to the Chemical Committee, which has reported
that research into the chemical and physical properties of these materials is highly
desirable, and the Executive are endeavouring to arrange for such investigations to be
begun.
4, Paper-making.— Australia is at present almost entirely dependent on the
outside world for its supplies of paper-making materials. In view of the present
shortage of shipping, together with the increasing scarcity of such materials throughout
the world, the whole question of paper-making in Australia obviously merits careful
consideration. The Executive have received many suggestions as to possible paper-
making materials. The question of the local production of wood-pulp has been dis-
cussed earlier in this report (p. 25), but, in addition, the Committee have considered
the possibility of utilizing wheat-straw, marram-grass, and lalang or blady-grass. me
prospects of establishing a paper-making industry in South Australia are discussed m a
Bulletin published by the South Australian Department of Chemistry,* m which the
conclusion is reached that wheat-straw is the most promising material m that btate.
The following materials are discussed in an Appendix to that Bulletin, viz. : inner
trunk and leaves of grass-tree, posidonia fibre, stinkwort, marram-grass, and a native
grass— Lepidosperma gladiatum. Other materials which have been suggested are stalks
of maize, and of broom-corn, flax-straw, sugar-cane refuse, old cotton-plants, banana-
tops, lantana, prickly-pear, St. John’s-wort, bracken-fern, hybiscus, Sida retusa, and
Ecdeiocolea monostachya. Preliminary tests of a number of these materials have given
promising results, but the main difficulty would probably be to obtain a sufficient
supply of any of these, except wheat-straw, to enable them to be successfully utilized
on a commercial scale. Weeds such as prickly-pear, St. John’s-wort, bracken-fern,
and lantana, of which large quantities are available, do not appear very promising as
sources of paper-pulp, though it is possible that their utilization for this purpose may
help to pay the expenses of their eradication. From articles in the press it appears
that blady-grass, and various weeds, are being utilized for paper-making by a company
which has recently started operations at Cairns, Queensland. Tests of difterent
materials for this purpose should form a valuable portion of the work of the botanical
section of the permanent Institute, and it will probably be necessary to erect a
special plant for the purpose similar to those already established in
England, Canada, and the United States.
(i) Marram-qmss. —This grass ( Ammophila arundinacea) has been used in many parts of the world
for planting on sand-dunes in coastal areas, to check the drift of the sand, and for this purpose is universal y
acknowledged to be the most useful plant in temperate climates It has been planted to some
all the Australian States, except Queensland, and it is estimated that at the present time about 5,700 acres
of coastal lands in Australia are planted with marram-grass, 4,500 of which are in \ictona where the chie
plantations are in the neighbourhood of Port Fairy. Experiments carried out m England by Messrs.
Clayton Beadle and Stevensf led them to conclude that though the fibres are shorter than those of esparto-
grass, the paper produced from it was of greater strength, and was suitable for fine printings and it i
understood that as a result of their tests marram-grass is now being utilized by E^^ ish P a P er ’f a ang p p ;
Tests made in Australia by the South Australian Department of Chemistry and by the Australian Pap
Mills Melbourne, appear to show that the qualities of the grass grown at Port Fairy are similar to thos
of that grown in England. The Australian Paper Mills report, however, that the grass suffers fiom the
• South Australian -I Department of Chesdatry, Bulletin 1, Adelaide, 1916.
t Kew Bulletin, 1918, No. 9, p. 363.


disadvantages that (1) knots are left after the boiling process, and (2) it is impossible to remove entirely
Ihe considerable proportion of sand and shell grit present, so that the resulting paper is dirty. It is doubtful
also whether under Australian conditions the harvesting of marram-grass could be effected sufficiently
cheaply to make it a commercial success. Further inquiries are being made by the Committee.
Textiles.— -The dependence of Australia on the outside world for textile
fabrics of all kinds is well known. At the present time the only fibre produced in the
Commonwealth to any considerable extent is wool, and of this only about 2 per cent,
is at present used locally. Cotton and linen goods are not manufactured in the Com-
monwealth, and it is not probable that these manufactures will be developed locally
until the raw materials are produced in Australia. Steps taken by the Executive to
assist the growing of cotton and flax have already been referred to (see pp. 21 and 22).
A fibrous material of which a large supply is available locally, but for which the best
reatment and usages do not appear to have been yet discovered, is the marine-fibre
i 01 1!? from Posidonia australis. A Special Committee was, therefore, appointed by
e Executive to investigate the physical and chemical properties of this fibre, with a
view to determimng the purposes for which it is most suitable.
n . ty.F' The fibrous portion of the leaf-sheath of this marine plant has on certain sheltered
p» of the Australian coastline formed considerable deposits in shallow water. Up to the present the
X are r? are J thoS ® in and St. Vincent’s Gulfs, South Australia, but it Kerns
possible that others may be found in Western Australia, where the plant is abundant
J, hre ® rge ha/ e between them spent £220,000 on machinery for raising, cleaning, and
moved that the 1 ° f nU ™ TO ™ fP er ' raents ’ the J have solved most of the difficulties, and have
p o d that the material can be raised and cleaned at commercially remunerative prices. Full information
as to the Processes adopted is contained in a Bulletin on Marine Fibre, by D. C. Winterbottom published
Austral^ 0 for ,Z aW f. Chemistry* A quantity of the material has been disposed of in
.Si. insulating steam and refrigerating plants, house cooling, and the manufacture of bedding
and for these purposes it has proved very satisfactory. The amount required for these purposes however
with* a Z?geZ%ut gr ° Wth ° f * ie indUStl7 ’ Which - *° be worked
The chief uses which have been suggested as likely to lead to a greater demand are for textile nur
f fi r n COtt °S m f 6 manufacture of nitro-cellulose, and as a material for paper-making
As a textile, posidoma fibre suffers from various disadvantages as compared with lute to which it is moat
similar but it has several properties not possessed by other vegetable fibres which ough? to give it spTcTal
v P ur P oses - Its strength is not great and is variable, and it is brittle It hasbeen
stated that this brittleness can be overcome by special treatment, and this is one of the questions which
the Special Committee is investigating. The brittleness of the fibre leads to an excessive amount of waste
Tvnid tK fib n IS fi! ard fn m i tte i or ? in^ 1T Way ’ but xt is P° ssible tb at a special process might be evolved to
avoid this On the other hand, the fibre has almost no elasticity, so that material mZTIoX Tilling
stretch, and it is unique amongst vegetable fibres in the readiness with which it can be dverl The ntp • i
investigations being made by the Special Committee may throJlighl on the^TeasoK this r?
fhTp„p m C°aMu?;rbr SbL inCTy wouM be — fOT
to compete a/f y 1‘ SeemS “ likd y will be able
cuough P rate. Boiling Site at a cheap
fo e :S.yl th Chl ° rme ’ * hlS m!ght bC e ®ectedjWhile’it3is:stilCdamp°with’ , sea-saterfby^Bubrdttii^ ) it
t. *£ St,^
cjlmte. for holding comprasod (U) the ~, ,1,;,,., ~f d! vf], i.'i,,.l' .'[ . 'f.'f'l'
building industry in Australia; and (iii) the design i eioping the ship-
combustion engines suitable for using alcohol as a fuel, in place ofMineral oils
In recent years a considerable number of cvlindom b Q , rQ n • , , .
high pressures to which the cylinders am suKiAptod releasing. Owing to the
processes have to be used in their manufacture. 'ln vimv Tthe fcj i^obtafoing
• South Australian Department of Chemistry, Bulletin 4, Adelaide, 1917.


cylinders from abroad, and of the necessity for maintaining a supply of the cylinders
for the distribution of the gases upon which various industries are dependent, the
question of manufacturing the cylinders in Australia is of considerable importance.
The Committee have already obtained certain information regarding the technical
processes of manufacture of the cylinders, and are expecting to receive from England
at an early date complete details which will enable the manufacture of the cylinders
to be undertaken in this country, if it is found that economic conditions are suited to
the establishment of the industry.
In March, 1917, Captain J. H. Butters and Mr. H. W. Gepp, members of the
Tasmanian State Committee, directed the attention of the Executive to the importance
of immediate steps being taken in this country to develop the ship-building industry
on a standardized basis. After making inquiries and consulting experts on the matter,
the Executive formed the opinion that the first step necessary with a view to giving
effect to the proposal was to obtain a report on the whole question, setting out the
possibilities and the difficulties that would have to be overcome, especially in regard
to the supply of materials and skilled labour, the size and type of vessels that should
be built, the rate at which they could be constructed, equipped, and manned, and the
purposes for which they could be used. The Executive proposed to appoint a Special
Committee of experts to enquire into and report immediately upon the whole matter,
and they recommended that a grant of £SOO should be made for the expenses of the
proposed committee, and for the payment of fees to such experts as the Committee
might find it necessary to employ. As the Executive did not receive the necessary
approval for the grant, and as the whole question was a month later taken in hand by
other authorities, no further action has been taken by the Committee.
The question of the utilization of alcohol as a fuel for internal combustion engines
has attracted a considerable amount of attention in various countries in recent years.
This is largely due to the prospective shortage in supplies of mineral oils. Increased
attention has* recently been drawn to the question in view of the rapid rise in the price
of these products, and of the large quantities of alcohol required for munition purposes.
In Australia petrol has increased in price from Is. per gallon in 1908 to 2s. 7d. per gallon
in 1917. If the war continues there is a prospect of a serious shortage in the supply
of petrol in Australia, if not even of a complete cutting off of the supply. As there
are no payable oil fields in Australia the question is one of considerable importance and
urgency. In any case, even if the war ends soon, the supplies of mineral oil are
practically stationary, while the world’s demand for that commodity is increasing
enormously. In March, 1917, the Executive appointed a Special Committee to
investigate the subject, and a sum of £250 was provided for the expenses of the Committee
up to the 30th June, 1917. In the first progress report of the Special Committee it is
stated that the main aspects of the problem requiring consideration are as follow,
viz.
(a) The design and manufacture of the engine.
(b) The supply of the alcohol, including its distribution.
(c) The denaturation of the^alcohol.
The Special Committee are of the opinion that it is desirable to pursue their
investigations into each of the above aspects of the problem concurrently, since it is
obviously useless to produce an efficient engine if a proper supply of suitable denatured
spirit is not available, while, on the other hand, the supply of spirit will not be
forthcoming in any considerable quantity until manufacturers are prepared to place
their engines on the market.
Though the questions of the supply and distribution of alcohol and its denatura-
tion are not, of course, engineering problems, it is convenient to refer to them in this
part of this Report, as they are being dealt with by the same Committee as is investigating
the question of the design and manufacture of alcohol engines.
(i) The Design and Manufacture of Alcohol Engines. —A large amount of work in the design and
manufacture of alcohol engines has already been carried out, especially in England, France, Germany, and
America, and alcohol has been used for a number of years with success in specially designed engines,
particularly in Germany. Any petrol engine of the ordinary types can be run on alcohol without material
change in its construction. The main difficulties encountered are in starting and in supplying a sufficient
quantity of fuel. When alcohol is used in an ordinary petrol engine the consumption of fuel per b.h.p. is
about 50 per cent, greater than in the case of petrol. It appears, however, that the consumption of alcohol
per b.h.p. in a specially designed alcohol engine will not exceed in volume the consumption of petroMn a
petrol engine.


The main alterations necessary in the ordinary design of petrol engines to fit them to work efficiently
on alcohol are as follow, viz. : — (a) An increased compression from about 75 lbs. per square inch, which is
the average for petrol engines, to about 180 lbs. per square inch, both above atmospheric pressure ; (h) a
preheating of either the fuel or the air or of the mixture of fuel and air ; (c) an increase in the area of the
fuel jets and fuel supply pipes.
Though an alcohol engine designed in the above manner will run efficiently, it cannot generally be
started from cold with alcohol. In order to overcome this difficulty some special means must be provided.
For example, either the carburetter must be preheated by a torch or in some other way, or an arrangement
must be provided whereby a small amount of petrol can be used at the start. When a temperature sufficient
to vaporize the fuel is attained, the alcohol can be gradually turned into the carburetter and the preheating
of the fuel maintained by the exhaust gases. Alcohol possesses various advantages over petrol as a fuel.
In the first place, the products of combustion in an alcohol engine are practically odourless and are free from
smoke. Secondly, the risk from fire in the storage and handling of alcohol is much less than in the case of
petrol. Thirdly, there are many theoretical, chemical, and physical reasons why alcohol should yield
superior results. It can be used without danger of pre-ignition under high compression; it can yield a
much higher percentage of its available heat contents in the form of work ; and for carburetting purposes
it is stated to be much more homogeneous than other fuels with which it competes. Lastly, alcohol is
produced in Australia, and, if necessary, can be manufactured in largely increased quantities in this country.
For reasons indicated in their Report, the Special Committee have decided to devote attention
primarily to the design and manufacture of stationary engines which have a low piston speed and long
stroke, rather than to the motor-car engines, which have a high piston velocity and comparatively short
piston travel. The Committee are working in co-operation with the Imperial Motor Transport Council,
London, and the secretary of that Council is making inquiries on behalf of the Committee as to the most
efficient type of engines available. On receipt of the desired information the Committee proposes either
to purchase or to have constructed an engine or engines for demonstration purposes. It is considered that
much can be accomplished in the way of advertisement and of familiarizing people to the use of alcohol
as a fuel by exhibiting alcohol engines at work at agricultural shows and other exhibitions in the Common-
wealth. It is hoped in this way to induce manufacturers in Australia to turn their attention to the production
of alcohol engines. The Committee are already in touch with several engineering firms in Australia which
intend to carry out experimental work with alcohol as a fuel.
(ii) The Supply of Alcohol. —The supply of alcohol is likely to prove a much more difficult problem
than the question of the design of the engines. The most economical source at the present time for the
production of alcohol is from sugar molasses, but even if the whole available supply of molasses in Australia
were used for the purpose in view, it would be sufficient for the production of only about 4,000,000 gallons
of alcohol per annum, whereas the annual importations of mineral oils are in the neighbourhood of 17,000,000
gallons. The total average annual quantity of molasses available in Australia for distillation is about
50,000 tons, of which about 12,500 tons are now used for that purpose. The remaining 37,500 tons are
largely wasted. The present price of methyl alcohol produced from molasses is about Is. 9d. per gallon,
ex store in Melbourne.
It appears unlikely that any considerable quantity of alcohol can be manufactured in Australia
from either raw or waste materials not at present utilized. The most important of these materials are waste
timber, grass-tree, prickly pear, waste fruit, and straw. The production of alcohol from cellulose, such as
waste timber or straw, is costly, and the immediate prospects of producing alcohol from these sources on a
profitable basis do not appear encouraging. The whole question is receiving consideration.
If the required supply of alcohol cannot be produced from raw or waste materials not at present
utilized, it will be necessary to grow special materials for the purpose. The most promising sources in this
respect appear to be maize, wheat, barley, potatoes, and beet. The Committee have obtained information
on these matters from various distillers and other persons, and are making further inquiries.
\ arious authorities have proposed that alcohol should be used as a fuel in admixture \\ ith other materials,
such as benzine, ether, or acetylene. The advantages claimed for the use of such a mixture are set out
in the Report of the Special Committee, who consider, however, that, broadly speaking, the arguments in
favour of the use of a mixture apply to motor-car engines rather than to stationary engines. The Committee
are of the opinion that in view of the higher thermo-dynamic efficiency of alcohol, it is desirable to aim
primarily at the adoption of engines using that commodity alone as a fuel. Concurrently with the develop-
ment of stationary alcohol engines, the Committee propose to take steps with a view to bringing alcohol,
either as an admixture or alone, into use for motor-car work.
(iii) The Denaturation Problem. —The denaturants at present necessary for industrial methylated
spirits under the Excise Act and Regulations are as follow, viz. ;— 2 per cent, of wood naphtha, per cent,
each of pyridine and mineral benzine. The cost of these denaturants is 1• 74 pence per gallon of alcohol.
In order that power alcohol may be available at as low a price as practicable, it is desirable that an alteration
should be made in the existing regulations as to denaturation. The Committee are in communication
with the Comptroller-General of the Department of Trade and Customs on the matter, and have asked
if the addition of 1 per cent, of pyridine only would be satisfactory. This would reduce the cost of denaturants
to 0.9 pence per gallon of alcohol. The suggestion was not acceptable to the Customs authorities, who
have, however, granted permission for the Committee to obtain a supply of a quarter-cask (32| gallons)
of spirit for experimental purposes denatured in the manner suggested. The Committee are making
inquiries, and are collecting data, with a view to determining upon a cheap and efficient denaturant which
can be produced in Australia. In this matter particularly the Committee are co-operating with the Imperial
Motor Transport Council, London, with a view to obtaining a denaturant which will be generally acceptable
throughout the Empire. The Committee hope that the whole excise question will be dealt with by the
authorities m a liberal spirit. Otherwise artificial difficulties in the wav of the extended use of industrial
alcohol will be greatly increased.


7. Miscellaneous. —The Executive have received several inquiries from
manufacturers asking for information as to processes. Of these may be mentioned the
production of sal ammoniac, the distillation of oil and other coal-products, the commercial
treatment of feathers and of pith cane. Unfortunately, in neither of the latter cases
has it been found possible to give the desired information, though it is probable that if
the permanent Institute had been in existence, this could have been obtained by
experimental work in its laboratories.
(i) Treatment of Feathers. —Previous to the war, feathers were shipped in large quantities from
Australia to Germany, where they were treated by special processes and machinery before being utilized
for filling cushions, mattresses, &c. When the export to Germany was stopped by the war, several
Australian firms made attempts to utilize feathers in this country, and one of these approached the Com-
mittee for information as to the best means of sterilizing feathers without rendering them more brittle,
and less soft, these results being found to take place with ordinary treatment. As no information appeared
to be available in Australia, and the Committee understood that feathers were largely treated in Norway,
inquiries were kindly made from that country by the Norwegian Consul in Melbourne. The reply received
was that Norwegian feathers were also mainly treated in Germany, or by German machines. The Committee
has since learnt that the firm in question is now placing feather goods on the market.
(ii) Treatment of Pith Cane.— The so-called pith cane used in the manufacture of chairs, go-carts,
&c., is a product of the East Indies. In its untreated state it is inferior, both in colour and elasticity, to
bleached cane, which commands a much higher price. The bleaching process was before the war carried
out in Germany, and the exact treatment to which the cane was subjected appears to be unknown in
Australia, though raw cane is available. Owing to the cutting off of German supplies of bleached cane,
owing to the war, manufacturers have had to use other raw materials, such as sea-grass. It seems possible
that a laboratory research would indicate a treatment for bleaching and softening the cane.
H.—STANDARDIZATION.
1. General. — In the Report of the Original Drafting Committee is is stated that
“ The highly specialized intricate work of standardizing electrical instruments and
other scientific apparatus for use as sub-standards by different Government Depart-
ments and other institutions in which research work may be carried on would also
naturally fall within the functions of the Institute.” The Executive Committee has
accordingly collected information both from published documents and by personal
interview with experts regarding the organization and work of standardization
institutions in other countries and has considered the probable requirements of
Australia in connexion with this class of work. They are of the opinion that work of
this nature is not only of fundamental importance to Government Departments and
scientific institutions, but would be highly beneficial, firstly, to consumers in bringing
about improvements in quality —and, secondly, to producers in the adoption of
improved standard types and qualities, and of scientific methods of control of tempera-
tures, pressures, measurements of time and space, chemical processes and other
technical factors which determine the amount and quality of the output of secondary
industries.
The Committee consider that it is of importance that arrangements be made
for the following standardizing work to be carried out, viz. :
{a) The standardization of scientific apparatus and instruments.
(6) The testing of electric lamps, apparatus, and machinery.
(c) The testing of instruments of precision used in industry.
( d ) The physical testing and standardization of materials used in industry
and by the Commonwealth Government.
Though it is probable that many of the standards which have been developed
in Europe and America can be adopted in the Commonwealth, it will be necessary for
investigations to be carried out in order to ascertain whether such standards are suited
to Australian conditions. It is also important that some organization shall be
established to act as an impartial authority in regard to referee work. The Committee
consider that the work of standardization should be developed, so far as practicable,
in close touch with industrial associations and other interested parties, as is done in
the United States of America through the Bureau of Standards and the American
Society for Testing Materials, Though it is obviously beyond the scope of the functions
of the Executive Committee to institute any comprehensive scheme of standardization
on the lines indicated above, a beginning in this direction has been made in respect
of the following matters, viz. : —(i) Standardization of analytical methods in the
chemical industries ; (ii) standardization of design of scientific apparatus used for


educational purposes ; (iii) the appraisement of alcohol in spirituous liquors ; (iv) the
metric system and decimal coinage ; and (v) standardization in the electrical industry.
2. Standardization of Analytical Methods in Chemical Industry. —During
the past two years the Society of Chemical Industry of Victoria has, in co-operation
with various scientific, industrial, and commercial interests, formulated the details of
a scheme for a series of investigations with a view to determining standardized methods
of analysis for use in the chemical industries. Other countries, notably the United
States of America and Germany, have long since recognised the importance of
standardizing analytical methods. Chemists in these countries have done much
valuable work in testing methods and selecting those deemed most suitable for general
adoption. In some instances methods investigated and recommended in this way are
made binding by legal enactment. In Australia analytical methods are playing an
increasingly important part in contracts between buyers and sellers of raw materials
and manufactured products, for example, in the case of phosphatic rocks for the
manufacture of fertilizers, and in the marketing of metallurgical products, such as
lead and zinc concentrates and the useful metals. In these cases the detailed methods
to be used m valuing the materials are ordinarily embodied in the contract. By the
US j °* standard, methods discrepancies between the results of various analyses are
reduced to a minimum, and disputes, often involving much loss of time and monev
are avoided.
The official methods of the United States Department of Agriculture have up
to the present been largely employed in the Commonwealth for the analysis of
agricultural and other products. But chemists in Australia are reluctant to adopt
without investigation, the methods recommended in other countries, especially in view
of the tact that such methods are worked out under conditions and upon materials
sometimes differing _ from those in this country. The scope of the work planned by
the Society of Chemical Industry of Victoria in conjunction with other bodies may be
summarized as follows, viz. y
(а) To review the best methods of analysis of materials.
(б) To compare the standard methods of other countries.
(c) To study the results of investigations made with those methods bv
various workers. J
(d) To conduct comparative tests on proposed methods.
(e) To recommend methods for general adoption.
(f) To keep in touch with all current work on analytical methods and to
report on new methods, and on old methods in the light’ of new
research. &
The work is to be carried out gratuitously by members of the society The
Executive Committee is of the opinion that not only will the direct results of the proposed
investigations be highly beneficial to industry, but that the work will engende? among
local chemists the habit of scientific research, and will assist in the draining and
formation of a body of skilled investigators. They have accordingly recommended
that a grant of £SO be made to the society for the purchase of materials and for
incidental expenditure connected with the investigations. It is proposed ’ that the
grant shall be made on the condition that the society furnishes reports from time to
time to the Executive Committee, which will bring the reports under the notice of
c emists in other States through the agency of the State Committees of the Advisory
nl “ y “ "*■”* ” analytical SS
3. Standardization of Design of Scientific Apparatus.—ln June IQlfi
attention of the Executive was directed by the Victorian State Commiitee to tb
desirability of procuring standard designs for the manufacture of apparatus which is
Tiff VI the teaching of science, and which could advantageously be made in Australia
e Victorian Committee pointed out that scientific apparatus—especially physical’
mechanical and engineering models-were practically linprocurabk from England
and that such apparatus as could be obtained was delivered only after long delay This
is due to the fact that nearly all the British workshops which manufactured scientific
apparatus are engaged m war work. It was urged that the drafting of SnX uff
roughout Australia should be undertaken immediately in order to enable both fh
teaching of science to be carried on without a shortage of apparatus affl the
of standard apparatus to be undertaken profit? £ ‘“if


the loss, delay, and inconvenience incidental to the existing methods of obtaining
apparatus from abroad by ordering from makers’ catalogues would thus be obviated.
The proposal was welcomed by the Victorian Department of Education, which was
considering the question of taking up the manufacture of scientific apparatus for its
own use.
The Executive appointed a Special Committee for the above purposes, and a
grant was made for the employment of a draftsman at the salary currently paid (£275
per annum) for similar work by the Commonwealth Government. Applications for
the position were invited by advertisement in the press, but the Special Committee
decided that none of the applicants who were willing to accept temporary employment
possessed the qualifications necessary for the work. The matter is accordingly in
abeyance for the present.
4. The Appraisement of Alcohol in Spirituous Liquors. —The question of
altering the present complicated methods for the appraisement of alcohol in spirituous
liquors was brought under the notice of the Executive by the Victorian State Committee.
Under the existing system alcoholic liquors are valued in terms of “ Proof spirit, which
by legal enactment in Australia is spirit of specific gravity 0*9198 at a temperature
of 60° Fahr. It is thus possible to have spirit of over 100 per cent, proof strength—a
paradoxical and confusing situation. The “ Proof spirit ” standard is an obstacle in
the way of the application of science to industry and could easily be replaced. The
Victorian Committee proposed that spirituous liquors should be valued in terms of
absolute alcohol by weight, and with a view to achieving that purpose they adopted
the following resolutions, viz. ;
(a) That the existing methods for the appraisement of alcohol in spirituous
liquors be revised.
(b) That the “ Proof spirit ” standard be abolished, and valuation in terms
of absolute alcohol by weight be substituted.
(c) That as a necessary preliminary to this reform the Executive Committee
be recommended to arrange for the compilation from existing data
of—(i) Official alcoholometric tables correlating specific gravities and
alcoholic percentages ; and (ii) an official formula for the determina-
tion of specific gravity at standard temperature from apparent specific
gravities at other temperatures.
These resolutions were submitted by the Executive for the opinion and comments
of the State Committees in New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, and
Western Australia. The New South Wales, South Australian, and Western Australian
Committees approved of them, but the Queensland Committee, though in agreement
as to the desirability of a reform, adopted a series of modified resolutions proposing
that the proportion of alcohol be recorded in terms of percentage of alcohol by volume
and not by weight.
In Victoria and South Australia thb opinions of a number of vignerons, spirit
distillers, chemists, and wine and spirit merchants, on the desirability of making the
proposed change were ascertained. In general, the vignerons, distillers, and chemists
are strongly in favour of the change, but merchants and importers, though agreeing in
some cases that the change would be desirable, if universally adopted, think that grave
disadvantages to the trade would result from the adoption in Australia of a standard
different from the English one.
The proposals of the Victorian and Queensland State Committees were com-
municated by the Executive to the Department of Scientific and Industrial Eesearch,
London, with a request for an expression of the views and the advice of the Department
on the suggested reform. The Executive was informed that the Advisory Council in
England agreed that the existing method of appraisement was admittedly unscientific,
and that the Executive’s memorandum had been forwarded to the Reconstruction
Committee with a suggestion that it should be referred to Lord Balfour of Burleigh’s
Committee on Trade Policy after the War.
The Executive are preparing a memorandum on the subject for publication.
5. The Metric System and Decimal Coinage— The war has shown that if the
British Empire is to hold its own in the commercial competition of the future, certain
reforms in its business and commercial methods must be made. Prominent among these
are questions relating to weights and measures and currency. The defects of the existing
systems, and the inconveniences they cause, both in regard to domestic trade and


*7° kter » ational relations, are too well known to require explanation in
p ' ,;!’ n . &0 !as the matter immediately concerns the functions of the
fhe ktroducZi of ° f f- prop t oSed permanent institute, it may be pointed out that
he introduction of the metric system of weights and measures and of the decimal
andln t^T3lation f l r P ° rt rif e b ° t t i a reSP - eCtt ° scientific and technical education
a CoiK*"” br »““»»»< -a •>-■*•«.«
T„ The Executive have accordingly taken action in the matter in several directions
ResearchL P nX;tL C Xa“ ICated t^ par “ of Scientific and IndusS
the desired change’s They „ Vp 6881 ® 11 of their opinion on the proposal to introduce
me aesirett changes, ihey were informed that the British Department did not
after a , ctl °" 111 the matter, that the Government Committee on Trade Policy
after the war, under the chairmanship of Lord Balfour of Burleigh wouldprobably
from ?hf Executive at “ ear l y / ate ’ and that the communication received
by l f^ 0m f ttee - *
is EAzt; S&J
Australia) undertook to make mouirips on -i, t •
sSzriSr^‘f tars *-*° a I *, s r «S
his—
. oomlSST E ."r
m the systems for the generation and distribution 7- , e “ ack of lmf ormity
recommendations for its improvement The Evee f * e< ftiical power and to make
important, and have appofnte” P,
Sc D F e R W S S °t th Y aleS t f ot r ° f the au b-committee and ProfeTso
bc.D., h.K.b., to act on the Victorian section 7 ’ IVIA *>
which l the , Execu , tive t 0 the Abilities
In the first place thereSSCT
in the capital towns, while the directf current " *be a lte r na,ting current supply
stations is almost as varied As COUntr y supply
50 periods for general work and 25 neriorl? f •/’ e eastern States have adopted
Australian Government schemeat the Westem
standards for voltage of transmission lids W Sir r “> there are 110 Australian
ratios, nor are there any SSZTwVf* 6 ° f f 1““ or for transformer
distribution, or for the rating of electrical machinery C °Thi?l "? th f re § a J d t( ? system of
a serious and artificial handicap on the development of the el ! I ' m '} miormi ty imposes
Not only does the multiplicity of systems in™, electr 3f ’ lndustr y Australia,
m stocks, but it greatly^ adds to the difficulties of “ S ”Ind St ° f
the progress of local manufacture. The indirect effects in P t. and ®uitates agmnst
m the supply of cheap electrical energy are also serious If ™ ?f “? de , velo P men t
systems in Australia were standarized' local f,, ' ’ on , 16 otdler hand, electrical
and by means of quality **
slow g^K«cl£e^l“^- mUSt ne “ ly be of solnew hat
immediate conversion to a standardized system woulTinvdveT' an<l their
of capital. The position is, however becoming wnw l to ° great an expenditure
that the work of the sub-committee will niL latilerI atiler than better,.and it is hoped
drift towards multiformity. 7 rate P reve nt immediately a further


PART V. —THE BUREAU OF INFORMATION.
1. General. — In the original Report on the constitution and functions of the
proposed Institute the Council were recommended to establish a Bureau foi tie
collection of industrial scientific information and its dissemination. As mentionec in
the First and Second Reports of the Executive, the Committee as a first step m this
direction appointed a Science Abstractor, who took up his duties on the 20th July, 10 .
Whilst primarily engaged in preparing reports and abstracts for the immediate use or
the Executive {see paragraph 3 below), the Abstractor has devoted his remaining time
to compiling a card index of information likely to be useful in the work of the Bureau
of Information {see paragraph 4 below). The Executive are indebted to the Trustees o
the Melbourne Public Library and to Mr. E. LaT. Armstrong (Chief Librarian) for their
kindness in placing a special room in the institution at their disposal lor the accommo-
dation of the Science Abstractor.
2. Commonwealth Catalogue of Scientific Periodicals.— At an early stage
the work it was realized that the lack of catalogues of the scientific periodicals in
Australian libraries made it impossible to ascertain whether a reference which coul
not be consulted in Melbourne was available in any of the other cities in the Common-
wealth. It was therefore suggested that a work for the whole Commonwealth, on the
lines of the late Dr. Hall’s Catalogue of Scientific Periodicals in Melbourne Libraries,
would form a valuable foundation for the work of the Bureau of Information. Ihe
State Committees were asked to provide lists of the Public Libraries in each State likely
to contain periodical scientific literature, and to furnish estimates of the cost of collecting
information as to their contents.
It is suggested that about 200 libraries should be included, and the estimated cost
of collecting the information is £220. The cost of publishing such a catalogue will, of
course, be much greater, but as soon as the information has been collected it will be
available to the public, as it will only be necessary to communicate with the Bureau or
Information in order to ascertain the nearest library in which any particular journal
can be consulted.
3. Preparation of Abstracts and Bibliographies.— ln the case of a number of
proposals that have come before the Executive it has been necessary to obtain additional
information before they could be properly considered. In some cases this information
has been obtained by research at the Melbourne Public Library. By this means reports
on the following subjects were prepared, viz.:—Marram-grass in Australia; St. Johns
Wort; the Production of Camphor ; Mangroves ; the Flax Industry ; Commercial
Glucose ; Manufacture of Rennet Extract; Industrial Casein ; By-products from W ool-
scouring—Methods for their Recovery ; Methods of Treating Feathers ; Occurrence o
Zinc Carbonate in Australia ; the Cultivation of Maize in Australia ; the Production o
Industrial Alcohol and the design of Internal Combustion Engines using Alcohol as a
Fuel. In addition, bibliographies on the following subjects have been compiled .
Recent Publications on the Educational Systems of Europe, America, and Australasia ;
Works on Denaturing Alcohol; Recent Literature on the Destructive Distillation of
Woods other than Pine-woods.
In regard to a number of matters, the Executive Committee have thought it desir-
able to obtain information or opinions from the several State Committees. The replies to
the inquiries thus made have often been accompanied by printed reports, <kc., and it
has been necessary to prepare summaries of the whole of the information thus received.
In other cases numerous suggestions dealing with some special subject have been
received, and have had to be combined in order that the subject might be considered as
a whole. Summaries of this nature on the following subjects have been prepared,
viz.Scheelite Deposits of Australia ; Australian Clays ; Occurrence of Alumte in
Australia ; Tannin in Australian Barks ; Tan-barks of Western Australia , Marram-
grass for Paper-making ; Eradication of Prickly Pear ; Insects damaging Stored Grain ,
the Blow-fly Pest; Opinions as to the Desirability of a Soil Survey of Australia ,
Proposed Methods for Collecting Information for a Soil Survey ; Cotton-growing in
Queensland; Proposals for the Encouragement of the Australian Flax Industry,
Proceedings of the Inter-State Conference on Forestry ; Australian Sources of Potash ,
Phosphatic Fertilizers ; Occurrence, Composition, and Possible Utilization m \ ictorian
Brown Coal; Opinions as to the Desirability of Altering the “ Proof Spirit Standard
of Alcoholometry ; Utilization of By-products in the Meat Industry; Dyes from
Australian Sources ; Grass-tree Gum ; Utilization of Waste Timber ; Forest Products.


n, £ nu “’ 3er of the reports listed above have been circulated to members of the
State Committees, and a few have been supplied to persons engaged in industry.
4. Index of Scientific Journals. --All published papers and articles utilized in
on T°t h ? reports and abstracts referred to in section 3 have been catalogued
in a card index for future reference. In addition, all articles likely to be of value in
papers and reports received by the Committee have been catalogued together with all
similar artic es published in the following journals during the Jt six years
AgnC iJT/ f Wales; Journ. Victoria; Queensland Agric.
Journal; Journ. Agnc S. Australia; Journ. Agric. Research ( VSA)-
Journ. Agric. Science (U .K.) ; Imperial Institute; Journ. Roy
TranJZ la L T?°f Z’ ! Z **■ &c - Q^nslaJ
i rans. Roy. Sac., S. Australia ; Proc. Roy. Sac., Tasmania.
Some volumes of the following periodicals have also been catalogued
Journ.Bd. of Agric. ( Great Britain); Kew Bulletin; Scientific Australian.
collected can be turned ?TZediately “formation on any subject at present
dealt article / ° n T OUS SUbj6CtS
stock, and another on the utZS lmp ° rtant diseases ° f
PART VI.—THE WORK OF THE STATE COMMITTEES.
the request of been b ? tbe State Committees at
was
Through the kindness ofthe G_^ T Y Chambers ’ ** Bth May, 1916.
room in the new Education Department hnilrl' 3 < ' orr " no l^ lou i 3 an(l suitably-furnished
Committee. Arrangements were also m flf jp f mg ,S aS , ac< ? d at disposal of the
(Mr. H. Davies) to perform ° f the Education
meets on alternate Tuesdays and altoo-Pth ' a ride > tJle Committee
inception. The time‘sand been held since its
the making of inquiries on behalf of the UP
information acquired. This could sometimes hp Lommittee a nd supplying the
knowledge of the members, but information had f. + r ® sult of the combined
who had an expert knowledge of particular n t 0 be sougilt from others,
or interviews. Individual membersof L r ] m means of despondence
E„uUv. on «o*. o.‘U“rfh”
r bl ~ ***** *l*
Government Departments TSKM hsTtb Inf °™ ation f «* referred to
difficulties. Certain larger problems a i • d the means of solving their
notice of the Com w £f e bought under the
warrant us in recommending to the Executive the ; su ® cient ly important to
and the expenditure of a considerable amount ? P6Clal Eommittee
connexion with it. Several visits Dvp w • 101l 01 J ey x to oat research work in
members, sub-committees, or the Committee *s a whole by individu al
of continuing such visits at all times when any matte/ml!? tbe pri ? cl P le was adopted
make them desirable. The Chairman and P™fpf w lavestl B atl °n appears to
Section of the Eoyal Society on ™ms and obmcts of addr f? ed - tbe Industrial
and Industry and the work of the Advisory Council le P ro Posed Institute of Science
The co-operation of the State Committee was p t.
connexion with the preparation of an Industrial Census the Executlve
information was supplied by Mr Trivett rWo- V c tbe omm °nwealth, and
principal firm. engas in indues wS^he ZZ the
of a closer touch with scientific research. It if regrettabD 'w! b 5 the result
sum was not voted for the more comnlete eaf,W “ ’ that the necessary
distribution, relative importance technical diffi If °®r e ° Industries showing their
still is) Willing to prepare. difficulties, &c„ wkch Mr. Trivett was (and


In connexion with, the “ Problem Census,” a circular was issued to all likely
sources asking for information regarding problems in terms of the letter sent by the
Executive, and notices were also issued to the press. The number of replies received
was most disappointing, less than a dozen problems being submitted and sent on to the
Executive. It seems very improbable that the list is anything like complete. Manu-
facturers evidently have objections to stating their difficulties in writing, and the
Committee is of opinion that a full census could only be prepared as a result of personal
interviews with all those likely to have problems to solve.
The Committee has seldom found it necessary to appoint sub-committees, although
individual members have frequently been deputed to collect all available information
on certain subjects. A sub-committee, however, investigated and reported on a
suggestion for carrying out some research work with the object of obtaining an improved
(and probably a standard) method for the production of tan liquors, especially from
wattle-bark. A very good case was made out, as there is evidently a great deal of waste
and lack of uniformity resulting from the present haphazard methods, and the Executive
agreed to vote the sum of £450 for the necessary research. The Committee has felt
considerably hampered in its activities by the temporary nature of their appointment
and the rather unsatisfactory financial arrangements, and all hope that the time is not
far distant when the Institute will be put on a proper footing by Act of Parliament.
2. Victoria. —The first meeting of this Committee was held on the 2nd May, 1916,
when preliminary arrangements were made to carry out the desires of the Executive, as
expressed in the communication from the Chairman. Mr. A. G. Millington, a member of
the staff of the Directorate of Munitions, was appointed Secretary to the Committee. The
compilation of the Industrial Census was intrusted to Mr. A. M. Laughton, Victorian
Government Statistician, who arranged for necessary clerical assistance to have the work
carried out, and the return was submitted to the Executive in August. The compilation
of a Problem Census on the lines suggested by the Executive was fraught with many diffi-
culties. Circulars were sent to all Associations, Societies, Institutes, &c., in Victoria which
it was considered could provide desired particulars, but, speaking generally, no material
information or assistance was received from this source. This poor result was probably due
to the fact that associations formed in connexion with certain industries have up to the
present been engaged mainly on questions as between employer and employee. Another
factor contributing to lack of information by medium of circulars was that many very
essential industries have no association which will enable those engaged in the industries to
come together and discuss matters. An appeal was made through the press for information
and suggestions, but this course also was not very successful. The impression gained by
the Committee was that before any definite knowledge could be obtained as to difficulties
experienced, it would be necessary to organize or bring together those engaged in certain
industries. However, with the few particulars obtained from above sources, and by the
aid of the members of the Committee, a preliminary census was completed and submitted
to the Executive.
The Problem Census was not lost sight of, and, coupled with a desire to ascertain
how scientific control of the processes and products of Victorian industries could be
improved, the Committee decided to interview representatives of some of the firms
engaged in certain industries. The Committee at the time also had in view the question
of encouraging groups or classes of industries to enter into co-operation to secure scientific
advice. Those interviewed comprised representatives of the cement, implement
manufacturers, and iron trades, and much valuable information was obtained. As a
result of the information received from these interviews, and of the work of the Committee
during the year, a report was submitted to the Executive early in May, 1917, covering
the whole position and submitting the following conclusions :
(a) The most important problems requiring research at the present time
in Australia are ones bearing on the primary industries.
(b) In general the existing secondary industries in Victoria are not at present
in difficulties on account of unsolved problems requiring research.
There is room, however, for great improvement, especially in the
smaller shops in the technical details of manufacturing practice and in
business management.
(c) The chief obstacle to progress in the secondary industries is labour unrest.
Until this is overcome there cannot be either industrial stability or
advancement. The factor most likely to alleviate the present condition
of things is the better education, scientific, technical and civic, of all
persons concerned in industry.
C. 7963.—4


The Committee also expressed the opinion that the Federal Institute of Science
and Industry could give assistance to the secondary industries in the following ways,
viz. :
(1) By conducting any necessary research.
(2) By means of a bureau of information.
(3) By organizing the means by which physical tests of materials could be
rapidly and cheaply obtained.
(4) By standardization of specifications.
(5) By active propaganda carried on by an officer in each State who would
act under the State Committee. Such an officer would be an organizer
bringing under the notice of the manufacturers the activities of the
Institute. He would ascertain their difficulties, and refer them to
the proper place for solution. He could secure co-operation among
the smaller shops in any one industry, explain and urge scientific
management, and in many similar ways increase efficiency ; costing,
lay out of works and efficiency of labour would be matters on which
the organizer could give advice.
(6) Especial attention was diawn to the desirability of the Institute encourag-
ing by its State Committees and organizers the formation of trade
associations, such associations could assist in—
(а) The organization industry.
(б) The specialization of work amongst its members.
(c) The dissemination of technical information amongst its
members.
(d) The establishment or appointment of analytical facilities
for the routine work of its members at an arranged
tariff.
(i) Proof Gallon. —As a result of evidence obtained and submitted by Mr. Russell Grimwade, the
Committee recommended to the Executive that the existing methods for appraisement of alcohol in spirituous
liquors be revised, that the Proof Spirit standard be abolished, and that valuation in terms of
absolute alcohol by weight be substituted. Certain suggestions were made regarding preliminary steps
necessary to effect a change, and the matter has been under consideration by the other State Committees
and the Executive.
«
(ii) Standardization of Designs of Scientific Apparatus. —ln June, 1916, a sub-committee was formed
to inquire into and report on the standardization of designs of scientific apparatus used in schools and
techmcal colleges, and which could be manufactured in Australia. This action was taken owing to restricted
imports and the multifarious classes of instruments, See,, imported. It was considered that with standardi-
zation there would be a reasonable chance of Australia providing for its own requirements. As a result
of the sub-committee’s recommendations, a Federal Committee was formed to take the matter up, and
approval has since been given for the engagement of a draftsman to provide necessary designs.
(iii) Standardization of Designs and of Specifications.— Evidence brought before the Committee
during the year indicates that very valuable assistance could be rendered to manufacturers and users
generally if the Institute took action in the direction of standardizing designs of articles and specifications
of materials which are now being manufactured in Australia. For instance, in the case of cement the British
not suitable, on account of the chemical composition of Australian raw materials being dif-
ferent from British raw materials, and this has led to users in many cases drawing up their own specifications
A standard Australian specification would be of considerable help to the manufacturers, and save many
difficulties. An instance in the case of designs is high voltage porcelain insulators. At present manufacturers
are called upon to supply to many different designs, whereas one set of designs should suffice If an official
set of designs were brought out, it would save much time and trouble and would materially help the industry.
(iv) Rennet and Pepsin.- Owing to shortage of rennet threatening to interfere with the production
of cheese, the Executive Committee in September, 1916, asked that inquiries be made as to the possibility
of the production and utilization of rennet. Inquiries were made immediately, circulars being sent to all
ffie principal butter and cheese lactones with the object of ascertaining the quantity of calves’ stomachs
which would be available, and the possibility of organizing collection. Valuable information was obtained,
and it has since been made available to firms contemplating manufacture of rennet. So far as the Committee
has been advised, one firm has actually taken up the manufacture of rennet in Victoria, and has sent out its
first orders comprising fibout half-a-ton, at a cost considerably below recent rates for the imported article.
The Committee also understands that the product has stood well to test. The action taken by the Committee
has helped considerably in establishing this new industry. Advice on this matter was given by Mr A E
V. Richardson, Superintendent of Agriculture, and a member of this Committee. He also submitted
valuable information on the manufacture of pepsin and its use for cheese making ; he also had tests made
to prove the value of pepsin for that purpose. Particulars as to the manufacture of pepsin were supplied
to the Executive, and subsequently circularized to meat companies for use in case they may consider it
advisable to take up the manufacture. J


(v) Alcohol as a Fuel for Internal Combustion Engines. —In November, Mr. Russell Grimwade raised
the question of utilization of alcohol as a fuel for internal combustion engines, and certain recommendations
were made to the Executive. As a result of these recommendations inquiries were instituted abroad as
to the possibility of securing suitable engines for the purpose. In the meantime the position as regards
supplies of petrol having changed, the Committee made further recommendations, as a result of which
a Special Committee has been formed by the Executive to make full investigations into the matter.
(vi) Brown Coal. —-At the request of the Executive, information was collected on this subject, and,
as the Victorian Institute of Industries decided to proceed immediately with investigations, the information
collected was passed on to the Institute to assist it in its work. The thanks of the Committee are extended
to the following for valuable information supplied : —Dr. E. H. Campbell, Messrs. J. L. Wharton and
W. L. Baillieu, and the Melbourne and Altona Colliery Company.
(vii) Miscellaneous. —ln addition to the above-mentioned matters, information was obtained on the
following subjects and submitted to the Executive, viz. : —Tannic acid from timbers, admission into Australia
of scientific apparatus, Xanthorrhoea gum, sources of supply of phosphatic manures; lists of scientific and
technical reports and bulletins were also submitted.
A few firms applied for information with the object of solving difficulties experienced in connexion
with manufactures, and action was taken to put them in possession of reliable advice.
In conclusion, the Committee desires to place on record its appreciation of the action of Mr. W. L.
Baillieu in placing the board-room of the Broken Hill Associated Smelters, Collins House, at its disposal
for meetings.
3. Queensland. —The personnel of the Queensland Committee is such that
represented on it are men personally identified with the pastoral, sugar, tanning, and
leather industries. Woollen manufacturing was also directly represented at first, but
owing to pressure of work the representative resigned. By means of circular letters
and the press, every Agricultural Association, Progress Association, Shire &c.,
in Queensland was made aware of the existence of the Advisory Council and its objects,
and requests were made with respect to any investigations or any problems with which
the Council might be concerned. The Queensland Chamber of Manufactures and the
Queensland Chamber of Commerce were also directly communicated with, and personal
relations established between these bodies and the Committee. In each all
branches and members of these Chambers throughout Queensland were circularized.
The result of this has been that the Committee received a large number of communica-
tions, both through the agency of the associations and also direct from individuals
engaged in industry or investigating special problems.
The Committee has met about once a fortnight since its inception on the 12th
June, 1916, until quite recently, and has concerned itself with questions that have
arisen in Queensland and those submitted to it by the Executive An
office and clerk are shared conjointly with the State Advisory Munitions Committee.
Every endeavour has been made to keep in as close touch as possible with the State
Government and its activities, and this has been carried on mainly through the Minister
for Agriculture and Stock, the Minister for Lands, the Home Secretary, and the several
scientific experts in the Government Service.
With the aid of the Government Statistician the Committee was enabled to
furnish information for the Industrial Census along the following lines:
(a) Return from Government Statistician showing the nature of manu-
factures, hands employed (male and female), and the salaries and
wages paid.
(b) Return from the Government Statistician showing a list of the manu-
facturers in Queensland.
(c) Return from the Department of Labour showing the hands employed
and wages paid in the various industries.
(i d) Return showing the average approximate quantity and value of raw
produce derived and marketed annually from the pastoral and
agricultural industries of Queensland.
The returns covered the information asked for with the exception of the capital
invested, which the Committee was unable to obtain.
With respect to the Problem Census, the Committee experienced considerable
difficulty in finding out anything really definite with respect to the general difficulties
or disabilities which affect the development and progress of existing industries. It
made a special effort through the Chamber of Manufactures, but up to the present has
not met with much success. Several of the Committee’s original inquiries were regarded


with suspicion, but in all cases the object of the inquiry was really appreciated, subse-
quent to either an interview or letter. The main difficulties under wdiich the great
pastoral and agricultural industries of this State suffer are well known, namely,
the pests, such as prickly pear, blow fly, worm nodule, cane beetle, banana borer, cattle
tick, &c. Just at present the banana and pine-apple industries are suffering seriously
from a shortage of potash.
Sub-Committees have been appointed to investigate the following matters :
(а) Utilization of Molasses.—This involves the production of alcohol and its commercial appli-
cation, also the product on of potash.
(б) Tanning properties of mangrove and other barks.
(c) Tuberculosis with special reference to cattle and pigs.
The Molasses and Tanning Sub-Committees are still pursuing their investigations, while the Tuber-
culosis Sub-Committee has completed its task, and 2,000 copies of its Report were printed by the
Queensland State Government. These reports are in the course of distribution.
Special investigation has also been made of cotton-picking devices, cane cutters and harvesters, and
prickly pear eradicators.
4. South Australia.— The first meeting was held at the office of the the Hon.
Commissioner of Crown Lands on the sth July, 1916, when Professor Rennie was
elected Chairman, and at a subsequent meeting Mr. W, H. Mongan was appointed
Secretary, The position of this Committee differs somewhat from those of the
Committees in the other States, owing to the fact that the South Australian Government
had already appointed an Advisory Committee of Scientific Research, to advise upon
questions relating to scientific industrial research and to deal with the results of
investigations. The carrying out of these researches is intrusted to the State Department
of Chemistry, which was established by the Hon. the Minister of Industry.
In order to achieve the best results in connexion with the measures being taken by
the State to assist local industries, it was deemed advisable to arrange that the Federal
and State Committees should work in conjunction, to avoid overlapping. This policy
has been followed. Furthermore, the Committee appointed by the State Government
has been in a favorable position as regards the effective carrying out of definite scientific
investigations, through being in touch with the Department of Chemistry, which has a
permanent staff of trained chemists and a properly equipped chemical laboratory
for which financial provision is made in the Annual Estimates of Expenditure of the
Government. _ So far, therefore, the work of this Committee has been largely confined
to the collection of statistics and information not necessitating actual scientific work
I. 6 particulars thus acquired have been forwarded to the Executive Committee from
time to time.
After the necessary preliminary arrangements had been made, it was arranged
for the Government Statist to compile an Industrial Census of this State and this has
now been completed. ’
The proposed Problem Census has not yet been compiled in this State as it was
considered that the information published by the Department of Chemistry met
requirements in this respect at present, and it was very doubtful whether a reliable
census could be compiled, owing to the reluctance of some manufacturers to admit
the necessity for any investigation or disclose the details of processes used by them
steps tQ 6 be Taken 80 ' m^orrrlat,lon afforded was not sufficient to enable any definite
The following matters have been given attention since the inception of the Committee
(i) Cream of Tartar^- The question of the production and utilization of Cream of Tartar was
discussed, with a view to deciding upon the advisability of appointin “a soechl
mittee to inquire into the matter, but the subject was postponed pendinf theTubMon
of the results of an investigation which was being conducted in South Australia
(U) were conducted in both
contents of South
the trees which were not
firms engaged in the tanning industrv held the oninirmGw ' * * as .
of this subject would be of assistance in overcomL manTof
with the industry. g man - v ot the difficulties connected


(iv) Phosphatic Manures. —The occurrence and use of rock phosphates in this State have been
under consideration, and some valuable information has been collected, with the assist-
ance of the Director of Agriculture and Director of Mines.
(v) Catalogue of Scientific Literature. —Arrangements have been made for particulars to be
supplied by various bodies possessing a supply of scientific and technical periodicals.
(vi) Miscellaneous.- —-Amongst others, the following matters have received attention : —Tick
Pest in Sheep ; the Possible Spreading of the Sparrow Pest to Western Australia ; the
Estimation of Alcohol in terms of Absolute Alcohol in lieu of Proof Spirit; and the
Importation of Scientific Instruments for Educational Institutions.
5. Western Australia. — The first meeting of this Committee was held
in July, 1916. In October, Mr. I. H. Boas, M.Sc., was appointed Secretary. In
addition to many minor matters, the following main questions have engaged the
Committee’s attention; —A Wheat Breeding Conference, the Utilization of Iron and
Aluminium Phosphates and search for new deposits of Calcium Phosphates, Plant
Acclimatisation, Grass-tree Gum, a Catalogue of Scientific Literature, Tanning
Materials of Western Australia, Utilization of Timber Waste, Industrial Census, Soil
Survey, Waste Paper, Low Temperature, Distillation of Coal, and a Forest Products
Laboratory.
Efforts have been made to obtain from manufacturers a statement of the diffi-
culties they encounter, and increased interest is being shown in the work of the Com-
mittee. Among matters raised in this way, the question of Bed Gum Tannage is
receiving special attention. A number of applications have been received from inventors
for assistance in developing their ideas ; but none have proved worthy of investigation.
Most of the inventors refuse to disclose details, and so nothing can be done to assist
them. Reports have been prepared and forwarded to the Executive dealing with
Industrial Census, Waste Timber, Tanning Materials, Plant Acclimatisation, Catalogue
of Scientific Literature, Grass-tree Gum, Phosphate Deposits, and Soil Survey.
Three Sub-Committees have been appointed as follow :
(i) Sub-Committee on Tanning Materials. —This Committee consisted of Messrs. Rosenstamm
(Chairman), Lane-Poole, Stacey, and Boas, and was appointed to make inquiries into the tanning materials
of Western Austra’ia, and especially into the use of Red Gum {E. calophylla ). This Sub-Committee has
since been appointed as a Special Committee by the Executive ( see pages 14, 26, and 27 hereinbefore.)
(ii) Sub-Committee on Plant Acclimatisation. —The Hon. W. Kingsmill (Chairman), Professor
Paterson, Dr. Stoward, and Mr. G. L. Sutton. This Committee has made a good deal of preliminary inquiry
and has drafted a proposal for a system of stations for the trial of plants of economic value. The scheme
includes all parts of the State from the North-West to the drier Eastern districts. Further progress is
blocked by lack of a grant of money. The sum asked for is small and it is hoped that the Executive will
shortly be able to make a recommendation that will enable the Committee to continue its work.
(iii) Sub-Committee on Waste Timber. —Mr. A. McNeil (Chairman), and Messrs. Lane-Poole, Mann,
and Boas. This Committee has made inquiries into the prospects of the commercial utilization of waste
timber by distillation and in turnery. This question of timber waste forms part of the work of a Forest
Products Laboratory, and the Committee considers that this should be established without delay.
At the date of writing this Report the Committee finds that many problems of
great importance to the primary and secondary industries of this State call for solution.
During its brief existence it has worked earnestly towards this end, and it awaits with
interest the foundation of the permanent Institute, which it is hoped will give to its
work increased practical utility.
6. Tasmania. — A delay of several months occurred in the appointment of the
Associate Members of this State Committee, and also in the appointment of a third full
member of the Advisory Council, the result being that sufficient members were not avail-
able to make a quorum until the 7th March, 1917, when the first meeting was held. During
the months of March, April, and May one meeting per month was held in order to enable
the members to carefully consider the problems to be tackled, and it was arranged that
after the third month of the State Committee’s existence the meetings should be held
fortnightly on the second and fourth Monday of each month. This practice is now in
vogue, and from now on Committee meetings will be held accordingly. Mr. W. F.
Vincent, 8.E., of the Hydro-Electric Department, Hobart, has recently been appointed
Secretary to the Committee, and this arrangement will enable the work of the Committee
to be managed much more efficiently than has been possible in the past.


1 The following sub-committees have been appointed:— (a) Scientific Literature
Sub-Committee ; ( b ) Geological and Mining Sub-Committee ; ( c ) Industrial Electricity
Sub-Committee; ( d ) Forest Products Sub-Committee ; (e) Fruit Industry Refuse
Sub-Committee ; (f) Executive Sub-Committee.
In addition to the above standing sub-committees, special sub-committees have
been appointed from time to time to investigate certain specific matters.
Up to date, the general policy of the State Committee has been to conduct inquiries
throughout the State, giving attention to the possibility of anything being done in the
State to assist (1) the prosecution of the war; (2) the establishment of industries to
manufacture articles to substitute for enemy products imported prior to the war;
v) the of industries which might, after the war, be advantageously estab-
lished in the State. & J
The active life of the Committee has not been of sufficient duration to enable any
positive proposals to be put forward. The investigations which have been made up to
date have, unfortunately, been of a negative character, one consideration or another
r mg the various proposals out as impracticable at the present moment. It is hoped
however that m the near future more concrete proposals will be put forward towards
the establishment of industries in the State at the termination of the war, and, possibly
one or two during the war With regard to the co-operation of the persons engaged in
industry, difficulties have been experienced so far, due to the fact that the industries
already established here having a scientific leaning have not shown an inclination to
co-operate closely with the Sub-Committee. Steps have been taken to formulate an
Industrial Sub-Committee and to bring on to this leading industrialists, together with
!fecUZr res C ffite° P ° f Chambers of Commerce and Manufactures to
Wtioh haTe received tie MeDtion 01 tie State Commi ttee daring its brief
(i) Preparation of a report setting out the facilities of the State Geological Department
... , in the directlon of its co-operation with the State Committee.
U 1e P re P aratl °n of a catalogue of Scientific and Technical Literature.
: n™!‘1 era |-° n ° ( f l he Tj'f’T 0f a PP lication of electricity to existing industries.
whtrStleadho . wf n ? ortS if 0 -t ustralia with a ™w to obtaining indications
men might lead to a substitution of local resources.
(v) The question of utilization of local timbers.
(vi) Trie question of utilization of forest waste products.
(yii) The question oi utilization of local timbers for paper pulp.
( Tl le q “ es *‘° n °. £ P™ duction ef alkalies, aluminium, nitrates, white lead, cyanide, &c.
(ix) The question of utilization of fruit and jam factory refuse.
(x) The question of the utilization of posidonia fibre for fruit packing
- SRSte- a;* - -- ■—
PART vII.— FINANCE.
~ !' ae “ eral -~f.Fant of £5.000 was made by the Federal Government to cover
the cost of the scientific work of the Advisory Council and of inoidenm exoLes in
connexion therewith. It was provided that the total expenditure fees
payable to members of the Executive Committee should not exceTdf? OOrt ™ ‘ *
and that the authority of the Government should be obmUVtc, 11 £2 ’ 000 P er annum-
2. Expenditure. The total expenditure incurred bv j-u aj ■ n -i
to the 30th June, 1917, is £3,593, comprising £lB7 for exnensefnf it Tf 7 U P
£2,011 for fees and expenses of the Executive Committee r Advisory Council,
expenditure, £274 for State Committees and £1 121 ’for T § and mcidental
following statement gives particulars of the expendßme TheWe J he
to slight revision, since it has not been practicable to s glven are sub l ect
publication of this Report, complete *s°
Committees up to the 30th June, 1917. tllre 0± an d Special


COMMONWEALTH ADVISORY COUNCIL OF SCIENCE AND INDUSTRY.
Financial Statement of Expenditure.*
From 1 Qth April, 1916, to 30 th June, 1917.
1. Advisory Council —
Brought forward .. 2,198
3. State Committees —
Travelling and out-of-pocket ex-
New South Wales
65
penses of members attending
Victoria
91
meetings
160
Queensland
49
Cost of reporting, typing, &c. ..
27
South Australia
Western Australia]
24
43
2. Executive Committee —
Tasmania
2
Attendance fees of members ..
603
4. Special Committees —
11
Travelling and out-of-pocket ex-
Alcohol Fuel and Engines
penses
352
Alunite
427
Am
Salaries of staff
761
Electrical Sterilization of Milk ..
3
Petty cask ..
59
Ferro-alloys..
137
Postage and telegrams
15
Mode of Occurrence of Gold ..
340
Office furniture, stationery,
printing, caretaker’s attend-
Tick Pest ..
49
Worm-nest Investigation
81
ance, hire of typewriting
Worm-nodule Disease
25
machines, &c.
221
Yeast and Bread-making
48
Carried forward .. .. 2,198
Totai .. .. .. 3,593
* The figures given are subject to slight revision.
PART VIII.—CONCLUSION.
1. The Organization and Work of the Permanent Institute. —So far as is
practicable, in view of the restricted financial resources and executive authority of the
temporary organization, the Executive and State Committees have largely performed
the functions for which the Advisory Council was created, and have prepared the way for
the work of the proposed permanent Institute. The Executive consider that it is
urgently desirable that steps should be taken for the establishment of the permanent
Institute under statutory authority. The general features of the organization and
work of the Institute were outlined in the Report of the Drafting Committee of the
Conference convened by the Prime Minister in January, 1916. That Report was
approved provisionally by the Commonwealth Government. In March, 1917, the
Executive Committee concluded that it was desirable that they should be in a position
to make further definite suggestions regarding the permanent Institute in the light of
the experience gained in the course of the work of the temporary organization. They
accordingly asked for and received opinions and suggestions from the Chairmen of the
several State Committees, who were informed that they were free to consult their
respective Committees on the matter if they desired to do so. This was generally done.
Having carefully considered the suggestions and recommendations received from the
Chairmen of the State Committees, the Executive drafted and adopted a Report, which
substantially embodies the recommendations of the original Drafting Committee, but
comprises also such amendments and additions as have been found desirable after a
year’s experience. Copies of that Report have been sent to members of the Advisory
Council.
2. Staff. —Mr. Gerald Lightfoot, M.A., who was Secretary of the Committee of
Conference which drafted the scheme of the Institute, and who afterwards visited
America and Great Britain with the Prime Minister to inquire into similar activities in
those countries, was appointed Acting Secretary by the Executive Committee on the
sth October, 1917. A memorandum by Mr. Lightfoot on the “ Organization of Scientific
Research Institutions in the United States of America” was published as a Common-
wealth Parliamentary Paper in December, 1916.
Mr. W. B. Alexander, M.A., Keeper of the Department of Biology in the Western
Australian Museum, was appointed by the Executive Committee to the position of Science
Abstractor, and took up his duties on the 20th July, 1916.


3. Acknowledgment. —The Committee desire to express their apprecia-
tion of the kindness of the Inter-State Commissioners in providing accommodation at
their offices for the Staff and for the meetings of the Advisory Council and of the
Executive.
Further they wish to acknowledge the valuable assistance they have received
from a large number of persons throughout the Commonwealth, including correspondents
who have forwarded valuable suggestions and information, and authorities on various
subjects who have been good enough to attend meetings of the Executive to place their
knowledge of these subjects at the disposal of the Committee.
Their thanks, and those of the Commonwealth as a whole, are also due to the
numerous individuals who are voluntarily giving their time and skill in the hope of
solving the various problems dealt with in this Report.
Q conclusion, they desire to place on record the efficient services of the Office
o an, which has spared no pains to further the work on which the Committee have been
engaged during the year.
(Signed) ORME MASSON,
Deputy Chairman.
(Signed) GERALD LIGHTFOOT,
314 Albert-street, East Melbourne, Acting Secretary.
30th June, 1917.
Authority: Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne.


