

COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
Report on Mosquito Survey of the
Brisbane Metropolitan Area, 1923,
By
L. E. COOLING,
Assistant Entomologist, Australian Institute
of Tropical Medicine , Townsville
MAY, 1923


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH.
REPORT ON MOSQUITO SURVEY OF THE
BRISBANE METROPOLITAN AREA, 1923.
By
L. E. COOLING, A. R. San. I.
Assistant Entomologist, Australian
Institute of Tropical Medicine,
Townsville.
May/-1923.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
5 age.
1. Introduction
Original survey 1> 12 ... .. • ... ... 1
Re survey 1. 1” ... ... ... ... 0
.. r estwS.' c su.*.vev, cw. ./ary ' ril ... ...
2. ' Ouse to louse u:: vcy waaiwly : , 4
Proportion of unscreened tanks ... ... 4
3. (Jullcine vurvey (C. 5-f'asciatus ,A. (o).vigllax,ete.)
(a) Polluted waters - ,' ... 5
Victoria Park (Brisbane) . ... 5
Ithaca Creel: (Ithaca j).., ... ..■» -5
hurray Vt. > ewer; (Ithaca ) ... ... ... o
Toowong Pari: water course (Toowong) 6
Thorpe 'lt. • atercourse (Toowong) ... 7
Baroona Road watercourse (Ithaca) ... 7
Ekibin watercourse (Stephens). ... 7
Ipswich Road sewer: outfall (Sth. Bris ) 8
si u ;; head of ( !i !l ) 8
Police Station,Vulture h Pain afreets.
South Brisbane. 8
■jooloowin Sewer (V/indsor)... ... ... 8
llundah r ever (Toomhul) 9
Swan Hill watercourse (Pindsor) ... 9
V/indsor Sever, Bell’s paddock (,/indsor) 9
Greenslopes-Coorparoo watercourse
(Coorparoo). 10
Memorial Park Sewer (Balmoral) ... ... 10
Moynihan St.watercourse (Hamilton) ... 10
McGregor’s water-hole (Hamilton) ... 10
V/oodville Road (Toomhul).., .... ... 11
Hendm watercourse (Toomhul) ... ... 11
Lutwyche Park (i/indsor)... ... ... 11
Small collections, various ... ... 11
Tanneries -
Gibson's (Kedron)... ... ... 12
Gallagher's (Kedron) ... .... ... 13
Haokler’s (Winds or) ... ... .... 13
Slaney's (Kedron) ... ... .... 14
Phill ’ s (Kedron) ... ... ... 1-5
Magg ’ s (jvedron)... ... ... 15
street gully traps ... ... ... l 6
The effect of constructional works. l 6
(b) natural 'halt Marshes and. Pools.
The vigilan: line- for Brisbane ... *.,17
(i) Brisbane and adjacent areas.
Breakfast Creek Vystem.., ... ~. lo
(a ) V r indsor ... ... ... ...
(0 ) .a aiai 1 con ... ... ... ... 10
Crosby lark.
Albion Park racecourse ...
. Ibion flats
(cj) Brisbane
Herston
Bowen Hills Sports Ground.
Mayne.


4©irman; Grech .Systtfti .... ’ ... ... , 20
(a; Cooix-roo
(b) ~..1-'Oi’:-l
pO.Sn.Cn wrC CB .yOL. U$ .* . .. . .. » .. . 4-X
j -CjuOx ia.l Po.-on, Bulii *OO, .• . .* .
Bel) ior;. 1 I o.rshco ... . .. ~. ... 21
.»CStCmc* r o C - v .gSCCiu ... .« . ... *. . '-I
Toe ong
: 11ton Tennis Courts
c iman * o } ddoch
x oo'. ong Chech ystc’iii .«, .*« ... ... 2c.
Ipiia Street
(ii;) Outlying places ;*
pofobagq. ‘i;rq£,arid iTpn<^r-Creche .... . . «■*,•; 23
Zillwere
HbdgeW Go liege
l T undoh Grech £\;am'p ... •.... ... ... 23
Cribb Island
Qa,i?bq.£e- ?ree £-••»*.. 23
fHidgee ’ v
bandgate
®a'ld.-fß|stl» , -’-Creelf i ... ... ... -v. 23
Roj?th^niet;.River ■»».»■». .•** * ... 23
railway bridge
Hay's Inlet . arch ... .v. ... ■■.•♦. 23
Anzac hemorl. 1 10ad... ... ...
The Kippering .i. ... ... ... 23
ireah portion
Salt
Xyllon s 1 .*cXiop ... ... ... ... 26
Cleveland .- * ... ... ... 26
4. Anopheline Survey ... ...... ... ... ... 27
Larvivorous fishes
water hyacinth, protective against fish
5. Rarer species of Loseaitoes found... ... ... 28
6 Breeding Places, according to Local Government
Preas 29
Brisbane
Gouth Brisbane
Windsor
Hamilton
Ithaca
Too' .ong
Cooparoo
Ba hvoral
Stephens
Toombul
Taringa
kcciron .
hnoggera, Belmont, Sherwood, IndporoopilMl
SamdiUite


6, (Continued)* ,29
Gaboolture ,
Redcliffe.
Wynnum.
Cleveland,
7, Summary and Conclusions, ••• ....•••33
Distribution of species in Metropolitan Area.
Aedes ( Stegomyia) aogypti I(S, calopua:
-gi f ciata )^
Culex quinquefasciatus Bay. (G.fatigang}
Aedes (Ochlerotates Wigilax (SkuseJ.
Migratory capacity,
Gulex sitiena Wiedemann.
Mucidus alteraana Westwood,
Anopheles aanulipea Walker (»vssorkvnchuß
annulipes),
Rarer fonns of mosquitoes.
Conditions influencing breeding & distribution, , , ,*35
Tanks:
A.asegypti dependent on»
Defective screening og.
Requirements for protection of.
Roof gutters
Clearance from leaves,etc.
Defective construction.
Other water containers about houses;
Garden receptacles.
Ant-stoppers.
Acetylene-gas generators,.
Polluted waters:
Effect of piped supply in causing,
Favoring effects of on C» 5-fasciatug.
Industrial wastes.
Risk from Victoria Park watercourse.
Septic Tanfcs*
Street gully-traps..
Salt marshes and Pools.
Clean natural waters
8, Suggested measures for/ control 38
General requirements for reduction of mosquitoes.
(a) Measures against strictly domestic species.
House-to-house Inspection.
Location of domestic breeding-places.
Power required for dealing with.
Tanks, screening of.
Wells, screening of.
Roof gutters, inspection of.
Barrels, screening of.
Ornamental ponds.


Domestic utensils
Responsibility of householders
(b) Measures against species breeding in polluted
■waters 40
D Defects of existing sewers
Tanneries, woolscours etc.
Noxious trade-area- for
Septic tanas
Street gully-traps.
Advantage of automatic oil dropper for
Defects of flap valves for,
(c) Measures against species 42
Harsh land requiring filling and draining
Larger outlying salt marshes
Borrow-pits, need for control of.
(d) Measures against anopheline species 43
Assisting natural enemies
Clearing water hyacinth
MAPS.
1, , Distribution- of mosquito-breeding .swamps and
watercourses in Brisbane.
2, Distribution of salt oarshes around Brisbane.
3, Detailed location of the various mosquito-
breeding places; areas covered by Stegomyia
survey-party. Boundaries of
Authorities are approximately indicated
in red.


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH.
REPORT ON MOSQUITO SURVEY OF THE BRISBANE
METROPOLITAN AREA (1923).
By L. E. Cooling; A. R. San, I., Assistant
Entomolggist, Australian Institute of Tropical
Medicine, Townsville,
I. INTRODUCTION,
(Mostly Historical)
Between February 27th o,nd April 26th 19 2 3» I was
instructed to make, under the direction of the Director,
Division of Tropica,! Hygiene, Goramon.wea.lth Department of
Health, and in cooperation with the Hookworm Campaign, a
survey of Brisbane and its contiguous are an in order to
ascertain the conditions governing the prevc-lence of mos-
quitoes in the area, as a whole, and to outline permanent
measures for control,, This survey was of particular
interest by reason of the font that in recent years several
extensive breeding places have been either filled or drained
and therefore rendered innocuous f and that even more recent-
ly, several ’’domestic" mosquito breeching places of a, greater
extent have come into existence further afield coincidently
with the increo.se in the Brisbane population, and the cent-
rifugal migration cf the residential and business areas of
the metropolis*
In 1912, Dsn J.S.C.Hikington, then State Commissioner
of Public Health for Queensland, directed a, preliminary
survey to be mate of Brisbane and suburbs, and the results of
the investigation were used for large scale anti-mosquito
work which was commenced a few months later. The rrriter was
entrusted with thfc executive charge of this survey, of which
the results were published in the Commissioner’s report for
1913* At that period the area which was sufficiently
settled upon to warrant the terms "residential areas" and
"business areas' 1 , amount approximately to square miles»
Nowadays this area embraces some 63 square miles - excluding
the outlying planes of Wynnum, Manly-, Sandgate, Cleveland,
etc* In other words, the habita/ble site of Brisbane has
expanded to twice its area in the course of a decade* This
expansion has had a very far-reaching effect on the appear-
ance and propagation of domestic mosquitos an will be seen
later on, when the actual effects,, qua mosquito-breeding, of
a pipe-borne water-service in an unsewered area a.re considered*


In 1919, as an officer of the State Health
Department (Oueonsland) I was instructed to make a re-
survey of the metropolis in connection with mosquito
work. Information resulting from this inquiry was
embodied in a report submittod at the conclusion of
the survey. In it, the effects of sewage-pollution
of natural waters were stressed as well as.the bad
state of repair into whicii tanks and tank-screens in-
stalled cIS cl result of the anti-mosquito opera.tions- of
19D2-13, had fallen,
Dor the present survey a staff of six,
including myself, was employed, four of whom were
detailed for systematic house-to-house visitation in
connection with tanks, and other domestic collections
of water,- Th>e services of Miss M. Walker M.Sc,, and
two inspectors were, made available by the Hookworm
Campaign for investigation into*mosquito-breedin® in
local swamps and other natural waters near at hand.
With the exception of a few minor (natural) breeding
places, the natural waters were seen by myself at one
period or another. Certain tanneries and marshes
which had been observed in previous years by myself,
and which on account of pressure of .work, could not
actually have been personally obtfe£ired .in the time at
our disposal during the present resurvey, were visited
by Miss Walker so that the present conditions might
be noted,.
The outlying portions of Brisbane were
investigated by myself but in the country lying between
Hundah and the southern shores of Deception Bay - an
area of approximately 80 square miles - difficulties
of time available and transportation, did not permit
either an exhaustive or final investigation of all
breeding places of Aedes (Qchlerdtatus)vigilaxi It may
however, be stated confidently that all the.chief
breeding places for A, vigilax within flight-range of
Brisbane were located.
Inspection indoors was not carried out
except in a few instances at the wish of the occupiers.
It was generally the case in these - especially when
the prevalence of domestic mosquitos was very marked -
that the less- obvious water-containers were solely or
in part responsible for the abundance of mosquitoes;
thus-the water-insula.tors of the legs of food-safes,
flower-pot saucers and so on, have, as in previous
surveys, been actually observed to act as breeding
places for Aedes aegypti (L.). Observations were
made mainly,on tanks, roofgutters and other external
domestic collections of water; but time was not spent
in vain attempts to secure larvae in unscreened tanks
after apparently negative findings. Thus it is that


Particulars
— 1 —
Bloch
{Total
i a ’
- — i —- — u
B
| c j
D ' P
G I
.a
H I
i
J 1
K
L
. _ ... , , _
M 1
!
N '
!
0
L-. - -- -■
Premises visited
; 688 ;
940
; 477 1
289: 175
258 I
i
211;
J
233 '
1
316
O
°3
88 !
22 |
1
42
3422
ispected
ffectively
{ 647 1
t 1
500
497 ;
j
!
278 I 200
f
259 ;
1
212 |
1
154 !
i
1
244
137
90 |
!
*
t
t
58
3321
screened
intage of Screened
|409 ;
294
244 ;
I I
121; 103
139 ;
1
61 1
1
19 :
1
91
37
2? 1
I
21 ;
t
16
1582
I to those inspected 63. 21'
fo, insufficiently ,
58,8
• 49,09'
>
43,52 51,50 53-66;
}
28,77;
12*33; 37-28
1
27.00
30, od
1
46,6: 27
,58
221
screened
• 4 1
,
-I *
... '
_ 1
108 !
133
-
— !
1
~ i
-
fnscreened
: 219 ;
184
’ 195 !
152 ! 87
86 !
133 ■
16 !
19
99
54 ;
2 0 ;
37
1281
fo. Dilapidated
: 19 i
22
58 ;
5 ! 10
34 ;
38 ;
11 !
21
1
9 .
4 i
5
23?
Is
; 6
19
3 :
0 1
1:
— 1
l
1
-
- ;
O <
41 ,
-
38
Gutters
1 6
-
3 1
7
4 ■
- 1
3
-
-
I
- !
-
23
n Receptacles
-
3 !
8 :!
— : t
-
-
— )
-
11
and Puddles
& water holding
| 12 |
1
34
, 7 ;
i i
25 ; 1
l
15;
r
*
1
{
2
3
~ 1
1
1
““ f
f
1
100
ubbish
! 3 :
5 10;
16 ,!
1
1 !
7 1
4
-
- -
-
41
rs and channels
: 37 1
22
: 12 !
4-2 '
•3 1
r
1
I
!
-
_
I
1
1
1
-
ll6
I - .
r 1
INDEX:
Bloch
A.
B.
C.
D.
P.
G.
1
i 1 1 1 ■>
iti
Local Authority
Windsor
Toowong
Stephens
Balmoral
Toombul
Ithaca
- • 2 •
.1 1
Bloch
H.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
-
J
Local-
G001
Brig
Sout
Yeei
Tar 3
Bein'
She 1
3
Author
par 00
bane
h Bris
'ongpil
nga
icnt
'wood.
t
1
-j»xy »
bane,
iy.
« \
I
8
BRISBANE MOSQUITO SURVEY, FEB. TO APRIL 192 3.
CONDITION OF PREMISES REGARDING MOSQUITO BREEDING.
This group includes those tanks which have been screened except overflow pipes or other openings
. into the tanks.
■ Comprising those tanks with lax-ge gaping holes in the sides.


Areas compared with reference to the percentage
of screened tanks to those inspected.


that/
the proportion of tanks in which larvae were
■actually found to those in which none were seen,does
not form any index of the infestation by adult
mosquitos. From observations conducted over a
number of years, It is safe to conclude that all. un-
screened .tanks in and about Brisbane constitute breed-
ing places for A, a-egypti at one time or another of
the year.
The generic and. specific names under which the
different species of mosquitos are referred to in the
following pages are those accepted at the present day
by Naturalists. As they differ from those employed in
former years, and in order to avoid possible confusion
by readers not versed in zoological nomenclature, the-
following list of obsolete specific names and popular
names, is given for the three most prevalent species,
Aedes (Stegomyia)aegypti (L. ) was formerly termed
Stegomyia calopus or Stegomia fasoiata. Popular name,
"Tiger mosquito". It is the mosquito which once
infected, carries yellow fever, and dengue fever,
Culex quinquefasciatus Say, (in text referred to
a-s C-, 5-fasciatus ) was formerly termed Culex fatigans.
It is the mosquito which conveys Filaria, It is the
common, brown, night-feeding mosquito of Brisbane,
Aedes (Ochlerotatus) vigilax (Skuse) - is the
well known "Black Bush Mosquito"; it was formerly
known as Culex vigilax.
This report is laid out as followsr-
-1,, Introduction,
2, The Stegomyia survey.which located breeding-
places mainly of A.aegypti and also in part, of
Culex quinquefasciatus,
3, The Culicine survey which was made in connection
0* 5-fascia.tus. A,vigilax, C. sitiens and
•C+annulirostis,
4, The Anopheline survey, ma-inly in connection with
A.annulipes.
5* Observations on the rarer species of Mosquitos,
6, List of breeding places, according to Loca.l
Government areas,
7* Summary and Conclusions,
8, Suggested Measures for control.


Natural fresh waters artifically contaminated
by sewer effluents and trade wastes .are dealt with
specially in Part 3 (Culicine Survey),
Natural salt marshes and pools are dealt with
in Part 2 under separatee head Legs for Brisbane and the
immediately adjoining Local Authorities and for Out-
lying Areas respectively.
The breeding places have been discussed in
relation to their magnitude and importance rather than
in relation to Local Government Areas, but a summary
of breeding places according to Local Authorities ♦
Areas is given in Part 6,
(2). HOUSE TO HOUSE SURVEY, (MAINLY STEGOMYIA)
The accompanying table shows the proportion of
unscreened to screened tanks in each area as well as the
number of inspections made* The proportion of tanks
screened to those inspected is expressed graphically
according to Local Authority Areas, Bearing in mind
that the growth of the Brisbane population has been
attended with a corresponding growth in the number of
residences and not by a species of compression into
existing houses, it will be readily understood that the
residential areas about the periphery of Brisbane are
those which will exhibit the newest houses (And also
tanks) brought more or less up to the standards required
by the Health Act and its*Regulations. A rather high
proportion of screened tanks, for example in the areas
like Windsor, Toowong, Ithaca and Toombul, contrasts
strongly with the older parts of Brisbane such as the
city proper South Brisbane and the older po-rts of
Coorparoo* Again* the number of garden receptacles
in the better class of premises is in excess of that
found on the premises of the poorer househoulder. The
property owner who erects a house in a crowded neighbour-
hood on 16 square perches of land cannot obviously find
room for a fernery or bush house which could otherwise
be erected in.a mors sparsely populated district. This
explains'the contract in this respect between the
conditions found in places like Toowong and Windsor,
and those of Brisbane and South Brisbane,
The case of Brisbane deserves special mention
in connection with the low proportion of screened tanks.
Almost without- exception these tanks were screened
during the anti-mosquito activities of 1912-1913 and - t* l6
fact that only 12,33# of the entire number examined are
now mosquito proof, is sufficient justification for
urging a periodic re-inspection of tanks disconnection
with routine systematic inspection by the’inspectors of
Local Authorities,


(3). THE CULICINE SURVEY.
(A) POLLUTED WATERS.
The Victoria Parle \7ater Course. Brisbane* This is
a natural drainage basin which commences about the Con-
fines of two contiguous areas (Brisbane and Ithaca) and
flows by a rather tortuous course through Brisbane, to
fall into Breakfast Creek by means of the Sneyd Street
sewer-invert* While in rainy weather this watercourse
forms the draina.ge system for surface water collecting
on the Brisbane side of the Ithaca area, inr dry weather
its waters are kept permanently replenished by house- -
hold sewage by means of two sewer outfalls (from Ithaca)
each discharging into an ap of the forked-headed (water-
course at Kormanby railway yards and Rochester St.,
(Ithaca). Throughout the summer weather the* sewage in
the Victoria Bark watercourse is actually coloured as a
dark mass by innumerable larvae of which
are seen to occur for a distance of about a mile or so
down-stream, iExcept for a few of the nonrlarvivbrous
fishes (Mogurn&a. iaogurnda var* adspersus - "Trout
Gudgeon”, arid gara-ssioiTs" corneresous * "Carp Gudgeon" ) all
fishes have' beer, killed off by t!he sewage and the stream-
let is too shoft to effect self-purification by the
natural proceeds of sedimentation, oxidation etc, : The
ultimate dispo&al might be considered one of dilution
into a tidal salt-water creek.
Measures are now being taken by the Brisbane and
Ithaca Councils to sewer this watercourse, For success
from the a,nti-mosquito viewpoint it will be essential
that the whole course be so dealt with, and not a part
only, .
The Victoria Park watercourse has, .for .many years
past, as is the case at present, continued to supply the
residences Of Gregory Terrace and Herston, and also the
Hospitals, with an abundance of C*s-fasciatus, Its
proximity to the General Hospital where cases of filaria-
sis have congregated for years pastmay conceivably have
an active influence on filarial endemiclty,
Ithaca Creek, near Waterworks Road (Ithaca), At
the point Where Ithaca Creek crosses under Waterworks
Road a sewer-outfall is to be found, A Chinese garden
is located at the intersection (-of creek and road) in
which the back-waters stagnate.being partly cut off from
the main stream by siltage. THe sewage stagnation in the
creek forms a very fruitful breeding ground for C« 5-fasc-
iatus and the "sewage-patch although limited in surface
area must undoubtedly supply the neighbouring area with
large numbers of nocturnal mosquitos, A few larvae of
Intzia halifaxi were also observed in the dilute sewage.


The edges of the polluted streamlet were in parts over-
grown with aquatic vegetation. Some 8-00 yards lower
down, just after Ithaca. Greek discharges into Breakfast
Creek the water is again contaminated "by the discharge
of -
The Murray Street Sewer (Ithaca), The water of
Breakfast Creek Being fresh (nor salt) at this point,
the effects of pollution- were mahif ested in the large
numbers of larvae and pupae of C. R-fasciatus with which
the water abounded. . As the sewer does not drain very
many properties, there is a correspondingly small out-
put of sewage, with the result that the destruction of
fish life in the stream is not so severe as with the
large sewer-outfalls, Breakfast Creek in this vicinity
meanders for 900 or 1000 yards further and then passes
the Kelvin Grove Wool scour, a.nd Johnson’s tannery,
Kelvin Grove, at which point the water becomes salt
owing to tidal influence..
The pollution of the lower pa,rt of- Breakfast Creek
by the discharge of several sewers may be entirely dis-
regarded from the mosquito reduction standpoint, for the
reason that the Creek in this part is subject to dally
tidal floodings, and that the wo,ter is salty; but a
small fresh water .tributary flowing into Breakfast
Greek in the vicinity of Newmarket (Windsor) is con-
taminated locally by the effluent from Mackler’s
Tannery 'at Sdmonstone and Creek Streets, Newmarket
(Windsor)., Culcx 5-fasciatus was observed to be breed-
ing very freely in the system of sewage disposal - i«e..
in a concrete precipitation sump a,nd in a couple of
soakage pits on the ba,nk of a snail water-bourse hard
by, The watercourse, . through soaka.ge from the pits,
was also polluted and seen to contain innumerable larva,©
of 5-fasciatus and a few of Lutzla halifaxi.
Toowong Park Watercourse (Toowong).- A Chinese
gs-rden in Issa.c St. marks the head of a, watercourse and
the approximate "outfall" of a concrete sewer-invert,
By an earthen dam. the mixture of water and sewage in a
part of the watercourse is kept stagnant on the premises/
occupied by the Chinese garden. The natural fall of
‘the land is in a south-easterly direction and alter
flowing through Toowong Park* the watercourse empties
into a small tidal creek which latter discharges its
waters into the Toowong Reach of the Brisbane River
at Langsville Bridge. . Quite an abundance of larvae of
C.5-fasciatus was found in the polluted waters in the
Chinamen's garden and Toowong Park, Moreover, the
amount of aquatic vegetation was sufficient- to render the
flow of water and sewage very sluggish, especially in
Toowong Park,


Thorpe Stroot Waterocurse (Toov/ong)« This
watercourse originates "in Tooucng Cometh ay and flows
in an easterly or an east by southerly direction, to
fall eventually into a ba-anch .of the' small tidal creek
to which allusion lias just been made. Of recent years
many houses have boon erected on the slopes of this
valley, and in consequence pollution of the water-
course by household sewage ha.s been very decided. Its
top waters about Thorpe Street'Toowong constitute very
fruitful breeding plaices for C.5-faseiatus especially
where the "bed" expards into marshy or boggy tra-cts and
where sewage finds its way into the water. As this
watercourse runs in the vicinity of, and parallel with,
Dixon Street it is drained by a concrete invert sewer
to empty into the river*
Watercourse which intersects Baroona. Roa-d near
Carrington Street. Rosalie (Itha-caTT The head waters
of this vadlcy arise” in Torwood (Toowong area) and
Bardon (Ithaca.) and immediately after crossing Baroona
Road - the boundary between two contiguous local
authority areas - pollution tadccs place by the effluent
from the Carrington Street sewer on the Ithaca side of
Ba.roona, Road* At the point of contact of tho sewer
with the.watercourse numerous larvae of 0.5-fasciatus
were observed.. About 50 yards lower down stream the
waters of this basin a.re received into a brick a.nd
concrete sewer which latter discharges into a tidal
creek at Milton. The top-waters of this watercourse
(in Toowong a.nd Itha.ca. a.rea.s) arc
to breed Anopheles a.nnulipcs V/.- especially where the
land becomes reedy a.nd marshy,.
Ekibin Vfctercoursc (upper side of Burnett
Swamp) (’Stephens7*,'" The Ekibin Street severer flows a.n
easterly course to empty into the upx>er waters of
Burnett ’'’swamp l ' or watercourse The sewer being a
short one and the ha.bitable draina.gc area small, the
pollution is only confined to a. very circumscribed
portion of the watercourse,. A pot-hdle of sewa.ge is
to be seen imnodia.tcly at the sewer-outfa.il at which
place innumerable larvae of C» s~fasciatus and several
of Dyhalifaxi- were present, Eor about fifty (50)
metres down stream the wa.tercourse is overgrown with
water -• hyacinth and it is noted that the larvae of
Culex annulirostris. (a G.consirailis of Taylor) were
present in rather" Targe numbers,. As the streamlet
becomes more purified a.nd more free from rank, veget—
ation,mosquato-larvae are only found with the greatest
difficulty a.nd for raa.ny hundred yards down stream
mosquito larvae cannot be observed - a condition result-
ing from the abundance of fish (Mela.nota.enia nigrans
(Richardson) "the Crimson-spotted Sun-Fish I ')' with '


with/
which the water atornds, la previous years
before settlement had talc?a place at Kkibin and when
water hyacinth had not atearned a foothold, this
streamlet flowed a natural course unaffected by
sewage contamination and in consequence did not con-
tribute to the breeding of domestic mosquitoes*
Ipswich Poad Sewer Qutfs.sl (South Brisbane)
The mouxh of a sewer.opens into the’noad of King-
fisher Greek in the vicinity of Via.lie or Street, and
logan Road. When seen daring the present survey a.
film of oil. was observed to be floa.tir.g on - the surface
of the slowly moving sewage, but previous experience
of this district ranks this place as a chronic breed*?
ing pla.ee for G* 5-fas ci a.tus. There are grounds for
believing that the presence of oil on this water did
not represent anything in the na.ture of regular
mosquito reduction measures, and mosquito breeding was
found to'be t;oramon in street gully-tra.ps of South
Brisbane«
Head of the Ipswich Roa.d Sewer (South Brisbane).
An inlet of ’inis sewef~in the vicinity of. a; railway
culvert neai the junction of Arthur Street and Ipswich
Road ma.rk3 the position of a small tract of polluted
water ’in which numerous larvae ox G > s~f as c i a.tus we re
found. The sewage stagnates on railway property and
by a. few ya.rds of sewering, the mouth of the railway
culvert might be connected'with the sewer inlet, this
would exclude the possibility of future trouble' in
connection with mosquito breeding.
Pa-diodc a.dja.cent to Police Station on corner of
Vulture Street and Main Street. South”BrTsbane)."
ma.rlcs the site of a. rubbish dump a-nd polluted pond
of water in which larvae of G.5-fasoiatus were seen*
A large amount of filling in is required here. In
reality this place is the remains of an old stone
quarry the exc.ava.tions in which have gone down too
far below da.turn level.
¥ooloowin Sewer (Windsor). Within very recent
yea,rs a. very excellent piece of sewering was done
through Wcoloowin, and the worlc has been responsible
for reducing in great measure, the myriads of noct-
urnal mosquitos (C.5-fascla.tus ) which had been
regularly produced in the sewage polluted wa.tercourse.
The earth resulting from the sewer excavations might
have been used to better adva.ntr.ge in the way of level-
ling off the bed ox’ the old watercoursej a. series of
hillocks a.nd depressions occurs in partsn a.long the
sewer-a.lignment, a.nd the water collecting in a few of
the hollows was observed to- conta.in la.rvae of
C.s~faso i a.tus, . When the sewer reaches the bouna.dry of


of/
adjacent areas, it is taken by a concrete sewer*-
invert through the shire of Toonbul ''There it ultimate-
ly empties into "edron ?rocl>: in the vicinity of
Kalihga Park. At the point of contact of the river
with the Erode, a few mo 3 quite larvae .are to he seen
(C» t }~faßoiatu3') hut the hody of water being large
the flow rather fast, self-purification is expedited..
Sundah Sewe r (Tcombul) - Larvae of 0}
ciatus and G.ai:r,v. liros xr I s were founo. at the outrail
of the sewer which opens in the vicinity of the BbnftOll
Pineapple Preserving factory.- At the mouth of the
sewer, water stagnates in a, short stretch of spa-de-cut
channelling, the latter emptying into the upper end of
the Serpentine Marsh. A,few larvae of Anopheles
(Ifyssorhynchus) annulipes were found about the marshy
and" boggy edges” of” the” swamp..
Swan Hill watercourse (Windsor).- Running a
parallel course wi th, s KHiT^etween Lutwyche Hoad and,
Victoria Street, a slight-depression exists,. This
depression, or watercourse, runs transversely through
the yards of the premises facing Lutwyche Road and
Victoria St**,.-and besides receiving household sewage,
forms the natural-get-away for storm water towards
Breakfast Greek. The bed of this watercourse is
moreover, overgrown with grass,- Innumerable
larvae of G. s~f asciatus were observed in the stagnant-
sewage in'the"bed'of this watercourse..
An earth-cut channel through the premises would
tempora-rily relieve the district of a great nuisance
and certainly of- numberless night flying mosquitoes,.
Windsor Sewer (at BejLl_*s_paddpck ) (Windsor) ■
A sewer draining & port’iorx of WiliHsor*, opens in the
vicinity of- Brown-St. to enter the premises, occupied
by Bell, Bell's paddock occupies portion of the bed
of a watercourse which crosses Lutwyche Road' (near
Windsor Station),, flows in'an approximately easterly
direction,, expands into a large marsh overgrown With
hyacinth and other vegetation,, and empties into Bread--
fast Creel near Campbell's timber yards, The upper
end of this water-course being highly contaminated,,
breeds innumerable mosquitos asciatus). The place
presents the decided disadvantage of’ being’boggy in
Bell's premises - a condition which intensifies the
breeding of mosquitos in polluted waters.. The periphery
of the large• marsh (lower down) was seen on examination
to be free from mosquito larvae Lower down-stream
(Albion Plats) the 'watercourse again breeds
considered the advisability of draining this watercourse,
but nothing definite has occurred► The mosquito
nuisance could be alleviated temporarily by rough
canalisation of the boggy portion of the marsh-


The_ Greenslopes-Coorparoo Vatercourse (Green’s
Gully )~TGoorparooX ~ The" upper waters of this stradm*
let' nave their origin about White's Hill and after
flowing north-westwards for a distance of about 1000
metres, the watercourse becomes contaminated at Intel?*
va,ls, .'by the discharge of household drains along the
banks. During t&e time of inspection which was in
droughty weather the watercourse was simply a string
of waterholes intercepted occa.sionn.lly by marshes* Pbr
the most part the water abounded with fish* but at
points where the vegetation became excessive in
larvae of Anopheles annulipes and Culex annulirostrj.B
were found by Miss walker. At portions where the
water wa.s polluted, the fish were expelled and the larvae
of C. 5-fa.sciatus were found* Owing to the fact that the
sewo.ge is not excessive in quantity there are chances
of loca,l pur if ication of the watercourse and reha.bitat*
ion by fish until the next contaminated source is
’By a tortuous route. Green’s gully eventually reaches
the tida-1 ba.sin of Norman Greek by way of one of the
la,tter’s tributaries-- Bridgewa,ter Creek*
Memorial Park Sewer (Balmoral) ** At Bulimba
(Balmoral) aT sewer-invert transverses Memorial Park in
a, southerly direction to discharge into Pashen Creek «
a tida.l gutter. In the semi-stagnant sewage (due to
siltage of the invert) la,rva,e of G.,s~fascia.tus were
noted,
Moynihon Street Watercourse {Hamilton). This
takes its"bfigin orT the "ea-stern slopes from the water-
shed formed by Bartley’s Hill and after traversing
about 400 metres, by the circuitous paths of street
waiter-channels, is polluted by the discharge of the
Moynihan Street sewer - a short conduit running in an
easterly direction a.long the northern side of the street.
It wa.s at the point of sewa.ge-content with the stream-
let that many la.rvo.e of C#s*fasciatua were observed*
The streamlet rapidly clears itself of gross contamin-
ation, for the quantity of sewa.ge collected by the
sewer is small. Lower down stream the water abounds
with fish (Mela.notaenia nigrans (H* ) or "Crimson
spotted Sun and™iT is only with the greatest
difficulty that mosquito larva.e may be found (A*(H,)
annulipes),
McGregor*s Waterhole: _ the Cla.yfield Clay Pit
(Kami 1 tonT.- 'This small lake* Ts bounded ly' Oriel'lVoadj
Bartley St. Russel St, and Denham St, It is in the
reramants ox a clay pit, and might be used as an illust-
ration of the sanitary evils of clay-pit
potters and brick makers in the way of making excavat-
ions below datum level. Bowser's quarry in Lutwyche
Road Windsor is following in the some footsteps, and
there is apparently no legislation to prevent such an
extensive "borrowing" of earth and stone without any
regard to draining or filling in with other material*


The Bartley Street sewer empties into one end of
McGregor's waterhcle and by reason of the rank grass about
the edges of the lake a few square yards of stagnant
sewage are 'left' undisturbed to bree-d countless n\imbers
°f 0,5-fasciatus, In certain ports of the lake which
were not materially affected by sewage contcaainat ion * but
which showed a luxuriant growth of aquatic vegetation, a
for/ larvae of Anopheles (Myspoil .ynchus) annuli pee Walker,
wore observed. The main boch of water is stocked with
larvivorous fishes, (sp ? ll.nls rans) and in consequence
no mosquito larvae could be found. The outfall of McGre-
gor’s waterhole is by a watercourse which flows by a more
or less unhindered route and is unaffected by mosquito
breeding.
Rubbish Dumps at Woodville Road. Hendra (Toombul)»-
At the fqot of Woodville Road a slight depression exists.
During the wet weather this place holds water,- and thd
wandering of animals .about the edges of the water makes the
surroundings ground boggy. on one side of thV small marsh,
rubbish has in past years j been tipped,with the result
that the putrescible portion thereof has been instrumental
in effecting a slight contamination of the water. larvae
of G.S-fasciatua were found in moderate numbers, the
natural,fall of.the land is towards the Serpentine Marshes
and by a short length (about 100 metres) of canalisation
the water might be drained away,
Hendra ¥/atercourse (Toombul).- The watercourse which
crosses Pring Street (between Gerler Road and*Manson- Head)
was specially examined On account of a compldint about the
prevalence of C«5-fasciatus in a house hard by. This
watercourse flows in a north-easterly direction for about
800 metres to fall into the Serpentine Swamps, Although
the streamlet flows through an inhabited area, vigilance
seems to have been exercised with respect to sewage dis-
charge into the water, for a close search did - not reveal
any sourefe of pollution. In consequence no mosquito
larvae could be observed and moreover, the water abounded
with fish'. Mention is here made of this watercourse as
serving to- illustrate the readiness with which natural
waters are blamed for mosquitos that they do not produce*
Park in lutwvche. near Wesley Street (Windsor) and
a back water, of ~ltedron near tamington Avenue (Windsor },
The fbrmer exists as a shallow depression while the latter
takes t&e form of a shallow tributary of Kedron Brook,- A
few larvae of C,5-fasciatus were observed in these waters
which were polluted by animals.
Several other smaller places will here be listed as
acting as breeding places for C.5-fasclatus» They are as
followsi-
(a) An earth cut gutter of sewage running a north
lasterly direction from the juncture of Brisbane Street
and Apollo Road, Bulimba, (Balmoral),


(b) A short sewer discharging into a small water-
course between AberJ.eigh Rood and Hetherington St.
Herston (Brisbane).
(c) Polluted water in Toowcng Creek bed between
Campbell and Alpha Streets f Toowcng, (Toowong) due to
household sewage. Per the most part, this creek-bed
was dry at the time of inspection and was only breeding
mosquitos in that poxtion where the replenishment of its
waters was rendered more or lees independent of weather
conditions by the discharge of household sewage,
(d) Sewer discharging into a tributary of Toowong
Creek between Oxford Terrace and Swann Road, Taringa,
(Taringa), Larvae were rather plentiful in the bed of
the watercourse.
(e ) Pool of water between Ryan’s Road and Bryce
St,, Ironside (Taringa).
(f) A small watercourse (polluted by household
sewage) running between Wylie Avenue and Marian Street,
Greenslopes (Coorparoo).
a. TANNERIES.
Some ten years or so ago the position of tanneries
on the peripheral portion of Brisbane was such that they
did not materially interfere with the residential areas
by reason of their distance from habitation, Nowadays
the case is entirely altered with the result that tanner-
ies are fast becoming nuclei of residential areas owing
to the centrifugal "flow" of houses to these areas.
Although certain tanneries have in past years acted (and
still do) as sources for the constant supply of
C.5-fasciatus, their situation beyond the ordinary range
of flight of the mosquito in question was sufficient
justification for considering them innocuous to "neighbour-
ing" premises. At the present do,y, the populated areas
of Staffordi Kedron, and Ghermside (Kedron), have their
principal sources of nocturnal domestic species of
mosquitos centred on tanneries, A portion of Newmarket
and Wilston (Windsor) is similarly affected.
Gibson’s Tannery. Stafford (Kedron),- This establishment
is situated on the north bank of Kedron Brook - a fresh
water stream which gains access to the sea through the
medium of the Serpentine Swamp. The site is more or less
flat but forms the head of a small watercourse which
eventually finds its way into the Brook, By an earthen
dam which has been thrown across the outfall of the water-
course from a depression,, a small lake is formed. This
lake,into which the effluent fros the tannery soak-pits is


is/
received after preliminary treatment through bark
beds, plays an'anaerobic part in the treatment of the
tannery sewage; : but satisfactory treatment is hot
possible on account of the large volume of liquid to be
dealt with (which necessitates broad-irrigation methods)
and the 'small amount of available land* . This sewage is
kept dammed up for long periods and only tends to dis-
appear by the slow process of soakage and evaporation* *
During flooding of the Brook in rainy weather a penstock
valve is opened in the carthcrn dam and the body of
sewage is released into Kodron Brook.
During the time of inspection, .Kodron Brook flowed
as a sluggish streamlet through an almost dry basin and
the whole presented the aspect of a string of disconnect-
ed watcrholes. No fouling of the Brook was notice**; ,but
about the grassy edges of the.pool of sewage on Gibson f s
premises innumerable larvae of G.5-fasciatus were observed*
The whole condition, ,from the standpoint mosquito work
could be materially improved by cleaning the grassy edges -
especially at the foot of the bark beds,,and weekly
pctrolisation.
Gallagher’s tannery. Stafford, (ICedron)«r : Situated hard
by Gibson’s premises is a smaller tannery, the effluent
from which after passing through a small amount of bark,
flows into a depression which meanders a couple of
hundred yards to enter Kodron Brook, No larvae were
observed in the sewage - a condition accounted for by its
very raw and particularly thick nature,. With the approach
of rainy seasons, this hollow becomes waterlogged by
diluted sewage and direct rainfall** with resultant mosquito
brooding. Apart from a small amount of filtration through
bark, .there is no further attempt at jjurification of the
tannery effluent*. The land available for broad irrigation
treatment is small in area*.
Macklcr ’s Tannery,. Newmarket (\7indsor).- This tannery is
situated at the corner of Edmonstone and Greek Streets,
Newmarket,- The sewage disposal plant consists of a dis-
used concrete, .’’soak" and a couple of subsidiary earth-cut
pits on the bank of a small watercourse,. This watercourse
in the vicinity of the tanning premises is fresh,but a
few yards lower down-stream it is affected by the' tides
flowing up Breakfast. Creek.. The water of these pits was
found to be swarming vath larvae of G,5-fasciatus and also
to contain a few larvae of Lul 2 ia haljraxY*By" "slow
accpoge, sewage escapes from the last soakage pit to find
its way into the watercourse, where larvae of C.5-fasclatms
were also observed* As the water of this streamlet
becomes salty, no mosquito'larvae arc to be seen. On the
immediate upper side of the tannery the watercourse abounds
with fish, (Melanotaenia nigrans (R) and Mogurnda mogurnda
var. adspersus Cast, 1 The sewage disposal of' this




tannery is too near the watercourse, being almost directly
on the hank, Ro successful land treatment of sewage ip
therefore possible,. In its present position the only
measure recommended for dealing with mosquitos here is
weekly petrolication.
Tanneries at Ifedron Park jjKcdron),- Those five tanneries
owned rcspcctTvelV' "by Ga T laglic r, ’ Gallagher, Slaney, Philip
and llagg are situated on the banks of a small watercourse
It seems preferable to consider these tanneries
rather than separately and the accompanying illustration
shows their position with reference to the streamlet and to
one another. The streamlet flows a rather tortuous course
for about a mile, where reaching rather flat country, it
expands into Trilly’s swamp and eventually’falls into Kedrdn
Brook in the neighbourhood of Kalinga Park,. Mies MiWalk®3f,
who re-visited this place states
"The conditions at the tanneries at Kedron Park
offer a striking illustration of the effect of pollut-
ion on larvae of Qulex 5-fasciatuo and their power of
withstanding it..,.. Between main building
And Gympic Road lies a watorhole {in reality the un-
polluted and upper end of the watercourse)’from which
water for use in the tannery may be pumped * It con-
tains a few fish,, but around the grassy edges CuICJC
annulirostris and Anopheles (Ryssorhynchus) annulipes
may bo' found. A small' stream proceeds from the
northern end of this,then turns sharply to the right
■(eastwards) to cross Gympic- Road under the bridge , 4 .
In pools along its length A.(1,) annulipes may be ‘found*
"Gallagher 1 o promises pOssess a *fultration plant
but it is not used and the sewage goes directly into
a drain which enters' the stream just in front of the
supplementary tannery, the sewage’from the latter
entering at almost the same point.. The vwater is
immediately rendered extremely foul and has a thick
grey scum on it; ho mosquito larvae are found in it
at this point or for some distance further on as the
stream progresses in a more or lose northerly/, -and
'fKell easterly direction,and where the scum persists.
Between the streamlet and Gympic Road there arc one or
two waterholes harbouring o, annulirostris and A,
annulipes. The stream curves rouhd in an easterly
and south easterly direction and widens out at several
points; the scum disappears and immediately larvae
and pupae of asciatus arc found in great abundance
although the water is sVill extremely foul - of a pea-
soup consistency and vile odour* The larvae continue
throughout the length of the stream, which was stagnant
at the time of inspection, and arc unaffected by the
entry of the sewage from tannery -which is not
sufficient to cause the formation of a continuous scum/


In front of Slaney’s tannery Id an isolated pool
ox clca.n water which contains fish and very few
larvae, (A. (H. ) annulipcs). The stream crosses
the end of Water Street and then receives the
sewage from Phill'c tannery which is filtered
through a clinker bed and a wattle bark bed. For
some distance after its entrance, no larvae are to
be found but shortly after the stream crosses the
dividing fence to I-agg*s property, they appear
again in numbers and continue until the sewage from
Llagg's tannery again causebb a scum to appear.
Ilngg* s possesses both filter beds and a septic
tank, but neither was in use at the time of inspect-
ion. The sewage (from lla.gg*s property) is conveyed
in an earthenware pipe from the corner of the
tannery for some distance and then the latter ends
abruptly and foul water trickles down (a rather
steep inclination) in s cveral small streams to
enter the main watercourse. As noted above* the
sewage again causes the disappearance of the laryac
for a short distance* but they coon appear again
and flourish unchecked ab the stream sluggishly
progresses towards Trilly’s swamp,"
All these tanneries are situated in too close prox-
imity to thewatercourse, and there is no land available
between the tanneries and the streamlet for land-treatment
of the sewage. Moreover, the tanneries as a whole are
grouped too closely and the area nowadays is quite un-
cut ted to the continuance of noxious trades.
Hot only in this group pf tanneries, but in the
Brisbane tanneries generally,the idea has always been
allowed to gain dominance that directly sewage reached a
watercourse all obligations on the part of tanners ceased.
The fact alone that they almost all stand on the banks of
streamlets serves as an heirloom of this species of
reckoning. There is a second objection which can be
raised against the areas in which tanneries are situated;
apart from thefact that at one time they were located
in bush country quite isolated from habitation, namely
that their location in relation to a large body of water
is quite unsatisfactory. The two natural drainage systems
of the present Brisbane tanneries arc IZedron Brook and
Breakfast Creek. ■ Kedron Brook, in its entirety is a
fresh water creek taking its origin in the Taylor Range,
Enoggera, and flowing in an approximate easterly course
to empty on to the .southern chores cf Bramble Bay - north
of the mouth of the Brisbane. The mouth of Kedron Brook
is intercepted from Hie sea beach by the Serpentine Creek
in reality the outfall of the Brook in question.
Breakfast Greek is fed by two mountain streams (also
originating in the Taylor Range) Enoggera Creek, and
Ithaca Creek which unite at Ithaca to form Breakfast Creeks


About 800 yards down-stream, Breakfast Creek becomes
tidal, and is flcdded by salt-water daily backing up
from* the Brisbane River,
Both these creeks are quite ill-adapted to receiving
large volumes of industrial sewage, yet, for years past
these drainage systems have been deprived of numberless
shoals of mosquito-larvivorous fishes which would in *
state of nature render the waters incapable of acting as
a breeding place for domestic species of mosquitos*
b. STREET GULLY TRAPS.
Tied was not spent in any exhaustive examination of
street gully traps, for there is every reason from past
experience, for believing that these breed mosquitos
(G,5-fasciatus) almost without exception. During the
present re-survey, approximately a dozen street gullies
wore examined in the area of each Local Authority r
(Belmont* Sherwood and Kcdron excepted, where sewers arc
raid or absent). Except in one area (Ithaca) which was
examined shortly after heavy downfalls of rain, all showed
the presence of mosquito larvae {C,s^ as diatus and
times L»halifaxi). in greater or lesser numbers► Ih the
case of Ithaca, three out of twelve examined showed the
presence of egg-rafts and young larvae of the species in
question.
c. THE EFFECT OF CONSTRUCTIONAL WORKS ON
THE BREEDING OF CULEX QUINQUEFASCIATUS.
The present excavations which arc being made in
connection with the Brisbane sewerage scheme play a very
decided part in the formation of breeding places for
mosquitos# In the' tunnelling operations and the sinking
of shafts large volumes of ground water must be raised to
the surface and generally speaking,. in the out-lying
portions okT Brisbane where visits by the street gutter
chipping-;party are rare iy oadc (- street gutters and vacant
land bccorjc silted, up with mod and overgrown with grass.
The bogs 30 created constitute very favourable breeding
places for C. 5-j‘asciatus and the difficulty is certainly
enhanced \fhcn wandering animals have access to these places#
Examples of these types of silted gutter breeding
mosquitos arc to be seen in Victoria Street (both sides)
Swan Hill (Windsor.)'and Creek Street and Newmarket Road,
Newmarket (Windsor),


B. NATURAL SALT MARSHES AND POOLS.
As this section will deal with the non-domestic
forms -- mosquitos which, by their power of migration
arc capable of causing great discomfort in gardens and
wooded localities in and about Brisbane, and thus
rendering apparently ineffective the reduction measures
against the strictly domestic species, certain coastal
areas up to a number of miles from the centre of
Brisbane were necessarily included in the general survey*
Thus.-j • besides an exhaustive examination of the inhabits®
areas of Brisbane, the coastal strip of country stretch-•
ing from Reef point, Scarborough, to Cleveland Point.,
Cleveland, was examined for the purpose of plotting out
the larger breeding grounds for Aedes vigilax. Roughly
speaking the survey in connection with A, vigilax cm**
braces a strip of coast 30 miles long, with an average
width of 4 miles* This width attains its maximum at
Brisbane, which is situated inland about 10 miles, or
following the meandcrings of the Brisbane River., some
15 miles above its mouth.
It is a notable physiographical feature of the
Brisbane topography that about 18 miles from the mouth
of the River the banks arc generally high and the land
being we 11 graded does not allow of the formation of*
salt marshes. A glance at Hap. 80. 1 will make this
clear. A line drawn from One Tree Hill to White’s Hill*
practically divides the salt-marsh fringed River with its
two main tributaries from the marsh free banks higher up.
The marshes and watercourses which occur south of this
line (with one exception where the salt marsh is almost
on the borderline) are all fresh and abound with Xarviv-
orous fishes* If for convenience, we term this line the
"Vigilax borderline" then we might state that the
habitable part of Brisbane south of (or on the up-stream
side of) the vigilax border lino, is in such a sparsely
populated condition (at present only, be it noted) that
sewage-polluted streamlets do not exist. Therefore,
except for migratory flights of A,vigilax from without,
almost all species of mosquitos, and certainly all
domestic forms result from local breeding - i.e.. house-
hold breeding ,
In the present section Brisbane can only be discuss-
ed in illation to that portion on the down-stream side
or norllicrn Side of the vigilax border line. On this
side the banks,, in certain parts, become very shallop,,
and tK* land about flat, so much so that spring tides
encroach on quite a number of square miles of useless
marsh land, to stagnate until a re-filling occurs,
cithdr by salt water' or by rain. Per the most part the
beds of the Brisbane marshes are below datum level so
that drainage by gravitation is impossible; where partial


drainage can be Effected the labour is generally in
vain on account of animals wandering over a f sd destroying
earth-cut invert-canals.
shows that the salt marshes are confined
principally .to the lower portions of the two chief
tributaries - Breakfast Creek and Norman Creek* and to
the smaller creeks such as Palshen Creek (Balmoral)
Toowong Creels (Toowong) and a couple *of> other smaller,
nameless ones,. If will be most practicable to consider,
salt marshes in relation to natural drainage systems,
and to subdivide these according to local Authorities
Within whose areas they lie.
The survey in connection with A. vigilax is divided
here intp two sections, the first of which deals with
Brisbane and the immediately surrounding Local Government
areas, and the second dealing with the more outlying pS***
tions of Toombul, Sandgate, Redcliffe,. part of Cab©oXtarS|
and Wynnum#
Section adjoining Local Goversmfeai
The Breakfast Creek System,-’*
[a) Windsor, Breakfast Creek skirts Swan Hill Sift thS
southern and western sides; as the land is very kSKr
lying in certain places along these two sides, the^ over*
flow of. salt water from the Creek causes the formation
of permanent or semi-permanent salt-marshes in whleli
A,yigilax breeds profusely. Larvae of both A.viWijLME-
and Culex sitlens Y/eide, were observed in plentiful
numbers during tHe present survey#
A small sal’t marsh Is aldo to be found about the
saltwater creek which empties'into Breakfast Creek near
the railway crossing over Breakfast Creek, This also is
a fruitful breeding place for A.’.vigilax#
There is no other salt marsh belonging to the
Breakfast Creek system in the area of Windsor#
(*) BEaU&Bfr • ■ The south-western and southern boundaries
of Hamilton are formed respectively by Breakfast CreSk and
the Brisbane River, As the north bank of the Brisbane
River at Hamilton Reach is rather high and does not
permit of the extensive inundation of land by salt water,
the only portion of the Hamilton areja of interest is
that lying towards its’ south-western- corner, or the mouth'
of Breakfast Creek# Crosby Park, Albion Park Race Course,
and the Albion Plats (immedlately to the western side of
Albion Park Race Course) are low lying localities which
mast be ranked as salt-marsh land*, * and as breeding places
fsr A.vigilax. The north-eastern oorner of the Race
Course is, by far, the most extensive breeding place in


respect of area; it is kept permanently filled by
spring tidal waters backing up Cookslpy Strbo# odwojh*
In previous years a large amount of filling has beeir
accomplished in a brackish marsh which existed ifl the
centre Of this land, but no pains have been taken to
level off the top of the filling-in material with- the
result that freshwater poo * r are found in the irregular
depressions. In a couple of these, larvfcd of‘Apses'
(Ochlerctaitus) alboannulatuß were observed*
The land comprising Albion Park Rene Course is
very flat arc. low-lying, but in spite of this condition
■che process of “borrowing ,J earth for levelling up .the
course is continually carried on in certain-parts of the
premises. r fhe sinking of borrow-plts on race-courses
lb in ©'vidchce also at Boomben Park Race Cqurec
(Hamilton) end hadron Park Race Course; (Windsor) both of
■which axe' also situated in lew lying'land#
Buring a survey made in 1912, and for several
years subsequent- to that tine* Q rosby mrked the
situation of a-large tea tree marsh wMfihV .having: bejen
fed by a hill-streamlet from the westertl' Slopes of
Bartley *s Hill, and having had corn.uni oat ion with
Breakfast Creek 'through hue Grove and the Colllngwood
Street® , sewers} presented she condition vf a .fresh marsh
gradually merging into 'a salt marsh, pa the lower side.
Af the time of- the present inspection almost the'
entire rawp' has been reclaimed v/£ift- wO oaoeptiOß of a
central- canal to give easement to'the flow of etite 1 -
weter from Bartley*s- Hill to the Creek, .and also with the
exception of a few mall salt puddles ; in which larvae of
til Tlftlllil- w * r '* observed, in its present state, a
moderate’ anoint, of' levelling of the filling*in material
is- required, but 'this will probably be accompli slied
with-• the;. completion of the reclamation work*
' ♦
The swamp land irvuediotely surrounding Albion
Bark Race Course on its western side has been in recent
years in great measure ■ reclaimed. ‘ A 'amall amount of
filling work is still-required (on private-' property.) ■ i*r
Jane Street, while -Ja:-x- Street required raising - above ;.
datum level* Both of these places*- though email in
extent, are •notorious for cue swarms of - larvae that are
produced* in t he' salt marshes*.
9
(c) Brisbane. Hers ton,- Bowen Hills Sports ti-uund, snl--
i-layne, fringe the right |southern) *banlc of Breakfast Greek,
The marsh land at here ten is private property and con-
tributes very freely‘to the propagation Of A r y I jji r
The -work of filling and draining would not be extatiM-ve,


git ©lt Sports ©round at Bowen Hills is occasionally
flbeded by salt ’water in which A.vigilax breeds;. drainage
%y spade-cut channels is possible and was at ©ne tlat
with euocess -hut, owing to l»c£ of attention* ,
siltage has occurred and the work thus rendered inerteetire*
.The mayne breeding places .take thp. form of td&liif
her pits and salt-swamp r land.: ■ A Meat ftmohnt fltop
bOrrOw-rpits skirting the embankment oh the eastern side
of the Horth Coast and Sandgate Railway line has beoih
’9V*¥fbdtes, ' fbe- filling of this line of.
,peeWN*«a'te that which hat Already accofcplishea #
would be a very small job. It would remove an active
ground and deserves consideration by the Railway
Department. During the, present survey the *at:er of theta
bornew-plts : ahonaded with larvae of A. vial lax, and a few
of Kacidusalternene Wfcetwobd.
j&fi-Jarman Creek Systefe.- The, salt marshes bounding
Borman Creek on its right (eastern) bank lie in the areas
of COorparoo and Balmoral. A small patch of salt watek
on its left bank occurs in the area of South Brisbane at
Buranda.
; (aj Coorparoo. The salt marshes in this area lit.
immediately about the banks of the Creek and of its Iglb*
utary • Bridgewater Creek in the vicinity of
Bark asid Coorparoo Racecotarse respectively. There, is also
a small salt marsh at the foot of Rome street fringing: the
southern bank of a small creek which emptles into Homan
Greek and which constitutes in part' the:tboundary beteeoa
the contiguous areas of Balmoral and Coorparoo.,;
places are below datum level and require filling* Their
waters were found to harbour larvae of A. vlgilax.
.Oh the iamediate upper tide of Burnett: Swam# Bridge
which ie approximately situated oh the ”vigilax border line I', 1 ',
Borman Creek is a fresh water creek and owing,.td. its
pollution by sewage coming: from the area of . South Brisbane*
aetetbs a breeding place for G* 5-fasciatue.
ib) Balmoral. > The two .principal swapth ; of the Bohnaa
creek occurlat jfoimß ltirk in the vicinity of the
'<w #oreton.Street...■ Three swamps are 'found• in the-: I■'
formed by the windings ofNomanCreek, and also
exlstat the foOtofakaileywhieh traverses a south
westerly course from Galloway 1 s Hill. Except in the very
rAiny season* this valley remains dry and it is only as it
expands at the foot of khretoh Street that it becomes of
interest by reason of the large numbers of mosquitos
(A.ylaliexf whlah are hatched in, its saline waters* The v
elril of iaosqui to-breeding here is very greatly aggravated


toy ttoe •’paddy-melon" holes over the eaftlve lower portion
of the salt swamp. Each of these paddy-melon holes
(which would present an average water-area of 40 square
inches) is separated from, its neighbours toy dry ground of
approximately similar area to the water, surfaces. Staring
the late Brisbane acti-moequito operations,. ttaM nwapi
were almost wholly drained (or at least the water area was
concentrated) toy the cutting of a central invert canal,
and a series of laterals. the wandering of animals over
the swamp and its drainage canals has in great measure
ruined this system of drainage. Unless concrete or brisk
sewer-inverts are installed in a future system the area
requires to toe fenced against the ingress of animals#
Pashen Creek System.-
Pasnen Cteek is quite a short cree.h - no longer them a
mile from source to mouth- rising in the Bulimtoa heights
and flowing toy a roughly westerly course to empty into
the Brisbane Rivei' at Bulimtoa Beach, its upland waters
are fresh, and it is only after, it traverses half its
length .'that it. reaches flat country whence there is a
lateral spreading of its waters formation#
tliis place, which occuraat thefoot of Memorial Park,
Bulimtoa s£ainoralj| is flooded by salt water backing up the
Greek, and forms a very 'fruitful breeding place for
There are a couple of other smaller salt
marshes in the area of Balmoral tout these occur independent*
ly of the Pachea Creek drainage basin*. They are lOMtei
Itwrew'down ktrdam and slightly more inland than the ApotAo
Candle Works, The marshes have immediate communication
with'the River at Hamilton Reach. As the land la raider
low lying here, there is no permanent measure other than
filling; .tout the water areas may '"toe materially reduced
toy partldi drainage.
’Western Creek Drainage System. -
The tipper^waters of this creel: are found on the slopes of
Eernberg, Rutledge’s Hill ana. Torwcod and after flowing s,
north easterly coi’iae, the Creek bends rather sharply to
take a south easterly direction, reaching the Milton hMkCh
of Bristoaha River, - Its . course of late. yeaHS has'hews,
aencwhat modified by tiie construction of sewers and .sewer-
ihtertG along its align Mab 'Arid it is only in the, vicinity
of the Southern and Western Railway that its banks ere -
overflowed by sa.it water backing the Greek# ' All the _
salt rrater part of this ereelc lodges in the area of Toowbng,
At Milton, /eetefn Creek has been straightened by the.
construction of a large concrete sewer-invert through which
the daily tides ebb and flow. During spring .tides the land
about the invert is fiooficd' and the' ‘'taare|»s sofoiwed .
'stagnate-’for long perloc.s and breed Alvigilax. ~ A couple


of the marshes have, in late yea,rs been filled in g but
the remaining onee : - occurring about the Milton Tennis
Courts and Sieman»« Paddock were seen to be still anting
as breeding places |A«vigil?o: and ITucicUrs. alternant.) c .
In the neighbourhood of Kilro'e Street i the offeTk'Te’ fed by
a branch which flows from Auchenflower (Toowong) through"
Dump re .Park, in the form of a concrete invert, Dunmore
Park is 'also flooded; by salt water backing up the Creak '
(invert) during spring tides and forme a favourite breeding
place for A,vigilax. A large part of Dumbo re Park has
lately been filled but, as with the other-marshes surround-
ing the Western Cireek system, much might be done by drain-
age, There is, moreover, an entire absence cf weep-holes
in the concrete inverts, which condition makes impossible'
the effective dfaixiagf of ground or seepage in immediate
proximity to .-the concrete work. Thus certain places
surrounding the inverts retain a sloppy aiid marshy
character which could be obviated by instituting a few
weep-holes in the sides of the inverts.
Toowong Greek Drainage System ( Toowong),-
Tcowong Creek originates bn the eastern slopes of Mount >
Cootha (One Tree Kill) and flows as a fresh water stream-
let through the area of Toov/ong until ihmeet? the loiter,
end of Alpha Street, whence its lower portion acts as ai
boundary between the adjacent areas of Toowong and TariagAi
Where it commences to form the boundary (at the foot of
Alpha Street) the water becomes saity and the creek-bed
marshy with the result that a breeding place for A,Yigil|||-
is formed. Much might be done here,to concentrate the
water on a central canal and so give the water a free flow
through the creek.
Immediately on the upper side of the stagnant wait
water the Creek (which is fresh) is polluted and breeds
C, 5-fasciatue, This has already been discussed oil page 12«
Toowong Creek is located about the vigilax border line
and therefore forms the upstream limit of vigj lax-producing'
places on 'the Brisbane River, This is the’ last place to
be considered with reference to the survey against
A,vigilax in Brisbane.
Section 2 - Outlying Areas,
The outlying salt-marshes on the north side of the
city will first be discussed, after which those to the
south-east side will-be considered. They will’be taken
roughly in order of their distance from 2r inbane.


Land about Cabbage Tree Creole and ITundah Creekfnear
Sandgatc),- It will be seen by the attached map that
Ga,bbagc Tree Creek arises about five miles to the west of
Virginia and flows roughly in an easterly direction to
empty into Bramble Bay at the south eastern corner of the
town of Sandgate. During its course Cabbage Tree Creek
drains the areas of Zillmere and Nudgee College,at which
latter place the creek is affected by tides. Discharging'
its waters into the estuarine mouth of Cabbage Tree Creek,
is another stream - Nundah Creek - which takes its origin
in the gentle slopes of Virginia in the area of Kedron.
Nundah Creek swamp near Cribb*s Island ( Toombul).-
Like the lower portion of Cabbage Tree Creek ITundah Creek
has a delta-like formation at its mouth, with the result
that the land about Nudgee Beach, Nudgee College, and
Sandgate, .are more or less permanently covered by stagnant
salt marshes e The salt marshes on the right bank of
Nundah Creek(Toombul) separate in part the so-called Cribb
“Island” from the mainland. The place is to a great
extent unapproachable on account of the oozy sand flats
which surround the marshes; here and there, however, where
the swamps were accessible, the water abounded with larvae
of A,vigila:c, A few larvae of C»sitiens and Mucidus
alternana were also seen. Nudgec Orphanage is on the
right of Nundah Greek, and.it is only about the lower (or
north eastern) portions of the field that the extensive
marshes here alluded to are to be found.
Cabbage Tree Creek Swamps near Nudgee College (Kedron)«
Lodging between the two arms of the "Y “formed by tne coax-
escence of Cabbage Tree and ITundah Greeks, is to be found
a very flat and low tract of country on a great part of
which the spring tidal waters encroach. This land constit-
utes a part of the district of Nudgee College, and occurs
to the immediate east of Nudgee College Railway Station,
A couple of silted up gutters give easement $f the marshes
into Cabbage Tree Creak and Nundah' Creek. Aedes i vi fii lax .
was observed to be breeding very freely in the Swamps, The
peripheral portions of the swamp are to a great extent,
broken up into small pools and puddles, due to-wandering
animals and it was in such water collections that larval
noticeably abounded,
A couple of hundred yards to rhe west of Nudgee College
Railway Station is another collection of salt water, A
small tidal gutter connects this swamp with Cabbage Tree
Creek- its outfa.ll being in the immediate vicinity of the
point where the Brisbane - Sandgate Road crosses Cabbage
Tree Greek. The tidal gutter has a fairly good fall, but
its flow, in parts, is rendered more or less sluggish by
an abundance' of swamp grass which fringes its edges.* In the
land near the upper portion of this gutter a few larvae of
A.vigilax were found.


Cabbage Tree Creek Swamps at AanAa.ate (Sandgate. -
About the left' (or north - )' bank' of’ 'Cabbage Tree Creek In
the vicinity of the railway overbridge a snail tract of
low lying country covered by stagnant salt water was
observed. To the cast of Deagon Station (Sandgate) the
peripheral waters of a salt marsh were also breeding
A.vigilax. The waters of this narsh drain directly into
Cabbage Tree Creek,
Bald Hills Crock ( ? Mosquito Creek)(Sandgate).-
Bald Hills Creek arises in the district raidway between
Sandgate and Strathpine and meanders in a northerly dir-
ection to fall into the mouth of the Horth Pine River,
A stagnant salt marsh fringes both banks of this creek
and in innumerable salt pools about the edges of the main
body larvae of A.vigilax were freely encountered. Time
would not permit of any thorough investigation to this
swamp,but it is apparently the case that a large part of
it might be drained by a system of "crowds foot" invert
channels. Adults of vigilax were an intolerable nuisance
while walking through the wooded parts of the outskirts
of the swamp, A few imagines of Aedcs (Skusoa)funcrea
mm ax m obsssvb&<
Horth Pine River,-. About the north Pine River in the
vicinity of the railway br.ll%c south of Petrie, the banks
wore rather high, and the land well graded, except three
small pools of salt-water about the railway bridge, Kb
larvae were noticed. Towards the mouth the river appears
to drain some salt marshy country but the invest!gation of
this would require several days, and time available did
not permit its completion.
Marsh about Hay's Inlet, (Shire of Gaboolturc, and
Shire ot Rcdcllffc),- On tbc Caboolturo side of the Creek
leading into Hay’s Inlet arc the head waters of an exten-
sive salt marsh. The marsh is located on both sides of
the Anzac memorial Road (on the Brisbane - Redcliffe Road)
and also on both sides of Hay’s Inlet, The marsh was
investigated at intervals for a course of about 4 miles
in the direction of the creck-bcd; and little or no var-
iation in the conditions was found. The country is very
flat and the nature of the marsh permanent, larvae of
A, Vigilax were very freely encountered all over the swamp
and the adults of this species were very numerous through'*
out the surrounding bush. The marsh is open to the access
of cattle and horses.
This marsh, together with the Kippering, is perhaps
the largest in the vicinity of Brisbane, The cost of drain-
age \vould certainly be great but it is certain that it
contributes to a very large extent towards the large
numbers of migrating forms of A.Vigilax which occasionally
manifest themselves along the habitable parts of the coast
including Brisbane,


Drainage, (along with the protection of drains by
fencing) is the only practical measure which night be reo»
ammended, and lifting of the drained waters by windmill 0#
other form of power would probably bo required in places*
together with 'banking. After sweetening of the drained
land, however, it is probaoln. that a large area of rich
soil would become available for agriculture or pasturage#
The Kippering (Shire of Redoiiffe ) „.~Tho Kippering ie
a large swamp, some A- miles long by one mile broad , bound-
ing a portion of the southern shore of Deception Day*
The approach to the swamp is protected by dense and
more or less impenetrable Lanta-na ard the swamp itself is
difficult of access in parts tj reason of 'treacherous boggy
mud and innumerable grass-protected pot-holes, A sort of
table-land bounds the southern margin of the swamp* This
table-land is raised about 12 to -15 feet about the marsh
and is quite dry t , but it dtps down very abruptly to the
level of the marsh, All along its foot a fresh water
boggy marsh iagf ormed, apparently by seepage from thd -high
ground. By the gradual mixing of the fresh waters and the
salt, there is a curetoh of country made up of brackish
marsh, and intercepting the fresh from the salt water* Id
certain places, capes of dry land project into the marsJl*.
and it was only along these routes that the salt wo,tcr-*part
of the marsh became approachable for investigation* Share
is a rank.growth of swamp grass in the fresh part of the
marsh wi th the result that innumerable boggy pools aad
puddles become obscured only a couple of yards away# It wd*.
in such places that i.arVae of Anopheles (Ky s a orh vnohuß)
annulipee talker, were found. The poimancncy or semi-
permanericy of this fresh marsh is indicated, by the a-lwndanie
of KQtonectidae (“water boatmen") a.nd fresh .waterCrustdeda
with which the*"*water abounded. The water is too shallow
and grassy fur fish. The, Anopheiine larvae referred to
were seen in quite moderate numbers, on the average three
or four being found to each ladle-full of water#
The salt part of this marsh which is by far the meet
extensive portion contained innumerable larvae of
A.vigilax and each scoopful of the water taken at raaftem
about the edges would’ contain between two and three huadfclß
larvae. The imagines of this species occurred in syrldd*
as one disturbed their resting places in the grace and QC|
too foliage of undergrowth; moreover, their vicious
attacks rendered investigation quite a burden of discovert*
The seepage from the tabic-land about the southern"'
borders of the Kippering should be dealt with by a circum*
vallatory drain. The method could be also extended as, a
series of concentric circumvaHating invert channels' until
there was an easement of the waters cn to the shore at
Deception Bay. The task is certainly a big one, for not
only is it very extensive but its location away from
habitation and the difficulty of access* cause it to be very
little known even to residents of the district# To an oven


greater extent than the Hay's Inlet system of marshes, the
Kippering presents possibilities for the reclamation of
valuable soil for agricultural or pastoral purposes, with
coincident removal of a vast mo s qui to - brooding area.
It is indisputable that the Kippering supplies Rod-
cliffc, and in part Brisbane, with the migrating species of
mosquitos, and especially A.vigilant.
Lytton Swamp (Wynnum).- This is the chief salt marsh
in a south easterly direction from Brisbane, It occupies a
rather extensive tract of land between Lytton and Hommant,
and in the number of mosquitos it breeds (A. vigilax) is
surpassed perhaps only by Kay's Inlet marsh and the Kipper-
ing, The marsh is in the form of a horse-shoe, with two
outlets into the lower part of Brisbane River. One of the
outlets passes through the Military area at Lytton to a
graded' channel through the Quarantine area, while the other
crosses' the Lytton Hoad a couple of miles on the down-
stream ,sido of Hommant, The upper waters of this swamp
are fresh and result from a natural basin dipping between
lynnum and Lindum, but it is only when the water is influen-
ced by spring tides that the breeding places for A, vigilax
are formed. Of late years the Defence Department (on
who Ise ' land, part of the northern swamp-outfallexists) has*
throv/n,across a portion of the swamp, a road under which
are a couple of culvert pipes at a slightly higher level
than the permanent water surfaces of the swamp. This has
partially damned the water bach on to the swamp. That
portion of the northern outfall which passes through
Quarantine land is quite innocuous in so far as mosquito
breeding is concerned. The southern outfall of the swamp
is a racher sluggish streamlet by •fcason of fallen timber
and siltage in its course. Clearing of the swamp-out-
falls would tend to lower the water in the swaiap very
materially. The lowering of the pipe drain on the' military
road would also form an essential part of the worlc. As has
already been indicated with reference to the Hay's Inlet and
Kippering swamp-systems, systematic drainage \7ould probably
result in the conversion of this great mosquito-breeding
area into valuable land for agriculture and pasturage.
Cleveland.- A line of railway borrow-pits on the south-
ern part of the Cleveland baJ.lv/ay erabahLment Was examined
and found to be holding up salt water in which a few larvae
of A.vigilax were seen. By cleaning and deepen;'-:;.:, the
drain-ouriali on to the ioreshore, the drainage of the
borrow-pits ui_;ht be e. xecteA*


4. THE ANOPHELINE SURVEY.
Many permanent fresh waters wore examined in and about
Brisbane a stage when the effects of a prolonged spell
of dry weather had been manifested by the small amount of
water which occurred in swamp-beds and watercourses.
Usually during times of drought, when a creek may be re*-
duced to a more string of watcrholcs, there is an abundance
of, or apparent increase in. the aquatic vegetation. ' Pish,
for the most part, are found in the larger gully holes in
the bed of the creek and it is from those "sanctuaries"
that the streamlet, in times of restoration to normal
conditions is restocked with larva-destroying fish.
Fresh water marshes and streamlets in a state of
nature, in southern Queensland, do not breed domestic
mosquito's by reason of the larvivorous fishes with which
the waters abound. When however, the activities of the
fishos arc impaired through overgrowth of aquatic vegetat-
ion, one is generally successful in finding a. few Anophel-
inc larvae (Anopheles (Nyssothynchus) annulipes), and the
rarer forms of Culicini, It Ts~ only after streamlets
become polluted by sewage that fish arc killed, and
domestic species of mosquitos are enabled to breed in such
waters 'Ty the protection so given against their natural
enemies.
The present survey has afforded a very favourable
opportunity for observing the maximum amount of Anopheline
development which follows during a protracted drought,
when the natural waters must be overcrowded with aquatic
vegetation due to the lack of flushing which would normal-
ly go on in the rainy season. It is particularly notice-
able that water hyacinth is shewing a decided increase of
late years in c ertain parts of Brisbane. Cases in point
are the kid bin watercourse and the Fairfield swamps
(Stephens), Chelmor Swamps (Sherwood), Bellas paddock and
Windsor watercourse (Windsor} f certain parts of Kedron
Brock and the Serpentine Swamp (Toombul), llundah watercourse
(Toombul) and the upper parts of Breakfast Creek (Ithaca),
and of Pashen Greek (Balmoral), The growth of Hyacinth
is generally sufficient to cut off all surface activities
of the larvivorous- fishes, and'the result is' that one may
usually find a few larva.e of A.(H,) annul.ipes in such
waters. Ekibin watercourse not only shewed Anopheline
larvae,but an abundance of larvae of G.annulirbstris,
Certain parts of Kedron Brook which shewed overgrowth of
green Algae and aquatic grass, were also found to contain
larvae of A. (11. ) annulip.es. *As a matter of fact by close
investigation "of "a much overgrown swamp or watercourse, it
was possible to secure Anopheline larvae. It was rather
noticeable, however, that a very great proportion of the
number of larvae encountered were in the early stages of
development, a fact suggesting that the natural restrain-
ing influences (fish, ITotonectidae, etc.) were great.


ho natural water collections were seen in such a
state as to have really caused a nuisance in connection
with Anopheline breeding; indeed the reverse condition
was the case, and it is surprising after having thorough-
ly examined clean naturalwaters, to find in what meagre
numbers mosqui to-larvae as a whole could be found.
Those watercourses and swamps which were observed
to contain-unusual numbers of larvae of either A,(h«}
annulipes or C.annulirostrls or both, are marked green
on the Spot Map (h 0 .3) and shewn as square dots on Map
ho.l.
The Einbunpin Lagoon.- a freshwater lake at Sand-
gate - was examined but no mosquito larvae were seen.
The main part of the larger lagoon (bounded on its west-
ern side by Southerden St,)also gave a negative finding,
but on its southern end where a dam has been thrown
across,* thus cutting off a triangular piece of the swamp
surrounded by three roads, larvae of A.(H,) annulipes and
G.annulirostris were found. These swamps with the except-
ion of the triangular southern portion of the larger swamp
are well stocked with larvivorous fishes,,; Another fresh-
water lagoon, the largest of thb three, is located on the
outskirts of Sandgate, its southern bank being bounded by
the Bald Hills Roa-d. In certain marshy parts about the
edges ©# a few larvae of A, (IT, ) annulipes were observed.
The main portion of this lagoon is evidently well stocked
with fish, A well defined edge or retaining wall to the
largest lagoon would have the effect of producing a beauty
spot for Sandgate and would enable the fish to do their
work. The triangular part of the second largest swamp-
should either be filled or connected by a culvert under
the road - with the main body of water so as to allow the
access of fish to all parts.
5. OBSERVATIONS ON THE RARER SPECIES OF MOSQUITOS.
Several of the rarer species of mosquitos were noticed
in certain parts of Brisbane during the present investig-
ation.
At Kalinga Parle a few adults of Aedes (pchlerotatus)"
vittiger.Skuse, Taeniorhynchus (Go qui liet'tid'i'a'Jlbrevice 11-
ulus Theobald, and Taeniorhynchus (Mansonioide's )unif oiroTs
(Theo,) were taken," biting, a'bout ; foliage. Miss Walker
succeeded in finding a larga of A.vittiger in a temporary
rainwater pool - an interesting observation as making the
third record of larval finding for this species,,
Ae4es (Skusea) funerea was noticed on a couple of occasions
bi"ting about" saltmars’hes. Careful examination revealed
the presence of no other Anopheline than A«-(H«)annulipes
Walker, ' The scarcity with which Anopheles (Myzorhynchus)
bancrofti Giles, occurs.either in the larval or imagr stage


is sufficient explanation for our failure to locate it,
; few larvae of Aedes (Pin ley a) notoscriptus v/ere
observed in the water* of* a* couple of ca'vTViVs* in the hole
of a koreton Bay fig-tree. In a few street gully traps
and sewer outfalls larvae of Lutzia halifaxi were found,The
foregoing species of mosquitos never' occur* in such a degree
as to constitute a nuisance, o’ ing in great part, to. the
types of breeding places which they select. For all'practic-
al mosquito work,, therefore, their presence might be dis-
regarded.
6. LIST OF BREEDING PLACES ACCORDING TO LOCAL
AUTHORITES ?
BRISBANE.
Breeding places for Culex s~fa-sciatue«
If Victoria park mtVrcourse (p.
11, Gewer outfall at Herston - discharging into a small
watercourse between Aberleigh Road and Hetherington
St, 12) «
111, Street gully traps, generally distributed (p,16).
Breeding places for Aedes vigilax. Gule:c sitleng and
Hucidus alternanß,
IV,SBalt marshes and pools at Herston, Bowen Hills, and
liayne ( pp, 19 & 20).
Breeding places for Anopheles (JTy ssorhynohusJannulipea.
V* Seepage water in vTcxoria Park at -the xoFt"'or "ITe
Boys* Grammar School, and on northern side of railway
embankment,
BOUTH BRISBANE,
Breeding places for Gulex 5-fasciatus,-
I, Ipswich Road sewer outfall'at head of kingfisher
Creek (p,Q).
11, Street gully traps (p*l6),
111, Polluted pool on north side of police station (near
lain St. and Vulture Street past)* (p,B),
IVi Watercourse at head of Ipswich Road Sewer at foot of
Railway embankment near Arthur St, and Ipswich
Road,, (p.B,
Breeding places for A.vigllax*
V# Small collections of salt water at end of kaynard St»
Buranda, where the railway crosses Borman Creek,


WINDSOR.
Breeding places for C. s~fasciatus.-
I, Depressions along the 'Vfooloowin sewer (,pp* 8 Cc 9).
11. Fool in Park about Lesley and Briice Sts, near Kedron
Brook, (pp.ll )♦
111, Depressions and small watercourses in vicinity of
preceding (p, 11 )*
IV. Windsor sever at Bell’s paddock, (p, 9 ).
V, Swan Hill polluted watercourse (p. 9)»
VI, Ilaokler’s tannery (p. 13 )*
VII, Silted gutters in Victoria St. Swan Hill (p*l6),
VIII, Quagmire at Newmarket Road and Creek ft, Newmarket*
IX. Street gully traps.
Breeding places for A.vigilax,
X# Land about Green Terrace and Garden St. near Breakfast
Creek, ,v van Hill (p.l8),
iO., Land about Swan St. and Edgar St. Swan Kill, (p,l8),
XII, Pools ebdut a tidal gutter near v/indsor Park* (p*JLB),
Breeding places for Anopheles (Nyssorhynchus )annulibes*
and Culex annul iroVtrls,
XIII. near" Fifth Avenue and "edron Brook Road,
\7llston,
XlV,Depression near Fifth Avenue and Sylvester St* \7ilston.
HAMILTON.
Breeding places for C.5-fasciatus*
I* McGregor \7aterhole; the ctayfield Clay pit (p. 10),
11. MOynihan Street watercourse (p»10)*
111, Street gully traps*
Breeding places for A.vigilax*
IV. Albion Park Racecourse (pp, 18-19).
V. Crosby Park (pp.lB-9)*'.
VI, Albion Flats (to immediate west of Racecourse)(pp.lB-9)
Breading places for Anopheles (Nyssorhynchus )annulipes»-
VII* Y/ateroourse on upper side o'f" Oriel Park.' See under
“Moynihan Street Watercourse" (p,- 10).
ITHACA.
Breeding places for Culex ff-fesciatue*w
.... I. It)hacd Greek and v/aterworke Road®p, 5).
Creek at Murray - StreetMpib),*
111. YAtet i c'bursa v which ihtetbecte Barq|na Road bear
Carrington ,St• -Rosalie (p. 7).
IV* Grass-choked and sewage-polluted water table in
Ranley Gwe St, Paddington.
V* Street gully traps.
Breeding places for A.vlfiilax - Nil,


TOOV/QITG
Sr ceding places for Quick j?-f ase.i a.tus : .
1, Toowong Parle' ‘laterccurse ( p. 6),.
11. Thorpe 3 t t r . V/a te re o.y:rse . ; (p .■//,)
111. Pollutedewater in 'Creek*- bed between
Campleell and_ Alpha/StEets ..
IV. Str e’et, gully traps.
Breeding places '•for’ A‘A -vigil-ax
V, Salt, swdeips ’ nea,r Milton Si ©man’s
Pa4dd.ck' and ’Dunrapre ParkEtAuchej^flot/er)■ (p-.SI)
VI. Marshy lahd- about- Toov/ong Sf.eOk nes,rMciip; foot of
.alpha St. (p, 22).-
0 OORPAROG
Breeding places'for G. 5-f-s.seia-tus.-
1. The Greens lopes CoOrpapop watercourse (Green 1 s
Gully ) (pi’lO).
11, 'Small watercourse running between AVpnue and
Marian St. Greens lopes (p, 12)'.
11l * Langland’s Pari-.
breeding places for A. (N. ) annulipcs.- •
V. Green’s Gully, and watercourse through Grecnslopes
BALMORAL.
Breeding pla-ces for
1. Memorial Park, Buiimba (p, 10).
11, Apollo Road ! ' (p, ll).
Breeding planes for A.vigilax,-
111. Land about Borman Creek’, Norman Park (p. 20).
IVv Pashen Greek swamp.(p.2l)
V. Small salt swamps in vicinity of Apollo Candle Wori
Bulimba' (p, 21).
STEPHENS
Breeding places for C.^fasciatus.-
1 Ekibin V/atercourse,n GA on kibih Street (p,7).
Breeding places for ..r.. vial lax. - Nil.
Breeding’ places for A, (N. )*..nnulipes & C .annulirostrls .
11. Fairfield Swamps,, and waterbole in Wilkins 1
paddock ( pi 27K
111, Ekibin watercourse on the lower side of Ekibin
Road (p. 27K


TOOFmUL. ;
'"reeding places 'dor .«
1. Rubbish dump at woodville Road nendra (p. 11) .
XI, HundJi sower-outfall in vicinity of NuncL.h Bine-
apple preserving factory (p. 9’)-
breeding places for a.vigilax.-
111. Hund.Ji Greek swamp near Cribb Island (p. 23) •
T^RINGA
3rceding places for J♦s-faßCiatua _.-
1. Sqxjot discharging into a tributary 01 Toowong Gree
bet. eon Oxford Terraco and Sv/an Road (p. 12 ),
11, Tool between kyan 1 s toad and Bryce St.lronside
(p. 12).
Breeding ple.ees for A.vigilax.- Nil
Breeding places for Iv. (N. ) ~nnu 1 ip es. -
111. Head of a wato.. course near Brisbane St. and Carried;
Road Ironside.
KAPRON.
Breeding places for C.5-fasciatus
1. Tanneries at Stafford" and Kedron (pp,l2-19).
Breeding places for A.vigilax.
11. Cabbage Tree Swamps near Nudgec College (p. 23).
ENOGGERA, BELL'QNT . 3IICR : 'OOP AND YBBBPNG?ILLY.
These Local Authority are grouped together
here by reason that there are no mosquito breeding places
(apart from the essentially household fours) of any conseq-
uence, to be considered at present. The ereas me not
sufficiently closely settled, nor do sewers of any import-
ance yet exist whereby streamlets may become polluted -
thus it is that swamps and watercourses, being found in
their natural state in these .ureas abound with Ic.rvivorous
fishes, and it was only with the greatest difficulty that
larvae of ... (N ■ )annulipes could be found in the "waters of
these ...reas. The finding of a young Anopheline larva here
and there along a few hundred yards of a natural stream -
a young larva which would possibly never attain maturity bv
be killed off by natural enemies - does not warrant any
serious consideration in a report of this description.
These areas being for the most part well raised abo
sea level do not contain salt swamps in which Aedes vigilax
could breed. In respect of (a) settlement and the preval-
ence of C.9-fasciatus and (b) contour and the presence of
A. vigilcoc. this group of areas contrasts very strongly wit
the preceding areas, "which latter, in one way or another
produce Q . 9-f asciatus by polluted writers and A. vigilax by
salt swamps.


ii is well to emphasise here the important fact that
neither.the physiographical position, nor the effect of
settlement* has any influence in affording protection'from
.Species, which are essentially- of‘domestic nature - to
Wit.. A. (S* )ae"gypti and g# 5-fas status, The former species is
well distributed In these, areas as” a tanh-breeding form,
while- the latter, when it occurs, is found breeding in
artificial receptacles - usually other than tanhs,
SAIIDGATE,,
~ Breeding places for A.^igilaoCv.-
1 • Salt pools and sv/ampa about the north 'bank of Cabbage
/ TTee Creelc (pp* ).
11, Marsh about Bald Kills Creeh*. (j>V ),
. .*
Breeding places for A, (IT. )annulfpee,-
The two larger lagoons.(pi ) m "
CA3OOLTKHE-,
..Breeding places for A.vigilax,*
Harsh about Hay's In-let (p, ),
BEDCIJFBE,
Breeding placea for A.vigllax and A, (H.)annulines.
The "Kippering" (p,
mmm*
Breeding places for A.vigilax,-
Lytton and Hemmant Swamp (p, r )•
CmVEJAW*
Breeding place for A,vigilax (p, )*
7. SUMARY AND CONCLUSIONS.
A. DISTRIBUTION OF SPECIES IN THE METROPOLITAN AREA.
I. Aedes fstegqmyia) aeaypti (L,) is very commonly
distributed throughout theMetropolls of Brisbane, its larvae
being almost invariably found in
places it for breeding are sagged arid. water-holding
portions of roof guttering* garden water-babrels, water
insulators of the legs of food-safes, bedroom water-juga* and
any other'domestic collection of water in an artificial
receptacle#


2; A.aegypti is almost always present in houses,
without any regard to adverse meteorological conditions
or the presence or atsence of swamps. In the essentially
business portions of the town, where rain water tanks hare
been banished in favour of the pipe-borne water service..,
A.aegyyti is seldom noticed. When its presence is felt
in the city proper, if there are no rain-winter tanks near
at hand, its larvae are found either in sagged and blocked
roof-gutters, or other artificial receptacles.
3. In the bush (and uninhabited) country about
Brisbane A. ae gyp til does not occur,
41 Culex quinonefasciatus Say, (G.fatigans) is also
a close; follower of man, but not to the same extent as
A.aegyptt*. inasmuch as it is a community follower and does
not necessarily follow isolated houses* In the Metropol-
itan district - and in Southern Queensland generally
speaking - C.5-sasciatus shows a decided preference for
breeding in foul rather* than in clean waters. Thus it is
extremely prevalent in a thickly populated area which is
unsewered (or only partly sewered), rather than in the
Sparsely settled areas like Enoggera, Belmonti certain
parts of Stephens shire a eto, Many individuals of this ,
species occurring in houses are not bred on the premises
but come from places further afield, (such as polluted
water-courses etc.) where their larvae should be sought,
5* Aedes vigilax (Skuse). on account of its capacity
for long migrations - either by independent flight, or •
carried on winds - is. a species which invades, »t times
to a greater or lesser extent, all parts of Brisbane, and
is well-recognised as the "Black bush-mosquito" by all
Brisbane dwellers, When migrant forms ocoufe , their
presence during times of anti-mosquito operations is liable
to prejudice people against the efficiency of reduction
measures directed against the disease-bearing and therefore
essentially domestic, species of mosquitoes, A
is found breeding very freely throughout the warm month*
of the year in the salt pools and marshes in and about
Brisbane,
6l During the months. of February and March the
larvae of Culex sitiens Wiedemann, and Mucldus alternane
(Westwood) "(the "Scotch Grey") are seen-occupying the same
breeding places as A. vlgilax. Towards the early part of
April their larvae are only found with difficulty,
7, Although the larvae of Anopheles (Ny ssorhyncJwiJ
annullnes laiier, are not difficult' 'to' ifind' in waters stocked
with dense growths of ; Vegetation, imagines of this specie#
are very seldom seen in the Metropolitan area.


8, Larvae of the rarer forms are sometimes or
rarely found; such as Aedes (Ochlcrotatus )alboannulair
and Aedes (Ochlerotatus )vittiger A few imagines of
Taeniorhynchus '<fcojulllPttidlaT~'brevicellulug Thee.
Taenioihynohui* (Mans quo ides )uHifo rmis .'and Asler
(Skuseaj la: 10r e a were noticed during the present re-survey .
in scrub country about Kedron Brock and Uundah maishoc,
Mosquitos of these species are characterised by the rarity
with which they are seen and their sylvan nature; their
numbers never attain to the extent of a nuisance. Occasion-
ally in houses situated in- wooded localities the larvae of
Aedes (Finlaya) notoscriptus may be observed in tree <
cavities, or rater barrels in ferneries. A specimen of
Bachisoura atrices was noticed once in a suburb of Brisbane#
B. CONDITIONS INFLUENCING THE BREEDING AND
DISTRIBUTION OF SPACIES, IN THE
METROPOLITAN AREA.
I* Tanks. A.aegyntl is to a very great extent,
dependent for its propagation upon tanks. large numbers of
tanks which were made mosquito proof during the 1912-X3
anti-mosquito work in Brisbane are, .now ineffective against
the breeding of this mosquito in them# The screens on the
manholes have become choked and broken or dislodged, and for
the most part Overflow-pipe screens do not exist,- There is
no kind of screen, whether fap-valve or gauze, which does
not require at one time or another, attention oh the part
of the householder. In the city, dust chokes the meshes,
while on the out-skirts failing leaves from overhanging
trees block the screen, A hooded (dust proof) .‘cover over
the screen, though reducing the deposit of-dust, becomes a
nuisance which is only detected after a long time# In a
few cases where fciteer the manhole or overflow (or both)
were effectively screened, large gaping holes were seen in
the sides of the tanks. There seems to be an erroneou-a
conception on the part of some plumbers and householders
that,be a tank in ever so dilapidated condition, so long
as rain water is strained through a piece of gauze in its
passage into the tank the,"ideal" is attained.
In a few Instances gauze was observed, which showed
on measurement 17 meshes and 18 meshes respedtlyely, on the
two sidfes of an inch square of the gauze (the two measure- '
mente made at right angles), instead of being "not coarser
than eighteen meshes to the inch each wav"as is provided lay
paragraph 4 (1), Part H, of the State Hosqulto.Prevention
and Destruction Regulations. Che type of patent mosquito
proof screen - the principle of which is a pipe which dips
into the manhole obliquely and the end of which is closed by
d swinging flap on an inclined plane - was seen to be in-
effective by reason of the distorted and gaping inlet pipe.


The iron hinges had rusted and made the flap valve fast
which apparently resulted in the pipe being forced by
hydraulic action. Flap-valves should invariably have
brass hinges to prevent rusting, Ho galvanizing pro-
cess can be relied on for the purpose,
2* Hoof gutters a As the survey was conducted
in a period of drought, no roof-gutters were actually
observed to be holding water, tut many likely places were
noted. Sagging gutters are caused by failure of the
supports, and not infrequently gutters are laid with
insufficient fall. Leaves dropping from overhanging trees
result in the blocking of down pipes and thus damming
water in the gutters. To remedy this there is no necessity
whatever to destroy ornamental or valued trees in Brisbane
gardens, but actually overhanging branches should be
trimmed away, and roof gutters examined and cleared at
regular intervals. The accumulation of dust and air-borne
rubbish in gutters renders this latter measure necessary in
any case, and sparrows’ nests are often found in gutters
or down pipes in dry weather,
3, Other later Containers, In certain areas it
will be noticed from the attached graphs and figures that
there is a preponderance of garden-receptacles over other
areas, A similar variation also exists as regards tanks.
This-condition is not so fortuitous as would at first
seem; for in a crowded area where the poorer types of
houses are to be found, houses which are built on a 16
square perch allotment, there is hardly room for wuch
out-buildings as ferneries and bush houses. In consequence
we do not expect to find many garden water-barrels or
other such accessory sources of rain water supply. Again,
the proportion of unscreened to screened tanks in these
overcrowded and older parts of Brisbane is greater than
that found in newer and more sparsely populated districts',
where the better class of house prevails* While the
presence or absence of garden receptacles fonps a fairly
good index of the type of,locality, the prevalence of
A.aegypti traceable to other breeding places must be
regarded a,s a fortuity. For instance plagues of A.aegypti
BATS S’esulted from neglected ant-stoppers under, safes,
both In the poorer and well-to-do classes of houses. The
less obvious breeding places are sometimes overlooked.
Thus in an investigation of a house and its environs -
the owner of which complained of mosquitos which he
asserted H came from a gully hole near by" - the water-seal
of a disused acetylene gas generator and other receptacles
were found to contain the cause of the invasion in the
form of numerous eggs and larvae of A.aegypti. The plague
of mosquitos complained of was obviously due to A.aegypti
bred on the premises; investigation of the accused gully >
hole showed that it formed part of a watercourse, all of
which abounded with larvivorous fishesm and that it was
free of larvae.


4. Polluted Waters, Where these are present in
an area there is always a superabundance of 0, 5-fasciatu.s,
Polluted waters in the luetropoll tan area generally occut
as a result of sewers and drains discharging into small
streams and gully holes, and are hot found except in
rather closely settled localities-, In Sherwood, Belmont,
Enoggera, Yeerongpiliy and certain parts of Stephens, by
reason of a sparse population per acre, contaminated
watercourses are, as yet, absent.
Where people rely solely upon rain water
collected in tanks for domestic supplies, watercourse
pollution can seldom take place owing to the fact that the
small quantities of water used (and therefore the corres-
ponding amount of sewage) may easily be disposed of,
without nuisance on the land immediately surrounding the
premises. It is only in the case of a pipe-borne water
supplied district in an unsewered or partially sewered
area, that the formation of contaminated waters on any
large scale is possible. Examples of polluted water
courses are found on the town side of Stephens area,
Coorparoo, Brisbane, Ithaca, Toowong, Windsor, Balmoral,
and South Brisbane,
Watercourse pollution literally means the
artificial selection of Culex s‘»fasciatus as the dominant
domestic mosquito >— a condition following on the banish-
ment of all natural enemies of mosquito-larvae.
Not only sewers and house drains but indust-
rial wastes (such as those emanating from tanneries) must
be considered as sources of contamination which lead to
this result.
In the pollution of waters by sewage almost
all living organisms are expelled save a few species of
the putrefactive Bacteria and Fungi which have the faculty
of living in very crude sewage. It is only by the
natural processes of sedimentation, oxidation and by
biological means that a polluted watercourse can purify
itself sufficiently to allow fish to live in it again,
but generally speaking the streamlet is too short, or
self-purification is only effective after the waters pass
away from habitation.
The case of the Victoria Park watercourse,
Brisbane, is interesting as being a place where myriads
of C,5-fasciatus are produced,in the near vicinity of a
large General Hospital where cases of filariasis are
frequently under treatment, Ut would be interesting to
secure data in connection with, a possible Filarial endemic-
ity of the population of Herston and Bowen Hills -
localities immediately surrounding the Brisbane General
Hospital,


5? Septic Tanks. Several septic tanks were
examined but were found to be practically mosquito proof,
excepting in the case of Wattlebrae Hospital Septic tank.
Herston (Brisbane), where a few larvae of C.5-lasciatus
were noticed in the anaerobic chamber. The pipe
was eaten, through by sewer gases, having thus afforded a
ready means of ingress and egress of mosquitos.
6. Street Gully traps contribute very freely
towards the breeding of cTy-fasciatus in sewered localities*
7* Salt marshes and pools. The more extensive
salt marshes in Brisbane have gradually disappeared in
recent years* The expansion of the Gity has necessitated
a large amount of swamp reclamation especially in.
of filling. There are however, several smaller pools and
marshes fin and around Brisbane, the filling and draining
of which, should be expedited. The outlying areas of
Brisbane show some very extensive salt marshes, of which
those about HudgeeCollege, Sandgate, Hay*s Inlet, the
Kippering, and Lytton have already been dealt ,iyitlx in
detail..
8* Clean Natural Waters* As these constitute
the chief breeding places for Anopheles (Nyssorhynchus)
annulipefe. and as they are invariably stocked with fish,
their rote in mosquito reduction work is of no importance
except occasionally when an overgrowth of aquatic vegetat-
ion (wattfr Hyacinth) acts as a mechanical obstruction and
bar to tlae activities of larvivorous fishes, .In certain
greas as Ekibin (Stephens), Kelvin Grove (Ithaca),.Hundah
(ToombulJ, and Windsor the increase in water Hyacinth is
instrumental in favouring the propagation of A. (H. )annulipes t
8. SUGGESTED MEASURES OF CONTROL.
A Campaign for the reduction of disease-bearing
species oif mosquito and certain feral species would require
to apply its efforts in three directions, viz.., (a) against
the essemtially domestic and disease-bearing forms,
(b) agaimst the polluted-water-breeding (and .also disease-
bearing) species, and (c) against the salt-marsh .breeding
species.
(A). MEASURES AGAINST THE STRICTLY DOMESTIC
SPECIES-GHIEFLY AEDES AEGYPTI AND TO A CERTAIN
EXTENT CULEX 5-FASCIATUS.
Systematic house-to-house Inspection, In active
anti-mosquito work a specis.l house-visitation party shouid
systematically inspect the areas under control* The chief
object wculd be t first of all, the location of household
mosquito places especially tanks, roof gutters.


water-holding receptacles etc. During the inspection,
where necessary, notices of default under Part II of
the Mosquito Prevention and Destruction Regulations of
should be served on the occupier and owner, and at
the same time specific directions as to’how to rectify
the nuisance should "be given in writing.
Part I, para. 3 of the aforementioned Regulations
requires that the Local Authority shall enforce measures
against mosquito-breeding*
Tanks should be screened with brass, copper, or
bronze wire gauze not coarser than, 18 meshes to the inch
each way, and cafe should be taken to see that the
screening of overflow is not overlooked. The mesy
of the gauze used is a matter which should be kept under
close observation, and Brisbane plumbers could with
advantage be notified officially of the liability of
error from merely measuring in one direction, a given
piece of gauze, Measurements should be made in two
directions, at right angles, as the distance of the
wires is liable to vary. Power should also be available
to authorise Inspectors to measure any gauze or device
advertised or exposed for sale as suitable for mosquito-
proofing tanks or other water receptacles, and to prevent
the sale of any which does not conform with the pre-
scribed measurements and requirements.
The.screening of wells is perhaps best undertaken by
building over the shaft a wooden gird over which a
flooring of boards may be laid. By continuing the brick
or concrete shaft up a few inches above ground-level,
white-ants may be prevented in the ordinary manner by
intercepting the posts from the ground by a layer of
sheet galvanized iron. The joints of the boards could
be caulked with pitch or the whole wooden structure
asphalted over. Care must be taken however, to provide
screened air inlets; a manhole covered by a hinged flap
may be supplied with advantage.
Roof gutters should be inspected regularly, especially
after rain* Mosquito breeding in roof gutters takes
place readily in houses overhung by foliage, especially
during rainy seasons. As has been already indicated,
however, there is no heed to destory trees in general.
The cutting away of over-hanging foliage will secure the
desired result and is perhaps the most practical method,
of preventing.the blocking of gutters. In certain cases
gutters may require regarding. In new houses steps
should be taken to secure proper grading during const-
ruction*


Barrels.(either of liquid manure or of rain water)
may be screened by a piece of bagging secured over the
top by hoop iron, ' The bagging may always be renewed at
little or no cost. Liquid manure barrels are perhaps
the chief breeding places of household origin for
C.’r-.fasciatus,
Ornamental Ponds, except in rare instances are
usually well stocked with Japanese gold fish or indigen-
ous fish. The Australian Crimson Spotted Sun Pish
(Melanotaenia nigrans (RichardsonJ) which has a fairly
wide range in the southern portion of Australia general-
ly, is a species which not only presents a pleasing sight,
bup devours mosquito larvae with avidity. It can always
b? obtained from any freshwater streamlet about Brisbane
and after acclimatising to artificial conditions will live
in an aquarium for many years*
The strictly domestic utensils which hold water
(viz,. neglected bedroom water-jugs, flower-pot saucers,
saucers under the legs of food-safes, flower cases etc.
etc.) are places which can never be dealt with in practice
except by individual householders.
Systematic, educational propaganda should never be
lost sight of,and reminders should be given through the
press from time to time, calling the attention of house-
holders to their indispensable share in anti-mosquito work.
(B) MEASURES AGAINST SPECIES BREEDING IN POLLUTED
WATERS, SOLELY AGAINST C. 5-fasciatus.
Apart from minor 'breeding places (liquid-manure
■barrel?, cesspools, septic tanks, water seals of acetylene
gas«igenerators etc) which occur about houses, the chief
source from which corns tie nocturnal mosquitos biting
indoors in Brisbane, is polluted water. Municipal
engineers in the past have failed to realise the serious-
ness of making a sewer empty its contents into the first
watercourse with which it comes in contact, it i? hoped
that with the introduction of the Brisbane sewage scheme
all polluted water courses ’will be cleared of contaminat-
ion and thus*be reconverted into their original form of
natural streamlets abounding with fish. Until this work
is accomplished, Brisbane mosquito work in connection wit&
the reduction of C.5-fasciatus must remain as a series of
compromises, and very much in the position of
good money after bad.
It is understood that Victoria park sewage course
will probably be sewered in the near future, the outfall
being Breakfast Creek. Attention should be chiefly
directed to the peripheral areas of greater Brisbane,


areas which, are now being settled on and which having
been connected with a piped water service, are about to
divert their sewage into the nearest water courses
(e. g.. Ekibin),
Tanneries* The time has come when no Local Authority-
in the Metropolitan District can safely proclaim p£.rt of
its area as a noxious trade, district,- The residential
growth of such areas as Toowong, Coorparoo, Ithaca,
Windsor, Kedron or Taringa already scarcely permits the
working of these trades without risk of continuance of
the mosquito nuisance to large numbers of persons. Prom
the standpoint of mosquito-reduction work, the essential
attributes of a district suited to the continuance and
development of these trades are, (a) that there' should be
a sufficient (and necessarily large) area of land avail-
able for each tannery, wool scour, etc* by which success-
ful 4jrea%fflent land treatment of sewage may be effected;
(b) that in the ansence of an extensive land there
shodld be a large body of water into which effluents ?of
the noxious trade establishments may be emptied without
nuisance, (c) that for land treatment, the soil should be
permeable} and (d) that pollution of the watercourses
is entirely prevented.
Many square miles of land exist about the mouth of
the Brisbane River which might be adapted to the devel-
opment of a noxious trade area. The special advantage
of having tanneries, wool scours, fellmongeries etc.
about the mouth of a river is that there is always
available a large volume of tidal water into which the
trade effluents can discharge after preliminary treatment.
With modern methods of dealing with trade wastes and trade
fumes, noaesthetic objections need arise if this area
were used.
The rapid growth and centrifugal migration of
population, the small and scattered areas of land at present
devoted to noxious trades and the obviously bacl results
of discharging sewage into watercourses, are arguments
pointing to the need for discontinuance of th£ present
system. The problem is a very large one, however, and
must include, now or evcntually, the question of permitt-
ing the continuance* of existing trades of this class in
the localities which they now occupy. Prom the experience
of Sydney and Melbourne in the same connection it would
appear wise to make a vigorous effort to settle it at the*
present stage of city development, as,whatever questions
of compensation may arise today,, will be magnified with
each succeeding year.


Septic tanks* Whenever, as in the case of non-
development of the surface-scum, - the anaerobic chambers
or well syphons of septic tanks are observed to breed
mosquitos, all the openings, intercepting traps, vent
shafts, and man hole covers, should be screened, or rendered
with close fitting joints as circumstances require* Wattle-
bx-ae Hospital septic tank might be made mosquito proof by
repairing the effluent pjpe. Septic tanks should be in-
spected from time to time especially after they hav# been
cleaned out, when their liability to constitute' mosquito
breeding places is greatest*
Street Gully Traps, These should be petrolised onoe a
week. The most economic method, however, is to'fit an
automatic oil-dropping can,hung over the water seal* The Can
may be regulated by a miniature stop cock to discharge &
drop, say once every five minutes. A can of two or three
quarts* capacity, under these conditions, would require
refilling with oil only once a month or even every tw©
months 1
The use of flap-valves to gully traps is e'ffeotivi Ut
countries where labour is had very cheaply, and where a pttg
of men is constantly employed in supervising, and in the
prevention of accumulation of debris under the valves* It is
improbable that any valve of this type would give satie*
faction under the ccndit.ions in Brisbane, Attention !•»
however, being given by the Australian Institute of Tropioel
Medicine to the question of a pattern of
street gully-trap based on other principles, and the problem
is not an insoluble one.
(C) MEASURES AGAINST THE SALT-MARSH BREEDING SPECIES.
Aedes (Ochlerotatus) vigilax. Culex sitieiis aaft
Mucidua She salt marsh land which occurs
aVou’t AIM Hamilton, Swan Hill (Windsor), Hers ton, and
Mayne (Brisbane), Norman Creek and Bulimba (Balmoral),
Coorparoo (Coorparoo), and Milton and Toowong (Toowong),
should be filled in and drained. When these areas ar®
filled in -it will be impossible for A.vigilax or its Wilt
water confreres to breed in Brisbane or'its 'immediate
surroundings•
The larger outlying salt marshes in the areas of Vynnum,
Toombul, Eedron P Sandgate, Caboolture, and Hedcliffe
places which should receive earnest consideration. Tfet ;
complete drainage of them would not be possible by gravity
alone on account of the low lying nature of the lands .bistj:
failing their conversion into agricultural or pastorfl land
by a regular engineering scheme in the manner already indic-
ated, there is much to be done in the way of canalisation
and in some cases the Interception of seepage waters frm
hi3,is and (for example, the Kippering and the uppey parts of
lylton swamp), crowds foot drains should be adopted in


conjunction with circumvallating ones. Where practicable,
invert channel# should be protected from wandering
animals by fencing, a measure specially recommended for
Norman Park (Balmoral),
The clearing of bush in the vicinity .of salt marfhf##
would undoubtedly destroy the harbouring places of the'
adult mosquitos but this Is a measure whidh, used alone,
is more or less fruitless. By itself it merely encourages
migration.
Borrow Pits, The borrowing of earth,, especially on
race-courses, "roads, and railway lines, is a measure which
should be carefully controlled, Para.lo of She Mosquito
Prevention and Destruction Regulations of 1921 provided
that borrow-pitting shall not be done unless the execrat-
ion is filled with "cleans sound material, finishing off
level with the surface of the surrounding*grpund", Whore
gravity drainage is possible the desired result could bo
effected by this means,
Thg borrow-pits sunk on the Albion Park Race Course,
especially, and on the Doomben Park Course should be
filled in and the process should not be allowed to con-
tinue by reason of the very flat and low lying nature of
the ground.
(D). MEASURES AGAINST ANOPHELINSS.
Theee are not of an extensive nature. Broadly speak-
ing the matter resolves itself into one of assisting the
small larvivorous fresh water fishes by clearing stream-
lets and fresh swamps of superfluous growths of vegetation -
•specially of Hyacinth - which prevent them from getting
at the larvae, A man with a drag-hook and a horee could
do some very beneficial work in clearing such waters as
are found at Ekibin (Stephens), Nundah (ToombUl), Kelvin
Grove ( (Windsor) and Chelmer (Sherwood),
LANCELOT E. COOLING.
XI-5-1923.


BRISBANE MOSQUITO SURVEY 1923.
MAPS.
X« Distribution of Mosquito-breeding swamps and
watercourses in Brisbane.
2. Distribution of salt marshes around Brisbane*
3* Detailed location of the various mosquito breeding
places; areas covered by Stegomyia Syrvey Party*
Boundaries of local Authoriifes are approximate-
ly indicated in red*






