

1919.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE.
REPORT
BY
SURGEON-GENERAL R. H. FETHERSTON,
DIRECTOR-GENERAL, A.A.M.S.,
TO
THE HONORABLE THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE
ON
1.—Australian Army Medical Services Overseas.
2.- Medical Services of Great Britain and the Allies.
3.-Re-education and Re-establishment of Cripples in
America, Europe, and India.
DEB KMT AI LY-NOVE MB ER , 1018.
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by Albert J Mullett
♦ Government Printer for the State of Victoria.
0*2941.


CONTENTS.
S action
1. —ltinerary of Work ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 3-4
2. —Canada ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 4-15
3. —United States of America ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 15-18
4. —Medical Services, A.1.F., England ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 18-25
5. Hospitals and Homes conducted by Military Forces of the British Dominions ... ... 25-26
6. —Salisbury Camps ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 26-31
7. —Medical Services, A.1.F., Franco, Italy, Greece, and India ... ... ... ... .. 32-37
8. —Medical Services, A.1.F., Egypt and Palestine ... ... ... ••• ... ... 37-39
9. —Nursing Service, A.I.F. ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 39-44
10. —Dental Service, A.I.F. ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ... 44
11. —(a) Pharmaceutical Service, A.I.F. ... ... • •• i ... ... 44-45
(6) Staff Sergeant Dispensers, India ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 45
12. —Massage Service, A.I.F. ... ... ... ... ■ ... ... ... 45-46
13. —Recruiting ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• • 46-52
14. —A.I.F. Aerodromes and Medical Examination for the Royal Air Force ... ... ... 52-53
15. —Food Shortage and its effect on Australians ... ... ... ... ... ... 53
16. —Prisoners of War ... ... ... ... .. ... ••• ... 53-54
17. —Statistics ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... ... ••• 54
18. —War Work at the various fronts ... ... . ... ... ... ... 55-60
19. —Control of A.M.C., A.I.F. (Overseas) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 60-61
20. —lnter-Allied Conference ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61-66
21. —Re-education of Maimed Soldiers ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 66-76
22. —Blind Soldiers ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 76-78
23. —Functional Diseases of the Nervous System ... ... ... .. ... ... 78-81
24. —Hospitals and Orthopaedic Institutions ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 81-85
25. —Artificial Limbs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 85-88
26. —Timber for Artificial Limbs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 88
27. —-Workshops attached to Australian Hospitals and Convalescent Camps ... ... ... 89
28. —Venereal Disease (printed separately).


Report of Surgeon-General R. H. Fetherston
ON
1.—Australian Army Medical Service Overseas.
2.-The Medical Services of Great Britain and the Allies.
3.-Re-education and Re-establishment of War Cripples in
America, Europe, and India.
SECTION 1.—ITINERARY.
Accompanied by Lieutenant-Colonel T. G. Wilson,
A.M.C., who acted as my Staff Officer, I sailed from
Sydney on 28th February, 1918. This officer’s know-
ledge of French and German languages was of the
greatest assistance in France and Switzerland.
Canada.
I arrived at Vancouver on 22nd March; I spent the
whole day there, and left the same evening for Ottawa,
where 1 arrived on 28th March. Many places were
visited in the eastern portion of Canada; most of the
officials of the various departments doing war work
Avere interviewed. Amongst other places, I visited
Montreal, Toronto, and St. Agathe.
United States of America.
I left Canada on 10th April, passing to the United
States, where eighteen days Avere spent, travelling via
New York, Washington, and other places to Chatanuga,
in the south. In the United States I met nearly all of
the senior officers of the United States of America
Medical Services, and inspected many hospitals, camps,
and medical stores. I interviewed some of the leading
artificial limb makers, as well as the officer in charge
of that work. The Red Cross Factory, for artificial
limbs in Ncav York Avas inspected, and inquiries made
into the supply of Avdllow wood available for Australian
use.
Together with Major D. A. Cossar, Staff Officer for
Pharmaceutical Services, inquiries were made into the
question of obtaining supplies of drugs, dressings,
surgical instruments, and appliances for use in Aus-
tralia. Arrangements were made with the Government
to give preference as regards westward railway transit
to articles purchased by the Commonwealth. Major
Cossar on his return submitted a report on this subject,
Avhich had been seen and approved by me.
I embarked at New York on the British transport
Mauretania, carrying 6,500 American troops, AAdiich,
after delay of several days, finally sailed on 30th April,
1918. Lieutenant-Colonel A. J. L. Wilson, of the
Q.M.G. Department, also accompanied me on my tour
in America.
England.
I arrived at Liverpool on the 6th May, 1918, pro-
ceeding on the same day to Loudon, and finally left for
France on the return journey on the 18th July, 1918.
My time, with the exception of three weeks spent in
France, and in going to and fro, was devoted to in-
specting the Australian units, camps, and hospitals in
England, in attending the Inter-Allied Conference for.
Cripples, and in idsiting the leading centres for re-
education, for the provision of artificial appliances, and
inquiring into matters relative to the medical examina-
tion of recruits. The matter of medical statistics was
also inquired into.
I A'isited the following places:—
Australian Auxiliary Hospitals at Harefield, Dart-
ford, Southall, as well as the small hospitals at Moreton
Gardens, Southwell Gardens for nurses, and St. Albans
for convalescent nurses, Cobhani and Welwyn for con-
valescent officers.
At Bristol I visited the only General Hospital in
England reserved exclusively for Australians, and
which receives Australian patients direct from the
Front. This is known as Bishop’s Knoll, and is sup-
ported entirely by Mr. Bush, a West Australian. This
hospital is not under the A.I.F.
I subsequently visited all the centres of A.I.F,
activity in London, such as post effice, stores, and offices,
including the Base Depot of Medical Stores and other
stores.
The camps at and round Salisbury were in turn
visited, as well as the camps and depots at Weymouth,
the gaol at Lewes for Australian prisoners, and the
camps of the Australian Flying Corps at and near
Stroud.
I was not able, owing to shortness of time, to visit
the training camps for Engineers, but they are small
and unimportant.
Having completed the purely A.M.C. work, I de-
voted a considerable amount of time to studying
methods at English hospitals or institutions, particu-
larly those for the re-education of cripples, and in con-
nexion with the manufacture of artificial limbs.
Amongst others, I visited St. Dunstan’s Institute for
the Blind, and subsequently had an interview with Sir
A. Pearson, Bart., G.C.8.E., the director, Holders
Green Hospital for Nervous Diseases, Roehampton for
limbless men, Hammersmith for cripples, Lord
Roberts’ workshop, and Queen Mary workshop for
limbless men, the Diamond Cutting Factory at
Brighton, where cripples are trained as diamond cut-
ters and polishers. The Canadian Hospital at Taplow,
the New Zealand General Hospital at Walton-on-
Thames, the New Zealand Convalescent Hospital and
workshops at Hornchurch, and at Torquay, and the
South African Hospital at Richmond.
At Cardiff, I visited the hospital controlled by
Colonel J. Lynn Thomas, C. 8., C.M.G., for limbless
men, known as the Prince of Wales’ Welsh Hospital,
and also saw the large Welsh General Hospital and
workshops at Cardiff.
I twice visited the hospital for nervous diseases and
shell shock patients at Newton Abbot, near Torquay,
directed by Major Hurst, a London specialist.
At Liverpool, I spent two days with Colonel Sir
Robert Jones, C. 8., at his hospital, Alder Hey, near
Liverpool, and also visited the large orthopaedic estab-
lishment at St. Helens, known as the Pilkington
Institute.
I visited the Lord Derby Hospital for Mental Diseases
at Warrington, where some 60 Australian patients were
being treated; Erskine House, near Glasgow; the
hospital directed by Surgeon-General Sir William
McEwan, and probably the foremost artificial limb
factory in the United Kingdom.
From Glasgow I proceeded to Edinburgh, and went
carefully over the hospital at Buangor, where Colonel
Sir Harold Styles is chief consultant and director.


At Hull I saw the schools for re-education. In addi-
tion, several other smaller institutions were seen, such
as technical schools and small hospitals.
The places selected by me were amongst the leading
institutions in England, and were chosen after full and
careful consideration, and after having obtained the
advice of the leaders of thought in the work.
In addition to the above, I had several long -inter-
views with Lieutenant-General I. H. J. C. Goodwin,
C. 8., C.M.G., &c., Director-General A.M.S., and his
senior officers, and discussed many questions and sub-
jects of interest to Australia.
I inquired fully into the question of the medical ex-
amination of recruits by the Imperial authorities, and
spent several days at various depots for recruiting,
seeing the actual examination carried out by the
Medical Boards, and noted the method of classification
adopted. Hot only did I do this for the Army, but
also for the new Force, known as the Royal Air I orce.
On three occasions 1 visited their depots, saw the woik
being carried out, and discussed the value of various
experiments and tests made.
I visited the Statistical Department, interviewed the
Director and various other officers, and saw their
methods.
The directors and officers of the two departments for
artificial limbs and artificial appliances were inter-
viewed, and the collection of appliances inspected.
A special report is attached for each visit made by
me, giving the main points of interest noted.
France.
I visited France on three occasions. In May for
four days, having gone specially to interview the
G.Q.C., A.1.F., with reference to the standard of
medical fitness. In June I spent two weeks inspecting
the A.M.C, units, from the field units to the rear. In
July I spent nearly two weeks in inspecting and doing
work in connexion with the French and Belgian ser-
vices for re-education, re-establishment of cripples, and
inquiring into the use, provision, and manufacture of
artificial limbs. I also visited the French Front as
guest of the French, and saw their system of dealing
with siek and Wounded from the firing line to the base.
The following places were visited, in addition to
those on the field:—-Ho. 1 Australian General Hospital,
Rouen; Ho. 2 Australian General Hospital, Boulogne;
Ho. 3 Australian General Hospital, Abbeville; Ist, 2nd,
and 3rd Casualty Clearing Stations at Cassell; and
Blendesque Ho. 1 Imperial Venereal Disease Hospital,
Staples; Ho. 2 Imperial Venereal Disease Hospital,
Havre; A.I.F. Convalescent Depot, Harfleur; Imperial
General Hospital, Hardelot; Imperial General Hos-
pital, Trouville; Imperial Stationary Hospital, Dieppe;
A.I.F. Reinforcement Camp, Havre; Imperial General
Hospital,. Wimereux and Boulogne (Thigh Hospital),
Belgian Hospital, Rouen; Belgian Limb Factory,
Rouen; Belgian Re-educational School, Vernon;
French Field Hospital (Front); French Casualty
Clearing Station, Seniles; French Casualty Clearing
Station, Chantilly; French Re-educational and Ortho-
paedic Hospitals at Grand Palais; St. Maurice and
Maison Blanche, Lyons, and Montpellier, Institute for
Blind, Renilly.
Switzerland.
From France I passed to Switzerland, and met almost
all the Australian prisoners of war interned in Switzer-
land, and also interviewed the leading British and Swiss
officials on matters relative to the welfare and repatria-
tion of our soldiers.
Italy.
Entering Italy from Switzerland on Ist August, I
visited the following places, where I saw work in con-
nexion with re-education and re-establishment, as well
as provision and manufacture of artificial limbs.
Milan, Genoa, Rome, Bologna, Padua, Meola, Treviso.
(I also visited the Italian Fronts, on the Trentmo,
the Dolomite, and the Piave I rents, and finally sailed
from Taranto on 13th August for Salonica. Major 0.
Mattei, A.M.C., A.1.F., acted as my interpreter, and
greatly facilitated my inquiries.
Greece. %
In Greece, I spent thirteen days, including travelling
to and fro. There I met the Australian nurses, anu
saw the hospitals in which they were working. I also
visited the Greek Front, on the Struma, and. visited
many Greek hospitals, seeing the Greek medical ser-
vices at work from the front to the rear.
Egypt.
In Egypt I remained for fourteen days, visiting all
the Australian hospitals and A.A.M.C. units, and spent
eight days with the Australian troops in Palestine, pass-
ing along the whole front from the Dead Sea to the
Mediterranean beyond Jaffa.
India.
I visited Bombay, Simla (to interview Oommander-
in-Ghief and D.M.S.), and several other places where
Australian nurses were on duty, and finally proceeded
to Colombo to join the transport for Australia, having
altogether been one month in India and Ceylon.
SECTION 2.—CANADA.
Staff of Director-General, Medical Services.— l Deputy
Director, Medical Services; 3 Assistant Directors, Medi-
cal Services, one in charge of office; 1 Matron-in-Chief;
3 Board of Consultants; 1 Adjutant.
Diagram of Head-Quarters Staff is attached.
Besides these, there was one officer on the staff in
position of Assistant Director, Medical Services, who
was intrusted with the duty of writing the medical his-
tory of the war, and of supervising the Medical
Museum.
The Dental Corps in Canada was quite separate from
the Army Medical Services, and there was no represen-
tative of the Dental Corps on the staff of the Director-
General, Medical Services. The head of the corps was
the Director-General, Dental Services, a Lieutenant-
Colonel, and he communicated directly with the
Adjutant-General. I gathered that from a medical
point of view, the arrangement of having the Dental
Corps separate from the Army Medical Services was
not satisfactory, hut that, having commenced on these
lines, was not likely to he altered.
Overseas the Dental Services were under Director-
General, Medical Seiluces.
Pharmaceutical Representative. —There was no
Pharmacist of the staff of the Director-General, Medical
Services.
The Chemists in the Canadian Army did not hold
commissioned rank, but were generally Staff Sergeants.
One of tfie Assistant Directors, Medical Services, looked
after medical supplies, &c.
Masseurs did not hold commissioned rank. They
were represented on the staff of the Director-General,
Medical Services, by one of the consultants (Assistant
Director, Medical Services), who w T as a medical man,
hut who was in practice as a Physic-Therapeutist.
Staff of A.D.M.S., Toronto.— A.D.M.S.; D.A.D.M.S. in
charge of hospitalization; 1 officer in charge of orders,
discipline, &c.; 1 Sanitary Officer; 3 officers in charge
of boarding patients; 1 officer in charge of office.


All wore Medical Officers. Toronto is the capital of
Ho. 2 Military District, which has sent the greatest
number of soldiers of any district in Canada—loo,ooo
having gone from that district.
Examination of Recruits, Montreal.
Every man was examined by a Board consisting of
three Medical Officers. First examination was held in
country centres by Medical Officers. From there those
passed were sent down to District Head-Quarters, where
all examinations were carried out at the Central Re-
cruiting Depot. The same three Medical Officers
carried out all the examination for districts. They were
full-time Military Officers.
Eyesight tested in ordinary way. If any doubt, there
was always an eye specialist present in same building
who was available. Only doubtful cases referred to
him. There was also an ear, nose, and throat man
always available, and doubtful cases were referred to
him. Ordinary method as described in green pamphlet
(copy attached) was allowed. After being passed by
this Board men were drafted into camp, where, before
being enlisted and attested, they were also seen by the
M.O. of the battalion. After he had passed them they
were attested.
At regular intervals during the training men were
again medically boarded if necessary, but before being
sent overseas all were again re-boarded, so that every
man was seen by at least three Medical Boards before
being sent overseas.
Dental Examination. —Recruits were not seen by
dentists until after they had enlisted, when regular
dental parades were held. Ho. men were rejected for
dental defects in the first place, and dentists undertook
to make a man dentally fit if he were otherwise passed.
This even extended to supplying with upper and lower
plates. Bridge work was not done, except for returned
men, who were considered worthy.
There was no dentist detailed for duty in the Exami-
nation Recruiting Depots, and in the first place only
those men were referred to dentists who the M.O.
thought required dental treatment.
Advisory Medical Board, consisting of three well-
known M.O.s, dealt with doubtful cases. Their decision
was final. This Advisory Board was also used in con-
script cases. There were five medical men available to
constitute this Board. A Board of three was constituted
from these five, an cl they sat on cases who had appealed
to the Courts against the decision of the Medical Board
who examined the conscripts on first being called up.
Ihe judges had all practically agreed to accept the deci-
sion of the Board. This same Board was made use of
as a Pensions Board, one of the members being a phy-
sician, one a surgeon or an orthopaedic surgeon or
a nerve specialist, as the case might be, and all were
men of standing in the profession, professors at the Uni-
versity, &c.
Toronto.
Main Recruiting Depot, for the 2nd Military Dis-
trict, was situated at the Armoury, in University-
avenue. The method and completeness of the examina-
tion were better than at the other Recruiting Depots in
thp district. There were only two other Central Re-
cruiting Depots for the 2nd Military District—one at
Hamilton, and one at Sudbury.
Recruits were first drafted into a room, where all par-
ticulars were taken down by clerks. Medical history
sheet was filled up as far as it could be before gojng
before a Medical Officer. These two papers were at-
tached to a board with a clip, and went forward with
the recruit during the rest of his examination.
He next went to another room, where he was seen
first by a specialist in ear, nose, and throat, and the find-
ings of these two Medical Officers were made on his
papers. Even if these findings were sufficient for re-
jection, he went right through with the examination.
He next went through into main examination hall,
which was artificially warmed, and there the recruit
was stripped. He was first weighed and measured, and
then went on to his medical examination. There were
three Medical Officers here examining recruits, the
method of examination being very thorough. All the
details—measurement of chest, &c., and other details on
his medical history sheet—were filled in by a clerk at-
tached to the Medical Officer who examined the recruit.
Each recruit was made to run round the room twice
before the Medical Officer examined his heart.
After this the recruit went to the Medical Board
Room, where three Medical Officers saw him together,
and completed his examination. He was marked up as A,
B, or C class, according to the findings of this Board, and
attested and enlisted if he came up to the standards re-
quired, Apart from a general examination of the mouth
and teeth, the recruit had no dental examination before
he was attested, but this examination and treatment, if
required, were carried out by the Dental Corps whilst
he was in camp, and if there were not sufficient time
whilst he was there, they were completed at the Base
Gamp in England, where the soldier finished his train-
ing. There was a general order to the effect that a
man would not be rejected for dental defects, as the
Dental Corps undertook to make any man dentally fit
according to his class. This extended even up to the
filling up of upper and lower plates.
The Dental Treatment and Examination of Trainees
were witnessed at the camp at the Exhibition, in
Toronto. There was a camp room, where there were
eight to eleven dentists employed, and a number of
dental mechanics (sergeants). There was a separate
room for officers, other ranks being all treated in the
large main hall, but there was a separate room where
extractions were made, generally under a local anaes-
thetic. The work undertaken covered practically every-
thing necessary, but no gold fillings were used, and
bridge work is practically only done for returned men
whose dental defects are a result of service.
All the men I saw were recruits, and not .conscripts,
and the A.D.M.S. stated there were none of the diffi-
culties with men attempting to evade the condi-
tions of the Military Service Act such as I saw in Mop-
treal. So that there was not the same necessity for the
Advisory Medical Referee Board, but there was such a
Board, which could be, and was, convened occasionally
where there were cases for it to examine and decide
upon.
Would-be recruits from country districts were sent
down to the three mobilization centres for examination,
and underwent no medical examination except at these
centres.
Hart House for Functional Re-education, Toronto.
Dr. Bott and Captain Smith in charge.
This place was not utilized in connexion with voca-
tional training, but was intended to be used as training
centre for instructors.
There were two classes—(l) those who were to be
surgeons in charge, and who need to know what they
are to order; (2) those who were to be in charge of
department carrying out these instructions. '
There were several departments—massage, electricity,
hydro, and chiropody, hot air, &c.
The great aim in movement was to endeavour to
obtain active innervation on the patients’ part, even if
the movements were passive.


Orthopaedic Hospital, Toronto.
I visited this hospital with the State Commandant,
Colonel Bickford, and the A.D.M.S., Lieutenant-Colonel
Eyerson. This is the hospital at which Lieutenant-
Colonel Starr, the well-known Canadian orthopaedic sur-
geon, works. It has a capacity of about 450 beds, and
practically all the serious orthopaedic cases from Canada
have been centralized here and fitted up with artificial
limbs. It had, until a week before I visited it, been
under the Invalid Hospitals Commission, and it was at
that time being handed back to the Military Depart-
ment, so that it was visited during the stage of transi-
tion. 4
Nurses’ Quarters. —Most of the nurses employed were
boarded out. There was a matron and 21 trained
nurses. There were also a number of Y.A.D. helpers.
The work otherwise was performed by A.M.C. orderlies,
of whom there were about 120, including N.C.O.’s and
men.
The officers, patients, nurses, and V.A.D. helpers had
their meals in the same building. There was one mess
for Medical Officers and nurses, but the nurses had
meals at different times, one mess for N.C.O.’s of unit,
one mess for convalescent patients. Over 80 per cent,
of the patients were up and about. There were separate
rooms for these three messes, and the idea of centraliz-
ing in one building was to lessen labour. Mess was
close to kitchen.
Kitchen was satisfactory, with all up-to-date appli-
ances —Niagara plate-washer, and an electric machine
for mixing puddings, cakes, &c., and for cutting up
fruit and vegetables.
The Storeroom opened out of kitchen, and seemed well
equipped.
Kitchen staff were all civilians.
There was a Dietician, who was the direct head of the
chef, and the matron theoretically had nothing to do
with diets, and seeing to how food was cooked. The
dietician was a woman.
Wards were good. Patients were allowed to smoke in
wards at any time.
All disciplinary matters, both as regards personnel
and patients, were attended to by Adjutant, who was at
that time a medical man, but under the old regime was
a combatant officer (mostly convalescent or “ B ” class).
Under the old regime, apparently, an endeavour had
been made to run the hospital on civilian lines, and cut
opt all military forms and discipline, so that, after only
a week’s running under military conditions it was un-
fair to criticise. There seemed to be no attempt to
recognise the presence of the Commandant or of senior
officer in the wards, and neither N.C.O.s nor men,
orderlies nor patients, made any attempt at standing to
attention.
Operating Theatre.— Quite ordinary, and though it
was a bright sunshiny day, operations were being done
by electric light.
X-Ray Room ordinary for good hospital. Stereo-
scopic apparatus.
Hydrotherapy on Basement. Whirlpool baths, hot
and cold douches, &c. Quite up to date.
Massage and Electrical Rooms up to date.
Gymnasium and apparatus for exercising of stumps
and disabled limbs all fixed up in large room, which
was also used as concert room, and seemed satisfactory.
Artificial Limb Fitting Room and Workshop. —All
the fitting of limbs was done here, but limbs themselves
were made at another institution.
Plaster casts of stumps before fitting were also made
here, and in another room plaster casts of feet -before
fitting them with brace for flat foot, &c. Fairly large
stock of limbs was stored here. They were apparently
kept in stock sizes up to the knee, and the bucket for
thigh was fixed to these. All repairs and alterations
to limbs were also carried out here. Originally the limbs
themselves were made here, but the work had grown to
such an extent that the room was too small, and the ap-
paratus and the factory itself had been removed. The
drying and seasoning room for the willow for limbs used
to be here, but was then at the factory. I learned that
artificial heat for drying and seasoning ha.d been used,
and the wood prepared in about three months, although
it was realized that the wood so prepared was not as
satisfactory as that naturally seasoned, but the demand
had been so great that the former method had to be
adopted. I did not see any artificial arms being made
or repaired.
Roof G-arden. —There was a roof garden for use by
the patients when the weather permitted, but was not in
use at time of my visit.
A Dentist was attached to this hospital from Dental
Corps. He was then under the Officer Commanding
Hospital. Appliances were satisfactory for good work.
Base Medical Hospital, Toronto.
Officer Commanding, Lieutenant-Colonel Bartells.
Tip till recently this had been main Base Hospital
for Toronto, but at time of visit 250 beds had been
obtained at the Main General Hospital, and all surgical
cases (acute) were transferred to general hospital for
treatment, so that cases treated at this Base Hospital
were principally camp cases —sub-acute cases, venereal
and isolation cases.
The building was originally the general hospital for
the city, but was given up in 1912, and left idle until the
outbreak of war, when for first year it was used as a
barracks, and the last two years had been used as Base
Military Hospital, It had never been under the Hos-
pitals Commission, but had always been military.
The original capacity of hospital was for 350 to 400
cases, but as military hospital accommodated 700 cases.
There were over 300 venereal cases there at time of
visit.
The arrangements of the hospital were quite inade-
quate to make it up to date. It was expected that in the
future the whole of this hospital would be used entirely
for venereal, skin, and infectious cases, but there was a
sufficient number of these cases in hospital at that time
to keep it filled to its proper capacity.
The staff was 220 N.C.O.’s and men, and O.C. had as
many nurses as he required. Military nurses were sent
here before being sent overseas, so that nurses were con-
stantly changing. There was a second in command—
Adjutant also a registrar.
All officers were medical, except the Quartermaster.
One of the Medical Officers was detailed as Permanent
Orderly Officer.
The great majority of the patients were walking
patients.
Venereal cases were utilized to do fatigue duty about
the hospital in two grades, under the supervision of
Orderly Officer. Venereal cases did only outside work,
and corridors, &c.
There was a duty roster in each ward, also for those
patients fit to do light duty—cleaning of wards and
helping in kitchen, &c.
The isolation cases— measles, diphtheria, C.S.M.,
scarletina, were isolated in another wing, and attached
to this wing there was accommodation for 200 patients
in tents, which were floored. These tents were used
for isolation cases who were more or less convalescent.
The nurses looking after these cases lived with the
general nursing staff, but adopted precautions—gowns,
masks, &c.—when dealing with isolation cases. The
O.C. stated there had been no infectious cases
amongst the general nursing staff of nurses,


There were altogether seven kitchens, where cooking
was done. Centralization had been impossible owing to
the construction of the building.
Patients on admission had bath, and their clothes
were taken from them and sterilized in steam heater,
and sent to pack store. Patients wore hospital blues in
wards. Admission rooms and pack store were on the
basement.
Canteen. —It was estimated that from the canteen a
profit of from 15 to 22 per cent, was made, which profit
was devoted to the general betterment of patients—re-
creation room, library, billiard room, &c.
The canteen was in special building on basement
level.
There werfe two barbers in a part cut off from the
canteen. Twice a week barbers went round the wards
and attended to bed patients gratis.
Charges.—Walking patients attended to in barber’s
shop were charged 20 cents for hair cutting and 10 cents
for shave. If patients had no money they were attended
free on order from Medical Officer.
There is a Y.M.C.A. attached to hospital, also general
writing and recreation room.
The wards were generally large and overcrowded.
They contained about 40 per cent, more beds than they
should.
The discipline, from a railtiary point of view, was
good, and both orderlies and patients seemed to have
a good idea of such discipline.
Smoking. —The patients were allowed to smoke in
the wards at any time.
Messing. —The patients were fed in the wards, each
man sitting on his bed or the bed-box placed beside his
bed at a table. The orderlies brought in the food in
mess tins in a large heated flat covered dish, and dis-
tributed it to patients in the wards. Each patient was
issued with knife, fork, and plate. In parts of the
hospital there were arrangements to have the messing
gear cleaned in boiling water, but this was not general.
There was nothing at all in the way of a common
mess room, although such a large proportion of patients
were walking cases, and this made a great deal of extra
work to be done by the orderlies and patients on .light
duty.
The diet seemed to be liberal and good.
The kitchens were ill-adapted for the purpose they
were used for. The cooks were all military, and the
O.C. complained of the difficulty in obtaining decent
cooks for the rate of pay that was given. All the order-
lies in the hospital were “ B ” and “ C ” class men,
principally “ C ” class.
Laboratory. —There was a large laboratory attached.
Routine examination for Wassermann reactions on all
patients admitted was carried out, and the pathologist
stated that the proportion of positive reactions obtained
had been from 11 to 16 per cent, of all cases examined,
whilst in civil hospitals the proportion had been from
8 to 11 per cent.
Toronto Military and General Hospital.
A.—Military Section. — This was the main hospital for
Toronto, and one flat, containing about 250 beds, had
been handed over to the Military for use as the surgical
section of Base Medical Hospital. The idea was that
all serious and operative cases at the Base Hospital
then existing were to be transferred here for operation,
and as soon as possible after operation such patients
would be transferred back to the base or to convalescent
depots. There was a Military Superintendent, and
entirely military staff (resident) for this portion of the
hospital, nursing would be done by the ordinary
nursing staff of the hospital, and in all other respects,
as regards food, diet, &c., the usual procedure of the
civil hospital would be followed out. This was a tho-
roughly up-to-date hospital, opened in 1912.
Chief of the Staff was Colonel Primrose, and he ar-
ranged the work of the staff on the team system. All
the staff, without exception, were returned officers, and
all on whole-time duty.
Wards were large, and contained 40 beds. All beds
were on wheels, and could be wheeled out on to veran-
dahs, which existed in most of the wards. Each ward
was self-contained as regards bath and lavatory accom-
modation, and each ward also had a pantry attached,
from which the food cooked in the general kitchen was
served.
Special wards. —There were special wards for serious
cases and post operative cases, also single rooms for
serious cases or those likely to die. These wards were in
close proximity to the operating theatre.
Operating Theatres were provided in connexion with
each group of wards. There were in them fixed enamel
wash basins, with overhead spray and douche worked by
elbow taps, a large conically-shaped copper sink, a large
movable tubular metal stand, and a completeset of instru-
ments in metal and glass stands. Provision was also
made for student onlookers.
(Preparation Room off the theatre, and off that the
Sterilizing Room, with autoclave and instrument
sterilizer cupboards for storing of kettles containing
sterilized dressing.
Surgeons’ Room, off Preparation Room, containing
lockers for each surgeon, also wash basin, lavatory, and
shower bath.
Kettles, Kettle Stands, Dressings, &c. —There were
also in the theatre kettle stands with automatic opener
by foot pedal, kettles for dressings, and kettles contain-
ing gowns and masks for surgeons and nurses, worked
on this principle.
Anaesthetists’ Apparatus. —Gas oxygen cylinders.
There was a complete set for each theatre.
Nurse in charge of Theatre attended to repair and
sterilization of surgeons’ gloves, &c., and theatre instru-
ments.
Dark Room for eye and throat cases was provided on
each floor, and this room was fitted with all necessary
equipment.
Pathological Rooms. —There was a small patho-
logical room in connexion with each group of wards,
where the Medical Officers would carry out ordinary
examinations of urine, sputum, &c. Microscopic and
ordinary apparatus were provided.
Trolleys for food, containing three shelves, were in
use, and each patient’s food was served on a tray. A
nurse was in charge of the trolley at meal times.
Diet sheets were made up by the sister in charge of
ward, and sent to dietitian who superintended the pre-
paration of the food in the kitchen.
Medicine cupboards were outside each ward or group
of wards for use in case of emergency, and the keys of
these were in charge of sister in charge of ward. The
poison compartment of these cupboards was fitted with
an alarm bell, which rang when cupboard was opened.
The medicine cupboards were extremely well stocked
with all ordinary drugs.
Bath and Lavatory accommodation was most up to
date, with tiled floors and walls.
Corridors were covered with red linoleum, which was
polished, and looked well.
Floors of wards were polished wood with strips of
polished linoleum. There were no skirting boards, and


the angles at the junction of walls with floor and ceiling
were rounded.
Heating.—Steam-heating was provided throughout
the corridors and wards, and was efficient.
Electric call system was by means of a series of
coloured lights in a conspicuous place in each o t e
wards and corridors. Each Medical Officer had a
definite colour or combination of colours for his call,
and when he was required these colours showed up
throughout the whole hospital. This system was worked
from the main entrance hall. When the Medical
Officer called answered the telephone, the operator at
the Exchange switched otf the colours. This arrange-
ment prevented the constant ringing of bells, and any
Medical Officer on duty was much more easily found.
In the same way there was a number on the boa id
for each patient in the ward which was numbered, and
the light burned until the nurse went up to the patient s
bed and turned off the light. This system is a, great
convenience in a large ward. The telephone bell itself
was the only bell which rang on the landing and had to
be answered.
Lifts.—There was ample provision in respect to lifts,
both for patients and stretchers, also for surgeons and
visitors. For the last named they were automatic.
jj—civil Section— All that has been, said in regard
to the military section applies to the civil section.
There were three classes of accommodation, viz.:—
(1) For hospital patients proper, where the surgeons
make no charge at all for their services.
(2) Semi-private Section, where patients paid some
fees to the hospital, and the surgeons made their own
arrangement with the patients. Some of these patients
were in wards, some in single rooms.
(3) Private Section.— Here the patients were charged
full fees for rooms, and surgeons charged their full fees.
This section was in a separate block of the hospital.
Pathological Department was one of the blocks of the
hospital building, and was in charge of the Professor of
Pathology at the University. Under him were certain
of the residents of the hospital. The routine patho-
logical work of the hospital was done here, and there
were laboratories for the use of students of the Uni-
versity. Everything was most up to date.
Physiological Chemistry. —This department was on
the floor above the Pathological Department, and was
conducted on the same lines.
Post-mortem Rooms were on the floor below the
Pathological Department, and here there were a large
post-mortem lecture room and cold-storage chambers for
bodies, &c. The arrangements for keeping records were
very complete.
There was a large pathological museum attached, and
a very complete index and description of specimens.
X-Ray Rooms were in the basement of the medical
side of the hospittal, and were most complete. There
were at least eight complete sets of X-ray apparatus,
all worked by transformers. Coolidge tubes and
McAllister Wiggin tubes were the tubes principally
used. There was a large room fitted up for the examina-
tion of slides, and a large number of slides could be put
on view at the same time. This Department was under
one Medical Officer. Plates were systematically labelled
in compartments, and could be referred to as required.
A complete stereoscopic apparatus was also provided.
Two X-ray plants were reserved for treatment—one for
dental photographs, one for patients from the private
wing, and several for general X-ray work. There were
several special couches for chest cases, and test meal
cases, and a very complete dark room for developing
plates,
The officer in charge stated that 100 cases per day was
about the average number treated. He also stated he
was cramped for room, and required three extra rooms.
Hydro-therapy and Massage Departments were also
on the basement, and these were fitted up in a most
up-to-date manner with various forms of whirlpool
baths, hot and cold douches, &c., mullostats and vibra-
tory massage apparatus of all sorts.
Kitchens, in general block, were in charge of men.
Blakeslie Dish-washing Machines were installed here.
Automatic Egg Boilers and many other labour-saving
devices were provided.
Pantries and Dry Stores were close to the kitchens,
and excellently kept.
Freezing Chambers and Cold Storage for Meat and
Perishable G-oods were most elaborate, and the cold-
storage apparatus pipes were all laid on from central
furnaces, &c.
Canadian Nursing Service.
Training. —All nurses certificated. Training was
for at least three years in a general hospital.
Status. —They were given commissions as officers but
only held “ relative military rank ”
Matron-in-Chief —Major.
Matron —Captain.
All others —Lieutenant.
There was no distinction between nurses and sisters.
All nurses were sisters.
Pay. —According to their rank, and at the same rates
as for commissioned officers.
Equipment Allowance. —250 dollars —100 dollars on
appointment, and 150 dollars on being sent overseas.
For a nurse with relative rank of lieutenant, the pay
was as follows: —- *
Daily pay (2 dollars) . . .. Bs. 4d.
Field Allowance (60 cents) .. 2s. 6d.
Subsistence (1 dollar 70 cents) .. 7s. Id.
Total daily pay and allowances 17s. lid.
Pensions for Nurses. —Precisely the same as for
officers, and according to their rank.
Dental Services.
The Dental Services had been separate from the Army
Medical Services before the w T ar. The Director-Gene-
ral, Dental Services, stated that, in his opinion, there
were many advantages in the two services being separate
and distinct. There was friction between the Director-
General, Dental Services, and the Director-General,
Medical Services, at Head-Quarters.
In Canada there was a Dental Corps attached to
training camps —1 Dentist to 500 enlisted men. In
convalescent hospitals there was an authorized- estab-
lishment of 1 Dentist to every 150 patients, in military
hospitals 1 Dentist to every 500 patients. On the field
the establishment was supposed to be 15 Dentists and
about 15 Mechanics to a division.
In a battalion there was a daily dental sick parade,
where men were paraded directly to see the Dental
Officer. In a hospital the Medical Officer notified the
Dentist that there were patients requiring dental treat-
ment.
On the field itself the Dentist was actually attached
to the hospital, and as such came directly under the
O.C. Hoyal Army Medical Corps or Canadian Army
Medical Corps.


The Dental Supplies in Canada were centralized in
the office of the Director-General, Dental Services, who
made out requisitions, which were sent to the Director,
Contracts, who arranged for the purchase of dental
supplies, which were distributed from the office of the
Director-General, Dental Services, to the Assistant
Directors, Dental Services, of the various military dis-
tricts. Ho requisitions from the Assistant Directors,
Dental Services, of districts went direct to the Director
of Contracts. At the Head-Quarters in the various dis-
tricts there was an honorary captain and quartermaster,
who was in charge of the Dental Stores, and his system
of bookkeeping showed how all his dental supplies had
been expended.
Pay and Rank. —Dentists’ pay according to rank.
A Dentist who had practised his profession for two
years would be appointed Captain, with less practice.
Lieutenant, and after one year’s service would be pro-
moted to Captain,
Pay for Major, 6.25 dollars, plus 1 dollar 50 cents
allotment.
Pay for Captain, 5.25 dollars, plus 1 dollar 30 cents
allotment.
Pay for Lieutenant, 4.50 dollars, plus 1 dollar allot-
ment.
Pay for Sergeant, 1.85 dollars, plus 1 dollar allot
ment.
Pay for private, 1.10 dollars, plus 90 cents allot-
ment.
Head-Quarters Staff,—l Director-General, Dental
Service; 1 Deputy Director, Dental Service; 1 Honor-
ary Captain and Quartermaster; 1 Warrant Officer;
1 Quartermaster Sergeant; 1 Staff Sergeant; 9 other
ranks.
Total Dental Staff for the whole of Military Districts.
—Lieutenant-Colonels, 6; Majors, 18; Captains and
Lieutenants, 223; Hon. Captains and Quartermasters,
11; Sergeants and Staff Sergeants, 245; other ranks,
247; total, 750.
Dental Treatment for Returned Soldiers. —Very much
the same procedure as with recruits was followed.
Dental parades were held, and any dental work required
was done before discharge. Even bridge work was
done if necessary in worthy cases, i.e., cases where
dental defects were the result of service conditions.
Copies of my reports sent from Canada, dated 9th
April, 1918, and 16th April, 1918, are attached.
STAFF OF D.G.M.S., CANADA.
D.G.M.S.
D.D.G.M.S.
run —
-( A.M.D. 1.
i/c of
Office,
Appointments, Promotions,
Movement of Effectives,
Reinforcements,
Leave,
Transfers,
Discipline,
Establishments,
Records of Personnel,
Corps Orders.
/
• A.M.D. 2. ■
Hospitals,
Records and Returns,
Patients,
_ Admissions,
Transfers,
Discharges,
Statistics,
Embarkation.
- A.M.D. 3. -
Technical,
Equipment,
Medical Supplies,
Stationery Supplies,
’ Contracts and Agreements,
Claims and Allowances,
Transport,
Pay.
-| A.M.D. 4. -
/
_ Matron-in-Chief,
’ Nursing Service.
V
A.M.D. 5. ■
Medical History of
the War,
Medical Museum
Board of Consultants.
_ Consultation and
~ Inspection.
Adjutant and
O.i/c Details.
All Orders,
_ Office Filing System.
Discipline,
All Clerical Details.
The Medical
Commissioner
D.M.S. Invalids.
1 v
' General Questions N
concerning Hospitals.
The Disembarkation
Movement and Disposal
of Patients.
Inspection of Hospitals,


Copy of Effort Forwarded April, 1918, from
Canada.
The Secretary for Defence.
Sir,
I have the honour to report that I arrived in Ottawa
on 28th March, and met .Major Cossar, A.M.C., Avho
had arrived from Europe two days before.
I presented my letters to the Governor-General, being
most cordially received. I idsited the Military Head-
Quarters. The Minister of Militia was absent in
United States of America, but I saw the D.G.M.S.
and other officers of G.H.Q. I was extended a very
full welcome, and instructions given that all informa-
tion available was to be placed at my disposal..
With reference to tbe strictly A.M.C. portion of my
Avork, I will report more fully on return to Australia.
As the work of Canada regarding re-education and re-
establisbment is well advanced and they are working
on definite lines, I am taking the opportunity of for-
warding some of my impressions by Major Cossar. I
have also arranged that Major Cossar will see some of
the working centres and the practical side of re-esitah-
lishment, so that he can give as much information as
possible to the Repatriation Department. Of course,
he has not been present at many of my interviews, and
is not fully conversant with the ideas, and ideals of the
workers here, iso I Avill try to give my impression as
fully as possible, hut time does not permit me to do
justice to the subject.
In early part pf 1915 a Canadian medical officer was
sent to England and France to report on questions of
re-education. Since his report was submitted, the
matter has been gone into fully and Avell.
Originally, the returned soldiers in Canada were
dealt Avith in a different manner to those in Australia
or England as regards medical attention. The prac-
tice Avas a failure, and has, as result of an inquiry by
Royal Commission, been altered; original scheme now
abandoned.
Army Medical Services in Canada dealt with a
soldier in every way until he embarked and sailed over-
sea, but there their control and responsibility ceased.
Soldiers came under the Expeditionary Force when
overseas, and on return to Canada they Avere taken
charge of by the Military Hospitals Commission, who
did everything for the returned i mud id; arranged for
pay, treatment, arranged for their discharge from ser-
vice, arranged for pay and pensions, as well as doing
everything for re-education and re-establishment in civil
life, and managed hospitals and homes. The medical
authorities in C.A.M.C. state this was most unsatis-
factory from their point of Anew, that treatment given
Avas not good, and that they Avere being often asked ,to
supply military officers, who did not like working in
many of the institutions of the Commission. Soldiers
being under civilians, discipline was had; often in Red
Cross or other civil and voluntary hospitals they got
drunk, refused discipline, kept late hours, and gene-
rally abused themselves, with bad results. While the
officers of the Commission will not admit a total failure,
they frankly say that it was abandoned on account of
difficulty in controlling soldiers and in obtaining
medical officers or getting satisfactory work from them.
_ These are the principal weak points in the purely
civil control, but there are many others, such as excess
of sympathy in dealing with schemers, malingerers—
men fit to return overseas hut not desirous of going.
The inquiry (copy of report enclosed) resulted in a neAv
arrangement, which promises to he much more success-
ful, and seems to be satisfactory and accepted by both
the Medical Services and by the civil side, or repre-
sentatives of repatriation, in that, the Military Hos-
pitals Commission has been superseded by Invalided
Soldiers’ Commission, and has handed over to the
C.A.M.C. the entire responsibility for treatment of all
returned invalids who may be considered acute, sub-
acute, or convalescent until such time as they are dis-
charged from the Military Services, and discharge does
not take place until treatment is finalized and no
further improvement can be expected. The hospitals of
Military Hospitals Commission are being handed over
to C.A.M.C., and others, to a value of 3,000,000 dollars
(roughly, £600,000) are being erected all over Canada.
To this rule there are the following exceptions: —(1)
Tubercular cases; (2) insane patients and epileptics;
(3) incurable cases —these classes are banded over
shortly after or on arrival! to the Invalided Soldiers’
Commissions, and treated in their homes or hospitals.
In supplying medical men for their work they (the
I. are helped by C.A.M.C,
lie-education or curative work is undertaken in
C.A.M.C. hospitals entirely by 1.5. C., hut on recom-
medation of medical officers only.
Closely related to the C.A.M.C. and Invalided Sol-
diers’ Commission is the Pension Department, which
may be said to be the third part in the new scheme.
The pensions are controlled by the Pensions Commis-
sions, a civil body of three.
The Commission is entirely independent, and its de-
cisions are final, no appeal being allowed, and no out-
side interference tolerated. Their work is very de-
liberate and slow, hut it is at the same time thorough,
and not in any way governed by sentiment. The one
object ,in view is that both State and soldier, or his
dependants, shall he fairly dealt with. In some large
towns special medical officers are attached to the Pen-
sions Commission, hut all the great hulk of their
medical work is done by C.A.M.C. Medical Boards, as
in Australia, with one great diffierence, and one worthy
of (consideration by Australian pension authorities.
All reports come from the various military districts to
Central Pensions Commissioners Avith a very full re-
port of the medical condition of. soldier. At Central
Office, Ottawa, there is a permanent Medical Sendee of
some eight or ten medical officers, and under one as
Chief. The medical officers embrace specialists in each
class of medicine. These medical officers, one or more
of them, carefully review all papers and fix the percen-
tage of disability Avhflch the soliders have received, and
on this percentage he is paid his pension. They grade
diseases and various disabilities, and so can, they think,
treat all men all over Canada equally and fairly, and
do not have now, as formerly, one district giving a
large pension and another a small pension for the same
disability. Their grades range from 100 per cent, to
5 per cent, classes, dropping (by 5 per cent.; thus, 100
per cent., 95 per cent., 90 per cent., 85 per cent., and
so on. I hope that papers and forms Avill accompany
this report, and, while the forms show a recommenda-
tion by Medical Boards as to proportion of disability,
this is not now filled up. Their reason for not filling
it in is that soldiers seemed to find out what was re-
commended, and growled and complained loudly when
the percentage Avas reduced by medical reference at
11. Q. Commission.
Outline of Constitution of Invalided,
Boliders’ Commission, as usually called I.S.C.
This consists of -a large Committee or Council
(eighteen) of business men or civilians, Avith president
and officers. While they are nominally the head body,
the work, and practically all details,’ is done by the
permanent officers, which consist of (heads) —
(1) A managing director, Mr. Armstrong.
(2) Secretary, Mr. Scammell.
(3) Vocational Superintendent, Mr. Segworth.
(4) Mr. Kidner, a psychological expert, Secretary,
B


The above are all civilians in prime of life, ex-
tremely keen, enthusiastic, and quick workers.
Mr. Kennedy is Propaganda Director, and controls
all publications; formerly on staff of The Times; he
is an older man, but imbued with the same keenness.
I have never met such a brilliant staff and one which
works so well together. Attached to their staff is (6)
Colonel Sharpies, <a Militia officer. He acts as Military
Director of the 1.5. C., deals with Military Department,
and deals with all aspects of military discipline; and,
from what I can gather, though he comes in as an O.G.
officer, he acts independently.
The D.G.M.S. informs me that his (Colonel
Sharpies) dealings with A.G. does cause delay, as
almost all his dealings of importance are medical
questions, and so have to come to D.G.M.S. in the end;
but at the same time it is easily seen that little passes
between Departments of importance except routine
matters, as notifications to result of Boards and re-
quisitions for medical officers.
This central body has under it a Chief Medical Officer
and staff of medical officers, with various inspecting and
instructional officers (not medical).
In each military district (there are twelve in work-
ing order) there is a District Committee, who control
and direct all work in their district, and in this way
work is decentralized to an extent, but many invalids
arc moved for training from their home centres; hut it
is not desired to do so, and every effort to avoid it is
made. Ultimately all provision will be made in each
district for training centres for re-education.
Winnipeg, Montreal, Toronto, and Calgary are the
principal centres now, but others are rapidly coming in
and catching up to the older ones. As most recruits
have come from Toronto districts, so, therefore, most
activities of I.S.C. have been there. These will he
described separately in each district, and Winnipeg and
Calgary, which I was not able to see (two or three days’
journey each way), will be reported upon by Major
Cossar.
Everywhere the University is used, if one exists, and
often additional buildings and class rooms are erected.
Special classes are .arranged, and special courses given,
conducted by the staff of the University, in some sub-
jects, hut very frequently by outside teachers appointed
by I.S.C. Technical schools are also used as centres,
and, where neither of these exist, new schools and col-
leges are erected and staffed.
> Accompanying is large paper, practically an adver-
tisement, showing the various institutions at present.
This is being prepared for the Inter-Allied Conference
to he held in London next month. The system and
syllabus for each course is very fully and carefully
thought out, and now some 200 different occupations
are dealt with. This large number has, to a great
extent, overcome the objections of trade unions to hav-
ing any particular trade overdone or flooded with in-
ferior workers, as few trades, except typewriting or
motor workers, have a large number of invalids trained
for them.
Various factories, small and large, public or private,
are surveyed, as they call it, by experts, to find out where
work now done by fully developed men can he done by
men with disabilities. These are numbered, and men
taught to take a particular position in a particular fac-
tory. The course of study to that particular man and
particular job is drawn up and arranged by experts in
that particular trade, submitted to expert medical offi-
cers, who certify as to man being able to do justice to the
proposed course. If this is satisfactory, the man starts
his course, and is under the eye of both this medical
officer and the Vocational expert during his study. If
he cannot stand the work, it is modified, or longer time
given, hut there .are very few failures.
'The men are maintained during the course of study
by being given allowances (attached), or in other places
by board and lodging in barracks (not military).
hint only is a survey of all factories being made and
all trades similarly dealt with, but the soldier before
being put to a course of re-education is also surveyed
twice; a preliminary survey is made, sent to H.Q.,
1.5. C., and, if satisfactory, a full official survey is made,
and the class of work the soldier is to do is decided.
The soldier has a right to express a preference and ask
for what he wants, but is not in any way the deciding
factor. In fact, I do not think his wishes are con-
sidered at all unless they coincide with the Specialist
Officer of the Department of A.S.C. These special
officers see each man, reason with him, and give him
every particular and all the possible prospects of new
undertakings, and the men accept their advices readily.
The main and guiding objects of all their efforts
is to keep invalids (1) at his old occupation.
ficial arms and appliances are made for each case to
overcome disability, and all sorts of other expedients
considered. (2) If not fit for his old occupation, at
some lighter job or work in connexion or allied to his
old trade. (3) To so arrange pay and pensions and
allowances .that they never come up to the sum which
the man can earn if he becomes a good tradesman. That
is to say, the man must always have the ambition to
improve, and, if he does improve, he increases his
financial position. In this matter the report of the
inquiry held recently in Australia, Which is in the
hands of officers here, was criticised as regards the
making up of the pay of incapacitated men to that of
journeymen before they can give a reasonable return
to their pay. This is considered as being a blot on the
Australian scheme, and they do not think any .such
scheme can succeed.
They would give the man a task for four hours a
day; pay for the work at piece-work rates. Then go
on to eight hours’ work and a larger task; gradually
increase the task until he gets a fair return for his
disability. All the time they add some payment as extra
to the pay pf factory or workshop, hut. the piece-work
pay and extra allowance never equal the full trades
union pay until he has come up to their standard of
his ability (ian easy one).
I have collected all papers I can on this subject and
arranged for any published later to be sent to Aus-
tralia.
Erom the foregoing it will he seen how fully the
whole subject is gone into, and each man is most fully
Studied, and each single trade (even for one position
in a big shop) is carefully scrutinized.
I cannot listen to these officers and see their wdys
without being struck with their ability and enthusiasm,
and also struck with the different type and character
of the man (invalided soldier) with which they have
to deal to that with which the Australian authorities
must handle. Without doubt, the Australian is the
more difficult to handle, and I think also less desirous
pf himself taking the trouble to thoroughly master the
new trade or calling.
Rtage at which Re-education and Re-estahlishment is
started and carried out.
Very early, on the principle that employment is
good for all soldiers, Canada allows and compels
patients in military hospitals to do work, and many
are regularly used and do much work—clean windows,
scrub floors, clean wards, assist cooks, sweep yards and
grounds, _ in fact, do a lot of work. This being the
case, it is easy to get them to take up some form of
re-estahlishment as their occupation, or to take courses
of study or practice to improve themselves. This is
encouraged by all medical officers. So many soldiers


while still patients at a military hospital are under-
going .some form of instruction, all of which is under-
taken and systematized by the vocational officer of the
I.S.C. The I.S.C. build buildings at hospitals, and
carry on What in Australia would be a small technical
college or school of arts. Men attend daily, according
to prescription or order by M.O.’s in charge of case.
Not only do they have these schools at the hospitals,
•but patients are allowed to visit the classes and work-
shops at the Universities and regular technical schools
while residing at hospital or attending as out-patient;
of course, they have cards to check their attendance
and to how ’the time and date of next class, so that
no imposition can be practised. Such is the system
and thoroughness of this work, and desire to give occu-
pation to invalids as early as possible, that the work
and instruction begins in the wards for bed cases, and
all the lighter occupations of needlework, fancvwork,
light .basketmaking, and knitting is done under instruc-
tions of the 1.5. C., and not by workers who are not re-
sponsible.
In various stages of their work, ordinary school
clasess are held to teach, from A. 8.0. for illiterates
(there are plenty in Quebec Province) to languages,
trigonometry, and high mathematics. In fact, in any-
thing. If an officer or man desires instructions in any
particular work they will do their very best to arrange
for it. I have Said that patients attend classes outside
the hospital, but in doing this motor buses are pro-
vided to take the men back and forward to the various
places of instruction; all fjjee of cost to soldier, and
at the expense of the civil authorities for the Invalided
Soldiers’ Commission.
In Ottawa I attended a private exhibition of cine-
matograph films given by the 1.5. C., who have had
some 9,000 feet prepared to show all the points of
interest in their work. The exhibition was a great
success, and demonstrated their institutions, their work,
and their methods, and is a very fine record of their
activities. I interviewed their Managing Director, Mr.
Armstrong, who stated, in reply to my question, that
Canada would be pleased to supply a copy of all, or
part of, the films to Australia, and, further, that cost
would be about 10 cents a foot (5d.). I would strongly
urge the purchase of a complete set to be used to
educate the officers of the Repatriation Department
and of the A.A.M.C., and to give them all an idea of
what they must work up to.
The films are made in comparatively short reels
(eight or nine), and arranged to deal with a special
point, an institution, or a district. They will convey
more information in one exhibition than could be got
by weeks of reading or by interviews. They are of
general interest, and could be hired to picture shows
or exhibited by Department, and would certainly re-
pay their cost. I mentioned this matter rather fully
in a note to the Controller of Repatriation, posted a
day or two ago, and when I had despaired of being able
to forward any report from America on account of my
time being fully taken up. That note also dealt with
the proposal to send some officers from Australia to
Canada to learn and investigate their methods.
Representatives of United States of America are
passing backwards and forwards investigating and
learning the methods of Canada. I have met several,
some holding high positions, and all inform me that
America is almost sure to follow the Canadian practice
in main lines.
With some modification to suit local conditions (at
present practically no provision is made in America
for such work, and that no serious attempt has ever
been made to re-educate the crippled civilians), I am
of opinion that Australia could gain a great deal by
sending some officers —two or three—to learn and study-
all re-educational work and methods in Canada,
The officers chosen should he young, energetic,
enthusiastic, and will also need to be tactful, and all
authorities here recommend men with some knowledge
of manual occupation, and, again, all give preference
to an engineering knowledge, either mechanical or civil.
They will have to become whole-time officers on re-
turn to Australia. The officers here are able men, and
it would be no use sending boastful men, or, in fact,
any but the best Australia can find.
Medical men will not be suitable for these positions,
and the authorities here say schoolmasters and pro-
fessors are generally failures on account of their fixed
ways, which cannot be got to change or alter for the
special circumstances of soldiers.
The Canadian authorities will welcome any such
visits from Australians. They are very proud of their
work and of the fact that they are leading and being
consulted by America. I would recommend sending a
cable asking their advice and their approval, as well
as time they consider necessary for representatives to
stay here (I think two months would suffice), and re-
member cost of living is very high. Their officials all
live at good hotels, where the bare cost of living is
from 7 to 8 dollars a day (295. to 335. per day).
Chief Re-educational and Re-establishment Centres in
Canada.
Both above are taught in same institution, the autho-
rities here defining re-establishment as education in
former occupation and re-education as in a new call-
ing. I personally visited the following, and remarks
are from my own observation, or verified by me.
Ottawa. —Head-Quarters of the Invalided Soldiers’
Commission or Pension Committee, and of the Mili-
tary Force, as well as Seat of the Government; both the
Minister of Defence and the Minister who deals with
invalids have their offices at Ottawa. Beyond the
above, little active work is done, as there is only one
convalescent home there.
Montreal. —ln province of Quebec. Majority of
population in the province French Canadians. Many
illiterates and few recruits under voluntary enlistments
were enrolled. Two Universities —the McGill Univer-
sity and Laval University; the former, English speak-
ing; the latter, French speaking. Naturally from above
remarks all vocational training is done in connexion
with English population. The McGill University has
a large block, principally an engineering school, where
all branches of electricity, mechanical engineering, and
engineering draftsmanship are taught, both practically
and theoretically. The workshops contain a very large
equipment, one alone containing all the machinery
to be found in a steamer (large size), and there are all
forms of electrical generators, from simple to' intricate
ones. A third shop must have at least twenty lathes
for engineering work. There is a complete wireless
and electric telegraph arrangement. A large receiver
is on the roof of the college, and can, and does,
receive from the Eiffel Tower at Paris; while,
for instruction, a complete plant, sending and
receiving, is in operation in one of the large rooms
of the school. This does not interfere with the autho-
rities, and does not send out of the building. It is
effective, and returned invalided soldiers are being
taught this and all the other work. They do a short
concentrated course. Some of the instructors are 'the
ordinary University staff, but generally they are officers
of I.S.C. The few ordinary students who have not
gone to the war work alongside the soldier students,
but, of course, latter are doing special courses.
Montreal Technical College. —A large building. One
wing has been handed over to 1.5. C., and is
worked an 1 controlled entirely by officers of the I.S.C.
Many trades and courses are carried on, from or-
dinary scholastic work to motor engineering. One


practice is to buy up old motor cars and remake all
worn parts, and sell the car, which certainly has been
carefully overhauled. Working models and sections of
models abound for every part of a car. The men can-
not help learning rapidly. Shorthand, typewriting,
commercial methods, classes for Civil Service, drawing,
and all architectural work are taught. Building and
building trades, joinery, cabinetmaking, and all sorts
of woodwork, such as patternmaking, &c., are done
here.- This school works in conjunction with a build-
ing at College of Pharmacy. Hot only are all sorts
of chemists and druggists’ work done, but also second-
ary science, hygiene plumbing, and more mechanical
engineering are taught. A considerable number of men
have taken a course for janitor. This was novel to me.
It is for positions of caretaker or house husband to
big buildings. Returned soldiers do very well at this
occupation. They are educated in the principles of gas
lighting, electric lighting, heating, ventilation, lifts,
and sewerage, and can do a lot for the building, and
are competent to act as clerk of works when repairs
are being done. They also are taught the necessary
books and how to keep the records. Men trained re-
ceive good wages.
In the Quebec district I visited a consumptive sani-
tarium at the village of Saint Agathe, 63 miles west
of Montreal. Regarding its side and medical details
I will report separately, but mention it to describe
the re-educational and vocational work done for con-
sumptive soldiers. They can accommodate 120 patients,
and had 66 at time of my visit. ( The principle of treat-
ment is: First, absolute rest; second, exercise under
careful control by a most competent medical officer.'
In the hospital is a workshop and also a large rest
hall. In the hall, men do all sorts of needlework
for a certain time a day. It is considered a mental
exercise and also an occupation; for each case the
class of work and time to be spent is ordered by
M.O. When exercise is begun and outdoor life allowed
a graduated portion of exercise is spent in the work-
shop. Here men were doing needlework, working
small looms (not toys), but extremely easy work, and
doing all the lighter work of joinery and cabinet-
making, Again each task had to be approved by M. 0.,
and time daily to spend, which is regulated by the
improvement men make. A machine saw is installed
as hand sawing is not permitted for any but very
small timber, and never for over |-in. wood. The
finished work can be purchased by the soldiers at cost
of materials, or it is sent to a central depot in Ottawa
and sold, the proceeds, less cost of material, being
credited to the men. The Ottawa authorities fix the
price, and will not allow any sentimental prices to be
paid. This is the practice throughout all their work-
shops, many things for hospitals and for the use of
1.5.
Toronto. —Here the greatest number of recruits have
enlisted, and so the greatest activity is to be found
with regard to vocational training.
There are two very large re-educational colleges 30
or 40 miles out of Toronto at Guelph, Where a penal
establishment on very modern lines and for very
modem methods of treatment of prisoners had re-
cently been built. This has been handed over to the
1.5. and is now being rapidly brought into use for
some 800 students, Who will live on the buildings after
the style of a college. They will be taught all forms
of agricultural work, of farming and stock manage-
ment, and also much industrial work, as there are
large machines for working and making articles for use
by hospitals of Government Departments. At Whitby,
30 miles from Toronto, there is a convalescent home,
where large curative workshops have been established
for both curative work and to provide education and oc-
cupation for the inmates.
Whitby was originally built (but never used) as a
lunatic asylum. Extra buildings have been added by
the LS.C.
Artificial Limbs. —The centre for the manufacture of
artificial limbs in Canada is at Toronto, where there are
two factories, one the bulk store and bulk factory for
Canada, the other the local fitting shop for the district.
At the central or bulk factory, limbs are turned and
pieced together from the rough or from set-ups which
they purchase from Hangar and Company. The
Hangar knee is not very satisfactory, but at present
is the only one in use. Here the limb is made in the
rough, sent to a fitting factory to be fitted and tried
by patients. It is, when satisfactory, returned and
finished ready for issue.
At the local factory, really a fitting factory, the
bucket is fitted to limb and the necessary fittings made,
and man uses the rough limb. These factories are
to be formed and placed all over Canada.
Ho legs are now fitted to Canadians in England,
and returned men can have a leg in two to three weeks
after return to Canada. At the orthopaedic hospitals,
one of which, for 300 patients, is placed next to the
fitting factory in one of the suburbs of Toronto, all work
in connexion with the stumps is done. As soon as pos-
sible after arrival, men are given a peg leg fitted by
plaster bandages to stump. With this they exercise
stumps and restore muscles; until they can use them no
final legs are given. Artificial legs weigh about 6 lbs.
The Artificial Arms. —All authorities admit that
they are not really satisfactory. Game’s arm is used
only in special cases; for these it is satisfactory, but
not for general work. The finger and other parts
break, and too much intelligence is needed to work
it well and with satisfaction. They are making a few
arms fitted with a utility hook and very similar to
the sample supplied by Mr. Aunger, but these are not
satisfactory and of very little use. Much thought is
being given to the manufacture of a serviceable work-
ing hook in hand. French arms are not considered ser-
viceable or satisfactory.
I here saw the hand used and advised by Judge
Coyle, of the United States of America, with which
he can pick a coin out of his pocket with
either arm. Both his arms are artificial. This
appliance is very intricate and involved. I con-
sider that the best they have is one now only
just out of the experimental stage, known as a Bowler
Hook. This I saw; it is very strong and promises
to be serviceable. I have arranged that a sample will
be sent to Australia as a pattern. I have also tried to
arrange that samples of all these limbs, if satisfactory
to them, will be sent to Australia for our information
and use if need be. As regards Bowler Hook, if the
sample is .satisfactory, the factory here will gladly
supply these in bulk or the parts for them. They have
now got the necessary dies and presses made to make
the hooks almost entirely, .and machinery, and so turn
them out in large numbers.
Hart Institute—for Vocational Re-education. —The*
whole of a very large building is here used and directed
by I)r. Bott, a professor at University of Toronto.
It is fitted with fittings of many types, some most in-
genious. It is managed by Captain Smith, C.A.M.C.
The exercises for crippled, stiffened, or amputated
limbs are very many and various. Wherever possible
they embrace some form of sport with some form of
competition. All instructors record and show the exact
power put into them by the cripple, who is thus en-
couraged to go on and try to improve.
, All machines and tools and appliances are simple,
and nearly all made of wood at the various workshops
controlled by the I.S.C.


Elaborate instruments, such as those known as
Zander’s, are not favoured, and only used to a very
slight degree. One-armed men are here seen playing
billiards with cue held by a simple attachment to the
stumps, while others play badminton and rackets with
the racket attached to the stump. A show patient who
has lost both arms and legs can play rackets quite well.
Men who have lost legs play games to strengthen the
muscles of stump, such as goal-kicking with football.
While these games are encouraged, all forms of
treatment is ordered by M. 0., such as massage, baths,
and electricity.
Military Work.
Canadian. —Their systems and ways are much more
like those of the Imperial Service than the Australian.
Their procedure is greatly centralized, and their
Commandants of districts cannot act without reference
to G.H.Q.
The size of the various staffs is very great. For
instance, the R.G.M.S. has on his staff one Surgeon-
General, three full Colonels, and three Lieutenant-
Colonels, and a Matron-in-Ch iof. All the above officers
are medical men. The office staffs are necessarily large.
In districts it is the same, and in all branches of the
service.
Militia officers now mobilized hold nearly all
the senior positions. R.G.M.S., A.G., and Q.M.G. in
G.H.Q. ,are all Militia officers, C.G.S. is an Imperial
officer. All the Ristriot Commandants I have met are
Militia men.
Prior to the war they had regulations and rules
for permanent services for Militia, and formed new
ones for Expeditionary Force, known as C.E.F. At
these various rules became difficult to work when men
returned from the Front, and caused great jealousy
as to pay and privileges, they suspended for the term
of war permanent regulations and Militia regulations,
and now only have C.E.F., which apply to the whole of
Canada, and to overseas as well. In Canada, the same
pay is granted as on service oversea.
There is a Minister and an Assistant Minister in
Canada, and an Oversea Minister in England. In
Canada, a Military Council, like the Military Board
in Australia, and oversea there is a G.O.C. Some
friction occurs between the two authorities (Home and
overseas), and Canada finds it is hard to get things done
in Europe even though the officers of the G.H.Q. staff
visit England and France frequently. At times, officers
and nurses are returned from Europe to take up duty in
Canada.
Medical Services Personnel. —'With a population of
10,000,000, Canada has sent about 400,000 men over-
seas. The strain on their medical men has not been
nearly as great as in Australia, as they have nearly
double the number to draw upon, and they use them in
a lavish way. All the old Militia medical officers are
called up, and are on full-time duty. The permanent
Medical Services has never been any size—just enough
for a few garrisons.
Nurses. —They get honorary commissions and rank
as officers with pay of rank. It works well, except that
nearly all agree that ,pay is too high. I agree with
that; only a total of 1,600 have been employed at home
and overseas.
Other Ranks in C.A.M.C. —On home service only
“ L ” and “ C ” class men are employed, except special-
ists. They are very poor physically. For overseas,
“ A ” class and “ B ” class.
Voluntary Workers. —Practically none employed on
any military work, and very few by Military Hospitals
Commissions, or by Invalid Soldiers’ Commission, and
those few are whole time. It was tried, and failed.
Fharraaceutical Service. —'As compared with Austra-
lian Reserve, none exist. They simply employ chemists
in a few of their responsible positions with a commis-
sion, and ,in others with rank of sergeant, and at the
same time some or many of these sergeants are not
legally qualified chemists. Medical officers are satis-
fied, but the chemists are not.
Dental Service in Canada is under their own
director, and is not a part of the A.M.C, In the past
there has been great friction between the two ser-
vices—Rental and Medical —and friction still exists
except in districts where the A.R.MjS. (P.M.0.) has
taken general control of dentists. This has been done
in Ontario, and friction is avoided. Large numbers
are employed all over Canada, and the amount ,of work
they do individually is very small as compared with
work in Australia.
Oversea. —The Rental Service was tried as an inde-
pendent branch early in the war, and failed, and was
placed under the R.G.M.S., and has been so working
for some time. I discussed this whole question with
both the Senior Rental Officer in Ottawa, with dentists
at camps and hospitals, and also with various medical
authorities, and am convinced that the advantages of
separate control are far outweighed by the great dis-
advantages of divided control. The dental officers have
less privileges than in A.M.C., and are not at all unani-
mous as to which is the best system.
Physical Standard of Recruits. —The Canadian
authorities are confronted with the same problems as
our own, and, until recently, had large numbers re-
turned as unfit from overseas, and who had never
fought. It is better since conscription, and will im-
prove on account of C.A.M.C. getting full control of
all returned soldiers. The A.G. informed me that he
had just returned from London, and had them insisted
upon the men being given an opportunity to fight, and
of more care to prevent malingerers being returned to
Canada.
In big cities the medical examinations are well done;
in small places often badly done. This is still the case
in spite of their system and the number of medical
men available.
At examinations all men now under conscription are
classed ( a ) fighting line; (h) lines of communication;
(c) home service. “ A ” and “ B ” classes are sent
overseas. “ C ” class, some are used for home sendee.
cc C ” class are very poor physique, and, except as
clerks, &c., do not give much effective work for their
pay. “ B ” class are sent overseas, and are by no
means good men. Generally, they are healthy but have
some weakness. Many are volunteers and well on in
years up to 45. Others have minor defects and ail-
ments. The men are more like the majority of the
Home Service in Australia, such as the Home
Guards stationed at Remain Camp, Melbourne, if a few
of those oldest men were put into “ C ” class. While, on
the other hand, in the Home Guard there are many
men who would undoubtedly be classed “ A ” in
Canada. I inspected men in Montreal in large num-
bers, most English-speaking men, but a few French-
speaking (these have separate barracks, &c.). I saw
others at Ottawa and Vancouver, and very large num-
bers at Toronto were carefully inspected. I paid par-
ticular attention to the men of poorer physique in all
places. I discussed the subject wdth many medical
officers, and saw their system of examination. I have
no hesitation in saying that their standard for “A”
class, as interpreted by their officers, is no higher than
the Australian standard, and particularly for their
volunteers. Compulsory enlistment is from 20 to 35
years, and voluntary to 45.
In Toronto I saw a large draft of men, both re-
cruits and trained, some 600 in all, who had been re-
cruited in United States of America; being English


subjects, they are transferred to Canadian Forces.
Some 20,000 have been so obtained. They were, very
poor (physique, much lower than the average Canadians.
This recruiting is still going on.
Food. —'The ration scale in Canada is a very good
one, slightly smaller ,in the amount of meat (14 oz.
daily), but much more varied than Australian rations,
as bacon, 3 oz.; cheese, 1 oz.; butter, 2 oz.; and milk
are given, and the articles to be obtained as substitute
or “in lieu ” are very varied. 1 inspected the cooked
food on several occasions, and saw it issued. The
caffeitiere system has been used, but is being given up
in many places for small messes of about twelve; the
chief reason being the time occupied and complaints
of cold food by men. Altogether, the Canadian soldier
is extremely well fed, and the food is very well and
economically cooked. Of course, all men are in bar-
racks.
Food is drawn by companies, and - cooked by com-
panies of, roughly, 250 each. An allowance of 30
dollars a month (£6 55.), is given to each company mess
to buy extras, while all messes are inspected weekly,
and a prize of 5 dollars (20s. lOd.) given to the
cleanest and best kept kitchen and stores. With these
allowances, the men buy extras. In fact, the various
company messes are nearly always well in credit. Both
the above allowances must be spent on food.
Accommodation in Barracks. —All the barracks I
saw were in old converted buildings, large stores, show
grounds and buildings, and such places, all of which
have been altered considerably, and various forms of
heating are employed.
The barracks were not smart, whilst the men slept in
tw<o-tier bunks made in double pairs, without the
slightest attempt being made to prevent one man from
breathing or coughing directly into the face of the next.
The whole of the bunks were boards, and no mattress of
any sort was provided or allowed. This accommodation
is much inferior to Australian.
SECTION 3.—UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
United States Medical Reserve. —There were 20,000
Medical Officers on the United States Reserve.
Private Practice for Medical Officers. —The regula-
tions stated that Medical Officers might do private prac-
tice, but could not open an office outside the hospital
reservation.
The Senior Medical Officers apparently carried on a
certain amount of private practice.
All Medical Officers were liable to be sent overseas.
The Director-General, Medical Services, is under the
Adjutant-General, but could communicate directly
with the Minister.
In the United States, neither the Adjutant-General
nor the Director-General, Medical Services, has a seat
on the War Council.
Orders for Assistant Directors, Medical Services, Dis-
tricts, or Commands, transmitted through the Assistant
Adjutant-General to the Officers Commanding Divi-
sions to which the Assistant Directors, Medical Services,
were attached; this practice thus conforming to ordi-
nary military custom; but in medical matters the
Director-General, Medical Services, communicated
directly with the local Assistant Directors, Medical Ser-
vices, Divisions.
Power of Officer Commanding Hospital. —The Officer
Commanding of hospital had a good deal of power, the
object being to decentralize. Each Officer Command-
ing had an independent command, reporting to the
Assistant Director, Medical Services, Hospitals, at
General Head-Quarters, The Officer Commanding
had the same disciplinary power for personnel and
patients as an Officer Commanding a regiment. He
could order two forms of Board of Inquiry:—lst. For
privates only, which consisted of one officer, and he
could award punishment up to six months’ imprison-
ment- —he could not order such a Board for H.C.O.’s.
2nd. A special Board, which consisted of three officers,
for dealing with H.C.O.’s. This Board had not as
much power as a Field General Court Martial with us.
Mess Officer and Dietitian. —Given a commission as
Ist Lieutenant, and his duty was to look after the
rationing of the hospital. He was in the Sanitary
Section, A.M.C. The Mess Officer was very often able
to make a good profit for the hospital in his purchasing
of provisions, &c.
Food. —Meat, fish, &c., could he drawn from the
Quartermaster, if required.
Savings Department, Food. —lf one hospital, say, did
not requisition for meat from Quartermaster, the Go-
vernment allowed a sum of money in lieu of what
should have been bought, and this money was paid to
the hospital at the end of each month. This fund was
utilized for the general betterment of the hospital.
Sixty cents per head per diem was allowed for rations
for hospital patients.
Nurses. —One nurse allowed to every ten beds.
The United States authorities were starting to train
nurses in military hospitals.
The nurses obtained training in everything, except
obstetrics, gynaecology, and treatment of children. The
proposal was for military hospitals to be affiliated with
State hospitals, in order that nurses might obtain in-
struction in these subjects during their course of train-
ing.
Artificial Limbs.— -Workshops in all hospitals did
minor repairs and made surgical splints and other ap-
pliances.
It had been decided in the United States not to estab-
lish any artificial limb factories, there being a great
number of private establishments already in existence,
and the proposal was to get these establishments to in-
crease their plant in order to tope with the demand.
Casts were supplied by the hospital to the limb-maker,
and he made the limb, which had to fit, and be approved
by the Medical Officer before payment was made.
A limbless man is allowed an artificial limb once every
two years, and if he does not draw the limb, he is
entitled to draw the cost—7s dollars.
Hospital Beds in camps in the United States were
worked on a 5 per cent, basis. The plans, at time of
my visit, were for 160,000, but eventually for about
200,000. Up to that time, the 5 per cent, basis had
not been found excessive, owing to the great prevalence
of measles and pneumonia. In one camp, there had
been 16,000 cases of measles out of a total of 40,000
men.
Limitation of Powers of Purchase of A.M.C. Depots
in United States. —The Royal Commission'which had
been sitting in the United States had limited the pur-
chasing power of the A.M.C. to some extent, i.e., that
materials which were required by other departments
besides the A.M.C. were to be obtained through the
Quartermaster-General’s Department. This was to
obviate the clashing of two departments purchasing in
the open market.
There were Medical Depots in a number of the larger
cities in the United States—Hew York, San Francisco,
Chicago, &c.—and each of these depots had buying
power for equipment, and was allowed to buy up to the
establishment laid down for each depot, without refer-
ence to Head-Quarters at Washington.


The Depots were decentralized, i.e., they bought
locally, as a rule, and the goods bought were supplied
directly from the manufacturer to the depots requiring
them, but purchases were not necessarily made within
the district of the depot requiring the stores —it de-
pended upon where they could be best obtained, and the
local A.D.M.S. was expected to know something of the
market.
Equipment.—Until shortly before my visit, all equip-
ment —blankets, beds, sheets, &c.—were purchased by
medical depots, and did not come through the Quarter-
master’s department. The Quartermaster supplied
kitchen stoves, &c., as well; but even these might be
supplied by medical depots.
Each Supply Depot (there were eight to ten in the
United States) had purchasing powers, and they pur-
chased, as a rule, by contract.
Construction Branch, i.e., Engineers, erected hospitals
according to plans supplied by the Medical Branch.
The Medical Branch furnished the hospitals, supplying
beds, blankets, and practically everything.
Transport. —The Quartermaster supplied all trans-
port except ambulances. The medical depot bought all
ambulances.
Camp Meade, 25 miles from Washington.
Officer Commanding. —General Kohn had just re-
turned from France, where he was a fortnight with the
British, a fortnight with the French, and six weeks with
the Americans. He was attached as United States Re-
presentative with the German Army for nearly two
years.
Local A.D.M.S. or Divisional Surgeon. —Lt.-Golonel
Hurington (permanent service).
There were over 35,000 troops in camp —one com-
plete division, 27,000, and part of a coloured division.
Each regiment (3,700 men) had a regimental hos-
pital for the convenience of regimental Medical Offi-
cers, of whom there were seven. The Senior Medical
Officer of the regiment is Officer Commanding hospital.
The hospital took cases for thirty-six hours only, and
if they were severe, were sent to the Base Hospital,
situated in the camp.
A.M.C. personnel, abodt 60, lived at regimental hos-
pital; but regimental Medical Officers lived with the
officers of the regiment; all sick parades (one a day)
were held at this regimental hospital.
Base Hospital.—ln each camp there was a Base Hos-
pital, which contained 1,500 beds; and at this camp
would shortly contain 2,500 beds. It was very com-
plete, with X-ray department, pathological depart-
ment, isolation blocks—at time of visit containing prin-
cipally cases of measles, scarlet fever, &c.—separate
wards for pneumonia. There were 3,000 black troops
in the camp, and the mortality amongst these was
high, streptoccal empyasmia and influenza being com-
mon. The nurses and orderlies attending to these
cases wore gowns and face masks, and pneumonia was
treated as an infectious disease.
In isolation wards sheets were hung between the
patients to prevent them coughing over each other.
There were separate wards for Mental Cases, where
great stress was laid on hot bath treatment.
Medical Officers. —The Officer Commanding of hos-
pital was a Regular (Lt.-Colonel)-. The other Medical
Officers were Reserve.
Records. —A complete system of card records was in
force in all hospitals.
Wards. —Ordinary wards contained 34 beds, and
each was complete in itself, with lavatories, bathrooms,
&c., either to a ward or between two wards. The latter
system is not satisfactory.
Five hundred cubic feet of air capacity was allowed
for each patient.
Pack Store.- —Pack store arrangements at the admis-
sion ward were complete, and doubtful cases had their
kits sterilized.
Heating. —The hospital was heated by steam through-
out. Boilers for the hospital part alone used 45 tons
a day, and these supplied the whole hospital. The rest
of the camp was heated locally with wood and coal
heaters for each hut.
Mess Room for Convalescent Patients, where food
was issued by nurses and orderlies. Other patients had
their food brought on heated trolleys or heated trays.
All wards connected by long corridors under cover,
except the isolation ward.
Catering for patients —60 cents per man per day were
allowed. Food to that value might be drawn from the
Quartermaster’s store. If not used, the money was
credited to the hospital, and this was paid in cash each
month to Officer Commanding, but this money had to be
used for food, and could not be diverted for other pur-
poses. Catering was under the charge of Mess Officer.
Diets were liberal.
Nurses’ Quarters and Uniform. — Each nurse had a
separate room. These rooms were rough, but comfor-
table. Nice mess-room. There were about 120 nurses
at the time of my visit. The nurses provided their own
uniform, which was not standardized, but there was a
standardized pattern of indoor unifom.
Nurses’ Kitchen. —A.M.C. orderlies helped in the
nurses’ kitchen, but the main assistance was rendered
by black women.
Dieting Allowance, Nurses. —The nurses were allowed
60 cents per day for dieting, and the matron stated it
was sufficient. The allowance shortly before had only
been 40 cents.
Head-Quarters. —French and British officers, and
N.C.O.’s —usually five from each country —were
attached to each training camp for instructional pur-
poses.
Troops’ Quarters. —Wooden building, two stories—
lower story and mess-room, where men were fed by com-
panies 4, kitohen, orderly-room, and dormitory were on
ground floor; dormitory on upper floor. Each of these
houses accommodated 150 to 200 men. Each man had
a spring bed, with straw mattress, and men utilized
their poncho as a substitute for a draw-sheet to prop
up between the beds as a curtain* to avoid coughing on
each other. These ponchos are about 6 feet by 5 feet,
and have a hole in the centre. They can also be used
as a raincoat, and are a great improvement on the
ordinary ground sheet.
Rifle Racks in dormitories and mess-rooms— also
used as lecture room —and blackboards, &c., were pro-
vided.
Floors were painted weekly with a mixture of kero-
sene and cresol, which made them black-looking, but
kept out bugs, fleas, &c., and made the floors easier to
clean—less water being required.
Windows of wooden building were sliding, and covered
outside with wire mesh. They went right up to the
level of the roof.
Sleeping accommodation and space for men excel-
and quite as good as in ordinary convalescent
hospitals.
Canteen, called “ Post Exchange,” for each regiment,
was like a department store, and the profits were utilized
as regimental fund.
Mess for men was same as for hospital patients, but
41 cents per man per day were allowed and credited with
the Quartermaster. The balance was paid each month
to the Captain of the company.


Large Laundry run by the Army, where men could
have their washing done. The charge was 1 dollar 25
cents per month, each man being allowed 25 articles per
week. It was an up-to-date steam laundry, and the
system seemed excellent. The capacity of the laundry
was stated to be the greatest in the United States. In
tips laundry, there were twenty washing machines of
extra large size. There were eight large ironing
machines, which had heated rollers, and so acted as
driers, as the clothes passed through several sets of
rollers. Besides these, there were 70 ironing presses for
pressing and ironing tunics, &c. Labour principally
black women. The washing was sent in by companies;
each article had a metal tab affixed before being washed
and sent through the laundry. These tabs were taken
off after completion, and the washing again made up
in lots for each company.
Bakery under a Captain. Bread for the whole camp
was baked. Ten per cent, of cornflour was added to
flour as war bread; but bread was quite white.
Stables.—Manure was sold to contractors for farmers.
Stabling accommodation and cleanliness were not very
satisfactory, according to Australian idea.
Filtration Plant.—Water was treated with lime. It
was drawn up to filter-tanks, treated with alum, and then
filtered and chlorinated. Tests were made daily by
hospital laboratory. Petri dishes, with smears, &c.
Plant was guarded, and under officer of Quarter-
master’s department.
Water Supply was local stream, which was dammed.
Supply admittedly contaminated, and was dirty,
muddy-looking to start with. The water was pumped
up into two large wooden vats, with a capacity of
250,000 gallons each. A small proportion of lime
automatically added to it as it was pumped
up. From these two large vats it flowed by gravita-
tion to two smaller vats, so made that the water had
to flow from top to bottom to get across vats. This
was effected by dividing each vat into three compart-
ments by baffle plates. The flow of water here was
slow. The lime added made the water more alka-
line, so that the next process, i.e., the addition of
alum, for precipitation, might act efficiently. Whilst
in these two tanks a definite quantity of alum in solu-
tion was added to the water. It next flowed by gravi-
tation to two larger precipitation tanks, about 4 feet
deep. In the bottom of each of these tanks was first
a layer of gravel (2 feet), and then .1 foot of
sand. The alum precipitated as a filter was deposited
as drawn, and assisted in filtration. The water flowed
through this filter-bed at the rate of 2 gallons per
square foot per itunute. (In order to clean the filter
bed, water was forced back-ward in opposite direction
at the rate of 15 gallons per square foot per minute).
After filtration, the water was forced through a small
pipe, and whilst in this was ‘mixed with liquid
chlorine in a small mixer. The container for the
chlorine was a metal cylinder on a weighbridge, and
the rate of flow of water was known; so a definite
quantity of chlorine could be added. The chlorinated
water went into two large tanks, from whence it was
pumped to large tanks high up on a hill, supplied to the
camp by gravitation. The water at the finish was beau-
tifully clear. Records of bacteriological examination
were kept. Water had been uniformly sterile, and
there had been no trouble from the water supply. 1
had camp water to drink at the officers’ mess, and could
not detect any taste from the chlorine. Water was
laid on throughout the camp; consumption, 2,000,000
gallons per day.
Refuse Destructor.- —Refuse was carted to a central
building, and there sold to contractor for 6 cents per
day per man. Garbage-tins were here washed by rotary
C. 2941. —2
machine brushes, and returned. Paper, &c., was burned
in incinerator. Tins, packed in bags, belonged to con-
tractor, who disposed of them for solder and tin ore.
Garbage was used for feeding pigs, &c., and from camp
was carted by contractor to Baltimore.
Utility Corps men, under a Sergeant, supervised
cleanliness of this department. They belonged to
Quartermaster’s department.
Chattanooga *
G-reenleaf Military Camp.—Situated at Dgcllhorpe,
about 7 miles from Chattanooga, in Georgia. The point
of interest was that it was a camp for training A.M.Ck
officers and men only.
G-reenleaf Medical Officers’ Training Camp.
The Officer Commanding was General Birmingham.
At the time of visit there were 17,000 all ranks in
camp, and of these over 1,200 were qualified medical
men. There were also 300 dentists, about 150 veterin-
ary officers, and a number of officers attached to the
Sanitary Section of A.M.C. Engineers, psychologists,
water experts.
The preliminary course of military training that
all these officers underwent was the same, and what is
said of Medical Officers applies to other officers. The
Medical Officers were members of the United States
Medical Reserve, and before being admitted they must
have passed their college examination; then their State
examination to practise; and must also have been re-
gistered. On applyling for membership of the Re-
serve, the American Medical Association inquires into
the- antecedents of the applicants, in order to prevent
the admission of any Medical Officers of bad repute.
Applicants were medically examined as regards
physical fitness before admission, and at the same time
were interrogated from a medical point of view in re-
spect to their medical experience. If they had been
doing any special work, say, X-ray, &c., they ’were in-
terrogated in regard to their knowledge of their
specialty and general professional ability.
When they went into camp, for the first month
physical exercise was given every morning or after-
noon, and then work was entirely military- They dis-
carded their officer badges, and, as regards military
work, drill, &c., were treated exactly like a private.
They were formed into companies and given ordinary
infantry, squad, and stretcher drill. The Medical
Officers of the company took it in turns to act as
Captain of the company, in order to become accus-
tomed to the word of command, &c. During this time
they were given instruction in the keeping of records
(medical) and in general administrative duties. The
Medical Officers lived in assigned quarters, and were
required to make their own beds and keep their rooms
and quarters clean and tidy. They messed together, and
the food was provided from a common kitchen. They
were here looked after by mess attendants and kitphen
staff, who were civilians.
Batmen or Personal Servants.—The United Stales
regulations made no provision for the supply of bat-
men or personal servants to officers of any rank below
that of Brigadier. They are supposed to hire a ser-
vant, not necessarily a soldier, and who on field service
was under military law. As a matter of fact, in prac-
tice, it worked out very similarly to our own system, as
a private could generally be got to do batman’s work at
a remuneration of 5 or 6 dollars a month; but an officer
was not empowered to give him an order to perform
personal service, such as the cleaning of boots, &c. A
mounted officer was provided with a mounted orderly,
who attended to his horse, but was not supposed to act
as mess orderly, or to cook officers’ food,


Further Training.- —After the first month, those
officers who were to do special hospital duty sur-
gical work, X-ray, pathological work, &c. proceeded
to those appointments. Those officers who were to be
attached to field units did at least another month’s
training, possibly being attached to field hospital or
ambulance, and during this time they went on with
their administrative and record work. There were
also clinics held where Medical Officers might brush
up their professional knowledge. If possible, officers
who were to go to field units had three months train-
ing before leaving the camp. There were a large num-
ber of Medical. Officers who, in civil life, held uni-
versity and hospital appointments as teachers, and
these were utilized in the imparting of instruction and
holding of clinics for Medical Officers.
Base Hospital. —lq the camp, there was a large Base
Hospital, improvised from what was the hospital hi
the permanent camp, and which had been there before
the war. It had been enlarged, and, at the time of my
visit, contained 1,200 beds, and was being enlarged to
contain 1,500 —that is 6 per cent, of the strength of
the troops in camp, 30,000. There was nothing strik-
ing about the equipment or wards of this hospital.
With 1,200 beds, there were 92 Medical Officers. The
details given for hospitals at camps also apply fairly
well here.
The patients in the hospital were principally men who
had been operated upon for hernia, varicocele, &c., in
order to make them fit for service.
Operations to Render Men Fit. —The United States
regulations practically made an operation compulsory
for a man who would be rendered fit for service if
operated upon.
If a man refused operation, he could be court
martialled; but, as a matter of fact, men practically
always consented after a little persuasion. The system
had not been in operation for a sufficient time for the
Officer Commanding to express an opinion as to whether
it was really worth while to operate upon these patients.
The Officer Commanding informed me that he fre-
quently did not advise operation for hernia if a man
could and was getting on comfortably with a truss.
Merging Arrangements for th§ patients, as in the
hospital at camp. The kitchen was fitted with plate
and mug washing machine, driven by electric power,
which saved much labour.
Transport Equipment consisted of three ambulance
companies of four mule-drawn ambulances, and one of
four motor ambulances, i.e., sixteen ambulances, and
there were four such companies to a division.
In this motor-driven section was a motor repair
waggon, and also waggons and motors for carrying
equipment, and one side-car ambulance carrying tent
equipment for the C.O. ambulance.
Clearing Station Unit. —Did not carry tent equip-
ment. I could not obtain details of establishment of
such units.
Review. —At a review in the afternoon of the day
of my visit there were between 8,000 and 9,000 troops
on parade, all A.M.C. There were 20 companies of
50 each—all Medical Officers, and two companies of
100 dentists, and one company of a Sanitary Section,
Engineers, &c. All these were attached to the Medical
Department. Also attached to the United States
Medical Department is the veterinary service. There
were ten companies of enlisted men wearing full
marching equipment, with about eight first-aid pack-
ages round the waist besides their ordinary equipment.
(The mackintosh poncho is used to roll up their pack.)
The type of men was very fine, and better than that
seen at other camps. Their marching, &c., was good.
The Medical Officers especially seemed keen, and
carried out the march-past well.
Tents.— The tents for the units corresponding to Field
Ambulances were about twice as large as our bell tents,
and rolled up round the tent pole. The guy ropes from
top of tent pole went right out clear of tents. Tents
were floored, and, although they were supposed to hold
eight men, five was the greatest number I saw in them.
Each man had an iron bedstead upon which to sleep.
The routine colour of the tents was khaki. The hos-
pital tents had no fly, were longer than ours, and nar-
rower. They were supposed to hold 40 patients, were
made in one piece, and, when fitted with iron bedsteads,
held 22 patients.
Cape Merritt, New York.
Situated about 20 miles from Hoboken, New York.
Embarkation Camp.—Used for troops immediately
before embarkation, and practically the same in all
details as Camp Meade, &c.
Capacity of Camp.—4o,ooo. I
Hospital. —Two thousand beds. Similar to hospital
at Camp Meade; but the hospital staff was permanent,
and they retained patients until fit for discharge. The
hospital was directly under the A.D.M.S. Embarkation,
and was not under the Officer Commanding camp, as
the Officer Commanding and his office staff were prac-
tically the only permanent officers of the camp.
Messing Rooms. —In this camp the messing rooms
for each company (250) were built beside the sleeping
huts, with kitchen for two companies between the mess
huts. ' ...
SECTION 4.—MEDICAL SERVICES, A.I.F., ENGLAND.
The A.M.C., A.1.F., are under the control of Major-
General Sir Neville Howse, V.C., K.C.8., who was
appointed D.M.S., A.1.F., after my previous tour of
duty overseas. This officer has effected a very great
change in the service, which is now certainly equal to
any medical services of the Allied armies. Too much
credit cannot he given to Major-General Sir Neville
Howse for his/work, organization, and leadership. In
Europe he has been ably seconded by many other
officers too numerous to mention, but none more so than
by Colonel Barber, C. 8., D.D.M.S., of the Australian
Army Corps, and Miss Conyers, the Matron-in-Chief,
A.I.F. In Egypt, Colonel R. Downes, C.M.G., has been
invaluable as D.D.M.S.
The service is doing very fine work. In Europe the
Units are all up to strength, both as regards medical
officers, and reasonably so in regard to other ranks.
I visited all A.M.C., A.I.F. units overseas, and attach
detailed notes of each in separate form.
In England there are three auxiliary hospitals, viz.,
at Harefield, Dartford, and Southall, and two small
convalescent homes at Cobham Hall, Kent, and More-
ton Gardens in London, both for officers. There is also
one for nurses at St. Albans. In addition to these, there
is a small hospital at Southwell Garden, London, con-
ducted by Mrs. Hall, for members of the Army Nursing
Service, and two convalescent homes for officers near
Welwyn, conducted by Mrs. Ackland and Mrs. Buckley
respectively.
At Weymouth there are three camps, or depots, par-
ticularly for those awaiting embarkation to Australia.
At the various camps in the vicinity of Salisbury
Plains and elsewhere there are small camp hospitals
for the treatment of minor ailments, or for the obser-
vation of cases. \
The hospital at Bulford and the light duty camp at
Parkhouse Camp for the treatment of venereal diseases
are both in the vicinity of Salisbury Plains.


There are no Australian General Hospitals in Eng-
land, and therefore all Australians requiring treatment
in general hospitals are treated by the Imperial authori-
ties in Imperial hospitals, some of which are very good,
with first class staffs, and in others which can by no
means be considered first class or with first class medical
attendants. It is a weakness in the chain of medical
attendance upon members of the A.I.F. in that the Aus-
tralian Medical Services are not responsible for the
treatment of either officers or men.
To make up for the non-treatment of Australians by
the A.M.C., A.1.F., an instructioh had been issued that
Australians were to be moved from Imperial hospitals
to Harefield, or other Australian unit, when considered
fit to travel, and their transfer was at times insisted
upon against the wishes of the Imperial medical at-
tendants. This, undoubtedly, had a very bad effect,
and militated against good treatment, for, as several
imperial and other officers informed me, as soon as they
had got the Australians half well they were taken away.
As a consequence they lost interest in Australians gene-
rally, and one leading medical officer informed me that
owing to this practice he refused to have Australians in
his hospital. To move patients in the middle of their
treatment is often not good for them, and the medical
officers in charge do not get a fair chance to do justice
to our men. Patients should either be left under their
medical attendant as long as he considers it necessary,
or as many as possible of the patients should be treated
throughout in Australian hospitals. 1 his latter course
can be followed in the vast majority of cases.
The South African and Xew Zealand authorities
concentrate their cases in their own hospitals, or receive
them direct from France. The Canadian authorities
do the same for a considerable number of their men,
but not for all. The Imperial authorities concentrate
various kinds of diseases and injuries in special hos-
pitals, such as fractured thigh, epileptics, shell shock,
and others; whilst officers are also collected in certain
hospitals.
From my observations and inquiries, I consider that
in the Western sphere the attention to the Australian
sick and wounded is not as complete as it might be in
England, and I made the matter a subject for report
to the G.0.C., A.1.F., with a view to bringing it to the
level of that in France and Egypt, and giving to Aus-
tralian invalids the opportunity of being treated and
cared for by Australians.
I consider that general hospitals should be established
in England by the Australian authorities, either by
raising ne ( w hospital units in Australia, and sending
them forward, or by transferring one or more of those
now in France.
I also think that the medical care of Australian
invalids in the various camps at and near Salisbury
and Weymouth should be undertaken by the Australian
service.
Both proposals are practicable, and can be carried
out without trouble or inconvenience, and I am sure
that the Imperial authorities will gladly hand over the
necessary hospitals and buildings in suitable places if
the matter were fully placed before them.
Notes on No. 1 Australian Auxiliary Hospital,
Harefield.
Situated about 25 miles to the north of London, and
about 34 miles from railway stations.
0.C., Lieut.-Colonel C. Yeatman.
Matron, Miss C. Ross.
Seventeen medical officers on staff.
Fifty nurses, 150 other ranks.
Sixty W.A.A.Cs. (Women’s Auxiliary Army
Corps).
Nine hundred patients at present.
Grounds are excellent, and at this time of the year
surroundings are all that could he desired for con-
valescing patients. The main administrative portion
of hospital is the old house belonging to the estate.
The wards are all hutments, each containing 34 beds;
are divided into wards for acute cases, and wards for
convalescents.
The Nursing Staff of 50 nurses is centralized in at-
tending the acute cases. The Matron or Head Sister
goes through all convalescent wards daily, and sees any
patients who are lying down, and, if necessary, these
patients are transferred to acute wards.
The acute wards are largely surgical, and about 150
operations a month are performed—both major and
minor. Lieut.-Colonel Shaw is in charge of surgical
wards.
Heating. —Wards are centrally heated with stoves,
and there has been no scarcity of fuel. The nursing
quarters and the common mess-room for the patients
are heated by steam from boilers.
Wards are bright and cheerful, and the accommoda-
tion generally is good. The whole of the personnel
are B and C Class—total 150.
Female Labour is supplied by branch of W.A.A.Cs.
About 60 of these are employed. They look after
kitchens, mess-room, and rough work in wards, and
are under a female superintendent. The Officer Com-
manding states there is no trouble with them, but they
have to be constantly watched as regards undue friend-
liness with patients and personnel.
Amusement and Recreation Rooms provided by Red
Cross. Quite bright and cheerful.
Canteen was provided by Red Cross originally, but
is now run by the hospital, and is self-supporting, and
profits go to ordinary corps funds for the general better-
ment of the hospital and patients. Food is supplied at
nominal charges, and greatly appreciated by patients.
Operating Theatre. —Any ordinary surgery can be
performed, and about 150 cases per month are dealt
with.
Mess Room. —On an average about one-third of the
patients have their meals in common which
is beside the kitchen. Messing arrangements are good,
and patients get fair meals, though the service is slow.
The messing is in two sittings, and serving is done by
W.A.A.Cs.
Pathological Department, under the charge of a
sergeant, who was trained in Brisbane Health Depart-
‘rnent. There is no Medical Officer Pathologist, though
there is a considerable amount of pathology to be done.
Isolation Wards. —Those at present there are almost
entirely cases of scabies, where routine treatment of
sulphur baths and ointment is carried out, and treat-
ment generally finalized in four days.
Dysentery and Dysentery Carrier Wards.— A consider-
able number of these cases are in hospital—the amoebic
from Gallipoli—the baciliary mostly from France.
Routine emetine and emetine iodide treatment is given.
X-Ray Department. —Apparatus is quite good, and
there is an up-to-date table for screen work A large
amount of X-ray work is done, and the results are good.
Xieut.-Colonel C. E. Dennis is in charge.
Workshop. —There is a small workshop, where ordi-
nary repairs can be carried out.
Shell Shock Ward.—JJnder Major Shaw there, these
cases are segregated. Major Shaw says he gets good
results from suggestion and moral treatment.
Nurses’ Quarters are close to main building. There
are two huts for nurses, and each contains bath and
lavatory accommodation, and there is a small sitting-
room for each hut. The nurses have cubicles, and two
nurses sleep in each. The quarters are comfortable,
but there is not much furniture in the rooms. The
rest of the nurses are housed in upper stories of the
main building. The nurses’ messing quarters are in


this building, on the ground floor, and close to, but
separate from, the officers’ mess.
Kitchens are conducted by the W.A.A.Cs., and aie
clean, and there is ample stove and cooking apparatus.
Heaters for keeping food hot before being served in the
mess-room are installed, and there is every facility tor
giving the patients hot meals.
“"The bed patients get their meals in the wards, all
wards being connected with each other, and with the
kitchen, by covered-in passages, through which the food
is carried or wheeled. The trays for food are pro-
vided with a receptacle for hot water on the bottom,
but hot water is not used.
Trolleys for spine cases are provided, there are
no trolleys capable of carrying out the entire bed to
allow these patients to be put on in the open with a
minimum of moving and discomfort.
The hospital generally is well kept, and the wards
are clean and bright. The patients were bright and
contented. All patients are on rations, and it is not
easy to feed men who are accustomed to a great deal ot
The Officer Commanding stated that extra jam
and dried fruit of any sort would be an acceptable addi-
tion to the patients’ food if it could be obtained.
The articles of diet for patients (enclosed copy)
were varied as far as possible; three meals a day, and
supper, consisting of cocoa or coffee and bread and
dripping.
The Tubercular Ward, with accommodation for about
30 patients, contained only eight or nine patients.
These patients, so far, are having extra milk and diet
generally, 'but under the hospital ration scheme will
have to fall in line with the other patients.
A table of the food consumption per 100 patients per
diem, as allowed by the I ood Control Board, is at-
tached, and the Officer Commanding said the consump-
tion was kept up to this standard as far as possible. If
it fell short in one item it was. made up on another
item.
There is no provision in this table for extra milk,
&c., for consumptives, or for extra food for diabetes.
There has been difficulty at times in obtaining the
full quantity of fish. The medical officers, sisters, and
non-commissioned officers are on a ration diet,
per diem for extras, but there are not many things ob-
tainable as extras that would be appreciated.
A copy of Army Council Instructions for feeding of
patients in hospital is attached to Section 13 Food
Shortage.
Wards Painting.—Some of the wards have been
painted lately, and look much better than the ones that
have not been painted. There is great difficulty in ob-
taining paint, or even calcimine; but when these wards
are done it will be a great improvement.
No. 2 Australian Auxiliary Hospital, Southall.
Situated about 8 miles from London. This was
originally a school belonging to the Asylums Board.
Staff. —-Officer Commanding, Lieut.-Colonel Buch-
anan, Chief Surgeon; Lieut.-Colonel J. Gordon;
Matron, Miss M. Finlay.
Seven medical officers, besides Officer Commanding.
Hursing Staff —40 sisters; male personnel, 150. There
are about 60 W.A.A.Cs,, and the patients do very little
to help themselves. Accommodation is for 500 beds,
and the place is practically full at present.
The great majority of cases are limbless men, being
leg eases almost entirely, as the arm cases are not sent
here. Since January, 1918, about 350 limbless cases
have been sent back to Australia. There is one large
ward, with about 40 beds, entirely for double amputa-
tion cases*
Annexe is an old school-house, where convalescent
cases are kept. It is situated about i mile from the
main building, and is connected with it by covered
corridor. Accommodation for 180. Wards are large
and lofty, and not overcrowded, and look comfortable.
Theatre is much the same as at Dartiord not first
class. Wards heated with steam. Laundry is poor,
and equipment out of date, but it does the work loi
hospital. Personnel of laundry is civilian.
Red Cross Workshops accommodate about 40 patients.
Carpentry, bootmaking and repairing, electric light and
wiring, wireless and telegraphy are taught. I
up is not elaborate, but efficient. lour Red Cross
teachers are in charge. * .
X-Ray Apparatus is in charge of Captain Hesbit.
ISTot elaborate, but good work is done.
Kitchens in the charge of W.A.A.Cs.; only mode-
rately clean.
Large grounds round the hospital, and good cricket
ground, and croquet, lawn tennis courts for staff.
Canteen run by A.N.A. Prices cheap.
Red Cross Amusement and Recreation Rooms. —Read-
ing and billiard rooms. Hot elaborate, hut com-
fortable.
Mess Room beside the kitchen, where all convalescent
and walking patients get their meals. All patients are
on rations. Three meals a day and supper at night.
Boiler Room and workshop, with lathes, &c., attached,
and in charge of civilian; and here a few convalescent
patients are taught lathe-turning, &c.
Nurses’ Quarters. —Hurses are mostly accommodated
two in a room. Rooms are comfortable, but there is
scarcity of furniture. Bath and lavatory accommoda-
tion sufficient.
Massage and Electrical Department is fitted up much
the same as at Dartford.
Artificial Leg Repair Shop.—Pour men are employed.
Ordinary repairs are done, and temporary limbs are
made. Major Lethbridge, in charge of this Department,
has some good ideas about improvements in artificial
limbs, especially apparatus for fixing automatically a
leg when flexed, for which he has invented a hand
brake, worked by strap from shoulder.
There are two medical officers on staff who have lost
a leg, and the Officer Commanding states they have ex-
cellent influence amongst the patients as regards dis-
cipline, and encouraging the patients to persevere with
their artificial legs.
v Wheel chairs are provided for double amputation
cases, worked by chain drive, driven by hand, and
guiding is done by circular band attached to back
wheel. Patient leans bank against this to guide the
chair. Patient can get about 6 miles an hour out of
this chair, and can do about 20 to 25 miles a day, with
comfort, on good surface. Makes a great difference to
welLbeing of patient being able to get out and about.
Artificial leg parades are held every Wednesday for
patients, and every patient is passed as being properly
fitted by Lieut.-Colonel Gordon before being sent back
to Australia.
No. 3 Australian Auxiliary Hospital, Dartford, Kent,
About 18 miles from London.
Officer Commanding—Lt.-Colonel B. M. Sutherland.
Matron —Miss A, B. Pocock.
Accommodation for 1,200 patients. Actually 1,500
at the time of my visit. Fifteen Medical Officers on
duty; Sixty-three nursing staff. Fifty wardsmaids,
are members of Women’s Auxiliary Army Corps.


Plan of Hospital attached.. Wards contain 48 beds,
and each ward is a separate hut. The majority of
patients are convalescent. Only 60 operations are done
per month, and mostly minor.
Army and Navy Canteen have a branch there.
Wards are airy and comfortable, not elaborate, but
for shack hutments, good.
Large Amusement Room, with billiard tables, &c.
Theatre for pictures, &c.
Nurses’ Quarters.— -Each nurse has separate cubicle,
Each hut contains about 30 cubicles, and bathrooms.
A.M.C. Quarters. —Practically the same for all ranks
as for nurses. Separate cubicles, &c.
Laundry. —Run by civilian women. Paid by Asylum
Board. Machinery not up-to-date.
Kitchens clean and effective, run by W.A.A.Cs. Ho
up-to-date machinery.
Massage Rooms. —Very little appliances. Faradic
and galvanic current and hot air; practically no equip-
ment for re-eduction of men with paralysis, &c., and
Officer Commanding in charge says it is impossible to
get timber to make apparatus.
X-Ray Room.— -X-ray apparatus originally brought
fropi Australia with Ho. 1 Australian Stationary
Hospital in use still. Results are pretty good. Medical
Officer in charge said a new apparatus had been on
requisition for some considerable time. There is a
good deal of X-ray work to be done.
Operating Theatre was not first-class. Most of the
cases are minor operations. A certain number of emer-
gency accident operations are done, as there is a Flying
School alongside the hospital.
Grounds round the hospital are ample, and there are
several acres of land under cultivation—potatoes, &c.
—where the work .is done by convalescent patients,
under the Warrant Officer, who says the men like the
work and are keen on it. The supply of vegetables
obtained is used in the hospital.
Many men at this hospital complained that the diet
was not enough, and that they had more food at other
English hospitals before coming into Hartford.
The hospital is rationed. (This subject is dealt with
in a separate paper.)
Welwyn Hospitals for Officers.
The houses comprising this hospital are situated in
Hertford, about 20 miles from Harefield, and 20 miles
from London, amidst ideal conditions for recovery of
convalescents. Officer patients are accommodated in
two houses belonging to Mrs. Acland and Colonel
Buckly, and about half-a-mile- There is accom-
modation for about 35 officers in the tvto houses. Mrs.
Acland and Mrs. Buckley supervise and take charge of
the officers, and there is a staff of nurses and helpers.
The officers are all convalescent. There is a resident
Medical Officer—at present a Major, A.M.C., who is
himself convalescent from asthma after being gassed,
but he has very little to do. The accommodation is as
for a first-class country home, the wards being large
rooms fitted as dormitories. There are a billiard-room,
tennis courts, and croquet lawn, and all patients seemed
perfectly happy and well. The average stay is from
fourteen to twenty-one days.
Moreton Gardens Convalescent Home for Australian
Officers.
Accommodation for 25 officers, (mostly in wards —two
or three small rooms. Only convalescent patients taken;
and it is really a private hotel in London for these
officers. There is a matron, one nurse, and several bat-
men, Medical Officer is Lt.-Colonel Sir John McColl.
House lias been lent for Australian officers by Mrs.
Popplewell, who arranges tbe housekeeping and draws
3s. 6d. per day for rations. The A.I.F. give something
extra, and Red Cross helps also.
House is ill-adapted for hospital. There is not suffi-
cient bath or latrine accommodation, and rumour has
it that it is shortly to be shifted to Hotting Hill Gate,
where more accommodation will he available. This
was reported upon adversely by me during visit to Eng-
land in 1915,
'■ V A >
Cobham Hall Hospital for Officers.
The home of the Hon. Ivor Bligh, Earl Darnley, situ-
ated in Kent, about 30 miles from London. One wing of
the house has been given to military authorities fdr hos-
pital for Australian officers. Accommodation about 51—
at present 47 in hospital. Officer Commanding, Lt.-
Colonel G. A, W. J. Knight. Matron, Miss E. Gould.
Male 'personnel, 20. There is generally another
convalescent Medical Officer available for duty, and
also one or more nursing sisters. There are two main
wards—the old dining-room, and the picture gallery
above it-—each accommodating about 24. All the
patients are convalescent, and they remain fourteen to
twenty-eight days. Ho acute cases are taken. Over
1,000 officers have been passed through here during the
last fifteen to eighteen months. The surroundings for
convalescent cases are ideal—beautiful grounds, tennis,
croquet, and billiard-room; but the building and wards
are not at all suitable.
Catering is done by Officer Commanding and Quarter-
master-Sergeant. Hospital is on rations, and food,
&e., is drawn from nearest supply depot—about 5 miles
away—two or three times a week.' If the patients had
to subsist on the rations allowed, it would be a bare sub-
sistence. Extras are provided by gifts. One neighbour
gives twelve dozen eggs per week; and by gifts from Red
Cross, jam, fruits—fresh and dried —tapioca, &c., which
make all the difference in the comfort* of the patients.
All other supplies are obtained from Ordnance Supply
Stores, &c., in the ordinary way, and the hospital is run
on military lines.
The hospital has been furnished partly by Red Cross
and partly by Government supplies, and a good deal of
furniture, &c., was left in house by Lord Darnley.
Hospital grows its own vegetables to large extent. A
good deal of poultry is given, and it is always possible
to get extra milk, cream, &c.; so that, taken altogether,
patients and staff are fed fairly well. Officer Com-
manding states they improve by their stay in hospital.
The patients in the two main wards are very crowded,
and there is not any provision made to store their
baggage and gear. There are a number of officers in
these wards who have suffered from shell shock, and
their asthmatic seizures at night are disturbing to the
other patients. Officer patients complained of these
disadvantages, and also of the smell of some of the cases
that have to be dressed, and said the dressing cases were
kept inside a long time, as there was only one nurse.
Others stated the food supplied was barely sufficient in
quantity, and that the officers were able to get more
food with their ration tickets when they went on leave.
Mrs. Hall’s Hospital for Australian Sisters, 12
Southwell Gardens, London, S.W.
This is really not an A.A.M.C. Unit.
House rented by Mrs. Hall, furnished partly by her
and partly by Red Cross—beds, and piano, and some
of the furniture, are Red Cross. Servants are provided
and paid for py Mrs, Hall, who has a housekeeper on


premises. All food is paid for by Mrs. Hall. Matron
gets a few extras —pickles, jam, &c. from Red Cross.
Sisters’ medicines, &c., are obtained from Australian
Head-Quarters.
Visiting Medical Officer.—Major Edgar Stevens.
Matron.—Sister Dwyer. Staff.—4 nurses, 1 orderly.
C Class man provided by Head-Quarters, who looks
after sisters’ luggage, runs messages, and does odd jobs
about the house. He lives on premises.
Accommodation for 25 sisters. At time of my visit,
only sixteen were being treated. All medical cases can
be dealt with here; but there is no operating theatre, and
operative cases are sent to Southall, where there is an
annexe for sick sisters.
From here, nurses are sent to St. Albans, ( or back to
duty, or return to Australia. Accommodation in wards,
4to 10 cases in ward. Bath and sanitary accommoda-
tion satisfactory. Sitting-room very nice and bright.
Visiting Medical Officer visits at regular intervals, or
as often as necessary.
Rationing satisfactory. Housekeeper arranges
everything, and this works out satisfactorily, especially
with extras supplied by Red Cross. If Medical Officer
orders extra milk and cream, it can be obtained; and,
as a matter of fact, there is always plenty available.
Matron has nothing to do with servants. While Sisters
are in hospital, no rations are drawn for them from the
Government. Their keep and food, &c., is a gift to
Nursing Service on part of Mrs. Hall.
St. Albans Convalescent Hospital for Australian
Sisters,
About 2 miles out of St. Albans, 20 miles from Lon-
don, in Hertfordshire.
This is the private home of Mr. Harold Mcllwraith,
of Mcllwraith, McEacharn and Company, of Mel-
bourne. Has accommodation for fifteen Sisters, but
can take twenty at a stretch. Sisters are generally sent
here from Mrs. Hall’s Sisters’ Hospital at Southwell
Gardens, and they stay fourteen to twenty-eight days.
Only convalescent cases are taken, and if anything
acute should arise, they are sent back to hospital.
There is an Australian Sister as Matron. Motor-
driver and petrol supplied by A.I.F. Head-Quarters,
but motor car for transit, and all other requisites, food,
&c., are supplied by Mr. Mcllwraith. There are beau-
tiful gardens, well-kept and lovely grounds, and every-
thing ideal for convalescence. Splendid bathrooms, and
every sanitary accommodation. Nurses are allowed to
entertain their friends here. There are many places of
interest in the immediate vicinity.
Sea Transport nurses and others are allowed to stay
here, if there is accommodation, when they are on leave
in England. These nurses greatly appreciate their
visits here.
This was as nice and comfortable as any of the
A.A.M.C. institutions which I visited in England. The
two houses are beautifully furnished.
No. 2 Command Depot, Weymouth.
Part of Weymouth Command Depot, where’all cases
are for return to Australia.
Weymouth Command Depot consists of four camps.
Senior Medical Officer for this area, Lt.-Colonel
Betts. There is accommodation for about 8,000
patients in the four depots belonging to No. 2 Com-
mand Depot.
Average duration of stay of men in Weymouth Depots
is four to six weeks, depending on -skips sailing.
All serious and operative eases occurring in the four
camps of No. 2 Command Depot are sent tor treatment
to Weymouth Hospital, R.A.M.C., as there is no oper-
ating theatre available at Monte Video Camp, though n
there is a staff of eleven Australian nurses.
At Weymouth depots, there is no definite occupation
for convalescents, except general fatigues and marching,
and a certain amount of gardening. There are so far
no real workshops or other occupational training, though
the Y.M.C.A. is erecting a motor mechanics’ workshop
at Westham Camp. On daily fatigues, the Senior
Medical Officer estimates that probably 20 per cent, of
the men would be occupied. Probably another 20 per
cent, would be under treatment with massage and elec-
tricity, &c., for part of the day, and 10 per cent, would
cover the men actually confined to bed; so, for the other
50 per cent., only marches and gardening in the way of
occupation is provided.
There is general leave for all able to take it, and
camp is allowed to close from 4 p.m. till 9 p.m. daily.
This open camp was instituted eight months ago, and
has been satisfactory. There is very little drunkenness
or cases of absence without leave in camp.
On an average, 50 to 60 cases per week are boarded
from the different Weymouth depots as fit for a higher
grade, and are transferred to other command depots for
•graduated training, and probably the greater part of
these are eventually made fit for return to the Front.
Visiting Medical Boards, consisting of Surgeon-
General C. S. Ryan, C. 8., V.D.; Colonels H. C. Mauds-
ley, C.M.G., and B. J. Newmarch, C.M.G., V.D.; and
Major Stevens, attend at camp each week.
1. Littlemoor., —All best of return 'cases sent here.
About 1,500 patients—soo in bed, 1,000 on wooden
stretchers, and some in tents.
All cases mess in sleeping huts. —All light diet cases,
nephritis, &c., are sent to Littlemoor. There is a
hospital here for light cases only; if serious they are
sent to Monte Video, where the most serious of return
oases are sent, and where there is a hospital and nurses.
No nurses at all in other depots.
General. —All cases, generally speaking, do for them-
selves—mess orderlies, and ordinary light fatigues about
the camp. So far, there is not much organized work
or drilling for these men to keep them fit. Two Medical
Officers, Officer Commanding, and staff of about fifteen
combatant officers, and permanent cadre of non-com-
missioned officers to look after the men. All “B” or
“O” Class men. From this depot, patients sent on
board ship after being reclassified and definitely decided
to be for return to Australia. There is a small hospital
for local cases of illness, and also a dressing hut for
slight wounds; but there is not much to do here, and
there are no nurses.
The class of patient seen looked fit, and a large num-
ber of_ them were well enough to walk into Weymouth
—2 miles away—at night.
The camp, as a camp, is very good, and the kitchens,
amusement and recreation rooms, &c., were satisfactory.
There i.s a wet canteen, and the patients are allowed
to have what they want—beer only—as long as they do
not get drunk.
2. Fortress Verne Depot.— lt is not now in use, but is
retained by Australians. Ts on Portland Island, a few
miles from Weymouth, and has accommodation for
1,100 patients. Was in peace time a fortress camp,
and the buildings are all permanent stone buildings
built before the War. Did not go over all the buildings,


which are ordinary ‘barracks; the rooms I saw were
badly ventilated.
At all these Weymouth depots, officers for return to
Australia are accommodated for a few days before the
ship leaves, and there is special officers’ accommodation.
The A.D.M.S., Colonel McWhae, D.M., C.M.G., said
that orthopaedic cases are all collected and sent, as far
as possible, in batches of about 250, in one ship, and the
Medical Officer to look after it comes down several days
before to get a general idea of the treatment, massage,
electrical treatment, &c., necessary for the voyage. A
definite orthopaedic staff according to the number of cases
is put on board. One assistant masseur for each 50
cases, and one electrician for twenty cases; and the
Senior Medical Officer, Weymouth, is responsible for
the requisitioning of sufficient electrical and massage
apparatus for voyage. These assistant masseurs are
more or less trained men of “ B ” and “ C ” Class, who
arc themselves for return to Australia.
3. Monte Video Camp,—Accommodation for about
2,000—1,200 in at present. Hutments as_ at other
camps. Beds, old military type —iron, which draws
out —a,ud wooden stretchers. Messing in sleeping huts.
Kitchens as at others. . •
Recreation. —Red Cross, Army and Havy Canteen
Board for wet and dry canteen, Salvation Army Hut for
refreshments. Red Cross Hut and recreation room
refreshments.
Y.M.C.A. also same.
Y.M.C.A. is putting up shed for classes in motor
mechanics.
Hospital for 240 patients. Since camp started, 6,000
patients have been in hospital, and in same period
42,000 men have been passed through the camp.
Massage and Electrical Treatments —Three Staff
Sergeants, and eleven permanent cadre rubbers, and
nineteen being taught. About ten Bristowe coils.
Faradic galvanism, &c. Quite satisfactory as far as
it goes. Massage about 200 to 400 patients regularly
under treatment—lso to 200 in electrical department.
Gymnasium.—About 200 to 300 having exercise.
Hospital Wards bright. Eleven nurses. All opera-
tive or serious cases being sent to Weymouth to R.A.M.G.
Hospital. Small theatre being built for minor cases—
sequestra, &c.
Nurses’ Quarters satisfactory —two in a room. ■
Officers’ Quarters satisfactory. These are for staff
and convalescent officers able to do for themselves.
Serious officer cases not sent to Weymouth at all. ' i
Tubercular Ward.—Cases carefully tested whether
positive or negative as regards sputum, and labelled
accordingly. This will be a great advantage on hoard
ship.
Pathological,Work is all done at the R.A.M.C. Hos-
pital—no laboratory in the hospital.
Medical Staff.—Four to Six Medical Officers.
4. Westham Camp, at Weymouth, one of the four
Command Depots. This is the receiving and distributing
camp for Weymouth. Every patient for dischaige to
Australia passes through this camp. It is the Head-
Quarters at Wevmouth, and the Senior Medical Officer
for district, Lt.-Colonel L. O. Betts, D. 5.0., resides here.
As soon as the patients arrive, they are housed here
for the night, and next morning are examined
Medical Officers, and distributed to the various depots,
after having their Medical Board papers and history-
sheets put in order. Practically speaking, all cases
here have been already boarded; but, if not, are done
lie re by Consultant Board. Patients retained in West-
ham are B2a and Cl cases, and any cases of men being
returned to Australia for non-medical reasons, also eye,
ear, nose, and throat cases. All other eases were sent
to the other depots (light diet and medical cases
(light) to Littlemoor; serious cases and orthopaedic,
to Monte Video) and retained in these depots till put on
board or graded high enough to be sent to Command
Depots 1,3, or 4.
The general arrangements at Westham, where there
is accommodation for 2,000 cases, is very like at Little-
moor, and practically all that has been said applies to
this camp.
Sidcup—Queen’s Hospital for Jaw Cases. —Situated
in Kent, near Sidcup and Frognal. This hospital was
started by British lied Cross originally, and the scope
of hospital has been gradually enlarged, so that it is
an Empire, hospital—-British, Canadian, and Aus-
tralian. Latterly, the Americans have decided to come
in. Accommodation for about 350 to 400 —all jaw
cases —three-ffifths British, one-fifth Canadian, and one-
fifth Australian. Lt.-Colonel Howland has about 60
beds. Officer Commanding is a non-medical man; but
there is a medical committee to which all medical
matters are referred. The Red Cross still take a large
share of the running of the hospital. Has been helped
largely by public subscription. Canada subscribed to
the building of their wards, but Australia has so far
not directly taken any share of financial responsibility.
The Americans are to build several new wards, which
will be staffed by American surgeons, and there are
several American surgeons at present attached to the
staff.
The general plan of the hospital is in the form of an
ellipse, with the wards running off it, and this is ypry
easy from point of view of working of the hospital.
There are no Australian nurses on the staff at present.
Colonel Howland has all Australians under him, but
fills up his wards with British patients if they should
not be filled with Australians. A number of new wards,
and two new operating theatres —one for Canada, and
one for Australia —are being built. This class of
patient necessarily remains in hospital for a very long
time, as many of them require to have several plastic
operations. Colonel Hewland’s wards were visited, and
his cases seen, and very excellent results are being
obtained. There is a separate officers’ annexe.
There are lovely grounds round the hospital, tennis
courts, and croquet lawns, &c. A large number of the
patients are able to walk about—the surroundings are
ideal for convalescence. There is a large amusement
and recreation room, mess-rooms, &c., and everything
is quite up-to-date.
There is an Australian dentist attached to the Aus-
tralian wards, as a large amount of dental and splint
work is required for these patients. Colonel Hewland’s
Assistant Medical Officer is a dentist who has medical
qualifications.
There is a museum attached to the hospital, where
water-colour paintings of patients before and after
operation are displayed. Also casts of patients before and
after operation, and a duplicate set of casts of each
Australian patient is made for return to Australia
later on. In connexion with the museum is a patho-
logical laboratory.
The operative results of plastic work are good, but,
as would be expected in these cases, where there is direct
communication with the mouth and nose, a certain
amount of suppuration after plastic operation is in-
evitable. -Some of the cases seen —replacement of nose,
re-making of mouth, &c.—were very good. Artificial
eyes are supplied.


Meals.
Sunday.
Monday.
Tuesday.
Wednesday.
Thursday.
Friday.
Saturday.
Breakfast
Porridge
Egg and Bacon
Tea
Bread
Margarine
Porridge
Bacon
Carrots and
Potatoes
Bread
Tea
Mince Meat
Porridge
Mashed Pota-
toes
Bread
Tea
Porridge
Fresh Bloaters
Bread and
Marmalade
Porridge
Ham and Mince
Mashed Pota-
toes
Bread
Tea
Porridge
Bread and
Margarine
Curry and Rice
Tea
Porridge
Kippers
Bread
Butter
Tea
Dinner
Sausages
Bacon and
Mashed Pota-
toes
Greens
Boiled Jam
Pudding
Curry and Rice
Potatoes
Bread
Custard
Fish and Sauce
Potatoes
Beans
Rice Pudding
Roast Beef
Mashed Mixed
Vegetables
Potatoes
Lemon Sago
Stewed Mutton
Green Peas
Carrots
Mashed Pota-
toes
Bread Pudding
Fried Fish
with Lemon
Parsley
Mashed Pota-
toes
Tapioca
Sausages and
Bacon apd
Mashed Pota-
toes
Bread and Jam
Tea
Tea
Cold Ham
Margarine
Bread
Tea
Stewed Rhu-
barb
Vegetable Soup
Bread
Tea
Butter
*
Bread
Syrup
Cheese
Tea
Baked Rice
Custard
Bread and
Butter
Tea
Jam
Soup and Bread
Cheese
Water Cress
Tea
Butter
Cold Boiled
Beef
Bread
Butter
Tea
Water Cress
Jam
Tea
Cheese
Bread
Bed Patients ..
Same
Same
Same
Same
Same
Same
Same
Sapper
Cocoa, Bread
and Dripping
Cocoa, Bread
and Dripping
Coffee, Bread
and Dripping
Cocoa, Bread
and Dripping
Cocoa, Bread
• and Dripping
Coffee, Bread
and Dripping
Coffee, Bread
and Dripping
Article,
A.C. I. 159/1918.
Consumption per
100 Patients.
A.
B.
Meats
Fish
Bacon
Bread, Flour, and Biscuits .
Sugar
Margarine
Potatoes
Vegetables
Cocoa
31i
18f
69
9
6*
50
25
1
31i
18f
m
75
n
70
35
1
130
29-304
16-619
8-87
69-60
8-33
5-97
61-71
34-36
Milk
Jam, &c. ..
80
5
•73
121f pints
Careals
7
20
50
4-78
Eggs
Tea and Coffee
40
H
3
16-919
46
Cheese
2
3
1-967
1-38
No. 1 AUSTRALIAN AUXILIARY HOSPITAL —HAREFIELD.
Patients’ Diet Sheet to be Strictly Adhered to for Period ending 19th May, 1918.
No. 1. A.A.H., HAREFIELD.
Food Consumption per 100 Patients per Diem for March, 1918—Messinq Period.


Diets.
Breakfast.
Dinner.
Tea.
Supper.
Ordinary
Porridge, | pint
Tea, 1 pint
Bread, 3 oz.
Butter, \ oz.
Sausages, 2 oz.; or
Mincemeat, 3 oz ; or
Rissoles, 3 oz.
Brown Stew or Irish Stew
or Roast Beef, 6 oz.
Potatoes, 6 oz.
Vegetables, 4 oz.
Pudding
Bread, 2 oz.
Tea, 1 pint
Bread, 4 oz.
Butter, £ oz.
Jam, 4/5th oz.
Bread, 1 oz.
Soup or Cocoa, 1 pint
Dripping, 1 oz.
Light Diet
Porridge, \ pint
Tea, 1 pint
Bread, 3 oz.
Butter, J oz.
Fish or White Meat when
obtainable, 4 oz.
Fish or Rabbit
Potatoes, 6 oz.
Vegetables, 4 oz.
Milk Pudding, Custard, or
Jelly, 2 oz.
Bread, 2 oz.
Tea, 1 pint
Bread, 4 oz.
Butter, £ oz.
Jam, 4/5th oz.
Bread, 1 oz.
Soup or Cocoa, 1 pint
Dripping, 1 oz.
Milk Diet
Milk, or Tea, 4 pint
Bread, 3 oz.
Butter, I oz.
Arrowroot, 1 pint
Milk, J pint
Bread, 2 oz.
Milk, or Tea, I pint
Bread, 4 oz.
Butter, | oz.
Milk, f pint
Bread, 1 oz.
Dripping, 1 oz.
No. 1 AUSTRALIAN AUXILIARY HOSPITAL.
Notes.
(1) Any article of food included in a diet ordered should not be shown as an extra; for instance, if 33 ordinary diets have been ordered,
there is no need to ask for 35 Breakfasts, 35 Porridges, and 35 Puddings, as these will be supplied as part of the ordinary diet. Supper also
need not be listed as an extra, as supper will be provided for each patient according to the diet he is on.
(2) Extras, with Ordinary and Light Diets are only to be ordered sparingly, as it is considered that the diets supplied are liberal and
sufficient for the needs of all, except special cases.
(3) The quantities of tea, sugar, and cocoa now ordered as extras must be considerably reduced in future and the custom of giving
custard and jelly is to be discontinued, either custard or jelly is to be used only.
(4) The greatest care is to be exercised in making out the diet and Extra Sheet Summaries (A.F. 734) as owing to the present diffi-
culties in obtaining supplies only the amount actually required will be cooked and shortages due to mistakes in requisitioning will not, in
future, be made good from the kitchen.
(5) Sisters in charge of wards, before serving out food, should ascertain from each patient, whether he actually requires the whole or
only part of his ration, any savings thus effected being returned to the kitchen. Sisters are also responsible that no" food is wasted by being
thrown into the waste bins.
Dartford, 22nd January, 1918.
SECTION S.—HOSPITALS AND HOMES CONDUCTED
BY MILITARY FORCES OF THE BRITISH
DOMINIONS.
1. Canadian—Taplow on Thames. —A Canadian
General Hospital, near London, visited by me, was
situated in grounds of a beautiful residence of Mrs.
Astor, at Taplow on the Thames, near Windsor. Colonel
Watt is the Officer Commanding. This institution was
originally used as a Red Cross Hospital, and was taken
over by the Canadian Army Medical Corps. It has
now 1,040 beds; was well filled at the time of my visit;
and amongst the patients were 127 Australians, who had
been admitted direct from the French Front a few days
, previously. An auxiliary hospital near by takes 500
other eases.
The hospital is well built and well equipped with
lovely grounds. In the scientific and operation depart-
ment, much research work was done by the staff.
There I met Professor Haldane, a well-known British
scientist, who had chosen this hospital and its staff for
some original work in the treatment and the prevention
of ill-effects in gassed patients.
2. New Zealand. —I visited the No. 2 New Zealand
General Hospital at Walton on Thames, the Convales-
cent Homes at Hornchurch, both near London, and also
their Homes and educational system at Torquay, where
they have establishments. I did pot visit their other
hospital (No. 1 General), at Brokenhurst, near
Southampton. All the New Zealand institutions are
finely situated and the sites well chosen.
Their General Hospital at Walton on Thames, 24
miles from London, is capable of accommodating 1,800
patients. Three large houses, and many wards—the
latter erected by the New Zealand authorities —consti-
tute this hospital. Qne of the houses, “ Oatland,” is
an old Elizabethan palace. These buildings together
make a very fine hospital, and are situated amidst beau-
tiful surroundings on the banks of the Thames. It is
well equipped and up to date, and tlie wliole atmosphere
of the hospital was one of cheerfulness and confidence
on the part of the patients; whilst the staff, medical,
nursing, and other ranks, showed the greatest enthusiasm
and pleasure in working for their own countrymen. The
advantages of this were very manifest. The wounded
and invalids from France, if landed at Dover, come
direct by special train to the hospital; whilst those who
cross the Channel via Havre are taken to No. 1 New
Zealand General Hospital, Brokenhurst, near
Southampton. x
At Walton, as at all their institutions, the New Zea-
land authorities pay great attention to education, and
very fine schools and workshops are erected, where in-
struction is given, which will later be of use to the
men on return to New Zealand. This instruction
embraces such subjects as wool classing and agricultural
work, in addition to the other classes usually carried on.
So advanced were they in the instruction in mqtor work,
that there were in the schools three types of aeroplane
engines and machinery for instructional purposes.
At Hornchurch, 20 miles east of London, the New
Zealand authorities have established a Convalescent
Home, which is conducted in a very up-to-date manner,
and includes a large technical school.
There are large grounds, and some 40 to 30 acres were
under cultivation for potatoes and other vegetables;
whilst pigs, poultry, and rabbits were extensively raised
and used as additions to food. All the work in con-
nexion therewith being performed by patients under
“ B ” Class foremen.
There were some 2,000 men in residence at the time
of my visit undergoing treatment, drill, or instruction.
Ihe workshops are large and extensive, including
facilities for teaching the usual trades, and two large
commercial classes. In this latter, men were being
taught stained-glass work, including cutting, painting
baking, and designing.


New Zealand Depots and Homes, Torquay.— Situated
at or near Torquay, which is extremely well sheltered
and in winter one of the warmest parts of England.
The Hew Zealand authorities have three Homes for men
who are awaiting embarkation for return to Hew Zea-
land. Two of the Homes are in Torquay itself, being
houses in large grounds; whilst the third, 'which is a
few miles away, is used in connexion wiith instruction
in farming. The men in Torquay attend at the School
of Technical Education of the town for certain hours
daily; after that they are free. At these Homes, the
returning of men to civilian life is being commenced,
and military rules and regulations are not strictly en-
forced, men being encouraged to lead a civilian life as
far as it is possible to do. Everywhere the men are
comfortable and well oared for.
Food in New Zealand Medical Institutions. —
The Hew r Zealand authorities have steadfastly refused
to place their sick men on the very restricted hospital
diet in force in English hospitals for English soldiers,
and provide a much more liberal diet than is given to
Australian sick. In meat alone the ration is double,
being 10 ozs. daily instead of 5 ozs. The Hew Zealand
Government sends food direct from Hew r Zealand to
their authorities in London, where it is stored and dis-
tributed, there being no shortage of such articles as
dried fruits, sugar, tea, and butter. There was at
one time some little trouble regarding shipping space,
but this was soon overcome when the Imperial autho-
rities found that the .Hew Zealand Government insisted
upon having it.
Work in New Zealand Hospitals and Homes. —The
whole work of the Hew Zealand hospitals in is
of a very high order. Altogether, they had 8,000 in-
valids in England at the time of my visit. Great credit
is due to the Hew Zealand A.M.C. for their fine service,
which is controlled by Colonel Parkes, the D.M.S., wdio,
in spite of his good and effective w T ork, is the only
Senior Medical Officer of one of the larger Colonies who
has not been given the rank of General.
3. South African Hospital. —-Situated in the lovely
park at Richmond on the Thames is a hospital on the
pavilion and open air system, built by the South African
authorities, to accommodate 500 beds. The accommo-
dation of the hospital was increased by a system of
billeting the out-patient class of cases in the neighbour-
ing village. Officer Commanding, Colonel Thomson,
It is a~ general hospital, and, as such, equipped with
all up-to-date plant and appliances. One ward is used
entirely for the continuous bath treatment of septic
wounds, the patient being kept in a bath for days and
weeks together, and the wound exposed to water without
any dressings. Septic cases do well, and the medical
staff are very pleased with the results.
Wounded and sick South Africans from France come
into this hospital, either direct from France, or within
two or three days, and the results are very gratifying.
The patients are on War Office diet scale, but the
Government provides extra to supplement the diet.
It was interesting to find in this hospital men suffer-
ing from bilharzia, and to be hold that they are accepted
when from hsematuria, and kept on service,
provided there are no kidney complications.
They had a fine large workshop in the grounds well-
equipped, where regular instruction was carried out.
SECTION 6.— SALISBURY CAMPS.
The Question of the Suitability of Salisbury District
as a Camping Ground for Australians.
The General Officer Commanding, A.T.F., Salisbury,
Major-General Sir Joseph McCay, K.C.M.G., C. 8.,
Y.D., had caused the camps at such places as Lark Hill
and Perham Downs, which were cold and exposed, to
be given up, and had his men camped at better sites.
The present camps arc sheltered, some being well pro-
tected. All men are in huts, which can be heated, and
everything is done to make them comfortable.
I am still of the opinion, as expressed in 1916, that
Australian troops should not have been sent tor training
to a place like Salisbury; but I think that the district
is being utilized to the best advantage, and that the
Australians are as well there as they would be in most
other places in England. t i
'The question of the transfer of the training camps to
the south of France was considered and discussed, and
it is now impracticable on account of the difficulty of
supplies and transport generally. The training should
have been carried out there as recommended when Aus-
tralians first went to France; but it is now too late to
make a change.
The whole arrangements of the camps and depots at
Salisbury were very fine, and much care and thought
was given to the welfare of the men by the General
Officer Commanding and his staff, and to them great
credit is due. Had the medical services undertaken their
full share of responsibility, it would have been still
better, and would have prevented many of the early
complaints regarding the treatment of Australians in
Imperial hospitals near Salisbury.
Messing Officer.—l would draw special attention to
the system of messing and control of food at Salisbury,
viz., that it is under a messing officer, who is really a
second quartermaster for food.
Owing to the shortage of food in England, care was
exercised to insure that none was wasted, as only by
so doing could the men be satisfied. The messing
officers have become very proficient, far more so than
any in Australia. There are several excellent officers
who would prove of great value, cause a very great im-
provement in the methods of feeding of men in camps,
in Australia, and at the same time effect many
economies.
It is recommended that two trained messing officers
should be brought from Salisbury to take charge of the
messing and feeding in the 2nd and 3rd Military Dis-
tricts. If successful, others can be taught locally. Hot
only should this be done for A.T.F. camps, but also
for all camps of Citizen Forces.
I attach copies of menus given to men.
Australian Camps and Depots, including A.A.M.C.
Establishments on and in the Neighbourhood of
Salisbury Plain.
In order to understand the routine, a short account
will be given of the method of dealing with —(1) men
arriving from Australia; (2) men arriving w T ho have
been wounded or sick from France.
Men arriving from Australia. —These men are sent
to one of the training battalions situated on Salisbury
Plain. They are medically and dentally examined
within 24 to 48 hours of arrival in camp. In con-
nexion with each training camp is certain hospital ac-
commodation, and the first sickness or possible sickness
that has to be dealt with is the question of infectious
disease, C.S.M., measles, mumps, &c., which has arisen
on board ship, and also of the contacts with these men.
These men are put straight into these hospitals or con-
tact huts, and undergo the necessary isolation —16 days
for measles, 24 days for mumps—till there are three
negative swabs from the throat in C.S.M. The same
applies to any cases of venereal disease discovered at
this stage, and these patients are sent to venereal
hospital. Any ordinary sickness is sent to the attached
hospital, and from there back to lines, or to the corre-
sponding Command Depot, either for treatment, or, in
the case of absolutely unfits, for return to Australia.
Once the men are in camp their training starts. This
course of training was, till recently, fourteen weeks;
but at the present time was only ten weeks. All these


men have at least one month’s training, and after this
eight days’ disembarkation leave is given to the men in
hatches, and the training is continued. Men intended
for special work are sent to their special schools—
artillery, engineers, &c.—Tor training.
During the training, cases of infectious disease de-
veloping are sent to appropriate hospitals, or cases that
break dowm under the course of training are either sent
to hospitals, or to various Command Depots, and dealt
Avith according to their capacity. Certain men found not
fit for general service are transferred to either the per-
manent cadre of teaching staff, to home service duties;
or, if classified as unfit for general service or home ser-
\dce, are sent to a Command Depot for evacuation to
Australia.
During their training, men are examined medically
at intervals, and individually ■ are gone over and
examined dentally and treated to be made fit. At the
completion of their training, drafts are Avarned for
transfer to France, and again examined medically and
dentally within 24 hours of being sent to France.
Throughout their training, men coming from Australia
are trained quite separately from men who have been
to France and been evacuated wounded or sick, and sent
back to England for treatment, and then for further
training before being sent to France again.
Men arriving in Camps on Salisbury Plain who have
been to France and have been evacuated wounded or
sick. The routine is as follows: —On arrival in Eng-
land, men go to English hospitals. From here, severe
cases may, after being boarded, be evacuated direct to
hospital ships for return to Australia. This is a small
percentage, and only serious cases. All other cases go
to command depots, of which there are four, all situated
on Salisbury Plain, or at Weymouth. The majority of
cases from English hospitals go to one or other of the
Australian Auxiliary Hospitals, and from these are sent
to command depots, after being classified as to which
command depot they shall go to. Cases from English
hospitals to he sent to command depots direct are all
seen at Horseferry-road Head-Quarters, and classified
there as to which command depot they are lo go to. A
patient who has been in hospital is, as a rule, given
leave before being sent to a command depot. Should a
man get ill during his leave, he is sent to hospital,
English or Australian, and is dealt with in the same
way as a patient from France. There are four com-
mand depots which receive cases according as to how
they have been classified, i.e., as temporarily unfit, or
as permanently unfit. All cases definitely permanently
unfit for further general service are sent direct to Ho.
2 Command Depot, at W r eymouth, and from there are
evacuated to Australia. All cases for return to Aus-
tralia, for any reason, are passed through this camp,
which is the largest of the command depots. The other
three command depots are for patients who are graded
temporarily unfit, and, according to their grading, they
are treated. When they are graded in “A ” class, i.e.,
fit for general service, they are sent to what is called
the Overseas Training Brigade, where they undergo a
three weeks’ course of intensive training to fit them
for return to France; and as a man passes through this,
and is physically, medically, and dentally fit for return
to France to his original battalion, and never at any
time is he mixed up with the general reinforcement
from the training battalions.
This applies generally, except in the case of certain
special training units, such as signallers, wdio, after
their course of training in the Training
Brigades, are sent to special instruction in the ordinary
training battalions. Generally speaking, all infantry
do the whole three weeks in the Overseas Training
Brigade, while special duty men —engineers, pioneers,
artillery, &c.—after being in the Overseas Training
Brigade for a fortnight, are sent to these special train-
ing units to complete their training.
In* the case of A.M.C. Details in command depots,
they are all sent to a special A.M.C. Training Camp,
which receives these men. and also, up to the present,
has received general A.M.C. reinforcements from Aus-
tralia, and they do their final training together; and,
after completing their training here, are warned for
draft overseas, according to the length of their stay in
camp.
In all the command depots, except Ho. 2, men have
graduated training and exercise according to their
grade; and their time in command depot is one of
gradually fitting them to undergo the final three weeks
intensive training in the Overseas Training Brigade
before being sent hack to France. While in these com-
mand depots, men are picked out for home service in
England, and the permanent cadre and instruction staffs
in the Training Brigades, and in the camps generally,
are composed of these men, who are all graded as not
being fit for general service overseas, i.e., not being of
“ A ” Class. A certain number of exceptions are in
this class, and are graded b A 3,” as, though they are
fit for service overseas, they cannot he spared for some
reason or other. Another exception is the “ A 4 ” Class,
i.e., “ A ” Class boys under the age of nineteen, who
are retained till they reach that age.
System of Classification and Grading Adopted.
“ A ” Class. —Fit for general service overseas.
“ A ” 3. —Men wdm are indispensable in England.
“ A ” 4.- —Boys under nineteen.
“ B ” Class. —Temporarily unfit for general service,
subdivided into:—
“Bl.” —For less than six months.
“81. a4.” —Unfit dentally only.
“ 81. a3.” —Fit for 3-mile march twice daily.
“81. a2.” —Fit for 3-mile march twice daily.
“ 81. al.” —Fit for physical training, hut no
marching.
“81. b.”—Unfit for training or for home service.
“ B2.” —For more than six months.
“ 82. a.” —Fit for home service.
“ 82. b.” —Unfit for home service.
“ C ” Class. —Permanently unfit for general service.
“ Cl.” —Fit for home sendee.
“ C2.” —Temporarily unfit for home service.
• “ C3.” —Permanently unfit for home service.
“ B 3 h,” “ 03,” and “ C 3,” are classed together for
return to Australia. “ Cl,” if not able to he employed
usefully in England, will be returned to Australia if
there is room in the transports returning.
The reason for this proviso is that these are mostly
men who have not been overseas to France, and there
was great dissatisfaction amongst men who had been
wounded, and Avere for return to Australia, being put
off for a long time in order that these “ Cl ” cases
should be given berths.
It will be noted “ B 2 b ” Class men are returned to
Australia. These are men temporarily unfitsfor general
sendee for more than six months, and unfit for home
service. This class comprises probably about one-fifth
to one-fourth of the total number of men returned from
Weymouth. It is admitted that these men may
eventually be fit for general service, but they cannot be
kept in the depots in England conveniently. They are
ill, and do not feel themselves fit for general sendee.
Again, the moral and physical effect of being suspicious
that they may be sent overseas for sendee again seems
to retard their recoAnry. They do not try to get well.
As soon as they are boarded for Australia, they begin
to improve, and, from experience, one knows that many
of these men are almost fit for general sendee by the


time that they arrive in Australia, or very soon after-
wards. These men comprise a class that cause com-
ments as to why they have been sent back to Australia.
In Australia, the routine has been that these men are
all discharged if they wish to be. It has been claimed
that, to force these men to return to England if they
objected to going, would damage recruiting, and after
discharge, probably the best of this class those who
really want to carry on as soldiers—do re-enlist. As
about 62,000 men have been returned to Australia, if
this estimate —one-fifth to one-fourth) of the number of
B2b Class returned be correct, it will be seen that it
comprises a large body of men potentially available for
further services who have been discharged from the
A.T.F.
Location of Various Camps and .Training Centres.
Command Depots.—
Ho. 1. Sutton Yeny.
Ho. 2. Weymouth (four different camps).
Ho. 3. Hurdcott. 1
Ho. 4. Hurdcott.
Overseas Training Brigade. —Sutton Yeny.
Training battalions for men arriving from Australia.
Those I visited were at Sutton Yeny. Codford. and
Hurdcott, and the Details Camp at ParkhoUse. There
are a number of these at other places*, but I did not
visit them. These units are:—
Infantry Training Battalions, 10.
Reserve Brigade Artillerv.
Pioneer Training Battalion.
Machine Gun Training Corps and Special Signal
Section.
Engineer Training Corps and Special Signal
Section.
Heavy Artillery Training Depot.
Details Camp at Parkhouse for A.A.M.C.,
A.A.S.C.
Some of these will be mentioned incidentally.
Bulford Hospital is entirely for patients actually
suffering from venereal disease, and these patients while
in hospital have stoppage of their pay. As it works
out, a man with syphilis is only in hospital, on an
average, less than eight days, and he loses his pay; he
is, then transferred to Parkhouse Yenereal Training
Camp, and stoppage ceases. A man with gonorrhoea
is in Bulford Hospital on an average 40 days, and
he loses his pay for this period. On the other hand,
he does not lose his pay while he is undergoing early
treatment at any of the early treatment depots; and
the rule is that if the disease is not cured in eight days,
he must be transferred to Bulford Hospital. As a
matter of fact, some at least of the cases in early treat-
ment depots remain longer than eight days if they are
practically cured, or, as at Weymouth, where venereal
cases are only sent to Bulford twice a week; but the
general rule seems to be that, if a man undergoing early
treatment at any stage of the disease is quite definitely
a case of gonorrhoea, he is transferred to Bulford right
away.
At Parkhouse Camp, there are also A.S.C. and small
Engineer camps.
R.A.M.C. Camp Hospital, at Sutton Yeny, where all
serious and operative cases for the whole of this area
are taken in. This corresponds largely to a general
hospital.
Fovant Hospital, R.A.M.C. Hospital for Hurdcott
Area were visited. They are good hospitals (hut-
ments).
Sutton Yeny.
Training Battalion for Infantry, and also Pioneer
Training Battalion. The men here are solely reinforce-
ments from Australia undergoing their training after
arrival.
There is accommodation for 3,000 men in camp, but
there are only 1,200 at present.
Hutments for men, arranged with wooden stretchers
which come to pieces, and in day-time piled up with
their bed clothes and kits. Huts hold about 40 men. ?
Kitchens. —Ordinary camp kitchens, fitted with Wyles
cooking stoves.
Amusement Rooms and Canteens, There is a wet
canteen in all these camps, where beer only is sold, but
it is very light.
» No. 1 Command Depot receives all soldiers of Bla
Class, except those sent to Ho. 4 Depot. These men are
temporarily unfit for general service for less than six
months. There were about 2,000 men in this camp.
The hutments, kitchens, canteens, and amusement
rooms were visited.
All serious cases from the whole of this area are sent
into a R.A.M.C. hospital in Sutton Yeny area.
Messing Officer. —In all camps, there is a messing
officer, who deals with the messing arrangements. He
draws his supplies from the Q.M., and buys extra
rations, &c., with the 64d. per day that is allowed for
each man in camp. This arrangement in the camps
has been found to be quite satisfactory. In this camp,
there is a rabbit-breeding enclosure, and pigs also are
kept. Altogether, the Australian troops on Salisbury
Plains have over 500 acres under cultivation, and the
work is done by the convalescent patients, both as occu-
pational and also as remedial treatment. Men in com-
mand depots do marches, graduated exercises, and farm-
ing work, and general fatigues according to their fit-
ness. At the end of each week, every man is examined,
and if his condition has improved sufficiently, he is put
into a higher grade. When they have got through the
various grades of “ B ” Class, and classed “ A,” they
are sent to the Overseas Training Brigade, where they
undergo a three weeks’ course of intensive training be-
fore being sent to France.
Overseas Training Brigade — Sutton Yeny. —The men
in this Brigade are drawn from the three command
depots—Ho. 1, Ho. 3, and Ho. 4—'and here the men
automatically .go through the graduated framing.
Soft—the first week, medium —the second week, and
hard—the third week. While in this depot, they are
also completely equipped ready to be sent overseas,
and after being warned for being sent overseas, are again
examined medically and dentally to see they are quite
fit for general service.
Special service men, e.g., Engineers, Artillery,
A.M.C., &c., and services other than Infantry, are sent
to their special training units for their final training.
From here they are sent to Havre, and from there
drafted off to their own units as required.
Hutments generally are heated by stove heaters. All
the men have wooden stretchers, and the occupied huts
had the men’s kits and bedding neatly piled up on top
of stretcher.
Latrines. —Pan system. Pans emptied at incinerator,
and fasces dealt with there. This is under a British
Sanitary Section, who also dispose of garbage.
Tins are kept separate, and dealt with by contractor.
The fat from meat in kitchens and from the grease
traps is saved. The former rendered down into drip-
ping, the latter made into soap for scrubbing, &c.
Wyles’ Stoves (field stoves) are in use in the kitchens.
Officer Commanding said they are too heavy for the
field, but most economical in a fixed camp.
There is a Group Hospital here (clearing hospital)
with about 250 beds. Ho nurses. Slight cases only
are treated here, and if surgical treatment or serious
medical nursing is required, patients are sent to the
General R.A.M.C. Field Hospital for this area.
This practice obtains right through the camps, and
no serious operative work or serious cases are treated


in the hospital attached to Australian units on Salis-
bury Plain, but the patients are sent to the nearest
R.A.M.C. General Hospital.
Parkhouse Camp.
Here is an A.M.C. Training Camp, Convalescent
Training Camp (for venereals), also A.S.C. Camp.
A.M.C. Training Camp. —Really corresponds to
Overseas Training Brigade for A.M.C. Details and
Training Battalion for A.M.C. About 470 in camp—
mostly from but also men from command
depots,
_ Men here have stretcher drill, A.M.C. training, first
aid, application of Thomas splints, gas-mask drill, &c.
“A ” Class men are here trained as stretcher-bearers,
are given bayonet drill, musketry, &c., and physical
exercises graduated according to instructions of Medical
Officers, and all men sent from here overseas must be
fit for field service. “B ” Class men for hospitals in
France and Base are supplied from units in France.
There are about 50 acres under cultivation by men
training. Officer Commanding and non-commissioned
officers are permanent, all the rest of staff is casual, and
constantly changing, as part of this camp is the Con-
valescent Training Depot lor patients discharged from
Bulford as non-infoctious, but still under treatment and
able to do a certain amount of training while finishing
their medical treatment. They get full pay while here.
Accommodation for men as in other camps.
Cookhouses. —Accommodation for 1,000. All food
is utilized, and there is no waste.
The camp is under guard, and there is a wire fence
all round, so it is really a detention camp. There is a
hospital ward, where sick—after .606 or other illnesses—
are treated, but no nurses.
Major A. Cook’s clinic for syphilitic cases was in full
working order. System as an example of team work
waa excellent.
No. 3 Training Battalion, Codford.
This is another training battalion, similar to the one
at Sutton Yeny. At present, there are 1,000 men in
camp, all from Australia as reinforcements, except a
company of signallers, who are men mostly from com-
mand depots.
Hutment accommodation similar to Sutton Yeny.
Cookhouses the same.
Canteen and amusement rooms run by Army and
Navy Canteen Board. There is a wet canteen in all
these camps, where beer is sold. Beer is weak, and no
limit placed on what men may drink, so long as they
can pay and don’t get drunk.
Messing Huts. —Messing by companies, except for
details, where they mess in the huts where they sleep.
Kitchens, and diet scale, satisfactory.
There were originally five training battalions, but,
owing to the reduced number of reinforcements, they
are now practically reduced to three. No. lat Sutton
Yeny, and No. 3 at Codford, and No. 4 at Hurdcott.
Group Hospital. —Accommodation for about 250.
Also isolation —only mumps at present—and special
hut for scabies. No nurses.
The arrangements at this training battalion were
identical to what obtains at Sutton Yeny. Men are
kept here on an average ten weeks, and are then ready
tor being sent overseas. There is a great deal to,be
got in during this time, as, besides training and equip-
ping, complete medical and dental supervision is carried
out, and this may interfere with their training.
No. 4 Command Depot, Hurdcott.
Depot for normally 81, A 3 and 4 cases. Only light
cases. Accommodation, 4,000—3,200 at that" time.
Good situation.
Six Medical Officers, under Senior Medical Officer
for area, Lt.-Colonel J. K. Adey, 0.8. E.
Sleeping huts usual type, with wooden stretchers which
come to pieces. All convalescent cases mess in sleeping
huts.
Nine dental officers, 20 mechanics. About 175 plates
per week made. All dentists’ chairs in one hall, not in
separate cubicles. Workshops good.
Massage and Physical Gymnasium Department, and
graduated exercises. One S. Sergeant Masseuse, and
about eight or ten other (untrained); but S. Ser-
geant says sopae of them are quite good. Physical
exercises—various sorts of mechanical machines, bicycles
with hand brakes, and rowing machines, Sandow ma-
chines, and Zander’s apparatus, &c. Classes in gym-
nasium, and exercises against resistance, &c.
Room for Classification of patients done by Medical
Officer daily, and every patient seen once a week. Each
patient paraded to dentist, and teeth systematically
attended to, and condition noted on his dental form.
Isolation Hospital for scabies cases, where routine
treatment is gone through in six days—bath with soft
soaps, and sulphur ointment every second day, then
ointment with thymol for irritation. Clothes sterilized
in Thresh’s disinfectant.
Massage Department.—Two hundred and sixty-two
cases under treatment. Staff Sergeant (Masseur) in
charge.
Cases treated for five months since Ist January, 1,656,
made up as follows:—Placed in higher category, 1,034;
boarded, 135; transferred to Eh. 4 Command Depot,
225; undergoing treatment at present, 262; total, 1,656.
All sorts of general physical exercises, drill, &c., carried
out here by competent staff, under orders from Medical
Officers, according to fitness. '
General Arrangements in other Command Depots.
Ho. 3 Command Depot, Hurdcott.— This is just
alongside No. 4 This depot takes all cases with slight
wounds requiring dressings, &c. The most serious cases
sent from hospitals are sent here. Bln cases. Con-
tanis a Gioup Clearing Hospital, with accommodation
for 250 patients. Separate wards for infectious cases,
measles, mumps, Hospital under Major J. B. f!
Mackenzie.
There is also a dressing station for slight wounds.
Cases, when marked up to “ A ” Class, are all sent to
Overseas Training Brigade, where they have three
weeks’ training before being sent overseas. This
applies to all command depots, and the training of over-
seas cases is kept separate from the training of recruits
who are in the Training Brigades.
-d thie , comm and depot is Ebvant Hospital,
K.A.M.C., and nurses, where cases—apart from infec-
ticks—are sent if they are likely to be in bed longer
than ten days. Hospital for this area at Hurdcott.
er f “ here a gymnasium for orthopedic cases,
under Major J. B. Lewis, and same sort of appliances
as at bo. 4. Massage and physical drill, &c.
Dental Department.— Much the same as at No 3
Command Depot, with dental officers.
Lt.-Colpnel J. K. Adey, 0.8. E., is Officer Command-
os ot this area, which includes also the Training Bat-
talion, where reinforcements for 3rd Division are
trained.
• an *P u g eme nts are the same as in the other train-
ing battalions already described. Only infantry are
taken here, and the troops have ordinary ten weeks’
training before being sent overseas.
Ihere is a regimental hospital for acute cases.
Foyant Hospital (Imperial), near Hurdcott, already
mentioned in connexion with Nos. 8 and 4 Command
Depots, was visited. Accommodation for 500 patients;


Meal.
Saturday.
25th May.
*
Sunday,
26th May.
Monday,
27th May.
Tuesday,
2Sth Slay.
Wednesday,
29th May.
Thursday,
30th May.
Friday,
31st May.
Breakfast
7.30 a.m.
Porridge and
Milk
Liver and Bacon
Mashed Pota-
toes
Bread
Margarine
Tea %
Porridge and
Milk
Sausage
Bacon
Bread
Tea
Margarine
Porridge and
Milk
Curried Sausage
Mashed Pota-
toes
Bread
Tea
Margarine
Porridge and
Milk
Mince Meat
Mashed Pota-
toes
Bread
Tea
Margarine
Porridge and
Milk
Rissoles Gravy
and Mashed
Potatoes
Bread
Tea
Margarine
Porridge and
Milk
Sausage and
Bacon
Mashed Pota-
toes
Mixed Vegetable
Bread
Tea
Margarine
Porridge and
Milk
Liver and Bacon
Mashed Pota-
toes
Bread
Margarine ■?
Tea
Dinner
12.30 p.m.
Boiled Mutton
Potatoes
Beans
Peas
Jam Roll and
Custard
Bread
Tea
Boast Beef
Brown Gravy
Potatoes
Peas
Beans
Plum Pudding
and Sauce
Bread
Tea
Fried Sausages
Potatoes
Beans
Peas
Plum Pudding
and Sauce
Bread
Tea
Steak Pie
Potatoes
Cabbage
Peas
Sago
Custard
Bread
Tea ,
Mince Pie
Potatoes
Cabbage
Beans
Peas
Plum Pudding
and Sauce
Bread
Tea
Stuffed Ox
Heart
Potatoes
Beans
Peas
Onions
Baked Rice
OoStard and
Raisins
Bread
Tea
Roast Mutton
Potatoes
Beans
Peas
Bread
Marguerite
Pudding
and Custard
Tea
Tea
4.30 p.m.
Cold Ham
Pickles
Fruit Cake
Bread
Margarine
Tea
Stewed Fruit
Rice Custard
Fruit Cake
Bread
Margarine
Tea
Salmon
Salad
Bread
Margarine
Tea
Sultanas
Sago Custard
Bread
Margarine
Tea
Bacon and Mash
Stewed Peaches
Tapioca Custarc
Bread
Margarine
Tea
Salmon
Salad
Bread
Margarine
Tea
Bacon and Rice
Kedgeree Jam
Cheese
Bread
Margarine
Tea
Supper
8.30 p.m.
Pea Soup
Bread
1
Lentil Soup
Bread
Onion Soup
Bread
Mulligty. Broth
Bread
Scotch Broth
Bread
Onion Soup
Bread
Barley Broth
Bread
fSfrd.l C
5. E. CLARK, Lieutenant.
Westham
Camp,
ran by K A.M.C.; and they take the serious and opera
centre, and the wards '
being "built with X-ray apparatus; but there is nr,
pathological department.
Lewes Detention Camp.
For Australian soldiers. Situated at Lewes, m
Sussex about 68 miles from London. Prison was a
civil prison before the war, and is supposed to be one
of the best prisons in England. Officer Commanding,
Can tain Phillips. Major F. Macky is Medical Officer.
There are 308 Australian soldiers undergoing detention,
varying from fourteen days’ up to two years sentence.
Va lnspected the prison. Xearly all prisoners have
separate rooms, and these rooms were spotlessly clean.
There are a few rooms where three, prisoners weie
kept but the great majority have separate rooms or
cells There if a small hospital prison with A.M.C
orderlies, but no serious cases are sent here, fepeci
accommodation is provided for two or three tubercula
mses Beds, &c., in cell, but they are not detained
oaol All“A” and “B” Class men undergo
training during detention, and musketry, gas drill,
training & , dr pp Reveille at 6.30,
S Ml from 9.30 till 13 and 2 till
f 3 T Put in X at 5.30, lights out at . After tea
It Q prisoners have tasks set them bag-making, &c, ill
8 and allowed to read till 9. On parade and drill,
&c not allowed to talk. All meals are served in their
cells by orderlies chosen from prisoners in raster
«C » Class men only do work in workshops—do no
physical training.
Kitchens were clean and well kept. . Only two 1 er-
nianent Staff in kitchen—rest of work done by prisoners.
Food diet scale is liberal, practically a- camp diet.
“A ” and “B ” Class get more diet than O Class.
Bread I saw was not good—sodden. (Piet scales at-
tached.) But all bread in England was very poor
Prisoners sleep on wooden stretcheis, thiee an es ,1
in summer, and four in winter. Blankets rather poor
quality. All mess equipment was beautifully kept, and
cells most tidy. Prisoners always have' part ot their
sentence remitted if conduct is good. Great_J r L a 3 ont y
of prisoners are undergoing sentence foi > ■ • an
desertion, and Officer Commanding said conduct taken
altogether was good.
Apart from drill, exercise, &c., no form ot amuse-
ment, &c., is allowed, and they are allowed.to write a
letter once a fortnight. While m detention, prisoners
have stoppage of pay entirely, but wife s allotment up
to 2s. per diem goes on, and this has to be worked on •
by the men after release. . ■ 1
' Apart from venereal cases, prisoners were wearing
ordinary uniform; but those prisoners in for second
or further sentence, wore blue band round their arm,
and these men are kept in a separate wing of the
prison. As prisoners are allowed no intercourse with
each other, no practical mixing up, except on parade, of
hardened criminal type and first offenders. Prisoners,
after their sentence is complete, are quite fit to be sent
back to the line. I
There is a dentist and dental unit attached, and
prisoners’ teeth are fixed up completely during theii
imprisonment. Taken altogether, prison was exceed-
ingly well conducted; there seemed to be no reasonable
ground for complaint as regards food, messing, and
accommodation.
EIET SHEET - No. 1 Cook Housb.
Wbek Ending 31st May, 1918. s
(Sgd.) 0. D. PLAYEORD, Major,
Commandant,
“ E ” Sub. Depot, No. 2, A.C.D.
(Sgd.) C. E. CLARK, Lieutenant.
Messing Officer,
“ E ” Sub. Dep6t, No. 2 A.C.D.
Westham Camp,
Weymouth.


Meal.
Saturday,
1st June.
Sunday,
,2nd June.
Monday,
3rd June.
Tuesday,
4th June.
Wednesday,
5th June.
Thursday,
6th June.
Friday,
7th June.
Breakfast
7.30 a. in.
Porridge and
Milk
Syrup
Mince Meat
Mashed Pota-
toes
Bread
Dripping
Tea
Porridge and
Milk
Syrup
Liver and Bacon
Mashed Pota-
toes
Bread
Dripping
Coffee
Porridge ■ and
Milk
Syrup
Sausages and
Bacon
Bread
Dripping
Tea
Porridge and
Milk
Syrup
Rissoles and
Gravy
Mashed Pota-
toes
Dripping
Bread
Tea
Vegetables
Stew
Margarine
Bread
Coffee
Tripe and
Onions
Porridge and
Milk
Syrup
Mashed Pota-
toes
Margarine
Bread
Tea
Porridge and
Milk
Syrup
Sausages and
Bacon
Mashed Pota-
toes
Bread
Dripping
Tea
Dinner
12.30 p.m.
Roast Meat
Cabbage
Baked Potatoes
Green Peas
Date Pudding
Bread
Tea
Potato Pie
Cabbage
Rangoon Beans
Plum Pudding
and Sauce
Bread
Tea
Irish Stew
Sago Pudding
Bread
Tea
Sea Pie
Cabbage-
Potatoes
Apple Roll and
Sauce
Bread
Tea
Stuffed Ox
Heart
Cabbage
Potatoes
Rangoon Beans
Macaroni Cus-
tard
Bread
Tea
Curried Sausage
Potataes
Cabbage
Cocoanut Pud-
ding, Lemon
Sauce
Bread
Tea
Dump Stew
Rangoon Beans
Potatoes
Jam Roll and
Sauce
Bread .'
Tea
Tea
4.30 p.m.
Salmon Salad
Vinegar,
Onions
Bread
Margarine
Tea
Fruit Cake
Jam
Margarine
Bread
Tea
Stewed Peaches
Rice Custard
Bread
Margarine
Tea
Bacon and Rice
Kedgeree
Mashed Pota -
toes
Bread
Margarine
Tea
Haricot Stew
Potatoes
Bread
Margarine '
Tea
Stewed Fruit
Macaroni Cus-
tard
Bread
Margarine
Tea
Cottage Pie
Margarine
Bread
Tea.
Sapper
8.30 p.m.
Pea Soup
Bread
Vegetable Soup
Bread
Barley Sonp
Bread
Mulligty. Soup
Bread
Scotch Broth
Bread
Italian Broth
Bread
Lentil Soup
Bread
Rations.
Bread.
Meat.
Margarine.
Sugar.
Tea.
Potatoes.
Vegetables.
Dried Peas.
Maize Meal.
oz.
OZ.
oz.
oz.
oz.
lb.
OZ.
OZ.
oz.
1
14
8
I
1
i
1
2
2
2
Rations.
Cocoa.
Rico.
Suet.
Oatmeal.
Cheese.
Salt.
Flour.
Sausages.
Rabbits.
1
oz.
oz.
oz.
oz.
OZ.
OZ.
oz.
oz.
oz.
1
2
i
2
2
i
10i
6
&
Rations.
Bread.
Meat.
Margarine.
Sugar.
Potatoes.
Vegetables.
Dried
Peas.
Maize
Meal.
Cocoa.
Rice.
Suet.
Oatmeal.
Salt;
OZ.
oz.
oz.
OZ.
lb.
oz.
OZ.
OZ.
oz.
oz.
oz.
oz.
oz.
*
1
13
6
i
i
1
, 4
2
2*
1
2
1
4
UNIVERSAL DIET SHEET.
C.d., B Sub. Depot. For Week ending 7th June, 1918.
22nd May, 1918.
E. PLAYEORD, Major.
Commandant, “ B ” Sub. Depot.
C. E. CLARK, Lieutenant.
Officer i/c Messing, “ B ” Sub. Depot,
No. 2 Australian Comd. Dep6t.
DIET-SHEET, LEWES GAOL.
Category “A” and “ B.”
Equivalents —
Meat, 8 oz. ; or Sausage, 6 oz. ; or Rabbit, 8 oz.
Bread, 14 oz. ; or Flour, 10J 07 .
Category “ C.”


SECTION 7.-MEDICAL SERVICES, A.I.F.—
FRANCE, ITALY, GREECE, INDIA.
Frahce.
There are fifteen field ambulances—one with each
brigade. Although the brigades had been very consider-
ably reduced in strength, no corresponding reduction had
been made in the field ambulances. They were all in
fine order, and doing good work. Nearly all were estab-
lished in houses or other buildings, the 'personnel living
in billets. Whilst the field units were doing good work,
at least equal to anything I saw elsewhere, so were the
regimental Medical Officers. lam sure that the Aus-
tralian soldier has been well and faithfully served by
these officftrs, wffio were all doing great and glorious
work for their country.
Australian Casualty Clearing Stations. —The estab-
lishment shopld be at least one for each division, so that
the A.M.C., A.T.F., with only three, were short in
respect to these stations. They are really hospitals for
the reception of men as early as possible after being
wounded or invalided. The Australian Casualty Clear-
ing Stations were not working behind the Australian
troops, and, therefore, did not specially treat Austra-
lians. They were established near Cassell and Blend-
esque.
There were three Australian General Hospitals in
France, viz., No. 1 at Rouen, No. 2 at Boulogne, and
No. 3 at Abbeville, the Officers Commanding being
Lieutenant-Colonels J. A. Dick, C.M.G.; H. A. Powell,
C.M.G.; and J. S. Py.rdy, D. 5.0., respectively. The
three hospitals each had accommodation for 1,040 beds,
but were capable of being very considerably enlarged.
They consisted of both tents and huts, and were in first-
class order, doing good, work, and as well equipped as
most of the Imperial hospitals which I saw.
It was regretted that at none of the Australian Gene-
ral Hospitals had any ‘attempt been made to concentrate
Australian patients in them, and they were only receiv-
ing the same proportion of Australians as were to be
found in Imperial Hospitals, roughly 2 to 4 per cent,
being Australians. As various classes of cases were con-
centrated in certain hospitals, I am of opinion that
many Australians could have been concentrated if
serious attempts had been made to do so. It would not
only have been most gratifying to the patients them-
selves, but would have insured ■ treatment by medical
officers responsible to the Australian authorities. This
formed the subject of a communication (copies at-
tached) by me to the General Officer Commanding
A.I.F.
The German air raids had been frequent over this part
of France, and, as some hospitals had been struck by
bombs, the British authorities were busily engaged in
sand-bagging all the wards and dormitories, also in pro-
viding trenches for the accommodation of patients and
others, and, in all cases, for the female staff. To such
an extent had the fear of air raids impressed the
authorities that hospitals 100 miles behind the front
lines were being fully sand-bagged at an enormous ex-
pense. The Australia hospitals shared with the others
in the work. No casualties from air raids hafl occurred
in any Australian General Hospital, but a bomb fell in
the grounds in front of No. 3 Australian General Hos-
pital at Abbeville. This note does not apply to casualty
clearing stations, some of which had been under fire
and others bombed. •
Nothing but praise can be bestowed upon the hospi-
tals, their staff, and the work of their officers and nurses.
The Convalescent Depot, Harfleur, was a camp hos-
pital established to give minor cases of sickness or
wounds an opportunity of recovering without being
sent to England. The men were accommodated in huts
and tents, the site being rather cramped; but it was
comfortable, and suited its purpose. The depot was
close to the Reinforcements Camp for the A.I.F. in
France. •
Members of the Army Nursing Service working in
Imperial hospitals formed the nursing staff of one
double general hospital at Hardelot, a stationary hospi- .
tal at Dieppe, and portion of the staff of a general hos-jJ
pital at Trouville, whilst others were scattered in many
places. Individual reports are attached. 1 inspected
all, and found them doing good and effective work.
Italy.
The only A.A.M.C. in Italy was a nursing unit
of thirty-six working at the No. 38 British Sta-
tionary Hospital, Genoa (Miss Davidson, matron), and
some twenty men at Taranto who had been left there
from the time when Australian troops w r ere being con-
veyed via Taranto.
I visited and met the members of the Army Nursing
Service at Genoa. They were very happy, quite con-
tented, and expressed satisfaction at their treatment.
Those in authority over them were, as in all other coun-
tries, loud in praise of them and their work.
Greece.
In Greece the only members of the Australian forces
were 320 nurses, who formed the staff of four British
General Hospitals. These nurses have performed
splendid work under trying conditions, and won great
praise. (Greece is dealt with in a separate paper.)
India.
In India, the A.M.C., A.1.F., is represented hy the
various nursing units, and by forty-five staff-sergeant dis-
pensers, which are also reported upon in a separate
paper. Small sections of the Army Nursing Service are
working or have worked in Mesopotamia, on hospital
ships plying in those waters, in German East Africa,
and at Vladivostock, in Russia, and have staffed field
hospitals formed for care of sick on the frontier ex-
peditions.
Notes on Visit to Medical Units in France.
Ambulances of 2nd Division. —A.D.M.S., 2nd Divi-
sion—Colonel A. E. Shepherd, D.S.O. The ambulances
belonging to this division are the sth, 6th, and 7th Field
Ambulances. There had been an advance of the 2nd
Division on the night of visit, and I saw the sth and
6th Field Ambulances at work receiving and dealing
with wounded.
The sth Field Ambulance (Officer Commanding Lieu-
tenant-Colonel W. C. L. H. Crowther) was situated at
St. Gratien (main dressing station), 6 miles from
Bertangles, in a farm house, the large barn of which
was fixed up as a dressing station, where patients were
re-dressed and sent to casualty clearing station in ambu-
lances. 1
The 6th Field Ambulance (Officer Commanding Lieu-
tenant-Colonel H. L. St. V. Welch, D. 5.0.), was doing
the forward work for division. Advanced dressing sta-
tion was -situated at a place beyond Pont Noyelles and
La Hoursaye. Forward dressing station was in a large
dug-out about 24 feet underground, with inlet and outlet
passage?. Patients were let down to dressing station on
a trolley, on which stretcher was placed and the trolley
was connected by a wire rope round the windlass. As
one trolley went up, the other Went down. The dug-out
itself was in the form of a gallery, and struts to take
stretchers were fixed up on either side so that patients
could be kept there until they could be evacuated. At
each end of the tunnel was a dressing station. The
trolley for stretchers was raised at the lower end so that
the stretchers remained level when being raised or '


lowered. The gallery was 6 ft. 4 in, high, 7 feet wide,
and long enough to take twenty patients—ten on each
side. Swinging cradles were also fixed up in the rooms
so that more patients could be accommodated. Provi-
sion had been made to prevent gas from getting down
into the gallery. This ambulance was under heavy fire.
All personnel were housed in dug-outs on the ground
round about. The quartermaster’s stores and the Medi-
cal Supply Depot were also in dug-outs.
This advanced dressing station was about 2 miles
behind the line. Beyond this, another advanced dress-
ing station and regimental aid-posts and relay depots
were situated. These were also visited.
The 7th Field Ambulance was stationed at Petit
Hammel. At time of visit was at rest. Officer Command-
ing, Lieutenant-Colonel A. M. Wilson.
Horse ambulances and motor ambulances and all
equipment housed in a farmyard. Officers lived and
messed in a chateau near by.
Ambulances of sth Division. —All these were in rest.
They were Bth, 14th, and 15th.
14th Field Ambulance (Officer Commanding Lieu-
tenant-Colonel C. W. Thompson, M.C.), in a wood off
the Allonville-road. Ordinary camp. Horse ambu-
lances only; all very well kept. Horse lines all sand-
bagged and trenched.
15th Field Ambulance in a wood near Amiens, off
Allonville-road, near Quilleau. Officer Commanding,
Lieutenant-Colonel K. Smith, C.M.G. All the personnel
in wigwams made of leaves and bushes. Both horse
and motor ambulances. Good medical supply depot
here, and also Dental Officer working in a tent.
This ambulance was in a wood where there was a
large ammunition dump, and a great number of D.A.C.
camped close by.
Bth Field Ambulance in rest. Camp close in to
Amiens, about a mile to south. All in tents. Ho work
being done at all, as they were quite isolated from the
troops. Officer Commanding, Lieutenant-Colonel A. R.
Clayton.
2nd Sanitary Unit camped in field just behind Amiens.
The orderly room was •in a large dug-out which had
been a shell-hole. Officer Commanding, lived in
a large dug-out. Sanitary units is a corps unit, and
consists of the Officer Commanding and 27 rank and
file. They deal with sanitation of the whole corps area.
Their function is five-fold:—
Ist, Inspection. —Men inspect and report daily on
sanitation of all corps in area to the Officer Command-
ing.
2nd, Painting Notices.- — Re sanitation.
3rd, Corporals making sanitary appliances for divi-
sion.
4th, Tin Smelting and plumbing, and making sani-
tary appliances for camps.
sth, Mlp -making for sanitation.
3rd Division, A.D.M.S. (Colonel F. A. Maguire,
D.S.O.).—Rivery visited main dressing station of 9th
Field Ambulance (Officer Commanding, Lieutenant-
Colonel A. F. Jolley). The 9th, 10th, and 11th Field
Ambulances were attached to 3rd Division. Hinth
evacuated cases into main dressing station of 10th, and
from there to casualty clearing station. There was an
advanced dressing station of 9th Field Ambulance on
bank of River Somme at Camon. Two bridges were
built, and a sling for carrying stretchers and a boat as
punt were fixed up in case the main road leading to 10th
Field Ambulance, St. Acheul, should be rendered im-
passable. This was merely an alternative route, as there
was a possibility of the road being blocked in the event
of a retreat. The advanced dressing station was on this
side of the river, and the relay post and the regimental
aid posts were further forward.
C. 2941.—3
St. Acheul.. —One of the suburbs of Amiens, where
the main dressing station of 10th Field Ambulance was.
(Officer Commanding, Lieutenant-Colonel McCarthy).
It was situated in a building which was a French civil
hospital, equipped to do any ordinary emergency work,
but the hospital had been badly shelled. There are
several tunnels under the building where patients could
be taken and where personnel slept. There were also
separate departments for gas cases, wounded, and sick
cases. There were 50 patients in the hospital.
Villers Bretonneux. —The main dressing station of
11th Field Ambulance was situated here (Officer Com-
manding, Lieutenant Colonel R. W. Chambers). Visited
the advanced dressing station for walking cases. There
was one of the dug-out dressing stations which were
being adopted as type. They have been already de-
scribed (vide 6th Field Ambulance) . The idea was to
have one for each regimental aid post, and two for each
advanced dressing station -when possible. All tents for
personnel were dug in; horse lines also, and kitchen, &c.
The advanced dressing station of 11th Field Ambu-
lance was on the road to Villers Bretonneux, and was
under a railway cutting where there was a tunnel, and
there was the usual apparatus ready for first aid.
About 200 yards behind the front line were two regi-
mental aid posts in dug-outs. Patients were carried by
regimental stretcher-bearers, and dealt with by Regi-
mental Medical Officer, and possibly by a Medical Officer
from advanced dressing post, if busy. Patients had to
be carrried on stretcher by hand back to advanced dress-
ing post.
Head-quarters of 3rd Division. —The 3rd Division
was in the line, and the head-quarters, situated at Glisy,
were a remarkable system of dug-outs in the side of a
hill. Sleeping quarters were well down in the earth —at
least 30 feet—with long tunnels and steps lighted with
electric light leading to them.
General plan for working of field ambulances of divi-
sions was that two were in active work and one in re-
serve. One took forward area, the other back area, and
they took areas alternately. The transport and carriers
of ambulance in rest were available for other two, and
the tent division of ambulance in rest was utilized for
hospital for local cases of illness. In the case of 3rd
Division, all ambulances were in work, as the division
was in the line, in each field ambulance was a Dental
Officer, accommodated in a tent or marquee with
mechanical workshop and a complete dental unit, i.e.,
two dental mechanics and one private. There was also
a medical supply store, which furnished drugs and
dressings for the area at each field ambulance.
4th Division, A.D.M.S. (Colonel A. H. Moseley,
D. 5.0.). —The ambulances attached to this division are
the 4th, 12th, and 13th Field Ambulances.
Advanced Dressing Station of 13th Field Ambulance
was situated near Bussy (Officer Commanding, Major
Morley, temporarily in command). —This was a tent
division, with dressing station, which evacuated to main
dressing station of the 4th Field Ambulance, situated
further back, at Les Allecons. Usual arrangements and
equipment as already described.
12th Field Ambulance. —At rest, camped in a wood
at Petit Camon. The stretcher-bearers and motors of
this ambulance were working for the 13th Field Ambu-
lance. This ambulance, at the time of my visit, was
only dealing with local sick from neighbouring troops.
4th Field Ambulance. —Situated in a fine modern
house at Les Allecons, further back towards Amiens
(Officer Commanding, Major H. B. Lewers, 0.8. E.,
temporarily in charge). Main dressing station was situ-
ated in a large barn, and the operating theatre was fixed
up in a tent alongside. Equipment and arrangement of


this theatre were under Major A. W. H. A’Court. Ab-
dominal and other emergency work could be undertaken
here.
A dental unit was attached to this ambulance. Per-
sonnel were in tents in garden, dug ih. Officers were
in the house, which had every modern convenience.
The tent division of the 4th Field Ambulance was
situated at Dreuil. This tent division was for walking
cases only, and there were two ’buses here for evacua-
tion back to the main dressing station at Les Allecons.
No. 3 Casualty Clearing Station (British) .—Situ-
ated at Gazaincourt, a place on the road to Doullens.
Accommodation existed for about 400. A.M.C. surgical
team did the work, and the surgeon was Lieutenant-
Colonel T. E. Y. Hurley, C.M.G., Officer Commanding
Officers’ Hospital.
Ist Divisional Head-quarters, at St. Sylvestre Cappels,
near Eblingham. A.D.M.S., of Ist Division, Colonel R.
B. Huxtable, C.M.G., D. 5.0., Y.D.
Visited advanced dressing post of Ist Field Ambu-
lance, situated in a brewery near Hazelbrook. Very
nicely fitted up. Officer Commanding, Lieutenant-
Colonel E. T. Brennan, D. 5.0., M.C.
The ambulances of this division were Ist, 2nd, and 3rd
Field Ambulances —Ist and 3rd in advanced and back
positions respectively.
3rd Field Ambulance (Officer Commanding, Lieu-
tenant-Colonel D. D. Cade, D. 5.0.). Visited main
dressing station at Sylvestre Cappels. Cases were
evacuated from here to No. 2 British Casualty Clearing
Station at Eblingham.
2nd Field Ambulance was at rest in a farm house,
only taking local sick and walking wounded or sick.
Officer Commanding, Lieutenant-Colonel W. E. Kay,
D.S.O.
Rouen—No. 1 Australian General Hospital (Officer
Commanding, Colonel J. A. Dick, C.M.G.). —Capacity,
normally 1,040, crisis up to 1,300. At time of visit there
were about 700 patients, principally British. Chief Sur-
geons, Lieutenant-Colonel T. P. Dunhill and Major F,
H. Langlands; Chief Physician, Major E. W. Fairfax;
fifteen Medical Officers; Principal Matron, Miss E.
Cornwell.
The hospital was situated on race-course, which it
shared with three other hospitals, and was cramped as
regards space. About one-third was hutted, and two-
thirds tented. It was being trenched and sand-bagged
on account of air raids, and this made the camp very
dusty.
i Wards. —The huts were principally of Neissen hut
type —either hospital or ordinary type. When these
huts are faced the right way they are very satisfactory,
but require a good deal of space between them. The
Officer Cemmanding stated they were not very hot in
summer. Some of the huts were wooden, with side
windows, some lined with match-boarding, some not.
Wards contained from 20 to 30 beds, and were bright
and cheerful. Some beds were wooden, some iron.
Fire extinguishers were placed throughout the wards,
and no smoking was allowed in the wards, except for
bed patients.
The tents were hospital tents —some single—mostly
placed side by side and end to end, with passages be-
tween. Each contained sixteen patients. Each group
of tents or wards contained small pantry and latrines,
room for bed-pans, &c., also a nurses’ room between two
wards, and linen room.
There was a fire station in the hospital, and fire drill
was held at intervals.
There were two operating theatres, bath and ablution
accommodation for patients, with hot water laid on.
The patients all messed in the wards. The food was
sent in hot-water dishes to pantries, and distributed to
patients on small tin plates. There was no common
mess room for walking patients.
In rush time, the hospital is practically a clearing
station, but at other times patients remain longer. The
Officer Commanding stated that within a period of six
months the average stay had been five days.
The surgical and serious medical cases were in huts.
The Sisters’ Quarters w'ere in huts.
Officers’ Quarters in huts, and very satisfactory.
X-Ray Room under Major Verco. Good work was
done. .
Cook House of ordinary field type, and equipment
sufficient to cope with work to be done.
No. 2 Australian General Hospital, Wimereux.—
Officer Commanding, Colonel IT. A. Powell, C.M.G.;
Senior Surgeon, Lieutenant-Colonel F. McClure;
Senior Physician, Lieutenant-Colonel A. E. R. White;
Principal Matron, Miss E. Gray.
Accommodation for 1,900 patients at crisis. About
1,200 in at tim§ of visit. Five per cent, of the patients
on an average were Australians.
Wards were largely wooden huts, rest of accommoda-
tion was in marquee tents, side to side or end to end,
forming large wards. Most of the tents were floored,
and contained beds; some have stretchers on wooden
blocks. Total tent accommodation for about 600. Wards
were light, airy, and well kept, and quite up to date for
a field general hospital. Each ward was self-contained,
with pantry containing a stove, wmshhouse, latrines, &c.,
attached to each ward. Wards contained 30 to 50 beds.
Each Medical Officer had one or more wards under his
care.
Tents for lighter cases were much on the same plan,
and each group was self-contained.
Operating Theatres.—There were two of these, each
with two tables, and well equipped. There was a re-
covery and pre-operative ward in connexion with each
theatre. *
X-Ray Apparatus, well housed, and good apparatus.
Satisfactory results obtained.
Personnel were housed in huts, with latrine and bath
and ablution accommodation close by.
Nurses housed in huts. Two in each cubicle, and had
a satisfactory mess. There were about 80 nurses on the
staff.
Dentist.—One dental team attached, and well housed.
Linen Store and Quartermaster’s Store were well
equipped.
Dispensary and Medical Supply Stores were satis-
factory, and there was a large stock of all sorts of splints
and appliances.
Kitchen.—There was a common kitchen for patients
and personnel, but separate kitchens for officers’ and sis-
ters’ mess. There was a mess room for personnel, but no
mess room for walking and convalescent patients, wffio
were all fed in their tents or huts. The arrangements
for taking food to these patients so that it should be hot
did not seem to be quite satisfactory, but the Officer
Commanding stated they were getting water heaters for
carrying the food to the wards.
Walking and convalescent patients generally averaged
about 600 in the hospital. Patients were kept in the
hospital unless they were _ not likely to be w r ell enough
to evacuate to convalescent depot, or back to their unit
within three weeks. Otherwise, with the exception of
patients who had been gassed, they were sent to Eng-
land. Patients who had been gassed were kept as long
as six weeks before evacuation, and the rule was that
these patients were not sent to England unless very
seriously affected.
Post-mortem Room.—Was quite up to date. Water
laid on throughout the hospital, and there were hot and


cold water showers for the patients in the bath and
ablution huts.
Latrines were on the dry-pan system.
Most of the huts had been sand-bagged, and revet-
ments were being built for the others. Ten thousand
bags, at lOd. each, were required for the larger huts.
There were two large dug-outs, sand-bagged all over, for
the sisters, situated near the sisters’ quarters.
The hospital was well laid out, with wide roads be-
tween the wards. The tents had wooden doors and win-
dows, which "were a great convenience, especially in the
winter, and arrangements were being made to have
stoves in all the tents for the coming winter. Hitherto
the tents had been very cold.
Officers’ Quarters and mess were satisfactory, but not
elaborate. Taken altogether, this was quite the best
laid-out and organized of the three Australian General
Hospitals I saw in France, and quite comes up to the
standard of the best general hospitals. A mess room for
convalescent patients would be a great saving of labour.
There was a large Y.M.C.A. hut in the hospital
grounds for the patients.
Incinerator was managed by FT.C.O. of the unit. The
garbage was burnt in incinerator of the ordinary British
type, which burnt coal, and did the work satisfactorily.
Tins were kept separate, and dealt with to recover the
solder by contractor. The fluids from camp went to
septic tanks. There was a large disinfecting machine
open at both ends, one end being in one room, the other
in another room, and as patients came in they took off
their clothes, had a bath, and were given hospital
clothes and sent to, the wards. Their dirty clothes
were given into a separate pack store, and patients were
handed a receipt. From this pack stDre clothes vrere
put into disinfectant, taken out in the other room, and
stored in pack store proper.
Abbeville—No. 3 Australian General Hospital.—
Officer Commanding, Colofiel J. S. Purdy, D. 5.0.;
Chief Surgeon, Lieutenant-Colonel H. C. Taylor Young;
Chief Physician (and second in command), Lieutenant-
Colonel E. A. H. Russell; 27 Medical Officers; Matron,
Miss G. Wilson; 40 nurses; A.M.C. personnel, about 190.
Hospital has accommodation for 1,500, but had taken
up to 1,900. Accommodation was half tents, half huts,
of various patterns. All serious surgical and medical
cases were accommodated in huts.
Plan of hospital is attached.
The whole hospital was sand-bagged.
This- hospital acted as a clearing station, and for a
time was definitely denominated a casualty clearing sta-
tion.
Quartermaster’s Department. —There were two Quar-
termasters, one of whom acted as a Messing officer,
though he was called Second Quartermaster, There was
a large linen store and quartermaster’s store, with all
equipment necessary for a general hospital.
Pack Store had accommodation for 1,500 packs, and
there were a large number of rifles, &c., which had been
taken from patients, principally from sick from camps
round about.
Cook House fitted up in ordinary way with stoves and
boilers sufficient for 2,000 patients.
Operating Theatres. —There were two main theatres
and one smaller one used as a dressing station. The two
main theatres were attached to a large ward used as
serious surgical ward; the theatres were heated with
steam heaters. All appliances in the theatres were satis-
factory.
Water was laid on throughout the hospital.
Pathological Laboratory was well fitted up, and a
great deal of work was done. A first class mortuary
was attached to the laboratory.
Y.M.C.A. hut and canteen in hospital grounds, with ft
large recreation room. Greatly availed of by the
patients.
Red Cross Store also on the grounds.
Nurses’ Quarters and Mess Room were in huts, and
were satisfactory.
Officers’ Quarters in huts and tents —two in each.
Personnel were all housed in huts, but there were some
tents for casual details attached.
Sergeants’ Mess and accommodation was probably
better than the officers’. Two sergeants in a room; large
mess room and recreation room for sergeants.
Corporals’ Mess. —There was a well fitted up Cor-
porals’ mess room, where corporals and lance-corporals
messed, and room used as a recreation room.
Mess Room for convalescent patients and privates of
the personnel close by the main cook house, nvith seating
accommodation for 400, which was sufficient for what
the hospital had been carrying. All other patients had
their meals in the wards, and the food was taken to the
wards in large dixies, and in cold weather would be very
cold. There were no food trolleys in use.
Tennis courts provided for the sergeants, and a battle-
dore net for the sisters.
Bath House. —There was a common bath house for all
male personnel and officers. Hours were set aside for
officers, H.C.O.’s, and men—a most unsatisfactory
arrangement.
No. 8 Stationary (British) Hospital, which was re-
served entirely for fractured thigh cases under Major
Sinclair, R.A.M.C. I saw these cases and methods of
treatment. Cases were kept there for eight weeks at
least, so as to be under continuous treatment. They
were kept until they were well enough to walk before
evacuation. The great principles of treatment was
proper extension, which was obtained by weighted pul-
ley attached to limb by special apparatus known as
calipers.
No. 5 Stationary Hospital at Dieppe.— There were
24 Australian sisters. Matron, Miss J. N. Miles-Walker,
A.H.S., A.I.F. '
This was a 400-lj;ed hospital, and had elaborate
trenches, sand-bagged huts, &c., as a precaution against
air raids.
Accommodation was provided in deep trenches for the
whole of the patients and personnal. Practically all
patients were walking cases. There were a number *of
Australian patients in this hospital.
No. 25 General Hospital (British), at Hardelot, on the
English Channel, was entirely staffed by 90 Australian
nurses, under Miss A. Kellett, A.M.S. Accommoda-
tion for 2,400 patients, principally light cases, but
took serious cases in a rush. A great many operations
were performed here. Aocommodaiton was partly in
houses, partly in huts, and largely in tents.
At Trouville, 100 miles behind the front lines, I
visited the 94th General Hospital (British). There
were 25 Australian sisters on the staff. The hospital
was beautifully situated on the top of a hill, and*there
were three other general hospitals here, 91st, 92nd, and
93rd General Hospitals, and a command depot. Accom-
modation for about 12,000 patients in surrounding dis-
tricts. The whole area was a medical one, and the
Commandant of the district was a medical man.
No. 94 had accommodation for 2,500 patients, all
mild cases, which were expected to be fit for general
service in three months at most. Here there were
graduated training and exercises, and as patients were
fit enough, they were sent on to the training depot.
Arrangements generally in this hospital were excellent.
There Was a separate portion reserved for officers.
No. 1 Convalescent Base at Harfleur, near Havre.—
The Australian depot for France, situated about 5 miles
south of Le Havre.


All men coming to France were sent to Havre and
distributed to their units in drafts. There was an
infantry camp, artillery and details camp, and con-
valescent camp.
Infantry Camp. —Officer Commanding, Lieutenant-
Colonel Mackenzie. About 1,500 men in camp.
Convalescent Camp.— Officer Commanding, Lieu-
tenant-Colonel S. R. Burston, D.S.O. Accommodation
for 1,600 men. Practically aBI command depot. Men
were all in tents —eight ,in a bell tent. Tents were all
floored. Large messing room and good kitchens. Men
underwent graduated exercises and marches.
There was a complete dental unit, and a good deal of
work was done. It was 'proposed to centralize the
dental units working in France for all Australian corps
here in one unit at the Convalescent Depot. The camp
seemed to be excellently managed. As men became fit
they were drafted off to the infantry or details camps.
They were examined by the Medical Officers twice a
week, and drafted off as considered fit. _
Ist Australian Casualty Clearing Station, Blendesque.
—Officer Commanding, Lieutenant-Colonel A. H.
Marks, D.S.O. Accommodation for about 700 at crisis.
Very empty at time of visit. Accommodation all in
tents, mostly Swiss cottage tents, placed end to end or
side by side. Accommodation for serious medical and
surgical cases had wards floored. Other wards w T ere
covered with tarpaulins on ground. Tents mostly
trenched with earth embankments round them —revet-
ment. Light cases slept on stretchers on the floor.
Serious cases had beds. Equipment was for 200 beds.
All casualty clearing stations were supposed to have
accommodation for 1,000 cases when in full evacua-
tion. Ho huts at all.
Operating Theatre, with four tables, quite good.
Ward for pre-operative cases, which was heated by
several (10 to 12) oil stoves and hot-air baths fixed up
to heat blankets, and pyjamas, &c. Patients were kept
in this ward whilst waiting operations. Fifteen Aus-
tralian sisters were all billetted near by. The Officer
Commanding was making a dug-out for them on side
of road close to their billet. •
Dentist in Heissen hut—one end for clinic, other end
for mechanical workshop. Dentist, two mechanics, and
one orderly were attached.
Officers’ Mess in longer marquee.
Officers in bell tents, sunk in the ground.
Personnel on stretchers in large marquee.
Quartermaster’s and Linen Store—large.
All paths fitted with duck-boards, and hospital well
laid out.
Had been there for two months, and had practically
no work to do.
X-Ray Room— Well fitted up. Power was obtained
from two engines (Petter type), which provided light
for hospital and ran the X-ray plant. Also acetylene
lamps in operating theatre for emergency.
No. 2 Casualty Clearing Station. —Just alongside Ho.
lat Blendesque, south of St. Omer. Officer Command-
ing, Lieutenant-Colonel V. O. Stacy; Chief Surgeon,
Lieutenant-Colonel B. Quick. Accommodation for from
800 to 900. Personnel, 90 H.C.O.s and men. About
fifteen officers and fifteen sisters. Accommodation
mostly in tents, but there were several Heissen hospital
huts for serious surgical cases. Only fifteen cases in
hospital at time of my visit.
Operating theatre well fitted up with four operat-
ing tables was one of the Heissen hospital huts. Elec-
tric light throughout. Other arrangements practically
as in Ho. 1 Casualty Clearing Station. Hospital well
laid out. All officers in bell tents, well sunk in the
ground and sand-bagged.
Marquees mostly sand-bagged or reveted with earthen ■
barricades. In the serious cases ward in all these hos-
pitals a part of each ward was sand-bagged on for the I
nurses on duty. Both these latter hospitals evacuated
to Boulogne by railway. ' £
Esqnebeck. —Visited No. 3 Casualty Clearing Sta-,
tion. * Officer Commanding, Lieutenant R. D. Campbell,*
DS 0 Major Woollard in charge. Accommodation
for about 500, all in tents. Fifteen Australian sisters.
Operating theatre with four tables, and had eight teams
when busy. At the time of visit three British teams
were working. Lieutenant-Colonel W. G. D. Lpjohn
was Australian Surgeon on the staff. Sisters were in
Armstrong huts. Very comfortable mess and sitting
room in tent. All Medical Officers were in bell tents.
Dug-outs and sand-bags near sisters’ quarters. Some
of the tents were sand-bagged, but it was not at all
general. Revetments —wards —composed of two or three
marquee tents end to end or side to side. Wards all .
floored. Beds provided. Duck-boards on paths covered
with wire netting —most necessary in winter. All
evacuations from here were carried out by motor, as the
railway was not available, though quite close.
Dental Officer. —A British officer with dental team.
He had brought his own equipment.
X-Ray Room satisfactory. Altogether the hospital
was very well equipped for a tent hospital. It must be
very cold in winter. Inner side flaps; lining of mar-
quees had square windows let in, the place of glass being
taken by calico, which gave good light when outer tent
flaps were taken down.
9th July, 1918.
Memorandum to
General Officer Commanding,
Australian Imperial Force,
F ranee.
Subject: Australian General Hospitals in England
and France.
Some time ago, when the 3rd A.G.H. was first in-
stalled at Brighton, it was felt that a long-felt want
had been met, in that Australian soldiers could be con-
centrated and treated by Australian Army Medical
Corps •personnel. I understand that, owing to the exi-
gencies of the war, this hospital was moved to France,
and has since been working at Abbeville. Hone of the
three Australian Auxiliary Hospitals in England can
in any way be considered general hospitals, and do not
receive patients direct from France.
The three Australian General Hospitals in France
do not have many Australian patients—probably not
more than 2 to 5 per cent. —and no system of concentrat-
ing them in Australian hospitals exists either in France
or England, not even as is done with other colonies, or
with special classes of cases such as shell shock, epilepsy,
thigh cases, &c. If it can be done for one colony, or for
one claSs of case, it can be done for Australian patients.
Much changing and re-arrangement of hospitals is now
taking place, owing to the extra danger from aerial
attacks; and this, in ray opinion, is a favorable oppor-
tunity to establish an Australian General Hospital in
London or other selected place or places, possibly one
each at Southampton and Hover, where serious Aus-
tralian cases can be concentrated, some direct from
France, and others at a very early date after their
arrival in England, and before active treatment and
often major operations have been undertaken. It
'would not be either advisable or practicable to have a
hospital large enough to take aP, cp.aes of Australians


who are sick or slightly wounded, but a 2,000-bed hos-
pital would easily be sufficient to attend and care for all
serious cases of sickness and injury, and work in con-
junction with our auxiliary hospitals near London.
Having patients so concentrated would present many
advantages, and it would be most gratifying to the in-
valids themselves to be nursed and attended by xkus-
tralians. It would also make Australian authorities
responsible for correct treatment. At present no real
responsibility is placed upon any one, and it is admitted
by those in a position to judge that the standard of the
general hospitals in England varies considerably, and
while a member of the staff may be highly skilled in one
branch, he may not be competent to undertake difficult
cases of another class. The same may be said of an
Australian hospital, but it should be within the power
of those responsible to see that such specialists as are
required are available.
I strongly recommend that an Australian General
Hospital be established in England, either by the trans-
ference and re-adjustment of the staff of one of our pre-
sent general hospitals, and that, where possible, all
serious cases arnongst Australians be concentrated either
direct from France or as soon as possible after their
arrival in England. Or, if it is desired, I will recom-
mend the Honorable Minister for Defence to raise an
entirely new hospital in Australia. This can be done
without trouble, and sufficient reinforcements be sent
forward for the increased personnel. Should any fur-
ther reduction in the personnel pf the Australian divi-
sions take place, a considerable number of Medical
Officers will be released for other work. Personally, 1
much prefer using the present hospitals for this purpose,
and bringing together some of our surgeons now work-
ing in non-Australian units.
(Sgd.)
R. H. FETHERSTON,
D.G.M.S., Australia.
9th July, 1918.
Memorandum to
General Officer Commanding,
Australian Imperial Force,
France.
Subject: Concentration of Australians,in Australian
Hospitals in France.
This subject is allied to that of concentration of
patients in various hospitals. It has always been con-
sidered impossible to send Australian patients to Aus-
tralian hospitals in France, but if special classes of
cases can, and have been, concentrated, surely Aus-
tralians can, to an extent at least, be concentrated. lam
confident it would be very advantageous to do so. At
present, thigh cases are concentrated in certain hos-
pitals, two of which are, or were, directly alongside Aus-
tralian hospitals. These and similar cases should; if
Australians, in my opinion be placed under Australian
care, instead of, as in the case of one hospital, under the
care of Medical Officers from another Colony or
Dominion. lam sure our patients have been well
treated by these Medical Officers and by their staff.
Still, the responsibility is an Australian one, and the
sooner it is accepted the better, both for the patients and
for the Australian service,-and for the peace of mind of
the invalids’ relatives.
I recommend that it should be insisted that (as far as
possible all serious cases, and without fail all classes’of
cases which are now concentrated into special hospitals
under special Medical Officers) Australian patients be
concentrated in Australian hospitals in France.
(Sgd.)
R. H. FETHERSTON,
D.G.M.S., Australia.
SECTION 8. —MEDICAL SERVICES, A.I.F.—EGYPT
AND PALESTINE.
The medical services were, without exception, doing
splendid work, and everywhere was manifest a most
exemplary spirit and comradeship. The one object
of every one was to help so that the very best service
could be given to the sick or wounded men under their
charge. Colonel R. M. Downes, C.M.G., who is
D.D.M.S., Desert Mounted Corps, is Senior Medical
Officer, acted as Director of Medical Services, Australia,
and had an A.D.M.S. on the Staff of the Base Com-
mandant at Cairo. His command is a difficult one, as
not only have the Australian troops to be dealt with,
but also three Divisions of Indian and Imperial
Cavalry, one Brigade of Hew Zealanders, one Regiment
of French Cavalry, and ’many other special corps.
Colonel Downes is deserving of much credit for the
efficiency of the medical arrangements.
The A.M.C. were short both of Medical Officers and
other ranks, whilst the number of nurses was only just
sufficient. Owing to the shortage of other ranks, the
A.M.C. had to draw upon the combatant troops to
supply the deficiency. This is not a good arrangement,
as “ A ” Class men, who were incompetent as A.M.C.
orderlies, are working in Base Hospitals, and, there-
fore, rendering ineffective service.
There is no way to properly train the men in Egypt
within a reasonable tirpe, or with anything like economy.
For these reasons, it was specially desired by the
D.D.M.S. that full A.M.C. reinforcements should be
sent to Egypt from Australia, and that they should be
trained before sailing. I concur with this wish, and
am confident that it would be a much better and more
economical procedure.
Hot only should full reinforcements be sent for
ordinary personnel, but nursing and dental services
also require to be kept up to establishment.
Health. —The invaliding was high, being principally
due to Malaria, mostly Benign Tertian, but there were
some cases of a malignant type.
In- spite of all efforts at prevention, many cases of
malaria were still being reported. This will continue
whilst our troops are in Palestine, as the whole country
swarms with mosquitoes of the malaria-spreading
variety, and the civil population is badly infected. The
Jordan Valley, with its swamps and marshes, was bad,
particularly where Turkish gun-fire prevented proper
preventive measures being taken. Jerusalem and its
district were also areas very productive of infection.
Apart from malaria, and a minor ailment known as
sand-fly fever, there was not much acute illness; but
the men who had been in the desert for a long time
were all run down, and showed the effects of heat and
the trying conditions under which they have lived.
Particularly noticeable were the men who had been
three years or three summers in the desert.
There is no place in Egypt, from a health point of
view, suitable to afford change for tired men. The
question must he faced, and these men must be given
long leave out of Egypt, either to Australia, England,
or India. Troops in Mesopotamia are granted regular
annual leave to India, when they go to the hills; and,
in my opinion, regular leave to new scenes and cooler
climates should be arranged for Australians in Egypt.
If arrangements cannot be made for them to be sent
to England, they should be allowed to return to Aus-
tralia. It is false economy, and unsound reasoning, to
retain at the Front men who are breaking down in
health, as they soon contract disease and break down
entirely, having then to be dealt with as invalids, and
taking a very long time to recover, whilst many will
never be fit to fight again; whereas a timely change
would have kept them fit to fight and from breaking
down.


No. 31 General Hospital, Abassia, Cairo.— This is
an Imperial hospital, which took over the building in
which the Ho. 14 Australian General Hospital was
formerly located. It is controlled and staffed by the
R.A.M.G., except in the case of nursing staff, who are
all members of the Australian Army Hursing Service.
Matron, Miss J. Gemmell. Seventy-five per cent, of
the patients are Australians. It is really an overflow
for the Ho, 14 Australian General Hospital. This
building is suitable for a hospital, but being in Cairo
is an objection. For the convenience of work, such as
the boarding of patients, I advised that a portion of
the medical staff should be supplied by the A.I.F.
Jordan Valley. —A hospital under the designation of
a Rest Station, was formed in the Jordan Valley.
Capacity, 200 beds, principally in tents but some mud
and brick wards had been erected. This hospital was
i doing good work under most unfavorable surroundings
of heat and dust. Officer Commanding, Major Hodgson.
A bacteriological laboratory was established here, doing
the work for the Jordan Valley. Major Ferguson was
in charge.
\ No. 14 Australian General Hospital. —Officer Com-
manding, Colonel W. E. Summons, A.M.C., A.I.F.
Practically all patients are Australians. This hospital
is located in a large building at Port Said, the property
of the Suez Canal Company, on the eastern bank of the
Canal. It contains a total of 2,100 beds, of which 400
are for convalescent cases. At the time of my visit,
nearly all the beds were occupied.
The buildings are of brick, and well suited for
hospital purposes. This was the most suitable and
best of the Australian hospitals which have at any time
been established in Egypt. Everything was convenient
and in good order. The cool breezes at night, facilities
for bathing and boating, as well as the ease with which
patients could be kept out of Port Said, were great ad-
vantages.
It was greatly regretted that the Imperial authorities
desired to take over the building; and so the hospital
was to be moved. Ho other suitable place being avail-
able, I interviewed General Allenby, who would afford
no assistance in the matter; and I, therefore, cabled to
Defence, Australia, asking that every effort should be
made to prevent the hospital being moved. At the same
time, I went into the question of alternative schemes,
and cabled on the subject to Australia.
No. 2 Australian Stationary Hospital.— Officer Com-
manding, Lt.-Oolonel W. L. Kirkwood. This is a tent
hospital, with a capacity of about 600 beds, of which
400 are in a special and separate portion for the treat-
ment of venereal disease.
Hear by, but not actually forming portion of this
hospital, is the camp for the isolation of cases of infec-
tious diseases and contacts from transports arriving in
Egypt T
Ho. 2 A.S.H. is situated at Moascar, near Ismalia,
on the sand. It is well equipped, and doing good work,
but there was a shortage of medical staff and other
ranks. There are no female nurses.
This hospital should be t moved, and sent forward
nearer to the Front, and be entirely separated from the
treatment of venereal disease.
There are five Light Horse Field Ambulances with
the Australian Mounted Brigades, some in the Jordan
Valley, the remainder being out of the actual line, and
resting near Ludd and Ramileh.
These field units, specially equipped to follow mounted
troops, have less personnel than the ordinary Field Am-
bulances. With the small number of Medical Officers,
they find, at times, great difficulty in providing the
medical services over the large areas which mounted
troops cover. These ambulances have done much hard
work in the field, and done it well. In future, an extra
number of Medical Officers should be available foi duty
with Light Horse Field Ambulances.
The field work of the medical services in Egypt has
been very varied, apart from the ordinary horse-drawn
ambulances, they have worked with motor ambulances,
sand carts, sledges, and with both mule and camel trans-
port. Carrying wounded over slippery mountain
tracks on camels in bad weather, as was done after the
battles near Essalt, taxed the resources of the service
to the utmost. I heard on all sides nothing but praise
for the work of the field units, and certainly the Aus-
tralian mounted troops were well and faithfully served
by the medical services.
A unit, not strictly medical, but very closely allied
to the A.M.C., was the Rest Camp, at Port Said—a large
tent camp on the shores of the Mediterranean, close to
the city. It has reasonably good recreation rooms,
erected principally by voluntary associations.
To this camp, men from the Front came for a holiday
of ten days; whilst, close by, the Hew Zealanders came
for four weeks. Ten days is not sufficient, but was all
that could be allowed on account of the lack of rein-
forcements. It has, nevertheless, done much good, and
provides some little change for tired officers and men.
The camp is under a combatant officer, with a special
medical staff attached. All made the best of the con-
ditions, and did the best that was possible under the
circumstances.
Transfer and Rank for D.D.M.S.—Two purely A.M.C.
questions, which vitally affect the work and efficiency
of that branch in Egypt, are transfer to cooler districts,
and the rank .of senior officers. As these matters are
both common to other spheres, I have dealt with them
elsewhere.
Leave. —As I was the only officer from Australian
Head-Quarters Staff who had visited Egypt within a
recent period, and who was returning to Australia, I
was everywhere asked to represent to the authorities in
Australia a matter which is not a medical question,
but which is causing great trouble and discontent
amongst all ranks. I was at every turn met with the
sdme complaint from Divisional Commanders, Briga-
diers, Officers Commanding regiments, combatant and
non-combatant officers. The question was that of
leave to Australia on private affairs. Firstly, the diffi-
culty and delay involved in having leaVe granted; and,
secondly, the reduction from full to half pay, and fur-
ther deductions for maintenance on transports. This,
it was explained, only allowed a lieutenant 2s. 6d. per
day, so that if he had any responsibilities, he could not
avail himself of leave. Imperial officers are granted
leave to England on pay, and obtain it without trouble
or difficulty. A definite percentage may be granted
leave on private affairs by Divisional Commanders
without further reference to higher authority. I would
strongly urge full and favorable consideration of leave
on private affairs being given by the General Officer
Commanding A.I.F. in Egypt, up to a regular per-
centage of l|r per cent, per month, and that leave should
carry full pay, without deductions. This is a very live
question in Egypt, and is causing more discontent and
grumbling than any other. *
Complaint of no Credit given for Work. —The only
other complaint which was *at all general was that the
troops were not given any credit for their work, and
that no official notice was taken of the hardships which
they had to put up with.
The great victory which they have won since the
date of my visit will, to an extent, have adjusted this
matter; still, in future, every effort should be made to
induce the public press to give as much publicity to the
work of the Australian Light Horse in Egypt as is given


to the work on the other Fronts, as, whilst there is not
so much fighting, there is always some fighting going
on, ahd the sick rate and invaliding is far higher than
on the other Fronts.
SECTION 9.—NURSING SERVICE.
Introduction.
I visited the members of the Army Nursing Service
in all hospitals and in all countries where they are
working, and have no hesitation in reporting that they
are all rendering splendid and faithful service, often
under the most trying conditions (some have been close
to the fighting front).
General.
At every centre I visited in Europe, in Egypt,
and in India, I was asked by the staff nurses if
they could be given promotion for length of service.
There are many staff nurses (some 400) who have been
over three years on service. They pointed out the great
disadvantage under which they were placed when work-
ing with English nurses, who often were made sisters
with much less service than they had; also the helpless-
ness of their outlook so far as promotion was concerned.
There is little or no chance of many of these nurses
being promoted, as the seniors are almost all fit and
well, and do not wish to resign, so that thqre will be
very few vacancies in the senior ranks.
The subject has been brought by them before the
A.I.F. authorities, who, when consulted by me, stated
that they intended to bring the matter forward for
Ministerial approval, and to recommend that all staff
nurses should, at the end of two years’ service, be pro-
moted to the rank of sister. I concurred in the sugges-
tion, and wrote to the G.0.C., A.1.F., to the effect that,
if he were cabling to Defence for approval in this mat-
ter, he could say that I favoured the request being
granted. It was in the belief that this had been done
that I cabled to Australia from Egypt, asking what
action had been taken in the matter, and found that
nothing had been brought before the Minister for De-
fence. I now recommend that all staff nurses who have
completed two years’ effective service in A.1.F., should,
if their work has been satisfactory, be promoted to the
rank of sister. It is fair and just, and will prevent the
members of the Army Nursing Service being placed
under their juniors in other services, and, at the same
time, be some reward for good and faithful service.
Another question which was a cause of anxiety was
whether nurses who have been married should be re-
turned to Australia at the expense of the Government or
not.
The number who have married is not large, and a
fair proportion do 1 not wish to return, as their
husbands are not Australians. I promised to lay
the matter before the Minister for Defence for
decision. All the nurses have been sent _ overseas
with the distinct understanding that they will be re-
turned by the Government, and at the Government ex-
pense. I consider, therefore, they are entitled to be
returned to Australia at Government expense. The De-
partment can call upon them for duty on the return
voyage, if necessary. If this is not done, some will be
undoubtedly stranded in Europe, as their husbands can-
not possibly save sufficient from their pay to provide the
necessary passage money.
I recommend that the matter be definitely decided,
and that all members of the Army Nursing Service,
A.1.F., who have married overseas be entitled to be
returned to Australia at departmental expense.
In some hospitals in Europe, Egypt, and India, the
pay of A.I.F. nurses was being stopped for breakages
of such articles as thermometers. This is wrong, and
I so informed the authorities, and requested that re-
funds be made. No such charges are made against
nurses in Australia, or against Medical Officers for in-
struments they break. I desire that my action be con-
firmed, so that a definite ruling upon the point may be
given for future guidance.
Control of Army Nursing Service outside France and
England.
The control of the Army Nursing Service is involved
in the question of the control of the A.M.C., which
is again subject to the control of the A.I.F. generally.
The latter is, of course, no business of mine; but as
there are in the Nursing Service some very special
points of difference from any other Australian service,
the question of the best method of dealing with it is
submitted. There are approximately 250 nurses work-
ing in Imperial hospitals in France and England, and
about 40 in Italy, 320 in Salonica, nearly 100 in Egypt,
and over 300 in India.
Where there is an Australian AJD.M.S., as in France
and Egypt, there is no difficulty; in Italy they are really
within the sphere administered by the A.I.F. in France.
Therefore the question is reduced to the administration
of the Army Nursing Service in Salonica and India.
When the nurses were originally sent to Salonica, the
cables from the A.I.F. authorities in the matter clearly
showed that they did not desire to have anything to do
with them, and their later actions in refusing to allow
invalids to be sent to England confirmed this view.
Without any knowledge of the circumstances under
which the nurses in Salonica were working, the A.I.F.
authorities cabled to Australia, asking that there be one
Principal Matron for Egypt and Salonica. There was
at the time one in Salonica and one in Egypt. The
request was refused by Australia, who advised the ap-
pointment of one for each place. I inquired most
carefully into the subject when in these places, and am
sure no system which places one person over our nurses in
both Egypt and Salonica, with the power of interfering
in details, will be satisfactory. It will not work, and
will cause great resentment by the Imperial Officers,
and the authorities in Salonica do not desire, and will
not tolerate, any interference from Egypt, and vice
versa.
That is quite apart from the difficulty and danger of
causing one person to pass to and fro, also of the delay
and uncertainty involved in communication by post.
There is no objection whatever to all papers, returns,
&c., from Salonica being sent to Egypt; in fact, I con-
sider that this is advisable, but no diminution in the
power of the Principal Matron can be recommended at
present. She can now make temporary promotions up
to establishments pending confirmation by Australia,
and is the controller of purely Army Nursing Service
matters in Greece.
I recommend that all the powers of the Principal
Matron remain as at present, but that for such matters
as returns, pay, and transfers, they be considered as
being under the G.0.C., A.1.F., Egypt.
Nurses -in India cannot be administered front Eng-
land, and must either come under Australia or Egypt.
An officer of the Army Pay Corps was sent from
London to India some months ago to inquire into the
pay question of troops. The pay of nurses was in order.
The officer referred to was under the authorities in Lon-
don, and not those in Egypt. In my opinion, it was
correct to send him to India, but it is not advisable
that communication should be sent to England when the
authorities, in Egypt could act just as well, and more
promptly.


There are many questions which arise and which must
be dealt with in Australia, and it "will involve great
waste of time if communications are sent to Australia
via Egypt, or as at present, via England. Questions of
pay and records as they affect the Army Nursing Ser-
vice in India can be dealt with through the A.I.F. repre-
sentative, who, in my opinion, should be under the
authorities in Egypt, or act independently of either,
dealing direct with Australia, the Principal Matron con-
tinuing, as at present, to have power to temporarily pro-
mote nurses up to establishment, and to communicate
direct with Australia on all matters concerning the
Nursing Service which must be dealt with by Aus-
tralia, such as reinforcements, transfers, &c.
Greece.
I was instructed by cable to inquire into and report
upon the question of discontent of nurses at Salonica,
and I attach copy of report sent to the G.0.C., A.1.F.,
on the subject, which deals fully with the matter.
The climate of Salonica is very hot in summer and
very cold, with snow, in winter, thus having extreme of
heat and cold.
The only Australian Forces in Salonica are members
of the Army Nursing Service—364 nurses —sent as four
nursing units, consisting of 91 each, who were despatched
duling the summer of 1917. • At the date of my visit
there were 319 in Salonica, under Principal Matron
McHardie White, R.R.C., M.8.E., the majority of the
remainder having been evacuated by order of Medical
Boards, due in almost all cases to dysentery or malaria,
six only being in a state requiring prolonged rest and
care; the others only needed change of climate, and
were quite fit for service, but not considered fit to
remain in Salonica.
The nurses were all working around Salonica in four
large general hospitals—Nos. 42, 50, 52, and 61 Gene-
ral Hospitals, where they are well and comfortably
housed. Their work was hard, principally consisting of
medical nursing, but they were very happy and con-
tented.
The D.M.S. of the British Salonica Force was most
sympathetic and considerate to our nurses, at the same
time loud in praise of their work, their keenness and
energy.
Principal Matron McPlardie White, R.R.C., M.8.E.,
has done most efficient work, and placed the service upon
a very satisfactory footing. She has insisted on being
entirely separate from the Imperial matrons, who, in
Salonica, have nothing whatever to do with the Aus-
tralians, Principal Matron White dealing direct with
the D.M.S. The system has worked well, and given
satisfaction to both the Australian nurses and the
D.M.S., B.S. Force, who informed me he did not desire
any change.
Owing to the prevalence, of certain diseases in
Salonica, special regulations existed for the guidance of
Medical Boards. These dealt with Imperial as well as
Australian nurses, and were really drawn up for condi-
tions of service in the Imperial Army. One rule was
that all nurses with recurrent malaria were to be sent
out of Salonica. In the Imperial Service they were
sent to England or France, and there placed on duty.
Owing to orders issued by the A.I.F. authorities in
London, this was not allowed for Australian nurses, and
all declared unfit to remain in Salonica were returned to
Australia, although they were quite fit for full work
elsewhere. Realizing the waste of service w r hich resulted
from the carrying out of this order, I recommended the
G.0.C., A.1.F., that it should be withdrawn, and that
Australian nurses should be dealt with in a simliar man-
ner to Imperial nurses.
In Salonica all officers are granted regular leave to
England, being given three weeks from the time of
their arrival at Southampton. Imperial nurses had
this privilege, but the Australian Army Nursing Service
had not. X reported upon the matter to the G.0.C.,
A.1.F., recommending similar treatment, and I received
a cable in Egypt saying that it had been approved. his
will afford some recreation, and be greatly appreciated
by all. There is little risk or danger in proceeding
from Greece to England, as the journey is now made byffl
train and motor to Itea, on the Gulf of irom
there a steamer runs to Taranto, taking approximately
24 hours at sea, hut by far the greater portion of the
sea journey is made in safe waters. Ihe dangerous
portion across the Adriatic is comparatively short, and
made at night-time, behind anti-submarine nets. From
Taranto the journey is by train to Havre, and thence to
Southampton.
It has been stated that Salonica is so unhealthy that
nurses should not be sent there. Whilst there is a good
deal of sickness, it is not of a very serious nature. The
figures showing evacuations to Australia seem high,
but that was due to the system as much to the actual
seriousness of the diseases.
There is more malaria among A.I.F. nurses in India
than in Salonica, but they are not evacuated under simi-
lar rules. ... I
Great care is being taken by the authorities, and
everything is being done to minimize sickness, nurses
at night working in mosquito-proof masks and long
gauntlet gloves to prevent them from being bitten by
mosquitoes, and so infected with malaria. If some
adequate form of covering for the legs were provided,
many cases would be avoided, as most nurses are in-
fected by being bitten on the legs knd ankles. It seems
a simple matter to wrap something around the legs, but
the great heat in summer makes this almost imprac-
ticable. The most up-to-date appliances are long top
boots, but these are too expensive to be purchased by
the nurses themselves. It is, therefore, recommended
that they be supplied at departmental expense, provided,
of course, our nursing units remain on duty in
Salonica.
(Copy.)
August, 1918.
From Director-General, Medical Service, Australia, to
General Officer Commanding, Australian Imperial
Force, France.
Sir,
I have the honour to report that there are now 316
A.I.F. nurses in Salonica. Originally, 364 were sent,
but 46 have been returned to Australia, and 14 others
are now waiting transport. None of the cases returned
have been really seriously ill, and only six were con-
sidered to need six months’ rest to recover.
The nurses are distributed for duty in four hospitals
in or round Salonica. I have visited all four units,
and interviewed almost all the nurses, and also visited
the sick nurses in the hospital or convalescent homes.
Everywhere I have found that the nurses are happy,
and speak in the highest terms of the consideration
which has been shown to them by every one, from the
highest to the most junior officer, as well as by the
Principal Matron, A.1.F., Salonica. Of complaints
such as I have received elsewhere, I have received none,
while, on the other hand, the G.O.C. and D.M.S., 8.5. F.,
speak highly of the work and conduct of the Australian
nurses under them, and both would, I am sure, be very
sorry to lose the services of our nurses.
From inquiries made by me from the officers of the
various units, I am satisfied that the Australian nurses
in Salonica are well maintaining the high reputation
which the service has won in other places. There was
no grumbling at the inconvenience under which they
work, or as to the danger of their work, or of the addi-
tional risk of sickness which nurses take in this district.


All are contented to do their best. Practically the
only matter which ’ gives them cause for worry is
whether they would be able to stand the climatic con-
ditions indefinitely, and whether there was any chance
of their being allowed to see England before being
returned to Australia. These two, questions were asked
by, or on behalf of, every nurse.
When these units were sent from Australia it was
foreseen that they could not work indefinitely in such
a climate, and they were told, as were the nurses now in
India, that when any further nurses were being sent
from Australia they would be sent to replace them,
and so allow those in bad climates to go to cooler places.
Owing to the difficulty of shipping, and, probably, also
due to my absence from Australia, none have been sent.
These nurses were all made members of the A.1.F.,
as it was not desired to have any other force out of
Australia, and it was certainly understood that they
would receive the same consideration as all the A.I.F.
nurses. This does not seem to have been the case, and,
in my opinion, the order regarding the refusal to allow
them to be transferred to England, where the Imperial
authorities urgently need" thq services they can give, is
harsh and unsympathetic, particularly when it forced
them to spend a perilous week in the Mediterranean, and
to make a very trying voyage in the Red Sea, both of
which could have been avoided by taking a short
journey, without risk, to England, and is certainly not
treatment which nurses who have faithfully served their
country should expect.
I do not think that the matter could have been
brought under 'your notice, and feel sure it only
needs to be fully explained to you to be corrected. I
shall be pleased if you will fully consider the subject,
and trust you will be able to arrange to allow the
transfer of these nurses, firstly, those showing signs of
wear and tear from effects of climate, and, secondly,
those who have been on duty for a definite period of
two years, which is the time allowed by the Imperial
authorities for their own nurses.
Should the point be raised of sending increased num-
bers for duty with Imperial units, or of finding a place
for them in England and France, I can assure you of
two things, that the Honorable Minister for Defence
has often stated in public that Australia is pleased to
do everything it can to help to win the war, and that
he will send all available help, and, further, that quite
recently the Matron-in-Chief at the War Office and the
Matron-in-Chief in France have told me that they will
be pleased to have all the nurses Australia can send
them. 7
If the transfer is allowed, I will undertake to supply
a considerable number of reinforcements from xlustralia,
and so help to relieve them. But, of course, a somewhat
similar arrangement must be made for the nurses in
India, and some in Egypt, so I cannot undertake to
relieve each one at the end of two years by drafts from
Australia. In my opinion, it would be fair and just
to send some of those nurses now in England or France,
many of whom have done no work in the tropics, to
take a share of the harder and more trying work in
Salonica. Their transport can be arranged without
any serious difficulty.
Leave to England.
Imperial nurses are allowed leave to England fairly
regularly, subject, of course, to the exigencies of the
service. Eight per cent, are allowed away at one time,
and they are given three weeks’ leave from date of
arrival at Southampton, the return journey and
leave taking about five or six weeks. •
This is strongly recommended for adoption by the
A.1.F., and will have the effect of greatly minimizing
invaliding, and will be very welcome to those nurses
who are not likely to be relieved at an early date,
I have refrained from discussing the question of the
sanitary state of Salonica and surrounding districts, as
I desired to particularly deal with the above subject,
but I cannot conclude this report without assuring you
that the unhealthiness of the district has been greatly
exaggerated, and the alarming reports and statements
which 1 heard in England and France are greatly ex-
aggerated. Of the actual fighting line I know nothing,
but in and near Salonica every effort is being made, and
has been made, to combat the fly and mosquito danger,
and to place hospitals in the least dangerous places, and
the nurses themselves are now learning the importance
of taking every care. I have no hesitation whatever
in stating that there is no reason why nurses should
not be sent for duty to Salonica for a period of two
years, provided they can be given reasonable leave, and
be transferred at or near the end of that time.
I leave in a few days for Egypt, where I expect to
remain till the middle of September, and shall be
greatly pleased if you will'cable your decision to me at
the earliest possible date, as necessarily your decision
must greatly influence my work and arrangements to be
made, and may possibly entail a complete alteration of
the system of lending nurses to the Imperial Govern-
ment. If such must be undertaken, the sooner I can
communicate fresh proposals to the Minister for De-
fence, the better. '
I attach a short statement for your assistance, show-
ing the points leading up to the sending of nurses to
Salonica. Most of the papers are at A.I.F. Head-
Quarters, and all have been seen by me.
I have, &c.,
(Sgd.)
R. H. FETHERSTON, S.G.,
D.G.M.S., Australia.
Recommendations.
1. That order re transference of Australian nurses
from Salonica to England and France.be withdrawn.
2. That in future, Australian mlrses in Salonica, as
considered best by the expert advisers of the G.0.C.,
8.5. F., be transferred to England or France, or re-
turned to Australia.
3. That regular leave to England be granted to Aus-
tralian nurses in Salonica, as is done for Imperial
nurses, viz., that up to 8 per cent, at one time be allowed
three weeks’ leave, to count from the date of their
arrival in England, and be given free transport to and
from England, usually via Italy.
First drafts to go as early as possible.
India.
The Australian personnel in India consists of 320
members of the Australian ibursing Service, 45 Staff
Sergeant Dispensers, 1 Officer, and a Staff Sergeant of
the Army Pay Corps, A.1.F., and a few invalids from
the Wireless Corps in Mesopotamia.
Principal Matron, Miss G. E. Davis, who also acts as
Matron to the Freeman Thomas War Hospital, Bombay.
Four hundred and fifty Australian nurses have been
sent to India, 50 of whom were transferred to the
western Front, 30 to Salonica, the balance having been
returned to Australia or had resigned.
The nurses are distributed amongst and form the
nursing staff of seven large general hospitals. There
are four hospital ships, one of which is working in the
neighbourhood of Vladivostock, and the others between
Egypt, Basra, and India. There are also some twelve
smaller hospitals for European patients. ♦
Owing to the reduction in the numbers of sick and
wounded men arriving from Mesopotamia, many war
hospitals have been closed, and the nurses are now
nearly all employed in the station hospitals scattered
throughout India and Burma,


At the time of my visit, Australian nurses were work-
ing at the following places, viz.:—Bombay, Poona,
Secunderabad, Bareilly, Nainital, Barrackpore, Banga-
lore, Deolali, Colaba, Naaik, Belgaum, Ahmednagar,
Quetta, Rawalpindi, Peshawar, Rangoon, and May-Myo
in Burmah.
There were approximately a total of 520 trained
nurses in India, consisting of 80 Indian Nursing Ser-
vice, 120 Queen Alexandra Imperial Nursing Service,
and 320 Australian nurses. Prom this it will be seen
that the majority of the nurses are Australians. They
are employed almost exclusively in nursing British
troops. For the Indian troops a number of Eurasian
women have been taught some nursing, but they are by
no means trained nurses.
Owing to the great distances.to be covered, and the
limited time at my disposal, I was not able to visit all
the nurses, but went to all the hospitals where any num-
ber of Australians were to be found, and, in addition,
met several on duty on hospital ships.
* I visited or met the nurses working at the Freeman
Thomas War Hospital, Bombay, Colabar Hill Hospital,
and Colaba Hospital in Bombay. At Poona the Deccan
and the St. George’s War Hospitals were visited, and
the large Station Hospitals .at Deolali, Secunderabad,
and Bangalore.
At each hospital I spent some time with the nurses,
discussed their work, and gave all an opportunity to
bring any matter they wished before me. The great
majority are anxious to get away from India and to
proceed to the western zone of operations.
Several other points were brought before me, such
as the legality of the action of the Indian Go-
vernment in making deductions from the pay of
nurses for such articles as broken thermometers,
expenses whilst travelling, deductions of mess
allowance when on holidays, whilst, as at all
nursing centres, the question of promotion after a
definite period of service was strongly urged. These
matters, which entirely concern the Indian Government,
were laid by me before the D.M.S., India (papers at-
tached), and those for action by Australia are dealt with
in separate reports.
Generally the nurses consider they have been treated
in a very parsimonious manner by the Indian Govern-
ment ; but they are happy and cheerful, and their
health, considering the climate, is good. Many show
signs of having worked in heat, and cannot continue to
nurse in India for another summer. Except for
influenza, which at, the time of my visit was very severe
all over India, the principal causes of sickness are
malaria, anaemia, and various forms of cardiac debility.
Work.—For some time after their arrival in India
our nurses had plenty of real war work for the Mesopo-
tamian troops, but recently the greater part of the
nursing is at various stations and cantonments, and
the class of work is such as is met with in similar
camps throughout the world; but at times such diseases
as small-pox, plague, Asiatic cholera, and hydrophobia
have had to be nursed, and there are always many
malaria patients.
The nurses have won great praise and thanks from all
for whom they have worked. The D.M.S., Matron-in-
Chief, the District Matrons, and the A.D.M.S., and many
O.C.s of hospitals were all loud in expressions of praise
for the work, the energy, and high tone set by the mem-
bers of the Army Nursing Service. Their remarks upon
the work and example of Miss G. E. Davis, Principal
Matron, were most laudatory and flattering.
From my personal observation, I can fully confirm
everything said, and am quite satisfied that they have
well and worthily upheld the high reputation won by
their fellow members in other spheres of operation.
/
As to the principal matron,, her work has been
wonderfully good and effective. She received little ot
no help from the authorities in India, and at times
much obstruction, hut by her tact, perseverance, and
sound judgment she has succeeded in placing the Army
Nursing Service on a most satisfactory footing. When
I say that she had to not only control and direct in all
nursing matters, but also to make all arrangements for
the pay of nurses scattered widely throughout India,
and at times to pay many herself, some idea will be
obtained of the immense amount of work which was
placed upon her shoulders.
Financial—Clothing and Expenses.—The salary of
the members of the Army Nursing Service is not as
high as that of the Indian Nursing Service, and our
nurses find great difficulty in making their salary meet
their ordinary expenses and provide for the cost of a
very necessary holiday once a year.
Cost of Clothes. —In India this is very high, also
that for all personal equipment, such as dresses and
linen, which have to be purchased by the nurses them-
selves. A paper on the question of supplies being sent
from Australia is submitted, and Indian authorities
were asked to allow these to be imported to India duty
free. (Copy of letter to D.M.S. attached.)
Travelling Allowance.—The Australian rates for
travelling allowance are totally inadequate, and I for-
warded a paper on the subject to the Indian authorities,
asking that the whole cost of travelling should be borne
by the Indian Government, and at the same rates as for
the Indian Nursing Service. The subject was favorably
commented upon by the D.M.S. and Matron-in-Chief,
but, up to the time of my leaving India, no reply had
been received to my communication.
Control.—The entire nursing service in India is
under a Matron-in-Chief, Indian Nursing Service, who
is on the staff of the D.M.S. at Simla. Under the
Matron-in-Chief there are various districts and Prin-
cipal Matrons, also Indian Nursing Services.
Orders for the Australian service are passed through
these officials, but all movements and internal arrange-
ments are carried out by the Australian Principal
Matron.
The system has worked reasonably well from an Aus-
tralian point of view, and the Indian authorities are
quite satisfied. It would be better if the entire Aus-
tralian Service were, as in Salonica, completely
separate from the Indian Nursing Services, but
there are difficulties to be overcome which do not
arise in other places, such as the great distances be-
tween the various units. Under war conditions, the
journey from Bombay to Burmah occupies from eight to
ten days, and nearly a week from Simla to places like
Bangalore, Having our nurses working in districts with
various kinds of climate, such as in the hills or sea-
shore, is a great advantage, but the distances would be a
difficulty in working out a system of control entirely bv
A.I.F.
I brought the subject before the D.M.S. for his re-
marks, and also discussed it with him, but did not ask
for a complete alteration in control, explaining that it
would form the subject of a later paper.
Whilst I did not ask for complete separation, I in-
sisted that the hospitals where our nurses are working
should be entirely staffed by Australians, and seniors,
from the matron down, should be members of the Aus-
tralian service. It was the practice in most of the hos-
pitals, but not in all.
It has been the practice in the past for Australia to
communicate with the Indian authorities on nursing and
other matters. This has not worked well, and has led
to much inconvenience and difficulty to those adminis-
tering our service. The Indian authorities have not


promptly passed all of the messages sent from Aus-
tralia, and in future all communications should be sent
direct to the Australian authorities, not to the Imperial
authorities.
Ceylon.
Army Nursing Service. —On arrival at Colombo,
nurses are taken charge of by the Ceylon military
authorities, and accommodation found for them at their
(tjie nurses’) expense. They are given warrants for
railway or boat to Bombay, generally for the railway,
which occupies from three and a half to four days. So
limited is the train accommodation that not more than
twenty can travel on one dqy, and often less. This
means that some nurses are detained in Colombo, and
have to pay their own hotel account. The sum allowed
(5 rupees per day) is quite inadequate. All
females must live at the good hotels in India and
Ceylon, and cannot possibly manage under 10 rupees
per day. That amount would be difficult to manage
upon, and necessitates much care and economy, even
with the reduced rates which are charged for nurses.
When waiting for transport to Australia, nurses have
to wait at times for several weeks, and this is a serious
matter.
All Australians are very well treated in Colombo. As
showing the difference in treatment of nurses in India
and Ceylon by the local authorities, the question of rail-
way travelling whilst on leave is mentioned. In India
no free warrants are issued to the A.N.S. nurses (they
are to those on hospital fdiips or from Mesopotamia),
but in Ceylon nurses are given free railway warrants
when on holiday or sick leave.
t lnvalids from Transports.
The Commandant of Ceylon, who stated that
there would be difficulty in finding hospital accom-
modation there for sick Australians should they come
in large numbers when returning from Europe, and
particularly so if suffering from infectious diseases.
He assured me, however, that they would do all in their
power, and promised to communicate later with the De-
fence Department on the subject,
(Copy.)
19th October, 1918.
From Director-General, Medical Services, Australian
Military Forces, to the Director Medical Services,
Imperial Forces in India.
Sir,
Since leaving Bombay I have visited Secunderabad
and Bangalore, where Australian nurses are on duty.
At both these districts, and, I presume, at others
which I have not been able to visit, nurses are charged
for clinical thermometers broken by them, or whilst
in their charge, and that demands have been made for
repayment for loss and damage of other articles of
furniture. In my opinion, these are illegal charges,
no power having been given to any authority in India
to make such deductions, and it is not peimitted
in Australia, and nil Australian nurses are entitled
to receive their full salary. I shall be pleased if
you will issue orders —(1) such deductions shall
at once be discontinued; (2) that a refund be
arranged of deductions already made, and that you will
notify the Principal Matron, Australian Military
Forces, and the Australian representative in Bombay
of action taken, so that the credits may be made in the
accounts of nurses who have left India, together with
particulars of refunds made, and that I can inform the
Honorable the Minister for Defence of Australia upon
the subject.
fSffd )
R. H. FETHERSTON, S.G.,
D.G., A.A.M.S.
(Copy.)
Colombo, 19th October, 1918.
From D.G.M.S., A.M.F., to D.M.S., Imperial Army in
India.
Sir,
I understand that nurses on leave from, say, Meso-
potamia and hospital ships are given free railway
warrants in India, but this is not extended to nurses
working in India. I desire to ask that special con-
sideration be given to the case of Australian nurses on
duty in India, and that they be granted free railway
passes for their annual leave. They are on active ser-
vice, and are entitled to all such rights, as against the
Australian Government, just as if they were in any
other war sphere, and they should not, in my opinion,
be treated by the Government of India in any other
manner. Owing to the great distances in India, a
very large part of the nurses’ earnings is taken up in
the payment of. railway fares for their holidays. It is
hardly fair that Australians should be treated as if in
the permanent Indian employment, for they cannot
avail themselves of many allowances granted to the
Indian nursing service, such as long leave at the end of
five years, 60 days a year retiring allowance, or pension.
These alone are a great saving to Indian Government
when comparing cost of Australian and Indian nursing
services.
I trust that the Indian authorities will favorably
consider my request in this, as in other matters pre-
viously reported upon, and so help to remove the feel-
ing which exists in my mind that the Government of
India have acted in a very parsimonious manner to-
wards Australian nurses.
(Sgd.)
R. H. FETHERSTON, S.G.,
D.G., A.A.M.S.
Sent 19th October, 1918.
(Copy.)
From the Director of Medical Services, Australian
Military Forces, to the Director, Medical Services
in India, Simla.
Travelling Allowances for Australian Nurses.
Sir,
The allowance paid to members of the Australian
Army Nursing Service was fixed for nurses serving in
Europe and Australia, and not for service- under such
conditions as prevail in India. They are less than the
Indian allowances. Up to the present all allowances
have been paid by Australia, but it is hardly right that
Australia should pay for, say, sending nurses to Burmhh
or other long journeys; neither is it to be expected that
Australian nurses can travel in any cheaper manner
than Imperial nurses. I think that movement of
nurses in India to and from port of embarkation, to
and from various places of duty, and from one district
to another, should be done at the expense of the Go-
vernment of India, and that the allowance should be
at the rates paid to members of the Q.A.M.N.S., 'lndia,
and recommend accordingly, such to include travelling
detention and field allowances as incurred as above.
(Sgd.)
R. H. FETHERSTON,
Surgeon-General,
Director-General, Australian Army-
Medical Services.
Bombay, 4th October, 1918.
■ (Copy.)
To D.M.S., India.
Re Payment of Customs Duty by Australian Nurses.
Many articles of the Australian nurses’ uniform can-
not be obtained in India, and other articles can only be


obtained at a very much, higher price than would be
paid for them in Australia.
Some time ago, wffien such articles were imported, the
nurses had to pay duty upon them. I think the Go-
vernment of India might reasonably forgo such duty.
I will be pleased if you can arrange the matter as de-
sired, and have the Australian Principal Matron in-
formed of the proceedings desired to allow them to be
imported duty free.
(Sgd.)
R. H. FETHERSTON,
D.G.M.S., Australia.
SECTION 10.—DENTAL.
The Dental Branch of the A.M.C. has grown till
there were, at the time of my visit, some 150 dental
officers overseas, and many more mechanics and skilled
workers. The dental sections were working at the field
ambulances, at hospitals and convalescent homes in
France, England, axxd Egypt, as well as at the camps in
England. All were busy, and doing a considerable
amount of good work. More care is taken by the
A.M.C., A.1.F., as regards dental defects than is taken
by the dentists of most other countries. It is hard to
compare the smaller colonies, but the authorities in
England, France, Italy, and Greece do very little dental
work of the class done for Australians. As far as I
could learn, the whole Dental Service in the Italian
Array was only as large as that of the A.M.C., A.1.F.,
whilst that of the Greeks was very limited, and at the
depot I saw was confined to extractions or to the relief
of pain.
In the British, French, Italian, and Greek Armies,
the Dental Services, as in Australia, form part of the
Medical Services. They work well together, but the
number of dentists employed is nothing like as high as
the proportion for Australia, and consequently the class
of work done is not so good.
The American Dental Service is part of the A.M.C.,
and their officers were seen by me at the A.M.C’. Camp
of Training going through a course of instruction in
military work. They have a good service. I could not
obtain the exact figures, but, from what I could learn,
the proportion of Dental Officers in the U.S.A. Army
is not as high as in the Australian.
Of small colonies I have no information.
The Canadian is the only Dental Service which is
separated from the Medical Services; even that, when
on service overseas, is under the Medical Services, a
trial to work it as a separate service having failed. I
went into the subject in Canada, and saw the Director
of Dental Services. Whilst he explained the advantages
gained, I found many Dental Officers very doubtful on
the subject, and universally the Medical Officers stated
it was a mistake, and that actually even now in practice
the Dental Service is under the A.D.M.S. of district.
The amount of work done by individuals each day
in Oahadawas much less than is considered reasonable
in Australia, either at home or overseas.
Promotion in the Dental Services is slow, and few
vacancies occur in the .senior ranks. I think that many
of these officers have earned recognition, and that this
branch of the A.M.C., A.1.F., merits recognition as a
whole. There are now one lieutenant-colonel, eight
majors, with varying number of captains and lieu-
tenants in the Dental Services,. A.I.F. It is recom-
mended- that, in addition to the above, one colonel
5.D.0., two lieutenant-colonels, and six majors be ap-
pointed from those at present on service.
At Sxdcup Jaw Hospital very good work in assisting
the surgeons was being done by two small sections of
dental officers and mechanics. This is special work, and
will have to be continued in Australia, I recommended
to the G.0.C., A.1.F., that two Dental Sections with a
knowledge of this class of work should be sent for duty
in Australia.
After consultation with D.M.S., D.D.M.S., and Senior
Dental Officers overseas, I sent a cable to Defence
asking that reinforcements should be sent regularly
both to the United Kingdom and to Egypt.
Ho proper provision exists in India for the dental
care of our troops from Mesopotamia or of the Aus-
tralian personnel in India. The care of their teeth is a
source of considerable expense. The Indian Govern-
ment do practically nothing for them. If Australians
are to remain for any time in India, one dental section
should be sent to work there.
SECTION 11 (a).—PHARMACEUTICAL SERVICE.
As ax-ranged befoi-e I left Australia, I met Major D.
A. Cossar, Staff Officer for Pharmaceutical Services, in
Canada, and together went into the question of supplies
of drugs, dressings, and sundries being obtained in
America and imported direct by Australia. The prac-
tice will be of considerable benefit from an economical
point of view, and the goods will be procured more ex-
peditiously than if they have to come from England.
Major Cossar reported upon the subject, and upon the
Pharmaceutical Services generally.
In Europe the promotions which had been made re-
cently in the A.I.F. had done much to make the service '
more contented, and I found it reasonably so. The con-
trol of the Base Depot of Medical Stores was still under
a civilian officer, in spite of the recommendation which
Major Cossar had made some time previously to the
D.M.S., A.I.F. I inquired personally into the question,
and consider that the arrangement in Exigland of having
a layman in charge of this store was wrong from all
points of view, at the same'time being an unnecessary ap-
pointment.
I forwarded a recommendation on the subject (copy
of letter attached) to the G.0.C., A.1.F., and I strongly
urge that the practice carried out with such marked suc-
cess in Australia of placing pharmaceutists in chax-ge of
■all depots where drugs are dealt with be carried out, and
that the G.0.C., A.1.F., be instructed accoi-dingly.
9th July, 1918.
Memorandum to—
General Officer Commanding,
Australian Imperial Force,
France.
Subject: Base Depot of Medical Stores.
Shortly before my arrival in Europe, Major Cossar,
Senior Pharmaceutical Officer on my staff in Australia,
visited and carefully went into all matters connected
with the pharmaceutical side of the A.M.C., A.1.F., and
found several matters in an unsatisfactory state, parti-
cularly as regards the stores at Salisbury and South-
ampton, and control of same. He submitted a report
to D.M.S., A.1.F., making recommendations, several of
which, I understand, have been carried into effect.
When I met this officer in America, he drew attention to
the fact that a layman, without knowledge of pharmacy,
was in charge of the Base Depot of Medical Stores.
He considered that the store will not be worked satis-
factorily until it is placed in charge of a qualified
pharmacist.
The policy of the Defence Department is that all such
stores shall be in charge of pharmacists, and that the
dental supplies (many of such articles required are the
same as used by medical men) shall be a branch of these
base stores under a person experienced in dental sup-
plies, not necessarily a Dental Officer.


In my opinion, the recommendation, if carried into
effect, will increase the efficiency, and at the same time
reduce the cost of managing these stores. lam aware
that there is a qualified pharmacist employed in each
store; but it is quite a different matter to place a profes-
sional man under an officer with no professional train-
ing and only a superficial knowledge, than to give the
professional officer charge, as, when in charge, there will
be far more opportunity and encouragement for the
exercise of zeal and accuracy of a professional nature.
I shall he pleased if you will consider this matter, and
can see your way to bring these stores into line with
those in Australia, and into line with the policy of the
Defence Department.
‘(Sgd.)
R. H. FETHERSTON,
D.G.M.S., Australia.
SECTION 11 (b). —STAFF SERGEANT DISPENSERS,
INDIA.
At the request of the Indian Government, 45 quali-
fied chemists were sent for duty with the Imperial
Forces in India, and arrived there, approximately,
eighteen months ago. Ho particulars were available
as to the exact work to be done, and no promise was
given them as to the class of work they were going to
perform.
I received a cable (W'.T. 979) from Defence, asking
me to inquire into the dissatisfaction stated to exist.
The dispensers were scattered in ones and twos all
over India, usually in outlying places. I was not able
to see many of them, but the few whom I was able to
interview all told the same story, which was one of
profound discontent. There were letters from thirty-
two Staff Sergeant Dispensers waiting for me on
arrival. These are now being filed in Central Becords
with the file on the subject. These letters were in the
same strain, and disclosed what seemed to me very
serious causes for complaint, the chief of which were —
(1) Little or no work to do.
(2) Inferior work in the country or at station hos-
pitals.
(3) Hon-receipt of proper clothing allowance and
rations, and had received no payment in
lieu.
(4) Being compelled to work under and take orders
from Indians who, in many cases, were not
properly qualified medical men (as under-
stood by English qualifications). This lat-
ter was a great source of discontent.
(5) That they desired war work, and not the very
inferior class of work for, at times, civilians
and natives.
After going very carefully into the matters of com-
plaint contained in the letters, and fully questioning
those seen by me, I was convinced that they had very
serious and just causes of complaint. I further found
there was no shortage of native compounders, either in
the civil hospitals or in the chemists’ shops, and, know'-
ing that many hospitals had been closed, I asked the
Commander-in-Chief, India (copy of letter attached),
that those Staff Sergeant Dispensers, A.1.F., who so
desired, might be allowed to return to Australia, as I
was fully convinced that in Australia they could do as
good or better work than they were doing in India.
I have received no reply to my request.
The Indian Assistant Surgeons who were placed over
these Dispensers hold warrant rank. With the object of
placing the Australian Dispensers on an even footing
with Jhem, I recommended by cable that they should be
given the honorary rank of warrant officer. This would
certainly relieve to some extent the ignominy of the
situation; but, with the reduction in the number of
hospitals, and the practical closing of war hospitals in
India, there is no reason why they cannot be spared,
and there is also no reason why the Australian authori-
ties should continue to pay them,
(Copy.)
To D.M.S., India.
Complaints hy Staff Sergeant Dispensers.
As mentioned to you on my visit to Simla, there is
considerable dissatisfaction amongst many members of
the A.A.M.C. in India who are acting as Staff Sergeant
Dispensers. I have letters of complaint from thirty-two
staff sergeants, and all allude to the subject as being
general. They all complain—
1. That they are not being given “ active” service,
which they expected when they volunteered.
2. That they are only doing inferior class of dis-
pensing (nearly all stock mixtures).
3. That before they arrived the work was done by
men who are not legally qualified chemists,
but only hold army certificates.
4. That the work usually takes an hour or so a day.
5. That in many instances they are compelled to
serve under Indians, who are not always quali-
fied medical men.
This latter clause is alone a cause of great discontent,
and naturally so, being made more irksome by the
policy of Australia known as White Australia.
From what I can gather, there has been a consider-
able reduction in the number of hospitals in India,
thereby freeing some dispensers.
While I do not wish in any way to hamper the
Medical Services of India, I shall be pleased if you can
see your way to return to Australia as early as possible
all Australian Staff Sergeant Dispensers who wish to
return, as I feel that there is plenty of work for them
in Australia, and that they will there be doing at least
as valuable work as they are doing now, and they will
not be subjected to the indignity of working under
Indian officers.
(Sgd.)
R. H. FETHERSTON, S.G.,
Director-General, A.A.M.S.
SECTION 12.—MASSAGE SERVICE.
Whilst the members of the Pharmaceutical Branch
of the A.M.C., A.1.F., in Europe may be said to be
contented, the massage service was seething with dis-
content. At Weymouth, I was given a paper from one
of the senior masseurs which put forward the case for
all concerned. The cause of the complaint was the
refusal of the G.0.C., A.1.F., to grant any commis-
sions to masseurs.
Some masseurs in Australia hold commissions, and
the men overseas feel they are being unfairly dealt with.
I am of the same opinion, and forwarded a report (copy
attached) to the G.0.C., A.1.F., recommending that he
should grant commissions to some masseurs, as was done
in Australia.
Another cguse of complaint was that the female mem-
bers (masseuses) were not allowed to wear badges of
rank as nurses do. This cannot, in my opinion, be
granted, as if all masseuses are given relative rank of
officers, then all males must be similarly treated, other-
wise there would be still further trouble and dissatis-
faction,
The work done by the Massage Branch of the A.M.C..
A.1.F., was very good indeed, and great care was being
taken with invalids prior to embarkation for Australia.
Shortly before my arrival a system had been adopted
and brought into force which will insure reasonable
attention to cases needing massage treatment during the


homeward voyage, and thus do away with many of the
complaints received in Australia upon the subject.
I feel that the masseurs deserve recognition on account
of their good work, and recommend that commissions
be granted on the same conditions as in Australia.
SECTION 13.—PHYSICAL STANDARD.
The physical standard of recruits, particularly that
of the large class of men who are on the border line of
fitness, and who are doubtful cases for acceptance oi
rejection, was a subject upon which I was instructed
to make special inquiries, and to obtain as much in-
formation as possible, the late Hon. J. C. Manifold,
M.H.R., being associated with me in this work.
In Australia, complaints were continually being made
that the interpretation of the standard of medical fit-
ness by the A.A.M.C. officers was top high, whilst, on
the other hand, complaints were being received irom
overseas that men who were medically unfit to proceed
to France were being sent to England from Australia.
The scope of my inquiries involved a study of the
actual medical examination of recruits in Canada and
England, where on several occasions I visited the
depots, and saw the work being carried out. _ In
America, France, and Italy no actual recruit examina-
tion was being carried out, but I interviewed the officers
responsible, discussing the subject with them, whilst" I
also saw a very great number of soldiers in these coun-
tries, from the fighting line to the base.
Lowering Physical Standard of A.l.F. —Almost im-
mediately after my arrival in England with the Hon.
J. C. Manifold, I went into the question of the physical
and medical standard of recruits. I interviewed
Lieutenant-General Goodwin, D.G., A.M.S., and other
Imperial officers, on the subject. Mr. Manifold and I
had an interview with the D.G.A.M.S. at the War
Office, when General Goodwin plainly stated the
difficulty they had experienced in getting regular and
even examinations made by different medical officers.
He also stated that the passing of unfits was inseparable
from any system of medical examination. With regard
to the employment of men sent from Australia who
were unfit for the Front line, he stated that there was
a great need for all classes of men in England, and that
they would be most welcome. He knew of the offer to
place these men at the disposal of the War Office, and
he had asked, in writing, that they be made available
for his Medical Boards'to examine in the terms of
Defence cables, but had heard nothing further of the
matter. He was, on behalf of the War Office, still
willing to carry out their part. We also discussed the
subject fully with the D.M.S., A.1.F., and other senior
Australian officers. From the very outset it was mani-
fest that any reduction in the A.I.F. standard would be
greatly resented by the D.M.S., A.I.F. It was further
ascertained that the order of the Defence Department
regarding the passing to the Imperial authorities of
men considered unfit on arrival from Australia had not
been carried out. In fact, except by the Commandant,
A.1.F., London, it had been ignored. The Commandant
had passed the papers for action to General Command-
ing Australians at Salisbury, and no further action had
been taken. Later it was found that the G.0.C., A.1.F.,
had not seen the cable at all, and knew nothing about
it.
Before going further into the question, Mr. Manifold
and I decided that it was essential that General Bird-
wood should be seen and consulted on the matter, as we
felt that if he were of the same opinion as his senior
officers there was no use thinking of any reduction in
the physical standard of men to be sent from Australia.
There being difficulty in getting permission for a
civilian to go to France, 1 went, on 15th May, to Aus-
tralian Army Corps Head-Quarters, then at Bertangle,
near Amiens, the D.M.S., A.1.F., accompanying me. I |
placed the matter before the G.0.G., A.1.F., and handed
to him the two attached letters, which had been drawn
up by Mr. Manifold and myself.
(Copy.)
F/FOG i 13th May, 1918.
To G.0.C., A.1.F.,
Australian Corps,
A.1.F., France.
Reference to men who on examination shortly after
arrival in England are found to be unfit for general
service, and who in the past have been returned to <
Australia. /
A number of such men, on return to Australia, are
apparently up to the medical standard for A.I.F. This
practice has had a very had effect on recruiting.
With the object of assisting the Empire to the utmost
and doing away with anything that may be a deterrent
to recruiting, it is desired that the wishes of the Hon-
orable the Minister for Defence, as expressed in cables,
may be given effect to, and that no man be returned to
Australia who may be of service either to Australia or
the Imperial authorities.
If is further desired that as many of these men as
possible may be used in France, even if they cannot be
used for general service.
(Sgd.)
K. H. FETHERSTON, S.G.,
Director-General, A.A.M.S.
(Copy.)
F/FOG. 13th May, 1918.
To G.0.C., A.1.F.,
Australian Corps,
A.1.F., France.
Some time ago the Minister for Defence forwarded a
communication to you, in which he stated that, owing
to the falling off in the number of recruits in Aus-
tralia, the time had arrived when the following alter-
native must he faced: —
1. Either reduced reinforcements being sent for-
ward, as sufficient numbers of men of the
former high standard of the A.I.F. were not to
be got in Australia;
2. Or slightly lowering the physical standard of
men to be accepted for the A.I.F.
Up to the time I left Australia, no answer had been
received to that letter by the Minister. One of the
principal reasons why I am being sent forward is to
'consult you and your officers on this matter. The Minis-
ter instructed me to state that he was most anxious that
Australia should keep up the five divisions now at the
Front, as he thought it would be a disgrace to Aus-
tralia if the number of divisions had to be reduced
owing to lack of reinforcements. At the same time, it is
desired that men who have been sent from Australia to
England should not be returned without being given a
chance to fight, if it is at all possible for them to be so
used. Many of the men who have been returned have
arrived in Australia in apparently a good physical
state, and these men go about stating that soldiers are
not wanted in England, as they had been sent hack and
were not allowed to fight.
Of course, we fully understand that the stories of
these men are probably untrue, but it does very great
harm to recruiting.


The Minister, before undertaking any amendment of
the physical standard, desired that your views should
be given as to which of the two alternatives you
favoured, namely:—
1. Slightly lowering the standard of medical fit-
ness; or
2. Of reduced numbers of reinforcements.
(Sgd.)
R. H. FETHERSTON, S.G.,
Director-General, A.A.M.S.
After considering the subject, and taking the opinion
of his officers, General Birdwood gave me the following
reply, which was at once taken to London, and discussed
with Mr. Manifold:—
1. Portions of the correspondence anent the
• matters raised by Surgeon-General Fetherston in
his two letters of 13th May have not, up to now,
been brought to my notice.
2. The points at issue appear to be—
(i) Whether or not the situation as regards
recruiting in Australia necessitates
some relaxation of previous medical
standards.
(ii) The disposal of men despatched from
Australia, and subsequently found to
be unfit for service in the field.
A. As regards (i), I am well aware of the diffi-
culties being experienced in Australia, and have
every desire to avoid the addition of any burden
by unreasonable military demand.
From the military point of view, the required
standard is that of physical fitness to withstand
the rigours of the present campaign. It is for
medical opinion to determine the technical and
professional basig, of “ physical fitness.” I wish,
however, to express the opinion that past experi-
ence proves incontestably that it is unwise to in-
clude in the enlistments for actual service in the
ranks men over the age of 41, and care should be
taken to insure that all men sent forward are of
sound physique. We must remember that the prac-
tically unfailing success attained by the Australian
troops must, to some extent at all events, be attri-
buted to the fact that the ranks have been full of
really fit men, who have not succumbed easily to
illness as the result of the hardships of service.
B. As regards (ii), which is a general statement,,
the subjects at issue may .be subdivided for deci-
sion as follows: •
(a) A lack of uniformity of standard and
opinion as to the physical fitness be-
tween the determining medical autho-
rities in England and Australia; and
(h) The advisability of finding employment
* for men despatched from Australia,
and boarded in England as unfit,
before actual employment in the
field.
The lack of uniformity mentioned in (A) is not
so much due to the lack of common and defined
bases as to the inevitable lack of unanimity in
human judgment as it affects medical authority
on the one hand, and the psychology of the soldier
on the other. It is probably medically correct to
say that a man under the exultation of enlistment
in Australia might easily be passed by the same
Medical Board which would reject him in England
when the exultation has worn off, and he had for
a period undergone strenuous military training.
These are every-day practical coziditions, and
while every effort must be made to remove their
effect, it is impossible to hope for a complete
harmonization.
The matter mentioned in (B) is one of policy,
and not wholly one for military decision. There
are points connected with it, however, upon which
I am bound to comment.
I am prepared to employ a certain number of
“B” class men in the A.1.F., but I have always
kept the number at a minimum. The “B ” class
man can rarely be said to earn his pay —for a
variety of causes. As regards employment in the
A.1.F., therefore, I do not wish the policy changed,
and those “ B ” class men for whom A.I.F. em-
ployment is found should, in the main, be men who
have previously served in the field.
If the Government so wish, I have no doubt that
the British Service could provide some form of
employment for “ B ” class men, probably by using
them in Area Employment Companies or Labour
Companies. As a form of Imperial co-operation,
the question is one for the Government, but I
would point out, firstly, by placing such men in the
“ soft ” jobs an injustice is done, and a bad ex-
ample set to the men serving in the field, and that,
secondly, it would appear to be more profitable to
send competent Australian working men for labour
duties, the cost being the same. Moreover, the
effect on the A.I.F. of a policy admitting of pro-
miscuous enlistment in Australia and easy transfer
to a labour unit in England cannot fail to be
detrimental.
/
(Sgd.)
W. R. BIRDWOOD, General.
(Copies to D.M.S., A.1.F,, and Surgeon-General
Fetherston.)
From, this letter it was seen that no reduction in
physique of the Australians would be acceptable to the
authorities overseas, and that, though they did not say
so, they preferred reduced numbers to getting men with
poor physique. A cable was sent to Defence on this
subject, but, unfortunately, an error was made in trans-
mission by the clerks and officials at Australia House,
and a draft was cabled. This mistake was discovered
a week later, when Mr. Manifold and I returned from
Salisbury, and, having completed our inspection,
handed in the proper cable for despatch. It was then
considered too late to alter or correct the cable, and as
the draft sent conveyed our recommendation on the sub-
ject (but was badly and crudely drafted, containing
some matter rather irrelevant), no further action was
taken. That cable conveyed to Defence the wishes of
the G.0.C., A.1.F., and his staff. The reply received
was as expected by Mr. Manifold and myself, and con-
firmed our views that it was no use proceeding further
in the matter of reducing the standard for A.1.F., and
at the same time settled the point as to whether any
Australians were to be lent to the Imperial Govern-
ment ; in other words, that no “ B ” or “ C ” class men
were to be used except by the Australian authorities.
These points being settled, it at once cleared up the
subject, and left nothing to be done but for me, as
Director-General, A.A.M.S., to study the question of
physical standard as applied by the Imperial authori-
ties, so that I could fully report on my arrival in Aus*
tralia. To this I devoted a considerable amount of
time, and the subject will be dealt with later in this
report.
On the eve of my final departure from England, a
further cable was received from Defence, much delayed
in being passed to me, requesting that a conference
should be held in London to settle the standard for
A.I.F. At the conference it was desired representa-
tives from the D.G.M.S., War Office, and from the
A.1.F., should be present with the Hon. Mr. Manifold
and myself. lat once endeavoured to get into com-
munication with Mr. Manifold, but failed to meet him.
Knowing the hopelessness of endeavouring to adopt a


standard (the Imperial being so much below the Aus-
tralian), I felt sure that no good would come of any
such meeting, and therefore did not postpone my de-
parture, but proceeded to the G.0.C., A.1.F., and dis-
cussed the cable with him. He agreed with me that
the best thing to be done under the circumstances was
for the D.M.S., A.1.F., to go to Australia, and explain
the position to the Minister personally from the point
of view of the A.I.F. officials, and to receive instruc-
tions in Australia for his future guidance. He drafted
a cable to that effect whilst I was present.
The question of classification of troops on arrival
was being taken up as the attached paper (Confidential
Circular, Memo., Ho. 255, of 11th July, 1918, by the
D.A. and Q.M.G., A.I.F. Depots) will show, but had
not been finalized. I was assured that the matter
would be dealt with, so contented myself with drawing
the attention of the A.I.F. authorities to it before my
departure.
Great Britain,
Differences in Interpretation of Standards hy Medical
Examiners in Australia and Overseas.
The percentage considered unfit on arrival to proceed
to France had decreased, and for the year 1918 was
stated to be 1.7 per cent.
Considering the great objection the A.I.F. authorities
have to men over 41 years of age, this is not a very high
percentage, and is not nearly as high as that of the
British troops sent to India for training, these being the
only British troops under circumstances comparable to
the Australians at Salisbury. In India, a considerable
number have to be rejected before the regiments or
drafts who have completed their training proceed to
the Front.
The system of classifying at Salisbury ' by A.I.F.
authorities has also caused large numbers of doubtful
men to be returned, and accounts for the number of men
who arrive in Australia apparently quite fit for “ A ”
class.
It will be noted that “ B2b ” class men are returned to
Australia. These are men temporarily unfit for general
service for more than six months, and unfit for home
service. This class comprises probably about one-fifth
to one-fourth of the total number of men returned from
'Weymouth. It is admitted that these men may even-
tually be fit for general service, but they cannot be kept
in the depots in England conveniently—they do not feel
themselves fit for general service. The moral and physi-
cal effect of being suspicious that they may be sent over-
seas for service again seems to retard their recovery.
They do not try to get well. As soon as they are boarded
for Australia they begin to improve, and from experi-
ence one knows that many of these men are almost fit
for general service by the time that they arrive in Aus-
tralia, or very soon afterwards. These men comprise a
class that cause comments as to why they have been sent
back to Australia. In Australia the routine has been
that these men are all discharged if they wish to be. It
has been claimed that to force these men to return to
England if they objected to going would damage recruit-
ing, and after discharge, probably the best of this class
—those who really want to carry on as soldiers—do re-
enlist. As about 62,000 men have been returned to Aus-
tralia from all causes, if this estimate (one-fifth to one-
fourth) of the number of B2b class returned be correct,
it will be seen that it comprises a large body of men
potentially available for further service who have been
discharged from the A.I.F.
Several points stand out which require special notice.
In one country men are passed with ailments which in
other countries would be considered a cause of rejec-
tion. I particularly allude to many minor conditions
such as hernia, slight degree of flat feet, dental caries,
and loss of teeth. These, in America, France, Italy, and
Greece are not causes of rejection, whilst they are in
Australia, in Canada, and, to a much lesser extent, in
England.
Another point was the variation in work by different
medical men. It is everywhere the same, the personal
equation coming in. In England I have seen various
Boards look at one class of abnormal or pathological
conditions in a totally different light, one rejecting and
another passing as fit. As an example of this, I would
draw attention to the report of the A.D.M.S., Salisbury,
on this subject, viz.:—
“ Thus, among 42,360 reinforcements, there have been
reported from France as medically unfit .159 soldiers,
as dentally unfit 45 soldiers, and as requiring re-inocula-
tion 46 soldiers. ,
■ “ Some of the medically unfit were suffering from
acute conditions such as gonorrhoea, measles, injuries to
face and ankles, meningitis, bronchitis, &c., which were
non-existent when they left England. The remainder
were suffering from more chronic disabilities, which,
however, had stood the test of training in England, and
about these, therefore, there was room for a legitimate
difference of medical opinion.
“ Considering the number of reinforcements that have
been sent to France', the numbers reported as unfit have
been exceedingly small.
“ The results, therefore, of the work of the Medical
Service in connexion with overseas drafts have been
very good.”
Which shows that men passed at Salisbury and sent
forthwith to France are sometimes on arrival reported
as unfit. I do not allude to the men who have con-
tracted fresh diseases, such as venereal disease, after
being passed, but to those (a small number) in respect
to whom there is a difference of opinion amongst medi-
cal examiners. Many conditions help to make this more
manifest, one being the individual characteristic of the
soldier himself, who will make more of certain ailments
or weaknesses, the nearer he approaches to the Front.
Some men, unfortunately, are not as courageous in
England as in Australia, and still less so in France.
This point is brought out by General Birdwood, G.0.C.,
A.1.F., in his letter on this subject of lowering the phy-
sical standard.
Medical Officers interviewed by me who were respon-
sible for boarding or for deciding as to fitness to serve
or to return to Australia informed me that—
(l) There were often differences of opinion as to
men being returned to Australia, and some
medical officers considered some were re-
turned who should have been sent to the
Front.
(2) Also some men are returned in*whom no disease
could be found, and no reason was manifest
from a medical point of view but that the
men would not fight, and persistently com-
plained of some ailment, but showed no phy-
sical signs of disease or infirmity.
When in Egypt I found that the percentage of men
who arrived from Australia considered, unfit to serve
was much lower than in England. As there is no dif-
ference whatever in the medical examination, or in the
class of men sent to the two places, this difference can-
not be accounted for in any way but by the different
interpretation of standard, and of the authorities in
Egypt allowing the men to try and make good.
The only men returned from Egypt are those who
manifestly should not have been enlisted, and in regard
to whom there is no doubt that either negligence was
shown or impersonation has taken place.


Should Australia send overseas men who are not fit for
the actual fighting line?
Canada has sent large numbers of such men who have
been used and are rendering valuable service in various
camps, or lines of communication, or at the Base.
Australia does not supply the units behind the front
lines in proportion to her other troops. In regard to
hospitals alone, Australia has not supplied anything
like her proper share in any war zone. Australia has
not sent many such men, and the A.I.F. authorities did
not want them, the principal reason being that, consider-
ing the high rates paid to Australians, the men do not
perform sufficient .work to earn their pay. This caused
a great difficulty in recruiting examinations in Aus-
tralia, as there was no employment for men sent over-
seas who are later considered unsuitable for fighting,
also, for this reason, there were few positions for men
worn by service.
There w r ere nearly always vacancies in England and
France for men in “B ” and “C” classes, if good
clerks, or those with a knowledge of bookkeeping, but
there were few places for others, who were therefore re-
turned to Australia.
From the remarks made regarding the interpretation
ol standards as laid down in France and Italy, it is
manifest that great latitude must be allowed to medical
examiners, and that any printed instructions cannot
always be applicable.
In England it was not possible to obtain the latest
standard for use in Australia, as that laid down was
continually being amended. Alterations are published
in Army Council Instructions, or by.simple memoranda.
The former are available in Australia, but the latter
are not.
The examination for the Royal Air Force w r as a very
good example of this. Acting under Army Council in-
structions received shortly-before I left Australia, I
issued orders relative to the special testing of air candi-
dates in colour vision. On arrival in England I found
that by the time the information had been received in
Australia, the instruction had been withdrawn, and a
very much easier and simpler test substituted.
It is the same for general recruiting, so no dependence
can be placed upon the printed standards, and Australia
must continue to work on her own standard, which is
undoubtedly much higher than that of the British Army.
With the object of ascertaining the physical
standard for the Imperial Army, and at the same
time learning any new methods of vvork and becom-
ing acquainted with details as now carried out in
England, I ascertained .from the D.G.A.M.S., War
Office, all the information I could, which, when epi-
tomized, may be said to be—
(1) That the R.A.M.C. officers now do not re-
cruit examinations whatever, all being carried out
by the officers of the Department of National
Services.
(2) That the R.A.M.C. are not satisfied, and
state that a great many men are wrongly passed to
the Army for training,
(3) There is a difficulty in promptly getting rid
of unfit men so passed.
I interviewed Sir Chas. Bedford, the Director of
Recruit Examination, was most cordially received, and
given every opportunity to see anything I wished.
With the Director I visited several depots, and saw
the men being examined and classed. On several other
occasions I went to the depots, until I felt that I was
conversant with the work and with their ideas. At
one depot, men up to 48 were being examined, and !
saw a large number passed and classed as fit for active
service in the firing line. At another depot, medical
men up to 56 years of age were being examined under
C. 2941.—4
a special standard of fitness to do field, base, or home
service. The whole of the medical examination is
carried out by civilian medical officers. Can-
didates are seen by one or two medical examiners, and
the papers are then passed to the Chairman of the
Board, who classifies the men.
Specialists in eye and ear diseases are available at
each depot, but only doubtful cases are referred to them.
Unless men are very bad indeed, and showed marked
signs of disease, they were not exempted, but classified
into Classes 1,2, and 3. Classes 2 and 3 have many sub-
divisions, and correspond, more or less, to the B and
C classifications used by the Army. The general
physique of the men coming up was very poor. Com-
pared with the Australians, Americans, or Canadians,
the inferiority of the British was very marked, while
men were passed as fit for active service who would not
have been taken for home service in Australia.
I was soon satisfied that practically all men, large
or small, who did not show marked signs of disease or
deformity were passed for the British Army. Thus
very small, light men, or boys with no strength or
stamina, and many men with a slight degree of flat
foot were passed for Class 1 (fighting line), whilst
others with a serious degree, of feet deformities were
placed in Class 2. Heart disease was not necessarily a
cause for rejection, whilst dental fitness or unfitness
was given little, and, in many cases, no consideration
at all. Similarly deafness of a lesser degree, or his-
tory of old ear disease was hardly taken any notice of.
From the very outset of my visit to the Recruiting
Depot it was manifest that the interpretation of stan-
dard by the Imperial authorities was very low, and, in
my opinion, the examination was often superficial, and
could not be compared with the work in Canada and
Australia.
* Results as seen in the Army.
At various times I have seen large numbers of Im-
perial soldiers, and everywhere took particular interest
in their physique. I have seen English soldiers in
France, at and near the Front, and have crossed the
Channel on several occasions with drafts for the
Front. I have seen them in Italy, in Greece, in Pales-
tine, and in India. When going to Greece, to Egypt,
and to India I travelled on transports carrying large
numbers of British soldiers proceeding on active ser-
vice. While men of some regiments are of good
physique and well built, the majority contain very in-
ferior specimens of men from a physical stand-point,
many being small, light, undersized, or narrow chested.
Whilst most are young, many being quite boys, there
were always old, grey-haired men amongst them. The
average physical development of British in Greece was
by far the best of any I saw, and large numbers of good
men were to be seen there. This was accounted for
by the fact that the majority of the regiments in Greece
contained many men who had enlisted in 1914 and
early in 1915, had served in France for a short period,
and were then drafted to Greece. Whilst they looked
big, strong men, they were nearly all suffering from
malaria, and not fit for any strenuous work. I saw
similar men in India. I crossed the Mediterranean
with some regiments of Royal Fusiliers proceeding to
Palestine. These were new regiments, and almost all
the men were of very poor physique. Many of the
regiments being trained in India for service in Meso-
potamia and Palestine contained small, weak, and a
very poor type of men.
Work of Imperial Boards.
The system in all the depots is much the same.
The men are notified to attend before a Board on a
certain date, and they bring up their calling-up card
with them. They have signed this when they receive


it, and, after examination, are required to sign then-
grade card, and the signatures on the two are compared.
This is the only means of detecting impersonation that
exists, and even if the man does not bring his calling-
up card with him, he has to be examined by the Board
and graded, so it is quite easy to impersonate.
There are two forms of Medical Boards, one con-
sisting of chairman and four members. Here each
member does a part of the examination —one takes the
limbs, another the measurements and testing eyesight,
&c., another the chest, &c. &c., and the chairman finally
sees the man before he is graded. This method is still
followed, and Sir Charles Bedford said it was satisfac-
tory, but very slow—average, 90 per day examined by
Board.
The other Board consists of the chairman and two
members, and one medical man does the whole examina-
tion, and the chairman sees the man, and signs his
grading card.
The medical men on the Board are mostly general
practitioners, who receive £1 Is. for each session, morn-
ing and afternoon, i.e., about three to three and a half
hours’ work. Preference is given in appointing mem-
bers of Boards to men who have been on active service,
but they act as civilians. The chairman of the Board
must be a well-known, competent medical man, specially
chosen by the Commissioner, and he is a whole-time
official, and receives from £660 to £BOO per year. They
are mostly senior and elderly practitioners.
These Boards are entirely civil Boards, and the grad-
ing is into four classes: — •
1. “ A ” fit for general service.
2. “ B ” fit for home service.
3. “ C ” fit for clerical or other duty, digging, &c.
4. “ D ” rejection.
Once this Board has examined a man, their responsi-
bility ceases, and he is handed over to the military
authorities.
The system of examination was the same at the dif-
ferent depots I visited, namely, Conduit-street, Hollo-
way, and at Bishopsgate-street. I also visited the Royal
College of Physicians, where medical men who have
been called up to the age of 56 are examined. A man,
after examination, is allowed to appeal within 25 days;
if he does appeal, he is examined by another Board. If
not satisfied he can go before the Court, and the Court
can send him to a Specialists’ Board, where decision is
final. There is only one such Board for the London
area. The class of men I saw were of very poor
physique generally, especially at Conduit-street, where
all examinees were men over 45. Sir Charles Bedford
said that in a mining area generally one man was
graded class “ A ” to every two men examined, but in
an industrial area like London one man was graded
“A ” out of every three examined. The system of ex-
amination as I saw it was not as thorough as is carried
out by Recruiting Boards in Australia.
Canada.
In Canada, three classes are dealt with, viz.:—
(1) Conscript.
(2) Volunteers.
(3) Recruits from U.S.A. enlisted by the
British Recruiting Mission in various
parts of America.
I .
Conscripts comprise two very distinct classes, viz.;—
(1) The true Canadian, principally of British
birth or descent; and
(2) The recruits from Quebec Province, known
as French-Canadians. Whilst the former
were willing recruits, the latter were prac-
tically all antagonistic to serving, many
being disloyal. These latter gave very
great trouble to recruiting oificers, and as
many as 90 per cent, appealed when
passed as fit.
Volunteers were married men and men over age for
compulsion. For convenience of handling the British
subjects in U.S.A. are passed to Canada, and go into
the Canadian Forces, thus appreciably swelling the
totals for Canada. Over 20,000 such men had been
accepted up to the time of my visit. J I
The Canadian authorities have also had to deal with
the question of medical fitness, which formed the sub-
ject of my inquiry. They had had many men returned
from Europe as medically unfit, and who had done no
fighting. They experienced great difficulty in handling
the question. From consumption alone large numbers
had been returned, whilst others had been discovered in
camps of training, prior to embarkation. Added to
this, the difficulties in regard to the medical examina-
tion of men in Quebec caused great trouble. In Quebec
the French-Oanadian medical men regularly differed
from the Canadian Army Medical Corps officers, and
when appeals were made to Courts, the most divergent
medical opinions were given on oath.
To combat this, a system of examination by Medical
Boards was in force.
An increased number of men were made available for
service under conscription, the number of unfit men
being sent to Europe has been considerably reduced,
but had not entirely ceased.
Under conscription, more men being available, the
doubtful ones could be rejected or placed in other
classes for duty other than in the firing line. (Canada
has sent large numbers of troops for non-fighting corps,
such as forestry and railway units.)
I saw men being examined at several depots, both in
Montreal (Quebec Province) and at Toronto, and saw
the classification made, whilst I inspected a great many
recruits in camps or barracks, special parades being
held on several occasions for me.
I have no hesitation in saying that many men who in
Canada are passed as fit for the fighting line would in
Australia be classed as doubtful, and some would not
be accepted, or, if accepted, would be returned as unfit
by the A.I.F. authorities at Salisbury.
In regard to the men drawn and sent from the U.S.A.
by the British Recruiting Mission, these were the
poorest recruits I had seen, and the Canadian
authorities had to reject a considerable proportion of
them. 1 saw 500 of these men leaving for the port of
embarkation, and at least 20 per cent, of them would
not have been accepted in Australia for the A.I.F.
To epitomize. The medical examination in Canada
is good, searching, and has been greatly improved since'
the adoption of conscription. Some men of poorer
physique are accepted who would be considered unfit
for the A.I.F. by the A.I.F. authorities in England,
America.
At the various camps visited in the United States of
America I arranged to have the smaller and poorer type
of soldiers brought before me. They were stripped, so
that I might see their physical development. This
afforded me opportunities of studying the physique of
the poorer type of recruits, and the class which was in
dispute.
To understand the question from an American point
of view it is necessary to go into the history of recruit-
ing since the United States of America entered the war.
Prior to their coming into the war the standard for the


American Army as regards height was 5 ft. 4 in. This
was adopted as the standard for active service, as were
the other regulations for permanent forces. After one
day’s work by the medical examiners it was found that
very large number of men, particularly those of foreign
birth, whilst otherwise fit, were being rejected for
height, and the mininfum height standard was at once
reduced to 5 ft. and 5 ft. 1 in.
Another point brought out early in the examinations
was the question as to whether men with minor ailments
and deformities were to be rejected as unfit or not. The
United States of America authorities decided this by
passing into the Forces all men with minor ailments
which could be cured, such as hernia, piles, varicose
veins, and deformed toes. They were sent into hos-
pitals in camps, and compelled to undergo surgical
treatment. Refusal to undergo operation was met with
severe punishment and imprisonment. At all camp
hospitals there were large numbers of men undergoing
treatment to fit them for service. Many others with
doubtful ailments were passed and taken into camp
hospitals for diagnosis and decision. The medical ex-
amination in other respects had been good in most
centres, but admittedly varied as to the interpretation
of the standard.
Broadly speaking, American recruits are divided into
two classes, each of these classes being again subdivided
into two others. There are conscripts and volunteers,
the latter being men not liable to conscription, and
drawn principally from the original volunteer regi-
ments, or National Guards, as they are called. The
two classes are placed in separate camps, and kept in
separate divisions. The conscripts comprise men under
compulsion, between the ages of 21 and 31, and are
known as the National Army. They, of course, ex-
ceed the volunteers in numbers, but in some classes, as
that of officers of the medical service, the volunteers are
in the majority.
Both volunteers and conscripts, but particularly the
latter, are comprised of three very different types, viz.,
the American negro, the Anglo-Saxons, or men of
Anglo-Saxon descent (not pure-blooded),
and the men of the darker European races, either born
in America or descended from immigrants to America
from such countries as border on the Mediterranean—
Greeks, Syrians, Armenians, Italians, Spaniards, and
Portuguese, as well as many from Russia, and men of
Jewish extraction. Many of these men are of poor
physique, and of poor fighting quality. It is known to
the United States authorities, and presented a problem
which they had not finally dealt with at the time of my
visit. Some regiments contained a large percentage
of these men, it depended upon the districts from
which they were drawn, the Eastern States and large
cities having far more than were to be found in corps
from the south, west, or central portions of the United
States of America. As an example of the mixture of
races in the American Army, it may be mentioned that
the company to which I was attached on the transport
crossing the Atlantic consisted of 232 men, born in
thirteen different countries (England, Scotland, and*
Ireland being reckoned as three countries), whilst only
eleven were American born (officers excepted). Many
of the men had been only a few years in the United
States of America, from five years up, some could not
speak English, and a large proportion could not sus-
tain a conversation in English or understand more
than single words.
The men of Anglo-Saxon descent and those descended
from northern races in Europe are of very fine phy-
sique v and leave nothing to be desired. They are as
good as any soldiers I have seen, and can be compared
in physique to the men of the Ist Australian Division.
These men form the greater part of the United States
of America Army, and practically the whole of their
officers belong to this class, but the other class of men
of darker complexion, whilst containing many well
built and well-proportioned men, also contained some
email men of inferior physique, who would be classed
as doubtful in Australia at the present time. Special
regiments of men of these types had been raised for
service in the Army of Great Britain to undertake
(special duty. They were men of very poor physique,
and below the A.I.F. standard.
The system of operation for minor ailments appeared
to work well in the United States of America, but whe-
ther the surgical work will stand the strain of war
remains to be proved.
American negro troops were seen by me; some had
been sent oversea, but not many. They were fairly
well developed men, but not up to the physical standard
of the men of Anglo-Saxon descent.
Belgium.
The Belgians seen were recruits being trained,
soldiers being made fit after wounds or sickness, and
men in hospitals.
Speaking generally, the Belgian is a short, rather
thick-set man of heavy or slow type, neither smart
looking or well set up from a military point of view,
but apparently strong,
A small number of recruits are still available to
reinforce their army, being men obtained from a few
escapees and from the boys driven out of Belgium in
the early days of the war who are now arriving at
military age. I did not see the medical examination
of their recruits being carried out.
France.
I called upon the Chief of the French Medical Ser-
vices at General Head-Quarters, Paris, and discussed
with him and his respopsible officers the question of
the standard of medical fitness. There is a fixed
standard laid down, but, as in the Italian Army, very
little notice is taken of it, this standard being used
merely as a guide to examiners, the authorities in both
countries stating that pay more attention to the
general state of recruits, and consider the results of
examination collectively. In both countries many men
with hernia are serving in the front lines.
At the time of my visit to France no medical ex-
aminations were being held, therefore I did not see the
actual work of recruit examination, but I was afforded
every opportunity of seeing large numbers of soldiers
in all parts, from the front to the rear.
I was surprised beyond measure to see the very fine
physique of the men of the French Army, all reports I
had heard and all previous ideas which I had formed
being completely upset.
The French soldiers are strong, sturdy, well built
men, of good age and height. It was very rare to see
undersized men, and I hardly saw any of poor physique.
Even the young men and new recruits are strong and
well built. Many of the men are older than those
found in other armies, whilst the men working at
bases, or on lines of communication are nearly all grey-
haired, but still sturdy and active.
I had many opportunities of judging the physique
of the French soldiers, not only seeing them in the
north, south, east, and west of France, but also in Italy,
Switzerland, Greece, and Palestine, as well as travelling
on transports with large numbers of them. Every-
where was the same fine physique noticeable, and it was
a common subject of remark and discussion by all
British officers.


Italy.
To raise their armies, the Italian authorities have
not had to draw to the same extent as the French upon
the population, and there are more men of military
age in plain clothes there than in France. Knowing
this, it was to be expected that the Italian soldiers
would be of good physique. I saw them in the Alpine
zone of war, and in the plains before Venice, as well
as in many large cities. The Alpine troops and troops
from the north of Italy are all fine men, of good stature
and physique. The men from some parts of the south
of Italy are of lighter build than the northerners, but
they are physically good. Very few small soldiers
were noticed, and none in the Alpine regiments.
Ko recruit examinations were in progress. In Rome
I interviewed the various members of the staff of the
Chief of Medicine of the Italian Army, and went fully
into the subject. Apparently the Italian printed
standard (copy attached) is low, but as explained
previously, they take little or no notice of any single
point, but consider the results of examination of each
recruit as a whole before deciding to pass or reject.
That the Italian Army is, from a physical stand-
point, a good Army cannot be denied, the men being
well up to, or above the average height and developed in
proportion, whilst the standard for Alpine troops is ex-
ceptionally high, they being picked troops, with a spe-
cially large chest development, which is necessary to
stand the rarified air at high altitudes.
SECTION 14.—A.1.F. AERODROMES AND MEDICAL
EXAMINATION FOR ROYAL AIR FORCE.
The Training School in aerial work for the Austra-
lian Flying Corps is situated on an elevated plateau
known as Minchinhampton and Leighton, some few'
miles from Stroud, in Gloucestershire.
Over 100 cadets were in training. The camp was in
a state of transition from the regular canvas
aerodromes, as commonly seen in England and France,
to permanent ones being built of reinforced concrete,
with a nice building for the staff and good quarters
for students (cadets).
For the personnel, everything was comfortable,
whilst the sheds for mechanics and for storage of planes
will, when finished, be very fine.
I also visited the aerodromes of the A.I.F. Flying
Corps in Palestine, near Ludd. They were of the usual
type of field aerdromes, with the ordinary tentage
and other accommodation in camps on service. The
esprit de corps, as shown by this service in Egypt and
by cadets in England, was very fine.
Medical Examination for Air Corps.— As mentioned
in another part of this report, the medical examination
for the Air Force is now of a very special character,
and not by any means confined to the usual physical
tests.
Consequent upon the deaths of many air pilots from
causes which were remediable or preventable, such as
fainting or going to sleep at certain heights, or smash-
ing on landing, various experiments were being made
in England with the object of weeding out men not
likely to be able to pilot flying machines with safety.
The physical standard was not in print, but I was
given a proof copy, which has been filed at Head-
Quarters. I interviewed the D.M.S., Royal Air Force,
and arranged that all alterations and reports of new
work should be sent to Australia as early as possible,
so that we may endeavour to keep abreast of the times ;
whilst, on the other hand, I promised to send all Aus-
tralian papers to him.
Medical Examination, R.A.F.— The type of examina-
tion of the R.A. Force is of a new and novel character,
being admittedly in an experimental stage, and many
of the results are not understood. Some, at least, of
the deductions are already disputed and not accepted
by all experts in air "work.
I personally attended at the depots on several occa-
sions, saw the work being done and the various experi-
mental tests carried out. It was very noticeable that
the experimenters would rarely express a decided
opinion on the value of some of the tests. The most
that can be said is that a very earnest endeavour is
being made to 'ascertain if any system of examination
or tests will diminish the mortality amongst Flying
Corps officers from causes which may be preventable,
and not due tq enemy action or to mechanical defects.
Attached is a report on visits to depots.
Report on Visit to Royal Air Force, Mount Vernon
Hospital, and Air Board Examination Rooms at
Arkwright-road, Hampstead.
The object of this visit was to see the methods of
examination used by the Medical Services of the Royal
Air Services. ‘ 1 • :
At Mount Vernon Hospital I saw the method of test-
ing a candidate for his fitness to stand high altitude.
Unless a candidate can stand the rarefaction of oxygen
that corresponds to a height of 6,000 to 7,000 feet, he
is not accepted, except for such service as a ferry
pilot, i.e., for taking machines over to France.
One reckons on the ordinary amount of oxygen in
the air as about 14-16 per cent. It is impossible to
stand an atmosphere where the amount is less than
1 per cent, oxygen, at any rate for any time. The
final test for an airman is that he can fly at a height of
20,000 feet. It is known what the rarefaction of
oxygen is in the air at different heights, and it is on
this fact that their tests are based, and the candidate
is tested with an apparatus in order to see his degree
of cyanosis—eyesight and general mental condition as
the amount of oxygen is gradually reduced. In actual
practice, this reduction is often very rapid, as a man
may rise to 16,000 feet in the,course of a few minutes.
The apparatus used is like a gas mask. To this is
attached a bag which contains the normal amount of
oxygen that is in the 'atmosphere. Above this bag is
a cylinder, which contains a chemical which absorbs
carbon dioxide in definite quantities. The candidate’s
nostrils ere blocked, and the apparatus is fixed on, and
he breathes into and through this apparatus. As he
breathes, he gradually uses up the oxygen in the bag,
and, at the same time, the carbon dioxide he breathes
out is absorbed. A careful record of the time is taken,
and also of his general condition (especially the degree
of cyanosis) of his pulse, and the occurrence of any
headache, vertigo, dimness of vision, &c. This is ascer-
tained by asking him questions and getting him to
read types, &c. His mental condition is also gauged
in the same way. When the candidate states he cannot
stand any more, is getting blue, or vision is failing,
or his mental faculties are being dulled, the mask is
removed, 'and the time taken. A sample of the air in
the bag is then taken and analyzed, in order to test
the proportion of oxygen left in it; and by knowing
this and the rarefaction of the atmosphere at a given
height is is possibly to estimate to what height the
candidate would be able to fly. I saw the test applied
to 'officer candidates. This is known as the test for
altitude.
Other tests were with a spirometer to estimate the
capacity of the lungs, blowing into a V-shaped tube
filled with mercury to estimate the pressure of expira-


tion, also testing the time which the candidate is able
to hold his breath after one full expiration and full
inspiration, and noting, at the same time, the 'accelera-
tion or otherwise of his pulse rate —the amount of
suffusion of his face, headache, &c., and asking the
candidate afterwards why he gave up. All these tests
have been worked out, and it is known how long a
healthy man should hold his breath—the normal capa-
city of his lungs with a spirometer, and the power of
expiration against the pressure of a mercury column,
both as regards the actual pressure to raise the column
of mercury, and also if the power of keeping the
column of mercury raised to a known height for a
definite length of time.
At Arkwright-road, the ordinary medical examina-
tion of the candidate is carried out. This comprises
the ordinary military medical examination as regards
heart, lungs, and general physical soundness.
Eyesight test is 6-12 for better and 6-24 for worse
eye, both of which must be capable of correction to
6-9 with glasses. There are special tests for nose,
throat, and ears, and especially power of equilibration.
There were many other novel and interesting methods
used in the medical examination of recruits.
SECTION 15.—FOOD SHORTAGE AND ITS EFFECT
ON AUSTRALIANS.
The food shortage in England had resulted in the
nation being placed on a fixed scale of rations for cer-
tain articles of food. The ration scale for soldiers was
reduced, both in France and in England, but the quan-
tity supplied Was greater than that alloAved to civilians,
and was ample to meet all reasonable requirements.
For sick soldiers a further reduction was made, and
the ration scale adopted was, in my opinion, a very
small and scanty one. Its adoption in the A.I.F. hos-
pitals was not compulsory, but had been carried out,
and resulted in the supply of food being less than the
men from Australia might reasonably expect to receive.
Copy of the scale is attached (A.C. Instruction No. 159
of 1918).
Many of the patients were in perfect general health,
yet they were given much less food and smaller rations
than was supplied to the prisoners in both “ A ” and
“ 0 ” classes at Lewes gaol.
Whilst the ration was sufficient to support the body
in health, it did not satisfy all our men, and it would
not have been possible to have kept them from open
complaint had it not been for gifts received from the
Red Cross Association, who, as far as lay in its power,
supplemented the ration. In addition, small quantities
of food could be purchased at most of the canteens at
the auxiliary hospitals, but even here the amount each
man could buy was limited to 2 oz. of cake, bread, or
such like food, daily.
I spoke to many men (except really sick men unable
to eat their food) and asked them if the rations satisfied
their appetites. They stated they would like more.
Some said they were often hungry after meals, but all
admitted they were well.
I did not think the Australian sick were being given
the food they were entitled to, and made the subject a
matter for report and recommendation to the G.0.C.,
A.I.F.
It is interesting to know that the New Zealand
authorities refused to adopt thd stinted diet scale in
their hospitals, and gave their men a ration which, in
the case of some articles, such as meat, preserves, and
fat (or butter), was, at least, double that allowed for
Australians. New Zealand regularly sends large quan-
tities of food from New Zealand to supplement the
rations of men in hospitals.
I strongly urge that such articles of food as flour,
butter, sugar, preserves, jam, currants, raisins, and
dried fruits, should be regularly sent from Australia
as extras for our sick men in Australian institutions.
As regards shipping space from Australia, I inquired
how the New Zealand authorities managed, and found
that they simply insisted upon having space, and took
no refusal, with the result that they obtained all they
wanted. Six hundred or 700 tons per annum would be
all that would be required for Australians, and would
make a great difference to the pleasure and comfort
of our invalids.
9th July, 1918.
Memorandum to General Officer Commanding,
Australian Imperial Force,
France.
Subject: Food in Australian Hospitals and
Convalescent Depots in England.
In visiting various Australian military hospitals in
England, I have everywhere been struck with the
meagreness of the diet scale allowed to patients, and
particularly for patients who are convalescent. While
this ration may be, and is, sufficient to keep men in
health, and to supply their vital needs, it is, at least,
a short diet. To Australians, who are used to large
meals and plenty of food, it is irksome to some men. I
have repeatedly met men in hospital who stated they
would like more food or greater variety, particularly at
the evening meal, while others purchase something at
the canteens in the evening. I am aware that the hos-
pitals are dieted on an Army Council ration, just as
most other hospitals in England, but not all, for I have
been told by Australian invalids on several occasions
that the food was not as much as they had had in
some other British hospital, which they named, and
personally I know that the scale of food given in New
Zealand hospitals and homes is much more liberal than
in similar Australian institutions.
There is an unlimited supply of food in Australia,
and I consider that arrangements should be made to
have extra food sent from Australia, or N that extra
rations should be drawn from the Imperial authorities,
such as meat. I understand that both these methods
are followed by New Zealand.
On my return to Australia I will recommend that
such foods as fruits, jam, butter, sugar, and flour should
be sent for use in Australian hospitals.
I am well >aware that much extra food is supplied
by the Red Cross Association. That is by w<ay of
luxuries or special extras, and realize that, were it not
for this supply, many patients would undoubtedly
suffer, and m'any complaints would be made, but my
remarks are with reference to what I consider essentials,
and not in any way luxuries.
(Signed)
R. H. FETHERSTON, D.G.M.S.,
* Australia.
SECTION 16.—PRISONERS OF WAR.
Switzerland. —l passed from France to Switzerland
on the 28th July, 1918. At the date of my visit, there
were 60 interned Australians in Switzerland. I met
nearly all of them, and obtained reports on those whom


I could not see. Captain Mills, the senior interned
Australian officer, met me at Geneva, and accompanied
me on my visits. He holds a position on the staff of the
British Embassy at Berne.
Distribution of Prisoners.—The British and French
are concentrated in the western portion of Switzerland,
around Geneva and Montreux, whilst the Germans are
concentrated in the eastern portion. All nationalities
were to be met at Berne, whilst British, French, and
German soldiers were living at the same hotels.
Internees wear the uniform of their corps.
At Berne, two Australians were seen —one officer and
one man.
At Interlaken, twenty non-commissioned officers and
men were interviewed. At Thurigen, and at a farm
about 3 miles from Interlaken, others were visited.
At Chateau D’Oex, there were fourteen Australians —
non-commissioned officers and men; and at Montreux
there were three officers.
All the internees in Switzerland have been released
from German internment camps as being unfit for fur-
ther military service. They had nearly all been
prisoners in Germany for eighteen months or more.
The great majority, in spite of this, seemed fit and well.
They were fairly happy, and, with two exceptions,
looked well. They were living in hotels and boarding-
houses. Five francs per day is paid for each man,
and 7 francs per day for each officer. They are allowed
to draw pay at the rate of £2 10s. per month per man.
Officers are permitted to draw on their pay-books from
any bank in Switzerland whatever is due to them.
Bread, fat, milk, cheese, &c., are rationed in Switzer-
land, and even for the civilian population there is a
shortage, but the amount allowed is sufficient to main-
tain health.
It is not permissible,to send food parcels to Holland
or Switzerland, on account of the objections by the Go-
vernments of these countries, who hold that prisoners
must fare as their own residents do.
The rate of exchange in Switzerland is very much
against England or France. At the time of my visit,
only 187 pence (cents) were given for each sovereign
or for each £1 cashed. This had been a very great
cause of complaint by the internees, who practically
only received 16s. 6d. in the £l. This has now been
altered, and men receive full pay in Swiss money.
Many feel the want of occupation very much, and it
is difficult to obtain employment. Some re-educational
schools are established, and others are proposed. One
of the last is the school of motor-drivers and mechanics,
at Yevey, conducted by an interned officer, and is sup-
ported by the friends of the Autocar Journal.
At Yevey, I met the Senior Swiss Medical Officer in
charge of British interned in Switzerland, and fully
discussed with him the question of release of more Aus-
tralians.
The Australian Red Cross Society in London has a
special branch for dealing with prisoners of war, and
a very keen and enthusiastic body of workers, under
the direction of Colonel Murdock. The Red Cross
Commission was doing very fine work in sending food
to Australians in Germany, and taking special charge of
repatriated prisoners on their arrival in London. In
addition, the British Red Cross at Lucerne carry out a
very satisfactory system for baking and despatching of
bread across the German frontier. This bread is regu-
larly received by prisoners.
General Hanbury Williams, the senior British officer
who is attached to the British Embassy in Berne, was
anxious to receive a supply of weekly papers from Aus-
tralia for distribution to our men. He desires copies
of at least twenty Australian weeklies, principally from
Victoria and New South Wales, but some from all
States.
Prisoners of war in Germany have not, as a rule, been
badly or brutally treated, except that they have been
given bad food. Many of them stated that they had
been reasonably treated during their incarceration in
Germany. At a few of the camps, harsh and bad
treatment had been received, but that was not the rule.
Nominal roll of officers, non-commissioned officers,
and men of the A.I.F. interned in Switzerland, and
pamphlet issued by the Chief Paymaster, A.1.F., Lon-
don, for information of Australian prisoners of war,
are attached.
Turkey.—The prisoners of war in Turkey gave con-
siderable anxiety to the Red Cross workers, as they
never know when parcels would be allowed to pass to
our men there. Occasionally, they were allowed to
pass, but not often; therefore, instead of sending
parcels, their value—sos.—per month was transmitted
to each man. Some were received, but the acknow-
ledgments and correspondence were by no means satis-
factory.
SECTION 17.—STATISTICS
A cable from Defence asking me to inquire into statis-
tical work in England was received after I bad com-
pleted this portion of my work. I interviewed the
Director of the Medical Research Committee, Sir
Charles Fletcher, who has charge of medical statistics.
Under an arrangement, the War Office pay half the
cost of all statistical work, the other half being paid by
the Pensions Department, and, except to forward returns
and records, that is all the War Office does in the
matter.
The statistics for the A.I.F. are kept as well as those
for the British Forces. I obtained as much informa-
tion as possible, and have handed to the Director-
General, A.A.M.S., the various forms and papers giving
particulars of the work being done.
All early records are very imperfect, and for much
of the work no records are available.
For the A.1.F., much information is missing from
the hospitals in Egypt and from Gallipoli, but in France
they are good. Sir Charles Fletcher desired search to
be made in Australia for any early records regarding
the A.I.F. in Egypt.
Some work allied to statistics was being done by the
A.I.F. in London, where Colonel A. G. Butler, D. 5.0.,
A.M.C., A.1.F., is engaged in writing the history of the
A.A.M.C.
Ahw that the scope of the work in England is known,
Australia can collect statistics on similar lines. The
Director promised to send to the Defence Department
all papers and instructions that may be issued in future,
so that the work may be kept up to date.
A great deal of time and labour will be involved in
compiling the statistics in Australia, and a specially
skilled officer to direct the work will be necessary.


SECTION 18. —WAR WORK AT THE VARIOUS
FRONTS.
Attached are full notes of my visit to the Fronts in
France and Italy, also short reports upon my visits to
the Fronts in Greece and Palestine.
Before proceeding to the French Front with the
French Army, I had been along the Australian Fronts,
both with the Australian Army Corps and with the Ist
Division, then further north than the Army Corps. I
had also seen some of the British Front, and had had
opportunities to see the methods of dealing with
wounded from the front lines to the Base. I desired to
see and compare the methods of the other nations, so was
attached to the 10th French Army. That Army had, a
few days previously, made the initial attack on the
Germans south of Soissons, and commenced to drive
them back. I was with the 10th Army when they took
Ouchy la Yille, on 25th July, one of the early successes.
I shared with the French their joy at this success, for
directly that place had fallen, the whole German line
fell back, and the French Army took up the pursuit of
the retreating Germans, taking prisoners freely, and
inflicting heavy losses. Large numbers of wounded
French, also many wounded Germans, were being dealt
with by the French Medical Service, who work on en-
tirely different lines to the British Service. It was
very interesting and instructive. I was also attached
to the Italian Army, and inspected some work by the
Greek Medical Service. I saw much new to me,
and was able to compare the systems. The French and
Italian systems are similar, and quite different to the
British; whilst the Greek Medical Service is evidently
founded on the Continental system.
In all these countries, there is a great shortage of
Medical Officers, who are saved as much as possible,
and do nothing but professional work, much of the
administration of medical services being carried out by
civilians.
France.
The personnel of all ranks is smaller than the British,
and is used with great economy.
They push their hospitals and ambulance far for-
ward, and deal very rapidly with the wounded. French
hospitals were not or reveted, as were the
British. They do not employ female nurses, excent in
rare cases.
Some of the professional work seen by me was of a
very high order, and many surgeons were able and
capable operators.
Altogether, I formed a high opinion of the work of
the French Army Medical'Services near the firing line.
The different units in the field were visited, starting at
the regimental post de secours, which corresponds to our
regimental aid post. One of these belonging to the
10th Army visited at Belly sur Ourch, which is just
behind Ouchy, was about 400 metres behind the fighting
line. Behind this I visited a Triage or advanced dress-
ing station at Vanhy—a Triage or main dressing sta-
tion at Betz, and an evacuation hospital at Chantilly
and Senlis, thus following the wounded man from the
Front until he was evacuated to the Base. At Betz, a
separate hospital for gas cases was visited, where as
many as 3,000 cases had been passed through in five
days.
The zone of evacuation is divided into two areas —a
forward one on the field —from the front line back to
the advanced dressing station or Triage; and a back-
ward one —from the forward dressing station hack to
the hospitals of evacuation to the Base or clearing
stations.
Their system of field hospitals, &c., is different from
ours, and their so-called ambulances are really hospitals
or groups of hospitals, while the hearer section of our
field ambulances is formed as a separate unit operated
by the Regiment (our Brigade), or by the Division.
Wounded prisoners, of whom I saw a large number
being brought back, are dealt with exactly as their own
men, until they reach the hospital of evacuation, when
they are sent to separate hospitals.
The regimental aid posts are similar to ours, usually,
in houses, &c. I saw one belonging to the 2nd Army
in a large dug-out. Only emergency work was done —
bleeding stopped, splints affixed, and antitetanic serum
given. From here patients are sent back by stretcher
or ambulance to the Ist Eschelon or Triage Avance
(advanced dressing station), where emergency opera-
tions are undertaken; but cases which can wait are
sent to the Triage of 2nd Eschelon —or Group d’Ambu-
lances du C.H.—which, in this case, was about 5,000
yards behind the front line, where any necessary opera-
tions are performed, and X-ray photos taken with mobile
X-ray plant. The patients, if very bad, are kept there
until they are sufficiently recovered to be evacuated
—chest, abdominal cases, &c., are kept from two to three
iveeks; others are evacuated by ambulance right away.
Ambulances plying to regimental aid posts and
Triage Avance do not go further back than this ad-
vanced dressing station, where cases are labelled sitting,
walking, or stretcher, and dealt with accordingly. Gas
cases are evacuated to gas hospitals. From the Triage
Avance, patients who are likely to be fit for the line
within two or three weeks, are sent to hospital near by,
and not evacuated further. The absolutely untrans-
portables are treated in the hospital until they are fit
to be sent further back. All other cases go to the 2nd
Eschelon Triage, either in buses (walking cases), or
in ambulances. All cases in the advanced station who
will not require to have their dressing removed until
they arrive at the clearing station, are so labelled, and
are not touched at the 2nd Eschelon Triage.
From the 2nd Eschelon Triage, all thigh cases —frac-
tures, &c.—are Sent direct to special thigh hospitals,
after being operated upon, if necessary, and put in
suitable splints.
The Medicin Chef de Service of the Army Corps
(D.D.M.S.) said the feeling was that the Ist and 2nd
Eschelon Triage stations should in the future be amal-
gamated, so that there would only be the one station
between the regimental post de secours and the hospital
d’evacuation.
The whole system of evacuation as I saw it was very
simple and very efficient, and all provision was made
for feeding the patients, &c., at the different stations.
There were specially heated shock rooms, where these
patients are kept while recovering from or awaiting
operation. The operating rooms at both advanced and
rear dressing stations were specially heated, and when
the patient had been undressed and washed, he was
sent right into the operating room without putting on
fresh clothes. This is possible on account of the heat-
ing of the rooms, and saves a great quantity of laundry
work. Fracture cases are thoroughly immobilized be-
fore being sent backwards.
I saw a number of surgical operations being carried
out at the 2nd Eschelon Triage, and the technique as
regards sterilization, &c., was very complete and effi-
cient.


Special hospitals for treating gassed soldiers are
established. The patients come into one part of the
hospital, have their clothes taken away, their eyes
washed in a saccharated solution of calcium sulphate,
have a hot shower bath and are sponged with lime
water, are given fresh clothes, and admitted to hospital
and carefully watched. The clothes, &c., are dealt
with by orderlies wearing masks, and are first washed
and then put out in the open air, and suspended on
clothes line for four or five days. No further treatment
or disinfection is necessary.
The schematic plan of the system of evacuation
appended shows very well the method followed.
SCHEMATIC SYSTEM OF EVACUATION OF THE WOUNDED.
• BILLY SUR OURCK
* VOUHY
♦ CHOUY
* BETZ AND
BARSONNE
* CHANTILLY AND
SENLIS
Regimental Post de Secours
(or Regimental Aid Post).
Triage Avance
Ist Echelon
(Advanced Dressing Station).
Point d’embarqueraent
de C.A.
Eventuellement.
Gazes
(Gas Hospital).
Intransportables
absolens
(Too bad to shift).
Recuperables,
Blesses, Malades,
(Cases for return to line
within 21 days).
Groupe d’Ambulances
du C.A.
Triage 2nd Echelon
(Rear Dressing Station).
Ho. E.
(Hospital of Evacuation).
Fractures.
Thigh Cases.
Point d’embarquement
• de C.A.
Zone de D.E.
Intransportables
!Too bad to send back).
Interieur
(Base Hospitals).
* Names of places where these stations were seen.
The French ambulance waggons hold five patients—
-2 above, 2in the middle, and 1 below. There is an
excellent scheme for fixing the forward end of the
stretcher on l6ops attached to a metal bar (the loop
has a spring in it) so that the forward end is pushed
forward without the necessity of being supported once
the ends of the stretcher are put into the loops. When
the ambulance is loaded, it is not practicable to do any-
thing for the patients in the ambulance, but the loading
and unloading are very simple.


Italy.
With the Italian Army, as guest of the Italian Go-
vernment, I visited the mountain war zone, twice
crossed the Alps into Austria, over the Trentine Alps,
in front of Reverato, and the Dolomite Alps at Piano
and Raossi. In both these districts I saw the Medical
Service dealing with wounded by pack animals, by
hand litters, and by the aerial railway, or teleferica,
as it is called. Sick and wounded men are carried on
these aerial cars, the working of which is very effective
and simple. After leaving the mountain fronts I passed
to the Piave front, where I was taken close up to the
Piave River, between Venice and Trevisco. Here the
Italian system of working for large bodies of troops
and great numbers of wounded was seen. Wounded
were coming in freely, and being promptly dealt with.
The work done was good, and was carried out by good
men. One specialist in each hospital was responsible
for the work there, and he decided which other medical
officer w T as to deal with each case, the patients thus
being placed in competent hands.
Some of the Italian field equipment was very fine,
and their movable hospitals had, by far, the best equip-
ment and transport of any I have seen or heard of on
any front.
The work of the Italian Medical Service was good
and reliable, while much of the work and the methods
employed were new to me.
The Italians do not employ trained nurses, but, like
the French, have a' few females —members of religious
orders —looking after the feeding and cleaning of his-
pitals, but they are not trained nurses, and do no real
nursing duty as it is understood in Australia.
I was in several Italian hospitals well within range
of gun fire, but none of them were sandbagged or
reveted. Some had been hit, but this was taken in a
philosophical manner.
Evacuation of Wounded in the War Zone in the
Italian Army.
There are three zones, just as in the French system.
The first, or 1. Zona dei Corpl d’Armata. 2. Second,
or Zona dTntendanza. Third, or Zona di TSgombero
or Zone of Evacuation.
The first zone comprises regimental aid posts, and,
back of that, Post di Riunione. Regiments are really
our brigades, so the post di Riunione is really a col-
lecting post for a division, and from these patients are
sent back a Collecting or Sorting Post corresponding
to a forward dressing station of a Field Ambulance.
Patients are sorted here- and urgent cases operated
upon, or shock cases rested and stimulated before opera-
tion, and after treatment sent back to Posto di Somis-
tamento, or Corps Collecting Post. Xon-urgent cases
are kept in the first zone, and may be returned directly
to the line after a few days. From the regimental aid
posts patients are sent back to Posti di Riunione by
stretcher bearers or on donkeys, either as sitting cases
or stretcher cases, or in Cacholets. Generally from
these Posti di Riunione patients are sent back by am-
bulances, either horse or motor. A certain number of
horse ambulances are used when the roads do not per-
mit of motor ambulances.
The diagrammatic scheme appended shows these dif-
ferent posts.
In the second area or zone are a large number of
different camp or field hospitals, where the patients
are dealt with according to their condition, and from
this zone they get back to the zone of stationary, or
general hospitals. In the second zone, slightly wounded
cases or slightly sick cases are treated, and may
be sent back direct to their regiments if well enough.
There are a large number of Hospital Field Units*
called Ospedale da Campo, in both the first and second
zones, and these vary in establishment, largely accord-
ing to the needs of the particular area. These camp
hospitals, generally‘speaking, have an establishment for
50, 100, or 200 patients, and primary surgery is done
largely in the first zone, and the cases evacuated as
soon as possible.
In the first zone only first aid is given at the Regi-
mental Aid Posts and at the Posti di Riunione, except
as life-saving measures. The first really surgical work
is done at the Ambulanza Ghirurgica, where the cases
are sorted into minor surgical and major surgical cases,
and from here oases which are to go backwards are all
collected again in the Posto di Somistamento. In this
zone there are also hospitals for walking wounded and
slightly sick, cases that are likely to be well enough to
get back to the lines, also hospitals for infectious cases
and establishments for disinfection and baths.
In the second zone there are a large number of Ospe-
dale da Campo, or camp hospitals, which correspond
more or less to our clearing stations, stationary hos-
pitals, and Base field hospitals. In this zone the cases
are segregated to a large extent in special hospitals or
special wards of camp hospitals—'head cases, chest and
abdominal cases, fracture oases, spinal and nerve in-
jury cases, shell shock and nervous cases, venereal
cases, infectious and tubercular cases, malarial cases,
and self-inflicted wound cases. There are separate hos-
pitals available for typhus and dysentery cases, and
also for contact oases, also a hospital for ophthalmic
and ear, nose, and throat cases. Here, also, are special
hospitals for slightly wounded and sick officers who are
likely to be soon returned to the Front. The same ap-
plies as regards X.C.O.’s and men. There are also dis-
infecting stations and bacteriological laboratories and
X-ray ambulances.
In the third zone we get back to the Base hospitals
proper in the various cities, Red cross hospitals, and
military hospitals proper.
The appended schematic representation of the sys-
tem of distribution of Medical Units gives some idea of
the organization, but there has been no attempt made
to represent all the hospitals, but only one of each
type, and the zone .of operations that they would
ordinarily be situated in. The actual size and accom-
modation of the hospitals would naturally vary ac-
cording to the type of warfare and the needs of the
wounded. For instance, in the mountain warfare, such
as was being waged in the Dolomite Alps, the ques-
tion of transport has always to be considered, and there
the different camp hospitals are very elastic in regard
to accommodation, and surgical work has of necessity
to be done further forward on account of the slowness
and difficulty of transport.
Itinerary and Xotes on the Italian Front.
From Padua motored to Abona, the Italian Head-
Quarters of the Commando Supreme. Thence motored
through Vioentia and to Schio, the Head-Quarters of
the sth Italian Army; thence to Dolomite Alps to
see the Teleferica system of handling wounded. In-
spected a camp hospital at Piano, which is situated
about 3 miles behind Reverato. Here I was about 10
miles into territory widely was originally Austrian.
Visited a large Divisional bath, where troops come for
baths and change of clothing. Hot and cold shower
baths are provided to take two companies of 200 each
at a time. There is special accommodation for officers.
Clothing is changed, disinfected by steam, washed in
a large steam laundry, and sent to mending and repair-
ing rooms, and is then ready fos re-issue. The whole
process is very complete, and the baths are able to deal
with 6,000 men per day.
After bathing, &c., men are given fresh clothes. This
takes place at least once a month, generally every fort-
night. The baths are beside a mountain stream.


I saw the system of handling wounded at the Tele-
ferica stations, and saw Teleferica lines three-quarters of
a mile long. At Piano, about 1,000 yards from the front
lines, there was a camp hospital in an old stone house.
Patients are brought here by stretcher-bearers or on
mules, either as sitting cachelots or stretcher oachelots
between two mules. There were also a number of small
hospital posts —more or less corresponding to dressing
stations of a Field Ambulance.
Trentino Front. —I motored from Verona through
Schio, ■ where I visited a large infectious diseases hos-
pital, partly housed and partly tented. The tents are
like ordinary E.P. tents, but larger. These tents have
sliding windows let in the sides, the panes of the
windows being made of calico, and is an excellent idea.
I visited several Field Units, which have accommoda-
tion for from 50 to 200, according to situation and re-
quirements. All are well equipped for field work.
From Mount St. Valentine motored up over the Tren-
tino Alps and saw the highest Teleferica which is in
existence, 6,000 feet above sea-level. Near here the
front trenches of the Italians and Austrians are, in
places, only from 50 to 100 yards apart. Here we were
about 25 kilometres within what was Austrian terri-
tory. A good deal of bombardment was going on.
At Luzzara I visited a Field Unit (surgical), which
was Well equipped, also an underground station for gas
cases. This was like the ordinary gas chambers I saw
with the Australian Field Ambulance dressing stations.
The roads in this district were all most winding, the
country precipitous, and all the roads have been made
since this territory was taken from the Austrians. The
railway to Trent’ capital of Trentino, now runs only
■as far' as Ohizzola. Some of the roads are wonderfiil
engineering feats, and looking down the mountain it
seemed impossible to have come up by motor car.
Some of the places where the wounded are taken across
by the Teleferica lines were tremendously steep and quite
impassable by any other means. The Italians have to
take all their food, ammunition, &c., to many of their
posts by the same means. Noting the difficulty of
transport, their Field Units are wonderfully well
equipped.
Piave Front. —At Maestro, 5 miles to the west of
Venice, one of the large Base hospitals is installed. It
is in a large building, and has accommodation for 1,020
patients, supposed to be entirely for surgical cases, hut
at that time they had 500 malaria cases. The O.C. of
the hospital is a major, and there is a consulting
surgeon and a consulting physician attached to the
■staff, who in civil life were professors at different
universities. The wards are large and roomy. There
are four Red Cross nurses (trained) in charge of the
operating theatres, the rest of the nursing being done
by orderlies or by Roman Catholic Sisters. Head
cases, ohest and abdominal oases, arid fracture cases are
segregated in different wards.
In the fractured-thigh cases, plaster of pans seems
to he invariably used, and there are windows left for
dressings, supported by projecting iron supports. Legs
are put on an inclined plane with extensions, and the
weights used are great, as much as 28 lbs, in many
cases. The patients did not complain, and the surgeon
in charge claimed good results. In some of the thigh
oases, the lower leg from the knee downwards is put
up in plaster, in order to diffuse the drag of this large
extension weight, and, even jf the leg is not put up in
plaster, the pull is not on the skin only, hut from the
whole lower leg. The-surgeon in charge said no trouble
was experienced as regards weakening of the ligaments
of the knee joint. Heavy extension is kept on for a
long time, as much as two months. A large number of
operations are performed at this hospital, and there is
a theatre for each two wards (about 40 to 50 beds
each). 'The theatres were up to date. This is one of
the largest general hospitals for the Piave Front.
From Maestro I went to a camp hospital, about 4
miles from the Front. This would correspond to one of
our casualty clearing stations, hut is smaller. It has an
establishment for 100 beds, -and was housed in a chalet.
This was one of the most interesting Field Units I
have seen. It is equipped with fourteen transport,
motor lorries and four motor ambulances, and is in
every sense a mobile unit, but capable of doing any
urgent surgery. One motor wagon contained an elec-
tric plant for working X-ray and for supplying elec-
tric light up to 2,000 candle-power. All the plant in
this waggon was movable, if necessary, but generally it
is worked from the wagon.
Another wagon had a steam boiler and pipes for
heating the operating theatre or wards, also a large
steam disinfector. This, too, was removable from the
wagon, but the whole wagon was self-contained. Each
of the other transport wagons had a carrying capacity
of 8 tons. The beds for the hospitals were of iron,
folding-stretcher type, and all could be stored and
carried in the wagons. Wooden hurts, which come to
pieces, are also carried in the wagons for the complete
accommodation of the patients, i.e., 100. There is
room in these wagons for the complete equipment of
the hospital to be set up anywhere. These wagons
belong to the hospital, are marked with the Red Cross,
and the O.C. stated were not used for other purposes.
The O.C. also stated that, at least, ten major operations
a day were being performed. Only the patients who
could not possibly be evacuated afterwards were re-
tained, and the aim was always to evacuate patients
as soon as possible.
Besides the wagons and ambulances there were four-
teen cycle side-cars and one motor car for the 0.0. in-
cluded in the equipment, which the 0.0. stated for a
hospital of 100 beds costs 1,200,000 lire (£40,000), but
he said that it was worth while to have the Unit
mobile and independent of transport, even though the
wagons were idle when the hospital was in working
order.
The idea of a Mobile Unit being independent as re-
gards transport is ideal. The Mobile Units of the
Italian Army, those corresponding to our Field Am-
bulances and clearing stations, are provided with their
owta transport.
I passed on to one of their Posti di Riunione—that
is, the Medical Unit immediately behind
aid posts. This was about 2,000 yards behind the River
Piave, and was under fire. This was a small station,
corresponding to a forward dressing station of one am-
bulance. Patients were brought here on stretchers or
in horse ambulances, ais the country is flat and well
wooded. First-aid work and absolutely urgent surgery
were performed, the patients then being sent back by
motor ambulances.
Transport, of Invalids.— The development of the
Teleferica system for the transport of wounded has
been marvellous. The motor power at the Teleferica
Stations is petrol motor engines, and there is
a double line, one stretcher coming down whilst
the other goes up, the speed being 8 miles an
hour. Two or more stretchers may be in use at
the same time, according to the strain on the
wire ropes. No attendant goes with the patient on
transit. Each stretcher is worked by an endless wire
attached to the lower part of the stretcher, whilst the
weight is.carried by the heavy fixed wire above, on
which there are sets of pulley wheels for each stretcher.
Italian motor ambulances are made to carry six
stretcher- or twelve sitting cases. They are quite prac-
ticable, hut are not as easily worked as the French ones.
They are provided wlith the fixed rod for sliding the


stretcher along. There is room in the ambulance for
an attendant when fully loaded.
In the mountain zone the stretchers used are very
light, and each stretcher bar is divided into two —one
end female, one end male—iso that the .stretcher can be
folded up and carried on the stretcher-bearer’s back
on the march. They are easy to manipulate, and the
Medical Officers stated there was no disadvantage as
regards weakness arising from the division of the
stretcher rods. They appeared to be about half the
weight of our mark 4 stretcher, and would he most suit-
able for Australian conditions,
Greece.
Visit to the Portion of the Front held by the
Greek Army, and some Notes on their Hospitals
and System of Evacuation of the Wounded.
From Italy 1 passed to Greece, .and there visited the
Greek Front on the Struma, opposite the famous
Ruppel Pass. I saw Greek hospitals and ambulances
from regimental aid post to the rear.
The 16th Army Corps consists of three Divisions of
Greeks and one British, and the portion of the Front
they occupy is in the Struma Valley, extending from
Lake. Dorran to the sea coast. D.D.M.S. Army Corps
’ —Colonel Birrell. The D.M.S., British Salonioa Force
-Major-General Sir M. P. C. Holt, E.C.M.G., C. 8.,
D. 5.0., came with me on my visit to the Greek Front,
as this portion comes under him.
The weather was exceedingly hot and trying. The
Struma River is about 70 kilometers from Salonica,
and the road is excellent all the way—very moun-
tainous country, and has been kept up by the British.
It is practically the only line of communication-to this
Front, and the amount of motor and lorry traffic was
enormous. There was a small graded road before the
war, hut it has had to he remade to accommodate the
requirements for traffic and supplies to this Front.
The Greek system of evacuation of their wounded
follows very much that of the French. There is, first,
the Post de Secours, or regimental aid post, and then
the various Field Units, corresponding to our advanced
and rear dressing stations of Field Ambulances, and
further Units acting as casualty clearing stations and
hospitals of evacuation. I visited examples of all these
posts. Generally speaking, their equipment was poor
and their appliances very largely make-shift —the hos-
pitals and wards themselves, from our standard, exceed-
ingly dirty. At the time of my visit there was not
much surgicai work going through, the cases being
principally medical. There had been a difficulty in
persuading the Greek authorities of the necessity for
keeping the forward Medical Units empty, and they
had been having as many as 70 to 100 medical cases
remaining at a Field Ambulance dressing post for
periods up to fourteen days, but this was afterwards
altered. At the regimental aid post, at a .small deserted
village called Makes, there was nothing of note. There
were a number of patients on improvised stretchers,
and the beds were supplied with sheets —very dirty, hut
sheets—which was a novelty for a regimental aid post.
The same applied to the Field Ambulance dressing
posts. Transport here was by stretcher or by mules,
but there seemed to he no regular equipment of ambul-
ances—motors and horses are used for transport further
hack, and the transport is apparently carried out for
them by the British. The stretchers employed are
similar to the British, but much lighter.
I did not see any Greek ambulance wagons.
The surgical equipment at an advanced dressing post
was efficient, and there was a very good type of folding-
up operating table. All instruments for different types
of 'Operations are put up in metal cases, and the other
usual equipment for such a station was in readiness.
There are three stations, corresponding to a Field
Ambulance, to each Division, each 'having a per-
sonnel of six Medical Officers. There are two Medical
Officers to each Battalion, and one Principal Medical
Officer to each Brigade—he is attached to the Brigade
or Regimental Staff (they work like the Americans, in
Regiments, and their Regiments are really our
Brigades), and he is in charge of an extra dressing
station in action—‘practically an extra forward dress-
ing ,station. Only first-aid work is done at these sta-
tions, and the surgical work is evacuated to a hospital
of evacuation. On the sector visited, the work of this
hospital of evacuation or clearing station was taken up
and conducted by a Red Cross hospital, which was very
well equipped with all modern conveniences. The
Chief Surgeon is the Professor of Surgery at Athens.
There were four Red Gross Sisters—'apparently not
trained nurses, hut one of these had c barge of the
operating theatre. This is the only hospital where
work worthy of being classed as modern was being done.
Much of the equipment of this Unit was fine, very ser-
viceable, and had been supplied by Germany before
Greece entered the war.
The surgery seemed good. Hospital entirely tented
—very good operating theatre, hut no X-ray plant.
There is a mobile X-ray plant available for the sector,
but it has not been used so far.
In Greece, the Red Cross Sisters (not trained nurses)
are in charge of the various Red Cross hospitals, and
the trained Greek nurses work under them. The type
of trained Greek nurses was very inferior, which ac-
counts for this anomaly.
I visited another Greek hospital, Which was equipped
by the British and handed over to the Greeks. It was
a stationary hospital (British) before, entirely tented,
for about 500 patients. Here there is an X-ray equip-
ment and all the usual equipment of a British station-
ary hospital, but no nurse? are employed. Each patient
in all these various Units is supplied with a mosquito
net, consisting of a small ring fixed to the side of the
tent, with a mosquito net affixed over each bed. This
hospital was quite clean and well kept. There was a
separate isolated block for enteric and dysentery cases,
algo a ward for enteric cases who had given negative
pathological examination of the stools. All the patho-
logical work so far had been done by a British Unit in
the neighbourhood.
All the drinking water at these hospitals has to be
boiled, and in each tent of the Red Cross hospital was
a keg on a stand filled with drinking water.
Taken altogether, the mledical arrangements are in
a very primitive state, and would need great improve-
ment to cope with a serious rush of wounded, but the
education of the Greeks is gradually progressing.
I visited the Struma River, and from here could see
the town of Seres (which was in the hands of the Bul-
garians) in the distance. The front Greek line was
about a quarter of a mile beyond the Struma, and the
Bulgarian lines a little further on, but the Bulgarians
were in occupation of all the high hills overlooking the
Struma Valley.
During my visit everything was quiet; most of
the fighting took place at night. The forward lines
on both sides consisted principally of posts of observa-
tion and reconnaissance. The type of Greek soldiers
seen was good, and they are good fight!mg men, especi-
ally against their hereditary enemy —the Bulgarian—
of whom they are not at all afraid. The clothing and
equipment were not good—they are provided with
Mannlicher rifles, with a very short bayonet.
Egypt.
As described in other papers (Medical Services), I
visited the Palestine Front just before the big offensive


in September, and spent eight days there, seeing much
of the preparations being made. I visited various
points on the Front from the Dead’ Sea to the north
of Jaffa, where the Turkish trenches were, and was
able not only to see the Australian and British Medical
Services, but also the various Indian ambulances and
hospitals for Indian troops.
These were very different to those in France or
on other Fronts, on account of the work and lines being
very scattered in proportion to the number of troops
employed. The services were all being carried out ac-
cording to the British system, modified for mounted
troops according to the class of country —whether
desert or mountain, barren or waterless. Should there
at any time be war in Australia, it is the class of work
carried out in Palestine "which "will be of value as an
example for Australian requirements.
SECTION 19.—CONTROL OF A.A.M.C. (OVERSEAS).
Due, I understand, to the distance which it was
thought that Australian troops would be from Aus-
tralia, power to act in certain matters Avas delegated to
the G.0.C., A.1.F., which, undqr ordinary circum-
stances, would be referred to the General Head-Quarters
Staff, Australia, as representing and carrying out the
directions of the Minister for Defence and of the Go-
vernment of the Commonwealth.
When troops leave Australia they come under the
G.0.C., A.1.F., who directs the service through his
staff. So far as the A.M.C., A.1.F., is concerned, this
arrangement wms correct when the corps were only
working in connexion with one sphere of t operations,
for then the D.M.S., A.1.F., could direct the service.
This is the practice in Imperial Forces. Each
sphere of operations is directed by the D.M.S. of that
particular Force. The Imperial D.M.S. has to apply
to the D.G.M.S. at the War Office for assistance in mat-
ters such as reinforcements, transfers, and details con-
cerning the service as a whole. Similarly the D.G.M.S.,
as an officer of the War Office and head of the A.M.C.,
issues directions for the general management and con-
trol of the medical branch of the service. This is*not
what occurs in the A.1.F., the D.M.S., as an officer of
the G.0.C., A.1.F., directs not only the Medical Forces
in his own sphere, but it is presumed also directs those
in other spheres.
The officer who is Senior Medical Officer in Egypt
is not given the position of Director, and for a long
time ranked as A.D.M.S. to the Australian Division.
His present position as D.D.M.S. is due to his appoint-
ment over a corps known as the Desert Mounted Corps,
which contains far more British than Australian
Tke G.0.C., A.1.F., in Egypt, is under the
G.O.C A.1.F., and so the D.M.S., A.1.F., in London,
controls Egypt, though he has little or no real know-
ledge of the state of affairs at this place, or of the
various positions which ha\ r e arisen, or are likely to
arise. This was very markedly shown when, in antici-
pation of big operations at the Front, the Commander-
in-Chief in Egypt desired to obtain more hospital ac-
commodation there, and asked Australia to increase the
size of Ho. 14 A.G.H. The D.M.S., A.1.F., objected
to the increase, and made suggestions which did not in
any way meet the case. He could not have known of
the anticipated operations which required increased
hospital accommodation. It was well Australia over-
ruled his objections.
The advantage of having only one Director of Medi-
cal Services overseas is stated to b e that the A.M C
dmr T Ol ? e ?. aS ° ne service in all spheres. It is very
■ OU U 1 t * ns 1 18 an advantage, and certainly results
n many anomalous positions being created which would
not be tolerated in tbe combatant branches of the
Forces. For instance, at the time of my visit
to Egypt, four out of five officers command-
ing the Light Horse Field Ambulances, though
senior in Egypt, were only given temporary
promotions as Lieutenant-Colonel and had had
that temporary rank for many months, some of them
over twelve months. This is most unfair to them, as,
if they are wounded or invalided, they lose their pay
and temporary promotion. It is not done in any other
branch of the A.1.F., where promotions are given and
made to the various establishments irrespective of the
general list. The A.M.C. is different to any other
branch of the A.1.F., being much more widely scattered
in the various war zones, and having a large personnel
working entirely under Imperial officers, as in Salonika,
India, Italy, and to a lesser extent in Mesopotamia
and on some Imperial hospital ships. There are also
A.M.C. personnel in France, England, and Egypt work-
ing in Imperial hospitals under Imperial officers, while
the A.M.C. Sea Transport Service is directed from Aus-
tralia.
The matter has been under consideration for some
time, and letters were sent from Australia to the
authorities overseas and to the War Office early in this
year (copies attached) aisking if they found any
trouble or difficulty in controlling or in working the
A.A.M.C. under the present conditions.
The War Office reply stated that they would he
pleased to consider any scheme submitted, and preferred
to wait till then. The reply of the G.0.C., A.1.F., in
Egypt was sent to the G.0.C., A.1.F., in France, and I
presume has been sent to Australia.
The G.0.C., A.1.F., London, has taken very little
action regarding the A.M.C. personnel at Salonika or
India, but in the case of the former, orders were given
on matters of policy without reference to Australia, and
which, had they been referred to Australia, would not
have been approved. This, and the sending of a repre-
sentative to India with orders to report direct to Lon-
don, show that, sooner or later, the question must be
settled as to the exact relation which is to exist between
the medical services in Egypt, Salonika, and India, with
the D.M.S., A.1.F., as representing the G.0.C., A.I.F.
Having visited all centres where the A.M.C. is work-
ing, and having inquired into the subject, the questions
to be considered are:—
(1) Can the A, M.C. be properly administered from
London?
(2) Should the various districts be administered
independently of each other, or should they
be grouped for administration
(3) What is the position, and what control should
Australia exercise?
With reference to control from London, it has not
been satisfactory in the past, and I am confident that
the A.M.C. cannot be administered properly and effec-
tively from General Head-Quarters, A.1.F.,’ in London.
Can the G.0.C., A.1.F., and his staff control Salonika
and India, where there are no Australian Medical Offi-
cers, and where the direction and orders of the G.0.C..
A.1.F., must be given to the G.O.C. of the British
Salonika Force or to the Comrnander-in-Chief in India?
From my interview with both these officers, I am sure
t u ey n W A l n greatly r6Sent aiiy interference or orders by
-nr ’”. an( i ikej would at once appeal to
as king to have such interference ended.
In© G.0.C., 8.5. F., and Commander-in-Chief recog-
nise that Australian regulations must be accepted,
ihey 'acknowledge the Government of Australia and
its responsible officers, but do not, and will not recog-
nise any officer of another Force.
Whatever might be done by London in controlling
some activities, they could not control or give any


directions in many details, therefore some self-control
must be allowed.
Can the dilferent spheres act entirely independently
of any others? The personnel in India and Salonika
are too small to do so, and to create sufficient .staffs
would entail a great expense.
In Egypt, I am of opinion that the present staff and
arrangements are sufficient to easily act independently
of other Forces in all matter regarding their Medical
Services.
Kot only this, but I think they are able, without
much extension, to control in many matters, both in
India and B.S.F.
Such matters as pay, stores, and equipment, can be
dealt with by them, also matters connected with trans-
port of personnel at sea. Some transfers could be
similarly dealt with. On the other hand, such matters
as appointments, promotions, invaliding, return to Aus-
tralia, and reinforcements must be dealt with locally. I
do not think that all transfers can be dealt with satisfac-
torily either in London, in Egypt, or in any district, and
feel confident that no satisfactory scheme will be devised
unless when there is any difficulty or difference between
districts that transfers are directed from Australia.
Could Egypt control ail the activities, they could
act much more effectively than London, both on account
of the nearness to B.S.F. and India, and also on account
of it being nearer to Australia and on the direct route
of shipping, but the same objections apply to Egypt
as to London control.
What is the position of Australia as regards control?
The raising of reinforcements and sending them for-
ward are matters entirely for Australia, A.I.F. authori-
ties overseas simply letting Australia know their re-
quirements, as in order that all spheres may be equally
treated these must be controlled from Australia.
Australia is responsible that those in all zones are
similarly treated. While nearly all transfers can be
arranged mutually between districts, there should bo
final control by Australia, and it should be known to
districts that such an appeal is allowed.
Sea transports and hospital ships have always been
considered as having their Head-Quarters in Australia,
A.I.F. authorities having power to transfer personnel
to shore duty on the condition that the number taken off
does not interfere with the satisfactory working of the
unit. This has worked satisfactorily, there have been
no complaints regarding control, and no alteration is
recommended.
Recommendations.
I recommend that, for the purposes of administra-
tion, the A.M.C., A.1.F., in France, England, and Italy
be directed by G.0.C., A.1.F., in London and his staff.
That Egypt be directed by the officer on the staff of
the G.0.C., A.1.F., in Egypt.
That the service in the British Salonika Force,
Greece, and India be directed as regards local matters,
temporary promotion, appointments, invaliding, and
return to Australia by the Principal Matron in these
districts (under any circumstances, her recommendation
is the only one that can influence whoever is in control),
and that, as regards pay, equipment, shipping arrange-
ments, and such other matters as may be decided, they
should be dealt with by the G.0.C., A.1.F., in Egypt,
or by his officers.
That transfers be arranged mutually between the
various districts, and when any difference or difficulty
arises, that they be referred to Australia.
That in such matters as reinforcements, India, as
well as Egypt, deal directly Avith Australia. Egypt
will, in this matter, be the medium of dealing with
Salonika reinforcements, as they can at times reinforce
them at once.
All matters of policy and all dealings with War Office
must be referred to Australia.
SECTION 20. —REPORT OF THE INTER-ALLIED
CONFERENCE FOR THE AFTER CARE OF
DISABLED SOLDIERS AND SAILORS, HELD IN
LONDON, 20th TO 25th MAY. 1918.
The Conference was opened by H.R.H. the Duke of
Connaught, who welcomed the delegates, and especially
those from the overseas Dominions. On a subsequent
occasion, their Majesties the King and Queen visited
the exhibition, when all the overseas delegates were pre-
sented to them. Mr. John Hodges, Minister for Pen-
sions, presided at the general meetings, and was the host
at the official dinner held at the Ritz Hotel.
Delegates were present from all the Allied nations,
including France, Italy, Belgium, Japan, Portugal,
Servia, Rumania, Greece, as well as from the United
States of America and from the overseas Dominions,
whilst many delegates from various parts of England'
were present. The meetings were open to the public
on payment of a nominal fee, and the exhibition was
open free during some part of the day.
Attendance was poor, rarely were any of the small
committee-rooms used by sections, half full, and fre-
quently not more than six to eight people were in
attendance at either discussions or the demonstrations
—usually cinema shows.
The General Conference consisted of two meetings
at the opening and closing of the session, and at both
only formal business was transacted and formal speeches
made.
An exhibition was held, roughly divided into two
sections:—(l) Artificial limbs and appliances for the
limbless; (2) Of work done at training and re-educa-
tional centres.
For purpose of discussion, four sections were formed,
at which papers were read in various languages. Sec-
tions were as under;—
(1) Pensions and allowances.
(2) Training,
(3) Medical treatment.
(4) Surgical treatment.
Very little interest was taken in the proceedings,
and no enthusiasm aroused.
In addition to the Hon. J. C. Manifold, and Surgeon-
Generhl Fetherston, the delegates nominated by Aus-
tralia ; the High Commissioner for Australia had
nominated Colonel Springthorpe, Lt.-Colonel Murdock,
of the Red Cross, and Surgeon-General Sir iSTeville
Howse, Y.C.—the latter did not attend the meetings.
It was decided that one representative from Australia
attend each section.
In order that this might be done, it was further
arranged that two Medical Officers, Colonel Strangman
and Lt.-Colonel T. G. Wilson, should assist. The fol-
lowing allotment was made:—
The Hon. J. C. Manifold to attend Section 1, on
pensions and allowances; Colonel Strangman to
attend section 2, on training; Colonel J. W. Spring-
thorpe to attend Section 3a, on medical treatment;
Lt.-Colonel T. G. Wilson to attend Section 3b, on
surgical treatment.
Surgeon-General Fetherston attended special papers
in various sections, and paid particular attention to the
exhibition, holding consultation with those Medical
Officers of the A.M.C. who have taken special interest
in orthopaedic appliances, and going carefully into the
merits of most of the appliances shown.


General Work of the Section.
The papers to be read or submitted were printed and
distributed before the opening of Air Congress.
The book of proceedings was forwarded to Australia,
’with other papers on the subject, in charge of Captain
Jermyn, A.M.C., who left for Australia two weeks ago.
The papers were followed in some cases by discus-
sions, but little or nothing of interest was brought out.
Papers were read in English, French, Italian, and Bel-
gian, and similarly the discussions. Owing to the
inability of the majority of the Australian delegates
to follow or understand many of the speakers, much
time was wasted.
In our opinion, the Congress, as a means of educa-
tion and exchange of ideas, was by no means a success,
and work was of a very mediocre standard. The only
papers worthy of special attention .were of purely sur-’
gical interest, one shown with cinema pictures by Putti,
of Italy, and another by Sir W. McEwan, of Glasgow,
on limbless and use of appliances, being probably the
best; and the only discussion to arouse any interest was
that on occupation for one-armed men, but, unfortu-
nately, the results of this were purely negatiye, and only
emphasized the helplessness of the condition.
While the Congress did not reach a high level as
regards the papers read, neither did the exhibition come
up to expectations. The artificial limbs and appliances
shown by France and Italy were well shown, as also
those by Scotland; but the attendants at the two former,
not being able to speak English, greatly detracted from
their value. The British official exhibits were very
badly shown, and simply heaped together, without any
explanation or attendants, and lost the greater part of
their value.
After carefully going into many exhibits, efforts were
made to obtain some as samples for use in Australia, but
were only partially successful, as some desired were not
for sale, and could not be purchased. A good set of
•stump peg-legs of French make were obtained, as was a
novel type of a simple artificial arm manufactured in
Italy. It is hoped that more may be obtained when
Surgeon-General Fetherston visits the Continent.
Arrangements are being made to send samples of the
English appliances to Australia.
The general conclusions arrived at were that, while
many forms of artificial legs are good and satisfactory,
both of the ordinary type and of the peg-leg type, this
form is finding favour with many, and particularly
since a reliable knee-joint has been worked out; but as
regards artificial limbs, all seem to be far from a satis-
factory substitute, and the opinion of all is that no
artificial arm has been found which is of much value
tor general use. Several arms more or less after the
type of Came were shown, but none, in the opinion of
most competent observers, equal to Came for an intelli-
gent person requiring an arm for light use.
Some arms can be used for special work, part being
made as desired, but none allow the wearer to in any
way approach or equal the tw r o-armed man in his power
or ability to work. It is generally conceded that it is
a mistake to attempt to try and educate one-armed men
to compete with skilled labour requiring any manual
manipulation, or to encourage them to undertake such
work.
The position and future of one-armed men is still a
grave problem, and has not been solved or improved by
the Congress, and very little by any of the artificial
appliances at present in use. Switchboard works seem
to be one of the most suitable for these men, and several
delegates advocated that legislation should be brought
in compelling employers to employ only one-armed men
on all simple switchboards.
The second portion of the exhibition dealt with the
work done by crippled and maimed in the various work-
shops, not necessarily limbless men. Lord Roberts
Workshops, St. Dunstan’s Hospital, and various others,
showed good exhibits, covering a large field and class of
work, while fancy leather work was shown by the cord-
wainers; but nothing of exceptional merit or worthy
of special merit exhibited. The principal being toys,
fancy boxes, some printing, cigarettes, brush basket and
network of various kinds, and fancy leatherwork, as well
as boot repairing, and a few samples of joinery.
Canada, almost entirely occupying a large hall, put
forward a good and well-selected exhibit, including some
fine-class metal turning.
A small exhibit was shown on behalf of Australia of
goods made at the auxiliary hospitals; while New Zea-
land showed a much more exiensive and better exhibit,
as also did South Africa.
Perhaps the most useful portion of the Congress was
the opportunities which were offered of meeting dele-
gates from various centres and other countries; but even
this was left to chance, and no organized effort was made
to bring them together.
General Fetherston has, as a result of these meetings,
been able to make arrangements to visit various centres
in England, Scotland, and Wales, as well as a few places
in France and Italy, and hopes to obtain much more
detailed information during these visits.
The most valuable portion of the Congress was the
opportunity afforded of visiting various centres of acti-
vity in connexion with re-establiShment of invalids, and
of meeting other interested persons.
Visits of inspection were paid by the delegates to
several of the institutions engaged in work with the
disabled and maimed in and around London. Roehamp-
ton Hospital for limbless, St. Dunstan’s and workshops
for the blind, Lord Roberts’ Workshops for the maimed,
and commercial enterprise with branches in twelve or
thirteen cities. (Pamphlet attached.) Golder’s Green
Hospital for neurotics and shell-shock patients; the
Richmond Hospital, for South African soldiers; and
the New Zealand Hospital, at Walton-on-Thames; the
diamond-cutting establishment at Brighton; and the
local hospital for limbless, were also inspected.
Many otjier hospitals, homes, and workshops have
been visited by General Fetherston, who will submit a
detailed report later.
INTER-ALLIED CONFERENCE AND EXHIBITION
ON THE AFTER CARE OF DISABLED MEN.
The foregoing report on the Inter-Allied Conference
wa3 sent from London by the late Hon. J. C. Manifold,
M.H.R., and myself soon after the conclusions of the
conference. The following report contains fuller de-
tails and reports, or extracts from reports, by the
officers who attended the sectional meetings.
Delegates were present at this Conference from Bel-
gium, France, and Italy, Portugal, Serbia, Siam, United
States of America, Canada, Australia, South Africa,
New Zealand, India, and Great Britain.
The central object has been to lead to the interchange
of ideas as to what is being done for disabled soldiers
in the various countries of the Allies.
The Conference itself was divided into three main
sections, viz.:—
(1) Pensions and Allowances.
(2) Training of Disabled Men.
(3) Treatment (subdivided into medical and
surgical). #
The printed programme attached gives a general idea
of the scope of these papers, and of the subjects dis-
cussed. A synopsis of the papers read is also attached.


In connexion with, and held at the same hall, was an
exhibition of the various articles showing the class of
work done by these disabled soldiers. This work covers
that done as a curative agent, and is also used to teach
the men from a re-educational point of view, e.g., teach-
ing them new vocations, and affording them opportuni-
ties to make a decent livelihood, in spite of their disabili-
ties incurred through war service.
Each afternoon of the week of the Conference, oppor-
tunities were given for the delegates to visit different
hospitals and workshops where the treatment and re-
educational and vocational instruction of disabled
soldiers are undertaken, thereby enabling the delegates
to see what has been so far undertaken on these lines
by the authorities in England. What was seen on a
number of these visits to hospitals and institutions, &c,
has been described separately.
Some of the Exhibits.
Lord Roberts’ Memorial Workshops. —Exhibits —
Examples of leatherwork, carpentry for one-armed men,,
toy making, basket making, cigarette making, &c. All
these were shown in process of manufacture by disabled
men, and a larger exhibit of the work made in these
workshops was displayed for sale. These workshops are
scattered throughout Great Britain. There are about
a dozen centres in the large towns where they are estab-
lished, and the institution has been described as a
national tribute to Lord Roberts for our permanently
disabled soldiers and sailors. Further details are given
in attached report.
The accompanying pamphlets also give details of the
class of work undertaken, and the general scope of the
workshops. There were exhibits also from the follow-
ing institutions
Military Orthopaedic Hospital, at Shepherd’s
Bush.
St. Dunstan’s Hostel for the Blind.
The Ministry of Pensions.
Exhibits of work performed by prisoners of war in
Switzerland, and from numerous other institutions
founded and run on similar lines, were also shown.
Descriptive pamphlets of most of these are appended.
Amongst the most interesting exhibits were a large
number of artificial limbs and appliances, of splints and
crutches, and all sorts of mechanical help for more or
less disabled men.
Such exhibits were shown by Belgium, France, Italy,
and the United Kingdom. The exhibit of artificial
limbs from Italy, France, and several firms in the
United Kingdom, were especially noticeable. Amongst
the British exhibits, those from Erskine House Work-
shops and the Surgical Requisites Association were par-
ticularly woilliy of notice, especially the temporary peg-
legs, as made at Erskine House Workshops, Glasgow,
and the types of splints made by the Surgical Requi-
sites Association. The artificial limbs and appliances
shown by Italy and France were the work of several
firms, an'd amongst the Italian ones must be mentioned
the artificial legs made by Fratelli Mardini, via la
Farina 10, Florence, which has a special attachment
that can be used as a peg stump for hard work, or with
the foot attached on ordinary occasions; and the special
ball-and-socket joint for attachments to (artificial
arms by the Lombardy Re-education Institute, at
Gorla 1, in Milan; and also by Professor Putti, at the
Institute Rizzoli, Bologna.
The foregoing were especially noticeable, and are all
listed in the catalogues accompanying this report.
The buildings were badly lighted, and the exhibits
poorly displayed, being crowded or jumbled together
without proper order, and with no book or person to
furnish information concerning them. This was very
noticeable as regards the English exhibits. Some of
those from France and Italy were well shown, and
attendants were present to explain them, but the diffi-
culties of language here were, as throughout the Con-
ference, a cause of trouble. The exhibit from Scotland
was well displayed and well demonstrated. I was sub-
sequently present at Cardiff, where the same exhibits of
artificial limbs were shown as a travelling exhibition.
Here they were well shown in a splendid hall, and,
although crowds were present, far greater interest was
taken in the exhibition than had been the case in
London.
Besides these artificial limbs, exhibits of the work
done by disabled soldiers in France, Italy, Serbia,
Canada, Australia, and Hew Zealand in various
hospitals and institutions were shown. These are also
listed in the appended catalogues, and the scope of these
can be better judged by an examination of the catalogues
and pamphlets. Generally speaking, the class of work
taught by all the nations represented is very similar,
and the one outstanding feature that is made evident
is that it is fully recognised by all that these disabled
men are helped in their recovery by having some definite
work to do, llso that it is quite possible to train and
educate a disabled man so that he can earn a living,
despite his disability, either at his old trade or at some
other trade, and that if this re-educational and voca-
tional training be carried out systematically, there is
no reason why a disabled man need not be a useful and
self-supporting citizen instead of a possible burden to
himself, his relations, and the community at large.-
It is essential that the treatment and re-education of
these cases should go together and be carried out under
the instructions of the Medical Officers.
During the Conference, a great number of cinema-
tograph pictures depicting re-education and vocational
training in all its aspects in all the different countries
represented at the Conference, were shown. These
should have a good effect in educating the public gene-
rally as to the great and increasing importance this
work is going to have after the war in the national life
of the countries concerned.
Surgical Treatment Section. —At this section, the
outstanding papers read were(a) “ Cinematic Am-
putations,” three papers by Italian authors, which were
illustrated by cinematograph pictures showing the pos-
sibilities of utilizing voluntary muscle contractions after
amputations in order to obtain control over mechanical
devices attached to artificial arms and legs—for closing
and opening the artificial hand, &c.; ( h ) a paper by
Surgeon-General Sir William McEwan, of Glasgow, on
the “Limbless,” especially dealing with the advantage
of discarding crutches at as early a date as possible,
fixing temporary peg-legs, and making the men use
these as early as possible, in order to get them accus-
tomed to exercising the muscles and obtaining control
over the movements of their stumps.
Lord Roberts’ Memorial Workshops.
Lord Roberts’ Memorial Workshop Ho. 1 is situated
in Fulham-road, London, S.W., and is for disabled
soldiers and sailors. This institution was in existence
before the war as a small workshop and salesroom in
Chelsea, but has increased its activities since the out-
break of war, and has now eleven branches scattered
throughout England, the one at Fulham-road, which
is the largest, being the head office. Its aim is to pro-
vide permanent employment for disabled soldiers and
sailors, and is run on a commercial basis.
It aims largely at assisting one-armed and one-legged
men to earn a livelihood despite their disability. When
a man first enters the workshops, he is given simple
work-box making, and receives 20s. a week and his
pension. At the end of a month, he is paid 225. 6d.
a week, and so on up to 30s. a week at the end of six
months —that is whether he is earning that amount or


not. After that period, he is paid according to his
ability, and there are many men who are earning from
£2 to £3 per week. As the institution is a commercial
one, he can look forward to permanent employment, and
the object is largely to endeavour to do work which
before the war was done in Austria and Germany. Toys
of all sorts are one of the great lines of output of the
workshops, also household utensils, stationery, printing
of all sorts, dolls, &c. As soon as a man shows pro-
ficiency in the work he is doing, he is given the oppor-
tunity to do more skilled work with better remunera-
tion. The great majority of the men employed were
at the commencement absolutely unskilled. There are
400 men employed here, and in all the institutions, there
are about 1,500. One of the main objects aimed at is
to make the combined workshops self-contained, so
that all the work required in their manufacturing shall
be done in one or other of the workshops. All metal
work is done in Bradford, for instance, and sent to the
different branches. Printing is done at another branch,
and this enters largely into the making of toys.
The Pensions Board have lately made arrangements
that all one-armed men are to be sent to the workshops,
with a proviso that, after six months, they are to be
guaranteed 30s. per week.
There is a small hospital in connexion with the works,
where a trained nurse is always in attendance, also a
visiting Medical Officer. This saves men reporting at
one of the hospitals for treatment during his working
hours.
At the end of each year, any profits from the work-
shops are divided amongst the employees. (See attached
papers.)
The following is a list of some of the work being
done at Fulham-road:—
Bag and portmanteau making.
Turnery in all its branches.
Sandpapering.
Doll making.
Carpentry and fretwork.
Basket making.
Toy making.
Paper and wooden box making.
Bookbinding.
Cabinetmaking and french polishing.
The cabinetmaking is the work that the most experi-
enced and expert of the men are employed at, and many
of these are now making journeymen’s wages. A special
branch of this is the copying of old furniture. •
There are a number of girls employed in doing paint-
spraying, painting dolls and toys, &c., work at which it
is said the men could not earn a living wage, and do not
like doing. There are a number of boys employed in
workshops, who act as messenger boys, and run about
for the men who are not able to get about very well
themselves; but, apart from these, and a certain number
of instructors in all the branches, who are mostly elderly
men, all the employees are disabled soldiers and sailors.
Boys and girls are preferably children of employees, of
maimed men, or of men at the Front.
The Workshops Committee buy all materials, and
undertake the marketing of all goods made in the work-
shops. They sell these goods wholesale only. The
men’s disabilities are considered when giving them work,
and the rules regarding their hours of labour, rest, sit
dow r n, &c., are more lenient than in an ordinary work-
shop.
Hew additions are being built, and when these are
finished, there will be a large restaurant on the premises
for employees.
I was much impressed with the Lord Roberts Work-
shops, and with the air of independence which pervaded
the institution.
Section 2. —Training.
The restoration of the disabled to health is the first
consideration, and if their discharge from military
service is inevitable, some form of re-education must
commence in bed, on mental rather than on manual
lines. As convalescence progresses, they should he re-
moved to an institution where a system of re-education
on general lines is in force. They see here disabled
men learning various methods of supplementing their
pensions in after life.
So far, from 30 to 47 per cent, return to their pre-
war avocations, but as many are physically unfit to do
so, or have a yearning for other occupation, they must
be trained de novo. It was pointed out that, after war
experience, a man’s outlook is often very different.
At present, in London, technical advisory committees
in each trade have to be formed. They embrace the
employers, trades union officials, and technical experts.
They have laid down the ruling that, if a man has
learned a trade he must stick to it, if possible; but if a
new trade must be chosen, the tools he has used, the
materials he has worked with, and the conditions he
has worked under, must be the finger-posts in deciding
his new calling.
Before the choice of a new career is made, a specially
skilled Medical Officer should report what vocations the
man is fitted for, the nature and degree of disablements
being taken into consideration; his family should be
interviewed; his history, and official and other records
inquired into, and his own leanings considered.
The calling should be simple, quickly learned, and
give promise of fair remuneration and permanent em-
ployment when the war is over.
There should be no delay over these preliminaries, as
experience has shown how rapidly crippled men degene-
rate when unemployed.
The Director of the Birmingham Institution bitterly
assailed the method of selection of avocations in force
there by Union Labour Exchanges. He said—“ It was
their worst difficulty. These exchanges are soulless
places after all, and members are more often interested
in the larger view of the sphere of influence than in
individual cases, with the result that they sent men
more often than not to unsuitable trades.”
One must get down to the mentality of the man to be
dealt with. He is the property of the Government, and
should be made to realize it. Many delegates em-
phasized the point that neither employees or employers
should choose the calling,
Ho teaching should be commenced except in an insti-
tution entirely devoted to the re-education of disabled
men, or at special classes for them at a technical insti-
tute. The Continental delegates were firm on this point,
demonstrating the discouragement that ensues when
men handicapped by infirmity work side by side with
men in full use of their limbs or faculties.
One must find out the number of outlets in each
trade for trained disabled men before the training com-
mences. u Blind-alley work ” —re-education in direc-
tions in which one is bound later on to come up against
low-paid labour—the most important of which is me-
chanical draftsmanship, should be avoided.
Provision should be made so that wives and children
shohld live with their husbands and fathers, and mili-
tary interest should be taken in them. A man cannot
afford to keep two homes.
After arm amputations, where the mentality is low,
men suffering from heart and kidney disease, and those
disabled men whose only pre-war asset was bodily
strength, must be always wet-nursed. It has been
found best to employ them in institutions more
especially on work where machine tools are in use,
one of which they can be taught to work properly.


As training progresses, everything possible must be
done to raise the general mentality. Our ideal should
be to get every man into a position of responsibility—
mere handy men are not wanted.
The men should be trained in groups, those chosen
for trades in which there are few vacancies being con-
centrated. There should be no compulsion, as that has
already ended in failure. Thirty hours per week is
quite enough for the first few months.
The object in view should be to make the one-armed
men do as much work as the one with two, but the men
that can do this, and the callings open to them —wood-
turning, switch-board attendants, &c.—are few.
Although when one-armed men have attained a certain
standard of education, positions such as storekeepers,
commercial travellers, rate collectors, telegraphists,
salesmen, and clerks are open to them.
The French delegates advocated chronological data
of each man’s work whilst he is in training. This has
been included in the Canadian re-education scheme.
From amongst “ war-worn ” men of good education,
which had not proceeded during the war, many should
be selected for professional training in business methods,
or as architects or teachers.
Treatment and Training. —lt was generally agreed
that these were inseparably intermixed. Both the re-
creational needs and the educational and restorative calls
of the individual were held to repay, as well as demand
attention from the earliest possible moment. Properly
met “ as soon as the patient’s physical condition ceased
to engage his full attention,” the net result was to pro-
mote, not hinder, his return to duty—if so returnable —
and, in cases found unfit for duty, to induce as well as
to assist further restoration. It is along these lines
that the Red Cross Society and the Y.M.C.A. have
become valuable adjuncts to more remedial treatment.
The work of the Kitchener House, the experiences of the
South African, Canadian, and other hospitals, the suc-
cess of the Eastbourne Convalescent Hospital, are illus-
trations of valuable extensions along the same lines.
The practical problem is to combine, organize, and
supervise these dissociated efforts, always, of course,
under final medical control. The main difficulty is to
find the ideal head.
Vocational Treatment as a class, comes later; but
the evidence in favour of preparatory training during
hospital months is conclusive. At present, this is being
carried out to some extent, as was apparent in a num-
ber of exhibits from various hospitals. The Bill just
introduced into Congress in America similarly approves
of such treatment being permitted “ during the period
of curative treatment.” The matter is one capable of
considerable extension.
Two extensions of effort deserve special attention,
the Khaki University movement of ’the Canadians, and
the American scheme of service through their Y.M.C.A.
The former now reaches some 8,000 soldier students
from Front line to home, and brings within the reach
of all everything the man should know as to his possi-
bilities, and the Dominion’s intentions and desires. The
details may be gathered from the organizing secretary,
Major Weir, and the methods and results from the
principal’s first and second reports. The latter is
described in the- paper of the American Educational
Secretary (pages 129-138 of the Transactions of the
Conference).
There was much discussion on the problem of placing
the men, when re-educated, on the labour market. All
seemed to be agreed that this was a national matter,
and that the conclusions of the Rockband Committee of
the House of Commons should be put in force. These
C. 2941- —5
embrace a national register of employers in every coun-
try and district, and the compilation of returns by them
showing (1) the number of disabled men they are will-
ing to employ, and (2) the trades or other occupations
in which the vacancies have occurred. It was pointed
out that this will allow many men to return to their
native country or town in which lucrative employment
is assured them.
The point emphasized was that all disabled men are
guaranteed a life-long pensions by Act of Parliament,
and that this, later on, in a competitive market, may be
used as a weapon in favour of the employees, and a pen-
sioned man regarded by the Labour leaders in the
same light as female or alien labour. ,
Lt.-Colonel Thornton explained the difficulties that
had been met with in dealing with disabled South
Africans. In a country teeming with coloured labour,
the white man naturally felt that it was only his duty
to supervise. A hospital with craft training facilities
had been established in England, where his men were
being trained in trades; they hoped later on to super-
vise at home.
Major McKeen, of Canada, outlined the scheme in
force in his country. All invalided men are under the
control of the Militia Department. A sub-department
is devoted to re-education, which is locally under the
control of Provincial Advisory Committees, which may
appoint sub-committees. Although the Canadian
scheme was much applauded; many delegates were
against two many committees; all pleaded for one unit of
control. The British system, with its two Ministerial
heads, was vetoed on all sides.
The practical points of the Canadian system are that
technical schools and colleges are much used, the staffs
engaged being paid by the Government. An individual
chart of each man is kept, and he is looked after by
the military authorities after he has obtained employ-
ment. A Government certificate is issued after train-
ing, and the Government is bound to find employment
for him.
There has been a great disinclination to go on the
land, or to go back to it. The same applies to France
ltaly, where only 10 per cent, of the disabled men
elected to enter agricultural establishments. We
were told that the dull life, low wages, and bad housing
of the European small farmer or farm labourer ex-
plains the position. Various schemes, such as the cul-
tivation of medicinal plants, poultry-keeping, or bee-
farming in small holdings, intense culture under glass
or in combination with afforestation acres, where half-
time work could be obtained, were amongst the proposals
put before the Conference. In the instances where suc-
cess in this direction had been obtained, a co-operative
system of collection and sales was in vogue.
Colonel Crossfield said that artificial arms were a
wash-out industrially, as the jig and attachments take
too long to manipulate. He advocated bench attach-
ments, to one or other of which the operator goes as
occasion requires. This statement was attacked by
more than one delegate. They pointed out that lately
wonderful improvements had been made. Personally,
I agree with the latter. Whilst visiting the Roberts
Memorial Workshops, I noted more than one man effec-
tively using his artificial arm in his work. My con-
ductor, who had a solitary 4-in. stump on the end of his
right shoulder, opened doors, and manipulated his arti-
ficial adjunct in a variety of ways with apparent ease.
The papers read by Mrs. Wood, Major Mitchell,
Major McKeen, and Dr. Bourrillon, were the most
applauded contributions to the proceedings of this sec-
tion.


Beport by Hon. J. C. Manifold, M.H.8., on
Section I.— Pensions and Allowances.
According to arrangement, I attended each day —
Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, at Section I.—
Pensions and Allowances. Papers were read as set
forth in the report, and discussion took place. That
contributed by the English delegates was of a local
character, and, as they were told, could be discussed
better at a meeting for that object.
The paper contributed by Avocato Pennare Lagliezza,
Lt.-Colonel, Italy, page 83 of the report, raises the ques-
tion of treatment of: —
1. Disabled soldiers who left the country of resi-
dence to serve in that of their birth.
2. The treatment of disabled soldiers who wish
to emigrate to one of the Allied countries.
3. The payment of pensions to such disabled men.
I replied that, as regards Ho. 1, I considered the
Australian Government would be only too pleased to
welcome those back to Australia who had formerly been
residents.
Ho. 2. I Was not in a position to state, but I con-
sidered the pensions paid to disabled men should be
something on the same lines as that paid to the disabled
men in the Allied country in which they went to reside.
Ho. 3. That Australia would be only too pleased to
make any pension payments on behalf of any Allied
Government,
Synopsis of Papers Bead.
Major Mitchell—“ The Training of Disabled Soldiers
and Sailors (pages 96-110).—Valuable as an official
resume of what has been done in England up to date,
and emphasizing, inter alia, the importance of starting
both treatment and training at the earliest possible date,
and the organized utilization of the many weeks of in-
activity in hospital and during convalescence.
J. Gustave White—“ Row can the American
1 .M.C.A. serve Disabled Soldiers” (pages 129-138). —
Crystallizing into a system, otherwise sporadic and only
partly supervized, efforts beginning “ just as soon as
physical suffering cease to engage the full attention of
the disabled soldier,” and to the immediate benefits;
recalling the British experience that only 5 per cent. »f
soldiers commencing their re-education before leaving-
hospital failed to continue, whilst of those who did not
so commence, 80 per cent, never report for training.
Mrs. Wood — “ After Training and its Results ” (pages
221-225). —Giving advice founded on experience as to
the basis and expectations of re-education.
Lt.-Colonel Thornton.-—“ The Training of South
African Disabled Soldiers, and its Lessons ” (pages
165-170). —Giving the facilities and methods of voca-
tional training in operation whilst still in military
hospital “ earlier than in any other institution in the
United Kingdom,” 90 per cent, of those suitable volun-
tarily taking advantage of their opportunities.
Sir John Collie —" Homes for recovery of Shell Shock
Cases” (pages 242-245). —Illustrating and describing
what is done officially for discharged shell-shock cases,
and the results obtained; also the establishment of
clinics for the out-patient, and psycho-therapeutic treat-
ment of these and allied cases.
Lt.-Colonel J. W. Springthorpe—“Suggestions as to
the better Treatment of War Neurosis” (pages 258-
265). —Dealing with some of the conditions that impede
efficiency, and referred to a sub-committee appointed
by the War Office to deal with such matters. I would
strongly urge ft be supported by our authorities, with
a view to the prompt removal of unnecessarily unsatis-
factory conditions.
Major Hartley—“ Care of the Tuberculous Soldier"
(pages 266-276). —Emphasizing the need for the care-
ful examination of recruits, the exclusion of past cases,
the use of experts in cases of doubt or difficulty, and
early diagnosis of fresh attacks by observation, regis-
tration of temperature, and repeated examination of
sputum, as well as suggestive physical signs.
Major Dundas Grant — “Report on the Deaf ” (pages
312-322). —Dealing with diagnosis, treatment, assess-
ment, and the benefits of lip reading.
Professor PuMi — “ Cineniatic Amputation ” (page
341). —Describing, as shown on screen, the remarkable
effects of so operating as to utilize the patients’ own
muscles for the subsequent movement of artificial ex-
tremities. “ A decisive opinion as to the value of the
method cannot at this moment be given, sufficient evi-
dence not having yet been obtained.” At the least,
exceedingly suggestive.
Major Sandes—“ The Treatment of Wounds by Con-
tinuous Bath ” (pages 435-440), —As practised at the
South African Military Hospital, Kichmond Park.
Professor de Marneffe —“ GymnaStique Medicate et
Medicins Gymnastes” (pages 415-434). —Describing
Belgian military methods and appliances.
Colonel Sir Robert Jones —" Military .Orthopaedic
Surgery. Its Scope and Aims '* (pages 519-528). —
Epitomizing up-to-date British orthopaedics.
Majors Turner and Boyer—“ Functional Re-educa-
tion. Preliminary Considerations ” (pages 408-414). —
Emphasizing the utilization of the wasted hospital time
to fill educational defects, the earliest possible recogni-
tion of the percentage of disability, with the making the
disabled the subsidiary organ, and pushing the re-edu-
cation of the sound, the importance of carrying on a
certain amount of propaganda work for the informa-
tion of certain permanently disabled cases, and the
utilization to the fullest extent of the “ active passive ”
of the patient, plus gymnasium and curative workshops.
Professor Verga—“Operations on Peripheral Nerves"
(pages 441-445).
Sir W. Mac Ewa n—•" The Limbless ” (pages 367-375).
SECTION 21.—RE-EDUCATION OF MAIMED
SOLDIERS.
With the question of re-education must be considered
what is called “ re-establishment ” by the Canadians
und “ re-adaptation ” by the Belgians. These two
latter terms are applied to the instruction in their for-
mer trade or occupation, whilst the word “ re-edu-
cation ” in a limited sense is used to denote instruction
in new work or fresh trade or occupation.
The right-handed man who had lost his right hand,
and was learning to use his left hand, was being re-
educated. I studied this question and the methods in
all the countries which I visited, and submit the attached
detailed reports on my visits to the principal centres in
each country.
United Kingdom.—Education is inseparably asso-
ciated with curative treatment, and in the United King-
dom the actual education given to invalids in hospitals
is certainly equal to that given after their discharge.
The training is used to exercise the maimed limbs, to
restore to activity the nerve centres in the brain, to
afford occupation, and in some cases recreation, for in-
valids and, at the same t time, the capacity of the invalid
to support himself is greatly increased. Workshops are
erected at nearly all the large orthopaedic hospitals, and
at some general hospitals. These workshops vary as to
the class of work taught, but generally follow the lines
laid down by Colonel Sir Bobert Jones.


Patients are kept for long periods— quite commonly
for ten or twelve months—undergoing a course of treat-
ment, and at the same time one of re-education or re-
establishment. All work done is as directed by the
Medical Officers and Officers Commanding hospitals.
After discharge from the Military Forces, which takes
place when no further treatment is required or con-
sidered necessary, the invalid, now a pensioner, is passed
to the local civilian committees working under the Pen-
sions Department. These committees, in addition to
doing much work with regard to pensions and other
financial allowances, find occupation and employment
for the men, and carry out various forms of education,
either by using the existing technical schools, or by
establishing and conducting new ones.
The class of instruction and subjects taught in each
district are of such a nature as to fit a man for the
class of employment available locally.
I visited several of these schools, which are similar to
the Workingmen’s College, in Australia. At all seen
by me, the attendance was voluntary.
These committees also arrange for the men to be
taught trades and occupations in the various privately
owned factories.
Uery good work is also being done by voluntary
efforts as opposed to Government control, the best
examples of which are the various factories scattered
throughout the United Kingdom, and known as Lord
Eoberts Workshops, all of which are doing very fine
work, the men being employed not in any respect as an
act of charity, but as a. regular business proposition.
(Papers attached.) Another example is seen, the
Oppenheimer Works, at Brighton, for cutting and
polishing diamonds, where several hundreds of crippled
or limbless men were working and earning good wages
at a new trade formerly controlled by Germany. The
proposal of the founder is to extend the works until
4,000 men can be employed. It is proposed to teach
only married men this trade.
The Queen Mary Technical School, at Brighton, for
limbless men, is one of several similar institutions where
limbless men are trained.
At the time of my visit, there was not much difficulty
in finding work for trainees, on account of the very
great demand for labour, consequently, men capable of
doing only a small amount of work were welcomed in
many places.
Some trade unions and similar organizations offered
no objection to men unable to do full work being em-
ployed alongside fully competent tradesmen, and, in
tact, had welcomed and assisted the Pensions Officers;
whilst other trade unions made strong objections, and
placed difficulties in the way. When I left England,
this was still a matter of negotiation between the repre-
sentatives of the Department and trades organizations.
Li order that no offence should be given to trade unions
whilst negotiations were proceeding, the Pensions De-
partment issued, for use by the local committee, a list
of occupations for which cripples might be trained,
designated approved trades, and to these the committees
were limited in their activities.
Special Cases. —For the re-education of blind or deaf,
and of men who had lost their right hand, special
hospitals or institutions were established, and special
departments were brought into existence in other hos-
pitals, St. Dunstan’s Institution for Blind Soldiers
was a bright example of this special work.
The deaf mutes were instructed at another hospital
in London, not so large or so well known, but good
work was being done there.
The Pilkington Home, at St. Helens, and . the
Orthopaedic Hospital, at Alder Hey—both Liver-
pool, the Welsh Metropolitan Hospital, at Cardiff, and
the Scottish Hospital, at Buangor, near Edinburgh,
were good examples of institutions doing fine work of
education, and at the same time undertaking high-class
surgical and medical treatment.
The West London Hospital, at Hammersmith, often
called Shepherd’s Bush, is one of the best known insti-
tutions for curative treatment, and is one of the large
series established and directed by Colonel Sir E. Jones.
It is, undoubtedly, a fine establishment, but in its
dimensions and size of its workshops, is far exceeded
by some of the above, and by several others. Colonel
Sir E. Jones’ original hospital at Alder Hey, Liverpool,
is amongst them. The West London Hospital is a
i show ” hospital, and is visited by a large number of
lay visitors from ail parts of the world, and one cannot
help feeling that some of the equipment is more for
show than use.
Instruction in writing with the left hand was being
given much thought by some experts. Several systems
were taught. The object of all these varied methods
is to do away with the reverse inclination of letters
as constructed by ordinary left-hand writing. Per-
sonally, I did not think there was any real value in
any of them.
Belgium. —Of all the educational institutions which
I visited in the United Kingdom, in Europe, or in
America, none equalled, or in any way were comparable
for completeness and for the character of instruction im-
parted, with that of the Belgians at Vernon, near Hantes.
Situated on a highland near the railway between Paris
and Eouen, and overlooking the Seine Valley.
I he great features of this school are the enthusiasm
of all workers or teachers, as well as of the controllers
of the institution, from the Officer Commanding down
to the men; all are soldiers. The training is compul-
sory, no man being discharged from the Belgian Army
until he has passed through the necessary training to fit
him to earn his living. The attached particulars of
my visit will convey a fair idea of both the system and
the scope of the work. I could not help feeling that
almost everywhere I went many of the best points of
this school have been copied and incorporated in the
working of many other countries.
France and Italy. —Ee-education is not compulsory
in I ranee, whilst in Italy the Government will not
grant a discharge from the Army to a maimed man who
can be benefited by re-education -unless his friends or
relatives undertake to support and care for him; there-
fore, to this extent, it is compulsory, and the trainees
in many of the Italian institutions were, as with the
Belgians, still soldiers. This was found to be the case
more often with limbless men than with other classes
of cripples.
Another difference in both Italy and Prance, as com-
pared with the United Kingdom, is the extent of the
efforts to finally cure men by surgical treatment. In
both these countries, if a man has any injury, such as
drop wrist, which might be cured by operation, and
which woul<j certainly be operated upon in the United
Kingdom, very often they do not operate if they can
teach a man to do good and effective work. Men were
seen undergoing training with various deformities, and
upon whom the surgeons had decided not to operate.
The course in most of the French and Italian educa-
tional centres is one of six months, the time being fully
occupied, and the men kept very closely at work.
They nearly all live on the premises, and are really
boarders, as at a large college. Some married men are
given permission to live at home.
The classes for agricultural training were instruc-
tive, and the system adopted is the same in both coun-
ti ies, due, no doubt, to the class of farming and of


labour required on farms. The education for farming
was as much for farm workers as for farmers them-
selves.
All the various branches of country or farm work are
taught, also the making of many of the implements and
tools used on farms. Thus, at Montpellier, in France,
and Milan, in Italy, the agricultural training embraced
instruction in the cultivation of the class of (hops
grown locally of vines, fruit trees, vegetables, marketable
flowers, care of cows, horses, stables, poultry (all kinds),
rabbits, pigs, and sheep. Not content with this, fur-
ther work had to be done in connexion with agricultural
machinery and the care of same. Horse-shoeing was
taught, also rought harness repair work, and the making
of farm brooms and wooden sabots. Ordinary school
work was carried out, and the necessary bookkeeping and
pricing for farming taught.
Of course, in no case was the course of training what
would be, in Australia, considered a complete education,
but, at the same time, it was sufficient to make a good
farm worker. At Montpellier, which was a very good
and up-to-date educational centre, the more or less
theoretical class, and such instruction as could be given
in small gardens, was carried out. When proficient in
this portion of the work, the trainees were sent to
selected and approved farms in the surrounding dis-
trict to there learn the practical side of the work. At
such farms, their progress and welfare were watched by
the school authorities.
At Montpellier, as at St. Dunstan’s, in England, an
Old Scholars’ Association existed, and the interest was
maintained by a newspaper, and an occasional gather-
ing of the past pupils, who were welcomed to the school
at all times, and were deliberately utilized by the direc-
tors to help and to encourage pupils with similar de-
formities.
India—Queen Mary Technical School for Disabled
Indian Soldiers. —Here Indian natives only were dealt
with. Prior to the establishment of this home, these
men had been given artificial limbs in Europe, which,
in nearly all cases, on arrival in India were found to
be useless. Therefore, the hospital and workshop were
established, providing accommodation for 200 invalids.
It is situated on the outskirts of Bombay, in a large
building admirably suited to the purpose, and well
managed. Artificial limbs are fitted on the premises,
and whilst awaiting fitting, men are taught various trade?
or occupations.
Some curious points were brought out when dealing
with Indians. Many will not have artificial limbs at
all, others will not wear them when made. Many who
have had both legs amputated have to be provided with
appliances to enable them to get about by using knees
instead of feet to walk.
Much work was done for the public, and outside
labour was being undercut, as, for instance, a small
flour-mill grinds corn for the public. The natives bring
corn in small quantities to be ground, and are charged
less than the outside firms charge. Similarly, socks
and stockings made at the institution are Sold to shops
and wholesale firms, thus competing in the open labour
market and unter-cutting prices.
One-armed men were being taught driving stationary
oil-engines with success, while many having both arms
were taught motor driving. Various forms of
wood and metal working were undertaken, and,
as usual, tailoring, bootmaking and repairing. One
large factory was devoted entirely to teaching men to
work knitting machines. After completion of their
education, the machines are sold to the men, who can
then earn a good living. Some forms of knitting are
suitable for one-armed men.
West London Orthopaedic Hospital Curative
Workshops.
Situated at Shepherd’s Bush. This is a large ortho-
paedic hospital; containing about 1,200 beds. Colonel
Sir Robert Jones is the Consultant Surgeon, and there
is a staff of about twenty Medical Officers.
About one-third (400) of the patients in the hospital
are given work in the shops. With the exception of
about 60, who are discharged men, and on pension, they
are soldiers.
Quite a number of the men are eventually sent back
to duty. Captain Bristowe is in charge of the electrical
department, and Dr. Senntag is in charge of the hydro-
therapy departments. The electrical departments are
amongst the most complete visited. Women are work-
ing Bristowe coils, Lowes Jones condensers, and other
apparatus under supervision.
The standard set for electrical treatment consists of a
galvanic coil, a Bristowe coil, and a metronome fof
each electrical worker, and under Dr. Bristowe the
graduated exercise of wasted and temporarily enervated
muscles is carried on. There are about twenty girl
electrical workers in this department. The hydro-
therapy and hot-air treatment rooms are extensive, and
contain contrast baths, douches of various sorts, whirl-
pool baths, and ionization.
There is an ultra-violet apparatus for treatment of
chronic healing wounds, and also a high-frequency ap-
paratus.
The Operating Theatre is very up to date, and con-
tains a Hawley table for setting of plaster immediately
after operation.
Plaster Rooms. —Casts are taken as a routine before
putting up various splints, and the complete system of
making reinforced plaster splint is shown.
The Workshops have been organized to a large extent
by Mr. Poate, of Sydney, and His Majesty King Manoel
of Portugal.
The making of splints of various sorts, especially the
metal splint introduced by Colonel Sir Robert Jones, is
done on a large scale, and all the splints necessary for
the hospital and general military hospitals are made
here. In each of the workshops there are a number of
trained mechanics in charge, and they supervise the
work of the patients.. A large number of the patients
are put to work in different departments for so many
hours each day, according to their doctor’s orders, and
efforts are made to arrange that the work they do shall
be curative as regards their physical deformity, besides
being occupational.
The workers in the wooden splint room, where Balkan
splints and other specialized apparatus is made, are all
trained carpenters.
There is a paint shop, boot-repair shop (where ortho-
paedic boots are made and ordinary repairs done),
electrical shop, blacksmith’s shop with lathe machines,
photographic shop, leather-working shop (where various
splints and apparatus are covered with leather), tailor’s
shop (where ordinary repairs and tailoring are done),
and a number of other occupational and curative work-
shops. All the work is done under the supervision of
trained experts.
A Hew Zealand Medical Officer was attached to the
staff, and a number of New Zealand orderlies were doing
a course, learning the methods adopted and the various
trades. This is to be a definite unit, which will be
sent out to New Zealand to form a central orthopaedic
unit for the training of 'personnel for similar institu-
tions in Hew Zealand,,, so that the orthopaedic work
can be carried on efficiently in New Zealand for re-
turned New Zealanders.


All the cases in the hospital part of the institution
proper are orthopaedic cases, hnd the general surgical
treatment is under the supervision of Colonel Sir R.
Jones, who visits there regularly. Dr. Purves Stewart
is attached to the hospital as neurologist.
A number of cases of bone grafting, tendon trans-
plantation, and nerve grafting were shown.
The X-Ray Department is very complete, and there is
a Transformer-Snooks apparatus in use, and not a coil,
and very good stereoscopic apparatus. The Medical
Officer in charge said that practically all X-ray cases
are'taken stereoscopically, and kept as a record.
Gymnasium and Massage Department.-— The gym-
nasium is used in connexion with the massage depart-
ment, where a system of graduated exercises against re-
sistance is carrried out. This and the massage depart-
ment is under the care of Dr. Morwell, of St. Thomas’
Hospital. The work of the massage department is less
in this hospital, because a great portion of the work is
done by the use of the Bristowe coil, which acts as a
direct mechanical stimulus for paralyzed and weakened
muscles, and so does away with the necessity for mas-
sage. The girls who are in charge of the various re-
actions have all undergone a short course of instruction
in elementary anatomy, massage, and electricity before
being detailed for the electrical work.
Prince of Wales Hospital for Limbless Soldiers.
Cardiff. —Officer Commanding, J. Lynn Thomas,
C. 8., C.M.G. It w r as a private house, given for the pur-
pose of being converted into a hospital. Accommoda-
tion for about 12 officers and 50 other ranks. Patients
are not sent here until they are convalescent and their
stumps are in a fit condition to be fitted with artificial
limbs. There are, at present, eight cases of double
amputations of legs. Both leg and arm amputation
cases are taken. Hospital is in charge of matron. No
orderlies, and the patients attend to themselves to a
great extent. They always keep one case of double
amputation of legs in hospital as a sort of show case,
and to stimulate and cheer up others being fitted and
learning to walk. Wards and hospital accommodation
good. Double amputation cases on ground floor.
Parade Room fitted with parallel bars for instruction
in walking for short and tall men. One device shown
consisted of long slabs of wood, \ inch, f inch, and 1 inch
thick. These are used for testing whether the patients’
leg is the right length. He walks along with the arti-
ficial limb treading on this board, and finds it is more
comfortable when one or other leg is raised the thickness
of the wood.
, In fitting room is what is called an aerial transporter
crutch—an arrangement for a man with double amputa-
tion to raise his own weight when being fitted. Parallel
bars, and above this a pulley with double ropes attached
to bar, from which hang padded nooses to put under
the arms. Siugle rope coming down in front, and
patient can raise his body or lower it wfixile his limbs
are being fitted. Something like tripod device for put-
ting patients back in plaster of paris, but weight taken
below armpits, and not from head (see photos in
pamphlet).
Fitting E.oom is under Blatchford, artificial limb
maker, and his arms and legs are largely used by the
hospital. Usual equipment here for making of arti-
ficial limbs, and several patients with artificial limbs
are employed in this shop.
Artificial Arm Parade Ground is a large sand-pit,
where men with artificial limbs can learn to use spade
and shovel, &c. Round this is a miniature railway, the
idea being that men may be kept interested and turn the
points, &c., with their limbs.
Artificial leg parade ground is a miniature land-
scape garden with slopes of varying degrees, hills,
and valleys, stepping stones, and paths. Paths
are paved with rough flat stones. Patients are paraded
here, and have to go u pand down hills and get practice
in walking under actual mountaineering conditions.
Colonel Lynn Thomas was most enthusiastic in regard
to the practical use of this garden, and it seemed quite
a sound claim, as a man is not always able to walk on
the flat in ordinary life. Colonel Thomas showed several
devices for use with artificial arms, the chief being
Williams’ Hook, which has a spring at its proximal endr
so that there is a certain amount of give and take. It
also has a pivot point at its point of fixation to the arm,
so that it can be moved in any direction, and when any
tool such as a hammer is attached to this it tends to
lessen the jar at the point above, and so obviate a
tramatic anthritis. (See attached pamphlet.)
There are recreation room, billiard room, &c., for both
officers and men. Originally it was intended to start
workshops, and some machinery was installed, but
patients are now sent to the Technical College in
Cardiff.
.About 500 artificial limbs a year are fitted here. Colo*
nel Thomas said that sometimes temporary stumps are
provided to men before sinuses arfe healed, but they were
not satisfactory in some cases, as sinuses will not heal if
men move about on artificial limbs. Patients are col-
lected from general hospitals and sent to Welsh Metro-
politan War Hospital for orthopaedic treatment. From
there, when their stumps are fit for temporary stumps,
they go to convalescent homes, and learn to walk pro-
perly, and then come into Prnice of Wales Hospital
to be fitted with a permanent limb. The appended
pamphlet, which gives a great deal of information, also
contains a number of jffiotographs.
The Welsh Metropolitan War Hospital, situated at
Whitchurch, near Cardiff, is entirely for orthopedic
and mental cases. The hospital was, before the war, the
Mental Asylum for South Wales. Half of it is taken up
for orthopedic, and half is kept for military mental
cases.
These latter are practically all uncertified cases.
The general arrangement is that these mental cases
(military) are held for nine months. If they are not
better they are then discharged from the army, and are
sent to the civilian mental asylums of their own towns
or districts. This is the general arrangement that is
followed in regard to mental cases arising in the
British Army.
The orthopaedic side of the Welsh Metropolitan War
Hospital is one of those orthopaedic hospitals that has
been established in Great Britain under the supervision
of Colonel Sir Robert Jones, and the whole of the ar-
rangements and equipment correspond to, but are on a
much larger scale than, some seen and described at the
West London Orthopaedic Hospital. Officer Command-
ing is Colonel Lander. Accommodation is for about
600 or 800. Accommodation is entirely in wards, and
everything is quite up to date. There is an A.M.C.
staff of about 60, besides nurses and civilian help, who
were originally employed by Asylums Board, and the
Board still retains a certain amount of control.
X-Ray room is quite up to date, and there is a large
shock transformer apparatus, as well as coils.
There are three operating theatres, which are well
equipped.
Pathological laboratory is large and well equipped,
and a great deal of work is done.
Electrical department is well equipped, and large
Bristowe cells, metronomes, and galvanic current being
the standard set for treatment. Massage is done by
masseuses.


Hydrotherapy Department.—All the usual forms of
baths and apparatus are available. There is also Taller-
man apparatus, &c.
Gymnasium is large and well fitted up with usual ap-
pliances as described at West London Orthopaedic Hos-
pital.
Splint Room.—All Sir Robert Jones’ splints are made
here. Here, and in the general workshops, a number of
the patients are employed from a curative and from a re-
educational point of view. There is a blacksmith’s
shop, where a crippled soldier is in charge of acetylene
welding plant.
Carpentry room, leather-working room, and boot-
making shop. Lathes are partly worked by foot, but
there are also larger ones worked by power. Everything
as regards workshops is equipped, and follows out
the best London hospital idea.
Kitchens are good. There is a bakery, where the
whole of the bread used in the hospital is baked. A
large laundry, with a number of up-to-date washing
appliances and two large hydro extractors of different
pattern to the usual ones were seen. These extractors
jWere made by Bradford and Company, of Manchester,
and seemed an improvement on the usual type.
The Pilkington Special Orthopaedic Hospital Liver-
pool, situated at St. Helens, 8 miles out of Liverpoool, is
for disabled soldiers and sailors after discharge. This
is another of the orthopaedic hospitals under Colonel
Sir Robert -tones, and contains several special features
of interest.
The present accommodation is for about 150 in-
patients and 150 out-patients—the latter mostly pen-
sioners.
Records of patients’ condition on admission are made,
in order to compare with records taken during course of
treatment.
The great feature of the treatment is the baths.
Hy drotherapeutical Department.—The important
element is the use of compressed air. There is a large
electric machine, made by the Rand Drill Company, of
Hew York, which compresses air in a large cylinder 20
feet long by 3 feet in diameter to a pressure of 15 lbs.
From this cylinder large pipes lead off to the various
baths. A large swimming bath with seats around the
edges. Water, 3 ft. 6 in. deep, and at a temperature of
86 degrees. Compressed air is allowed to escape into
this large bath, so that it looks like a boiling cauldron.
Patients go into this bath, swim and potter round, be-
fore having their massage or exercises. The whole point
that is claimed for. these compressed-air baths is that it
produces hyperaemia of the part immersed, and also is
soothing. Sort of gentle mechanical massage. There
1 r anot^er s^ mmin §' hath alongside— temperature
ot 12 degrees There are a series of arm baths in the
orm of troughs. The floor of these is graded, and the
water circulates from the highest to the lowest, so that
we get a succession of small “ salmon ” steps. The
water is made to circulate by a centrifugal pump at-
tached. At the same time, compressed air is liberated
into the hot running water. This form of trough is for
arm cases, and each trough can take six arms at once—
three lefts and three rights.
There are leg baths—deep troughs for two or four
egs at the same time—built in the same way—circu-
lating water and compressed air. These are a. modifica-
tion of the French eau caurant baths, with the addition
of compressed air, all used with the idea of getting
hyperemia of the affected part before passive or active
movement and massage or electricity.
Gymnasium.— The ordinary forms of gymnasium
apparatus are fixed up ladders, Sandow weights and
pulleys, ladders for swinging from, steering wheels
bicycles. This department is in charge of a gym-
nastic instructor.
Mechano Therapy: Zander Apparatus Room.—Here
are Zander apparatus in different forms, enough to treat
about 60 patients at once. The Zander apparatus used
is modified from the ordinary apparatus, inasmuch as
all movements done are capable of being recorded, and
the patient can see from week to week or month to month
what improvement is being made. All this apparatus
was made by Zander, in Paris. A number of females
are in charge of these machines, and every care is taken
that experiments are not tried that might result in
injury being done to stiff joints. The movements of
all these apparati have been carefully gone into.
There is an apparatus for moving every joint in the
body. The form of movement to be given is ordered
by the doctor, and carried out under supervision. The
doctor sees the patient and his record of movement at
intervals.
In connexion with the movements of joints, the in-
strument called a “ coniometer ” is used to record the
amount of movement at individual points. (See illus-
trated pamphlet.)
Electrical Room.—There are about 40 sets of in-
struments. Bristowe coil. Galvanic current, combined
current and astronoms at each table. Each table is in
charge of a masseuse, more or less trained, and here
again records are kept of the progress made each week.
Massage Department.—ln connexion with electrical
room. The necessity for massage is done away with,
largely by the graduated movements obtained by the use
of the Bristowe coil, &c.
X-Ray Department.—Large shock apparatus, and all
modern American appliances in use.
Workshops.—Good and well equipped. One-armed
men are taught to write with left hand, and carpentry,
splint-making, &c.
Plaster Cast Room, where plaster casts are made for
fitting of splints for feet, hands, &c., and also museum
with casts of deformities before and after treatment.
Operating Theatre.—Up to date, but not much sur-
gery is done here, as patients mostly been finalized
as regards surgery treatment before admission.
Thermo Therapy.—Compressed air is utilized. There
are various boxes used, just like ordinary Tallerman
boxes, but instead of the radiant heat used here, there
is in connexion with each box a small electrical heater,
with switch for either one, two, or three heaters. The
compressed air is passed into these boxes, and from
there into the I allerman box, which holds the affected
limb or part of the body. In each case box is a ther-
mometer. Ihe heat, therefore, is a dry heat, but as the
air is circulating the moisture from perspiration,
&c., is largely got rid of. These small boxes are exactly
like little radiators, through which the compressed air
is passed,.and the heated compressed air is passed by a
nozzle into the actual Tallerman chamber. This is the
first institution where I have seen this method employed,
and it seems to have many advantages, provided appa-
ratus is available for the compressed air. Another advan-
tage of this method is that the compressed heated air
can be moved about from part to part. For instance, in
a case of sciatica, the nozzle would be played over the
couise of the sciatic nerve. The result is, of course, a
local hypersemia. The attached pamphlet illustrates all
t icse different departments. In the Tallerman boxes
the limbs to be treated are packed round with asbestos
cotton wool, and a temperature of about 350 degrees
centigrade dry heat can be obtained when all three
switches are turned on.
Alderney Hospital, Liverpool—Orthopaedic.— Officer
Commanding, Lieutenant-Colonel Mac Diarmid. This


hospital was in existence before the war, and was the
first orthopaedic hospital really opened by Colonel Sir
Robert Jones. It is now situated in a modern hospital
building that was designed for a children’s hospital,
with accommodation for 1,700 patients. Ward accom-
modation is modern.
Theatre up to date. ,
Workshops are seen here at their best, and are on
a much bigger scale than at West London Orthopaedic.
Splint-making, carpentry, boot repairing, plaster cast
making, acetylene welding, blacksmithing, &c.
Acetylene welding, most useful for making iron
splints; cylinder of oxygen, cylinder of acetylene gas
(outside the workshops), pipes leading from each of
these to a pipe with mixing chamber and burner at the
end. When lit, flames go up to temperature of 1,700
degrees. Special iron is used as flux, and this and the two
articles to be welded are all made red hot and melt into
solid mass, aud are so joined together. Useful in mak-
ing Thomas splints, &c.
In all these workshops, patients are employed under a
trained superintendent. Patients who work get extra
leave; superintendent gets grant from Government of
£SOO per year, and for articles made charges cost price
to hospitals, and trade price to others, so that the con-
cern is not run at a loss.
Electrical Room fitted up as at West London Hospital;
dynamos were being installed instead of accumulators.
Lewis Jones Condenser used for testing muscle’s reac-
tions. Otherwise equipment as described at Pilkington,
but on much bigger scale.
Massage Room. —Very large. All masseuses trained
and have special course in electrical work. The operat-
ing surgeon in charge of patient remains in charge,
even when the patient’s operative work is finished and is
sent to this department for massage and electricity.
Massage and hydropathy departments are under super-
vision of Medical Officer, and the electrotherapy depart-
ment is also under the supervision of another Medical
Officer. These Medical Officers take instructions from
the Medical Officer who did the original operation.
Hydrotherapy Department is much the same as at
West London Orthopaedic Hospital, but on larger scale.
All sorts of whirlpool baths, hot-air apparatus, &e., but
there is no compressed air here, as at Pilkington.
There are wards for leg cases—amputation cases —
and these are all fitted and finalized. The temporary
peg-legs or pylons were seen being made in the work-
shops, and the method of making these of papier mache
is interesting.
Papier mache pylons.—Ordinary waste paper is boiled
and stirred till soft, when the mass, though soft, breaks
easily in small lumps; then squeezed out in muslin
to get rid of excess water, mixed with ordinary glue,
and makes then a putty-like mass, but still friable; it is
then mixed with a small quantity of ordinary whiting.
This does away with friability, and the mass can be
pasted on with a putty knife,' and has now a putty-like
consistency.
Method of making the bucket for a stump.—First a
plaster cast of the stump is made in the ordinary way.
This is covered with felt sewn on to fit tightly. The
felt covered over with a mixture of papier mache
and glue, pasted on to form a thin layer with a
putty knife, and is allowed to dxy. This takes
several hours. In making the cast, about 2 or 3 inches 1
is added’on to length of cast, in order to allow for pack-
ing, and the bucket is made this extra length. Then the
bucket is taken off and trimmed up. A bottom piece
of wood is now fixed on to it. When dry, the side pieces
of iron wire, one on either side and one fore and aft,
are moulded on to the bucket and fixed in position
with gauze aud glue, and possibly with more papier*
mache. These side and front irons have the bottom
piece of iron attached, to which the peg-leg is attached.
When this is dry the whole is again covered with
gauze saturated with glue, and the whole painted. The
pylon is now finished, and should fit the stump per-
fectly, and as there is a space of 2 or 3 inches at bottom
of the bucket for packing, this is filled as much as re-
quired with cotton wool. If there is to be a joint at the
knee, this is fitted on, and the position of the joint
marked from the other knee. This temporary pylon
will last quite well for at least four to six months, and
by that time the permanent stump can be made and
fitted.
At the Alder Hay Hospital I saw examples of the
Critchley leg. This is a leg which has a band brake on
the knee, so that the knee joint can be locked at any
angle desired. It works quite well, and the mechanism
is simple. As soon as any weight is put on the toe the
band brake tightens and the joint is fixed. When the
weight is put on to the heel the joint is free. The
Medical Officer stated that it took somewhat longer for
patients to get used to this type of leg. When the sim-
plicity of the mechanism is seen, one wonders that it
was not invented before, as the need of rigidity at the
knee joint has been the outstanding weak feature of arti-
ficial legs, particularly in eases of double amputations.
The Medical Officer stated that the leg which had
been used most and given most satisfaction at this hos-
pital was the Essential, but other forms of legs are used
—Hangar’s, Anderson’s, &c. Patients are allowed to
choose within limits. Arm cases are taken here, hut not
many, as they are generally sent to Rockhampton to be
fitted.
I visited Critchley’s shop and saw the models of his
legs, and obtained drawings and specifications of his
patent.
Glasgow. —l went with Sir William McEwan to see
an artificial leg factory conducted by Yarrow and Com-
pany, shipbuilders, in Glasgow. Here the willow wood
for artificial limbs is dried artificially in from three to
four weeks. I saw one leg which before being dried
weighed 13 lbs.; after drying 5 lbs. This artificial dry-
ing saves'-a great deal of time, as natural drying takes
from eighteen months to two years.
All the legs made are standardized—the same metal fit-
tings are adaptable for any leg, and if a man loses a bolt or
a nut one can be easily supplied. There was a stock
of all parts of legs, fully 300 completed legs, i.e., the
knee joint and downwards. Measurements are sent as
to the legs required, and the completed leg is sent from
the knee joint downwards, also a block of wood for the
bucket, and this is made and fitted at the hospital work-
shops. The legs are made in sizes and numbered, and
when the measurements, &c., are supplied, it is pos-
sible to provide a suitable leg for the case. The mea-
surements are given by taking the actual tracing of the
stump* and of the sound leg, so that there will be no
rtiistake.
The idea of standardizing the parts is that any
mechanic or blacksmith can repair an artificial limb,
and all the bolts and screws are made to be easily got at.
Erskine House Hospital and Workshops for Limbless
Soldiers and Sailors.- —This is situated about 12 miles
out of Glasgow, and is located in the house of a noble-
man, which has been converted into a hospital—the
Princess Louise Hospital. Accommodation for 400
limbless men.
There is a good operating theatre and a good X-ray
outfit (Snook’s machine), Surgeon-General Sir Wil-
liam McEwan does the surgery. All men as soon as
possible are fitted with a temporary stump. These also
are standardized as already described in the notes on the
Erskine exhibit at the exhibition held in London.


t There are eight sizes of rings to fit the thigh. The
man chooses which size fits him, and the temporary
stump is provided according to this size. Each of the
eight stock sizes aye subdivided again into A, B, and C,
according to the length of the leg.
The bucket of this temporary stump can be drawn in
by straps so as to fit the stump as it shrinks.
Some of these temporary peg-legs are provided with
a joint at the knee, which can be made to lock. The
patient can Avear a boot on the peg, and the bucket is
made so that it will fit the permanent leg so that the
permanent bucket can be repaired or altered while the
patient is still wearing the temporary bucket.
The temporary peg-legs are very light, and many of
the patients prefer them to the permanent legs, especially
for rough work, as for a labourer, &c. (See pamphlet
on Erskine workshops.)
Workshops for making the temporary, the permanent
buckets, and for doing repairs, also some workshops for
boot repairing, carpentry, and turnery, bucket-making,
&c., where limbless patients are employed. The work-
shops are very small, and only employ a small per-
centage of the patients. About 50 legs per week are
fitted and turned out.
Surgeon-General Sir William MeEwan has the
patients fitted with temporary peg-legs before their
stumps are healed, and not only sees no objection to this
practice, but says it is a good thing, as it hastens the
. loosening of any dead bone, and the dressing can easily
be done with the peg leg in position. Of course, the
cases are chosen, but it has the advantage that the
muscles of the patients’ stumps are exercised at an
early date.
I nere is a large room fitted with ramps and parallel
bars for teaching the patients to walk with their stumps
on, just as at Cardiff Prince of Wales Hospital.
' kitchens of this hospital are of interest, inasmuch
as the whole of the cooking is done by electricity, which
is generated on the premises.
The Wards are built outside, and hold about 60 beds
each, and were bright and cheerful. Temporary wooden
hutments. This is the main hospital in Scotland for
limbless soldiers and sailors,
i -i-idinourgh War Hospital.-—Situated at Buangor,
about 14 miles out of Edinburgh. Officer Commanding*
Lieutenant-Colonel Raye. Accommodation for about
5,000 patients. Ibis hospital was, before the war, the
Lunatic Asylum for Edinburgh District. The accom-
modation is provided in about a dozen large stone
buildings, and a number of temporary buildings have
been erected. About 1,000 beds are provided in large
marquee tents scattered about the hospital grounds.
There is a central kitchen for the Avhole, and the
tood is taken to all the different buildings in motor
earners, as the buildings are Avidely separated, but each
building has a kitchen for invalid foods, &c.
Class of Patients.—This hospital is practically a
general hospital, and receives patients in convoys
direct from France. Of the total accommodation
there are about 1,200 beds reserved for orthopaedic cases
and it Ayas this part of the hospital that I specially
inspected. This orthopaedic department is under
the supervision of Colonel Sir Harold Stiles, of Edin-
burgh, and there is a resident staff of eight Medical
Officers, several of whom are Americans. The Avards
operating theatre, and X-ray room do not present any
feature of marked interest.
Workshops. The Office Commanding has made a
point of giving employment not only to orthoptedic cases,
but to convalescent cases of any description. The em-
-18 lT ked on J more as convalescent
patients something to do rather than be curative.
1 heoretically, work is not compulsory, but practically
the patients who are fit to work are induced or made to
work.
First, patients who work get extra leave.
Second, patients who work get 3s. per week of their
pay.
This is left to the discretion of the Officer Command-
ing, and he holds that a man whose Medical Officer
says he is able to work and will not is not a suitable
patient to have pay given to him.
Third, patients who work get extra cigarettes and
tobacco from the Red Cross issue.
Fourth, patients who work have preference in
being allowed to go to the various entertain-
ments that are organized for patients in hos-
pital. . •
These regulations only apply, of course, to those
patients who are labelled by the Medical Officers as
being fit to do light work, and, as a matter of fact, the
Officer Commanding says that of these convalescent
patients practically all of’them do find employment in
the workshops. In giving these patients work, the ques-
tion of what work will be curative for them as regards
their disability is considered, and they are allowed a
certain amount of choice according to their previous
trade or occupation.
The workshops are all under the supervision of Major
Coles, who takes a great interest in his department.
The scope of the workshops is much the same as at other
hospitals visited. Basket-working, carpentry, turnery,
lathe machines, making of household implements, elec-
trical workshops, blacksmith’s shop, &c.
All the splints required in the hospital are made in
the workshops, and repairs executed to artificial limbs,
and all the temporary peg-legs, <fec., are also made. The
bucket for temporary peg-legs are made from plaster of
paris, the stumps being first covered with a sock, and
the plaster put on and then the iron or three-ply
wood su2)ports incorporated in the plaster of paris
bucket. This works quite well, only in special cases is
a plaster of paris cast of the stump made and the bucket
fitted to this, as at Alder Hay, in Liverpool.
Electro therapeutic and hydrotherapy departments
are provided much on the same lines as already described
at Alder Hay Hospital, but so far the equipment is not
as complete. In the whirlpool baths, air is driven direct
into the without previous compression, as at Pil-
kington Hospital. This apparatus, which is a simple
orced-air pump driven by electricity, is much simpler
t nan the apparatus described at Pilkington, but seems
effective.
The massage and electrical work is done by trained
masseuses, who have had a special course of training ill
o ectncity, and Bristowe machines are in use, but the
opeiaiois are not as keen in regard to them as they are
those at West London Hospital.
In the wards I saw* several cases of tendon trans-
it antation done in cases of irreparable nerve injury.
o onel Stiles is keen on this work being performed
early m cases where nerve regeneration is not possible.
One of the appliances for extension of fingers, &c., in
vn.-t injuries Avas novel. Instead of elastic extension,
smad ratchets are fixed at the end of a tennis racquet
sp int, and the extension can be regulated for each
finger by means of these ratdhets.
Queen Mary Technical School for Limbless Soldiers,
Brighton.—An old building of Oriental type, formerly
a palace erected by George IV. It was early in the war
used as a hospital for Indian soldiers, and has accom-
modation for 200 men. The palace building, including
he old stable and menage, are not readily adaptable to
the purpose of such an institution.
Very little medical treatment is carried out, and little
attention paid to artificial limb cases. The workshops
can accommodate 100 men, so all work is taught in two


shifts daily, with short hours. All the usual trades are
taught, and a large class of men who had had the right
arm amputated were being taught commercial work, and
to use their left hand. Very little care is taken in
guiding the men in the choice of a new trade, or as to
their possibilities of employment -and success after the
war, when they must compete Avith first class workmen.
The men practically choose their own trade or occupa-
tion, though nominally the director is consulted.
I was not impressed either with the accommodation
afforded or with the general tone of the institution.
Belgian Re-educational School.
Vernon, near Rouen—lnstitute ’Militaire des In-
valides et Orpheiins de la Guerre. —This is the Belgian
institution for re-education and re-adaptation of
wounded soldiers, and is situated at Port Yillez, near
Vernon, about 25 miles from Paris.
Director, Lieutenant-Colonel Bo set, and the institu-
tion has about 1,800 beds. The hospital part, 320
beds, is principally for cases of local sick-
ness; but when I was there, I visited some 60 odd
Americans, who Avere injured in a troop train collision
close by. It has the usual equipment of a military
hospital. There is an X-ray room, pathological labora-
tory, operating theatre, &c., besides a gymnasium and a
department of orthopaedics. There are over 300 cases
of men Avho have lost limbs at the institution, and the
majority are being re-educated in some trade; but
some need further operative treatment and fitting of
artificial limbs, which is carried out in the hospital at
Rouen.
The re-educational schools altogether have about
1,500 men under instruction. They speak of re-adapta-
tion for those men who were in a particular trade be-
fore the war, but who, owing to their injuries, require
to be taught to re-adapt themselves to their trade.
With the Belgians, re-education is compulsory, and
the men are not discharged from the Army until they
have gone through a course of re-education. They re-
ceive military pay, and do not get their pension until
they have been discharged from the Army. The Officer
Commanding said there was very little trouble, as the
men wish to be rehabilitated and fitted for civil em-
ployment. A man who is to be discharged from the
Army, and Avho is capable of taking up his former trade,
is not re-educated at all, nor taught another trade, even
if he desires it. He is re-adapted to his old trade.
Each man is given the opportunity to state Avhat trade
he wishes to learn. A committee considers each case
separately, and advises the man, but the man himself
is allowed the final choice when ijb has been decided he
is to learn a new trade. When a man will be incapable
of making about 75 per cent, of his former earnings
when re-educated at his original trade, he is re-adapted
for his former trade, or given advice to take up a similar
trade, as otherwise his former knowledge and experience
may be lost.
It is reckoned that about 75 per cent, competency,
plus his pension, Avill enable him to earn his livelihood.
The course of training extends up to two years for
many of the trades, each course is di\ T ided into term
or sessions, and each man must go right through the
different sections before he is considered as re-educatet
arid given his discharge from the Army.
The courses of training throughout are as at a well-
equipped technical college or university, and the classes
might easily be taken for those of a high-class technical
college in ciAul life. In some of the classes, regular
examinations are held and diplomas giA r en, so that, ar
the end of his re-education, the man is qualified to take
highly technical positions. The institution definitely,
undertakes to get the men placed in suitable positions
when re-educated, and numbers of men have been so
placed, even where competitive examinations are neces-
sary.
There are over 70 highly trained teachers in the insti-
-1 tution; between 50 and 60 different trades and pro-
fessions are taught, and all in the same thorough man-
ner. This institution has been in existence over three
years, and is by far the most comprehensive and
thorough school of the kind visited, and, seeing this,
one realizes that the other schools run on the same lines,
or similar lines, for the re-education of disabled soldiers
such as those seen in Canada, England, and France,
have almost certainly adopted the methods of this in-
stitution. f
The teaching of English is extensively carried out,
also other languages. One man, who had lost a leg and
an arm, has been in the school for eighteen months,
has been taught four languages, and is being trained as
a foreign correspondence clerk.
Diamond-cutting and polishing is being taught, also
the curing of skins and the preparation of furs, which
are very suitable trades for a partly-disabled man.
There are all the ordinary trades that have been
mentioned in - other institutions—carpentry, french-
polishing, tailoring, bootmaking and repairing, brush-
making, watchmaking, accountancy and business train-
ing, designing, modelling, wood carving, basket-making,
sculpture, photography and photograph retouching,
printing and linotype printing, typewriting, shorthand,
linotype, plate making, etching on metal for engraving,
brass beating, painting and artistic signwriting, electri-
city, wood turning and working in metals, blacksmith-
ing, bakery, repair and tuning of pianos .and organs,
bookbinding and repairing, hair cutting and wig mak-
ing, are amongst these.
In the printing school, a medical journal is published
each week for some Belgian Army Medical Society.
Every branch of architecture is very fully taught.
The highly artistic types of occupations, such as paint-
ing on china, engraving, scenic and advertising painting
and signwriting, embossing and illumination of
addresses, making of artistic book covers, decorative
sculpture, &c., are exceedingly well and thoroughly
taught, and a pupil who goes through these courses be-
comes practically a master tradesman.
The making of wooden sabots, such as are used by
the Belgians, is also carried out, and from 12,000 to
15,000 pairs a month are made for the Belgian Army.
This is easy work, and a man soon becomes proficient.
Besides these, there are at the main school classes for
poultry rearing, and use of incubators, a piggery for
teaching the keeping of pigs. Babbit hutches for
rabbits and hares, horses, cows, and sheep are kept and
looked'after by the men who intend to be farmers.
Attached to the schools are four farms, where farming
on a large scale is carried out, and men are drafted
to this farm work after having had some instruction at
the school. All sorts of crops and vegetables are grown.
There is also at the school a large flower garden, where
expert gardening is taught. On the farms, pig farm-
ing, poultry raising, dairy farming, sheep farming, &c.,
are all carried out on a large scale; so that a man, on
undergoing the complete course, should be a scientific
farmer. While here, too, is given instruction regarding
manures and soil, the commercial side of farming is not
neglected. The articles manufactured in all the differ-
ent schools are marketed. A very large number of
wicker baskets are put on the market, also boots and
saddlery, carpentry, and household utensils made in the
workshops.
While the object of the institution has never been to
make money, but to re-educate disabled men, it ia


realized that in re-educating these men to commence
trades for themselves, the purely business side cannot
be neglected, and those men who require it are given
the chance to get thoroughly au fait with the business
aspect of marketing the commodities that they are to
make for a livelihood in the future.
The men, during the course of their re-education, are 11
housed in barracks at the schools. The barracks, con-
sidered from an Australian point of view, were poor
and untidy; each man has a bedstead, and those who
have not been long out of hospital have extra mat-
tresses, &c. Large men’s rooms are provided to seat up
to 1,200; there is a concert and entertainment hall, a
church, reading rooms with a library attached, play
and sports grounds, and every inducement to make the
outdoor life agreeable and pleasant. The food is good,
and meat is provided twice a day.
_ A certain number of the men have their families
living in the village close by, and they are allowed to
live with them, but attend the classes daily.
Records are kept by the teachers of all the classes,
and the men’s progress in their work is recorded, and no
man is discharged until the committee is satisfied that
his re-education is complete.
Re-education—France and Italy.
Rouen, France, 1918.
Ecole de Re-education Professionale des Blesses de la
Guerre. Director, J. Breuil. There are a number of
these schools situated in the large towns in France, one
in each town of 40,000 inhabitants, and two or more
in the larger towns. The scope of the re-education
work varies in the different towns according to the faci-
lities afforded. All the men dealt with have been dis-
abled as a result of the war, and the object of the schools
is to put them in a position to again earn their living,
either at their original or at some other trade.
At the school in Rouen, the following were the
branches of teaching undertaken:—
Accountancy in all its branches.
School Teaching and education of men to become
teachers in similar institutions to this one, and in
ordinary schools.
Bootmaking and Repairing. —At the end of
. twelve months, it is reckoned that an absolutely
inexperienced man would be able to start for him-
self.
Watchmaking and Repairing. —Here the course
of instruction extends up to eighteen months.
Tailoring.— lnstruction up to twelve months
Basket Making.
Tinsmith Work in a large number of its branches.
Hairdressing and Wigmaking was started, but
has been discontinued, as a sufficient number of
pupils were not available.
There are about 100 soldiers being re-educated at*
tins school, most of whom are kept entirely at the school
—a tew only are extern pupils. They are boarded and
ted at the institution, and are paid 'a small salary. Pay
starts at 50 centimes, and works up to 1 franc per day
with an extra bonus for good work. Ho charge is
made lor the course of instruction. All the pupils
have been actually discharged from the Army and
those seen were mostly men who had lost a limb, or had
stiff or weak joints, &c.
Their sleeping, messing, and recreation quarters were
(t™ e ’£ nd 3 ej haV * a regular routine. Get
up at 6.30, breakfast at 7, work from 8 till 12, with
fifteen mmutes off for rest. Lunch 12, work from 1.30
of IvTl! % teeil ™ te3 ’ work 5. Course
ot study—English, French language, &c., till 6.30;
' dinner, 6.45; recreation from 8 till 9; and to bed.
Teachers are provided in all the classes.
The courses of study and work have been carefully
thought out, and the Director said he had had no
trouble with the men, all of whom seemed anxious to
learn and equip themselves for their work. There are
fc no other regulations beyond the ordinary routine, and
that the men shall work and try to improve themselves.
A large class of one-armed men were being taught to be
school teachers. Course up two years.
Ecole de Re-education Professionale du Grand Palais.
—This is in the old exhibition building. I saw the
different classes of re-education. They have 350 men
employed here—all maimed soldiers—and the majority
of them have beeft discharged from the Army.
The following were some of the trades being taught
Bookbinding and repairing, glass-blowing, soap-making,
tailoring, hairdressing and wig-making, carpentry and
upholstering, work in .electrical workshops and metal
turnery, tinsmith work, work in mechanical workshops,
cleaning of clothes and repairing, bootmaking and re-
pairing, &c., &c. There were also classes in accountancy
and commercial training, English designing and orna-
mentation, modelling, re-touching photographs, photo-
graphy, and political economy. Altogether, the classes
visited were most complete, and all were well attended.
The men generally work from six to eight hours a
day, but any that have to attend the departments of
treatment, massage, &c., were allowed off to do so.
Those men who have been discharged have their
pensions; those not discharged have their military pay,
plus allowances (about 3s. per day) to their dependants,
and as soon as they are able to turn out profitable
work they receive allowances for their work.
Institute National Professional des Invalids de la
Gueire a Saint Maurice (Seine). —This is a well-known
re-educational establishment of St. Maurice, situated
just outside Paris. The director, Dr. Bourillon, is well
known, and I went over the institute with him. There
is a hospital proper, which accommodates from 800 to
1,000 patients; and in connexion with this are the re-
educational workshops, where there is room for about
300 men to be employed. The trades taught are much
t ie same as at the Grand Palais—bootmaking, carpen-
try, &c. There are large, new mechanical workshops
and electrical workshops being installed, as the present
accommodation is too small. A large factory attached
to this hospital for the manufacture of artificial limbs
ia been recently destroyed by fire, and has not yet
been rebuilt.
Taken altogether, the institution was not as good as
many others I have seen.
The operating theatre and dressing-rooms of the
hospital proper represented no feature of special in-
terest, and the same applies to the departments of
mechano-therapy, massage, and electricity.
the men undergoing re-education are lodged and fed
in the institution, and are allowed to attend the differ-
ent departments for treatment if required
La Maison Blanche.—Situated at Heuilly-sur-Marne,
about U miles out of Paris. It is a branch of the Ecole
de Re-education Professionale du Grand Palais, but the
i educational part is entirely for men who have lost
an arm or a leg, or both. (There is a hospital in con-
nexion with this institution. There is a storeroom for
the stock of temporary limbs—l egs , arms, and ap-
pliances. There was a very large stock of these buckets
and pylons of all sizes, all of standard pattern. They
were very light and well made, are of wood, and padded
„ 1 - ~a n,y , S]zestum P- Here, also, were seen various
appliances for fitting on to stump of arms, &c.
norirv ~ , M I K 1 S 0! li(M> wkk a is given a tom-
bin' lull' 6 ' f.” d . a P erman ent one if he desires it,
at this institution, only the temporary legs are


fitted. Patients are not sent to the re-educational school
until they are ready to be fitted, and they are not dis-
charged from the Army until they have finished their
course of training, if they elect to go on with it. Here,
again, the Director said the vast majority of the men
prefer the peg-legs to the ordinary artificial legs, and
certainly for their work it seems the general rule to
use the former.
The workshops are well built and well equipped. The
scope of the training is much the same as at the Grand
Palais, but the workshops are much bigger and better,
and everything gives one the impression of having been
well thought out and planned, and to afford the men a
really good training for their trade. They remain in
this institution from two months to a year, according
to the trade and their intelligence, and when they com- 1
plete their training, they are placed in a situation by the
institution. Most of the men live on the premises, and
there are quarters for married men, where each house
has a small plot of ground for cultivation.
The Training School was very complete. There are
about 150 acres under cultivation, and all the work is
done by the limbless men. About 60 per cent, of the
wounded men who have lost limbs were on the land
originally, and so this class principally does the farm
work, as the other men do not, as a rule, elect to be
taught farming. Sheep, pigs, poultry, rabbits, cows,
bullocks, and fowls, are on the farm. The area is cul-
tivated ydth all sorts of crops, and the whole system is
taught scientifically and systematically, so that a man
gains experience in managing horses, cattle, sheep, &c.,
besides the actual cultivation of the land.
Vegetables are extensively grown, and the men take
a great interest in the work.
One new departure seen in the re-education school
was the preparation of skins and furs. This should- be
a suitable occupation to be taught in Australia, as it is
work that can be done well by a man who ’has lost a
leg.
Montpellier (South-west France).
Ecole Professionale de Blesses de la XVI. Region.—
The school for the re-education of the wounded
in this region, of which Montpellier is the centre,
is the largest of the schools established throughout
France by the Government for the re-education of the
wounded and mutilated. There are about 300 men
undergoing re-education, and the Director said that
about 600 men had been passed through the school, and
had practically all been placed in situations after the
completion of their education. The Director is M.
Droissart, a Belgian, who showed us oyer the school.
Re-education is not compulsory, but any discharged
man who wishes to be taught, and who is unable to follow
his former avocation, is eligible for admission. Ho
one who is able to follow his old trade is eligible. There
are extern and intern students, the former being men
who are not yet discharged from the Army, and who
are living in hospital, or whose families live in Mont-
pellier. All the other pupils are discharged men. They
are kept entirely in the school, receive no pay, or, if
their work is satisfactory, 50 centimes per day; but
allowances are paid to their dependants jusd the same
as when they were in the Army.
M. Droissart, the Director, is strongly of the opinion
that, no matter how badly injured, there are no men,
after they have recovered from the acute illness, who
were unable to be taught to make something, and so
to spend their time usefully. The system employed in
this re-education centre is practically the same as at
the Belgian school at Vernon, but on a much smaller
Artificial limbs are fitted and altered, and a
certain number are made. There was nothing striking
to mention about the department. The school itself is
an annexe of the general hospital, part of which has
been taken over as a military hospital; and, in this
portion of the hospital there are massage, hydro-
therapy, mechano-therapy, and electrical departments,
just on the same lines as other hospitals already de-
scribed.
A certain number of men who have been farmers, or
intend to go on the land, are taught trades—shoeing,
mechanical work, &c., —generally such as is likely to be
useful on a fa,rm, and receive instructions respecting
vegetables, grain growing and cultivation; and are, on
the completion of these courses, sent out to approved
farms in the neighbourhood, where they get practical
work. All men, on admission, are taken over the work-
shops, seen personally by the Director, and given a
choice of the trade they are to learn, but they are advised
by the Director according to their physical condition
and their mental aptitude. The reports by the teachers
are considered by the Director, and if these reports are
unsatisfactory, the man is advised to transfer to
another trade.
I he system seems to be satisfactory, and there has
been no trouble regarding the discipline of the men.
A man is allowed to leave the school at any time he
wishes, but he is advised if a fuller course would increase
his earning capacity.
There is an old students’ re-union, and the Director
endeavours to keep in close touch with all men who have
passed through the institution.
The literature and pamphlets of the institution give
the scope and regulations of the work done. The classes
seen and visited were about twenty in number, and are
of the usual type—general education, bookkeeping,
stenography, shorthand, English and accountancy, shoe-
making and repairing, saddle and harness making,
motor mechanical workshops, wood carving and sculp-
ture, carpentry, joinery, and wood turning, metal work-
ing and tinsmith shops, &c. Recreation and reading
rooms are provided, and concerts and educational cinema
shows are held regularly. All men, while in the insti-
tution, are entitled to receive medical attention as re-
quired. I saw working in the garden-some men who
had lost an arm. They were using various kinds of
apparatus fixed to their stump. One man, with a
double amputation of the arms, was digging the garden
quite comfortably.
Great stress is laid on the re-education of the moral
tone of the men, as men who have lost limbs are apt
to be depressed, and living in an institution where they
can see the actual results in other men—who are often
more seriously mutilated than themselves—has a very
helpful influence. The personal encouragement of the
Director and his staff of teachers has also a very definite
influence for good.
Lyons.—Hospital and workshop for re-education,
situated in an old hospital building on the bank of the
Rhone; not different in any important points from
those at Rouen and Montpellier. This institution was
on the same lines as at Rouen and Montpellier, but it
is a much smaller school. The Director is M. le Oetoi
INTore Josserand, Professor Medicin de Ist Classe.
Italy.
Milan—Comitato Lambardo Pro Mutilato in Guerre.
Gorla I. — Situated about 3 miles out of Milan. This
is one of the re-educational schools established in Italy
for maimed and mutilated soldiers. The guiding spirit
of this institution is Professor Galliatzi, but the school
itself is more or less a Government concern. It is
divided into three sections: Ist. For teaching of ordi-
nary trades; 2nd. For elementary and secondary educa-
tion, reading, art, accountancy, and ordinary clerkship,
&c.; 3rd. Agricultural college for men wishing to go on


the land. There are altogether about 380 men in the
first and third section, and about 130 in the second sec-
tion; and I -was informed that this is the largest insti-
tution of the kind in Italy.
Hone of the men are discharged from the Army before
re-education. Their wives and dependants receive the
same separation allowance as when soldiers are at the
war.
Re-education for a maimed man is compulsory unless
his friends and relatives furnish an undertaking in
writing to support him. The Government insist that
a man who is not able to follow his ordinary avocation
shall have at least six months’ re-education. During
this time he lives at the school, and is entirely main-
tained there. If his wife and family live in the near
neighbourhood, he is given extra leave on Sundays, &c.,
but is not allowed to live with his family.
In Italy, the question of pension has not been
finalized, and apparently will not be granted until the
war is over. Even though a man has finished his re-
education, and has taken up civil employment, he is
not discharged but placed on the Reserve, and is liable
to be called up again.
There is an Officer Commanding in the institution,
who attends to the discipline and general welfare of the
men.
The trades taught, which are under master trades-
men, are shoemaking and repairing, carpentry in all its
branches, frenchpolishing, work in machine and
mechanical workshops—which weate especially good,
basket making, tailoring, &c.
In the art school, one-armed men are taught to write
and. draw, also painting, sculpture, architecture, book-
keeping, and accountancy.
In the agricultural school, the men are first taught to
be handy men, i.e., to make any ordinary appliances
used on the farm, brooms, tools, &c.; also to make
wooden sabots or shoes, which are largely used by the
peasantry in Italy; carpentry, and blacksmithing work.
They have also instruction in the keeping of silkworms,
which is a large industry in Italy. The keeping of
poultry, rabbits, hares, pigs, cows, &c., is carried out
on a small scale, so that the men may become familiar
with the work necessary in connexion with the keeping
of these on a farm. Vegetable and flower gardening,
all sorts of grain growing, and fertilization of the land
taught practically, and lectures are given on these sub-
jects.
The system of teaching is complete and practical,
and when the man has finished his course, he should be
able to obtain employment in his particular trade. A
large number of men have passed through the school,
and have been placed in situations after the completion
of their course of farming.
In connexion with the school, there is a large work-
snop for the manufacture of artificial limbs—temporary
and permanent—and here 100 workmen are employed,
but these are mostly skilled artisans, and only a few
war cripples are employed. The limbs, which are made
on a large scale, are illustrated in the pamphlet attached.
The exhibit of limbs from this factory were amongst
the best of the exhibits shown at the Inter-Allied Con-
gress in London. It is the Eerrocis della Stats, and
apparently the limbmaking section is subsidized by the
Government.
In the barracks where the men are housed are several
large rooms devoted to the mechano-therapy. This is
Professor Galliatzi’s speciality, and he has invented a
number of scientific appliances for registering the exact
functional capacity of amputated stumps, &c. The'Se
instruments make records on revolving drums, so
that permanent records are available to refer to from
time to time. Some of the appliances are like modified
Zander apparatus, and extremely scientific, and do not
seem to be used much.
In the making of buckets for artificial limbs, plaster
casts of the stumps are always employed, and there is
a very larger plaster-cast section in the factory.
1 Rome —Institute di Re-educatione Professional.—
Operi di assistazai Militair Ciechi Storpi Mutilati.
Ville Son Filepp.— This is another of the schools for
technical education of disabled soldiers, which was
originally started by the American Red Cross. It is
situated at a large villa in a suburb of Rome, and has
accommodation for 275 men, but there are only about
170 at present. Attached to the technical school is a
farm, where ordinary farm work, vegetable and flower
growing are carried out by the invalids as a course of
instructional education. The classes that are held
in the technical school proper, are much on the
same type as seSn in Milan—bootmaking and repairing,
tailoring, bookbinding, carpentry and inlaid work,
sculpture and drawing, also carving of mother-of-pearl
shells. (The lastnamed is quite a remunerative trade,
and might be carried on in West Australia, where pearl
shell is found.) Elementary education, and writing
with the left hand. The teacher of this class was quite
an enthusiast of the system described in the visit to
the Quirinal. (Pamphlet attached.)
There is a room set apart for the technical instru-
ments for recording movements of muscles in amputated
stumps, as devised by Professor Galliattzi, and described
under “ Milan,” also several mechano-therapy devices
for the same purpose; but nothing especially new.
There is a large factory for the making of artificial
limbs, and a museum with samples of the different
limbs made in Europe. The wood used is willow.
There is a chamber where this wood is artificially dried
by hot air at the cut ends, having previously been
dipped in melted sulphur. The limbs are roughly
fashioned before being dried, and the man in charge
said probably 5 per cent, were spoiled in the process of
artificial drying from splitting and cracking of the
vwood. Practically the same type of legs are made as
described at Quirinal —temporary and permanent peg-
legs, and artificial limbs. A .certain number of maimed
men are employed in this factory; but, in the majority
of cases, the men were previously skilled mechanics.
One very striking feature noted here, as at the
Quirinal, was the number of men who were walking
about with crutches.
A number of mechanical devices for fitting on to
artificial arms to enable men to carry on trades, hooks,
and various clutches, &c., similar to those seen at other
places, were shown.
The officer in charge said that the men, after their
course of re-education, were discharged from the Army.
Ihis is different from the procedure as described under
Milan.
SECTION 22.—BLIND SOLDIERS.
In England, France, and Italy, I went into the ques-
tion of the re-education of blind soldiers. I interviewed
the several authorities on the subject, including Sir A.
Pearson, the Chairman of the Blinded Soldiers and
Sailors Care Committee, and an active spirit amongst
blind workers in England. He is himself blind,
having lost his sight in adult life.
The description and details of my visit to the three
leading institutions in the above countries are attached,
together with much literature.
There are some points which deserve notice. The
hopeful and cheerful atmosphere of the institution at
St. Dunstan’s in England is very fine. It is due to


the example, enthusiasm, and personality of Sir A.
Pearson. There is no great difference between this and
the other institutions, but the hopeful feeling of the
inmates is very much more in evidence, due possibly
to the fact that the large home at Reuilly, near Paris,
and the other home at Rome, are controlled and con-
ducted by experts in the work amongst the blind, but
who, before the war, were controlling charitable insti-
tutions for the blind; and they do not seem to have
broken away from the ways and manners of officials of
such institutions. The inmates in both places have a
sad or heavy appearance, and the general atmosphere of
the institution was not bright, whilst the inmates had
not the same independence as those at St. Dunstan’s.
In France, some new trades for blind workers were
taught, and appeared very suitable. These comprised
such trades as grinding and polishing glass-stoppers for
bottles, making pottery (one class of plates), whilst
many were engaged in making wine casks, for which
there was a great demand.
All blind Australian soldiers are sent to St. Dunstan’s,
where they will derive great benefit from the surround-
ings. If they are to keep up to the times, arrangements
must be made in Australia for the continuation of their
education, and for teaching new developments in their
trade. They do this in England and on the Continent.
Two systems prevail, and these are worked together.
Firstly. Inspectors or instructors from St. Dunstan’s
regularly visit the blind workers in their homes and
factories, and afford them any help and information
they can. Secondly. Arrangements are made and faci-
lities afforded for the pupils to return to St. Dunstan’s
occasionally for a fresh course of study, so, as to speak,
to undergo post-graduate instruction. Both of these
methods must, in my opinion, be instituted in Aus-
tralia. In an interview I had with Sir A. Pearson, I
discussed this proposal, and he cordially agreed that it
was necessary to do this or to return, the men occa-
sionally to England. To insure the men being able to
do good work, and to manufacture at reasonable prices,
the supply of raw material at fair rates must be under-
taken by some central body. Attached are notes by
Sir A. Pearson on the after care of blinded soldiers and
sailors.
Sir A. Pearson asked me to lay two subjects before
the authorities in Australia responsible for the care
and attention of the blind. One was that the pension
as granted was not sufficient, and should be increased
by 25 per cent. He holds that men who have lost their
sight are, as compared with other men, handicapped to
at least that extent.
I went into the question of the supply of artificial
eyes in England. Both the War Office and St. Dun-
stan’s find great difficulty in obtaining fresh supplies,
and are really dependent upon the stock held in Eng-
land before the war; whilst efforts are being made to
manufacture them, and a few are being painted by
what is known as hand painting —a slow and expensive,
but very good process. Endeavours are being made
to teach maimed men to do this work. There are no
supplies of artificial eyes in England available for
export.
NOTE BY SIR A. PEARSON, 'CHAIRMAN,
BLINDED SOLDIERS’ AND SAILORS’
HOSTEL, ON AFTER-CARE SCHEME FOR
THE FUTURE BENEFIT OF BLINDED
SOLDIERS AND SAILORS.
The after-care scheme aims at levelling down the
handicap under which the blind home worker, however
thoroughly trained, must work.
Raw material bought in small quantities is apt to be
of high price and poor quality. The work of the blind
inevitably deteriorates unless it is subjected to con-
stant supervision by skilled experts in the various trades,
and it is almost impossible to obtain a sufficient sale
locally for articles made once the circle of local
sympathizers has been exhausted.
So it has been arranged with the Council of the
National Institute for the Blind that they shall estab-
lish a branch, the primary object of which will be the
after-care of those blinded soldiers who have been
trained at St. Dunstan’s under the direction of a blinded
officer.
The benefits will include the supply of raw material
of the best quality, at cost price, from stock wdiich we
shall keep up, the supervision by experts of the various
men, wffiose duty it will be to see that the work is kept
up to standard and up to' date, and the purchase at
retail price of all goods which cannot be disposed of
locally, and which are properly made.
In the case of workers who have been trained to such
occupations as massage, boot repairing, telephone
operating, or shorthand-typewriting, every effort will be
made to secure them continuity of well-paid employ-
ment.
These measures will, to a great extent, make up for
the handicap under which the blind home worker
labours. They will enable a steady, conscientious man
to earn an - amount approximating to that within the
capacity of the sighted worker.
It is gratifying to note that very few of the men
trained at St. Dunstan’s have, as yet, to send many of
the articles they make to be disposed of by the after-
care department, as in almost every case a very satis-
factory local trade has been established, and it is fre-
quently found that repeat orders from customers are
so numerous as to indicate that this trade will be
lasting.
The problem of the efficient after-care of Australian
blinded soldiers trained at St. Dunstan’s and returned
to their homes in different parts of the Continent, is a
very difficult one, owing to the tremendous distances
separating the men.
England.
St. Dunstan’s Hostel.—For treatment and re-educa
tion of blind soldiers and sailors. Established by Sir
Arthur Pearson. Situated at Regent’s Park, vhere
there are spacious grounds and buildings for work-
shops, &c. It was originally the home of Mr. Otto
Kohn, the American millionaire. Altogether, about 600
patients under treatment, and about 500 have been dis-
charged since the hostel was started.
Patients are blind from the military point of view,
i.e., they cannot see sufficiently to earn their living.
The patients are taught how to be blind, i.e., taught
how to make the most of their lives though they have
lost their sight.
The house is specially furnished. The position of
the furniture is never shifted, so thp,t blind men can
become accustomed to getting about by themselves, and
to discard walking sticks, &c., as soon as possible. There
are strips of linoleum through the rooms along which
patients can walk by sound.
They are taught various trades and occupations, and
the great object is to give them some interest in life,
and, if possible, to make them self-supporting.
Of course, every totally-blind man gets his pension—
for a private, 275. 6d. per week—and this, with what
he is able to earn from his work, is sufficient to
keep him.


A large number of trades are taught—carpentry,
poultry keeping, massage, bootmaking and repairing,
mat and basket making, typewriting, reading Braille.
Every man is taught to read Braille, and to write with
the typewriter if he wishes, and has the intelligence to
do so.
The teachers for these two subjects are voluntary.
Many women haA-e learned these subjects in order to
teach the blind. There is also a paid staff of per-
manent teachers in the different subjects.
Volunteers come regularly and take the men out for
walks, whilst concerts and others forms of entertain-
ment are organized for the patients.
The Aiter-care. Care after discharge is exercised
by a special committee, who keep in touch with the
men, and aid them in buying raw material for their
trades, and in selling their goods after they are made.
All Colonial xroops are taken in here—Canadians,
Australians, Hew Zealanders, and South Africans—and
arrangements being made to have these men looked
after when they retui’n to their homes. The military
authorities of the different Colonies encourage the men
to hai r e a course of training at St. Dunstan’s before the}
are returned to their homes. In Great Britain, this
after-care is exercised by the Hational Institution for
the Blind, and in Canada by the Invalided Soldiers’
Commission, &c.
.AH _ details re the working of this institution are
given in the enclosed pamphlets.
France.
la Maison de Convalescence des Soldats Avengles
99 Rue de Reuilly.— This is a hostel for blind soldiers
veiy much like that at St. Dunstan’s in London. The
Director is Mr. Paul Emard, who showed me over the
establishment. There is accommodation for about 200
men, who nearly all live, eat, and sleep in the home,
these men are kept here till they have learnt their
trade, and are then allowed to shift for themselves.
Altogether, about 100 blind soldiers have passed through
the institution, and have started for themselves, or have
been found situations in workshops, &c. Those who
have started their own business can bujr all necessary
materials at cost price from the institution.
1 atients are taught Braille and typewriting if they
wish it, and have access to Braille library also There
xs a Braille paper published each day in the institm
cion.
, The institution did not seem to be so complete as that
at bt. Dunstan s, though there were several trades taught
t fi. at n ar - e /- 0t ta £ gil f at T>unstan’s. One of these is
the finishing off ot glass stoppers, which is done on a
large emery wheel fitted with a special device for the
olmd. Another is the making of pottery (plates), but
only one ot tne processes is actually done by a blind
operator. Another new trade for the blind was the
maxing of barrels. At all these trades, the men were
a le to make good wages. _ Basket making, mat making,
and netting, shoe repairing, piano tuning, mechanical
v orkshops, polishing and finishing of metal work, tele-
taught ° peratmg ’ &c -’ are am ongst the trades being
• Tea f m g of massage, and lessons in anatomy, are
given here. _ The instructor is himself blind, and the
Practice on the instructor, who is able to tell them
their faults, Ac. Men have at least twelve months’
instruction before they are allowed to do the actual
work at one of the hospitals. A pamphlet descriptive of
the Avork undertaken is attached. F
Italy.
Institute Cieski, Milan. —This is the blind instituh
for the City of Milan, and is a fine building. One wins
of it is set aside for soldiers who have been blinded ii
the war, and there are 40 such soldiers there at presen'
undergoing six .months’ course of training and re
education. They are kept quite apart from the ordi
nary civilian patients, and the six months’ re-educa
tional course applies here as at the other re-educationa
schools.
i --..A
As regards njethods, nothing neW to what has beei
described at St. Dunstan’s Avas seen. The patients gene
rally go to their homes after six months, and there doei
not seem to be any machinery to keep track of them, anc
to assist them in their after life. The classes seei
Avere carpentry, barrel-making, boot repairing, basket-
making, brush-making, and making of nets for women’t
bicycles. Typewriting is~ also taught. Six months
seems a very short time to re-educate blind men. There
are several similar institutes throughout Italy. There
was an air of depression and sadness about the whole
place.
SECTION 23.—FUNCTIONAL DISEASES OF THE
NERVOUS SYSTEM.
One subject which was receiving very great attention
from physicians and neurologists in Great Britain was
the treatment of the functional diseases of the nervous
system, many of which are classed under the term
“ shell-shock.”
Many institutions throughout England are provided
or the treatment of these diseases. I visited two of the
leading ones—Golders Green and Hewton Abbot, near
lor quay and devoted several days to the special study
ox this work, which is very far ahead of anvthing so far
attempted in Australia.
In passing through Canada, I had noted that there
were practically no shell-shock cases or neurotics such
as are commonly seen in Australia. When I made in-
quiries in regard to them, the authorities informed me
that such cases had been cured in England prior to
being returned to Canada. Ho cases were to be seen
causing the bed to shake with tremors or any other simi-
lar highly nervous states,
I attach full notes of my work, and of interviews I
had with Dr. Thurnside and Major Hurst, the Officers
Commanding of the two hospitals mentioned, also with
Major Earnea, of Birmingham, and Major McGregor,
ot Oxford, two other experts in the United Kingdom!
The mam points now insisted upon are intense moral
persuasion in special institutions for the treatment of
Whl f h : n ° otlier class of Patients are
admitted, and in which a most optimistic atmosphere
is considered essential. Treatment is by whole-time
officers making a special study qf the cases, and who
T tlnU ? lj i Wlth theiT patients * The institutions
be entirely separate from all mental cases, and
all suggestion of mental treatment or attendants. The
mdical men known as alienists or mental specialists
are not now treating these oases.
The provision of suitable occupation is also essential;
y speaking that in which the man was engaged
before the war. When this is not possible, they are
given agricultural labour of some form. Ho hypnotic
or electrical treatment is given, nor are drugs used, reli-
ance being placed upon intense moral persuasion and
encouragement.


Golders Green Hospital for Shell-Shock, Neurasthenia,
and Allied Conditions.
The building Avas originally portion of the Mania
Vale Hospital—the Golders Green branch—and pro-
vides accommodation for 150 cases—all N.C.O.’s and
men. No officers are taken. The Officer Command-
ing is Dr. Thurnside, one of the leading nervous
diseases specialists in London. All patients are dis-
charged men, i.e., they are no longer soldiers.
This hospital is one of the eight or ten similar insti-
tutions which have been established, and is maintained
by the Ministry of Pensions.
The average length of hospital treatment which
patients have had before admission is ten months, and
Dr. Thurnside stated that the average length of stay in
hospital for the patients w r as from seven to eight weeks,
the average cost to the institution being about from £lB
to £2O, and as over 90 per cent, of the patients admitted
are discharged as being fit to carry on some trade, and
to take a normally useful position in civil life—it may
be reckoned that this amount of from £lB to £2O is the
cost of restoring an individual, generally speaking, use-
less to himself and others, to the condition of being an
asset to the community at large. The only patients
refused admission have been definitely mental cases.
The bulk of cases admitted are shell-shock cases, with
large hysterial element. There are a large number of
neurasthenics—a chronic condition in many cases, pre-
sent to a large extent before enlistment—and these cases
are most difficult to improve. There are also cases of
definite cerebral and spinal concussion, Avith superadded
shell-shock.
There are a considerable number of single rooms,
where these patients are first accommodated, and they
are not put into wards until they have been under obser-
vation sufficiently long to see how they are likely to
progress. There are also some two or three- and up to
seA’en-bed wards. Each case has individual treatment,
and the treatment is largely intensive moral suasion
and encouragement. Hypnotism is not employed at all.
Besides this, massage and electrical treatment are used
as indicated, and from the very outset endeavour
is made to give the men definite occupation for a cer-
tain length of time each day. After a short stay, the
majority of the patients do about an average of 32
hours a w»eek, according to their condition.
Provision is made for carpentry, intensive ground
culture for vegetables, floAA r ers, &c,, after the French
system, games, and amusements. All patients a
full pension whilst they are under treatment, and when
they are discharged as fit to do work their claim for
pension is considered by the Pension Board entirely
de novo. Dr. Thurnside said that there had been prac-
tically no re-admissions of patients sent out as cured
during the time he had been i'n charge. Efforts are made
to keep in touch with the patients after they are dis-
charged, and every patient discharged as fit to do work
is found employment before being discharged. By a
special Act, any patient who has been through a course
of treatment in one of these hospitals is exempt from
any further military service; and, as a matter of fact,
these patients who have actually broken down under the
nervous strain of war life are quite unsuited to be
allowed to undertake further war work. The knowledge
of this fact on the patient’s part has in itself a curative
influence.
For the past two years of the war these patients
generally have very little active treatment in the mili-
tary hospitals, and their condition has been allowed to
drift on, and no rational or intensive treatment has been
applied for months aftqr it might have been commenced,
so that there has been a great waste of time, and- the
cases at this later stage are more difficult and tedious
to treat. Now, however, the Pension Board is recognis-
ing the condition and the proper treatment, and in the
future these cases will he taken in hand very much
earlier, and the results will be correspondingly better.
It is quite impossible to treat these patients in a
general hospital, the institutional treatment, especially
the treatment in single rooms at first, is absolutely
essential.
The personal equation in the treatment of these
patients cannot be too strongly insisted upon, and the
only way for the medical man to give individual treat-
ment to the patients is by having them in separate
rooms. By getting into personal contact with his
patients he is able to obtain the full advantage of his
personal influence and moral suasion on them, and to
follow up their treatment until they are cured and fit
to take their place in ordinary civil life.
R.M.A.C. Scale Hayne Hospital.
Officer Commanding, Major Hurst.
This hospital is about 3 miles from Newton Abbot,
in Devonshire. The building was an agricultural col-
lege, only completed in 1915, and taken up as a hospital
about eighteen months ago. Accommodation is for 300
patients.
The Officer Commanding stated the hospital was for
the treatment of cases of functional diseases of the
nervous system, and his remarks are intended to refer
to this class of case, and not to true shell-shock cases
alone. It is important that this be understood, as it.
makes much more comprehensible the apparent diver-
gence of his opinion from most authorities.
As a matter of fact, a large number of the cases were
cases of functional nervous disease, hysterical paralysis,
paraplegia, aphonias, &c., and had never been under
shell-fire at all.
It is an ideal hospital for this class of case, as the
accommodation includes numerous single rooms Avhere
the serious cases are accommodated at first until their
most severe symptoms have been dealt with.
Cases of functional nervous disease, including shell-
shock, arriving here had, up to the time of my visit,
been from three to tw T elve months in other hospitals, but
the Officer Commanding hoped in the future that they
would be moved earlier. Paraplegias—paralysis of
various sorts, deafness, aphonia, &c., the result of shell-
shock, constitute the main class of patients. On first
arrival patients are put in separate cubicles, and the
intensive moral treatment - as explained in connexion
with Golders Green Hospital for shell-shock is under-
taken. There are four Medical Officers (Captain Rey-
nell, of Adelaide, is one of them), who have been speci-
ally trained in this work. Except in some cases of
insomnia, hypnotism is not used. The condition is ex-
plained to these hysterical men, and the Officer Com-
manding states that in practically all cases they are
cured in a few days, in the sense that they have been
taught that they can help themselves. The paraplegics
walk, aphoniacs talk, and paralyzed are persuaded to
use the paralyzed limb; each case is gone into individu-
ally, and the Medical Officer remains with the patient
until he is convinced he can do as he is told. The
atmosphere of trust in the Medical Officer and of cure
is a great thing in the treatment. The Medical Officer
may remain with one patient from half to three hours
at one sitting. As soon as- possible, the patients are put
into larger rooms with two or three or more wards, but
the treatment does not end here. There are various
games—bowls, croquet, also work of various kinds.
There is an agricultural farm attached, and as soon as
the men obtain confidence in themselves they are put
to Avork in classes. Those who had done farming before
are put on similar work, unskilled men on to general


farm work. Painters, blacksmiths, mechanics, carpen-
ters, are given work to which they are accustomed, and
they are kept under the personal supervision of their
Medical Officers, who encourage them and use moral
suasion throughout.
Patients may remain there for two or three months,
and are then drafted out in the following proportions: —
About 5 per cent, for discharge as not likely to be fit for
further military service. This is a small percentage,
but the Officer Commanding was convinced that it was
approximately correct, and the majority of these cases
are of bad family history and neurasthenic tendency.
Even this 5 per cent, are sufficiently restored to enable
them to follow a civil occupation.
About 15 to 30 pei cent, are fitted for trade, but are
permanently discharged for home service.
The rest are discharged either for return to general
service or for home service for six months. This latter
class, guaranteed home service for six months, is a new
class instituted by the Government, and is a very useful
one.
The Officer Commanding states, in deciding which
cases are fitted for general service, one takes into account
the family history, but also the conditions under which
the shell-shock comes on—whether developed immedi-
ately upon being sent on active service, or as the result
of severe strain for a long time, and probably of being
buried. It is interesting to note that Major Hurst does
not agree with the opinion that a definite shell-shock
should never be sent into the trenches again, as does the
Officer Commanding at Golders Green Hospital, who has
only discharged men, and who plays largely upon the fact
that the men will not be sent on active service again,
and considers that the knowledge of this fact tends
greatly to their recovery. Constant moral encourage-
ment and physical and mental work are the main factors
in the treatment. Electricity and massage have been
practically discarded, also hypnotism, except for rare
cases.
Some of the cases shown here were bordering on the
marvellous. One man had had a contracted hand for
two years before enlisting, and had not seen the palm
of his hand for four years. He had had two years’ ser-
vice, and was sent into hospital and cured in one day.
The contracture was hysterical after the amputation of
a finger, and it has not recurred. Several other cases of
hysterical paraplegia—deafness—aphonia were shown,
which had also been cured in a few days aftbr persisting
for months.
The remarkable point that was brought out was the
number of men who had hysterical symptoms grafted
on to real injuries, back and head injuries especially,
where the acumen of diagnosing that all the symptoms
present had not a definite organic basis, and could be
cured by this intensive suggestive treatment. It brought
. out the fact that even though a man may have altera-
tion to his reflexes, &c., all his symptoms may not be
really due to organic changes, and are susceptible to
treatment.
The cases of two stump orators were shown and de-
scribed. These men would, in almost any country, have
been cerixfied as lunatics, and be sent to an asylum.
Thej both went about speaking loudly, and addressing
■the other men or imaginary crowds on various subjects.
They slept and ate, but otherwise kept continually on
the move as orators. VTith a little persuasion and watch-
ing both men gradually ceased their oratory, and in a
few weeks were quite recovered.
Many other strange cases, suffering from various
forms ol functional disease were seen. Failure was so
rare as to be practically unknown, though some cases
required a much longer time than others. One man
whom I saw would, on the mention of the word “ bomb,”
immediately scramble under the bed or a table or else-
where to hide as if taking cover. His was a very long
case, but ultimately he was completely cured and put
to farm work.
I saw a case of a man who had been wounded -in the
shoulder, and who had developed a paralysis of the whole
arm. Major Hurst went over the case, and came to the
conclusion that he had had a localized tetanus in this
arm, which had caused painful spasms of the muscles
of the arm. condition had cleared up, but had left
the arm in a condition of spastic paralysis—really a
condition of spastic habit paralysis. He was able to
explain the condition to the patient,'and by moral en
couragement and suggestion actually cured the condi-
tion in the course of fifteen minutes. This case was
purely an hysterical one, which had been grafted on to
an original organic basis; but there had never at any
time been any question of shell-shock in this case, and
the condition had not developed until at least a month
after he had been wounded.
Several cases of hysterical dumbness were being
taught to speak, and also a case of stammering of func-
tional origin being treated. In addition, two cases of
the typical shaking of the head and limbs, the result of
shell-shock, were being treated, and definitely improved
in the course of half-an-hour’s treatment. These two
cases were of men w T ho had been buried or affected by
shell fire, but the symptoms that remained at time of my
visit were definitely hysterical. There was also a case
of whispering aphonia (recurrent) coming on after
being gassed being made to speak normally after ten
minutes’ treatment by explanation, moral suasion, and
suggestion. The rationale of the treatment, as pre-
viously explained, w T as much more comprehensible in the
light of the further knowledge which 1 obtained from
Major Hurst.
The true case of shell-shock, i.e., concussion from high
explosive, is generally killed outright. It is quite pos-
sible to have a minor degree of this condition where the
patient does not die, but this condition is mostly accen-
tuated in the same class of case of nervous instability.
In a very great proportion of cases this is proved by the
history, viz., that the patient has not been a stretcher
case, e.g., has not had concussion, and very often the
various symptoms only develop at a later date to that
on which the patient first paraded sick. A man with a
neuresthenic tendency breaks down under the result of
war strain—nervous apprehension, fright, want of
sleep, &c.—conditions that probably would not affect
a man with no family history of nervous instability.
Professor Stanley Barnes, of Manchester, Consulting
Alienist to the Western Command, who is the great
authority on these cases of so-called shell-shock, has
definitely found a family history of nervous instability
in 80 per cent, of these cases of nervous break-down
under the mental strain of war. The fact is that a
large proportion of the so-called cases of shell-shock are
really cases of nervous break-down under the stress of
the war in patients so predisposed by mental instability;
this nervous break-down in the great majority of cases
taking the form of certain manifestations which are
essentially hysterical in origin, and their treatment
must be undertaken on these lines. There may have
been a definite organic trauma in the first place, buff this
clears up, the purely hysterical manifestations which
have been grafted on to this organic basis remaining,
and the large majority of cases of so-called shell-shocks
as seen in the various hospitals have only these hy-
sterical symptoms that really require treatment. Many
of the paralyses and spastic conditions of muscles seen
in these cases might be defined quite accurately as habit
paralyses or habit spastics contractions of muscles, &c
Colonel Myles discussed the question of shell-shock cases


He strongly combats Major Hurst’s idea that a man
who has one really bad shell-shock may become again
fit for the I'ront. He thinks that such a, man ought
never to be sent to the Front again. The whole idea
of the treatment of shell-shock is, in his opinion, the
question of proving to these men and their friends that
they can do useful work and are able to earn their own
living. He estimates that there are 100,000 such cases
■ in Great Britain doing nothing, and receiving high rates
of pension. By treatment, these cases will be shown
that they can do work, and earn their own living. They
can, therefore, be discharged with no, or with a very low
rate of, pension. He is definitely of the opinion that
these cases should be treated while they are soldiers and
amenable to discipline, can be made to work, and not
discharged before treatment. In the early stages of
the war, the public sympathy for shell-shock cases had
a great deal to do with increasing and keeping up the
number ot this class of case. He would define shell-
shock as seen in 90 per cent, of the cases in hospital
as cases of nervous break-down under the strain of war
conditions in men who had a condition of nervous in-
stability, i.e., practically neurasthenics.
SECTION 24.- HOSPITALS AND ORTHOPAEDIC
INSTITUTIONS.
> British.
I was unable to find time to visit Colchester or Sum-
merdown, which are two of the most attractive Imperial
Hospitals. The following notes are supplied by Lt.-
Colonel J. W. Springthorpe, A.M.C., A.I.F,:—
Special Military Heart Hospital, Colchester.^—This
is the hospital appointed to carry out the treatment 'of
cardiac cases, recommended by the “ Special Report
Series of the Medical Research Committee, No. 8,
1917,” and upon whose work “ Observations upon Prog-
nosis ” appeared in the Lancet, 2nd February, J9lB.
both are papers worthy of the widest distribution. On
a recent visit, I found from 600 to 700 patients, of whom
trom 15 to 20 per cent, were sent back to the firing line
after an average duration of treatment of from 6 to 7
weeks. By their system, cases are promptly weeded
out at both ends, ( a ) those structurally unfit as per*
agreement, and (h) those found unequal to graduated
exercises. The sorting and fitting for the Front are,
of course, done by specially trained Medical Officers,
with specially trained instructors, and results daily
noted, as per plan, upon a special record-sheet. With-
out these safeguards, of course, the satisfactoriness of
the system may fail. There are Medical Officers—
American, Canadian, New Zealand, but no Australian
y ln training up to a period of two weeks to months.
Ibe plan has been in operation under me here since I
introduced it in January, 1917, and has given every
satisfaction. Dr. Lewis’ recent paper enumerated some
of the special points.
The Summerdown Convalescent Hospital, Summer-
down, Eastbourne, was established in 1915. Three
thousand men in winter, 4,000 men in summer; staff,
•DO. Commanding Officer, medical; adjutant, also
medical; Quartermaster, R.A.M.C. Five Divisions,
each 600 to 800 men, with one Medical Officer and com-
batant officer not higher than Captain), and two
subalterns under the medical authority, and having to
do with route marches and discipline. Receives some
700 a week. Usual stay four weeks, but may be kept
eight months. Receives from various general hospitals
in London, and eastern command—type of men who can
attend to themselves.
C.— 2941.—6
Aim.—To get the men fit for service if possible, and
to do the best possible in the meantime.
On arrival, met at station by motor bus, taken to
v\ elcorne hut, where ladies attend daily and serve
iea, particulars taken here; and then sent to a division,
preferably where pals or regiments are attached. Here
standing orders are read to them, and a copy posted
in their hut ‘and elsewhere. Kit handed in at Divi-
sional Packstore, with receipt; in return, hospital cloth-
ing received, and A.B. 42 signed. Next day, the Medi-
cal Officer inspects, and after teeth and short-arm
inspection, the man is put into his medical group, of
which there are three:—
h Nearly ready for the Front again:
2. Requiring remedial and modified gymnastics.
Lie about and be happy, plus dressings, mas-
sage, Ac.
Military hospital, 200 beds, hard by. Patients re-
quiring special treatment sent there. " The patient, if
fit, may go straight into Group 1., and not as in com-
mand depots dependent on time and progress made.
If in Group 1., he enters into physical training, mostly
games, route marches—two 14 miles a week, dinner out,
resting 2 to o miles—and is free after 12.0, doing what
they like—golf, cricket, into town, Ac.—until 10 p.m.,
n ith special late passes under conditions in blue uni-
forms and overcoats. After from seven to ten days,
may return to unit. About 80 per cent, dealt with.
If in Group 11., two hours’ work, fatigues. One
commander of each hut (20), with (a) remedial exer-
cises, sometimes to music, according to injury, under
special Medical Officer; ( h ) modified gymnastics, ad-
vance on (a) under instructor under Medical Officer in
charge. Pest of time, games, Ac. Same privileges,
but no late passes.
If in Group 111., light fatigue, massage under ex-
pert, or light dressings under special Medical Officer
during anything with approval of Medical
Officer—no fatigue without his sanction.
Staff.—-Officer Commanding, and Adjutant; Aledical
Officer in each division (5); in sick lines (1); iu
change remedial exercises (1); and in charge of dress-
ings (1); also expert Medical Officer iff charge of
electrical and massage department; a qualified lady
dispenser; no^pathologist; no bacteriologist; 250 men.
Regimental Sergeant-Major, Section Staff Sergeants,
> Sergeants for dining-rooms, R. A.M.C.; personnel for
sick hues, massage, dressing station, military police
(25), Ac. No nurses, no boundaries to camp, 41 quali-
fied masseuses, also electrician. Gymnastic Staff (16),
with xAldershot certificates (appointed by the military,
but removable by the Commanding Officer), under Ser-
geant-Major.
Equipment.— Twenty huts to a division — loo. Thirty
to thirty-two hospital beds in each! Some tents—struck
in winter; fine massage room, well equipped; usual and
% specially devised instruments—adding interest and
motive; electrical the same; hot baths, Ac.; 800 cases
a day; variety workshops—basket shop and art school
(for the neurosis), carpenters, tinsmith, forge, shoe-
maker, tailor, woodwork, Ac.
Amusements.— Games — store hut — -almost all varie-
ties, all free—fives, croquet courts, golf course, cricket-
ground, fishing, eight tennis courts, football, pushball,
bowls, skittles, Ac.; theatre, holding 1,200 men; recrea-
tion-rooms, bagatelle, billiards, cards, Ac; reading, writ-
ing, and various games. Band of 00 playing daily on
the lawn and in recreation rooms; marches men back
from route marches; concerts twice a week. Whist,
drives, gymnkliana once a week.
Grounds. —Forty acres. Gardens outside each hut,
with lady gardener in charge of each division. Work—
rolling and cutting lawns, to keep in order. Ten acres


under crop; staff and patients; all groups as detailed by
the Medical Officer, according to the kind of work.
Physical Drill Daily.—Eight to 12 a.m., except for
men otherwise directed.
Aim. —Makes every man (1) contented and happy;
(2) fit for the Front; and (3) if not, fit for command
depot if requiring more time; or (i) fit enough for
employment.
There is also an Empire Club in the grounds for light
refreshments to relatives and visitors at moderate
prices, a hostel for relations and friends, and the usual
dentists’ hut, church huts, post and telegraph office,
barber’s shop, camp co-operative depot, canteen —dry
and wet, &c.
The successful carrying out depends on the personality
of the Officer Coinmanding; is considered to be ideal.
He fakes a personal interest in each and all —every man
has a right to see him on any subject, and is welcomed.
The staff are imbued with the same spirit. Over
50,000 have been sent back to the Front, and some 10,000
to command depots, employment, or hospital. It is
held that a convalescent hospital has the most to do
with refitting for the Front—tha casualty clearing sta-
tions, stationary hospitals, and general hospitals, throw-
ing the men back to England—and that it is the most
important work of all. It is not concerned directly
with settling the individual’s future in any other way;
but, whilst leaving that for the various centres for re-
education, it helps indirectly by dealing with the man’s
psychology. He becomes willing, though not ready to
go back; gets his mind normal again; everything being
'done to build up to what he was before broken by the
war. Malingerers —the number is very small—receive
absolutely no consideration. It pays the man to be
improving and good.
Newton Abbott, Devonshire.—At an interview with
Colonel Myles, who is the Consulting Alienist for the
Southern Command, the question of the number of
mental cases amongst Australian reinforcements came
up. All these cases of Australians come under Colonel
Myles’ purview on account of his position in the
Southern Command. Hq said that two years ago'the
number of mental cases —degenerates, epileptics, &c.—
amongst the Australians was much larger; but for the
last year it had been very much less. lie said exactly
the same applied to the British troops and the Cana-
dians in the Southern Command. Two years ago, the
proportion of these mental cases was quite as large as
amongst the Australians, but there were considerably
fewer at the time of my visit. . Colonel Myles was,
till just before the war, in charge of one of the lunatic
asylums in Sydney, and has naturally been interested in
Australians.
Lord Derby’s War Hospital, Warrington.—This is
about 20 miles from Liverpool, and was visited because
Australian mental patients are treated here. It was
previously a mental asylum, and has accommodation for
2,500. One thousand of these are now military medial
eases, the other beds are taken up as a general hospital.
In plan and building, it corresponds exactly to the
Welsh War Hospital, at Cardiff, already described. I
saw a number of the Australian patients. As a mental
hospital, everything seemed to be all that could be de-
sired, and the men were looked after well. Imperial
military patients are retained for nine months, and then,
if not cured, are certified and sent to the lunatic asylum
of their own district, and are discharged from the Army.
Some of the Australian patients who were cured com
plained that they were unable to get any pay. They
are entitled to 3s. 6d. per week while in hospital. I
reported the matter to the Commandant, at A.I.F.
Head-Quarters, Loudon.
Quartermaster’s Department is quite separate from
the Food Supply department or store. The former
deals only with clothing, hospital stores and equipment,
and the latter is still run by the Asylums Board on the
usual civilian lines as a food supply store.
Bishop’s Knoll Hospital.—At Stoke Bishop, near
Bristol. This is an annexe of do. 2 Southern Com-
■ mand General Hospital. it is the private house of
Mr. Eobert Bush, a West Australian, and has |>een
utilized as a hospital since J 914. For the last two
years, only Australian patients have been admitted,
and Mr. Bush lias made an arrangement that all Aus-
tralian patients arriving for .No. 2 Southern Command
Hospital are sent direct do this hospital. There is ac-
commodation for .100 patients, all O.E. A few officers
used to be taken, but are not now. There is a staff of
seven trained nurses, only one of whom is an Aus-
tralian. There are five Medical Officers, all civilians,
and well-known practitioners at Clifton and Brighton.
The whole expense of running and management of the
hospital is defrayed by Mr. Bush, and he himself acts
as commandant, as quartermaster, and as registrar. Mrs.
Bush does all the cooking for the hospital, and Miss
Bush acts as assistant.
Besides the trained nurses, there are 25 V.A’.l).
helpers on call if required. There are a certain num-
ber of orderlies, all E.A.M.C., belonging to the staff of
No. 2 Southern Command General Hospital, Mr.
Bush says ho does not get a penny from the Govern-
ment, not even postage. He has even provided all the
blue hospital suits for patients. The Bed Cross have a
store in the hospital, and apparently provide some of
the extras. The hospital is well equipped. There
is a good operating theatre, and the usual lavatory
accommodation is sufficient. The patients are ,
housed in wards, the largest of which contains about
-10 beds. The others are smaller. There is a pack
store, and provision is made for storing patients’ clothes
on arrival. Mr. Bush claims that this is the only
hospital in England that takes only Australian patients
coming direct from France. Patients, on discharge
from the hospital, are sent to one or other of the Aus-
tralian auxiliary hospitals, and patients for return to
Australia follow this routine, and are not sent direct
to hospital ships, &c.
• The grounds round the hospital are very nice, and
it is an ideal place for men to convalesce. The usual
military routine in regard to leave, passes, &c., is fol-
lowed out. There are a billiard-room, croquet and
tennis courts, &c., and the patients in the hospital seem
to be well looked after.
There is no X-ray room nor pathological department,
but this work is sent to Bristol to be carried out. There
is no resident Medical Officer, but the Medical Officers
all live quite close to the hospital, give a great deal of
time to the patients, and are available at all times of
the day and night. There are three stories to the house,
and the more convalescent patients are in wards on
the second and third stories. There is also an isola-
tion ward, mostly used for cases of scabies. From what
Mr. Bush stated, he does not even receive the 3s. per
head per .day for each patient that the Government
allows to similar hospitals—such as the Prince of Wales’
Hospital, at Cardiff. The hospital has been recognised
by the War Office as a war hospital, and is inspected
by them. No official from the A.A.M.C. or A.I.F. had
ever visited this hospital until the time of my visit.
Early in 1915, a Medical Officer —Dr. Norris—on the
High Commissioner’s staff had once been there. Many
parliamentary and other officials from Australia, and
the Agent-General, have- been over the hospital.


Belgium.
Hospital de Bon Seccours, Beige. —This is the large
general hospital for Belgian soldiers situated at Rouen.
Attached to it is an artificial limb factory, under the
care of Capt. B. Ricketts, B.A.M.C. Men who are to
have artificial limbs are fitted with a temporary peg-
leg as soon as possible, and in many cases before the
sinuses are actually healed. The temporary legs, con-
sisting of plaster of paris buckets, and a peg-leg
attached, are made very much like those seen at Alder-
hey, in Liverpool, and at Buangor, near Edinburgh.
The men are encouraged to walk at the earliest oppor-
tunity, and practically never allowed to use crutches,
and are also encouraged to play football and other games
with the temporary legs on. As a rule, the permanent
leg is not fitted until from three to four months after
the temporary leg.
Each man is given a temporary peg-leg, and a per-
manent artificial limb when he is discharged. Officers
are given two artificial limbs if they wish it, but a
large number prefer to have a peg-leg, and most of the
men prefer the peg-leg for all ordinary work, as it
gives greater stability.
The factory for the manufacture of legs (permanent)
was visited, and the whole process of manufacturing
the legs seen. The workmen employed 'are mostly dis-
charged soldiers, but not men who have lost limbs.
Wood was being used practically entirely for making
the limbs, but experiments were being made with papier-
mache, &c. Even the tilting tables for thigh amputa-
tions are made of wood. They have had difficulty in
regard to the proper drying of the willow wood used,
but no satisfactory method of artificial seasoning had
been found. The whole of the metal parts for the
joints, &c., are made in the workshops, and all these
metal parts are standardized. The wooden brackets,
&e., are covered with doe-skin, and the finished limbs
seemed light. The permanent peg-legs were nicely
finished off, and for amputation above the knee there
is a simple device to lock the knee joint. The men
mostly use the peg-leg stiff, and only unlock it when
sitting down, &c.
The Hospital was visited, and particular attention
given to the electrical mechano-therapy massage and
hydrotherapy departments. The massage department is
in charge of Swedish masseuses. There is a very large
mechano-therapy department, with all sorts of modi-
fied Zander apparatus; this department was- very
complete. They have an apparatus in which
compressed air is utilized—compressed in an ordi-
nary four-cylinder motor engine worked by electricity
—and attached to small rubber bags, which again
are fixed on to various apparatus in order to get
rhythmical movements of all the joints in the body.
There is a separate one for each individual joint—the
limb is fixed in position with the rubber bag also placed
in position. When the air is turned on, the bag is
filled and emptied alternately, and so causes regular
regulated movement at the joint affected. The joint
is fixed at the start in its extreme flexum or extension,
as the case may be, and records can be kept of the im-
provement from time to time. This is a novelty in
'the way of these appliances, which obtain the same
effect as has been seen with other appliances.
France.
Paris—Hospital Grand Palais. M. Copin, Medicln
Chef; M. Carins, Professor de Service de Kinesotheropie.
—This is established in one of the large buildings that
formed part of the Paris Exhibition in 1900. There is
accommodation here for 1,100 patients, but men are not
kept long, as they are evacuated to the South of
F ranee.
C. 2941.—7
Mechano-therapy Department is fitted up with a large
number of modified Zander apparati, but taken alto-
gether, there was nothing particularly new, though some
of the appliances seen are different from others seen
elsewhere.
Electrical Department. The usual apparatus
is employed, but there is one appliance made in the
institution worthy of special mention. It aims at
obtaining a gradually increasing current, which then
gradually decreases, and is then broken. This is worked
by having a circular channel filled with acidulated
water, in which an electrode circulates.
It appeared to be a modification of the Bristowe coil
as used at Hammersmith, and the current is not painful.
There were electrolysis baths (ionization, &c.) as at
other institutions visited.
Massage Institutions. —l saw blind masseurs at work,
and the Officer Commanding said they were quite satis-
factory. They have at least twelve months’ training
before being allowed to treat cases.
Radium Institute.- —The radium is used chiefly for
the softening of cicatrices, and for neuromata, &c., in
amputation stumps, and the officers claim good results.
Quite a large department, much larger than anything
seen elsewhere.
Italy.
Home — L’Ospendale del Quirinale.— Croce Rossa
Italiana.—This is the main orthopaedic hospital (mili-
tary) in Rome, and is organized by the Italian Red
Cross, under the charge of Dr. Maggiore Scufi, who
conducted me over the institution. It is housed in the
Quirinal, which was, till 1870, the home of the Popes,
and has since been taken over by the Italian Imperial
Government, and is one of .the residences of the King
of Italy, who gave it up to be used for a hospital for
limbless soldiers.
Combined with the purely hospital portion is a cer-
tain amount of re-education, but this is more or less
secondary. There is a large factory for the making of
artificial limbs—-permanent and temporary—and a cer-
tain number of the men who have lost limbs are em-
ployed at this factory.
The hospital is in the various large rooms of the
King’s palace —ball rooms, reception rooms, &c.—which
are huge rooms. The ceilings are decorated with paint-
ings and stucco work, the walls covered with valuable
paintings and Gobelin tapestries, and in practically
every room huge chandeliers have been covered over.
There is accommodation for 275 men, and, as war
hospital accommodation goes, is good. Very good mess
rooms, latrines, and wash-houses, &c.; large X-ray room,
with Snook apparatus; two operating theatres, not very
well equipped; dressing rooms, &c.
A large number of men were going about on crutches.
In most orthopaedic hospitals, crutches are not used at
all, patients being fitted with temporary peg-legs, &c.,
at as early a date as possible.
Mechano-therapy Department.— All sort of modified
Zander apparatus; very well equipped.
Thermo-therapy. —Well equipped.
Hydro-therapy. —The ordinary forms of baths and
douches, but not up-to-date.
Electrical and Massage Department. —Small, but well
equipped.
Re-educational Department. —A special feature is the
department for teaching men to write with the left
hand, and one method adopted is to get them to write
from above downwards —similar to Chinese writing.


It is held that it is easier for a left-handed man to
write so:—
Chinese
As, for instance, in the illustration the word Chinese
is written with the paper in the position shown, and
when the writing is finished, it is turned round into the
upright position.
Elementary Teaching for those who are not able to
read and write; wffiile arithmetic, geometry, &c., modern
languages, geography, bookkeeping, experimental
science, painting, drawing and sculpture, hygiene,
designing, typewriting and shorthand, were amongst the
classes which I saw.
All the patients remain in hospital during the course
of re-education, and during this time have their arti-
ficial limbs finalized.
The artificial limb factory is a large one, with modern
machinery installed, and a large number of skilled
mechanics and workmen employed. The wood is stored
and seasoned here, and it is generally about twelve
months before it can be used. During the process of
drying, the ends are coated over with a layer of sul-
phur, to prevent splitting.
There is a plaster cast department, and a large num-
ber of the buckets are made from casts. The temporary
plaster of paris buckets were heavy. The men are pro-
vided with a peg-leg and a finished artificial leg, and
here again the Director said that, for ordinary use, the
men prefer the peg-legs. There is a good, light peg-leg
made for amputations, both above and below the knee,
which seemed very satisfactory. The permanent arti-
ficial leg was of the ordinary type as supplied by Hangar
or Aunger. A great feature of Italian legs is the metal
joints. The joints w'ere modelled on the same type of
knee joint as was seen at the Inter-Allied Congress in
London. There is a standardized type of bucket for
the stumps, made of different sizes, very like that seen
at the Maison Blanche, in Paris. There were model
legs cut in cross sections, so as to show the mechanism
of the different joints—knee, ankle, and toe joints—
which shows at a glance the whole of the working of
the joints. Some of the legs were entirely supported
from the bucket downwards by the metal splints at the
sides of the limb, and the shaped cast of the limb
attached to these is purely camouflage.
There are spacious grounds around the hospital, where
the patients can walk or be wheeled round and take
exercise, and it should be an ideal rest home for these
limbless patients while being taught to use their arti-
ficial limbs.
There is a large room for teaching the patients to
walk with their artificial limbs, and here were several
of the usual appliances, such as were seen especially
at Hart House, in Toronto. This is in connexion with
the gymnasium and mechano-therapy department.
Ospendale Principal Militare d’Rome.—This is the
largest general military hospital in Rome. Has ac-
commodation for 1,080 patients; a general hospital—
medical, surgical, tubercular, infectious, &c. Visited
the wards and operating theatres, of which there were
several, all in one block. The building is an old one •
there were about 40 beds in each ward; the accommoda-
tion as such was good; and there are good grounds
round about. The hospital pavilions are three or four
stones high, connected by long, covered-in passage-ways
built of iron and stone. Each pavilion is more or leps
self-contained.
There is a special pavilion for tubercular cases, of
which there are a large number in the Italian Army.
This pavilion, which takes 400 cases, is for diagnosis
only. When the diagnosis is complete, the patients are
sent to various other hospitals and sanatoria for treat-
ment.
In tubercular cases, great stress is laid on X-ray
examination of the chest, and every case is so examined,
besides the ordinary clinical examination and bacterio-
logical examination of the sputum. Plates of all the
cases that have gone through this diagnostic pavilion are
kept and recorded, and up to the time of my visit, 7,000
X-ray plates had been taken. There is an excellent
X-ray plant—something like a Snook, but of Italian
make—and the plates of chest cases were quite the best
I have ever seen. The Medical Officer in charge is aii
enthusiast in regard to the value of X-rays in these
cases, and thinks he can correlate the picture as seen in
the X-ray plate with what will be found in the bacterio-
logical examination of the sputum, i.e., in active cases
only, as the tubercular lesions which have been cured
often show glands and shadows in the lungs.
The medical wards were similar to the surgical, and
presented nothing of special note. Taken altogether, it
is a large, general civil hospital, not nearly as up-to-
date as the civil hospitals in America, but still quite
good. Xo orthopaedic work nor massage, electricity,
and mechano-therapy, are undertaken hero, as these
cases are sent to special departments, just as at the
orthopaedic hospitals. All special cases, double ampu-
tations, &c., are sent to Professor Putti’s Hospital, in
Bologna, at the Institute Rizzoli.
Bologna—lnstitute Orthopedico Rizzoli.—There is
accommodation for 13,000 military patients in the
hospitals at Bologna.
This is the main orthopaedic centre for Italy, and is
supervised by Professor Putti, who is the Director of
the institute. It was a civil hospital before the war,
and was taken over as an orthopaedic institute for both
civil and military patients—l2o civil, and about 350
military. As a hospital and institute, it is quite up
to the standard of the best British or American civil
hospitals, is clean, well kept, and seems thoroughly
organized.
The_ hospital is the property of the Province of
Bologna, and they take military patients—officers and
men '^ n the Government, and charge them so much
per day; also provide limbs at a fixed price.
Mechano-therapy department is extensive, and con-
tains all sorts of appliances both for civil and military
cases children and adults. Saw this department in
lull working order. Spinal curvature appliances,
Zander apparatus modified, and the usual apparatus for
teaching legless men to walk with their temporary peg-
legs, &c., all on a large scale. Has good massage and
electrical departments, an up-to-date operating theatre,
and large X-ray department. In going over the
hospital, no doubt remained as to the organizing ability
of the Director, Professor Putti.
Amputations,—Saw a number of the
patients who had been operated on after this method—
illustiated in the booklet attached. Professor Putti
said he had had no trouble with the setons tearing out,
and the cases seen seemed quite satisfactory; and when
wearing their artificial legs and arms, able to work
these quite well. One patient with the seton put
t irough the extensor muscles just above the patella was
able to extend his artificial leg at the knee, and patients
with setons in extensOr and flexor muscles of the arm
and lower arm were able to work their artificial arms
and hands quite well. This has already been described


in mentioning the cinematograph pictures shown at the
Inter-Allied Congress, in London.
The artificial limb factory is probably the largest
visited, and the workmen are all skilled mechanics.
The wood for limbs takes from twelve to sixteen months
to become properly dried, and no artificial drying is
employed. Professor Putti lays great stress on using
temporary peg-legs at an early date. Every patient
is supplied with a temporary pylon or peg-leg, and a
permanent artificial leg. He said the patients prefer
the former for hard work. He uses a peg-leg with a
hinge joint at the knee, which can he fixed or unfixed
at wilj.
I saw no patients here going about on crutches, as at
other Italian orthopasdic hospitals. Every permanent
leg is made from a plaster cast of the stump, and the
leg is made in two parts, which are afterwards fixed
together. This is a great advance bn what has been
seen before, as the permanent bucket for the stump
should be an absolute fit. The shape of the bucket for
cases is roughly triangular—a projection for the
tuber ischii, a depression for the great trochanter, and
a concave shape for the hamstring muscles. The main
weight is taken on the tuber ischii and the great tro-
chanter.
One model of a temporary bucket for a peg-leg was
shown, where the back portion of the bucket is of wood,
and the front and external portion of leather, which can
be laced, and this allows for the shrinkage of the stump.
Both the peg-legs and the permanent legs were well
made, and light in weight. Ho springs are used in the
knee joint, but only an elastic band to produce exten-
sion. Extension at the ankle joint is allowed, hut uo
flexion angle of the knee joint is 1 c.m. behind the line
the leg is bowed towards the knee, such as occurs
especially in the female, as compared with the male
figure, owing to the wider hips in a woman. The
flexion angle of the knee joint is 1 c.m, behind the line
of gravity, carrying the weight to the heel.
With temporary peg-legs, the general arrangement of
a thigh bucket is to have a projection upwards to which
a pelvic girdle is applied, and the whole mechanism is
extremely simple. The joint parts in the permanent
legs are wooden, and reinforced by metal bands, and
the finished legs are covered witfh thin leather or parch-
ment. The buckets for amputation below the knee are
also triangular-shaped, so that both the tuberosity of
the tibia and the fibula shall take weight; and the tem-
porary bucket is made of leather flaps behind to allow
for shrinkage.
Centro Stomato Itroica. —Hospital for jaw injuries
also situated in Bologna; contains about 250 beds. Is
poorly equipped and poorly kept. A certain amount of
plastic work is done, but the major operative work is
sent to a surgical clinic, and the patients returned to
the jaw hospital to have the dental work completed. There
are four Medical Officers with dental qualifications, and
some dentists, on the staff. Osteo plastic bone grafting
is not practised much, and the patients are merely fitted
with dental plates. The great bulk of the work done
here is dental, and the head dentist said that the
Italian jaw is harder than the English one. He was
speaking from his experience as a dentist in London,
where he practised before the war. He also said that,
generally speaking, Italian soldiers had good teeth,
better than the English, and mudh dental treatment
after enlistment was not necessary. There was a large
collection of photos of cases after being wounded and
after treatment, both for plastic work on the face, and
dental work of the jaws; and the result shown seemed
good, but not to be compared with the results obtained
at Sidecup, in England. There was a large exhibit of
dental splints, &c.
Ospedale Gozzidine.— This is one of the large general
military hospitals at Bologna. In this hospital, there
was a large number of thigh cases, and the routine
treatment seemed to be to have them put in plaster of
paris, with windows for the dressing of wounds, and
metal supports incorporated in the plaster to strengthen
the plaster splints. This hospital had accommodation
for 450 patients (all surgical), and was hu'lt originally
as a children’s hospital Except that the hospital was
poorly kept, there was nothing of special interest to note
in'reference to it.
SECTION 25. —ARTIFICIAL LIMBS.
I went fully into the subject in every country I
visited with the exception of Greece, where, owing to
the short time at my disposal, I was not able to dp any-
thing in the matter.
England.—ln England the responsibility for the pro-
vision of artificial limbs is undertaken by the Pensions
which has, a branch directed by Sir C. H.
Kenderdine to do the work.
I visited the Director, and was given every help by
him and his officers. The attached list of approved
articles and limbs show a great multiplicity of work and
style.
The Pensions Department have a small show room,
where what are known as approved patterns are kept
as samples. I was shown the various articles in this
museum.
Officers Commanding hospitals, and in some cases
patients themselves, are given the choice of which type
of limb they will recommend or have. lit some hos-
pitals the Officer Commanding has been careful to only
allow good or satisfactory limbs. This is the case at
A.I.F. Hospital at Southall, whilst in others no special
direction is given, and I saw men being fitted with most
unsuitable limbs, simply because they had been talked
over by the agent or representative of the firm con-
cerned.
There is a large advisory committee of reputedly ex-
pert Medical Officers, to whom all new appliances are
shown (Australia had a representative on this com-
mittee). Each appliance considered satisfactory became
an approved pattern.
The multiplicity of approved patterns was quite
bewildering, and elaborate mechanical appliances were
used when simple ones would have done. Members of
the committee had widely divergent views, and so the
approved patterns were of various types and of varying
degrees of utility. For some time past an effort had
been made by ths officers of the Department to induce
the committee to adopt a standard pattern, and to have
only that pattern supplied, but they had not been able
to induce the experts to agree to a standard pattern.
The leg most generally approved is very similar to the
Aunger leg. It is generally true in medicinal and sur-
gical practice that when very many different patterns
and sorts of articles are used for one purpose, none of
them are really satisfactory. This is very true as
regards artificial limbs, and, generally speaking, arti-
ficial limbs do not give satisfaction.
I visited the hospitals and workshops at Roehampton,
at Aldorhey, the hospital where Colonel Sir Robert
Jones is chief, the Prince of Wales Hospital under
Colonel J. Lynn Thomas at Cardiff, Erskine House,
near Glasgow, of which Surgeon-General Sir W.
McEwan is director, and also saw work under Colonel
Sir Harold Styles at Buangor, near Edinburgh. These
comprise the foremost hospitals for limbless men in the
(Jnited Kingdom, and their Medical Directors are un-
doubtedly the leaders of thought in Great Britain.


Whilst Roehampton is still an active hospital, doing
fine work, it is being passed and superseded by the large
hospital on the Clyde, near Glasgow.
At nearly all the institutions in the United Kingdom
limbs are made by various firms of manufacturers for
individual cases, and this practice results in many types
of limbs being supplied. It adds to the cost, and greatly
increases the difficulty of repair. Everywhere the
leaders of thought desire to standardize a limb, and it
hoped that a standard limb will soon be adopted for the
United Kingdom.
Surgeon-General Sir W. McEwan has grasped the
situation differently, and, in my opinion, is now leading
the rest of the United Kingdom. He had Erskine
House, on the Clyde, made suitable as an hospital for
limbless men, and there some 400 men were- —
(1) 'being fitted with an artificial appliance,
(2) being prepared for fitting, or
(3) taught to use the one supplied.
In the hospital grounds there were fitting rooms
or fitting factories. The appliances were made in other
places, and only fitted and adjusted at the hospital. It
was the only place which I saw where the arrangements
were in any way suitable for Australian conditions.
Being dissatisfied with the multiplicity of types of limbs
issued to soldiers, and the great difficulty of effecting
repairs when men became scattered, Sir W. McEwan
decided to make the limbs independently of any inter-
mediate limb-maker. He adopted a very simple pattern
leg, and also a peg-leg as a temporary limb. Having
done this, he called a meeting of leading shipbuilders on
the Clyde who had large plants and great installations
of machinery for wood and metal work. These ship-
builders, after a little demur, agreed to make the arti-
ficial limbs, also parts thereof, and within 48 hours of
the meeting legs had been made by several large firms.
Each firm then took some part and made it in large
quantities, the largest share of the work being done by
Messrs. Yarrow and Co., the well known shipbuilders.
I visited their yards and saw many hundreds of parts
made by them or by various other firms being assembled
and prepared for despatch to the hospital foi fitting.
A very large stock is held. The willow timber is
brought in in logs, cut up, seasoned, turned and finished
within two or three months from the day when the tree
was felled. An ordinary-looking artificial limb is made
as well as parts for temporary limbs, large numbers of
which are also kept in stock.
Having adopted a pattern of peg-leg, eight sizes are
made and kept on hand, each capable of being lengthened
or shortened at will. When a man arrives at the hos-
pital he is given a peg-leg. His crutches are taken from
'him and a stick allowed for a short time.. He is then
placed in a class for instruction, and taught by compe-
tent instructors to walk properly. When considered
ready and able to use the heavier leg, he is given a
“ fancy ” or “ Sunday ” leg, as it is called, being the
ordinary standard pattern leg. He must learn to walk
with it, must attend regularly at all limb parades, and
do exactly as directed, and is not given his discharge
from hospital until satisfactorily provided for, both as to
fit of limb and his ability to use it.
Canada. —All Canadian limbless soldiers are returned
to Canada to be supplied with artificial limbs. There
no satisfactory appliance had been devised for use by
men who had lost their hands. The outstanding feature
of all the work in Canada was the re-education of the
muscles of the arm and leg before being fitted with
artificial appliances. Whilst they had no good or satis-
factory artificial arms, they took great pains to endea
vour to re-educate the muscles of that part of the arm
and stump which remained. Men with arms and hands
amputated were made to play games such as billiards
and badminton, thus developing the long unused
muscles. I bad samples of these appliances sent to
Australia. ISTo such care was exercised in any other
country I visited. In fact, little was done in this
respect. Not only were arms developed, but also leg
muscles, and several very ingenious devices were in
use, while regular exercise, drill, and games with tem-
porary legs were arranged and made compulsory.
The Carnes arm was issued to some, but generally ■
was considered suitable only for lighter work. The
Casey hand, made for Judge Casey, was seen, but is
much too intricate for general use. In fact, I do not
think any one of ordinary intelligence could use jt. It
does not in any way resemble a hand, is heavy, arl it
is necessary to use many extra tools with it. The
authorities were endeavouring to obtain an appliance
suitable for working men, and were experimenting with
a “ Bowler’s ” hook, make by Mr. Bowler, the foreman
of their factory. It was simple for hard work, and
had some good points. I arranged for samples to be
sent to Australia.
At Toronto there is a special hospital for limbless
men, with a factory for the manufacture of limbs, and
a large establishment near the hospital for fitting only
and for making temporary peg-legs. The whole is
directed by Colonel Starr, an eminent surgeon.
Other factories and fitting establishments were being
arranged in large centres. Artificial legs are made in
large numbers, and various sizes are kept in stock. All
that is necessary is to fit them to each particular case.
One type was standardized, the pattern being a modified
Hangar, limb. It was good and serviceable.
All men were given temporary limbs at first, and
none are passed for the final limb until they can use
the temporary one well and the wasted muscles have
regained their strength and tone.
United States of America. —When I visited America
there were no returned men who had lost limbs, the
authorities had made no special provision for the work,
and no factories were established by the Government.
I inspected one in New York controlled by voluntary
workers under Mr. D. C. McMurtrie. -
Owing to the great extent of country, and their many
large cities, the American authorities do not propose
to establish any Government factories, but to arrange
with any firm of manufacturers which was approved
by their officers to make and supply limbs to cripples,
the Government paying a definite sum for the first
limb, and a regular amount every two years for re-
newals. I heir official stated that so many good limb-
makers were working in various towns that there
would be no difficulty in having the work done in this
way. I saw some of their leading manufacturers, in-
cluding Mr. Hangar and Mr. Marks, in conference
with Major Silver, the Director of Artificial Limb
Work. All manufacturers were anxious to do business
with Australia.
French Limbs.—l visited the Grand Palais, the
Maison Blanche, the Hospital Saint Maurice, under
Dr. Bourillon, and also saw limbs being made
at Rouen, at Montpellier, and at other places in
I ranee, whilst as far as possible I discussed the subject
with the medical authorities wherever I went. Most
of the work is in the hands of manufacturing firms,
v ho supply stock limbs as ordered, and of those seen
by me few were actually made for individual cases.
I he large factory at Saint Maurice had been burnt
down shortly before my visit. This was greatly re-
gretted, as there the best French work had been done.
I, however, saw samples of those made before the fire.
Nowhere in France was I impressed with the work,
and fee] that the French place very little value on the
supply of elaborate artificial limbs, contenting thexn-


selves with giving a good but light pyllon (stump leg),
or an ordinary metal arm with Various attachments
for the class of work to be undertaken by the man.
Italy.— -Factories in Milan, Rome, and Bologna
were visited.
Milan— controlled by Dr. Galliatzi. Very good work
was being done at a large establishment, which employed
over 100 workers to make artificial appliances. Ordi-
nary peg-legs were supplied, and also some shaped like
an ordinary leg. The former was principally favoured,
while the latter are known as “ Sunday ” legs. The arm
supplied wias a modification of the ordinary metal
appliance.
At Rome, two factories and hospitals were seen simi-
lar to that at Milan, both giving much care and thought
to the work.
One very striking feature noted in Milan and Rome
was the number of men who were walking about using
crutches, and there appeared to be no definite routine
method of fitting men with temporary peg-legs as soon
as possible.
A number of mechanical devices for fitting on to
artificial arms to enable men to carry on trades —hooks
and various clutches, &c., similar to those seen at other
places—were shown.
At Bologna (Professor Putti’s clinic), I was able to
see in actual practice what I had heard about at the
Inter-Allied Congress in London, and here saw un-
doubtedly the best work in any country visited by me.
Professor Putti’s mechanical work was very fine, and
his limbs were very good,-made on an entirely different
plan from that at other places, whilst his method of
moving the artificial appliances is new and most effec-
tive. It is known as kinemetization. Papers, drawings,
and pamphlets were obtained by me. These give very
full and detailed information. I consider the artificial
limb work done in Italy, particularly at Bologna and
Milan, to be superior to anything seen in other coun-
tries. The limbs are very light, strong, and well
finished.
Belgium. —l visited the hospital and limb factory at
Rouen. Hot only are the Belgians making limbs for
their own wounded, but also for the French civilians
and for various civil refugees. The care which the Bel-
gians take with patients is very noticeable, and very
much more work is done to save joints and keep them
movable than in other countries. They have a large
factory fitted with much machinery, and worked by
Belgians unfit to fight but still in the Army. The
limbs turned out are of the usual type, being good and
well made, rather heavy, but possess no special features.
Every part of the limb was made in the factory, both
metal, wood, and leather work. Particulars of my visit
are attached to other papers on hospitals.
Artificial Legs.
With regard to the question of the best type of arti-
ficial leg to provide for soldiers.
Until quite recently the medical profession have not
taken a very great interest in the actual type of limb
to be given, having left that to the limb-maker. It was
found everywhere by leading medical men who gave the
matter careful consideration that limb-makers always
desired to supply a limb which looked more or less like
a leg, and some had peculiar ideas as to the exact func-
tion of the artificial appliance. How medical men
such as Colonel Sir Robert Jones, Colonel Lynn
Thomas, Surgeon-General Sir W. McEwan, in Great
Britain, and Professor Putti, in Italy, have set out with
the fixed intention of compelling the limb-makers to
do as they wished, and of having a limb which will con-
form to their idea and requirements. These medical
men will, in my opinion, completely revolutionize the
manufacture of limbs.
In France, in Italy, in Belgian factories, and in
many places in England the peg-leg, modified and care-
fully made, is now supplanting all other types for hard
work. They are much preferi-ed by the men, except
those who look for “cosmetique” effect. The peg-legs have
been developed to such an extent that they are made to
do everything a full leg can do, and are much lighter
and more easily manipulated. They can be fitted with a
boot, have a knee joint which can be made rigid at will,
are much lighter and cheaper, and when used are much
less fatiguing. In many places in France and Italy no
other limb is issued except what is known as a pyllon
leg—a form of stump or peg-leg.
The opinion above expressed is held by many of the
leaders in artificial limb work. Personally I think that
the peg or stump leg can be made to do everything
which the ordinary limb can do, whilst they are much
easier to make and repair, the only objection to them
being their appearance.
I would strongly urge that every Australian be given
one peg-leg and one of the ordinary type, for what the
men call “ Sunday ” wear. lam sure that when men
become accustomed tp them they will not use the
heavier, though perhaps the more natural looking, leg,
and ultimately they will not be needed.
I purchased some legs of the best type for samples,
and arranged to have them delivered to and shipped
by the High- Commissioner. There was great diffi-
culty in getting samples owing to the local demand,
and I could not purchase as many as desired, but ar-
ranged that other samples should be sent by A.I.F.
authorities from England, and asked the G.0.C., A.1.F.,
that an officer* be appointed in England to watch all new
developments in limb-making, to regularly report to
Australia, and send any new limb considered worthy of
imitation by the authorities in the Commonwealth.
(Copy of letter attached.)
1 he manufacture of limbs for short-thigh stumps or
for amputation through the hip-joint is very difficult,
and results are unsatisfactory. A few makers in Eng-
land seem to do better than the rest, and therefore are
most favoured with orders. It will be necessary to
bring a man from Europe who is skilled in this work to
start their manufacture in Australia.
Artificial Arms.
Many types of artificial arms are being used in Eng-
land, Canada, and on the Continent, some being simple,
others very elaborate and. difficult to use. Samples of
nearly all the British arms have been sent to Australia
from time to time, and further particulars were sent
whilst I was in England. I arranged to purchase several
continental arms. Of the English mechanical arms,
Blatchford, Anderson, and Hobbs are probably the best,
but, in my opinion, none are of much value, unless for
very special wmrk. A simple arm, known as Williams’
arm, is the best for hard work. It is a modified hook.
I arranged for a sample to be sent to Australia. Carnes’
arm, the well-known American arm, is the best un the
market for light work and intelligent use. It is issued
in special cases in all countries, but, on account of its'
expense, by no means often. It is admittedly only suit-
able for light work, and not for any form of mechanical
or laborious work. It is more in favour on the Conti-
nent than in England. Without doubt the best arm,
and, in my opinion, the only arm or hand worked
simply and without complicated parts, is the hand and
arm made by Professor Putti, of Bologna, Italy. This
is a light appliance, resembles a hand, and can easily be
made to open and close the fingers, as well as to be flexed
and extended on the wrist. It is far in advance of
Caines arm, and at the same time lighter and simpler.
I tried to purchase a sample, but was not able to do so,
Professor Putti stating that he could not sell any. X


obtained the drawing, &c., and hope the arm and hand
can be manufactured in Australia. On the Continent
many forms of appliances and attachments for use by
labourers or for laborious work were seen. At Mont-
pelllier I saw men who had lost both hands and part of
both arms in the garden doing hard spade work. Draw-
ings and descriptions of as many as possible were ob-
tained by me. They are all fairly simple, and can be
made easily by any ordinary mechanic.. I could only
purchase a few samples, and the manufacturers would
not take orders.
The Best Type of Artificial Arm to be adopted
for issue by Australia.
Whilst no arm has been made which can be said to be
satisfactory, the arm and hand of Putti should be
adopted, and endeavours made t© have it manufactured
in Australia. This, with Carnes’ arm, will fairly well
fill the requirements of men who do not do hard or
laborious work. Armar’s work is not known in France,'
and I failed to meet Mr. F. Armar, though I repeatedly
tried to do so. He is not devoting himself to this work,
being employed in some other branch of the service.
For tradesmen, either a special arm should be pro-
vided of the type of Anderson, Blatchford, or Hobbs, or
one of the continental patterns. All of these can easily
be made in Australia, whilst for labouring or farm
work the Williams arm or the Bowler hook will be
found to be most satisfactory.
A very simple appliance seen and being used with
good effect was a plain leather strap 1-| to 2 inches
wide round the end of stump (wrist), and under which
the end of knife, fork, or tools or button hook was
passed.
Epitome—Artificial Limbs.
To review the subject of artificial limbs as seen by
me in the various countries visited and in the Belgian
Factory at Yernon, I have no hesitation in saying that
the Italians under Professor Putti, of Bologna, Italy,
lead the way, both for general utility and for originality,
whilst tile limbs are made with a fine finish, and are at
the same time very light.
In France the work was disappointing, but I was un-
fortunate, in that the factory under Dr. Bourillon, one of
the leaders in Paris, had been burnt down shortly before
my visit.' Still I saw nothing of special merit in France,
and almost everywhere the simple pyllon leg was being
supplied, and a simple metal working arm, after the
pattern, but lighter and with more attachments than,
the arm known in Australia as Armar’s arm.
It is evident—
(l) That all leaders in the work are coming to the
conclusion that the peg-leg up to date fulfils
all desired conditions as well as any other
type, and at the same time possesses many
advantages over the older forms.
(2 ) That there is no artificial arm which gives
satisfaction, and that the Putti arm is the
best of mechanical arms, whilst there is
little to choose between many of the working
arms, those of the very simplest make—the
Williams arm or the Bowler hook—being
probably the best.
Memorandum to—
The General Officer Commanding,
Australian Imperial Force,
France.
Subject: Supply Sample Artificial Limbs and Reports
of same— Amputations of Arms and Legs.
In order that the Department in Australia may be
able to keep in touch with advances in artificial limbs,
and in various appliances used for maimed and
wounded, it is very necessary that all new appliances
should be sent to Australia as samples, so that others
can be made locally if desired, and that Australian
wounded may have the benefit of the latest thought and
experience.
I shall be pleased if you can see your way to appoint
one Medical Officer of standing and experience, firstly,
to specially watch this work and to report regularly to
the Defence Department, Australia, upon all such mat-
ters, and secondly, to arrange through your officer in
London for the purchase and despatch of such appli-
ances as should be at the disposal of the Defence Depart-
ment or the Repatriation Department in Australia.
I would further recommend that Lieutenant-Colonel
J. Gordon, A.A.M.C., who has been in charge of the
provision of artificial limbs and of work in connexion
with limbless men at Southall, should be appointed and
instructed to do this work in addition to the work now
being performed by him. This officer to have the right
to call to his assistance such other Medical Officers ad
may be advisable.
SECTION 26.—TIMBER FOR ARTIFICIAL LIMBS
AND SUBSTITUTES.
For the ordinary type of wooden leg or arm seasoned
willow is universally used, owing to its strength, tough-
ness, and light weight. The willow known as silver
(white and red) is the best. The ordinary weeping
willow is not much used, but I was informed that it is
quite satisfactory. Willows grown in cold climates and
in the high altitudes are said to be the best and closest
grained, but that grown in other altitudes is freely used.
In fact, any sound willow is used, the lighter and more
porous the better. Wood is not the only substance used,
and good limbs are being made of metal, of papier
mache, and of fibre. Peg-legs are made from elm,
hickory, ash, of lancewood, and various substances,
such as fibre or pulp.
Seasoning Willow. —The great drawback to using
willow is the time required to season it, and various pro-
were being used to expedite its drying. In
America one leading firm seasoned it by placing it in
hot ovens; another firm applied heat to the centre of
the willow log (previously bored).
In Italy and-France the timber was dried in cham-
bers heated with artificial heat. Care had to be taken
to prevent splitting by regulating the temperature of
chamber and by plastering the end of the blocks with
glue, pitch, or sulphur. Roughly, 5 per cent, of the
blocks were cracked in this process.
The best process was employed by Messrs. Yarrow
and Company, at Glasgow. Here they dried the timber
in three weeks by subjecting it to a continuous current
of air at the temperature of the adjoining factory. This
method is very suitable to Australian requirements, and
is recommended for trial, being simple, effective, and in-
expensive.
Supply in America. —-I made inquiries regarding the
supply of willow in America. There is plenty to be
purchased in the open market at New York or any of
the large eastern centres where timber is dealt with.
Care would have to be taken to be sure that it had
been seasoned before purchase.
The American authorities stated they would willingly
look after any orders Australia placed, and see that thev
were properly completed.


SECTION 27.—WORKSHOPS ATTACHED TO AUS-
TRALIAN HOSPITALS AND CONVALESCENT
CAMPS.
Apart from the small workshops at Southall and at
the Convalescent Depot at Weymouth, • both of which
are under the control and management of the Red Cross
or the Y.M.C.A., there are no workshops attached to our
Australian hospitals. I look on the utility of these
workshops as twofold•
Eirst, as curative, inasmuch as they give patients
mental and physical occupation.
Second, as necessary for re-education of certain
men who have been disabled in one way or
another.
I am convinced that it is advisable that men in hos-
pital should, when practicable, have something to
occupy themselves with, and amongst orthopaedic cases
especially this work can be definitely made curative as
regards their disability.
Cases with certain disabilities—paralysis, &c., who
will be eventually returned to Australia—can very pro-
fitably occupy the time that they must remain in hos-
pital in being taught some work which will be of use
to them afterwards in earning their livelihood, and as
much of this work as can be done whilst they are in
England should be undertaken while they are in hos-
pital there.
I am definitely of the opinion, also, that these work-
shops should be organized and administered by the Mili-
tary Department, and not be undertaken by outside
associations. Workshops of this description, such as are
installed in a great many hospitals in England and else-
where, should be started as soon as possible in our Aus-
tralian Auxiliary Hospitals and Convalescent Depots,
not only for orthopaedic cases, but for convalescent
patients generally who are for return to Australia.
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by Albert J. Mullett.
Government Printer for the State of Victoria.


