

1921.
REPORT
BY
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE
ON THE
MILITARY OCCUPATION
OF THE
GERMAN NEW GUINEA POSSESSIONS.
. JuthoritjJ:
ALBERT J. MULLETT, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE-
0.18347.




THE POSITION IN THE PACIFIC AT THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE
WAR, AND THE DESPATCH OF THE AUSTRALIAN NAVAL AND
MILITARY EXPEDITIONARY FORCE.
Upon the outbreak of War on 4th August, 1914, the German Possessions in the
Western Pacific became at once factors of great strategic importance, particularly as
bases for the German Pacific Cruiser Squadron, and as links in the chain of stations
which Germany had erected for the purpose of joining Samoa, Nauru, New Guinea,
and the Marshall Islands in wireless telegraphic communication with the Naval Head-
Quarters at Kiao Chau in China.
The German Fleet in the Pacific, when War commenced, comprised the cruisers
Scharnhorst (the Flagship of Rear Admiral von Spee), Gneisenau, Emden, Leipsic,
Dresden, and Niirnberg, together with the small cruisers Gormoran, Planet and Geier.
The Scharnhorst and Gneisenau were first class cruisers with 8 • 2-inch guns. They thus
carried heavier guns than any ship of the Royal Australian Navy, with the exception
of the battle-cruiser Australia. The German Squadron was therefore a formidable
one, and as long as it remained in the Pacific and could keep in communication by
wireless with its bases in the Islands it was obvious that the position was one fraught
with endless possibilities for Australia and New Zealand.
In these circumstances, therefore, it was inevitable that the Commonwealth of
Australia and the Dominion of New Zealand would be involved in operations against
the German Possessions in the Western Pacific. The call came very quickly —two
days after Great Britain’s declaration of war upon Germany. On 6th August, 1914,
the Secretary of State despatched to the Governor-General of Australia a telegram, of
which the following is an extract: —
“ If your Ministers desire and feel themselves able to seize German
wireless stations at New Guinea, Yap in Marshall Islands, and Nauru on
Pleasant Island, we should feel that this was a great and urgent Imperial
service. You will realize, however, that any territory now occupied must at
conclusion of war be at the disposal of Imperial Government for purposes of
an ultimate settlement. Other Dominions are acting on the same under-
standing in similar way, and, in particular, suggestion to New Zealand is being
made with regard to Samoa.”
Here was a stirring summons for action, and Australia responded at once. The
Commonwealth Government decided to take immediate steps to raise and equip an
Expeditionary Force to proceed to New Guinea. Action against the wireless stations
at Nauru and Yap was also contemplated. On 10th August, 1914, in acknowledgment
of the communication from the Secretary of State, a telegram was despatched informing
him that an Expeditionary Force of 1,500 men was being organized by the Common-
wealth Government for service in the Pacific.
This was the origin of the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force.
It consisted of six companies of the Royal Australian Naval Reserve, a Battalion of
Infantry at war strength, two Machine Gun Sections, a Signalling Section, and a
Detachment of the Army Medical Corps.
The command was given to Colonel William Holmes, D. 8.0., V.D., who had a
record of good service in the South African War, and who, at the time of his appointment
to the Expeditionary Force, was commanding the 6th Australian Infantry Brigade.
Preparations were pushed forward with the utmost rapidity by the Department
of Defence, and exceptionally efficient work was done by Colonel Holmes and his staff,
assisted by the Commandant of the Second Military District, Colonel E. T. Wallack,
G.B. (now Brigadier-General E .T. Wallack, C. 8., C.M.G.), and his staff in organizing,
clothing, arming, equipping and training this Force. The greater number of the men
who volunteered were not on the active list and had no uniforms, arms or equipment.
They had to be sworn in, organized, clothed, armed and equipped. All this was done
in less than one week.
German Pacific
Possessions
become
important
factors.
German Naval
power in the
Pacific.
Request from
Imperial
Government.
Australian
Naval and
Military
Expeditionary
Force.
Colonel Holmes
appointed to
command.
Rapidity of
organization.


Equally creditable results in organization were achieved by the Navy Office in
getting together from the States of Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, and South
Australia the naval portion of the Expeditionary Force, and in arming and equipping the
same as a complete unit ready for embarkation at the same time as the Infantry
Battalion.
In the meantime arrangements had been made with the P. and 0. Company for
the charter of the liner Berrima as a Transport, and she was being fitted up at Cockatoo
Island, Sydney, for that purpose in order to be ready to proceed to sea as soon as the
embarkation of the Force had been completed.
Colonel Holmes had with him as second in command Lieutenant-Colonel John
Paton (now Brigadier-General John Paton, C. 8.). In command of the Infantry
Battalion was Lieutenant-Colonel W. Russell Watson (now Colonel W. Russell Watson,
C. 8., C.M.G., V.D.), and Lieutenant-Colonel Neville R. Howse, V.C. (now Major-
General Sir Neville Howse, V.C., K.C.8., K.C.M.G.), had been appointed as Principal
Medical Officer.
In command of the Berrima was Commander (now Captain) Stevenson, R.N.,
and the Naval Unit was under Commander J. A. Beresford, R.A.N.
1 On 18th August, 1914, the Force embarked on the Berrima which left Sydney the
following day at noon. Off Sandy Cape the Transport was met by H.M.A.S. Sydney,
and the two ships proceeded in company to Palm Islands where H.M.A.S. Encounter
was awaiting their arrival.
At Palm Islands the troops were sent ashore for instruction in musketry, and
after some days spent in this manner the Berrima proceeded under escort to Port
Moresby and thence to a rendezvous off Rossel Island on the 9th September as arranged
with the Rear-Admiral Commanding the Australian Squadron.
At the conference held at this place it was decided to go direct to New Britain and
seize the wireless station, which was supposed to be situated near Herbertshohe, and
then to occupy Herbertshohe, and also Rabaul, the seat of government of the German
Possessions in the Western Pacific.
1 This order of procedure was accordingly set in motion, and the Berrima, escorted
•by the ships of the Royal Australian Navy under the command of Rear-Admiral Sir
George Patey, K.C.V.0., departed from Rossel Island to complete the last stage of her
now Historic voyage to New Britain.
Just after daylight on the 11th of September, 1914, the Berrima, escorted
by the Australia, rounded Cape Gazelle, the north-eastern end of New Britain, and
steamed into Blanche Bay.
The light cruiser Sydney, with the destroyers Warrego, Yarra, and Parramatta,
had arrived at 3.30 a.m. and reconnoitred the harbour and the surrounding coast.
The Sydney then proceeded to Herbertshohe and landed a party of 25 troops
whom she had taken aboard from the Berrima at Port Moresby. This party advanced
from Herbertshohe in the supposed direction of the wireless station.
A party of 25 men from the Naval Reserve under the command of Lieutenant
Bowen and accompanied by Captain Pockley, Army Medical Corps, was landed by
direction of the Admiral at Kabakaul, near the entrance to Blanche Bay, with instructions
to locate and seize the wireless station which was thought to be in this neighbourhood.
This party, however, met with strong opposition at the commencement of its advance
along the road from Kabakaul to Bita Paka. Reinforcements consisting of two
companies of the Naval Reserves, two Machine Gun Sections and a detachment of the
Army Medical Corps, under the command of Lieutenant-Commander Elwell, were
therefore sent ashore. This party was accompanied by Commander J. A. Beresford.
Shortly afterwards word was received by the Berrima that Captain Pockley and Able
Seaman Williams had been seriously wounded and were being sent aboard the troopship.
Meanwhile, as nothing had been heard of the party of 25 men landed at Herbertshohe
by the Sydney, Colonel Holmes decided to send ashore four companies of Infantry under
Lieutenant-Colonel Watson to get into touch with this party and also to co-operate
with the two companies of Naval Reserves. The infantry was landed in boats at
Herbertshohe, about 5 miles further down the Bay from Kabakaul.
In the meantime, the Naval Reserve was endeavouring to push along the Bita
Paka-road. This proved a difficult undertaking owing, in the first place, to the advance
being contested and, in the second place, to the fact that the dense tropical jungle on
either side practically restricted the line to the narrow road itself. As it appeared that
the attack on the wireless station could not be delivered that day, instructions were
given to Commander Beresford and Lieutenant-Colonel Watson to retire to the beach
Naval Forces
quickly
organized.
Berrima
engaged as
transport.
Personnel.
Departure from
Sydney.
Instruction at
Palm Islands.
Rendezvous at
Rossel Island.
Plans outlined.
Departure from
Rossel Island
for New Britain.
Arrival at
New Britain.
The landing,
and the attack
on the wireless
station.


before nightfall. It was also arranged that if the Force were still meeting with resistance
on the following morning, the ships would shell with shrapnel the ridge between Kabakaul
and Herbertshohe, and that immediately after that a vigorous attack would be launched,.
In the evening of the 11th, however, the wireless station, which was discovered
to be at Bita Paka, surrendered to the party of Naval Reserves under Lieutenant Bond,
with whom was also Captain Travers as Intelligence Officer. This force remained in
possession of the station throughout that night, and after removing the instruments,
retired to the coast. In view of the opposition this party had met with and the difficult
nature of the country the performance of this party of Naval Reserves was highly
creditable. For their services on this occasion Captain R. J. A. Travers and Lieutenant
Bond received the Distinguished Service Order. Unfortunately this operation had
been accomplished at the cost of life. The casualties on the side of the Australians
were as follow :
Killed. —Captain B. C. A. Pockley, Army Medical Corps ;
Lieutenant-Commander C. B. Elwell, Royal Australian Navy.
Able Seamen Williams, Courtney, Moffatt and Street.
Wounded. —Lieutenant R. Bowen, Royal Australian Navy.
Able Seamen T. Sullivan, J. Tonks and A. P. W. Skillen.
In his despatch of 13th September, 1914, Colonel Holmes specially mentions
Captain Pockley, Lieutenant-Commander Elwell, Captain R. J. A. Travers and
Lieutenants Bond and Bowen as having acted in a gallant manner. Captain Pockley
was killed shortly after taking off his red cross brassard to give to one of his men who was
without a badge ; and Lieutenant Commander Elwell was shot, drawn sword in hand,
whilst leading a charge. The names of these officers and men who gave their lives so ;
bravely in action will always be held in grateful remembrance by their country.
The opposing force had consisted of German reservists and of native armed
constabulary under the command of white officers. Amongst the prisoners taken were
three German Regular Officers and about sixteen white non-commissioned officers and
men and a large number of native troops.
In the afternoon of 12th September the Berrima left Herbertshohe and proceeded
to Rabaul which lies at the head of Blanche Bay. Four companies of Infantry, one
company of Naval Reserves and one Machine Gun Section, were put ashore, but there
was no opposition and the town was garrisoned without delay. The following afternoon
at 3 o’clock a parade of all available troops was held at Rabaul, and the British flag was
solemnly hoisted, the guns of the warships in the Bay joining in the Royal Salute.
On the same day Colonel Holmes issued a Proclamation, of which the following
is a copy :
PROCLAMATION.
“ Proclamation on behalf of His Majesty King George the Fifth, by the
Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and of the
Dominions Overseas, King, Defender of the Faith, Emperor of India.
By Colonel William Holmes, D. 5.0., V.D., Brigadier commanding
His Majesty’s Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force.
Whereas the Forces under my command have occupied the Island of
New Britain ;
And whereas upon such occupation the authority of the German
Government has ceased to exist therein ;
And whereas it has become essential to provide for proper government
of the said colony, and for the protection of the lives and property of the
peaceful inhabitants thereof.
Now I, William Holmes, Companion of the Distinguished Service
Order, Colonel in His Majesty’s Forces, Brigadier Commanding the aforesaid
Expeditionary Force, do hereby declare and proclaim as follows :
(1) From and after the date of these presents the Island of New
Britain and its dependencies are held by me in military
occupation in the name of His Majesty the King.
(2) War will be waged only against the armed forces of the German
Empire and its Allies in the present war.
The men who
fell.
The German
Forces.
The British Flag
hoisted at
Rabaul.


(3) The lives and private property of peaceful inhabitants will be
protected, and the laws and customs of the colony will remain 1
in force so far as is consistent with the military situation.
(4) If the needs of the troops demand it, private property may be
requisitioned. Such property will be paid for at its fair value.
(5) Certain officials of the late Government may be retained, if they
so desire, at their usual salaries.
(6) In return for such protection it is the duty of all inhabitants to
behave in an absolutely peaceful manner, to carry on their
ordinary pursuits so far as is possible, to take no part directly
or indirectly in any hostilities, to abstain from communication
with His Majesty’s enemies, and to render obedience to such
orders as may be promulgated.
(7) All male inhabitants of European origin are required to take the
oath of neutrality prescribed at the garrison head-quarters ;
and all firearms, ammunition, and war material in the possession
or control of inhabitants are to be surrendered forthwith, as is
also all public property of the late Government.
(8) Non-compliance with the terms of this Proclamation, and
disobedience of such orders as from time to time may be
promulgated, will be dealt with according to military law.
(9) It is hereby notified that this Proclamation takes effect in the
whole Island of New Britain and its dependencies from this
date.
Given at Government House, Eabaul, this twelfth day of September,
1914.
(Signed) WILLIAM HOLMES,
Brigadier Commanding.”
When Eabaul was occupied it was found that the German Governor had, about
a month previously, removed from Eabaul to Toma in the hill country behind
Herbertshohe, and that with him at this place were the remainder of his military
forces and the senior members of the Civil Service.
As he had not given a satisfactory reply to the requests sent to him for surrender,
it was decided that the Fleet would shell the high ground round Toma and that an advance
on Toma would be made immediately afterwards. This was accordingly done ; the
Encounter shelled the TomaEidge for about an hour, and then Lieutenant-Colonel Watson
was ordered to advance on Toma from Herbertshohe with four companies of Infantry,
one Machine Gun Section and one 12-pounder Field Gun.
The Encounter s shells and the advance of the troops produced good results. In
the course of his march to Toma, Lieutenant-Colonel Watson was met by a flag of truce
from the Governor, and arrangements were made at Toma that the Governor would
meet Colonel Holmes at Herbertshohe on the following day to discuss terms of surrender.
At this meeting on 15th September and a subsequent conference which took place
two days after, terms of capitulation were agreed to and duly signed. These terms
are as follows :
“Terms of Capitulation.”
“ Made this 17th day of September, 1914, between Colonel William
Holmes, D. 5.0., V.D., Brigadier Commanding the Australian Naval and
Military Expeditionary Force, on behalf of His Most Gracious Majesty King
George the Fifth of the first part, and Herr E. Haber, Acting Governor of the
German Possessions known as Deutsch Neu Guinea, on behalf of the Imperial
German Government of the second part.
Whereas the principal centres of Deutsch Neu Guinea have been
occupied by an overwhelming force under the command of the said Colonel
Holmes ;
And whereas the said Acting Governor has no authority to surrender
any portion of the German Possessions under his administration, but, in view
of the said occupation by the said overwhelming force, the said Acting Governor
is prepared to give an assurance that all military resistance to such occupation
in Deutsch Neu Guinea shall cease forthwith.


Now, the following terms and conditions are solemnly agreed upon
between the said contracting parties :
(1) The name Deutsch Neu Guinea (German New Guinea) includes
the whole of the German Possessions in the Pacific Ocean
lately administered from Rabaul by the said Acting Governor
on behalf of the German Imperial Government, and the said
possessions are hereafter referred to as “ The Colony.”
(2) All military resistance to the said military occupation of the
Colony shall cease forthwith.
(3) The armed German and Native forces now in the field are to be
surrendered at Herbertshohe on the 21st day of September
at Ten o’clock in the forenoon. Military honours will be
granted.
(4) Upon the said Acting Governor giving his parole to take no further
part directly or indirectly in the present War no obstacle will
be placed in the way of his returning to Germany. Such
parole shall not prevent the said Acting Governor from tender-
ing to the Imperial Government at Berlin such advice as he
may deem proper with regard to terms of peace.
(5) Such of the officers of the said forces in the field as are officers
of the German Regular Forces, will be treated as prisoners of
war in the usual manner. Such of the officers of the said forces
as are not officers of the German Regular Forces, but whose
usual occupation is civil, on taking an oath of neutrality for
the duration of the present War, will be released and permitted
to return to their homes and ordinary avocations, except
where such avocations are official, in which case the provisions
of paragraphs 10 and 11 hereof will apply.
(6) As the said Acting Governor gives his assurance that none of the
white Non-commissioned Officers and men now in the field
belong to the Regular Forces of the German Empire, such white
Non-commissioned Officers and men, upon taking the said
oath of neutrality, will be released and permitted to resume
their ordinary avocations, except where such avocations are
official, in which case the terms of paragraphs 10 and 11 hereof
will apply.
(7) As it is understood that the safety of the white population depends
to an extent on the existence of a Native Constabulary, that
portion of the armed Native Constabulary which now forms
part of the German Forces in the field, if found satisfactory,
will be transferred to the Military Administration.
(8) As the administration of the Colony during the military occupation
will be conducted by the British Military Commander, all
moneys and properties of the late administration are to be handed
over to the said Colonel Holmes, Brigadier Commanding.
(9) During the said military occupation the local laws and customs
will remain in force so far as is con-istent with the military
situation.
(10) As it is intended that administration shall be carried on under
the control of British officers, subject to the succeeding
paragraph, such only of the civil officials of the late German
Administration as it may be considered necessary to retain
in an advisory capacity, will be continued in their offices.
Officials so retained will be required to take the oath of
neutrality and their former salaries will be continued. Officials
not so retained, and those who refuse to take the said oath,
will be deported to Australia,.but will have no obstacle placed
in the way of their returning thence to Germany as soon as
is possible.
(11) For the protection of the white population against the Natives,
the German officials now in charge of outlying portions of the
Colony will continue in their official capacities until relieved
by the military administration.


(12) Any British subjects at present imprisoned, or held in duress in
the said Colony, are to be released and returned to their homes
and former positions forthwith. This does not apply to such
persons (if any) who may be serving a sentence imposed by
a Criminal Court of competent jurisdiction.
In witness whereof the said contracting parties of this first and second
parts have hereunto set their hands this 17th day of September, 1914.
(Signed) E. HABER.
Witness to Signature of E. Haber.
(Signed) Von Klewitz.
(Signed) WILLIAM HOLMES.
Witness to Signature of W. Holmes.
(Signed) J. B. Stevenson.
After receiving the surrender of the German Governor and his forces at Herbert-
shohe on the 21st of September, Colonel Holmes left Rabaul on the following day in the
Berrima, escorted by the Australia and Encounter and the French cruiser Montcalm
and proceeded to Friedrich Wilhelmshafen on the mainland of New Guinea. This
place was occupied without opposition, and a garrison of a half company of Naval
Reserves, and one and a half companies of Infantry was left in charge.
.Other Government stations and centres of district administration throughout
the Possessions were occupied and garrisoned in succession—Kaewieng, the chief town in
New Ireland, on 17th October ; Nauru or Pleasant Island on 6th November by an
expedition under the command of Colonel Holmes ; the Admiralty Islands on 24th
November; and Kieta in the German Solomons on 9th December. Three smaller
stations —Eitape and Morobe on the New Guinea Coast, and Namatanai on the north-
east coast of New Ireland —were occupied at a later stage.
DESCRIPTION OF THE TERRITORY.
The German New Guinea Possessions which thus passed under British authority
in the form of military occupation by an Australian Force constitute a large territory
of approximately 92,000 square miles. It consists of the portion of the mainland of
New Guinea lying to the north of Papua and to the east of Dutch New Guinea, and
also comprises the Bismarck Archipelago and the German Solomons. These three
geographical divisions formed an administrative group known as the “ Old Protectorate,”
the centre of government being Rabaul on the Island of New Britain in the Bismarck
Archipelago. The area of the New Guinea mainland formerly belonging to Germany
comprised nearly 70,000 square miles, and is very mountainous in character containing
a series of great ranges in which are peaks of over 10,000 feet in height. The coastline
from the Dutch boundary on the north-east to latitude 8 degrees south to the British
boundary is about 700 miles in length, and is low-lying and fringed with numerous
coastal islands and reefs.
This long coastline is broken by several large bays, of which Huon Gulf and Astro-
labe Bay are the chief. There are also huge rivers which rise in the great watersheds
of the mountain-chains in the interior. Notable amongst these waterways is the Sepik
or Kaiserin Augusta River, to match which one must go to the Fly River in the west of
Papua. The Sepik is a broad winding stream, with a wide entrance that is easy of
approach, and it is deep enough to be navigable for over 250 miles by a vessel of 600
tons.
South of the Sepik—and almost connected with it at one point in its upper course
by a tributary of the Kaiserin Augusta called the Topfer Fluss, which is less than 9 miles
away —is another large river named the Ramu which flows into the sea about 20 miles
south of the entrance to the Sepik. Further south again there is a third big river, the
Markham, which flows into Huon Gulf.
These fine streams will supply the natural means of access to the unknown interior
of this part of New Guinea, and their fertile valleys may become centres of cultivation
on an extensive scale.
Further posts
occupied.
The Territory
briefly
described.
The mainland
of New
Guinea.
Large rivers.
The Sepik.
The Ilamu.
The Markham.


There are three Government stations on the mainland —Madang, formerly known |
as Friedrich Wilhelmshafen and onee the head-quarters of the New Guinea Company!
when it governed the Territory and later the capital of the Protectorate, is situated in
Astrolabe Bay, the best harbor on the New Guinea coast. Eitape in the north-east is
about 80 miles from the Dutch Border and fronts an open roadstead where the surf runs
heavily ; Morobe is in the south on Adolfhafen —an inlet of Huon Bay —not far from
the boundary of Papua.
Lying to the eastward of the mainland are the numerous islands of the Bismarck
Archipelago. The largest of these are New Britain, New Ireland, and Manus the chief
island in the Admiralty Group. New Britain is a crescent-shaped island about 300 miles
in length, with an average breadth of 50 miles. It is about 10,000 square miles in area,
and is of mountainous and volcanic formation, a high backbone of ranges running east
and west with an altitude of 4,000 to 5,000 feet. The eastern end of the Island is broken
into the Gazelle Peninsula which contains the spacious harbor of Blanche Bay, the head
of which is called Simpsonhafen. Situated on the north shore of Simpsonhafen is Rabaul,
the seat of Government for the Territory ; and 20 miles down the Bay is Kokopo
(formerly known as Herbertshohe) which was the capital of the Protectorate before the
removal of the Government to Rabaul in 1910. The military administration established
a Government station at Talasea, about the centre of the north coast, and one at Gas-
matta, about half way along the south coast of New Britain.
Rabaul is destined to be one of the pivotal points in the Pacific. It is an admirably :
well-chosen site and possesses many natural advantages, especially in its deep, spacious, l
and safe harbor, and its central position. The Germans would appear to have been
resolved to make this seat of Government a worthy capital of their Western Pacific
Possessions. The town is well laid out. The streets are planted with avenues of shade-
trees ; and the Government buildings and bungalows are a good type of tropical architec-
ture. There was special provision made for distinct quarters for the Europeans, the
Chinese, the Malays, and the natives. Excellent facilities and accommodation were
arranged for shipping. The amenities of life in this outpost were not neglected and,
as an instance of this, mention may be made of an extensive and beautiful botanic gardens
which have been maintained with equal pride by the military administration. During
the occupation the town has been improved in many respects, and it is readily admitted
that it has been kept much cleaner and is more healthy than it was when under the
German regime.
Overlapping New Britain, and separated from it by St. George’s Strait, is the:
long and narrow island of New Ireland. It is the second largest in the Bismarck Archi-
pelago, and has an area of about 4,600 square miles. Like New Britain, it is mountainous,
the ranges in the south rising to over 6,000 feet. The commercial centre is Kaevvieng
on the north-western extremity of the Island. There is also a Government station and
township at Namatanai for the southern portion of the Island. North-west from New
Ireland lies the Admiralty Group of which Manus is the largest island, with Lorengau
the Government station situated on an excellent and spacious harbor called Seeadler-
hafen. In a north-westerly direction from the Admiralty Group are the Western Islands
comprising the Hermit, Ninigo, Anchorite, Commeison, and other islands. There are
also numerous other islands dotted about the Bismarck Archipelago, the best known
being New Hanover (500 square miles in area), St. Matthias, Gardner Islands, the French
Islands, Nissan, the Read Islands, the Carterets, and Rook Island.
The German Solomons comprise the two northern islands of the great chain of
the Solomon Islands. Of these two islands the most northerly one is small, being 300
square miles in area, but the second one is the very fine island of Bougainville, which
contains 3,500 square miles. There is a Government station and township at Kieta,
on the east coast.
It will thus be seen that the component parts of the Territory are scattered and;
widespread, very considerable stretches of sea separating the various island groups. The
Possessions cover a geographical area between latitude 1° south and latitude 8° south,
and between longitude 141° east and 156° east. The climate is therefore essentially
tropical. It is, however, equable ; and the rainfall, although varying greatly in different
parts of the Territory, is plentiful and regular. There are two seasons. The North-west
Monsoon commences about the end of November and brings what is known as the rainy
season, which continues on until March or April. There are frequent thunderstorms
and heavy downpours of rain, and the weather is hot and oppressive. Then about April
Government
Stations on the
mainland.
The Bismarck
Archipelago.
Island of New
Britain.
The Gazelle
Peninsula.
Blanche Ba#
and Simpaon-
hafen.
New
Government
Stations.
llabanl an
important
centre in the
Pacific.
New Ireland.
The Admiralty
Islands.
The Western
Islands.
The German
Solomonlslands.
Territory a
scattered area.


the south-east monsoon sets in, and lasts until November. The days are usually bright
and clear, and the Avind, although often boisterous, is generally a steady breeze, making
the conditions more pleasant than in the rainy season.
The average rainfall for the Territory is from 100 to 115 inches per annum. At
Rabaul it averages 83 inches per annum, and at Madang, on the New Guinea mainland,
seaward of the great ranges, it averages 150 inches per annum.
The average maximum temperature at Rabaul is 89° and the average minimum
temperature is 71° ; but to appreciate what this temperature means in that latitude one
must also remember that the average solar reading is 147° and the average humidity
is 69°. Oppressive as such climatic conditions are, they are nevertheless more tolerable
than those prc Availing in countries lying in a corresponding latitude north of the equator.
STEPS TO TAKE OYER ADMINISTRATIVE FUNCTIONS.
Following upon the successful occupation of the Territory by the Expeditionary
Force under his command, Colonel Holmes was appointed Administrator. He at once
took up the work of organizing the various Government Departments in such manner
as to make them constituent parts of a Military Administration. By the terms of
capitulation he had reserved the power of dispensing with the services of the German
civil officials, and he decided to adhere to this policy except in cases where he deemed
it advantageous or necessary to retain certain officials in a professional or advisory
capacity. Thus he availed himself of the services of the Judge to advise upon questions
of German law ; medical officers were kept on to deal with patients suffering from
tropical diseases unfamiliar to the ordinary medical practitioner ; an official of the
Treasury was retained because of expert’ knowledge of details of finance ; and the same
procedure was adopted in other cases.
In one of his despatches he refers to the difficult problem with which he, \A r as
faced :
“ Now the German laws and customs in this colony are very complex
and unique, particularly those relating to the large native population. The rules
and regulations in respect to Finance and Customs also are different to anything
I have been accustomed to in Australia, and, moreover, all entries and records
were, of course, in the German language, and competent interpreters were not
available. I therefore determined to avail myself of the services of certain officials
in an advisory capacity for a period of three months, and entered into agreements
accordingly, promising to continue the payment of their former salaries.”
This arrangement, however, did not continue very long, and in the meantime
the actual work of administration by members of the Occupying Force Avas put upon
a good basis.
The functions formerly exercised by the German Governor Avere centralized at
Administrative Head-Quarters, where the Administrator, Avith the assistance of a Military
Secretary, dealt with matters of policy and general administration of the Territory. As
the first Administrator, Colonel Holmes had to cope with the difficult problems of the
transition stage between the German system and the changes and modifications demanded
by the circumstances of the Military Occupation. Associated with him in this work as
his Military Secretary was Major F. B. Heritage (now Colonel Heritage, M.V.0.)
, The Law Department A\ r as under the control of an officer known as the Deputy
Judge-Advocate-General, who acted as adviser to the Administrator upon all legal
questions, including military Dav. He Avas also the J udge of the Superior Court of Justice.
The first officer to'hold this appointment aa t us Captain C. E. Manning, a Sydney barrister,
who Avas afterwards killed at Pozieres.
Other branches of the Administration Avhich had novel problems thrust upon
them by the conditions of the Occupation were those under the respective control of
the Treasurer, the Principal Medical Officer, the Postmaster, and the Government
Printer ; also the Departments of Native Affairs, Land and Surveys, Government Stores,
and Public Works. The Avork of some of these departments is further dealt with in
other parts of this Report.
THE NORTH-WEST PACIFIC EXPEDITION.
It has been shown that the north-eastern portion of the mainland of New Guinea,
together with the Bismarck Archipelago and the German Solomons, formed an adminis-
trative group governed from Rabaul and known as the “Old Protectorate,” but there
was another administrative group also governed from Rabaul and known as the “Island
.Rainfall.
Temperature.
Colonel Holmes
appointed
Administrator.
Problems
encountered.
Administration
carried on by
members of
Occupying
Force.
Administrative
Departments.
Law
Department.
German
Possessions
north of the
Equator.


Territory.” This consisted of certain islands lying north of the equator and known as
the Marshall, the Caroline, the Pelew, and the Marianne Islands. Included in this group
was Nauru, which lay south of the equator and 960 miles from Rabaul.
These islands were comprised in the surrender and terms of capitulation agreed
to by the German Governor at Herbertshohe on 17th September, 1914. They had not,
however, been occupied or garrisoned by the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary
Force under the command of Colonel Holmes, which had confined its energies to taking
effective occupation of the various centres in the German-Possessions south of the equator.
The work done by this Force had accomplished one part of the project indicated
in the telegram dated 6th August, 1914, from the Secretary of State. In order to comply
fully with the request of the Imperial Government, however, the Commonwealth authori-
ties had also directed their attention to the “ Island Protectorate.” The wireless station
at Yap, in the Caroline Islands, had been put out of action by H.M.S. Hampshire, and the
installation at Nauru had been similarly dealt with by H.M.A.S. Melbourne, on 9th
September, 1914. No steps had, however, been taken to garrison these islands so as to
establish there an effective military occupation, and it was considered that this should
now be done. Arrangements were accordingly made for the despatch of an Expeditionary
Force to effect this purpose. A commission as Australian Commissioner for the Pacific
was issued to Commander S. A. Pethebridge, C.M.G. (R.A.N.R.),the Secretary for Defence,
and on 21st November, 1914, he was also appointed with the rank of Colonel to the
command of the new force which was known as the Tropical Force, or the Third Battalion
Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force. The steam-ship Eastern was
chartered as a transport for this Force. She was fitted up to accommodate officers and
other ranks to the number of about 230, and was provisioned for two months in addition
to the rations taken by the troops.
While these preparations were in progress communications were being exchanged
between the Imperial Government and the Japanese Government with reference to
co-operative action in the Pacific, and it was agreed between the two Powers that Japan
would assume Military Occupation of the German Possessions north of the equator.
This arrangement abrogated the primary purpose for which the Expeditionary Force
in the Eastern was being despatched.
In the meantime, however, reports had been received which suggested that there
was a German station with an armed ship and troops about 60 miles up the Sepik
(Kaiserin Augusta) River. Colonel Pethebridge was therefore ordered to proceed with
his Force in H.M.A.T. Eastern to that point. On his arrival there he was to co-operate
with and put his troops at the disposal of Colonel Holmes, who would be instructed to
proceed from Rabaul with three companies and field and machine guns to the Kaiserin
Augusta River, where the destroyer flotilla (Warrego, Yarra, and Parramatta) would
block any existing enemy ship.
; In accordance with these instructions the Tropical Force was on 28th November,
1914, embarked on the Eastern, which departed from Sydney the same day, and shaped a
course for Friedrich Wilhelmshafen. This town, which had been a former capital of the
German Territory, was situated on a good harbor in Astrolabe Bay on the New Guinea
coast. It had been occupied on the 24th of September, 1914, by Colonel Holmes, who
had left a garrison.
On his arrival at this rendezvous on 7th December, 1914, Colonel Pethebridge
received from Commander Cumberlege of H.M.A.S. Warrego, which had also arrived at
Friedrich Wilhelmshafen, information derived from certain missionaries, which gave
him every reason to doubt the probability of the Germans being in force at the Kaiserin
Augusta River. He therefore arranged with Commander Cumberlege to reconnoitre up
the Sepik with the destroyers Warrego and Parramatta and the small vessel Nusa. This
was accordingly done, and after the river had been navigated for a distance of about
60 miles, it became clear that the reports of the existence of a German Force in that
locality were incorrect. They had apparently been based upon the fact that a German
Government official had been stationed at Marianbad on the Sepik River with a small
force of native police. Further naval and military measures with regard to the Sepik
River were therefore abandoned, and the ships proceeded to Rabaul.
Arrangements were then made for the relief of the officers and men belonging to
Colonel Holmes’ Force who were desirous of returning to Australia, their places being
taken by the members of the Tropical Force who had arrived in the Eastern. Colonel
Holmes himself was relieved bv Colonel Pethebridge. and returned to the Commonwealth
Included in the
surrender of the
German
Governor.
Compliance
with request of
Imperial
Government.
Arrangements
made for
despatch of an
Expeditionary
Force.
Co-operation
between Great
Britain and
Japan.
Report as to
German Force
on the Sepik
River.
Tropical Force
is diverted for
service in New
Guinea.
Eastern proceeds
to this point.
Doubt as to
existence of
alleged German
Force.
Expedition up
the Sepik River.
At Rabaul.
Tribute to
Colonel Holmes.


with the intention of seeing further fighting in another theatre of war. In New Guinea
he had rendered eminent service to Australia and had laid the foundations of a successful
Military Administration. His subsequent career in the Australian Imperial Force was
a very distinguished one. He attained the rank of Major-General and established a high
reputation as a fearless leader and a fine soldier. In an article written at the time General
Holmes was killed in France, Mr. C. E. W. Bean, the historian, referred to him in the
following terms :
“ There is naturally a tendency to wonder how far citizen soldiers, who
have been more or less complete amateurs until the war plunged them into soldier-
ing as by far the most important business of their lives, could be suitable for high
commands. It is a tremendous thing to entrust the lives of 20,000 Australians
to a man whose professional soldiering has lasted only three years, when the
divisions on the other side of No-man’s Land are led by generals with thirty and
sometimes forty years of keen professional training. None will grudge it to
General Holmes that he was, of all others, the Australian who first showed that it
could be done with complete success.”
It was in January, 1915, that Colonel Pethebridge succeeded Colonel Holmes as
Administrator of the Territory, and he continued to hold that position until his death
in January, 1918, although failing health had forced him to relinquish his active duties
in October, 1917. Upon him fell the main burden of the Military Administration in its
constructive phases. Colonel Holmes had paved the way, but the real task of estab-
lishing the government of Territory upon a firm and practical basis had yet to be accom-
plished, and that task devolved upon Colonel Pethebridge. He was well fitted for the
work. Personally popular with all ranks, tactful, earnest, and energetic, he showed in
his work a marked capacity for organization and administration. It was his hand
which shaped the main structure of the administration in a form that stood the test
during six and a half years of military occupation. In May, 1916, he was promoted
to the rank of Brigadier-General, and in January, 1917, he received a knighthood in
recognition of his services. Others followed and completed the work of Sir Samuel
Pethebridge, but to him is due the greatest share of credit for the success of the military
administration of New Guinea. In the performance of this work he sacrificed his health
and contracted an illness which led to an untimely death.
General Pethebridge left New Guinea in October, 1917. His health, already
impaired by successive attacks of malarial fever, had been further affected by anxiety
over the disappearance of the Matunga, off New Britain, in August of that year. The
Matunga, which was due in Rabaul on 7th August, had not been heard of since the
receipt of a wireless message from the ship on sth August. Amongst her complement of
90 people were sixteen members of the Expeditionary Force, including Brevet-Colonel
C. L. Strangman (Principal Medical Officer), Major J. W. Flood, A.A.M.C., and Captains
A. W. Cains, F. Laycock, and P. H. Macintosh.
The Administrator had used every means at his disposal in a search for the
missing vessel, but without avail; and the loss—as then supposed —of the Matunga
and of those on board was keenly felt by the Force in New Guinea. It was not definitely
known until January of the following year that the Matunga had been captured near
St. George’s Channel by the German raider Wolf, and that of her passengers and crew
some had reached Denmark and others were prisoners of war in Germany.
When General Pethebridge left New Guinea in October, 1917, he appointed as
Acting Administrator Major (afterwards Lieutenant-Colonel) Seaforth Mackenzie, who
had, since April, 1915, been the Legal Adviser to the Administrator, and also Judge of
the Central Court. After General Pethebridge’s death in January, 1918, Lieutenant-
Colonel Mackenzie was formally appointed Acting Administrator, and he continued to
hold that position until 21st April, 1918, when he became Judge of Appeal for the
Territory upon the appointment of Brigadier-General G. J. Johnston, C. 8., C.M.G., Y.D.,
■as Administrator. General Johnston administered the Territory until May, 1920, when
he was succeeded by Brigadier-General T. Griffiths, C.M.G., C.8.E., D.S.O. In April,
1921, General Griffiths was followed as Administrator by Brigadier-General E. A. Wisdom,
C. 8., C.M.G., D. 5.0., V.D. On 9th May, 1921, the long military occupation was
terminated, and civil administration was established in pursuance of the terms of the
Mandate granted to the Commonwealth over New Guinea. General Wisdom assumed
office as the first Administrator under the civil regime. With the inauguration of civil
government in the Territory the Administration of New Guinea under the control of
the Department of Defence came to an end.


LAWS IN FORCE IN THE TERRITORY AND THE
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE.
One of the obligations imposed on the Military Administration of German New
Guinea by the Terms of Capitulation was that contained in Article 9, which stipulated
that during the occupation the local laws and customs were to remain in force so far as
was consistent with the military situation. What this really implied in practice was
that the Government Departments were to continue to administer the various German
laws relating to their respective administrative functions such as Taxation, Native Laws,
Land Legislation, and so on. More important still it meant that the Courts of Justice
were to remain virtually German tribunals wherein the territorial law of the German
Protecto 1 ate would still be dispensed and where the practice and procedure would be
the same as obtained before the British Military Occupation. This was one of the chief
problems the Administration had to cope with, and it was rendered all the more difficult
by the fact that the services of the former German officials were retained for only a brief
period after the surrender of the Territory. It was thus a matter of supreme importance
that the Administration should be able to obtain advice upon the innumerable legal
difficult ies that would inevitably be encountered. A particularly onerous task, therefore,
devolved upon the Legal Adviser to the Administration. In the first place he had to
make himself familiar with a system of foreign law expounded in a foreign language,
and be in a position to advise all departments of the Administration upon any legal
questions that arose. In the second place he had to take the place of the former German
Judge and interpret the laws and administer justice in the court. In addition to this
it was his special duty to advise the Administrator in what manner questions of policy
inight be affected by considerations of international law, or how far .the existing German
laws could be modified or amended in the exigencies of the situation, and generally to
safeguard the legal interests of the Administration in conformity with the laws and
linages of war relating to Military Occupation. Notwithstanding the difficulties with
which the problem was surrounded it is admitted that the administration of justice and
the work of the Law Department were amongst the most successful features of the
Military Administration. Credit is chiefly due in this respect to the first two officers
appointed in turn to the position of Legal Adviser, namely, the late Major Charles Manning
a Sydney barrister who carried out these duties from the beginning of the Occupation
until April, 1915, and Lieutenant-Colonel Seaforth Mackenzie, an officer of the Common-
wealth Attorney-General’s Department, who occupied the position of Legal Adviser to
the Administration from April, 1915, to the end of the year 1919.
Contrary to expectation, with a British Judge presiding over a German Court,
the German settlers did not hesitate to bring their suits before him during war time,
but on the other hand, readily availed themselves of the opportunity afforded for the
hearing of civil cases. The volume of litigation indeed became greater than it had been
before the war, owing, no doubt, to the fact that the Possessions increased in commercial
importance and activity during the period of the Occupation, and to the fact that the
war itself gave rise to many complicated transactions and abnormal business conditions
that in many instances required judicial interpretation in the courts.
' During the Military Occupation, then, the laws in force at the date of the capture
of the Territory remained in force in accordance with Article 9 of the Terms of Capitu-
lation. Certain amendments of these local laws were made from time to time by the
Military Administrator owing to the necessities of the Military Occupation, but sub-
stantially the laws now in existence in the Territory are those that were in force in the
former German Protectorate of New Guinea.
These laws are of three kinds ;
(i) The laws of the German Empire, contained in enactments such as the
German Civil Code, the Commercial Code, and the Criminal Code ;
(ii) Ordinances made by the German Government at Berlin for the German
Colonies and Possessions overseas and applied to the Protectorate
of New Guinea ;
(iii) Laws made by the Governor of the Protectorate in the form of
Ordinances.
The German Civil Code, which has been described by Professor Maitland as “ the
most systematic effort ever made to codify a nation’s laws.” and which took thirty years
tb prepare, consists of 2,385 paragraphs, and is divided into five books. Book I. deals
With general principles ; Book 11. with the Law of Obligations ; Book 111. with the Law
of Things ; Book IV. with Family Law, and Book V. with the Law of Inheritance.
German laws
and customs
remained in
force.
The Law Courts.
Legal adviser.
The Court in
request by
German
litigant*.
Description of
German law.
Three kinds.
German Civil
Code.


The Commercial Code deals very fully with such matters as Master and Servant,
Banking, Bills of Exchange, Cheques, &c.
The Ordinances of the German Governor deal with local matters affecting the
Territory. The volume of legislation of this kind is considerable. The most important
enactments are the land laws and the regulations in regard to the administration of native
affairs.
In the early days of the Occupation, justice was administered by Courts Martial
convened under the authority of the Officer Commanding the Expeditionary Force ;
but it was soon found possible to restore the ordinary Courts for all causes and proceedings
except the trial of offences against military law.
In April, 1915, the Judiciary Ordinance (No. 1) provided that appeal from
judgments sentences and orders of thelmperial District Court in its civil and criminal
jurisdiction should lie to the Administrator in all cases where there would formerly
have been a right of appeal to the Supreme Court. A little later provision was made
by the Judiciary Ordinance (No. 2) that sessions of the Imperial District Court should be
held and constituted by the Judge sitting alone.
In August, 1915, the Administrator directed, by the Judiciary Ordinance (No. 3),
that the Imperial District Court should thenceforth be called the Central Court. The
Court was declared to be a superior Court of Record, and its judgments and orders were
given effect throughout the Territory. The principal seat of the Court was at Rabaul,
but the Judge might visit any part of the Territory as occasion required. The jurisdiction
of the Court was declared in the following words :■ —
“ The Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all civil cases
in which a person being a European of having the same rights or status as a
European is joined as a party, and shall have jurisdiction over the like person
in any cause affecting his status under the laws relating to aliens, marriage,
divorce, bankruptcy, or insolvency. The Central Court shall also have and
exercise criminal jurisdiction over Europeans and persons having the same
status as Europeans, and shall have and exercise criminal jurisdiction over
natives (whether aboriginal natives of the Colony or members of any race not
having the legal status of Europeans) if and when the Administrator shall refer
or remit a cause or suit affecting a native to the Judge of the Central Court,
either as a Court of first instance or of appellate jurisdiction. An appeal shall
lie from a judgment degree or order of the Central Court to the Administrator
in person.”
In January, 1916, by the Judiciary Ordinance No. 4, the District Officers were
given, within their respective districts, and if the defendant resided within their respective
districts, a civil jurisdiction equivalent to that of the former German District Officers
as to- —
(а) Actions for the price of goods sold ;
(б) Actions for money payable for work and labour done ;
(c) Actions for the repayment of money lent and for interest thereon ;
\d) Actions for money payable for rent or for the hire of any property ;
(e) Actions for the repayment of money paid by the plaintiff for the defendant
at the defendant’s request;
(/) Actions for the payment of money received by the defendant for the use
of the plaintiff;
(g) Actions for the payment of money by the defendant to the plaintiff upon
an account stated and mutually agreed to between them ;
(h) Actions for damages for the breach of any contract not enumerated above;
(i) Actions for damage done to the plaintiff or his property by animals the
property of the defendant or in his custody or control;
(j) Actions for damage caused to the plaintiff or his property through the
negligence of the defendant or his servants acting under his orders
or in the scope of their employment:
provided that in any such action the debt or claim did not exceed Fifteen pounds,
inclusive of interest where interest was claimed.
They were also given, within their respective districts, a criminal jurisdiction in
respect of all offences not punishable with death where the accused resided or was
found within their respective districts. If the fine imposed by a District Officer exceeded
Fifteen pounds, or the period of imprisonment awarded, whether with or without hard
labour, exceeded six months, the amount or period of the excess had to be confirmed
by the Judge of the Central Court.
The ordinary
Courts
restored.
Imperial
District
Court.
Ile-named
Central
Court
jurisdiction
defined (1915).
Judicial
functions
of District
officers (1916).
Civil
jurisdiction.
Criminal
jurisdiction.


The Judge of the Central Court had power to order that any proceedings before a
District Officer,should be brought before the Central Court at any stage.
An appeal lay from a District Officer to the Judge of the Central Court, whose.
decision was final unless the Administrator gave permission for a further appeal to himself.
Where any party to a prosecution was an aboriginal native, fines and sentences in -
excess of the amount and period within the competence of the District Officer had to
be confirmed by the Administrator instead, of by the Central Court ; and appeal, both
in civil and criminal cases, was to the Administrator direct.
By the same Ordinance, District Officers were authorized to perform various
ministerial functions incidental to the administration of justice.
In May, 1918, by the Judiciary Ordinfmce 1918, the judicial power in the Territory
was vested in a Court of Appeal, a Central Court, and District Courts.
The jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal was made exercisable by a Judge of
Appeal, and comprised all the appellate jurisdiction theretofore vested in the Adminis-
trator or formerly exercisable by the Imperial Supreme Court.
The jurisdiction of the Central Court —which remained the same as had theretofore
been exercised by the Central Court and previously by the Imperial District Court—
was to be exercised by the Judge of the Central Court, but an additional Judge might
be appointed if required. The jurisdiction of the District Courts remained unchanged.
In July, 1918, the Officer-in-Charge of the Department of Native Affairs at
Kabaul was given the same jurisdiction as a District Officer in civil and criminal matters
to which a native or a person having the status of a native was a party.
In February, 1919, the civil jurisdiction of District Officers was enlarged, if all
parties consented, to cases in which the debt or claim did not exceed Fifty pounds.
ADMINISTRATION OF NATIVE AFFAIRS.
In the numbers of its native population the Territory is more fortunate than any
other part of the South Pacific. All the South Sea Islands are sparsely populated, and
the former German Possessions are not an exception ; but the latter contain districts
where the native population is comparatively numerous. The island of Bougainville in
the German Solomons, for instance, is more densely populated than any island in the
British Solomons, with the possible exception of Malaita, and the mainland of the
Territory contains more natives than the corresponding mainland of Papua. It is always
difficult to estimate with certainty of accuracy the native population of such countries as
New Guinea, Papua, and the Solomon Islands. Various conjectures have been given
of the number of natives in the Territory ; sometimes estimates have run as.high as
500,000 ; but it is thought that the true figure is somewhere between 350,000 and 400,000.
It will be understood that there are great stretches like the valleys of the Sepik River on
the mainland which have not yet been traversed, and which may contain large tribes,
but may, on the other hand, prove to be thinly populated. As a matter of comparison
it may be stated that the population of Papua is given as between 200,000 and 300,000.
In the case of the former German Territory, although we are somewhat more favoured
by numbers, yet it must be admitted that a population of 350,000 or 400,000 is a very
scanty one for a country containing 92,000 ; square miles —an area greater by some 9,000
square miles than the State of Victoria.
It is when consideration is given to the question of the supply of native labour
that the paucity in numbers of the aboriginal population assumes significance. The
industrial development of the Territory depends primarily upon the fact of a sufficient
number of natives being available for manual labour, otherwise the economic resources
of these South Sea Islands would lie dormant and undeveloped. Even in the modest
stage tropical agriculture has attained in the Territory of New Guinea, with about 150,000 ■
acres in actual cultivation, there are already occasional difficulties in procuring an
adequate supply of labour for the plantations. As the area brought under cultivation
is increased the problem of native labour is likely to become more difficult. This is the I
shadow on what is otherwise a very bright prospect for these islands. There have,
however, been factors operating in the former German Possessions during the war which
have tended to create abnormal conditions. The latter have materially affected the
native —both the agricultural labourer and the village-keeping kanaka ; and it may well
be that the threatened security in the numbers of labourers offering is due to the disturbing
effects of the war and not to a real crisis in the labour position such as a growing delibera-
tive disinclination on the part of the natives to enter the service of the white man.
It is also to be remembered that under the Military Administration the recruiting i
laws were more strictly interpreted and enforced, and that evasions or breaches of the 1
regulations were more severely punished than was the case during the German regime. 1
Appeals.
Cases to which
natives were
parties.
Judicial
power vested
(1918) in:
Court of
Appeal.
Centra I
Court.
District
Courts.
Officer in
Charge of
Native Affairs.
Civil
jurisdiction of
District Officers
enlarged {1919).
Population.
Supply of
native labour.
Development
dependent upon
native labour.
Quantity o£
labour is
limited.
Strict
enforcement of
native labour
laws.


This policy had the effect of supjuessingin a very considerable measure numerous irregu-
larities in connexion with the recruiting of natives. One other effect it also had, of course,
that of making recruiting less easy than it had been before, and consequently of tending
to decrease the number of native labourers. This effect was not intended, but it was
foreseen and considered inevitable in the endeavour that was being made by the Adminis-
tration to afford more protection to the native against the evils of illegal recruiting.
Notwithstanding these adverse tendencies due to the rapid changes caused by
the war the supply of labour in German New Guinea continued on the whole to be satis-
factory and was sufficient to meet all reasonable demands made upon it. These demands
did not decrease because of the war, but on the other hand they steadily increased during
the Military Occupation. The reason for this was that the large German companies
deprived of the power of remitting money to their head offices in Germany, applied all
their spare capital and accumulating profits to planting up new areas of land. The same
procedure was adopted in the case of a number of the smaller companies and individual
planters. It followed that additional native labour was required to cope with this
development, and with the demand came the supply.
With considerable reserves to draw upon in large districts yet untouched, it is
thought that the supply of labour in the Territory is assured for many years to come ;
but it is clear that the population indicates a limit, and it is not possible to predict whether
' the numbers would be adequate to meet a vigorous policy of close settlement or of opening
up the country on an extensive scale.
As in other parts of the Pacific there exist in late German New Guinea two kinds of
labour —the indentured and the free. The indenture system is by far the predominating
one. In this case the native enters into a contract of service with an employer for a
definite term in accordance with the provisions of the Native Labour Ordinance which is
designed to afford as much protection as possible to him from ill-treatment and the abuse
of authority. The employer is obliged to maintain the native in accordance with a
prescribed scale of rations and the native is entitled to receive proper housing accom-
modation and medical attention. The minimum wage is fixed and the employer is also
bound to return the native to his home at the expiration of his term of indenture.
Free labour on the other hand is essentially of a temporary nature. The native
can come and go to work on as many days as he may arrange. There is no definite
obligation on either side except that the native must be paid for actual labour done.
Free labour has been found to be very useful as a supplementary measure to the indenture
system, especially where a plantation is situated in the midst of a thickly populated
district* In such cases the natives often prefer what may be called day-labour. This
leaves them free to return to their villages when they choose ; and they will often readily
offer themselves for free labor where they are unwilling to be bound for a term of years.
In many parts of the world the indenture system has been subjected to criticism.
In New Guinea, however, it is difficult to see how this form of labour can for the present
be dispensed with. The New Guinea native is as yet too casual and inconsistent in
temperament to set his hand to steady and continuous work unless he becomes accustomed
to the routine of a system which at the same time binds him by definite legal sanctions.
The experience gained during the Military Occupation would seem, however, to
suggest that the native is beginning to realize that the conditions of his existence are
altering, that his life is likely to be closely linked with the industrial development of
the country.
By the date of the Military Occupation of New Guinea in September, 1914, by the
Australian Forces, the system.of indentured labour had been firmly established by the
German Government. A great impetus had been given by the recognition by the German
planters of the increasing demand for copra in the commercial world.
During the years preceding the war special attention had therefore been given to
the cultivation of the coconut palm. This activity in planting involved the employment
of a large quantity of labour. The German Government had brought into force legis-
lation regulating the employment of natives. These laws were less stringent and less
strictly interpreted than the native Ordinances of Papua and the British Solomon Islands
Protectorate; and in actual practice gave more facilities for the recruiting of natives.
These reasons, combined with the fact of a greater population, accounted for labour
being more plentiful and more easily obtained than, for instance, in the neighbouring
Australian Territory of Papua.
Closely connected with the fact of more encouragement being given in the German
Territory to recruiting of labour is the difference in the German view-point in regard to
native races and the British traditions of colonization in the country of a dark race.
Demand for
labour increased
during the
military
occupation.
Native labour
position assured
for many
years.
Effects of policy
ol close
settlement.
Labour is of
two kinds,
ndentured and
free.
German view ol
colonization.


The Germans came to New Guinea in 1884 primarily for strategic reasons and as
part of the ambitious programme initiated and planned by Bismarck in pursuance of
his conception of a German Colonial Empire. Once under the German Flag, however,
the Protectorate was linked up in the scheme of commercial activity upon which Germany
had already embarked in the Pacific, and which had begun with the remarkable rise of the
firm of Godeffroy and Son, and culminated in the establishment of powerful trading
corporations like the New Guinea Company.
This phase of commercialism involved the development of the German possessions :
in the South Seas, a project which fitted in with the German idea of colonization, namely, 1
the utilization of the native races for the benefit of the dominant white race. In New'
Guinea, therefore, as according to this policy, the development of the resources of the
country was to come before all other considerations, it followed that the companies and
planters would not have difficulties placed in the way of their securing the required
amount of native labour.
As a corollary to the fact of labour being more easily obtained in German New
Guinea than in British Possessions, it followed that it was also less costly for the planter.
The recruiter could often buy natives very cheaply through their chiefs who, in return for
a nominal sum of money or a present of coveted articles of “ trade ” (which, though
valuable in the eyes of a native, were inexpensive for a white man to purchase), would
order certain members of their own tribe to go away with the recruiter. In other cases
the recruiter, ignoring the laws, forcibly carried natives off. As a general rule the planter
could obtain native labourers by lawful means for a comparatively small outlay, either
by doing his own recruiting or by engaging an agent to perform his service for him.
About the time the war occurred the German Government had the intention of
repealing the existing native labour regulations and of enacting amending legislation.
The proposed regulations were available in draft form ; and, shortly after the commence-
ment of the occupation, as the Military Administrator was, owing to the Terms of Capitu-
lation, fettered in his powers of altering the existing Native Labour Regulations but
certain amendments were urgently necessary owing to the exigencies of British Military
Occupation, it was decided to use as a basis for new native labour legislation the revised
draft regulations which the German Governor had intended to bring into force. This
draft was therefore used as the main ground-work, but numerous amendments were
made, some forthwith and others from time to time as the administrative officials gained
experience of the working of the German system.
The most important alteration made was that relating to corporal chastisement
of natives. It was the practice of the German Government to issue, to approved employers
of labour, licences which conferred upon them the power to inflict corporal punishment on
their employees. This licence was revocable at the discretion of the Government if the
licensee abused his powers or incurred odium as an employer of native labour. Side by
side with this system the German Government claimed the power and exercised the right
of inflicting what may be called official floggings on native labourers. Both these
practices were altered under Australian Military Administration. The first ‘ ‘ Native Labour
Regulations ” issued by the Administration were brought into force on 14th July, 1915.
These contained a provision continuing the German system as to licences for the corporal
chastisement of native employees. But a month later, on 14th August, 1915, this pro- :
vision was repealed and another inserted in its stead, abolishing the power of employers ;
to inflict corporal punishment on natives, and restricting the power to a Government J
official duly appointed in that behalf in pursuance of a Judge’s order or the sentence of
a Court. By a further amendment it was provided that such orders could issue in respect
only of certain very serious criminal offences. Subsequent legislation by the Military.
Administration, however, went further than this and, in March, 1919, absolutely abolished !
corporal chastisement of natives in the Territory. This is the present state of the law.
Amelioration of the lot of the native employee was also effectively carried out by
the Australian Military Administration in other directions. The laws as to recruiting 1
were made stricter, and many malpractices in regard to forcible taking or kidnapping
of natives from their homes, or to compelling them against their wills to enter into
contracts of service, were dealt with successfully by legislation which was framed in such
a way as to make evasions difficult. The position of the Military Government was
further strengthened by the strict but just and impartial administration of the laws in
the Central Court. It was made clear to the German colonists that, while every
support would be given to recruiting in accordance with the native labour ordinance,
infractions of the law would not be overlooked.
C. 18347.—2
Germany in the
Pacific.
Natives to be
worked for the
benefit of the
dominant race.
German
Government
intended to
amend native
labour
legislation.
Amendments
made by
Military
Administration.
German practice
with regard to
corporal
punishment.
Military
Administration
restricts
corporal
punishment.
Abolition of
corporal
punishment.
Further
ameliorating
measures
affecting
natives.


luspeetion of
recruiting
vessels,. Ac.
In connexion, with actual recruiting, improvements were also effected by the
Military Administration in such ways as instituting stricter inspection and licensing of
recruiting vessels ; safeguards were taken against the evils of overcrowding during the
recruiting voyages ; better provision was made for ships being adequately stocked with
medical supplies, and a more generous scale of rations for natives whilst on recruiting
ships was prescribed.
Attention was also given to the housing, food, clothing, medical attendance, and
general comfort and well-being of natives working on plantations or engaged in other
branches of service.
It may justly be claimed that the change from Gferman to Australian control
has meant for the natives of New (Guinea a fuller protection of personal liberty and of
tribal and communal property, and a keener solicitude and higher regard on the part
of the (Government for the sanctity of human life. The natives have also been brought
into closer and more confident relations with the Administration, and have been
encouraged to continue such of their local customs as tend to develop their social
organization along lines of advancement consistent with the highest principles of the
government of a subject-race.
TROPICAL MEDICINE.
For the first few months after the arrival of the Expeditionary Force in New
(Guinea the general health of the troops was excellent. The Principal Medical Officer had
under him a detachment of the Australian Army Medical Corps, and he set to work to
organize the various hospitals and to maintain and improve the sanitation of the towns
and settlements. Early in October, 1914, the first Principal Medical Officer, Lieutenant-
Colonel Neville R. Tlowse, Y.C., returned to Australia after rendering valuable services
and his place was taken by Major Maguire. Up till the end of that year all went well.
Then the insidious tropical climate began to tell. An abnormal spell of dry weather —
one of the longest known in the history of the Territory —came to an end, and with the
setting in of the rainy season fortune began to change. In January, 1915, shortly after
the arrival of the Eastern with reinforcements, there was a serious outbreak of malaria
fever and dysentery. Colonel Pethebridge had brought with him as Principal Medical
Officer on the Eastern Major (afterwards Lieutenant-Colonel) C. L. Strangman, who had
specialized in tropical medicine and had been for many years (Government Medical Officer
in the Northern Territory.
It was accordingly arranged by Major Maguire that Major Strangman would
take over the duties of Principal Medical Officer at Rabanl, as the work now called for
a specialist in tropical diseases. Major Maguire accordingly returned to Australia at
the same time as Colonel Holmes’ Force, after a record of extremely useful work.
The next three months w T ere anxious ones with regard to the health of the Force.
In January, 1915, about CO per cent, of the troops stationed at Rabanl were found to
be infected with benign tertian and quartan fevers, mixed infections being the rule.
The benign cases reacted rapidly to treatment, but the quartan required three or four
weeks’ treatment in hospital. Almost all the garrison at Madang (Friedrich Wilhelms-
hafen) on the New Guinea coast were also infected, the malignant form (subtertian)
being most in evidence and causing several deaths. The troops at Kawieng, in New
Ireland, and Kieta, in Bougainville, in the Solomon Islands, were about the same time
showing both benign and subtertian infections. A similar state of affairs existed amongst
the Naval Force and the Naval Reserves, but in these two instances the proportion of
cases was not more than 15 per cent.
With careful medical attention this outbreak of sickness was gradually got under
control. In the townships, the breeding places of the particular species of anopheles
mosquito, whose bite causes the infection, were as far as was practicable sought out
and either destroyed or otherwise effectively treated. Special attention was also given
to sanitation, and the general conditions of Rabaul and other settlements were greatly
improved. The epidemics of dysentery were found to be mostly due to the drinking
of unsterilized water and to carelessness in regard to the eating of vegetables and fruits.
After these outbreaks of malaria and dysentery in the beginning of 1915, there were
no recurrences on a large scale. As time went on the Principal Medical Officer had
also succeeded in training a number of medical officers in tropical medicine, and in this
Housing, food,
and medical
attendance.
What British
rule means for
the natives.
Health of
troops.
Outbreak of
malaria and
dysentery.
Anxious times.
The epidemic
under control.
Training of
medical officers.


Comparative Yearly Statement of Revenue prom Date
of Occupation
to 30th June,
1920.
From Occupation
From 1st
From 1st July,
From 1st July,
From 1st July,
From 1st July,
to 31st August,
September. 1915,
1916, to 30th
1917 to 30th
1918 to 30th
1919 to 30th
1915.
to June, .1016.
June, 1917.
June, 1918.
June, 1919.
June, 1920.
£ s. ■ d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
Trade and Customs —
Imports ..
29,263 12 1
39.580 16 4
41,596 10 0
J5.160 14 7
Exports ..
5,326 17 5
12,188 4 6
24,085 4 6
18,596 13 11
■ 98,657 16 11
Royalty ..
14 12 8
964 15 9
1,164 12 1
384 0 0
Harbor Dues
927 9 11
1,344 6 0
1,550 8 6
1,471 14 7
2,437 11 9
Sundries ..
146 13 3
Total ..
27,973 6 4
35,532 12 1
54,078 2 7
68,396 15 1
55,759 16 4
101,095 8 8
way it became possible to cope with health problems throughout the Possessions.
Although there may always be malaria to contend with as a factor in Administration,
it has been demonstrated during the Military Occupation that this scourge can, with
proper medical facilities, be at least held in check.
REVENUE.
During the Military Administration the Revenue has, for each year, shown a
steady increase. The outbreak of the war and the change from German to British!
control were, of course, disturbing factors in the economic life of the Territory, and,;
during the unsettled trade conditions and the general uncertainty of the first twelve
months following the beginning of the Occupation, circumstances were such as materially
to retard progress and development. With the passing of this phase, however, the
Territory began to show better results, and the appended comparative statement of
Revenue will show how great has been the increase in production and general improve-
ment in prosperity.
From September, 1914, until Ist September, 1915, the total revenue is stated;
to be £39,606 13s. 3d. From Ist September, 1915, to 30th June, 1916, it is given as
£77,286 11s. 2d. From Ist July, 1916, to 30th June, 1917, the Treasury returns show
£115,559 ss. sd. From Ist July, 1917, to 30th June, 1918, the revenue was £139,920 14s.
sd. From Ist July, 1918, to 30th June, 1919, it was £143,636 ss. 7d. ; and from Ist July,
1919, to 30th June, 1920, it was £202,159 17s. 3d.
Customs duties are the main items of revenue. The existing tariff is fixed upon
a 10 per cent, basis, and if it is retained, it is anticipated that the returns from Customs
duties will increase considerably under a civil administration, inasmuch as, in the
military administration, members of the occupying force obtain their supplies free of
duty. When a civilian personnel is substituted for the military administrative officials
there will be many more persons paying duties. In the report of the Inter-State
Commission on British and Australian Trade in the Soiith -Pacific it is pointed out that
the Customs Tariff in German New Guinea is of a revenue-producing and not of a
protective character.
There is an export duty of 255. per ton on copra. For the year 1919-1920 the
copra yield was 24,000 tons, and this item therefore produced £30,000 in revenue. There
was no taxation of incomes in the Protectorate, but there was a Business Tax which, in
1918-1919, brought in £6,019, and in 1919-1920 produced £8,134. It was calculated
on gross turnover in accordance with a graduated percentage rate. From this turnover
copra transactions were excluded, because, as has been shown, copra is already subject
to a direct tax of 255. per -ton.
Native head tax produced, in 1918-1919, £20,970, and in 1919-1920, £11,210.
It is payable by every adult and healthy native who is not indentured, but there are
exemptions, especially in regard to missions and schools. The maximum amount is
10s. per head, but discretion is left to the District Office to deal leniently with cases of
hardship or where the circumstances possess special features. ,In new districts where
Government influence has only recently been extended, the tax is introduced gradually
so that the natives may become accustomed by easy stages to their new obligations.
An examination of the revenue figures during the period of the military
administration would appear to encourage the hope that the Territory will be practically
self-supporting un,der a civil regirm.
It is thought, however, that for the development of the Territory and for such
purposes as public works, a subsidy or loan will be required for some years to come.
Lessons •!
military
occupation.
Steady increase
in revenue
during the
Military
Administration
Revenue
returns.
Customs duties
Export duties.
Business tax.
Native head
tax.
Prospective
revenue.
Question of
subsidy for
public works.


Comparative Yearly Statement
oe Revenue prom Date op Occupation to 30th June, 1920 — continued.
From Occupation
From 1st
From 1st July,
From 1st July,
From 1st July,
—
to 31st AU};,
ust,
September, 1915,
1916, to 30th
1917, to 30th
1918, to 30th
1919, to 30th
1915.
to June, 1916.
June,
1917.
June,
1918.
June, 1919.
June, 1920.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
8.
d.
£
d.
Licences —
Recruiting
260
14
0
255
0
8
449
3
6
1,078
13
0
Fishing ..
10
10
0
143
16
8
344
17
6
Dynamite
46
5
0
280
17
0
932
0
0
Gun
591
12
4
454
i
6
768
0
0
639
10
0
Trading ..
205
0
0
854
18
0
1,646
15
9
1,124
17
0
Liquor . .
562
16
3
593
16
10
482
0
0
958
15
0
Visit Hotels
27
15
0
19
16
8
142
5
0
43
0
0
Dog Tax
24
12
0
18
16
6
75
1
10
72
15
7
Other Licences
1,503
2
5
599
0
11
319
8
8
1,643
10
10
Total ..
685
0
1
3,232
7
0
2,795
11
1
4,307
9
11
6,837
18
11
7,587
3
11
Business Tax
1,361
17
3
536
3
6
7,097
5
5
4,203
13
5
6,019
9
4
8,134
3
8
Law Department— ..
Court Fees
475
2
9
290
0
0
427
7
2
113
10
1
Fines and Costa
652
3
11
558
17
4
691
13
7
1,032
6
4
Ships’ Register
102
17
0
39
10
0
32
10
0
11
5
0
Total ..
976
8
9
1,230
3
8
888
7
4
1,151
10
9
1,157
1
5
2,281
12
7
Lands Department—
3,591
Rents (land)
6
5
2,494
16
8
3,455
13
4
3,160
16
6
Survey Fees
54
15
0
161
19
3
2,441
10
9
565
18
1
Sundries ..
11
9
2
Total ..
340
2
11
3,646
1
5
2,656
15
11
5,897
4
1
3,738
3
9
11,381
17
0
Native Affairs —
Head Tax
2,837
5
6
7,014
19
5
12,410
15
8
10,685
17
5
20,970
2
4
11,210
12
6
Indenture .fees
3,282
0
2
2,779
8
9
2,508
15
10
3,786
16
0
Fees and Fines
812
8
10
154
9
6
223
19
8
255
14
8
318
12
7
j- 3,855
16
7
Total ..
3,649
14
4*
10,451
9
1
15,414
4
1
13,450
7
11
25,075
10
11
Rost Office—
Stamps ..
4,000
1
0
3,904
4
9
1,884
0
4
3,013
13
10
Telephones
11
17
0
13
9
0
21
10
6
Sundries ..
20
9
11
7
18
0
13
4
0
49
3
5
Total ..
1,597
3
1
4,020
10
11
3,923
19
9
1,910
13
4
3,084
7
9
4,061
7
1
Wireless Messages
1,016
2
3
1,630
3
1
1,724
4
11
3,136
16
0
4,780
17
8
Shipping Receipts
1,634
3
1
10,597
8
9
10,995
13
3
19,632
18
1
20,699
18
2
28,060
10
1
Plantations
196
7
7
1,450
8
2
3,511
2
10
1,934
7
9
5,636
15
2
Hospital Receipts —
458
European
0
9
409
17
11
634
15
6
699
4
5
Native
515
0
9
1,999
8
10
1,094
19
0
2,165
5
6
Sanitation
84
5
10
136
9
0
217
18
6
185
2
0
Total . .
270
,16
6
1,057
7
4
2,545
15
9
1,947
13
0
3,049
11
11
3,027
6
9
Interest ..
253
14
0
794
8
3
358
2
5
217
19
5
81
8
3
Miscellaneous —
Sale of Ice
460
9
9
2,438
4
10
123
1
4
Exchange
341
19
0
327
9
9
482
1
6
910
18
6
250
16
0
Sale of Stores
664
14
4
2,317
2
3
6,040
12
3
8,940
7
10
4,447
19
6
Rent ..
48
0
6
. 110
13
4
137
7
3
L34
6
8
Sale of Water
272
16
4
246
7
0
155
1
6
103
6
10
Gazettes ..
56
15
7
61
3
6
57
16
0
65
0
0
Sundries ..
ui
7
7
2,033
9
5
1,903
8
4
3,161
7
7
7,800
13
7
Total ..
1,118
0
11
5,516
3
7
11,282
10
9
13,368
18
8
12,925
3
11
10,964
16
10
Grand Total
39,606
13
3
77,286
11
2
115,559
5
6
139,920
14
5
143,636
5
7
202,159
17
3
TROPICAL AGRICULTURE.
Area op Land under Cultivation.
The total area of land that has been alienated in the Territory by the German
Government is 697,179 acres. Of this total the New Guinea Company owns more than
half, or 368,118 acres. The Hamburgische Sudsee Company owns 62,271 acres the
H. R. Wahlen Company 14,129 acres, and Hernsheim and Company 8,549 acres. ’ The
various Roman Catholic Missions hold an aggregate area of 61,985 acres. The Protestant
Missions own a total of 18,720 acres, of which the Methodist Missionary Society of


Australasia owns 5,387 acres. The balance of the area of alienated land in the Territory—
approximately 161,000 acres, is held by some 150 smaller companies and planters, of
whom about 120 are Germans.
The preponderating area of land in possession of the New Guinea Company is ;
due to the fact that when the Territory was annexed by Germany in 1884, this company,
which had been formed in Berlin the same year, was selected as the instrumentality of
the Imperial German Government for carrying out the administration of German New
Guinea, and was, by a charter issued in 1885, given wide powers to acquire land. And
when, in 1898, the German Government decided, owing to international complications
with Great Britain over Treaty rights, to rescind the executive power of the Company
and to assume the administration of the Protectorate, the Company was liberally
compensated for tne loss of its privileges, by a grant of £200,000 and 50,000 hectares
(approximately 125,000 acres) of land. The company was thus placed in a very
favoured position as compared with any possible competition from other firms.
Only about one-fifth of the total area of alienated land in the Territory has, been
planted, namely, 144,979 acres. The New Guinea Company has planted 21,962 acres,
or less than one-sixteenth of the land it claims to own. The Hamburgische Sudsee
Company has planted up to 9,985 acres, somewhat less than one-sixth of its total holdings,
and Hernsheim and Company has planted. 6,698 acres, or slightly more than three-fourths
of the land in that firm’s ownership.
The Missions have 15,831 acres under cultivation, and derive a considerable portion
of their income from the proceeds of agrieidtural products. The smaller commercial
firms and planters have in the aggregate 86,831 acres under cultivation.
As everywhere else in the South Pacific Islands it is chiefly the coconut palm that
has been cultivated in the Territory of New Guinea. From the dried kernel of the coco-
nut the copra of commerce is obtained, and this in turn yields as its product a valuable
vegetable oil for which there is a great and increasing demand. A coconut plantation
in full bearing should, if the soil is good, produce from one-third to one-half ton of copra
to the acre.
The quantity of copra annually exported from late German New Guinea has
risen from 14.266 tons at the beginning of the Military Occupation to 24,000 tons for the
year 1919-1920.
The products of copra, narpely coconut oil and oilcake, are used for many purposes.
The oil is utilized in the manufacture of soap and glycerine, and also of margarine. The
growing consumption of margarine in the place of butter has created an enormous and
apparently insatiable demand in the world’s markets for copra-oil. The future of the
Territory of New Guinea, with its rapidly increasing output of copra, should therefore
be assured.
Next to copra, but at a long interval, as a product of the Territory comes cocoa.
There are between 1,000 and 1,500 acres under cocoa trees, and very satisfactory results
have been obtained. The quality of the cocoa-nib or bean produced at Witu, in the
Bismarck Archipelago and other places in the Territory is excellent, and the price
realized has soared as high as £l2O a ton.
The cultivation of rubber in the Territory has not been successful. There are about
5,600 acres planted with rubber trees, of which area about 3,350 acres are in bearing.
The soil and climate are quite suitable for rubber, but in the great majority of instances
inferior varieties of trees were planted before what appears to be the decided superiority
of Para had become generally known. This circumstance, combined -with the fact that
the Germans achieved such a measure of success with copra as to prejudice them very
strongly in favour of the cultivation of the coconut palm, led to their ceasing to take
keen interest in rubber, and in many cases they either abandoned the rubber trees or
else planted coconut palms in their stead.
The general opinion amongst the planters in late German New Guinea seems
to be that the cultivation of the coconut is a safer and better commercial and financial
investment than a rubber plantation, because, it is stated, the former offers a less fluctuat-
ing margin between profit and loss, and does not necessitate the employment of as many
labourers as are required on a rubber plantation. It is also thought that the New Guinea
native is not eminently suited for the work of tapping and the close and careful attention
that rubber trees demand.
The climate and soil of the Territory are, according to expert opinion, suitable
for the cultivation, amongst other tropical products, of rice, sugar, coffee, cotton, manila
hemp, sisal hemp, cinchona, nutmeg, vanilla, tobacco, maize, and arrowroot. It has
been proved that nearly all these can be grown successfully, but hitherto their cultivation
has either not advanced beyond the experimental stage or has been attempted only on
The New Guinea
Company.
Area under
cultivation.
Land held by
missions.
Copra is,the
chief industry.
Output of
copra.
Utilization of
the products of
copra.
Cocoa.
Rubber,
Copra and
rubber
industries
compared.


a small scale. During the German regime the strong predilection in favour of copra
was the cause of other products being neglected by the planters, and the same factor
continued to operate during the Military Occupation. Nevertheless, the German Govern-
ment had already commenced to pay considerable attention to the prospects of tropical
agriculture. When Rabaul was finally selected as the capital of the Territory, an extensive
botanic garden was Said out in that town, and experimental nurseries were planted there
and maintained under the direction of an expert. At the time the Possessions were
surrendered to the Australian Forces the botanic gardens at Rabaul had become of such
value from both the economic and the ornamental point of view, that the necessity for
their care and upkeep impressed itself at once on Colonel Holmes. He accordingly
retained the services of the former German curator until other arrangements could be
made, in a despatch dated 11th December, 1914, the Administrator referred to the
anxiety he feels about the welfare of this place owing to the pending resignation of the
curator. ‘‘l am much concerned” he stated “about the maintenance of the botanic
gardens here .... As previously pointed out the Germans have spent many
thousands of pounds in the establishment of this place and in experimenting in man}-
ways. Considerable thought and energy have been expended in making these gardens
a beauty spot. All trees and. plants are carefully labelled with botanical name plates
of enamel, and it would be nothing short of vandalism to allow this place to become
neglected. I, therefore, strongly urge that inquiries be made in Australia for a man
experienced in tropical flora who would be competent to take charge, and that he bo sent
here as early as possible.”
This request met with immediate support from the Department of Defence, which
realized the importance of safeguarding such a valuable asset of the Territory. As a
result of the inquiries that were made, the services of Mr. (afterwards Honorary Major)
Howard Newport, were lent to the Administration by the Government of Queensland,
in which State he occupied the position of expert on tropical agriculture. Under his
supervision not only has the beautiful botanic garden at Rabaul been maintained
throughout the Occupation, but. it has been improved in many respects; and, in addition,
expert advice has thus been available to the Administration when coping with the pests
and diseases that from time to time attack the valuable plantations, and when dealing
with the genera,! question of tropical agriculture in the Territory. It is also highly
creditable that, notwithstanding the handicap imposed by the circumstances of military
occupation, each Administrator has in turn taken special pride in having the botanic
garden maintained in an efficient and worthy manner.
In pursuance of its policy that until the future of the Territory should be decided
in the Peace settlement, the material conditions of the 'Territory should, as far as possible,
remain unchanged by Government action, the Administration did not enter into new
contracts for the sale of land or for the granting of forestry or mining rights. Contracts
for the sale of land already entered into by the German Government were completed in
cases where there was no administrative objection ; but applicants for new land were
given leases only, and these were subject to a year to year renewal. The applicants
for such leases were not numerous, for no newcomers in search of land were allowed to
come to the Territory, either from Australia or elsewhere, and only a few of the persons
already resident in the Territory desired to take up new laud.
The development of the economic resources of the Possessions would appear to
offer attractive possibilities for Australian enterprise under Civil Administration. In
particular, from the point of view of tropical agriculture, the Territory offers all the
advantages and security that attach to the fact that it lies completely out of the zone of
hurricanes or cyclones.
CURRENCY AND COINAGE.
During the German administration, the Imperial German coinage and currency
notes (no trading bank having a branch in the Territory) were in use.
The circulation of German money was for some time not restricted by the Military
Administration ; but early in 1916 when a branch for general banking of the Common-
wealth Bank of Australia was opened, the use of German paper money was forbidden,
although German silver money was allowed to remain in use. Provision was, however,
made for the acceptance of German money by the Commonwealth Bank and by the
Government, until 30th June, 1916, at the rate of 20 marks 50 pfennigs for a £l-note
of the Commonwealth of Australia. It was also provided that all debts incurred in
marks might at the option of the debtor be paid either in silver marks or in notes of the
Commonwealth of Australia, or in British or Australian coinage; if the debt was
incurred before Bth May, 1916, the rate of exchange was to be 20 marks 50 pfennigs to
Sale of
land and
granting of
forestry and
mining rights
suspended.
Possibilities for
Australian
enterprise.
1 inmunc from
hurricanes.
German
currency.
Use of
German
paper money
forbidden
(1916).


Classification.
Expenditure incurred by
Defence Department.
Portion of expenditure
chargeable to the
Commonwealth.
Portion of expenditure
chargeable to the
Administration.
Pay and Allowances
Transport
Stores .. .. ..
Other Expenditure
£ s. d.
661,540 11 0
37,795 18 2
480,030 9 8
12,893 13 10
£ s. d.
661,540 11 0
18,709 3 9
234,952 17 7
872 13 9
£ s. d.
19,086 14 5
245;077 12 1
12,021 0 1
1,192,260 12 8
916,075 6 1
276,185 6 7
Stores .. .. ■ ■ £480,030 9s. 8d.
Classification.
Expenditure debited to
to Commonwealth.
Expenditure debited to
Administration. *
Rations ..
Forage
Clothing
Stationery
Medical Supplies
Fuel and Light
General Stores
£ s. d.
138,317 18 3
675 3 11
39,230 19 9
1,876 19 5
9,728 5 3 .
3,588 3 10 ‘
41,635 7 2
£ s. d.
94,861 9 5
1,445 11 5
12,905 6 3
4,467 16 10
5,409 9 6
14,315 6 4
111,672 12 4
234,952 17 7
245,077 12 1
Adjustment by Administration.
Amount debited to
Administration.
Amount paid to date.
Amount still due by
Adroinistraiion.
£ s. d.
276,185 6 7
£ s. d.
220,225 6 8
£ s. d.
55,959 19 11
the pound sterling ; if, after that date, the rate was to be one German mark to eleven-
pence in British or Australian currency. This provision applied also to debts due to
or by the Government with the exceptions that moneys due to the Government under a
contract or agreement specifying payment in marks should be payable either in marks
or in Australian notes or British or Australian coinage at the rate of elevenpence
for a mark, and that moneys due as fees, taxes, &c., after Bth May, 1916, should be
payable in shillings, and as if the amounts had been specified as shillings instead of as
marks. Natives, however, were allowed to pay moneys due to the Government either
in silver marks or in Australian notes or British or Australian coinage.
The Currency and Coinage Ordinance 1919, issued in April of that year, prohibited
the use of German coinage after the 31st July following, subject to the exception that
natives might continue to use such coinage for another year. Provision was made for
the exchange of German coinage for Australian notes or British or Australian coinage
at the rate of one mark for elevenpence.
The Currency and Coinage Ordinance 1920, issued in February of that year, pro-
vided that all debts and moneys due, if incurred or expressed in marks, should be regarded
as if expressed in the same number of shillings, and might be paid in Australian
notes or in British or Australian coinage.
The Currency and Coinage Ordinance 1920, made in December of that year,
repealed previous Ordinances relating to the use of German currency; and forbade the
use, after Ist January, 1921, of German currency, notes, or coinage, subject to the
exception that any aboriginal native might pay any fees, taxes, or other sums owing to
the Administration in silver marks or other German coinage.
An Ordinance issued in 1916 forbade the use of counters or tokens. An exception
was made in 1918 permitting the use of shells and shell money in the part of New Britain
lying between Cape Merkus and Cape Dampier ; in September, 1918, the exception was
limited to the use of the gold-lip shell. In 1920, it was declared that gold-lip shell used as
money should be reckoned at the rate of 12s. a pair. In May, 1920, the Native Currency
Ordinance 1920 forbade the use by European or persons having the status of Europeans,
or persons in their employ, as currency or as a means of barter or exchange of the earthen-
ware saucepans used as currency in the Siassi group of islands (in the Talasea District
of New Britain).
COST OF ADMINISTRATION.
The expenditure incurred by the Defence Department in connexion with the
occupation of German New Guinea from the date of occupation to the date of transfer
to Civil Administration on 9th May, 1921, is shown in the following statement: —
Use of
German
coinage
forbidden
except by
natives
(1919).
Debts
payable
in marks to
( be payable
in the same
number ot
shillings
(1920).
Use of
German
currency
forbidden
except by
natives in
payment of
taxes (1921).
Counters,
tokens, and
shell money.


Revenue
of the
Military
Administration.
The revenue amounted in all, from September, 1914, to Bth May, 1921, to £883,604,
and it was applied in maintaining the administration of the Territory and to the amount
of £220,225 in part payment for stores, transport, &c., for the use of the Expeditionary
Force which carried on the Government. The pay and allowances of the Force (£661,541),
and the balance of the cost of stores, &c. (£254,536), making a total of £916,076, were
defrayed by the Commonwealth Government, and, besides this sum, the Commonwealth
Government defrayed the naval costs in connexion with the Territory, and provided
pensions for members of the Force who were invalided, and for the dependants of those
who died.
POLICY IN REGARD TO GERMAN NATIONALS.
The Terms of Capitulation made provision for the return to Germany of civil
officials of the German Government, but other German residents, not being officers of
the regular forces, were allowed to remain and carry on their ordinary occupations in
the Territory. Under these arrangements, the former civil officials left the Territory
during the first few months of the occupation, and were allowed to return to Germany,
and officers of the regular forces were sent to Australia as prisoners of war. The conduct
of the German residents who w ere allowed to remain was for the most part satisfactory,
but it was found necessary, during the four years over which hostilities extended, to
deport some for military reasons, and these were interned in Australia.
The Treaty of Peace with Germany, ratified on 10th January, 1920, gave power
to the Allied Governments to deport German nationals from former German territories
ceded to them, and to retain and liquidate all property, rights, and interests belonging
to German nationals, or companies controlled by them, within such territories.
To enable effect to be given to these provisions of the Treaty, various Ordinances
were made by the Military Administrator.
In December, 1919, the Lands Ordinance 1919 was passed to prohibit, without
the consent in writing of the Commonwealth Minister for Defence, any transfer, sale, or
lease, or contract for the transfer, sale, or lease, of any estate or interest in land; and in
January, 1920, by the Enemy Properly Ordinance 1920, the sending or remitting from
the Territory of any property or money belonging to any former enemy subject, or to
any company incorporated in former enemy territory, was forbidden.
On Ist September, 1920, by the Expropriation Ordinance 1920, provision was
made for the vesting in an officer of the Commonwealth Government, the Public Trustee,
under the Treaty of Peace Act 1919 of the Commonwealth, of the property of any firm
or company which the Administrator should declare to be in his opinion managed or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by or under the influence of, or wholly or mainly for
the benefit or on behalf of, subjects of Germany or persons resident or carrying on business
in Germany ; of any person whom the Administrator should declare to be in his opinion
a German national; and of the estate of any deceased German national which the
Administrator should declare to be an estate to which the Ordinance applied. The
management of the property of any firm, company, person, or estate so prescribed was
placed, in the hands of an Expropriation Board of three members appointed by the
Administrator.
In pursuance of the power given by this Ordinance, the property of the seven
principal German companies in the Territory was vested in the Public Trustee on Ist
September, 1920, and a few weeks later the property of smaller firms and companies,
the estates of several deceased persons, and the property of a number of German nationals
not then resident in the Territory was also so vested. In March, 1921, the property of
most of the German nationals still resident in the Territory was vested in the Public
Trustee.
The properties which were thus vested in the Public Trustee, and came under
the management of the Expropriation Board, pending sale or valuation in accordance
with Article 297 of the Treaty of Peace with Germany, were .for the most part coconut
plantations, but they included several very large businesses. All these properties
remained under the management of the Expropriation Board at the date of the inau-
guration of civil Government; but by an amendment of the Expropriation Ordinance
made a few days before the termination of the military occupation, the control of and
legal title ‘to the properties was transferred from the Public Trustee to another officer
of the Commonwealth Government, the Custodian of Expropriated Properties.
Melbourne, 10th October, 1921.
The provisions
of the
terms of
capitulation.
Provisions
of the Treaty
of Peace.
Transactions
in hind
Hispended
(1919).
Expropriation
of German
properties
0920).
Management
of expropriated
properties.
by Athour


