

WATER CONSERVATION AND IRRIGATION COMMISSION
NEW SOUTH WALES
WYANGALA DAM
DESIGN FLOOD REPORT
MARCH 1960


Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission
New South Wales
REPORT
ON THE
1959 DESIGN FLOOD STUDY
FOR
WYANGALA DAM
March, 1960.


Section
Item
Page
1
Introduction
1
2
Previous Design Flood Estimates
3
I
Preliminary (Pirst) Estimate
1922 Design Flood Estimate
1925 Design Flood Estimate j
Estimated Peak Run-off Rates
l 3
1959 Design Flood Estimation Procedure
Design Storm
Rainfall Losses
Unitgraphs
Design Flood
7
I 4
i
j
Description of the Wyangala Catchment
Location and Size j
River System and Topography j
Geological Features and Vegetal Cover s
Occurrence of Snow and Average Rainfall
8
• 5
Wyangala Catchment Stream Flow Records
12
i
I
Gauging Stations
Selection of Data
Estimated Peak Discharges of Major Floods
Estimated Wyangala Inflow and Outflow
Hydrographs
6
Rainfall Data
Daily Read Stations
Pluviograph Stations
Storm Rainfalls
Storm Temporal Patterns
15 '
! 7
!
i
i
i
I
1
Rainfall Losses
Initial Loss
Loss Rate
Estimation of Losses - Adopted Procedure
Adopted Rainfall Losses
Coefficient of Run-off
19
8
;
;Wyangala Unitgraphs
General
'Base Flow Separation
Unitgraph Derivation
Design Unitgraph
1
20
WYANSAIA DAM-DESIGN FLOOD STUDY
INDEX OF CONTENTS


Section
!
Item |
Page
I
9
i
Yfyangala Design Storm j
24
| i
I
General I
Maximisation Theory I
Transposition Theory
Consideration of Natural Storms
Transposition of the 1955 Storm
Representative Dew Points
Inflow Barriers
Moisture Content Adjustment j
Temporal cittern of Storm
I
1 10
Blood Probabilities |
30
11
' ' '" ,l 1 " Ll " "" T 1 1
Wyangala Design Flood
| Procedure Adopted
Magnitude of Flood
30
1 Index of Plans
32
Bibliography
1
33


WYANGALA DAM
DESIGN FLOOD STUDY
1939
1 • Introduction
Over recent years, the irrigation development
in the Lachlan Valley has increased to a stage which has
necessitated consideration being given to the provision
of additional storage capacity on the upper catchment.
As a consequence, the Water Conservation and Irrigation
Commission of Now South Wales has under investigation a
number of proposals, one of which is the possible
enlargement of the existing Wyangala Storage. In
conjunction with this proposal, the Commission directed
that the adequacy of the present spillway capacity be
critically examined.
Since the completion of Wyangala Lam in 1935,
improved flood estimation techniques have been developed
and much additional rainfall and run-off data has been
obtained, whilst data used in early investigations has
been revised using the additional information available.
It has therefore been realised for some years that the
design flood estimate should bo reviewed. This
realisation was strongly emphasised during recent years
by the occurrence of the record February, 1955 storm
over inland New South Wales and by the 1952 Y/yangala
flood which was of the same order as the flood adopted
for the design of the dam.
In October, 1959,the Chief Engineer of the
Commission instructed that an investigation bo undertaken
to estimate the maximum probable flood which was likely
to occur on thoY/yang'ala catchment. For reference
purposes, a locality plan of the catchment is included at
page 2; this plan shows the main river system and gauging
stations above Wyangala,
This report has boon prepared to outline the
procedures adopted in, and the actual results of the
hydrologic study which was completed towards the end of
December, 1959* The detailed work involved in the study
was carried out by the Commission’s engineering staff
engaged on hydrologic investigations under the control of
the Senior Hydrographic Engineer,




2. Previous Design Flood Estimates
When the original estimates vjorc prepared, very
limited rainfall and run-off data was available and the
estimates were therefore based largely on survey data,
empirical formulae and comparison of results with estimated
flood run-offs for other catchments. Brief details are given
in this section of these early estimates, with the actual
hydrographs being shown on the plan at page 5.
Preliminary Estimates 50,000 cusocs
The first estimate was for a flood with a peak
intensity of 50,000 cusecsj this was on the basis which had
boon adopted for the estimate in the original design of the
Burrinjuck spillway, i,c, 16 cusccs per square mile of
catchment♦
1922 Estimates 165»OQO cusocs and 410»Q00 acre foot
Y/ith the occurrence of the 19*16 floods, which wore
estimated to have had peak discharges exceeding a rate of 40
cusocs per square mile on both the Burrinjuck and Warragamba
catchments, it was obvious that the proposed Wyangala spillway
capacity should be substantially increased.
It was therefore decided to thoroughly investigate the
1870 and 1916 floods at Cowra and Wyangala and to base the
design flood estimate on the results of this investigation and
the estimated 1916 Purrinjuck and Warragamba flood run-offs.
The main data available wore some 1870 flood levels,,
the 1916 flood profile at Gowra, a range of current meter
observations to 28,000 cusecs at Cowra and 19*16 rainfall
records from eighteen daily read stations on the Wyangala
catchment (there wore no stations in 1870),
This investigation was based largely on the use of
various empirical formulae and the estimated discharges so
derived were compared with flood run-off rates estimated for
other catchments to assess their probable reliability.
The adopted 1922 design flood hydrograph was ultimately
ba.sed on estimates of the 1870 Wyangala peak discharge and of'
the 1916 Gowra hydrograph shape. The peak discharge was 165*000
cusccs (53 cusccs per square mile) whilst the total volume of
run-off was 410,000 acre feet over a period of approximately
six days,
1925 Estimate; 240*000 cusecs and 500*000 acre feet
When the near record flood of May, 1925 occurred at
Burrinjuck with an estimated peak run-off rate of over 70
cusecs per square mile, it was apparent that the Wyangala
design flood should be further revised.
The actual procedure adopted was to base the new
estimate on the results of the comprehensive investigation
which had been carried out to determine the order of the
Burrinjuck 1925 inflow flood hydrograph. The ordinates of
the estimated Burrinjuck hydrograph wore simply reduced in
accordance with the ratio of the respective catchment areas
and a mean curve was drawn through the computed points to
form the Wyangala design flood hydrograph.


This estimated design flood had a peak discharge of
240,000 cusees (75 cusecs per square mile) and a total volume
over a period of six days of about 500,000 acre foot. It was
this design flood which was included in the Water Conservation
and Irrigation Commission’s submission in December, 1925 to the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works considering
the necessity for the construction of Wyangala Dam and
associated conservation works in the Lachlan Valley.
Estimated Peak Run-off Rates
It is of considerable interest to compare the peak
run-off rates of the design flood estimates described in this
section with the data used to construct the envelope curves
shown on the plan at page 6. If such data had been available
prior to the construction of Wyangala Dam, the peak discharge,
even^ for the preliminary estimate, would obviously have been
considerably in excess of 100 cusecs per square mile*






3• 1959 Design Flood Estimation Procedure
The term "design flood" is used in this report to denote
the inflow flood derived by hydrologic procedures. It is not
necessarily the same as the flood adopted for the design of the dam
and related works which is based on a detailed consideration of
many aspects; the more important of which are the results of a
comprehensive hydrologic investigation, the possible consequences
of failure of the dam, the type of structure, site characteristics
and economic considerations.
The procedures adopted in this investigation were based
on current recognized hydrologic practices, the main details of
which are contained in the United States Bureau of Reclamation* s
YYater Studies Manual. Basically, the procedures involve the
derivation of the design storm, the rainfall losses and the
catchment unitgraph, which are then combined to form the design
flood hydrograph, A brief description is given in this section
outlining basic aspects of the procedures.
Design Storm
The design storm is obtained by transposition and
maximisation of storms which have occurred either on the
catchment being considered or on catchments from which it is
meteorologically permissible to transpose. The design storm
can therefore be defined as the maximum which could be expected
to occur under known meteorological conditions.
Rainfall Losses
The volume of rainfall which will actually run off from
any storm is mainly dependent upon the characteristics of the
catchment, antecedent rainfalls and temperatures, intensity of
storm rainfall and the duration of the storm.
From a study of run-offs resulting from past storms and
their antecedent conditions, it is possible to derive a series of
values for initial loss (loss before any run-off occurs) and for
loss ratee (loss occurring during the period of run-off) for
varying conditions.
Unitgraphs
A unitgraph can be defined as the hydrograph of storm
run-off which will result from one inch of excess rainfall of
unit duration occurring uniformly over a catchment. (Excess
rainfall is the term given to the rainfall which occurs in excess
of the loss rate after any initial loss has been satisfied.)
The main bases of the unitgraph theory are that, in
any storm of unit duration, the time base of the surface run-off
hydrograph is constant and that the ordinates of the hydrograph
are directly proportionate to the volume of run-off.
Unitgraphs are normally derived from the rainfall and
run-off records of past floods. Some investigators, however,
also derive synthetic unitgraphs from survey knowledge of the
physical characteristics of catchments; such unitgraphs could
be subject to extreme errors and accordingly it is not
our practice to use this method of any other procedure
is possible.


Design Flood
In this study the design (inflow) flood has been
considered to be the maximum flood which could occur with a
repetition of known hydrometeorological conditions, i.e, the
flood hydrograph obtained by the application of tho design
storm (lec> minimum rainfall losses) to the adopted unitgraph.
Such a flood might bo termed the "maximum probable
flood" which can be derived by tho application of the accepted
current hydrometeorological iDrocodures to our comparatively
small sample of hydrologic data. It will bo appreciated that
improved techniques will probably be developed in the future
which, coupled with additional data, may indicate the
possibility of a greater flood, i,c, tho design flood, derived!"
in this study is not necessarily tho so-called "maximum possible
(or probable) flood" for our present geological and climatic ora,
4, Description of tho Wyangala Catchment
Location and Size
Tho catchment lies mainly in tho Mitchell and
Southern Tablelands Regions of New South Wales and is situated
on the western slopes of the Great Dividing Range, with tho
exception of a section to the cast of Cullarin Gap (near
Goulburn) whore over 100 square miles have been pirated from
tho adjoining coastal catchment, Tho dam itself is located
130 miles west of Sydney, downstream of the junction of the
Abercrombie and Lachlan Rivers,
The total area, controlled by Wyanga.la Dam is 3? 200
square miles but, in this study, only the catchment on the
western slopes was considered to bo "effective". This was
because examination of the contours of tho catchment oast of
the Great Divide indicated that this section would not have
contributed significantly to the floods on which tho study
was based.
River System and Topography
The map of the "effective" Wyangala catchment on page
10 has boon prepared showing details of the main river system
and of generalised contours.
The Lachlan River rises in a comparatively flat part
of tho Great Divide between Goulburn and Gunning and flows in a
northerly direction t lire ugh undulating country until it enters
a broken mountain section some 75 miles from its source. At
this noint it is joined by the Crookwoll River, a major
tributary with headwaters in tho east of the catchment near
tho town of Crookwoll.
From its junction with the Crookwoll River, the
Lachlan continues to flow in a direction slightly west of north
until it roaches the Y/yangala storage and is mot by the
Abercrombie River, the principal tributary which drains tho
mountainous northern section of the catchment.
The greater part of the Y/yangala catchment is comprised
of hilly to undu3.a.ting country at an average elevation of some
2,000 foot. The remainder of tho catchment varies from steep
to mountainous terrain up to about 4,000 feet.
In tho Lachlan catchment, tho river valleys are
comparatively shallow and, in general,.slopes range from 3 to 8
degrees. In the. Abercrombie catchment,the undulating country


gives way to steep and deeply dissected mountainous terrain
having slopes in excess of 15 degrees. The upper reaches of
the Abercrombie River are characterised by rock-bound gorges
and steep-sided valleys which fall over a thousand feet to
their floor.
Geological Features and Vegetal Cover
The generalised geological map at page 11 shows the
locations and extent of the main geological formations in the
catchment.
Most of the soil types are a result of in situ weather-
ing of the underlying rock types and, except for the regions with
basaltic rocks, the soil types are almost exclusively of a. light
sandy nature. Most of the catchment is affected to some degree-
by either sheet or gully erosion.
The Lachlan catchment is almost devoid of dense timber
cover and is covered by a heavy mantle of thick grass during
favourable seasons. The Abercrombie catchment, on the other
hand, has a dense cover of timber on its eastern section which
merges into woodlands of decreasing height and density proceeding
westward to Wyangala Dam.
Occurrence of Snow and Average Rainfall
Most of the high country in the eastern and northern
sections of the catchment have experienced snowfalls of varying
depth and frequency, with most falls occurring between May and
September; isolated falls with reduced depth and frequency also
occur on the lower portions of the catchment. Snow does not
normally remain on the ground for any lengthy period and the
depth or extent o'!’, any area of snow has not boon sufficient to
produce important run-off.
The mean annual rainfall for the whole catchment is of
the order of 27 inches, varying from as low as 25 inches up to
about 35 inches. The highest recordings are observed along the
mountain ranges forming the catchment boundary to the north ad
cast and in the elevated country near Crookwoll,






5• Wyangala Catchment Stream Flow Hecords
Gauging Stations •
Prior to 1955* the only stations established on the
catchment were those located at Wyangala, on the Lachlan River
at Reids Plat and on the Abercrombie River at Abercrombie Bridge
(these stations are shown on the map at page 2),
The Abercrombie and Reids Flat stations were established
in 1930 and measure the contribution from almost 80$ of the
Wyangala catchment. Unfortunately, however, examination of the
records of those daily read stations showed that they were
unsuita/bIG for use in this study due to lack of flood measurements,
the instability of the Reids Flat control and the inadequacy of
gauge readings obtained in flood periods.
Since 1908 five different staff gauge stations have
boon established at Wyangala for various trial periods, whilst
the present discharges arc estimated from storage levels and valve
releases. With the exception of the period from to 1919*
records are continuous but it has only been since the installation
of the float recorder in the main wall of the dam in 1949 that
flood profiles have been accurately defined.
Eight additional gauging stations (of the daily read or
pressure recorder type) were established on the upper Abercrombie
and Lachlan catchments in 1955. Those stations should provide
valuable records for future studios for the catchment, but were
not adequately rated to be of a.ny use in this study.
Selection of Bata-
As a consequence of examination of all available data
from the various gauging stations, it was apparent that the only
suitable records available for the derivation of unitgraphs were
those based on the Wyangala storage levels since 1949.
It was realised.that this gave an extremely limited
sample of data.. This was, however* compensated to some degree
by the fact that a number of floods had occurred during the poriod,
one of which had the third highest peak discharge recorded in
over a hundred years.
Estimated Peak Discharges of Wya.nga.la Major Floods
The peak discharges of the three record floods which
hare occurred on the Wyangala catchment in the past hundred years
hare been estimated as;-
April, 1870 ; 330,000 cusecs
October, 1918 ; 210,000 cusecs
Juno, 1952 t 186,000 cusecs
The estimate for the 1952 flood was derived from the
recorded storage levels, the elevation-capacity relationship, the
spillway discharge curve and actual valve releases. Those for
the 1870 and 1916 floods have been based on the extension of the
discharge curve for the gauging station downstream of the dam.
This discharge curve extension was calculated by
standard methods using a range of current meter observations to


50,000 cusccs, the estimated 1952 peak outflow (174?000 cusecs)
and survey data which included 1870, 1016 and 1952 flood levels.
Estimated Wyangala Hydrographs
Outflow Hydrographs
The Wyangala spillway is considered to have operated
under "free fall" conditions during all floods which have
occurred since the dam was constructed, i.e. the spillway curve,
being unaffected by backwater effects, is based on the standard
weir formula*
In view of this and of the small capacity of outlet
valves (approximately 3>ooo cusecs), the estimated outflow
hydrographs, based on continuous storage levels, are considered
to bo much more accurate than those normally obtained for
gauging stations.
Recorder charts were examined and detailed profiles
extracted for all floods (14) between. 1949 and 1958. Using
these profiles and the valve releases, the outflov/ hydrographs
were determined.
Inflow Hydrographs
The section of the inflow hydrograph up to spillway
level was determined from the profile and elevation-capacity
relationship, whilst the modified Puls routing procedure (with
3 hour periods) was used in the derivation of the remainder of
the hydrograph.
The volume of the outflow hydrograph was compared v/ith
the corresponding volume of the inflow hydrograph as a check on
the results obtained by routing.
1952 Inflow and Outflow Hydrographs
The derived hydrographs for the maximum flood which
occurred in the period considered (Juno 1952) arc plotted on tl©
plan at page 14.




6. Rainfo.il Data
Daily Road Stations
Consideration of the locations of the official stations
showed that the records of these stations were completely
inadequate for satisfactory definition of the areal distribution
of storm rainfalls over the Wyangala catchment.
To supplement the official coverage, a field survey
was carried out to locate additional rainfall records. This
resulted in the number of stations available for analysis being
doubled. It is also worthy of mention that only in a few
instances wore private records available for storms prior to
1950, i,c, even had satisfactory stream flow data been available
for earlier years, the study would necessarily have been
confined to floods produced by storms since 1949#
The locations of the forty-five rainfall stations used
in this study are shown on the plan at page 16, Whilst this
coverage is still considered inadequate, it was assumed to
reasonably define the areal distribution of rainfall. The
avero.ge rainfall depths for the selected storms were therefore
calculated on this basis,
Pluviograph Stations
Prior to the installation of the Commission pluviograph
at Crookwoll in 1956, there were no pluviographs located in the
Wyangala catchment. It was therefore necessary to base the
temporal patterns of storms prior to 1956 on the records of
pluviographs located around the catchment even when it was
apparent that those were outside of the main storm area and
therefore did not necessarily represent the main storm temporal
pattern,
, The pluviographs considered were those at Cowra,
Canberra, Burrinjuck, Obcron and Blackheath, The locations of
these instruments in relation to the Wyangala catchment are.
shown on the plan at page 17.
Storm Rainfall Depths
Isohyetal maps were prepared for every storm associated
with the selected Wyangala floods; the isohyetal map for the June
1952 storm being shown on page 18.
The volumes of rainfalls for each storm were then
computed by the standard isohyetal method and chocked by the
inclined plane method. The average difference between the results
obtained by each method was found to be loss than Is, with a
maximum difference of about 2s,
Storm Temporal Patterns
The Crookwell pluviograph records wore assumed to
represent the average temporal patterns of the 1956 storms, whilst
mass curves for the previous storms wore based on the most
suitable records from one or more of the pluviographs located
outside the catchment.
It will be appreciated therefore the adopted mass
curves wore based on most inadequate data and could not be
expected to bo truly representative for a. catchment of over 3,000
square miles.








Flood Details
Storm Details
Dat e
Natural
Peak
Gusecs
Surface
Run-off in
Av.
Rain
Inches
Loss
Rate
Ins/hr
Run-off
Percent
Ac, Ft,
Inches
30.3.1950
37,000
79,000
0,48
1.81
0.23
26
1.4.1950
75 j 000
370,000
2.14
3.90
0.03
55
27.5.1950
43,000
89,000
0.54
2.14
0.06
25
8.6.1950
55,000
135,000
0.77
1,80
0.05
43
23.7.1950
59,000
124,000
0.75
1 .44
0.05
53
3.8.1951
78,000
170,000
1 .04
1.99
0.05
57
25.9.1951
63,000
158,000
0.96
2,88
0.03
33
26.4.1952
42,000
99,000
0.63
2.42
0.15
26 I
17.6.1952
186,000
484,000
2.93
3.83
0.04
77
18.7.1952
32,000
86,000
0.52
1.10
0,02
47
27.7.1952
95,000
101,000
0 • 62
1 .26
0.03
49
u.3.1956
45,000
156,000
0.95
3.39
0.08
28
25.6.1955
45,000
129,000
0.78
1.46
0.04
53
29,6.1956
35,000
185,000
1 .12
1.44
0.01
78
7, Hodnfo.ll Losses
Initial Loss of rainfall can be defined as the combin-
ation of losses which occur prior to surface run-off. Those
losses include those from interception, depression storage and
infiltration.
The value of initial loss is obviously directly
proportionedo to antecedent conditions and the value adopted for
design purposes will be dependent upon the antecedent conditions
which are assumod,
Loss Hate is the term given to the average rate of loss
duo to all factors during a storm. The loss rate value is also
dependent on antecedent conditions, if incorrect or no allowance
is made for initial loss.
If no allowance is made for initial loss, the loss rate
value wiil be high under comparatively dry antecedent conditions
and short period storms, but will approach a minimum value under
wet antecedent conditions and long period storms.
Adopted Procedure for Estimation of Losses
In this study fourteen flood producing storms were
analysed. Consideration of the antecedent rainfalls for these
storms indicated that the catchment, in all but the initial floods
in each series, would have been comparatively wet.
In view of this it was decided initially to calculate
the average loss rates for all storms without allowance for any
initial losses. The results obtained are tabulated in the table
which follow So
As those results indicated that the initial loss was
not significant in many instances it was decided that it was
unnecessary to analyse the various storms in more detail.


Adopted Losses
To decide upon the losses to bo adopted in this design
flood study, consideration was given not only to the calculated
loss rates, but also to recognised current practices and associated
meteorological aspects.
In this regard attention is drawn to the variation in
practices adopted in America.. The Bureau of Reclamation 1 s
practice is to base the so-called "Maximum Probable Flood" upon
severe but not uncommon antecedent conditions and the "Maximum
Possible Flood" upon extreme antecedent conditions, whilst the
Corps of Engineers (New England Region) have recently suggested
the adoption in design flood studies of extreme conditions,
i.e, no allowance for initial loss.
Meteorologists recognise that there is, in many areas,
a large degree of correlation between major storms and consequent-
ly that a design storm could quite conceivably be preceded by
very wet, if not saturated, catchment conditions. This aspect for
the Wyangala catchment was referred to the Hydrometeorological
Section of the Bureau of Meteorology and advice was obtained that
it would be "reasonable to assume that heavy rainfall could have
occurred two weeks prior to a design storm based on the natural
storm of 1955".
Consideration of these factors in conjunction with the
results of the storm and run-off analyses led to the adoption of
a design storm loss rate of 0.03 inches per hour with no
allowance for initial loss.
Coefficient of Run-off
It is considered of interest to refer to another
practice relating to rainfall loss estimation, viz, the use of
a coefficient of run-off, which is commonly expressed as the
percentage of total storm rainfall which appears as flood run-off.
Consideration of the results tabulated in this section
shows that, whilst the hourly rainfall loss rate had a reasonably
consistent value (for other than the initial flood in each series),
the coefficient of run-off was extremely variable. In other
words the uso of such a coefficient is completely unsuitable even
for preliminary estimates of flood run-off from rainfall data,
8. Derivation of Wyangala Unitgraphs
G-cneral
The basic data described in earlier sections consisted
of fourteen derived inflow hydrographs, together with the
associated storm patterns and average rainfall depths.
The derivation of a unitgraph involves the use of this
data to determine the surface run-off hydrograph and excess
rainfall increments.
Base Flow Separation
From semi-logarithmic plotting of the fourteen inflow
hydrographs, an average base flow recession curve was derived.
This curve was then applied to the inflow hydrographs to obtain
the surface run-off hydrograph for each flood, (The base flow
separation for the 1952 flood is shown on the plan at page 14.)


Derivation
It was decided that throe hour unitgraphs should be
used and these were derived on the University of New South Wales 1
"Utecom" Digital Computer using the least squares programme.
Whilst all floods were analysed, it was found that only
six satisfactory unitgraphs could be developed. The unsatisfact-
ory results for the other floods were apparently due to signific-
ant inaccuracies between the adopted and actual areal and temporal
patterns of rainfall over the catchment.
Design Unitgraph
The adopted design unitgraph has the average shape of
the six derived unitgraphs with the same peak- as that derived
for the major flood of June, 1952, These unitgraphs arc shown
on page 22,
As a check on the actual derivation, the excess
rainfalls wore applied to the respective unitgraphs and, in each
instance, the surface run-off hydrograph was satisfactorily
reproduced. The general order of reproduction achieved is
indicated on the plan at page 23, which shows the actual and
reproduced June, 1952 surface run-off hydrographs.






9. Wyangala Design Storm
General
Whilst the Wyangala Design Storm was based on recognised
transposition and maximisation procedures, it was necessary to
obtain advice from the Bureau of Meteorology on the various
meteorological aspects involved in this particular study.
In the following sections the basic theory of trans-
position and maximisation is outlined and brief details are given
of the actual data and procedures used,
Maximisation Theory
The maximum amount of rain which can occur over an area
is dependent upon the amount of moist air which can flow over the
area and the amount of moisture which can be precipitated from
that air.
For any storm pattern it is Cissumed that the moisture
actually precipitated is a function of the total moisture in the
inflowing air and that a change in total moisture will not alter
the storm pattern. Any storm oan thus be maximised by increasing
the actual precipitation in the ratio of maximum experienced
moisture content to the moisture content of the storm considered.
Assuming a saturated pseudo-adiabatic lapse rate of the
atmosphere, the moisture content is considered to be a unique
function of the surface elevation and dew point. Dew points must
therefore be obtained where the inflowing moist air is on the
surface.
Dew point records from the selected stations a,re used to
determine the moisture content of the inflowing air and to
indicate the probable maximum value which could have occurred.
It is normal practice to consider a number of major
storms for any study to ensure that the adopted maximised storm
produces the greatest rainfall depths (over the catchment
considered) which could result from the available records.
In addition, some investigators suggest that adjustment
should also be made for the rate of inflow but, as meteorologists
contend that such adjustment would affect the fundamental storm
pattern and efficiency, it was not considered in this study.
Transposition Theory
The basic assumption in this theory is that storms can
bo transposed to a catchment from any area considered to bo subject
to similar meteorological conditions, provided adjustment is made
for any topographical barrier between the natural and transposed
storms; the presence of an inflow barrier causes a reduction in
the precipitable water available in any storm.
It is also required that, in any transposition, the
relative locations of the representative dev; point stations to the
storm are maintained for both the natural and transposed storms.
Consideration of Natural Storms
To determine which natural storms should be analysed,
consideration was given to the storms used in the 1956 Burrondong
study and to meteorological advice that the storm of February, 1955


was of unprecedented intensity and magnitude in inland New South
Wales and that maximisation and transpostion of any inland storm
other than that of February, 1955 was unlikely to yield comparable-
rainfall depths.
Preliminary examination was also made of the record
cyclonic coastal storm of May, 1925. From this it was apparent
that any logical transposition would result in much smaller
average rainfall depths over the Wyangala catchment than thos e
from the February, 1955 inland storm.
It was therefore decided to base the Wyangala Design
Storm on the transposition and maximisatior/of the critical section
of the February, 1955 storm. As meteorological aspects of this
storm have been considered in much detail in recent years (see
bibliography), no description of the actual storm is given in this
report•
Transposition of the 1955 Storm
The transposition was carried out in accordance with
advice by the Bureau of Meteorology that the isohyetal pattern of
the 1955 storm should bo transposed to the Lachlan catchment, not
the results of a depth area duration study for the complete storm.
The actual transposition involved moving the natural storm some
170 miles to the S.S.E. along the storm trajectory over
comparatively uniform terrain.
As the original isohyetal plan for earlier Water
Conservation and Irrigation Commission studies covered the major
portion of Now South Wales, a now isohyetal plan was xaroparod to
a larger scale for the most critical section of the storm. The
Wyangala catchment shape was then superimposed on this isohyetal
plan so as to give the maximum catchment rainfall,
A series of trials gave a maximum average depth of rain-
fall of 12.3 inches with a ICr reorientation. This amount of
reorientation was accepted as it was within the maximum limit of
20° recommended by both the United States Bureau of Reclamation
and the Australian Bureau of Meteorology,
The critical section of the storm for the Wyangala
catchment is shown in deto.il at page 27, whilst its actual location
in the 1955 storm pattern is shown by the plan at page 28,
Representative Dew Points
The index stations adopted for the natural storm were
these suggested in meteorological advice by the Bureau of Meteor-
ology, namely Dalby, Roma and Charlcvillo, for which the average
dew point at 1,000 mb was 72°F.
In selecting the representative dew point for the trans-
posed storm, recorded maximum persisting 24 hour dew points in the
zone bounded by St. George, Goondiwindi, Walgett and Bourke wore
considered. These records indicated that a sea level dew point of
76°F should be adopted. (In this regard it is stressed that, as
available records only cover a period of about 50 years, the
adopted value cannot be regarded apf.n absolute maximum,*)
Inflow Barriers
The average elevation of the index stations for the
natural storm was 1,000 foot which was found to be the actual
inflow barrier for the natural storm.


The highest topographical barrier between the locations
of the natural and transposed storms was the actual boundary of
the Wyangala catchment. The height of this inflow barrier was
determined by plotting the catchment boundary elevations on a
section normal to the transposed storm trajectory; the average
elevation of the adopted section was approximately 2,300 feet
above sea level.
Moisture Content Adjustment
This adjustment is the ratio of the maximum prpcipitable
water available to the transposed storm in position over the
catchment to the precipitable water available in the natural storm.
The observed average rainfall depth is multiplied by this adjust-
ment to obtain the maximised and transposed average rainfall depth.
Calculation of this adjustment is as follows:-
Observed Storm
Sea level Bow Point 72°P
Inflow Barrier 1000 feet
Precipitable Water 1,000 mb to 200 mb = 2.50 inches
1.000 mb to 1000 ft = 0.22 "
1.000 ft to 200 mb 2.-28 inches
Ad justed Sto rm
Sea Level Bow Point 76°P
Inflow Barrier 2300 feet
Prociioitable Water 1,000 mb to 200 mb = 3*04 inches
1.000 mb to 2300 ft = 0.57
2,300 ft to 200 mb 2.47 inches
*t. o+ . Moisture Content of Adjusted Storm 2.47
iajuo ion" Moisture Content of Observed Storm 2.28
= 1.085
Transposed and Maximised Average Catchment Rainfall
= (12.3 x 1.085) inches
= 13.35 inches
Temporal Storm Pattern
As shown on the plan at page 28, the centre of the
transposed section of the natural storm was in the vicinity of
Trangic. The design storm temporal pattern was therefore based on
the trace actually recorded by the Trangio pluviograph and the
maximised three-hourly rainfalls were calculated using this
temporal pattern.
Whilst it was considered meteorologically desirable to
adopt the natural storm (percentage) temporal pattern for the de-
sign storm, it was apparent that use of this pattern would result
in a double peaked flood hydrograph which is not in accordance
with recognised practice.
It was therefore felt that sore rearrangement of the tem-
poral pattern was justified. Accordingly, it was decided to adopt
the procedures recommended by the United States Bureau of Reclama-
tion, i.o. the pattern was rearranged to give the maximum peak sur-
face run-off for a single peaked hydrograph. The resulting pattern
was adopted in the design storm hyetograph. The maximised mass
curve and storm patterns are shown on the plan at page 29.








10. II ood Probabilities
To enable economic aspects of any dam to be critically
considered, common practice has been to carry out probability
analyses to indicate the probable recurrence interval for the
recommended design flood.
It will be appreciated that in any probability analysis,
the order of accuracy of the final estimate is dependent upon the
period of records, the reliability of available data, the method
of plotting and the method and extent of the necessary extrapola-
tion, It is generally accepted that probabilities based on 100
years of reliable data should give fairly reasonable results up to
a recurrence interval of say, 50 years, and that after that stage
the reliabilities of estimates fall rapidly and beyond 100 years
can be virtually meaningless.
Another vital aspect to be realised in connection with
probability studies is the effect that the occurrence of a major
flood can have upon probability estimates; in a recent overseas
study, the estimated recurrence interval of a 1955 flood in
America, based on records prior to 1955? was 10,000 years but,
when the study was. revised using the additional flood data, the
estimate fell to 400 years. Similar results have also boon
obtained in 'Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission studios.
It would therefore appear that the use of probability
analyses to estimate a design flood recurrence interval is of
little, if any, value and can in fact be most misleading. For
this reason, no estimates of the possible recurrence interval of
the Wyangala Design Flood arc given in this report,
11, Wyangala Design (Inflow) Flood Hydrograph
Procedure
The total volume of excess rainfall was determined by
subtracting the adopted constant loss rate of 0,03 inches per hour
from the design storm hyetograph. This excess rainfall was then
applied to the adopted three hour unitgraph to derive the
hydrograph of surface run-off.
As'wet antecedent conditions were assumed to exist prior
to the occurrence of the design storm, normal practice was
followed in allowing an initial base flow of 5,000 cusecs, The
base flow and surface run-off hydrographs were then combined to
form the recommended design flood.
Magnitude
Flood hydrographs were determined for both the design
storm and the maximised storm.with the natural storm temporal
pattern. The hydrograph for the latter storm was found to have
a peak discharge 12 fo less than that from the design storm.
The design flood hydrograph shown on page 31 has.a peak
discharge of 600,000 cusecs and a five day volume of 2,000, 0<°»o
acre foot. The peak discharge is equivalent to a run-off rate of
194 cusecs per square mile, which is about 8$ in excess of the
Myers Maximum value,
D. E. DAVIDSON
Hydrographic Engineer, Investigations,
31st March, 1960,




Description I
Number
Page
Locality Plan of the Wyangala and Cowra
Catchmonts
179/297
2
Previous Estimates of the Wyangala
Design Flood Hydrograph
179/298
5 1
Envelope Curves of Peak Run-off Hates
37/217'°
6
j
Wyangala Catchment - Generalised Contours
157/421
10
Wyangala Catchment - Geological
Formations
179/288
11
Inflow and Outflow Hydrographs of the
June 1952 Flood
179/275
14
Location of Rainfall Stations on or
adjacent to the Wyangala Catchment
179/282
16
Location of Pluviographs used in the
Design Flood Study
179/273
17
Isohyetal Pattern of the June 1952
Storm
179/274
18 j
j Derived Unitgraphs and the adopted
Wyangala Design Unitgraph
179/277
i 22
I
Surface Run-off Hydro graph, and
Unitgraph of the June 1952 Flood
179/276
1
23 !
Critical Isohyetal Pattern of the
February 1955 storm in New South Wales
superimposed on the Wyangala catchment
179/278
27
Isohyetal Pattern of the Storm of
February 1955 over centralNcw South
Wale s
179/281
1
28
Maximised Mass Curves and Hyetographs
179/279
29
Wyangala Design Flood Hydrograph
179/280
31
—
WYANGALA DAM-DESIGN FLOOD STUDY
INDEX OF PLANS


WYANGALA DAM-DESIGN FLOOD STUDY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission Annual
Reports - Government Printer, Sydney.
2. Report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public
Works, 1925-27 - Government Printer, Sydney.
3. United States Department of the Interior, Bureau of
Reclamation Manual - Volume IV, "Water Studies",
4. Design Flood Estimates for Burrendong Dam, 1956 -
Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission Report.
5. Determination of a Unitgraph from a Multi-Period Storm -
Transactions, American Society ofCivil Engineers,
-September 1939.
6. Preliminary Surveys of Resources on the Mitchell, Lachlan
and Southern Tablelands Regions - Three reports of the
Premier's Department, Sydney,
7. Inclined Plane Method of Determining Average Rainfall
Depths over a Catchment - Water Conservation and
Irrigation Commission Internal Report.
8. North Eastern Floods, 1955 s Flood Control Hydrology -
Xnerioan Society of Civil Engineers, Hydraulics Journal,
June 1958.
9. Estimation of Extreme Precipitation - a 1919 Project Report,
Bureau of Meteorology. :
10. Flood Estimation Procedures - Commonwealth Engineer,-.
November and December, 1958,
11. Use of a High Speed Digital Computer for the Derivation
of Unitgraphs from Multi-Period Storms - 1957 Technical
Note No, -15, School of Civil Engineering, University of
Technology, N.S.W.
12. The Floods of February, 1955 in Nov; South Wales - Bureau
of Meteorology Report.
13. Maximum Possible Rainfall in Australia, Thunderstorm
Model - Bureau of Meteorology Report.
14. Depth-Area Duration Study of the February 1955 Storm -
Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission Report.
15. Evaluation of Probable Maximum Precipitation -
Transactions American Geophysical Union, October 1953.
16. Studies in Engineering Hydrology (A Symposium) - Journal
of Institution of Engineers, Australia,, November %954«
17. Report on Conference on Estimation of Extreme Precipitation
in Melbourne , April .1958 - Bureau of Meteorology Report.


18, Maximum Possible Rainfall over the hotter Rivor
Catchment - Bureau of Meteorology * Meteorological
Study No, 10, 1957.
19. The Plood of May, 1925 in the Murrumbidgoe River -
Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission Publication.
20, United States Department of Agriculture - Soil
Conservation Service Hydrology Guido, 1957.
21. Run-off Phenomena - Transactions, American Geophysical
Union, 1939.
22, Plood Mitigation Measures for the City of Launceston -
Report of the La.unceston Plood Protection Authority,
September, 1959•
23, Structure of Discharge Recession Curves - Transactions,
American Geophysical Union, 1939,
24. Hydrology Handbook - Engineering Practice Manual No, 28,
American Society of Civil Engineers,
25. Separating Hydrographs from Small Drainage Areas
into Surface and Subsurface Plow - Transactions,
American Geophysical Union, 1941,
