

AUSTRALIA.
CAPTAIN MILNE'S LANDS
A
IN THE
METROPOLITAN HARBOR
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.






AUSTRALIA.
REPORTS OF PUBLIC MEETINGS,
MEMORIALS, SURVEYORS’ REPORTS,
MINUTES OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL,
PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS,
PUBLISHED BY OEDBR OF THE GOVERNMENT OP
SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
TO ASSIST
CAPTAIN MILNE
AND OTHER LAND OWNERS TO RAISE CAPITAL POE SUPPLEMENTING GOVERNMENT
CONCESSIONS, GOVERNMENT GRANTS OF LAND, AND GOVERNMENT
EXPENDITURE, TO EFFECT THE OPENING OP THE
METROPOLITAN HARBOR
FOR THE ACCOMMODATION OF THE RAPIDLY INCREASING COMMERCE
AND SHIPPING OF
THE COLONY.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY GEORGE BERRIDGB & CO., 87, EASTCHEAP E.C,
1868.




PRELIMINARY REMARKS.
The present shipping place of South Australia, misnamed
Port Adelaide, being notoriously unfit for the growing trade of
the Colony, public meetings have been recently held in the
place itself, at which even those interested in the continuance
of the trade at this ill-selected locality, confess its utter unfit-
ness for a harbor; and have therefore signed petitions calling on
Government to remedy the crying evil, and acknowledging that
ships drawing more than twelve feet of water lie aground, both
at the wharfs and in the stream, by which they are subjected to
great damage, and their owners to great delays, expense, and
losses.
This conclusively proves, after all the money unwisely thrown
away on the place by the Government, under the pressure of
clique influence, that it is totally unfit to be the Metropolitan
Harbor of a Colony six times the size of the British Isles, and
that some other place must be found.
"Wharfs and warehouses lower -down the river, alongside of
which vessels of the largest size may discharge afloat, is the
place destined by nature, and by Government selection.
The North Arm—a magnificent sheet of deep water, land-
locked, forming a basin of great extent, with smooth water, and
easy navigation for vessels of the largest burthen —is a harbor
formed by Nature , docks and all; wanting nothing but the erec-


tion of the quays and warehouses. By means of a short railway,
wharfs at this part of the river can he connected with the railway
to the Capital, and with the Great Northern Railway, so as to
secure the traffic from the towns, and the great copper mines of
the North.
The opening of this, the Metropolitan Harbor, will also save
to the Colony, to and from , about thirty miles of land carriage,
and will free the shipping from the difficulties and vexations
attending the approach to the present shipping place, situated at
the head of a creek; which, after leaving the North Arm, be-
comes a narrow and tortuous channel, two miles in length, diffi-
cult to navigate without grounding; and, except at flood-tide
and with a favourable wind, inaccessible to vessels without the
expense of a steam tug.
In the original condition of the Thames—flooded on both
banks, and on the south side far and ■wide —imagine the com-
mencement of the Port of London to be at Teddington or
Chelsea, forced there for a time by the floods and swamps in the
vicinity of the Tower, and the British people will have, in the
cartoon of such a position, some idea of the inconvenience,
vexations, expenses, damages, and losses to the shipping, in the
place called Port Adelaide.
It will be seen that the proposed wffiarfs, having a depth of
thirty-one feet at flood and twenty-one feet at low water, with
commodious warehouses, and all the modern improvements for
discharging vessels and the storing of goods, will have a decided
advantage over the shoal-w r ater place higher up, and will, there-
fore, of necessity , command the trade and the settlement of the
maritime population on the adjacent lands.
To facilitate this, the Government, after making concessions of
land, after expending £20,000 in road-making approaches, and
after voting £40,000 for railway communication—which was


intentionally squandered by a clique to whom it was imprudently
entrusted —are themselves at this moment expending that amount
in railway extension to within about a mile of the sites of the
wharfs and warehouses; the erection of which in the centre of the
harbor is so urgently required.
The absolute necessity for safe and additional shipping accom-
modation to the rapidly-increasing trade of the colony, will be
apparent from the commercial returns; which show that the
exports and imports for the year 1850 amounted to £1,416,389 ;
that of 1860 to £3,423,307; that of 1861 to £4,063,155; and
that of 1864 to £5,718,476 ; upon which the wharf dues alone
amounted to £40,000 per annum.
Such was the state of things four years ago; since which the
want of shipping accommodation has greatly increased, and the
call for it more urgent than ever.
To those who trade in lies, libel, and slander, and who are
interested in preventing the opening of the Metropolitan Har-
bor, the following may be submitted for their reply, and for the
consideration of capitalists who wish to find safe and profitable
investments for their money.
“ Astounding Hental.— A man of business, who is satisfied
with a small opening in a good position, has taken a little spot
adjoining Mr. Platt’s, Exchange Colonnade, and having an area
of five feet by two feet, at s s. per week, According to Maun-
der’s Table of Land Measure and Cocker’s System of Arith-
metic, this ground rent is at the rate of £56,628 per acre per
annum.” —South Australian Heyister, January , 1854.
If such be the demand for good business sites nine miles
inland, can any man of common intelligence doubt the value, the
safety, or the profit of investments in the very centre of the
Metropolitan Harbor, when thrown open to the commerce of
the Colony ?


THE
METROPOLITAN HARBOR
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The Colony of South Australia, the formation of which was
forced upon the Government by a mercantile association, the
most distinguished of whom was the now Honourable George
Fife Angus, was founded under an Act of* Parliament, which
limited the authorities, in town foundings, to that of the capital.
All others were to be left to private or mercantile enterprise.
The commissioners appointed to carry the Act into operation,
knowing nothing of the country intended for colonization, en-
trusted the selection of a site for the capital to Colonel Light,
the Surveyor General, but enjoined him to plan it with
“ broad streets and roomy quaysan injunction which, while
disregarding its intention, he carried into effect to perfection,
according to the letter of his instructions ; for he laid it out with
“ quays ” a mile in width; not, however, on the sea coast, as
intended by the Commissioners, but on the banks of the dry bed
of a winter torrent, eight miles inland; apparently anticipating
improvements in navigation, which some day might enable ships
to float on air and sail in dust.


This unfortunate step left the Colony without its first essential
requisite, maritime convenience, and saddled it with a useless
expense of land carriage.
One error leads to many. The Governor, Captain Hindmarsh,
annoyed at the doings of the Colonel and his friends, sailed for
England, and was succeeded by Colonel Gawlor; who, finding
on his arrival that the shores of the Metropolitan Harbor, being
like the river Thames, subject to flood, required tide-banking to
render it approachable ; that the Act authorizing the formation
of the Colony forbade him to form a second township, even for
maritime purposes; and that the Colony was, therefore, in con-
sequence of Colonel Light’s blunder, without any maritime
accommodation, proposed—at a meeting of holders of preliminary
land orders specially convened, all of whom, in order to obviate
the great maritime difficulty, pledged their honor to assist him in
the proposal to purchase the lands of the Metropolitan Harbor
on behalf of the Crown —a proceeding with which the provisions
of the Act could not interfere —and, at the expense of the Crown,
to form the required maritime township. But the Manager of the
South Australian Company lay like a cat watching a mouse, until
the survey, at an expense to the Colony of £1,500 was made;
and then, violating his honor to the Governor that he would,
with other holders of preliminary land orders, waive his right to
an enforcement of the provisions of the Government enactment,
broke faith on the completion of the survey ; and thereby not only
frustrated this admirable plan, but prevailed on his Excellency to
accept temporary maritime accommodation for the Colonists at
the Company’s intended shipping place, situated at the head of
an inconvenient creek, leading into the Harbour; which gave
them what the Manager aimed at for a time, a monopoly of the
maritime business of the Colony. To this his Excellency gave
his consent with great reluctance, remarking, “ that although his
plan had been defeated, it would be impossible to keep the
Metropolitan Harbor long closed to the requirements of a com-
mercial community.”


This imprudent concession of the Governor gave to the Com-
pany and their friends a position at the door of the Treasury and
of the Government House; which prompted them to exert all
their influence, secretly and openly, to defeat every attempt to
construct approaches to the Metropolitan Harbor ; an opposition
which a concatenation of unforeseen occurrences rendered long
successful; the attention both of the Executive and the public
being engrossed by sudden and unexpected changes of Governors,
and by derangements consequent on the gold discoveries.
The details of a warfare now happily decided in favour of the
public are unnecessary. The opponents of maritime accommo-
dation, when losing ground, pleaded strongly to defer the
opening of the Metropolitan Harbor for a limited time, naming
five years; on the expiration of which they agreed that all oppo-
sition should cease; and when driven from this position, they
stumbled on the unmeaning expression “ when the exigencies of
commerce shall require it,” forgetting that the “ exigencies of
commerce ” required the immediate abolition of a mischievous
monopoly, and an immediate place of safety for the shipping.
It is proper, for the sake of explanation, to state that the party
opposed to an extension of maritime accommodation having ob-
tained a monopoly of the maritime commerce, called their ill-
selected shipping place Port Adelaide; an appellation to which
it had no right. The improper assumption of a name which did
not belong to the place, was the only support of a bad cause, and
has all along utterly deceived the public. The misappropriation
of the name led to misconception, and misconceptio2i led to the
substitution of a new name for the Metropolitan Harbor, which
came by degrees to be counter-distinguished by the name of the
North Arm —a term descriptive of a peculiarity in the formation
of its capacious waters.


EXTRACTS
FROM
REPORTS, MEMORIALS,
AND ALSO
dßbibenct jiitii before \\t J&lwt Cmmnittw
OF THE
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL,
MAJOR CAMPBELL.
MEMORANDUM.
“ Captain R. L. Milne lield a seat at the Central Road Board
in South Australia, as Chairman of the District Board of the
Hundred of Port Adelaide. lie is the proprietor of land in
the harbor of Port Adelaide, said to he of great value, and of
still greater prospective value. I believe he would not state
anything, in any matter, which he did not believe to be
correct.
(Signed) NORMAN CAMPBELL.
Private Secretary to His Excellency the
Lieutenant Governor of Victoria.
Government House, Melbourne,
February Ist, 1853.
Now, 2\st August, 1855, {Registrar-General).”


HANSON.
“ South Australian Railway,
“ Adelaide, 9th January, 1858.
“ Sir, —Referring to tire Map of the district between Ade-
laide, the Port, the North Arm, and the Dry Creek Station of
the Adelaide and Crawler Railway, taken to England by Mr.
Stapley, and which shows the Milunga property with the
Harbor, and proposed railway from the Milunga Section to
the Dry Creek, I would beg to observe, —that the plan is an
accurate copy of documents in the office of the Surveyor-
General, —and that the line of railway there laid down affords
the cheapest and best method of connecting Port Milunga
with Adelaide, and also with the North and East of the
Province: to which latter places the new line and port will
give a much better access than do the lines at present
existing.
“ I have not gone into the detail of the wharf and ware-
house accommodation; hut, from what has been clone at the
present port, I am of opinion that about £lOO,OOO should
be put down as the ultimate cost; of which, at present, it
would probably be necessary to spend only about one half,
leaving the remainder to be expended as the trade increased.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
(Signed) W. HANSON, C.E.
H. Gilbert, Esq ”
( Captain Milne's Solicitor.)
LINDSAY.
“ The New Port, Port Milunga, or the North Arm (for it is
known by all these three appellations) was projected by
Colonel Gawler, the second Governor of South Australia in
the year 1839, at the most eligible part of the Harbor of
Port Adelaide.”
“ In the year 1839-40, I was employed by the Government
to lay out the land around, and in the immediate vicinity of
the North Arm, and extending upwards to the present ship-
ping place, in the form of a town, from a design by his
Excellency Colonel Gawler, covering an area, exclusive of
Streets, Squares, Public Quays, Government and Public


Reserves, &c., of 1,124 acres; and in addition to the work on
shore, I took and laid down soundings in the Harbor.”
“ An inspection of the Government Chart of Port Adelaide,
compiled chiefly from my surveys, is sufficient to show that
the North Arm and its immediate vicinity, constitute the best
part of the Harbor, so far as the interests of the shipping are
concerned, but having the one drawback of not being in its
natural state, easily accessible from the Eastern or land side.
This difficulty has been removed, as far as the Eastern side of
the Harbor is concerned, by the recent completion of a road
and landing place, leading down to low-water mark, on both
sides of the great square at Section G; and a bridge which
would not cost more than £IO,OOO (and might probably be
constructed for less) would remove the difficulty, as far as
regards the Western or Milunga side of the Harbor*”
“ The present price of land in St. Vincent Street upon the
property of the ‘ Port Land Company ’ at the back of the
South Australian Company’s property is £2,000 per acre;
and in the North Parade it is above four times that amount,
or about £12,000 per acre. I think that land at the North
Arm the_ final port, which never can be superseded, may be
safely estimated at half the latter amount, £6,000 per acre;
which, on 134 acres at Port Milunga and the adjacent lands,
would amount to £804,000. “
A. F. LINDSAY, C.E.,
Justice of the Peace , and Member of the
South Australian Parliament.
May 15 thy 1858,”
HALL.
“A. F. Lindsay is a Surveying Engineer, a Justice of the
Peace, and a Member of the Parliament of South Australia.
“He is a gentleman of talent and of the strictest honor.
His report, therefore, of the maritime capabilities of ‘ Milunga ’
—a well known estate in the centre of the Metropolitan
Harbor—is a document on the correctness of which the most
entire reliance may be placed ; and when I state that there
can bo no doubt of the great value of this celebrated estate, I
am only expressing the general opinion of the colony.
“ For the satisfaction of the British Public and any to whom


the localities and maritime requirements of South Australia
may he unknown, I may add, that I am an old colonist,
recently a member of the Corporation of Adelaide, the capital
of the colony, and one of the trustees of the lady of Mr.
Symonds, the grantee of the Crown, from whom Captain
Milne purchased the property; and that, with my co-trustee,
I signed the conveyance to him in my capacity of Trustee to
the lady of that gentlemen for her marriage settlement.
(Signed) ROBERT HALL.
Melbourne, 4th November , 1859.
“ P.S. —Mr. Hanson, brother of the Attorney-General, our
present Prime Minister, whose report upon ‘ Milunga ’ I have
also just seen, is chief of the Railway department, and also a
gentleman of the highest honor, on the correctness of whose
report the fullest reliance may be placed.
(Signed) ROBERT HALL.
Melbourne , 6th November 1859.”
BURR.
MEMORANDUM.
“Various reports relative to the maritime capabilities and
great value of Port Milunga, the property of Captain Milne,
in South Australia, having been submitted for my perusal, I
feel no difficulty in again recording my opinion.
“As one of the oldest colonists of South Australia—having
been for many years the Deputy-Surveyor-General of the
colony, by appointment direct from the Imperial Government;
and, referring to the several documents—especially that of
A. F. Lindsay,Esq., Civil Engineer, dated 15th May, 1858, and
to one written by myself, dated 9th August 1850—I beg to
state that the facts and figures in all these reports are unques-
tionable.
“ Intimately acquainted for 25 years with every part of the
province and every part of the coast, I may add that Port
Milunga is destined to be the chief harbor of South Australia.
THOMAS BURR, C.E.,
Melbourne Crown Lands Office.
23 rd January, 1860.”


CHAUNCY.
“Port Milunga, South Australia.
“ Mr. Surveyor Lindsay’s report upon the value of Captain
Milne’s property at the North Arm having been laid before
me for consideration, I beg to submit the following observa-
tions :
“ Seven years since, I valued it at a sum little short of £400,000
(four hundred thousand pounds ;) and from the extension of
commerce since that period, and the consequent increase in
the value of commercial sites, I cannot but think that Mr.
Lindsay’s valuation must be confirmed.
“My own opinion is, that there is abundant scope for the
immediate expenditure, upon reproductive works to the extent
of £500,000 (five hundred thousand pounds).
“ It is difficult to say what might be the additional value
thus created; but I should say, judging from analogy, that
every pound laid out in this way would be worth two on the
completion of the works.
(Signed) W. S. CHAUNCY, C.E.,
Surveyor in H.M.S.
Belvoir, Victoria, February 1, 1860.”
PHILLIPS.
Report on the Milunga Sections, the property of Captain Milne,
and their proximity to the North Arm, or the great natural
Harbor of South Australia.
“ I could not but share in the general impression on a
matter so recurrent in the topics of conversation during my
five years residence in the colony, without having the import-
ance of ‘ Milne’s Sections ’ reiterated on my attention.
“ Being aware of the jealousy and ill-feeling of property
holders in the present shipping-place, their clashing interests,
collusions, and the advocacy of the late Governor, Sir Henry
Young, in favour of the North Arm, as well as the memorials
from different sections of the people, I was drawn into a con-
versancy which induced me to join in the general animadver-
sions upon the ill-judged adoption of the present shipping
place; the only reason for which adoption being its easier and
cheaper access to the main land at the head of the creek, for


smaller number and forces first landing in boats and small
craft, —merely best at a time when a wheelbarrow was actually
lent at half-a-crown per hour.
“ I should have been a very indifferent listener and a blind
observer, had I not soon acquired a definite idea of the supe-
rior value and ultimate importance of the Milunga part of the
river and its Western banks, in connection with the spacious
harbor that is naturally and truly the best in every point of
view. And I feel no hesitation in stating my belief in their
immediate reproductiveness, supposing their capabilities to bo at
once improved by wharfs and their appurtenances. Upon the
many reports in favour of the above-named property, I need
not offer a remark.
“ I have selected Mr. Lindsay’s for my endorsement, as being
not only pertinent and truthful, but the most critical and
amplified.
JOHN PHILLIPS, C.E.,
Trigonometrical Surveyor, fyc., Bfe., Balloarat,
and 50, Collins Street East, Melbourne—lately
of Adelaide.
12 th April, 1860.”
CAREY.
“ Lloyd's Exchange Rooms,
“ Melbourne, February 2nd, 1853,
“My Solicitor, in Adelaide, having examined the title
deeds of certain property belonging to Mr. R. L. Milne, called
‘ Milunga,’ I can clearly state, although minutely scrutinized,
the same were found perfectly satisfactory.
“ The value of the property I consider incalculable.
(Signed) J. B. CAREY,
Auctioneer, Melbourne
THE MAYOR OF MELBOURNE.
“ Town Hall, Melbourne,
“ September 22nd, 1860.
“ I have known Captain Milne for the last twelve years,
“As an honest, zealous, and good citizen, he was deservedly


much esteemed in South Australia, where I had the happiness
of his friendship for some years.
“ Relative to his property at Port Milunga, I trust, not merely
for his own sake, hut for the good of South Australia, his
project will be successful.
RICHARD EADES, J.P., Mayor .”
HAMMOND.
“ Melbourne, September 24th, 1860.
“ My Dear Brother, —This will introduce to you an old
and valued friend of mine, Captain Milne, who is visiting
England for the purpose of establishing a genuine port at
Adelaide, the particulars of which you will find in the Pro-
spectus handed to you.
“ A more safe or lucrative colonial investment is not to be
met with. And, knowing all the gentlemen signing the
Surveys, Reports, and Testimonials to be men of standing, I
have no hesitation in saying, that the statements made are
much within the mark, in fact greatly underrating rather than
exaggerating the value of the property, or the advantages of
the undertaking.
“ Captain Milne will more fully explain his object in person ;
and I trust you will do what you can to forward his views.
He is a gentleman of unimpeachable integrity and veracity;
and, in saying that no benefit, either immediate or prospective,
would induce him to either forfeit his word or make a wilful
misstatement, I merely echo the opinion entertained of him
by a large circle of old friends both in this and the adjacent
colonies.
I am, my dear brother, yours truly,
WILLIAM HAMMOND.
Munden Hammond, Esq,,
27, Lombard Street, London.
Extracts from Official Communications between the Heads of
Departments.
“ Surveyor- General’s Office, Adelaide.
To the Honorable the Colonial Secretary.
“ Sir, —I have the honor agreeable to his Excellency’s
instructions to submit the following observations upon the pro-


position by tlie Government made by the Committee of a
Company for introducing railway communication into the
province.
“ The accommodation for shipping at the present Port, par-
ticularly for those of the larger class of vessels, having been
for a considerable time palpably insufficient, I do not think
that the Government ought to offer encouragement to any
projected railway having the present Port for its terminus.
“ An extension towards the North Arm is absolutely necessary
for the convenience of the yearly increasing number of ships;
especially as the water at the present shipping place is every
year shoaling.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
E. C. FROME,
Captain Royal Engineers , Surveyor-General.
21s£ February, 1849.”
Extracts from Official Communications between the Heads of
Departments.
“ Surveyor- General’s Office, Adelaide.
To the Honorable the Colonial Secretary.
“Sir, —On the subject of the Port Terminus, I can do no
better than allude to the reports of Captain Frome, late
Surveyor-General, dated 19th and 21st February last, in
which a decided opinion is given as to the absolute necessity of
an extension to the North Arm, in which opinion I coincide.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. 11. FREELING,
Captain R.E., Surveyor-General.
3rd December, 1849.”


THE METROPOLITAN HARBOR OF SOUTH
AUSTRALIA.
Government Announcement.
THE FIRST SHIPPING MEMORIAL,
Colonial Secretary's Office, Adelaide.
13 th September, 1849.
His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor has been pleased to
direct the publication of the following Memorial from
Masters and Owners of Vessels at Port Adelaide, relative
to the North Arm.
CHARLES STURT, Colonial Secretary.
“ RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH—
“ That the long, narrow, tortuous passage up to the present
shipping place, occasions greater loss of time, than scores of
miles in the open sea.
“ To pass by such a splendid sheet of water as that of the
North Arm, equally convenient to the Capital, and miles nearer
to the sea, merely to cram the shipping into a narrow, rocky
mud-hole, where taking the ground, they must strain their
timbers, or break their hacks, appears to your Memorialists
perfect madness.
“A place so injurious to large ships, so inconvenient to
small ones, and so frightful to all, from the danger of conflagra-
tion, to which they are exposed, when crowded together
aground, is, your Memorialists respectfully submit, the last that
wise men would select for a Harbor.
“ How useful soever the steam-tug which recently arrived
may occasionally he to large ships, she can neither remedy
these glaring evils, nor aid the smaller and more numerous
class of vessels which are unable to pay for her services.


Hence, while large ships are burdened with the expense of her
maintenance, the lesser ones, including the whole of the Colo-
nial and coasting craft, derive no benefit whatever from her
employment; and are left to contend with all the difficulties of
an almost inaccessible shipping place. The existence of the
North Arm, with its twenty-one feet of water at the lowest
ebb, so accessible, so capacious, and as just remarked, so con-
venient to the Capital —a Harbor greatly superior to the far-
famed Birkenhead of Liverpool —leaves the Government. with-
out any excuse for continuing to entail ruinous expenses on
underwriters and ship owners, by forcing their ships onward for
miles, to lay them on their beam ends, in a narrow shoal creek,
where there is less than two-thirds of that depth, and where
they receive latent and irreparable injuries; to say nothing of
the extent to which life and property are endangered in vessels
thus strained and damaged when they put to sea.
“An inconvenient and dangerous shipping place is always
an expensive one; and the expense though borne at first by the
ship owners and the foreign merchants, must ultimately
through the medium of the invoices fall either on the Govern-
ment finances, or on the pockets of the settlers. Shipping and
Custom-house conveniences at the North Arm, would save
thousands to the Colony annually, and would raise its character
in the esteem of mariners, by freeing them from the thousand
delays and vexations to which they are now subject.
“ The adoption, and still more the continuance, of a policy
so demented as that of expending large sums of money, year
after year, not to raise but to lower the maritime character of
the province in foreign estimation, is and ever will be to
strangers an inexplicable mystery. No expense which the
movement to a better locality may occasion, will cost the
Government half so much as the maintenance of a place
which is hated and execrated by every Master of a vessel
that visits it. To remain at such a place is not to econo-
mise, but to waste and squander the funds of Her Majesty’s
Treasury.
“ A removal to the North Arm, let the expense be what it
may, will be, not a loss, but a gain to the revenue, and to every
interest in the Province.
“ Maritime accomodation is the life of a Colony.”
“ Your Memorialists, therefore,
Pray,
“ That Shipping and Custom-house conveniences be provided
at the North Arm with as little delay as possible; and on the


reserve, which they are given to understand, was originally set
apart by the Government for Custom-house and Dock-yard
purposes.
P. Deslands, master of the barque -
H. Dale, master of the brig - - -
G. Hullin, master of the brig - - -
“ The sooner shipping coming to South
Australia have proper accommodation
the better, as the delay, inconvenience,
and expense are most annoying.
R. F. Davison, master of the barque
G. R. Gourley, master of the barque -
J. Cheeseman, of Port Adelaide, mas-
ter and owner of the Cutler - -
J. J. Byrns, master of the ship - -
R. J. Moodie, master of the ship - -
J. B. Freeman, master of the - - -
C. Tindale, master of the - - - -
W. Williams, master of the -
G. Gilbert, master of the barque - -
B. Prynn, master of the barque - -
T. Allen, master of the
W. Davison, master of the schooner -
M. M‘Lcan, master of the ship - -
C. J. Colbeck, master of the brig - -
J. James, master of the ship - - -
T. Pagen, master and owner of the
barque
W. G. Greaves, master of the barque
T. Carlyle, master and owner of the
barque
E. Edwards, master of the -
J. M. Bance, master of the - - -
J. L. Cooke, master of the barque
J. Scott, master of the barque - -
J. D. Baragwanath, of Sydney, mas-
ter of the brig
H. Bahr, master of the ship - - -
J. Longrigg, master of the brig - -
J. Stewart, master of the barque - -
A. Wilson, master of the ship - -
H. Stewart, master of the barque
Royal Sovereign.
Hero.
Appleton.
Posfhumos.
j Endora, to and from
the Colonies for
eight years.
Mary Ann.
Childe Harold.
Dorothy.
Sir Edward Parry.
Florentia. 10
Sarepta.
Jenny Jones.
Calcutta.
Joseph Albino.
Hawk.
Lady Clarke.
Mary Clarke.
Brankenmoor.
Warlock.
Ellerslie.
Elizabeth.
Alpha.
Cromwell.
Augustus.
Conway Castle.
Wild Irish Girl.
Princess Louisa.
Martha.
Haidee.
Alice.
Hydaspes.


B. Henrich Boy son, master of the
barque Wilhelmine Maria.
J. Reid, master of the barque - - - Duncan.
J. Keene, master of the brigantine - Red Rover.
W. Wilson, master of the ship - - Emily.
T. Pain, master of the ship - - - Eliza.
J. T. English, master of the barque - Indian.
T. Saunders, master of the barque - Margaret Brock.
E. Heldan, master of the schooner - John.
H. Robertson, master of the - - - Margaret.
W. Perry, commander of the ship - Caroline.
Signatures 41.
THE SECOND SHIPPING MEMORIAL
To His Excellency Sir H. E. F. Young,
Governor of South Australia.
THE MEMORIAL
OF THE UNDERSIGNED
COMMANDERS AND OWNERS OF VESSELS.
“ Respectfully showeth —
“ That the place at present called Port Adelaide, has faults
which no expenditure can remedy.
“ The circumstance of ships taking the ground, and going on
their beam ends, with or without cargo, at the ebb of the tide,
is an evil which steam tugs will not remove.
“To say nothing of the latent injuries which ships so
treated must sustain, a conflagration among shipping aground,
and crowded together in a space so narrow, is, as a recent fire
proved, a possible and a fearful contingency, calculated to
make ship-owners tremble.
“ The needless extension of six miles added to the voyage
of every vessel visiting the harbor; the delays invariably
occasioned after passing the locality of the North Arm; the
expense, inconvenience, and risk of completing cargo outside
in the gulf, and the alternative of either losing time or paying
for the services of a steam-tug, are also evils which no im-
provements in the place itself will ever remedy; and which


December 4 th, 1849.
F. M. Lodge, master and owner of
the ship - - - - - - -
R. Matheson, master of the - -
R. Jennings, master and ownerof the
B. Robertson, master of the brig -
J. E. Jones, master of the barque -
W. Barrett, master of the -
Eleanor Lancaster
Ann Smith.
Fairy.
Acaste.
Onyx.
Sophia Margaret.
will be more and more injurious to the shipping and commer-
cial interests of the colony, as its trade increases.
“ The undersigned would, therefore, strongly, hut respect-
fully recommend to his Excellency the making of a road
direct from the capital to the North Arm, a place evidently
destined by nature to be the Metropolitan Harbor.
“ This land-locked sheet of water, in which ships can
always lie afloat, is in a direct line to the anchorage in
the gulf; equally convenient to Adelaide ; will shorten the
voyage of every vessel; save, in most instances, the expense
of a steam-tug; and obviate every evil incident to the present
ill-selected locality.
“Money expended at the North Arm will permanently
benefit the shipping and commerce of the colony. Elsewhere
it is thrown away.
“Your memorialists, therefore, believing their suggestions
to be in unison with the present , the future , and the most
important interest of the colony—its maritime prosperity,
PRAY,
“ That shipping and Custom-house accommodation be pro-
vided at the North Arm, and on the spot adjacent to the
deepest water; which, they are given to understand, the
Government reserved out of the original survey for Custom-
house and Dockyard purposes.”
T. Buckland, commander of the ship Harpley.
F. W. Wcthecombe, master of the Llewellyn.
R. G. Gilmore, master of the barque Santipore.
E. Barber, master and part owner
of the barque Baboo. 10
C. G. Petherbridge, master of the
ship Thomas Lowry.
H. G. Decker, master of the ship - Alfred.
W. Reed, master of the brig - - Acacia.


T. Rapson, master of the barque -
W. Heard, of Port Adelaide, master
and owner of the
T. Ayres, lately master of the Alpha ,
now of the
H. How, of Port Adelaide, master
Union.
Roseanna.
Tamar.
0. G.
of the
R. Kemball, of Port Adelaide, mas-
ter of the
Breeze.
R. Thornhill, commander and owner
of the ship -------
T. English, master and part owner
of the barque
W. Henry, master of the ship - -
G. F. Lindsey, of Port Adelaide,
master and part owner of the brig
T. Midcalf, master of the brig - -
C. P. Cramer, master of the barque
J. W. Hurst, master of the ship -
T. Robertson, formerly pilot in this
Port, now master of the brig
J. Pallet, master of the barque
A. Macfie, of Port Adelaide, owner
Duke of Bedford.
Richardson.
Hooghly.
Palmyra.
Oak.
Steinwaerder.
Samuel Boddington
Augustus.
Jane.
of the
Petrel.
G. W. Woodward, master and part
owner of the barque - - - -
J. K. Harwood, master of the - -
J. Toby, master and owner of the
barque
J. W. Brown, of Port Adelaide,
late master of the
S. H. Nash, of Port Adelaide, late
John Bartlett.
Kingston.
Frederick Hutch.
Hawk.
master of the schooner
Lightning.
Psyche.
T. W. Bowbyes, master of the barque
H. T. Fox, late of the Emma, now
of the
Phantom.
In which vessel I have been
nearly five years, constantly trad-
ing between this port and Sydney.
J. G. Irving, of the schooner - -
and other vessels trading to this
Port for the last eleven years.
G. Savign, of Sydney, master of
colonial brig
Captain Cook.
Sir John Byng.


G-. Gwatkin, late of the brig Scout,
and now master of the - - -
J. Lambert, master of the -
W. Shaw, of Port Adelaide, master
and owner of the
G. French, of Port Adelaide, com-
mander of the ship -
T. Hill, commander of the ship -
J. M'Pherson, commander of the
barque
G. Richardson, commander of the
barque
G. Dowsett, of Port Adelaide, mas-
ter and owner of the cutter - -
W. Smith, five years in the service
of the colony, and now master
of the
J. Buckley, commander of the ship
G. Sutherland, commander and part
owner of the ship -
R. Taggart, master of the schooner
P. Roberts, of Port Adelaide, mas-
ter of the cutter
J. Goss, commander and part owner
of the ship
J. F. Bennet, of Port Adelaide
J. Bannatyne, commander of the
ship -
T, J. Cundell, master of the brig -
J, S. Hunter, of Port Adelaide
S. Hill, master of the schooner
H. Walsh, master of the brig - -
and a regular trader to the colony
for more than eight years.
R. Buck, master and owner of the
and the oldest barge owner in the
colony.
G. Philipson, commander of the ship
W. Duncan, of Port Adelaide, mas-
ter of the schooner - - - -
S. Phillips, of Port Adelaide
for the last ten years.
W. Osborn, master of the brig
J. Wyng, master of the brig
Waterlily.
Cecilia.
Joseph Lee Arche >
Symmetry.
John Woodall.
Derwent.
Trafalgar.
Midge.
Jane and Emma.
William Money.
Wuzeer.
Young Hehe,
Thompson.
Candahar.
Ship owner.
Glenely.
Scout.
Ship owner.
Timho.
Dorset.
Phehc.
Padcliffe.
Venus.
Shipping Agent.
Emma.
Lady Mary Pelham.


T. C. Foyle, of Port Adelaide,
master of the schooner - - - Lady Flora.
0. W. M‘Kierlie, Hon. Comp.’s
service, commanding E. I. ship - Marion.
D. Williams, commander and part
owner of the ship ----- Alice Maud.
F. Scott, master of the barque - - Royal Archer.
H. Behn, commander*of the ship - Oodeffeory.
T. Finnis, owner of the - - - - Joseph Albino
and one 'of the longest residents
in the colony.
W. H. Croft, of Port Adelaide, late
master of the brig -
M. Probert, commander of the Bre-
Arpentuer.
men ship
On her third voyage to the colony
under my command.
George Washington.
J. Byron, master of the barque - Cecilia
J. Skey, master of the schooner - Souvenir.
Five years trading to the colony.
Signatures 73.
And, adding the strong testimonies of the following,
75.
The commanders of the Westminster and the Sihella, refused
to place tdeir names on any paper in which the Company’s mud-
hole is named, so strong was their indignation at the very
mention of it. But they desired it to be recorded, that if a
Avharf were erected at "the North Arm before their return,
they would lay their ships alongside, and their discharge, in spite
of either agents or consignees; and they further desired that
their determination should be announced to the Governor and
made public.
The Westminster did not return, but the Silella did; and, true
to his resolve, Coleman, cast anchor in the North Arm ; and
there discharged his cargo sooner than again risk his ship in
what he called a mud-hole, but others more appropriately a
ship trap.
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE.


T. S. Bowden, master of the barque
Lady Denison.
W. H. Sleehoorn, captain of the
ship - -
Australia.
it. Box by, master and owner of the
ship
Louisa Baillie.
W. H, Eldred, master and owner
of the ship
Casper.
THE THIRD SHIPPING- MEMORIAL.
To His Excellency Sir H. E. F. Young,
Governor of South Australia,
THE MEMORIAL
OF THE UNDERSIGNED
COMMANDERS AND OWNERS OF SHIPS
“ Respectfully showeth —
“ That your memorialists, entirely agreeing with the senti-
ments expressed in the memorial lately presented to your
Excellency by commanders and owners of ships, and published
by your Excellency’s command in the Government Gazette ,
earnestly
PRAY
WITH THEM,
“ That accommodation be immediately provided for ships
trading to and from the colony at the North Arm, to free them
from the intolerable expense, inconvenience, and dangers to
which they are needlessly exposed, by being obliged to work
up a long, narrow tortuous creek, and then be huddled
together in shoal water, to incur the risk of broken ribs,
broken backs, and conflagration.”
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE.


It is considered superfluous to reproduce succeeding
Memorials, but suffice it to say, they are very numerous and of
similar or more imperative tenor bearing, as lias been stated,
the signatures of many thousands of all classes of society in the
Colony.
Extracts from evidence taken before the Select Committee of the
Legislative Council.
CAPTAIN LIPSON, R.N., Harbour Master,
Called in and examined.
636. “ How long have you resided at Port Adelaide ? ”
“ About 13 years.”
639. “ How many vessels of 500 tons could you safely moor in
the present shipping place, keeping them always
afloat ? ”
“No ship of that tonnage could lie afloat at low water
this side of the North Arm.”
640. “ How many could you safely moor without their being
afloat ? ”
“ The depth of water in the present shipping place is not
sufficient to moor a vessel in the stream, without
impeding the navigation, the channel being so
narrow.”
651. “ Would Steamers find the present shipping place suffi-
cient for plying and turning ? ”
“ There is very little room for turning. It must be done
by ropes, not by engines. Occasionally we are
obliged to turn the Steam-tug by ropes.”
Mr. HUGH QUIN, Chief Pilot, and Deputy Harbor
Master, (now Harbor Master),
Called in and examined.
728. “ You are Deputy Harbour Master ? ”
“ I have been acting as such.”


735. “ How many years have you been in the Pilot service of
this Province ? ”
“ Twelve years.”
738. “ How many vessels could find anchorage at the North
Arm?”
“ One hundred sail could find anchorage.”
* WILLIAM ELDER, Esq., Merchant, Adelaide,
Called in and examined.
“You have had considerable experience of the capabilities
of Port Adelaide, as the commander of a Ship ? ”
“Yes.”
“ Are you acquainted with the various parts of it ? ”
“ Yes.”
“ What part do you consider the best adapted for a Port,
or place of shipment ? ”
“ The North Arm.”
“ Considering the increasing trade of the Colony, do you
think that there will be sufficient accommodation at
the present place of shipment ? ”
‘ I do not think there will be sufficient safe accommodation.”
“ Have you any interest in anv part of the creek of Port
Adelaide?”
“ None whatever.”
“ Have you any property at the Port—the present ship-
ping place, or at the North Arm—the Metropolitan
Harbor?”
“ None whatever.”
“ What may be the effect upon property now vested at the
present shipping place, should a branch of the rail-
way, as contemplated, be carried to the North Arm ? ”
“I should think it would decrease in value very much.”
“ Are you well acquainted with the capabilities of the
stream, for the accommodation of shipping from the
* This Gentleman belonged to the first Mercantile Firm in the Colony ,
Lloyds Agent, and a thorough Mariner.


present shipping place to the North Arm inclusive ;
and what, in your opinion, are the relative advantages
of the present shipping places, Hindmarsh reach and
the North Ann ? ”
“I am well acquainted with the waters between the
present shipping place and the North Arm ; and the
advantages to be obtained from a Harbor at the
North Arm would be, that ships would lie afloat ; that
vessels coming from sea at the top of high water,
could get up to the North Arm in one tide, and that
the Mail could be forwarded direct to Adelaide,
instead of having to be pulled for miles in a boat,
which sometimes occasions great delay. It would
consequently arrive in Adelaide before it could other-
wise reach the present shipping-place.
“Is the channel entrance into the North Arm good and
deep, and sufficiently broad to be safe at all times ?”
“ Yes .”
“Is it the opinion of the Colonists generally, so far as
you know, that immediate accommodation for ship-
ping should be extended to the North Arm?”
“It is the opinion of the Maritime portion of the Colonists
that immediate accommodation for shipping should
he extended to the North Arm, and that the railway
should he carried there in a direct line.”
“ Then you, and others, think that the trade of the Pro-
vince would be materially benefited by a direct
extension from the Capital to the North Arm, and
not by any branch railway ?”
“ Decidedly.”
“ How many vessels could find anchorage room at the
North Arm ?”
“ I could not say the exact number; but a fleet of ships
of perhaps 100 sail. There is no end to accommoda-
tion at the North Arm”
“ Would they lie snug in high winds, or would a gale
from any quarter affect them ?”
“ They would lie quite snug. No gale could affect them.”
“Is the anchorage at the North Arm good holding
ground ?”
“ Very good.”


“ How many ships do you think the present Port could
accommodate with the aid of Steam dredges ?”
“ I hardly think it possible to make the present Port safe
even by Steam dredging.”
“ Did you read a statement published lately in the
Government Gazette (see the first Shipping Memorial)
respecting the disadvantages of the present shipping
place; do you think that statement correct or other-
wise ?”
“/ read the statement, and believe it to he correct.”
“ Are you the owner of any trading vessels ?”
“ The firm to which I belong are owners of trading-
vessels.”
“ Arc trading vessels ever consigned to you ?”
“ Yes.”
“ If the Harbor and approaches by sea and land were in
their natural state, and measures available to make
the land approaches good, where would you select
the shipping place, having regard to the ends of
commerce as well as the convenience of shipping ?”
“At the North Arm; there is no finer place in the world
for a Port.”
“Would an expenditure of a certain amount of capital,
say £lOO,OOO, judiciously and scientifically con-
ducted, be more beneficial to the public in the im-
provement of the Harbor, Wharfage, and Ware-
houses at the North Arm, or at the present shipping
place ?”
“ In my opinion £50,000 spent at the North Arm would
be more beneficial than £150,000 spent at the present
shipping place; because they can never deepen the
present shipping place sufficiently for vessels to lie
afloat; without which, there is danger in case of fire,
as the whole of the ships in the Harbor may be con-
sumed.”
“You said just now it would not be possible to make the
present Harbor safe. Will you state what are its
dangers.
“ I mean safety from ships lying aground, and, as men-
tioned just now, from fire; for whenever a ship lies
on the ground, it is unsafe, whatever may be the
nature of the ground.”


“ What reason have you for saying that a line direct
from the North Arm to the City of Adelaide would
he the most advantageous ?”
“Because you will have quicker communication in a
direct line between two given points.”
“ Bo you think it prudent for the Railway Company to
make the branch to the present shipping place, before
they undertake the extension to the North Arm ?”
“I do not think so. In my opinion, if the extension to
the North Arm were made at once, there would be
little use of a railway to the present shipping place,
as I believe all the trade would be carrried to the North
Arm”
“ Bo you think the present shipping place can be deep-
ened sufficiently to keep vessels at all times afloat, at
low water ?”
“ I do not.”
“ Will you give your reasons why this cannot be done ?”
“ The very great expense would be against it; and from
the hardness of the ground, I do not think it possible.”
“ Were not the proprietors of the North Arm property
required to give up their rights of selection which
they had acquired by virtue of preliminary land
orders, in order that the public might be allowed to
compete for land, which was theirs by right; and do
you consider, that in refusing to give up their private
property for the public good, without compensation,
they were doing anything unreasonable ?”
“ I have been called upon to state the relative advantages
of the present Port, and the North Arm. Ido not
know the circumstances referred to sufficiently to give
an opinion.”
“Is it not reasonable to suppose that individuals would
look after their own interests, before studying the
interests of the community at large ?”
“ I should think so. It would be a species of transcenden-
talism were it otherwise.”
MINUTES OF EYIBENCE.


ADDENDA.
HARBOR ACCOMMODATION,
POET ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Extracts from the South Australian Register, 22 ml October,
1864.
“ The statement made by the treasurer in the House of
Assembly, relative to the large increase of shipping at Port
Adelaide, raises the question, whether the occasional voting of
one or two thousand pounds for deepening the harbour, is all
that the legislature ought to do in the important work of pro-
viding accommodation at the chief port of the Colony.
“ This state of things will soon have to be remedied if the
shipping trade is increasing to the extent mentioned by the
treasurer. It will not be sufficient to clear the channel every
year of a little silt, which only leaves room for a larger quan-
tity to accumulate ; and it will be useless to increase the wharf
accommodation, if there is not water enough alongside to
receive the large ships which are now visiting the Port. A
correspondent who recently wrote on this subject, pointed out
that four or five vessels were waiting for water to get to the
wharves, whilst several others, which were already there, were
stuck in the mud. This is really a matter which deserves
serious attention, for we need not say that nothing would be
so certain to check the increased trade which is now growing
up, as a series of delays and disasters to the improved class of
ships which are at present coming to the port. South Aus-
tralia cannot afford to be the only one of the Colonies which


is without a spacious harbor, and without means of accommo-
dating the shipping traffic which properly belongs to her.
“ It is certain that a country which must have a large export
trade, cannot remain without a good harbor —a harbor capable
of accommodating the largest ships, which increasing traffic
may bring to our shores. At present, this is far from being
the case. Nearly every day there are complaints as to the defi-
ciencies of the present port; and if those complaints get abroad,
as they are certain to do, we may soon expect to find a falling
off in the number of those ‘ first-class vessels ’ which have
been lately trying the experiment of unloading and loading in
the stream at Port Adelaide. To show how inadequate is the
accommodation at present, a correspondent recently remarked,
‘ There are instances where vessels have paid £SOO for
damages sustained by lying aground at the port, and there is
seldom a vessel of over 13 feet 6 inches draught of ivater, that is
not subject to some detention before mooring at the wharf.'
Statements like these are conclusive as to the necessity for
increased room and extended conveniences.”
Extract from a Memorial Signed at a Public Meeting, held at
the Local Court House, Port Adelaide, on Tuesday, 22nd
November, 1864,
Mr. GEORGE YOUNG, in the Chair.
“To the Honorable the Speaker of the House of
Assembly, and the Honorable the Members of the House
in Parliament assembled.
“ The humble Petition of the Inhabitants of Port
Adelaide and the adjoining Townships.
“SHEWETH—
“ That the Port of Adelaide is the only port by which the
City of Adelaide and the Colony receives supplies, not only
for British manufactured goods, but of raw material from all
parts of the world, and at which great part of the exports are
shipped, in most instances as back freights; which, as securing
a certainty to the shipowner, enables him to bring goods at a
lower rate.”
“ That, in its present condition, ships drawing more than


twelve feet of water lie aground, both at the wharves and in
the stream, by which they are subjected to great delay and consi-
derable damage.”
“ That the effects of such want, not merely of accommoda-
tion, but of safety, is to check the increasing trade of the
Colony, and to raise very considerably the price of necessaries
to the whole province, by obliging shipowners either to
decline sending their vessels here at all, or to require a high
freight to meet the delay and damage to which their ships are
subject.”
“ And your Petitioners, &c.”
Extracts from the South Australian Advertiser, 1 6tk May ,
1865.
“ Shortly after 7 o’clock we received from our Port reporter
a telegram announcing that the gale, acting upon the swollen
waters of the full spring tide, had burst the embankment, and
that the streets of the Port were, in places, four feet deep in
water ! The utmost consternation prevailed. People were
rushing about in all directions, anxious to save their property,
their lives, and the lives of their families. The mail ceased
to be thought of; boats were plying about the streets in all
directions, whilst the cries and screams of women and children
in places most exposed, were sad to listen to. The service of
boats, upon what was dry land, alone saved many lives. The
boatmen were incessant in their endeavours, and we trust their
praiseworthy efforts will not be passed by unforgotten. The
situation was most critical. Some of the imprisoned inmates
of insulated houses were literally within a few inches of death.
It was impossible to get at them except by breaking in the
roofs of their houses, and they were found sitting upon boxes
placed on the top of tables. Happily, no life is lost, that is,
not by the inundation; but the loss of property will be very
great. The custom house and the court house were thrown
open for the relief of sufferers who thankfully availed them-
selves of the temporary refuge. Provisions were served out to
satisfy the wants of nature, and many poor creatures, thus
rescued from the fear of death, felt grateful to their bene-
factors. On arriving at the Port by the first train in the
morning, it was at once evident that the inundation of the
previous night had been very disastrous. Nearly the whole of


the land to the west of the railway was covered with water,
and as we came opposite the streets, boats were seen visiting
various houses, and taking off such articles and furniture as
were valuable. A, closer inspection showed what considerable
damage had been done.”
The South Australian Register, on 1 6th May, says —
“ The further injuries caused by this gale—injuries to pro-
perty as well as distress to many of the inhabitants of Port
Adelaide—will have to be considered by the Parliament.
Private assistance may do much towards relieving the distress;
but the inundations which have just occurred, show that both
the general and the local Governments have been overlooking
the presence of a great danger. A large number of the inha-
bitants of Port Adelaide live in constant danger of being
drowned A
“ After the accident which has now happened, it would be
folly to expect people to settle down again without some
protection from future danger. But even if the residents were
indifferent to the risk—and we do hear of people who build
their houses on the edge of volcanoes —it would still be the
duty of Government to guard against loss of life and property.
They know now what Port Adelaide is liable to when a gale
of wind blows ; they see how narrowly many of the inha-
bitants have escaped with their lives, and they must feel that,
whatever the residents themselves may do, it is a responsibility
which attaches to the whole Colony to provide against a
future, and perhaps a worse accident.”
In a leading article, the same paper, on 22nd May, says —
“ But what other marine township does the sea overflow ?”
“ Where else is the land level so low ?”
“ When do we hear of the streets of other ports being laid
from three to six feet under salt water ?”
Extract from the South Australian Register, 2 6th
February, 1867.
“Mr. Duncan’s Quarterly Immigration Report, complains
of the serious detention which the Prince of Wales incurred


through not being able to get into the port from the 17th
October until the Bth of November, as she drew too much
water. In fact, Dr. Duncan advises, that for the future no
ship should be selected that would draw more than 17 feet.
This is certainly a timely comment on the shortcomings of
Port Adelaide, as the chief shipping place in the Colony of
South Australia.”
“The Chamber of Commerce have appointed a deputation
to wait upon the Government, and urge the necessity of
improving the means of ingress to, and egress from, Port
Adelaide.”
“ At the Quarterly Meeting of the Chamber of Commerce,
Mr. Charnock would have liked the Committee to have said a
little more in reference to what progress was being made as to
Port Adelaide.”
“ The Orient was detained for three weeks, at a cost of over
£5OO. Irrespective of that, there had been many ships which
had suffered during the past few years. The Reindeer, which
was here last March, when only drawing 20 feet, took the
ground and lay in a dangerous position for a fortnight. The
cost for general average was over £5OO, and the ship had to
be recoppered at great expense. A similar result occurred to
the Murray, when she lost her false keel, and involved a cost
of over £7OO for repairs.”
“ Mr. J. Acrraman, in supporting the motion, said he could
endorse what Mr. Charnock had said; only that week they
had found that the Glenaros, only 670 tons register, had been
detained a week on account of the leant of water.”
“ They were also in the deplorable condition of their not
being a single berth by any of the wharves, where a small
vessel, like even the Canterbury, could lie at, on account of
the impossibility of obtaining depth of water.”
The foregoing will give the reader some idea of the dangers,
of both life and property, to which residents at the present
shipping place for the Capital of South Australia, are sub-
jected; and the following Extracts principally from the
Government Gazette and the South Australian Register, are a
few of the many heavy lossses winch have been sustained by
shipowners. But there are numerous instances of a more
serious character in a pecuniary point of view 7, of daily occur-
rence, wliich are not chronicled; namely, the constant deten-


tions to which vessels are exposed, entailing losses against
which the shipowner can have no compensation from the
underwriter.
“ The ship Indian , under my command, takes the ground
here even when discharged. This, to say nothing of the delay,
expense, and other annoyance, in working up to this inconve-
nient port, will oblige her to be docked in India, prior to
receiving cargo, the cost of which, to parties concerned, will
not he less than £5OO. All this, and much more, I should
have escaped at the North Arm.”
“J. T. ENGLISH.”
“ The Psyche , prior to her sailing for England was on her
beam ends full of copper ore, at the Company’s Port; and
after putting to sea she was found so leaky as to be obliged to
return to the North Arm, where she lay about two months for
repairs.”
“ The Duncan going on her beam ends fully laden, was
thrown almost on her broadside.”
“ The Ilydaspes, when alongside the M'Clarcn Wharf, took
the ground, broke a chain placed around her to keep her
upright, and heeled over.”
“ The brig Martha took the ground in working up the creek
and could not be got off, even by the steam tug, until lightened
of her cargo.”
“ The Enmore, taking the ground, put to sea, returned
leaky, and discharged her cargo, in order to be repaired.”
“ The Joshua Carrol , over-riding her anchor, dimpling her
bottom, and leaking, was obliged to be docked on reaching
London.”
“ The Hero, taking the ground twice, damaged part of her
cargo.”
“ The Success , taking the ground was forced outside to com-
plete her cargo, drove on shore, returned for repairs, and her
captain was obliged to advertise for £2,500 on a bottomry
bond to liquidate the damages.”
“ The Orient met with a sad accident at Port Adelaide.
When placed in the stream to make her ready for the tug to
take her out to the light-ship. She grounded at low water,


and went on her beam ends. Sixty tons of copper had to be
taken out, and eight extra seamen put on board to keep the
pumps going. The loss sustained was about £4OO.
The list of disasters might be easily extended by farther
enumerations, such as—
u The Lady Wellington , breaking her back and becoming a
total wreck ; the whole of the ships narrowly escaping confla-
gration during a recent fire; and many of the captains and
owners declaring that they would never return to it again.”
The rapid progress of South Australia , compared with that of
her elder and more favoured Sister, New South Wales,
New South Wales in 1855, then about 70 years
old. Population 350,000. Exports, without gold £1,585,794
South Australia in 1856, then only 18 years old.
Population under 100,000. Exports, without gold 1,646,827
In 1863, when only 25 years old. f Exports 2,738,276
Population 140,416 (_ Imports 2,062,444
Exports and Imports in 1863 4,800,720
In 1864 5,718,476
Securities in an old country when moneys are in-
vested in them are at their maximum Securi-
ties in South Australia—a young country—are
at their minimum, aud are continually increas-
ing in value.
She has now 60,000 horses, 250,000 horned cattle,
and 6,000,000 sheep. Her pigs and poultry are
countless. She produced last year 4,691,918
bushels of wheat, and 606,565 gallons of wine.
Her revenue this year—without any pressure of
taxation —is expected to reach 700,000
The population of Britain is about 30,000,000, and
her revenue about 70,000,000
The revenue of South Australia, with a like popu-
lation, would amount to 150,000,000
Britain exports —for the most part merely imports,
the products of foreign countries in transit—to
the amount of only £7 2s. per head of her
population.
South Australia exports —all her own indigenous
productions —to upwards of £2l per head of her
population.


The Exports of Britain, with a population of
30,000,000, amount to 213,000,000
The Exports of South Australia, with a like popu-
lation, would amount to upwards of - - - - 600,000,000
The trade of Britain —Exports and Imports—
amounts to 487,000,000
With a like population, the trade of South Aus-
tralia —Exports and Imports—would amount to 1,260,000,000-
Since the above was put into type, news by the
present —the December mail of 1865 —announces
that her population is now 155,000; and that
she is able to lend her sister colony of Vic-
toria—the famous gold producing colony—a
quarter of a million of money, now lodged in
the Banks of W elbourne for her benefit - - - 250,000
Talk of Securities! Where are there any to be
found in the British Isles, in Europe, in Asia, or
in America, to equal those of such a Colony for
safety, or to make any approach to them in
Returns.
-1






