

1889.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
REPORT ON EXPERIMENTS
DEMONSTRATING THE EFFICACY OF
PASTEUR’S VACCINE OF ANTHRAX,
AS A PREVENTIVE AGAINST
ANTHRAX (CUMBERLAND) DISEASE IN SHEEP AND CATTLE.
CARRIED OUT BY THE REPRESENTATIVES OF M. PASTEUR PARIS, UNDER
SUPERVISION OF THE MEMBERS OF THE ANTHRAX BOARD, AT
JUNEE, DURING SEPTEMBER AND OCTOBER, 1888.
SYDNEY: CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER,
11c 66—86 1889.
[48.]




1889.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
REPORT ON EXPERIMENTS
DEMONSTRATING THE EFFICACY OF
PASTEUR’S VACCINE OF ANTHRAX,
AS A PREVENTIVE AGAINST
ANTHRAX (CUMBERLAND) DISEASE IN SHEEP AND CATTLE.
CARRIED OUT BY THE REPRESENTATIVES OF M. PASTEUR PARIS, UNDER
SUPERVISION OF THE MEMBERS OF THE ANTHRAX BOARD, AT
JUNES, DURING SEPTEMBER AND OCTOBER, 1888.
SYDNEY : CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
11*66-88 1889.
[4*.]


LOUIS PASTEUR.
(From a photograph in the possession of W. M. Hamlet.)


INDEX.
PAGE.
Appointment of Board 1
Tleport on Experiments at Junee 2
Opinion of the Board on ... 3
Kecord Notes on 4
Government Veterinarian’s Paper on Anthrax 8
Government Analyst’s Paper on Bacilli ... 20
Discussion on these Papers ... 20
Notes on Anthrax by A. A. Devlin and Dr. Germont 23
APPOINTMENT OF BOARID.
Department of Mines, Stock Branch,
Sydney, 14th August, 1888.
His Excellency the Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council, has
Been pleased to approve of the appointment of the undermentioned gentle-
men as a Board to watch and report upon the experiments to be made by
the Eepresentativcs of M. Pasteur, Paris (France), in demonstrating the
■efficacy of Pasteur’s “Yaecino of Paris” as a preventive for Anthrax
■(Cumberland Diseases) in Sheep and Cattle, viz.: —
John de V. Lamb, Esquire, Chairman, Board_of Sheep Directors, Sydney;
Arthur A. Devlin, Esquire, Chairman, Board of Sheep Directors,
Narrandera;
William M. Hamlet, F.1.C., F.C.S., Esquire, Government Analyst;
Alexander Bruce, Esquire, Chief Inspector of Stock ; and
Edward Stanley, Esquire, F.E.C.V.S., Government Veterinarian.
FRANCIS ABIGAIL.


Report on experiments at Junee during September and
October, 1888, carried out by tbe representatives of
M. Pasteur, Paris, under supervision of tbe members of
tbe Anthrax Board, to demonstrate tbe efficacy of
Pasteur’s “Vaccine of Anthrax” as a preventive against
Anthrax (Cumberland) Disease in sheep and cattle.
The Honorable Francis Abigail, M.P., &c., &c., Sydney,—
Sir,
We have the honor to submit our report upon the experiments recently
carried out at Junee by Dr. Germont and M. Loir, the representatives of
M. Pasteur, for the purpose of demonstrating the efficacy of his vaccine for
anthrax, i.e., Cumberland disease.
During the early part of August last, Mr. T. W. Hammond, of Junee, was
asked if he would allow the experiments to be carried out on his run, when
that gentleman at once placed some 30 acres of land adjoining the railway
line, about a mile from Junee Junction, at the disposal of the Board. The
site was inspected and found in every way suitable, and the necessary fencing
and buildings were erected under Mr. A. A. Devlin’s supervision.
First Vaccination.
Dr. Germont submitted a programme of the proposed demonstration (similar
to that by M. Pasteur at Pouilly-le-Fort in 1881), which was approved by the
Board, who proceeded to Junee on the 3rd September to witness the first
vaccination. In order to ensure that none of the stock were infected with
the disease, thirty-nine ■ sheep and six head of cattle had previously been
purchased at Cootamundra, an uninfected district, and of these twenty sheep
and four cattle were vaccinated by Dr. Germont, assisted by M. Loir, on
the 4th September, under the supervision of the Board.
The sheep were vaccinated on the inner side of the off thigh by the
hypodermic injection of one-eighth part of a cubic centimetre (about two
minims) of attenuated virus of anthrax—“ First Yaccine of Pasteur.” The
cattle were similarly injected behind the shoulder, each receiving one-fourth part
of a cubic centimetre, i.e., four minims of vaccine. The temperature of each
animal treated was taken immediately afterwards, and will be found recorded
on page 5, the mean normal temperature being—sheep, 103£ deg. ; cattle,
102| deg. It was also taken on the sth, when a general rise of the tem-
perature of the sheep was discerned, and in the case of one of the sheep
had risen to 106-3 deg. On the following day the temperature had in most
cases slightly fallen. This was also the case in regard to the sheep whose tem-
perature had .reached over 106 deg. Another had gone up to 106 deg., but
was on the following day found to have gone down to 102-3 deg. The sheep
between this and the second vaccination continued to be closely watched, but
exhibited no symptoms of being affected by the operation.
A


Second Vaccination.
The members of the Board (with the exception of Mr. Lamb, who was
unavoidably absent) attended at Junee on the 18th September to watch the
second vaccination, when Dr. Germont and M. Loir revaccinated the twenty
sheep and four cattle, this time with the same quantity of Pasteur’s Second
Vaccine of anthrax. The temperature of the animals was taken immediately
afterwards, when it was found that it corresponded with that of the previous
vaccination. On the following day a considerable rise of temperature was
noticeable in those sheep which had shown no rise after the first vaccination,
some of them going as high as 107 deg. On the following day there was a fall
in nearly all the sheep except one, which registered 105 - 2 deg. (See page 5.)
The vaccinated and unvaccinated animals were allowed to run together, but
no ill-effects were noticed.
On the 18th September Dr. Germont also inoculated two sheep, in the
presence of the Board, with a cultivation of the virulent virus of anthrax
(Cumberland disease). This virus had been originally procured by the Govern-
ment Veterinarian (Mr. Stanley) in May last from Mr. A. A Devlin’s sheep
at Uarah, and was handed by him to the Government Analyst (Mr. Hamlet),
on the 13th September, for this inoculation, the object being to test its efficacy,
and, if still effective, to obtain a supply of fresh virulent virus for the demon-
stration. As showing that the virus had lost none of its vitality, the two
inoculated sheep died at 8 p.m. on the following day, being thirty-two hours
after inoculation. Careful post-mortem examination of these sheep by Mr.
Stanley and Mr. Devlin, in the presence of Mr. Hamlet and Dr. Germont,
showed unmistakable indication of the disease anthrax, and the microscope
revealed its characteristic bacilli. Blood was taken by Mr. Hamlet from one
of these sheep for the purpose of preparing a cultivation for the final test, and
the cultivation was carried out in the Government laboratory, Sydney, under
his supervision, by M. Loir.
Inoculation of Sheep ivith Virulent Virus for Demonstration.
The cultivation prepared under Mr. Hamlet’s supervision was taken on the
29th September to Junee Junction, and on the 30th three sheep were inoculated
with different quantities of this cultivation by Dr. Germont, in the presence of
Mr. Devlin and Mr. Bruce, with the view to have the deaths occurring at
different times for the purpose of the demonstration. Of these, the first sheep
died at 6 a.m. on the 2nd October, thirty-four hours after the inoculation ;
the second at 3 - 30 p.m. of the same day, forty-three and a half hours after
inoculation; and the third sheep at 9 a.m. of the 3rd, fifty-nine hours after
inoculation.
Final Experiments and Demonstration.
All the members of the Board attended at Junee on Tuesday, the 2nd instant,
together with visitors and, by invitation, Dr. Thompson, of the Board of Health,
the Chief Inspectors of Stock for Victoria, Queensland, and Tasmania, and the
Government Veterinarians for Victoria and Tasmania. There were also pre-
sent a considerable number of delegates from the Pasture and Stock Protection
Boards, and a good many Inspectors of Stock and visitors from different parts
of the Colony, in all about 200 people. At 3 - 30 p.m. one of the sheep
inoculated on the 30th September died, as anticipated. After post-mortem
examination, inspection of the blood under the microscope, and the Board
2


being satisfied as to the cause of death, Dr. Germont and M. Loir com-
menced at 4-45 p.m. the inoculation of the thirty-nine sheep with the blood
of this sheep, doing the vaccinated and unvaccinated sheep alternately,
using the same syringe and the same quantity of blood for each, viz., the
one eighth part of a cubic centimetre, equal to two minims. The six head
of cattle were also inoculated with blood from the same sheep, and with
the same syringe, receiving one-fourth part of a cubic centimetre. The
whole of the sheep, both vaccinated and unvaccinated, were then placed in the
same enclosure, fed upon the same food, and drinking from the same trough.
Green food was scattered about the floor upon which the unvaccinated sheep
were dying, and sanious discharges contaminated the food. The vaccinated
sheep, in addition to the inoculation, also had to undergo the risk of contracting
the disease by taking up the blood or other excreta from the unvaccinated
sheep which died in the same pen, where they were confined and fed for four
days after the inoculation took place.
The first of the nineteen unvaccinated sheep succumbed to the disease at
BTS p.m. on 3rd October, being about twenty-seven hours after inoculation,
and the last of that number died at 5 - 30 a.m. on Friday, sth October, sixty
hours fifteen minutes after inoculation. Of the two unvaccinated cattle (Nos.
88 and 33) the former died at 10-30 p.m. on Saturday, 6th October, while
the latter, though having been very ill, is likely to recover. All the protected
sheep and cattle continued unaffected, and are in remarkably good health.
Mr. Stanley made a post-mortem examination of each sheep that died, and
found the leisons of anthrax very decidedly indicated in every instance. The
diagnostic changes were the black semi-fluid blood, the enlarged, softened,
blackened spleen, and the dark bloody colour of the urine. These conditions
were well marked in each case. During the examination the changes produced
by the disease, such as the bloodstains, patches of inflammation in various organs
and parts of the body, the gelatinous bloody effusion at the point of inoculation,
and other points of interest, were explained to the visitors. A healthy sheep
was killed for the purpose of comparison of the organs with those of a diseased
sheep; the blood of the same was examined and exhibited.
In order to remove any possibility of doubt as to the cause of death, the
Board requested Mr. Hamlet (Government Analyst) to examine the blood of
the sheep as the post-mortem examinations were made, and in every case the
blood, when submitted to that test under the microscope, contained the bacilus
anthracis.
At the request of one of the visitors present (Mr. R. G. Higgins), a sheep
which had been protected by vaccination and afterwards inoculated on 12th
September was killed, but did not show any trace whatever of the disease,
neither was there any effect upon the wool. This was eighteen days after
inoculation. Some, additional experiments are being made by the Board to
ascertain, if possible, why travelling sheep are more subject to the disease, and
if there is any difference in the post-mortem appearances of inoculated and
naturally-infected sheep; but as sufficient time has not yet elapsed it is pre-
mature to offer an opinion thereon. The results will form the subject of an
additional report.
Opinion of the Board.
After carefully watching the whole series of experiments and giving the
subject the fullest consideration, the Board are unanimously of opinion that
Dr. Germont and M. Loir have conclusively demonstrated the efficacy of M.
Pasteur’s “ Vaccine of Anthrax ” as a preventive against that disease, and
3


Eecoud Notes of Animals vaccinated with 1st Yaccine at Junee, while
under observation, on 4th, 5th, and Gth September, 1888.
Sheep.
Ear Taj
Kumbers,
Sex.
Age.
Temperature.
Seat of
Vaccination.
4th Sept.
5th Sept.
6th Sept.
225
Wethers...
2-toolh ...
1C3-2
1040
103-0
-N
227
6
103-8
104-0
103-0
228
6
103-4
104 6
106-0
229
4
104-2
104-8
104-8
230
4
1034
104-4
1040
231
4
103-2
103-4
102-4
232
4
104-0
103 8
103-6
233
4
1036
106-2
1040
On the inner sur-
234
ft
4
ti
103-8
104-6
104-2
faceof the right
236
J) •••
6
fi
1Q3-2
104-8
104-6
thigh.
237
if •••
6
it
1030
103-2
1034
Note. —The part
238
8
1030
103-4
104-6
was first washed
239
6
103-0
1030
102-8
with carbolic
240
6
103-0
1040
104-0
water.
241
4
104-2
104-4 .
1040
212
6
1036
103-2
104-6
243
4
103-6
103-8
104-4
244
G
104 0
1046
103-4
246
6
103-6
103-0
104-6
247
ti •••
6
if •••
104-0
104 2
103-0
J
Mean...
103-54
104-07
103-92
Fire-branJ
Cattle.
right horn.
41
Cow
A
ged
1020
101-8
1020
55 .
4
years ...
1022
101 4
102-0
22
if
3
104-8
102 0
101-8
77
if
3
tt •••
1020
101-8
101-8
Mean...
102-75
101-75
101-9
therefore recommend its adoption and use. In conclusion, the Board desires to
express its appreciation of the untiring efforts of Dr. Germont and M. Loir,
by whom the late demonstration was made most interesting and instructive
to the large number of gentlemen attending. The Board also wish to express
its appreciation of the able and efficient manner in which the duties of
secretary have been discharged by Mr. E. 0. Weller.
J. de Y. LAMB, Chairman.
WILLLIAM M. HAMLET, F.1.C., E.C.S.
ALEX. BRUCE.
EDWARD STANLEY, F.R.C.Y.S.
ARTHUR A. DEVLIN.
Dated at Sydney, this 12th day of October, 1888.
4


Recoed Notes of Animals vaccinated
with 2nd
Vaccine, at Junee, while
under observation, on
18th, 19tb, and 20tb September, 1888.
Sheep.
Temperature.
Seat of
Ear Tag
Sex.
Age.
Numbers.
18th Sept.
19th Sept
20th Sept.
Vaccination
225
Wethers...
2-tooth ...
1030
105-8
1030
'I
227
6 „ ...
103-4
105-0
1030
228
6 „ ...
1040
103 2
103 0
229
4 „ ...
104-8
1070*
104 8
230
4 „ ...
101-0
106-0+
1010
231
4 „ ...
103 6
1050
102-8
232
4 „ ...
103-4
1050
103-8
233
4 „
104-0
1040
102-8
231
236
tl •••
1) •••
4 „ ...
6 „ ...
103-6
1030
101-0
1040
103-6
102-4
The inner. 8ur-
237
6 „ ...
103-0
1032
102 8
thigh.
238
8 „ ...
102-6
103-0
102 8
239
6 „ ...
103-1
104-0
1014
240
6
103-6
104 0
102-8
241
4 „ ...
103-4
107-0+
103-2
242
6 „ ...
1040
103-0
103-6
243
4 „ ...
104-6
101-6
105-2
244
6 „ ...
1038
105-0
1030
246
6 „ ...
1040
101-6
104-2
247
n
6 „ ...
103-8
106'0§
J
Mean...
10363
10167
1034
Fire-brand
Cattle.
right horn.
41
Cow
Aged
102-4
102 4
1020
55
4 Tears ...
102 0
1020
102-2
22
3 „ ...
101-8
101-8
102-2
77
ft
3 „ ...
102-4
1030
102-3
Mean...
102-15
102-3
102-17
Table showing Deaths of Nineteen unprotected Sheep.
No.
Date of
Deaths.
Time.
No.
Date
of Deaths
Time.
2
VV cdocsd^Y)
October
3 ...
8-15
p.m.
4
Thursday,
October
4 ...
5-45 a.m.
7
Do
do
3 ...
8 26
18
Do
do
4 ...
6To „
15
Do
do
3 ...
10-41
1
Do
do
4 ...
7- 0 „
14
Do
do
3 ...
11-25
3
Do
do
4 ...
12- 0 p.m.
11
Thursday,
do
4 ...
1255
a.m.
9
Do
do
4 ...
3- 0 „
19
Do
do
4 ...
1-40
17"
Do
do
4 ...
3- 0 „
6
Do
do
4 ...
1-45
16
Do
do
4 ...
5-30 „
13
Do
do
4 ...
2- 5
8
Do
do
4 ...
6-15 .,
12
Do
do
4 ...
2-35
5
Friday,
do
5 ...
5*30 a.m.
10
Do
do
4 ...
3-40
»
* High temperature on the 19th. f Pulse too rapid to count. J Marked red. § Marked red near eye.
Cattle.
Of the two unprotected cattle, one died on 7th October; the other,
though very ill, recovered.
5


SUPPLEMENTARY REPORT A.
The Honorable Francis Abigail, M.P., Minister for Mines, Sydney.
Sir,
We have the honor to report the result of the supplementary experi-
ments carried out at the experimental station at Junee Junction, with some
of the sheep generously furnished by Messrs. Robertson Brothers, of Mimosa
and Goree, for the purpose of ascertaining as far as possible,—
i. The cause of the comparatively sudden deaths which at times occur
among travelling sheep from anthrax.
11. Whether there is any difference, as it was alleged there is, in the
post-mortem appearances of the spleens of sheep which died from
infection contained in their food or water and those presented by
sheep which died from inoculation with virulent virus.
I. —The cause of Sudden Deaths among Travelling Sheep prom Anthrax.
To test this, four sheep were inoculated at 2 p.m. on the sth October, with
blood taken from the heart of a sheep which had died of anthrax.
The sheep were then kept moving for six or seven hours in the paddock, as
if they were being driven on the road. In this way their temperature tvas
raised considerably over what it would have been if the sheep had been left
quietly in the paddock; but it was, of course, much lower than if the sheep
had been for some time on the road, and had suffered from want of grass and
water, long stages, and over-driving.
On the following day (6th October), at 2 p.m., one of the inoculated sheep
died ;at 4 p.m. another of these sheep died ;at 6 - 30 a.m. of the 7th October
another inoculated sheep died; and at 7'30 a.m. of that date the fourth and
last inoculated sheep died.
From this it will be seen that the first two deaths occurred within a shorter
time than those of any of the other sheep which died of inoculation with
virulent virus during the demonstration, and that the average period of incuba-
tion of the whole four sheep—thirty-three hours—is considerably less than
that of the other inoculated sheep; and the result, we think, indicates that
our supposition is correct, and that given conditions favourable to a speedy
development and termination of the disease—such as fever, starvation, and
exhaustion—we need not be surprised if deaths occur among travelling sheep
within twenty hours of their coming on infected ground. While, however,
the somewhat imperfect experiment points in this direction, the Board would
advise that the matter be put to a more severe and thorough test, with the
view to finally settle the question.
11. —The difference, ip any, in the Post-mortem appearances of Sheep
DYING FROM INOCULATION AND FROM NATURAL INFECTION.
.It was decided to carry out this test by drenching the sheep both with blood
from a diseased sheep and also with a cultivation of virulent virus, so as to
have the germs in a similar state to those naturally infecting the sheep.
1, The Drench with Diseased Blood. —At 12 - 45 p.m. of the 6th ultimo four
sheep were drenched with some of the same blood as the other four sheep
were inoculated with, the sheep receiving the following quantities;—
No. 1, branded d- in red on top of shoulder; with a strong dose—about
2 ounces.
No. 2, branded d" in red on near rump; dose—about 1J ounce.
No. 3, branded Ain red on off ribs; a smaller dose—about ounce.
No. 4, branded d> on near ribs; a still smaller dose—about 1 ounce.
6


Of these four sheep, the one which had received a dose of 1 ounce died on
the 7th October, at 4 a.m., i.e., in about forty hours; another, which had
received 2 ounces, died on the 9th, at 2 a.m., i.e., in about eighty-six hours;
and another, which received 1J ounce, died on the 11th, at 12-15 a.m., i.e.,
in about 144 hours. The fourth sheep, which was drenched with 1J ounce,
was apparently unaffected by the dose, and is alive and well.
The three sheep which died exhibited, on post-mortem examination, the
marked symptoms of anthrax, and the bacilli were found in the blood; but
these were in no way different from the symptoms exhibited by the sheep
which died from inoculation.
2. The Drench with Cultivated Virulent Germs. After some delay in
obtaining a supply of cultivated virulent germs, arising through the first
cultivation having been kept too long before being used, —
One horned wether, brandedd- in red on shoulder, and
One wether, branded d- in red on loin,
were drenched, at noon on the 24th ultimo, each with 8 drams of virulent
cultivation.
The first (the horned) wether died at 3 p.m. on the 26th, in fifty-one hours,
and the other wether at 6-10 p.m. of that day, in fifty-four hours ten minutes
after the drench was administered. On the post-mortem examination these
two sheep exhibited the characteristic symptoms of anthrax, and the bacilli
were found in the blood, but the symptoms different in no respect from those
observed in sheep which died from inoculation with the virulent virus..
From these experiments it would seem the supposed differences in the
appearance of the spleen of sheep, or that the sheep in which a difference had
been observed had been dead for some time, and putrefactive changes had set
up in the spleen.
J. de Y. LAMB, Chairman.
ALEX. BRUCE.
WILLIAM M. HAMLET, E.T.C., F.C.S.
ARTHUR A. DEYLIN.
EDWARD STANLEY, F.R.C.Y.S.
Sydney, 15th November, 1888.
SUPPLEMENTARY REPORT B.
Test of efficacy of Mr. P. H. Gehrig's specific for anthrax.
To the Honorable Francis Abigail, M.P., Minister for Mines, Sydney,—
Sir,
We have the honor to report that, in accordance with your request, we
made a close observation of the experiments at Junee by Mr. P. H. Gehrig, of
Albury, to prove the efficacy of his specific as a preventive and cure for the
disease anthrax.
Six sheep from Cootamundra, an uninfested district, were provided, and
numbered 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, and 25.
On the 2nd October Mr. Gehrig, under supervision of the Board, administered
his specific to three of the six sheep set apart for him to prove its efficacy as a
preventive. These sheep were numbered 20, 22, and 25,
7


During the afternoon all six sheep were'inoculated by Mr. Government
Veterinarian Stanley, with two minims of blood taken from the same sheep
' as that taken for M. Pasteur’s experiments.
To show that his specific was a cure as well as a preventive, Mr. Gehrig,
at ll'lO a.m. on the following day, drenched the sheep numbered 23, 24, and
21 (which had been inoculated with virulent virus the day previously) to
protect them from the effects of the inoculation. At 7 - 30 p.m. these sheep
commenced to die, and at 3 a.m. on Thursday morning, 4th October, all the
six were dead.
The deaths took place in the following order :—•
No. 23, at 7 - 30 p.m., Wednesday, 3rd October.
No. 22, at 8 - 0 p.m., do do.
No. 25, at 8-35 p.m., do do.
No. 20, at 11 - 25 p.m., do do.
No. 24, at 3 -0 a.m., Thursday, 4th October.
No. 21, at 3-45 a.m., do do.
Opinion of the Board.
“ That Mr. Gehrig’s specific is ineffectual, both as a preventive or cure for
the disease anthrax.”
J. de V. LAMB, Chairman.
WILLIAM M. HAMLET, F.1.C., F.C.S.
ALEX. BRUCE.
ARTHUR A. DEVLIN.
EDWARD STANLEY. F.R.C.V.S.
Sydney, 15th November, 1888.
The following papers were read before the assembled visitors at Junee, the
discussion upon which will be found on page 26 :
THE ANTHRAX DISEASE.
[By Edwaed Stanley, F.R.C.V.S., Government Veterinarian, N.S.W.]
Junee, 2 October, 1888.
The subject of my paper to-day is one of vast importance to the stock
owners of Australia, and as the purport is to introduce a preventive measure
for saving the lives of hundreds of thousands of animals now lost annually
by a well-known disease, it means saving of an immense sum of money to
the pastoralists and farmers.
The malady is only too widely known as Cumberland disease. The losses
in sheep alone in this Colony are admitted to be from 100,000 to 200,000
yearly; large numbers of cattle and horses also succumb to the same
disease.
If I could add the numbers of stock annually claimed by this disease in
the adjoining colonies, the immense loss would seem incredible.
The preventive measure to be instituted is protected vaccination by
Pasteur’s method.
I propose to give briefly the history of the disease, its nature, causes,
symptoms, pathology, and treatment.
The biology of the micro-organisms, so intimately associated with the
malady, will form the subject of a special paper to be read by my friend,
Mr. Hamlet, the Analyst to the Government of New South Wales. After
which, I hope, gentlemen, you will all take part in a general discussion on
the disease and its treatment.
8


Geographical Distribution.
Tho word anthrax is derived from the Greek, signifying coal or charcoal;
from the same root we have anthracite. The disease is known by various
names, all having an analogous meaning, indicating the dark, black colour of
the blood, its tar-like character, and black carbuncular tumors.
In English it is Splenic fever, black quarter, or carbuncular fever.
In Erench—Charbon, maladio de sang, charbon symptomatique.
In German—Anthrax, milzbrand.
In Italian—Carbone, antrace, carbonculare.
In Spanish—Lobado, alevosa, carbunculo.
In Dutch—Miltvuur, typheuse varkenzicbte.
In Swedish—Euria infernalis.
In Lappish—Skott millsyge.
In Russian—laswa, schclwaki, jaswa.
In Brazil—Carrapato.
In America—Splenic fever, Texas fever.
In Australia —Cumberland disease.
It is supposed to be tho plague of blains and boils that attacked men and
beasts in Egyptian history, during the time of the Pharoahs.
This disease prevails over the entire surface of the globe; decimates the
reindeer of Lapland, the flocks and herds on the Mongol Steppes. It has
been carefully described in Siberia, Lapland, Finland, Egypt, East and
'West Indies, Russia, Central Asia, China, Cochin China, Peru, Paraguay,
Brazil, Mexico, North and South America, the Continent of Africa, and in
these colonies, while in Europe the written accounts are innumerable.
It is the most universal disease that attacks animals, whether domesticated
or wild, and is communicable to mankind.
There are different forms of anthrax, and the symptoms vary in degree,
and situation of the lesions ; they are also modified by country and species
of animal attacked. Splenic fever is the most common form, and the one
we are now considering. {See Fleming’s Veterinary Works).
History and distribution of Cumberland Disease in Australia.
In 1851 a Commission was appointed by the Government of New South
Wales, Mr. John Stewart being the veterinarian, to inquire into an epidemic
disease in stock, and from the very able report of Sir B. Deas-Thomson,
it appears the disease was first noticed in 1817, when some cattle belong-
ing to Mrs. Cordeaux, between Liverpool and Camden, in county Cumber-
land, were supposed to be maliciously poisoned.
The Commission found the disease extended over a considerable area on
the Sydney side of the Blue Mountains, attacking mostly cattle, also sheep
and a few horses.
The disease was recognised as being analogous to the maladie de sang of
France, by a translation from M. Hurtzel D’Aboval, and the milzbrand of
Germany, and was named spleno-enteritis.
It was supposed to be caused by miasma of too subtile a character, to be
detected by the most refined analysis.
It was proved to bo contagious, being communicated experimentally to
animals, and accidentally by inoculation in men. Two deaths occurred
from malignant pustule.
Sheep died with the disease after being inoculated from an anthrax horse ;
pigs fed on raw flesh of diseased cattle also died.
Slight allusion is made to a similar investigation in the colonies of South
Australia and Western Australia, but apparently they did not agree with
this Commission.
9


The result of the inquiry was to make the best suggestions possible,
which were that of burning all the dead, and stopping the travelling of
diseased stock for fourteen days.
From a report made in 1859 by Mr. R. Meston, and Mr. Charles Moore,
the Government Botanist, it appears the disease had extended westerly to
the Lachlan, Castlereagh, and Liverpool Plains District; whilst it was
found other maladies in animals also had the opprobious name of Cumber-
land disease.
The herbage at this period seems to have been called in question. I will
give Mr. Charles Moore’s own words. He says, —“ If the sheep and cattle
disease, commonly called the Cumberland disease, be caused by any one or
more plants, it is not as yet possible to determine with accuracy what these
plants are.” Prom these reports it is very clear that this disease has been in
the Colony for at least forty years, probably having been introduced by
imported sheep, just as British weeds have been introduced, and spread
with stock and merchandise travelling into the interior; now we find it
extensively distributed, being on the Gwyder, Namoi, Castlereagh, Macquarie,
and Bogan Rivers, in the north-west; and on the Lachlan, Murrumbidgee,
and Murray.
In 18G6 it had reached the Darling Downs, in Queensland.
In 1869 Dr. Morris, of Sydney, wrote an interesting account of the disease,
as it was then known, to Mr. Gordon, the Chief Inspector of Stock in
Queensland.
In 1876 and 1877 it spread over the "Western Districts in Victoria. The
alarming losses led to a public inquiry as to the nature of the malady. It
was called the Hew Disease in Sheep, but owing to the prevalence of para-
sitic diseases caused by liver flukes and intestinal worms, much confusion of
opinion was expressed by the veterinarians engaged on the inquiry, and my
friend Mr. Archibald Park, M.R.C.V.S., about that time recently arrived
from England, was the first to recognize the so-called new disease as
Anthrax.
The history of this outbreak has been carefully recorded by the late Mr.
Graham Mitchell, P.R.C.V.S., for some years the leading Veterinarian of
Victoria; he has very clearly proved the disease was anthrax, and already
known as Cumberland disease.
In 1883 Mr. Anthony Willows, M.R.C.V.S., then attached to the Stock
Branch of the Mines Department, visited the Lachlan District, investigated
and distinctly recognized the disease anthrax, and identified it with Cum-
berland, and proved its contagious character by inoculations.
In 1885, Mr. Bruce, Chief Inspector of Stock, received a report of anthrax
affecting cattle at Dubbo, when two men contracted the disease from skin-
ning the cattle. 100 cats, three pigs, and five dogs were said to have died
from eating the flesh of the cattle. I was informed that several pigs and
dogs died at Richmond from eating anthrax sheep, purchased the previous
day at Homebush, these sheep having been hurried into the market on the
outbreak of the disease on a Cumberland infected run.
In 1885 I was asked by the Chief Inspector of Stock to investigate a
disease in the Lachlan District, and found it on the same station (Mr. A. A.
Devlin’s, Uarah) as my predecessor, Mr. Willows, had visited two years
previously. I was shown the milk weed {Euphorbia Erummondii) as the
noxious weed, and the water,was considered doubtful, but my investigations
confirmed his opinion, as to the disease being anthrax, not caused by poison-
ous plants, and having given Mr: Devlin a copy of “ Klein on Micro-
organisms,” he quite discarded the poison plant theory, and he set to work
10


to study anthrax, and has become an enthusiast I was astonished to hear
of the enormous losses that were annually caused by this disease, the true
cause of which appeared to be then not recognized.
In 1886 a virulent attack of this disease caused a heavy loss in a mob of
travelling cattle at Duhbo, and a little later on at Bourke a very large
number of ewes with lambs died in a few hours.
Nature.
It is a highly virulent and fatal disease of the blood, having the character-
istics of an acute inflammatory fever, and is communicated by contagion
from one animal to others.
It is undoubtedly spread by the excreta of sick animals, contaminating the
soil and herbage.
It is easily inoculated from cattle to sheep, sheep to horses, other animals
or to mankind. Fortunately the susceptibility to take this disease is not the
same in all animals—the herbivora suffer the most. From experiments
made by virulent inoculation it has been ascertained that young animals are
more susceptible than adults: —
Mice, all die in from 21 to 30 hours ; rabbits and guinea-pigs, all die in
from 30 to 35 hours ; sheep, all die in from 36 to 40 hours; horses,
70 per cent, die, the period is not so definite, it is from 2 to 3
days ; cattle, 2 or 3 per cent, die, the period is not so definite, it is
from 2 to 3 days ; mankind, 30 per cent, die, the period is not so
definite, it is from 2to 3 days; cats, swine, and dogs, only one in
1,000 die.
Some animals and most birds cannot be inoculated.
Cause.
The disease is caused by a micro-organism named Bacillus Anthracis, con-
tracted by animals passing over infected country.
It is very satisfactory to be able to state the cause of the disease so
definitely,because so long as itwas attributed to such mysterious agencies as
miasma, fog, cobwebs, or dew on the grass, noxious plants, too nutritious
feeding, enzootic or epizootic influences, that no one understood; its treat-
ment or control were impossible.
There can be no doubt that the microbes are immensely influenced by
surrounding conditions, character of the soil, herbage, season, climate, and
situation. Briefly, I may say that it is a vegetoid organism, and thrives
outside the animal body, even passing an independent existence, like a
ground weed, for years; therefore, as supplementary causes, I mention the
spring and summer seasons, with light rains and warm nights, rich deep soil,
such as grows rich herbage on river frontages or surrounding creeks and
swamps, the sort of soil worms, caterpillars, and beetle luxuriate in.
Lime and saline country are least favourable to the life of these germs,
nevertheless it has been seen in salt-bush country.
Symptoms.
Owing to the sudden character and short duration of the illness the early
symptoms often escape notice. On careful observation they are to be
detected even some days before an outbreak occurs. Sheep are unusually
lively and excitable ; they now and then rise up on the animal nearest to
them. The delicate rosy skin which surrounds the eyes, tip of the nose, and
in the ears assumes a bright red tint, the small blood-vessels running
11


towards the inner corner of the eyes are distended with blood. Blood
drawn from the jugular vein is black and coagulates in two or three minutes
(it takes six or seven minutes to do so in a healthy state), and w r e perceive
later that it is very rich in corpuscles and albumen and deficient in the
watery elements.
When the flock is moving about at freedom, wo notice the finest,
fattest, and younger sheep stop for some moments, stretch out the head,
dilate the nostrils, open the mouth and breath with difficulty; but this
dyspnoea soon disappears. Many, in the intervals of feeding, lick the ground,
and search for salt. After a meal the stomach distends and rumbles, but
this indisposition last but a short time.
Having observed these signs, wo may force the animals to micturate, by
squeezing at the same time the mouth and nostrils. When they pass reddish
bloody urine, and we notice the fleeces of some stained red, from urine of
others already ill.
' Pinally we notice the excrements (usually hard and in the shape of little
balls) become soft and covered with slime, and often bloody.
Having observed these precursory symptoms, extending amongst the
sheep for two or three days, it will soon become aggravated and rapidly
cause them to die.
If at this stage, and travelling, often feeding heartily, they are exposed to a
hot sun, sudden change to a hot wind, or storms of rain, with electric disturb-
ance in the air, sudden change of temperature, or excitement of driving, they
lag behind the flock, breathe rapidly and with difficulty, the sight wanders,
they seem intoxicated, stumble along for a few paces, snort, rattle in the
throat, a bloody froth is ejected from the nostrils, fall on their back or side,
kick the legs about convulsively, expels a small quantity of bloody urine
and sometimes blood-stained excrement, and die in from five minutes to three
hours.
It is not always that these premonitory signs can be observed. The
attack is more sudden and the end more rapid. These exhibit symptoms of
asphyxia and internal hoemorrhage.
Cattle often decline to feed, lose their milk, seem disturbed and restless,
mucous membranes are congested, they shudder or tremble, and have
muscular twitchings, then become weak and listless, respire with difficulty,
their temperature rises, the pulse becomes small and weak; they have
convulsions and fatal collapse, with a sanious discharge from the mouth and
nares, also with the excretions.
In the horse the symptoms are similar but less acute, and local swellings
are more frequent.
. Post-mortem .
The carcase will present lesions of various kinds; decomposition is
usually rapid. The following parts are affected, sometimes simultaneously,
sometimes singly:—The shin and sub-cutaneous cellular tissue and fat
stained with blood; the spleen swollen, soft, and black; lymphatic
glands, intestinal mucous membrane, lungs, kidneys; pancreas and tissues
of the brain show the bad symptoms, congestion of the blood, followed
by hoemorrhage, and patches of gelatinous effusions of lymph without
emphysema and often bloody coloured. The blood leaves the veins and
rushes to the membranous organs, the bronchial and digestive tubes, renal
gland, and bladder; while the organs composed of soft vascular tissue,
such as the spleen, kidneys, lungs, lymphatic, and other glands, the blood
not only distends, but gorges the veins, and even exudes little by little,
forming purplish-brown stains, stellate spots, and small confined effusions
12


of blood, some of which gives place to complete hcemorrhage. This is well
seen in the spleen, which becomes enormously distended, till its structure, is
destroyed, and it is lacerated by very slight pressure. The healthy spleen of
a sheep weighs from 1£ oz. to 2| oz.; a diseased one from 3 oz.to 13 oz. A
healthy cow’s spleen weighs from T) lb, to 3 lb., and when diseased will
weigh from 10 lb. to 20 lb.
The heart and largo arteries show nothing remarkable. The blood they
contain is liquid and very black. The blood itself is a purple-red colour,
thick and tarry looking, rarely forms even soft coagulations ; it is usually
liquid, and the serum is stained purple-brown.
The bladder frequently retains bloody-coloured urine.
The post-mortem lesions are most extensive in two or three years old
fat animals, and when the deaths are most numerous.
They are less extensive in young, aged, or thin animals, and when the
disease is declining.
The pathological injuries are not the same in all cases. In one animal the
spleen, kidneys, and bladder are affected; in another the spleen very slightly,
parts of the bowels black and effused with blood; in another, the sub-
cutaneous capillaries of the skin are most involved, accompanied by extensive
gelatinous and sanious effusions ; in another, the bronchial tubes and lungs
contain the most noticeable injuries. So uncertain are the appearances,
that in doubtful cases recourse must be had to microscopical examination of
the blood, when an unquestionable diagnosis can be made. It is the presence
in the blood (examined while still fresh and warm) of small straight filaments
or rods, broken and motionless, only visible under a microscope magnifying
from 400 to 500 times. These are named bacteridies, i.e., bacilli anthracis.
To grasp their extreme minuteness we must remember it is 500 times smaller
than we see it under the microscope.
Whenever we find these microscopic organisms in the blood of an animal
which has just died, we know wo have to do with anthrax. On the contrary,
if they are not present, the animal died from some other disease.
The anthrax bacillus is, then, the criterion of ( anthrax ) Cumberland
disease.
Etiology.
As this subject will be treated in detail by my friend Mr. Hamlet in his
paper on the bacilli, I will only say a few words now. The red and white
cells in the blood are necessary for the vitality of an animal, so that the
invasion into the circulation of the bacilus anthracis, causes a dreadful
struggle for existence ; it is war to the knife, carried on within the blood
itself, the leucocytes (white cells) actually eat up the invaders, so that when
the bacilli are few in numbers, or weak in vitality, they disappear in the
circulation ; so it happens if the blood cells are the most vigorous, the
animal survives the attack; but if the bacilli develop rapidly in numbers,
then they win the victory, and the animal succumbs.
The bacilli live on the oxygen in the blood, and so do the blood cells, the
supply of oxygen being limited, as it is mainly kept up by the circulating
blood cells ; the bacilli by arresting this process kill the animal by asphyxia,
as surely as if his breathing and circulation had been arrested by strangu-
lation.
The presence of numerous bacilli in the blood causes disintegration of the
red blood cells, they often appear under the microscope as if melted into each
other, sticking together, they lose their outline, and the density of their cell
walls; so that the hesmatine is released, and being deoxidised, becomes
blacker in colour, and accumulates with patches of destroyed cells, obstructing
13


the blood-vessels, which often hurst from over distention; this explains why
bloody discharge is seen oozing from the external orifices, it having exuded
from the blood-vessels through the mucous membranes. The microbes are
Sosed to eliminate a noxious product into the blood, and in that way
uce toxic effects. I must leave these interesting points for future
discussion.
History of the Microbes.
So long ago as 1850 Drs. Davaine and Rayer discovered rods in the blood,
hut they did not recognize their importance, and thought they were only a
result of disease.
In 1857 Pasteur began studying fermentation.
In 1863 Pasteur discovered similar rods while studying this process, and
finding they were essential to fermentation, it occurred to him that such
rods might play an important part in disease. Davaine compared the two
rods and recognized their similarity.
In 1865 Delafond, a French Veterinarian, found the rods in sheep having
anthrax, and considered them cryptogamic vegetable organisms. Other
Veterinarians were struck by the pathological resemblance of the organs in
anthrax to the lesions caused by suffocation; they strangled a horse, and
three or four days after death, observed little rods in the blood, and concluded
they were the same as Davaine saw in anthrax.
The controversy attracted M. Pasteur, and he set about to try and culti-
vate the rods artificially taken from an asphyxated horse, and was at first
unsuccessful; he persevered, and at last made the grand discovery that they
were anaerobic, that is, grew without air; whereas the anthrax microbe was
aerobic, therefore could not be cultivated without air.
Experiments were made by inoculation with this microbe, from a horse,
asphyxated, named by Pasteur the septic vibrion, and certain animals were
found to be killed in from twelve to fifteen hours, being much quicker than
by the rods of anthrax.
The pathological lesions are similar to anthrax, but have gaseous infiltra-
tion or emphysema with the gelatinous and sanious effusions. It was
further found that these rods were motile, and are always present in the
intestines in health ; in about twelve hours after death they are found to
have entered the blood-vessels.
Septic Microbes.
The analogy and effects of the septic vibrion is so strikingly like the
bacillus anthracis (and owing to its wide distribution) it is likely to be
confounded with that disease, indeed its discovery caused much confusion
and angry controversy amongst veterinarians and bacteriologists.
Therefore, I repeat the septic vibrion is distinguished by motion, greater
length of the rods, and by causing gaseous gangrene on inoculation. It has
a very close pathological resemblance to black-leg, i.e., Charbon symptom-
atique of A doing.
Some of these microbes cannot live in the blood of certain animals.
Curiously enough, the rabbit is not susceptible to the septic vibrion; the
septicaemia of the house-mouse has no effect on the field-mouse.
There are several other septic microbes which are likely to contaminate
the vaccine of anthrax, and which are antagonistic to its development, and
may arrest altogether its protective influence; the secret of the cultivation
and of the use of the vaccine depends on the rigid exclusion of contamin-
ating microbes.
14


Many varieties of septic microbes are found in all sorts of decomposing
materials ; they are the silent scavengers of the world ; many are harmless ;
they are like the seeds of plants, many bearing a very similar appearance,
but produce very different results; it is as impossible to transform one
harmless microbe into a virulent one as it would be to grow a gum-tree from
a potato.
The study of these minute organisms has developed the science of biology,
and has created quite a revolution in our knowledge of diseases.
Their discovery has simplified much that was mysterious, and a knowledge
of them teaches us how to contend with some of the worst maladies attack-
ing animals.
In 187 G Koch first gave the life history of the bacillus anthracis; he
discovered the seed germs or spores of the bacillus.
Davaine first discovered the bacillus. Pasteur discovered the method of
protective vaccine by artificial cultivation and attention of the microbes. It
has since been pointed out the course to pursue in order to prove that disease
is caused by microscopic organisms.
(a.) The micro-organism must be found in the blood, lymph, or diseased
tissues of man or animal suffering from, or dead of, the disease.
(5.) The micro-organism must be isolated from the blood, lymph, or
tissues, and cultivated in suitable media, i.e., outside the animal
body. These pure cultivations must be carried on through succes-
sive generations of the organism.
( c.) A pure cultivation thus obtained must, when introduced into the
body of a healthy animal, produce the disease in question.
(d.) Lastly, in the inoculated animal the same micro-organism must
again be found.
These processes being carried out proves that certain organisms produce
certain diseases.'
Although there had been many workers in the same field, plodding along
year after year, it was not till 1877, after twenty years labour, that M.
Pasteur had the honor of giving absolute and irrefutable proof of certain
diseases being determined by microscopic organisms alone. This he dis-
covered while experimenting with the microbe of chicken cholera, a disease
ho has investigated with his inexhaustible patience, and with the most
successful results.
Analogous Miceobic Diseases.
Swine Fever.
A disease highly contagious and fatal is caused by microbes. This w r as
demonstrated by Pasteur in 1882, and protection is given to swine by using
a vaccine artificially prepared.
This disease (so far as is known) can only be communicated to rabbits and
pigeons. Sheep are not susceptible to this microbe, and strange to say, when
it is conveyed by vaccination from one rabbit to another it gradually loses its
virulence, so that blood of the seventh or eighth rabbit, will retain only
sufficient virulence to make it a protective vaccine for pigs. Another pecu-
liarity is that adult strong pigs are much more susceptible than young pigs
up to four months old ; the latter withstand a vaccine which protects them
from future virulent infection, while the same vaccine is actually fatal to
their parents.
Hence in practice only the young pigs are vaccinated with a first and
second vaccine, and to give some idea of its success in Prance, I will give an
extract from the Annals of Pasteur’s Institute, published 1887.
15


18S3.
18S1.
1885.
1886.
France ...
2,396 ..
. 2,786 .
... 3,449 .
.. 9,881
Other countries...
820 ..
,. 2,585 .
... 9,820 .
.. 9,860
3,216
5,371
13,269
19,741
In 188G forty-nine veterinary surgeons reported on the results of vacci •
nating 6,500 pigs the loss was only 1’7 per cent., whereas in the previous year
preceding the vaccination the mortality had been 20 to 30 per cent. To
show the continuing increase in the use of a protective vaccine in this dis-
ease, I append a table, giving the numbers vaccinated in France and in three
outside places, Austria, Hungary, Portugal, and the Grand Duchy of Baden
collectively:—
I may mention that it is doubtful whether the disease in France is
identical with the swine plague of America and Britain, as the subject has
not yet been exhausted.
Chicken Cholera.
Is also a microbic virulent contagious disease, and its prevention is success-
fully ensured by vaccination. In France about 2,000 are operated on
annually. It is only done in places where necessary. This microbe has its
peculiarities; it attacks all domestic poultry, also certain birds, but the only
animal to which it can be communicated is the rabbit, and strange to say
its fatal effects are increased in these animals. They die in from eight to
ten hours after virulent inoculation, while fowls survive for twenty-four
hours.
The first protective vaccine, that is the weakest used for fowls, is found to
kill rabbits in twenty hours.
This disease is by no means so formidable as its name might lead us to
suppose. I am told by M. Loir it attacks no other animal, and spontaneous
outbreaks in a poultry farm do not usually spread beyond their run, it does
not destroy the birds of the air over any considerable area, and indeed there
is no record of its assuming an epizootic form.
The microbes or germs of this disease cannot spread in the air, because
dry air kills them outright; they would be spread by rabbits’ feet over large
areas, and so contaminate the herbage, which would infect rabbits, but not
birds. It is the food that is the medium for conveying the microbic poison
into the animals’ systems, so that it is not such an impracticable method of
killing rabbits as some people imagine. I have no doubt the cultivated
microbes of chicken cholera will be used as a poison to kill rabbits. It has
the advantage of being innocuous to other animals, whereas the chemical
poisons already in use kill many animals and birds which are natural enemies
of the rabbit; at the same time, by virtue of its contagious properties, it
will be extensively spread by the rabbits themselves.
Wo one imagines it will kill all the rabbits, but if it is as perseveringly
used, as many other poisons have been, it promises to give far more satis-
factory results, without the disastrous destruction of other animal life.
Holies.
Although the microbe of rabies has not been demonstrated, nevertheless
successful vaccination has been obtained. By fragments of the corebro
spinal marrow being used on a succession of rabbits, it has been found to
become increased in virulence gradually, but of a strength always the same,
known by the rabbit dying in seven days, and’ after exposure of the spinal
cord to the air for some days it is used for vaccination. Material from this
16


rabbit forma tbe first protective vaccine for dogs, and such is the subtle
virulence of the disease, that eight or more vaccines of increasing strength
obtained from rabbits dying at gradually extending periods, are required,
before immunity is obtained by this process, after which the dog is protected
for two years against virulent infection.
A quotation from Bristow’s “ Theory and Practice of Medicine ” may be
interesting : —“ By the above method it seems certain that Pasteur has
succeeded in rendering many of the lower animals insusceptible to hydro-
phobia, and there can, we think, bo little doubt that he has also prevented
the development of hydrophobia in many animals experimentally inoculated
beforehand with potent virus, and in many human beings bitten by rabid
animals, and brought to him for treatment from all parts of Europe. It is
well known that only a minority of persons bitten by mad dogs contract
hydrophobia; and it is impossible to tell beforehand whether a person thus
inoculated will suffer or not. It was not unnatural tj suspect, in the
beginning, that much of Pasteur’s apparent success was duo either to the
fact that his patients would have failed to become hydrophobic even if ho
had not treated them, or to the fact that they had not been bitten by rabid
animals. But, on the other hand, the exceedingly small percentage of
deaths from hydrophobia occurring among his patients, and the fact that all
of them, in the course of treatment, have been harmlessly inoculated with
virus capable of giving rabies without fail to dogs, seems to bear unanswer-
able testimony to the importance of his discoveries, and the protective
efficacy of his treatment.”
Black-leg,
Charbon symtomatique is a variety of anthrax, most often seen in cattle
under two years of age. It is a local disease, more like malignant pustule
of man ; the distinguishing criterion is the cultivation of the bacillus. It is
anaerobic, that is, grows without oxygen.
A protective vaccine is prepared by M. M. Arlong, Cornevin, and Thomas,
Veterinarians at Lyons. They attenuate the virus by drying muscular pulp
from a charbonizcd limb, at a certain temperature, and use it powdered,
mixed with water, as a protective vaccine. Passing the virus through a
series of animals also makes a safe vaccine for cattle.
Malignant Pustule, or Anthrax in Man,
Takes the form known as malignant pustule; this is identified by the
gelatinous infiltration, and the localized presence of the bacilli. The inocu-
lation of those bacilli produce anthrax in animals, owing to its local character
in man it is far less fatal, and is successfully treated by interstitial injection
of tincture of iodine.
Rinderpest, the Siberian Cattle Plague,
Is occupying the attention of Dr. Gameleia at Odessa, and he is reported
to have succeeded in isolating the microbe, and to have cultivated a success-
ful vaccine for this, the most fatal of all cattle diseases.
Time will not permit me to speak of the microbes of tuberculosis or of con-
tagious mammitis, or of typhoid fever, cholera, and other diseases peculiar
to mankind ; the medical and veterinary sciences blend here, but there are
more animal diseases communicable to mankind than can be conveyed from
mankind to animals.
B
17


'Remedial and Preventive Measures,
The chemical effects of lactic acid and of the hypo-sulphite of soda—a
favourite remedy of mine for retarding the progress of black-leg and the
variable degrees of resistance of animals to infection, might lead one to hope
that medicine may some day cope with such diseases, but it must always be
borne in mind that such agents are expelled in a few hours from the animal’s
body, so give no protection against a second attack; therefore, vaccination
commends itself as being a far more certain remedy, its prophalysis extending
over many months, and the average lives of animals being short —at most
only a few years —vaccination is clearly the best remedy at present available
to combat these virulent and fatal diseases. This is why veterinarians are
content to tolerate inoculation of disease, when they are satisfied the con-
tagion is not spread by such method, and we have the assurance of Pasteur
that his vaccine becomes absorbed and assimilated in the system, and does
not escape in the form of living germs.
Since the true nature of the disease has been so clearly demonstrated the
pharmacopoeia and chemistry have both been ransacked to find a remedy to
destroy the microbes, and spare the sheep, but these sciences have found the
problem too difficult. The disease being incurable attention was next sought
in prevention, and it is due to the greatest scientist of the present day, M.
Pasteur, to acknowledge that he has, after many years of patient study,
solved the problem. ,
It must be remembered that he had no medical or veterinary education, so
for years he kept clear of disease, devoting his attention to fermentation, which
ho discovered was brought .about by the growth of living organisms instead of
chemical action, as had previously been supposed. He first ventured to
inquire into a fatal disease that threatened the destruction of the silkworm
industry in the south of Prance, and demonstrated that it was due to para-
sites. ' Prom insects he went to fowls, then to animals, and now he is treating
mankind for rabies.
The bacteridies of anthrax discovered by Davaine, and their life history
worked out by Koch, were in 1877 announced by M. Paul Bert to be neither
the cause nor the effect of anthrax, but that the disease was due to a liquid
virus, without the organisms. Pasteur resolved to inquire into it (and having
procured professional medical assistants), he took some anthrax blood and
cultivated it in broth, then allowed the cultivated microbes to settle, so that
the solid particles would gravitate to the bottom of the vessel, then on taking
the liquid plasma from the upper part and inoculating an animal he found
no results, but on taking the sediment, which swarmed with bacilli, the
animals inoculated died with anthrax.
Pasteur exclaimed —“ Is there not here the proof that the bacteridie is
really what constitutes the virus, that the charbon (i.e., anthrax) is the
disease of the bacteridie, as trichinosis is of the trichina, and as scab is the
disease of the acarus.” His subsequent work fills many volumes, the out-
come of which is the manufacture of an attenuated vaccine for protecting
animals from the contagion of the natural disease. The processes and some
of the methods will be described by Mr. Hamlet, who, having had personal
experience with similar microbes for several years, will explain their
biology.
Protective Vaccination.
It having been clearly proved by many observations and experiments that
the germs of this disease contaminated the ground on which they are
deposited by diseased sheep, and that such land retained the contagious
material in a state of vitality for several years, virtually poisoning stock
18


depastured upon it, and also poisoning hay crops, thus furnishing the means
of carrying the disease into town stables and dairies, it became an important
matter to ascertain if a mild form of the disease would protect from future
attack, and after very diligent experimental research and indomitable per-
severance, and in the face of an immense number of failures occurring on all
sides, owing to the science of bacteriology being in its infancy. Pasteur has
now arrived at such a certain method of cultivating his vaccine that its use
is extending year by year, not only in Prance, but in several other countries.
He has by a method of artificial cultivation so successfully attenuated (in
other words reduced the strength of) the bacillus anthracis as to make it
play tho part of a protective vaccine. As this most interesting and important
part of the subject will be ably dealt with by Mr. Hamlet, I will describe
Briefly the vaccination. Time will not permit me to enter into this subject
generally, so I must postpone doing so at present, as it will be fully dealt
. with in the report of the Anthrax Inquiry Board.
The operation itself is extremely simple, but the secret of success lies in
the strictest observation of very strict antiseptic precautions; extreme
vigilance in the use of the syringes and of the vaccine is absolutely necessary
to prevent the accidental introduction of septic microbes, that may cause
fatal results, or at least would counteract and destroy the protective action
of the vaccine, and so prove unsuccessful.
Therefore, the management of the vaccines, and the instruments used, will
have to be in the hands of a thoroughly trained expert, and on the efficiency
of the laboratory work, aided by experimental tests, carried on from time to
time under veterinary supervision. I see no difficulty in the adoption of this
method of treating this formidable malady.
Before leaving this subject of prevention, I wall again point out the grave
importance of destroying the germs of disease by burning tho carcases in
their skins where they lie, otherwise a plague spot is left, and will certainly
develop the disease at some unknown future date. I must leave this part
of the subject, and go on to the results of vaccination.
It may he seen from a table in the Annals of Pasteur’s Institute for 1887
that every year for the five years from 1882 to 1887 over 3C0,000 sheep,
40,000 cattle, and 1,000 horses have been vaccinated against anthrax in
Europe.
It must not be supposed for one moment that vaccination of this character
is unattended by losses, as accidents of various kinds are sure to happen.
The health and susceptibility of the individual animal exercises a peculiar
influence on the vaccine, and sometimes careless operators commit disastrous
blunders, still the losses are slight compared with the numbers protected.
On reference to the table above it appears that the mortality in sheep
from the first vaccine was about 700 per annnum; from the second, about
520 per annum; in cattle, from the first vaccine, about 22 per annum; from
the. second, about 8 per annum; in horses, from the first vaccine, about
per annum ; from the second, about 1 per annum; so that the mortality,
after protection was completed, was found to be less than one-quarter per
cent, tor sheep, and less than one-half per cent, for cattle.
To ascertain the length of time which vaccination gives.
Immunity.
The following experiments were made in 1882, at Montpellier: —Twenty-
five sheep were vaccinated with the first and second vaccines. Every year
afterwards, five of these sheep were inoculated with a virulent virus. They
were still protected until 1887. In that year out of three of the twenty-
19


five which had not been tested since vaccination in 1832, two resisted the
virulent virus, one succumbed. This 'is published in the Montpellier
Agricultural Society's Journal for 1887.
Although this experiment proved the long period of protection afforded in
this instance, it is not safe to act on, because, in practice, the susceptibility
of sheep to the action of the two vaccines is found to be somewhat uncertain;
hence, as a precautionary measure, to ensure immunity against natural con-
tagion, a single operation is repeated annually, with a medium vaccine, the
strength of which is between the first and second vaccines used in the first
year. The sheep, being still partially protected, are able to resist this
vaccine, and at tho same time it is strong enough to protect for at least
another year.
I believe immunity is given to vast numbers of sheep by means of natural
infection, communicated by ingestion of the anthrax microbes on infected
pastures. We know for certain that the disease can be communicated in
that way. I have drenched sheep with anthrax blood, and it does not
always kill them ; indeed a large dose, even ten times as much as will kill
when injected beneath the skin of tho thigh, may have no effect when intro-
duced into the stomach.
Some sheep resist infection even when anthrax blood is injected sub-
cutaneously. Tho only explanation I can give is that such sheep have
probably become naturally protected; indeed, if such were not the case, it
is difficult to explain how any sheep escape when pastured in fatally infected
paddocks during the season when the disease is virulent.
I fear, gentlemen, I have trespassed on your patience, but tho subject is
so extensive that I have found great difficulty in compressing these hastily
prepared notes into such a small compass.
, I trust that the public demonstration of M. Pasteur’s representatives, Dr.
Germont and Mr. Loir, will be attended with the success we anticipate,
which must prove to be of immense benefit to the pastoral interests of the
country.
EDWAED STANLEY,
Fellow of the Eoyal College of Veterinary Surgeons, London,
Government Veterinarian,
N. S. Wales.
THE HISTORY OF THE ANTHRAX BACILLUS.
[By W. M. Hamlet, F.C.S., F.1.C., Government Analyst.]
The question may possibly arise in tbe minds of some who are here to-night,
what has the Government Analyst to do with a subject which is apparently
more within the domain of pathology and veterinary practice than in that of
pure chemistry ? The answer lam able to give is of a threefold nature:—
Firstly.—That the disease called anthrax has been over and over again
attributed to the effects of poisonous plants. During my own time,
and also during the time of my predecessor, Mr. Charles Watt,
cases beyond number have been brought to us for investigation,
from squatters and large stockowners, as well as from the Director
of the Botanic Gardens, cases in which, no other cause being
assigned, it was generally believed that the so-called Cumberland
disease arose from the action of a poisonous plant or plants. We
have analysed some scores of specimens of plants, and months of
long and tedious work have been spent over one single specimen
20


without arriving at a satisfactory result. Our results have, in con-
sequence, often been discredited, and the Government Analyst has
been, on such occasions, discarded like a broken reed ; at any rate
he has been unable to show a cause for the disease. Mr. Stanley
has given you Mr. Charles Moore’s own words, and these are:—
“If the sheep and cattle disease, commonly called Cumberland
disease, be caused by any one or more plants, it is not yet possible
to determine with accuracy what those plants arc.”
Secondly.—That a part of my scientific training was happily spent in
the study of the subject of fermentation. In 1887, when Pasteur’s
celebrated researches were given to the world, I had the good
fortune to be thrown, nolens volens, into the vortex of the germ
theory, little thinking of what use it might hereafter prove to be.
Later on I was engaged by Messrs. Watncy & Co., near Loudon,
the eminent brewers and distillers, in a lengthy research on yeast,
alcohol, beer and its diseases, especially the lactic and butyric
ferments then just discovered. It was, therefore, with no ordinary
interest that I came into contact, through my official duties, with
the subject of anthrax, of which I am privileged to speak to-night.
Thirdly.—The results of the life of these small organisms is, in effect,
chemical changes set up iu those media in which the organism lives;
and, therefore, seeing thatchemical changes are inseparably connected
with the action of microbes, their study I think is the legitimate work
alike of the physiologist and of the biological chemist.
"When the history of our times shall have been written, one of the greatest
services rendered by science to humanity will be found in the work that
has been done in regard to the origin and cause of contagious diseases —a
work that is in its entirety, nothing short of a new revelation. And if wo
have still to confess how little we yet know of the subject, there is ground
for congratulation in the record of steady progress and valuable results—
results that remain with us for the lasting benefit of mankind.
I am here reminded of that ancient writing wherein it is proclaimed that
‘we know only in part, and can prophesy only in part,’ while ‘the truth and
the whole truth ’ lies still beyond.
Modern science has, in effect, thrown considerable light upon some of
the most terrible of contagious diseases, and promises valuable aid to the
stockowners of this great Colony, in the direction of providing means for
the protection of stock against the ravages of disease, means which, I may
say, have emerged from the privacy of laboratory experiment to the region
of practical demonstration, and which I, for one, have no hesitation in
saying, will be for the benefit of the country.
. All the work done towards this desirable end has been inseparably con-
nected with an instrument known to every one of us as being one of the
most marvellous and fascinating ever invented—l. mean the compound
microscope. Of the many implements employed by the modern analyst, the
microscope is by no means one of the least in importance; for upon its
revelations hang, sometimes, issues of life and death, honour and dishonour,
truth and falsehood.
This instrument indeed plays so important a part in the subject I am now
engaged upon, that I think it will be of interest to mention the curiosity,
not unmixed with reverence, with which I actually saw some ten years ago,
the first and original compound microscope ever made. I refer to none
other than the famous instrument constructed by Janssen in the year 1590,
and which was shown me by Mr. Sorby in 1877.


Had it not been for the microscope, with its innumerable improvements
and attachments, the study of biology would have been impossible, and the
vast region of the “ infinitely little ” would have for ever remained a perfect
terra incognita. Soon after its discovery a Dutch observer named
Lecuwenhoeck,* in the year 1860, recognized and described living organisms
in putrid water, the globules of fat in milk, and, for the first time, also the
yeast cell—that most potent of ferments found in the production of alcoholic
liquors.
These researches shared the same fate as the work of many a scientific
worker, both ancient as well as modern; they remained forgotten and
unheeded by the world until the year 1836, when Cagniard-Latour redis-
covered the living organism in brewers’ yeast. The same organism became
the subject of an independent discovery by Schwann, of Berlin, in 1837.
In the month of August, of the year 1850, two distinguished Frenchmen,- M.
M. Bayer and Davaine examined under the microscope the blood of some sheep
that had died of splenic fever, and noticed, some minute transparent rods in
and amongst the blood, and crowding out by their presence, the little blood
corpuscles. In 1861 Pasteur published his research on -the Butyric ferment,
which was followed in 1862 by his work on “ The Theory of Germs and the
Corpuscles of the Atmosphere,” an investigation that has since become
classic in the annals of science.
On reading Pasteur’s researches, Davaine became convinced that the
small transparent rods he found in diseased sheep in 1850, were neither more
nor less than living corpuscles or germs, and they were named by him
bacteridie de charbon. The exact significance of these bacteridie was not fully
understood until 1876. At that time Dr. Burden Sanderson was working
at the subject in England, but it was reserved for a young German physician
named Kochf to read the life history of the organism. Taking a minute
portion of the spleen of a sheep dead from anthrax, and placing the same in
the glairy fluid, called the aqueous humour, of the eye of an ox, he succeeded
in tracing the growth of the organism and the birth of its spores or infant
germs, thus proving in the clearest manner that the rods of Davaine were
living organisms and that they were likewise propagated by division.
. At this same time Pasteur was also at work on the same organism and
quite independently arrived at the same results. Ho, in company with
Joubert, Professor of Physic at L’Ecole Nor male, communicated the results
of his investigation in a paper read before the Academy on the 30th April, in
1877. M. M. Pasteur and Joubert showed that the rods found by Davaine
were the organisms always present in sheep that die of anthrax, and that the
smallest possible quantity taken from a diseased sheep could be grown or
cultivated altogether outside the sheep’s body in broth, urine, and other
liquids. The intimate connection between the germ and the disease was
proved beyond all doubt; and, what was still of more vital interest, means of
protection by vaccination, was proposed, worked out, and perfected by care-
ful experiment a little later on.
Summarising the steps made in the elucidation of this disease hy different
observers, we have Bayer and Davaine who first noticed the bacillus in 1850,
Pollender’s verification of the same in 1855.
The publication of Pasteur’s paper on the butyric ferment in 1861,.
Davaine’s inspiration on hearing Pasteur’s paper that the rods he noticed in
1850 must have been living organisms.
Brauen’s observations in the same direction. Pasteur’s confirmation of
the fact in 1863.
♦ Leeuwenhoeck. Opera Omnia (Lugd. Bitav., 1722.)
t Beitrage zur Biologie der Pflanzen, Bd. 11, Heft 11.
22


The first cultivation of the microbe was made by Delafond in 1865. The
work of Koch on the fife history of the bacillus in 1876, and the brilliant
researches of Pasteur in 1877, in which all doubt as to the microbe nature
of the disease was dispelled.
Thus far the history of the wort in Europe proceeded. "When coming to
our own Colony we find Mr. Anthony "Willows, veterinary surgeon, reported
to the Government in 1883 on anthrax* and its prevalence in the Lachlan
District under the name of Cumberland disease.
In the month of May of the present year another important stage was
reached when M. M. Loir and Germont, who were here, as all the world
knows, on the rabbit business, demonstrated that anthrax and Cumberland
disease were one and the same disease.
The disease, named after the county of Cumberland, is known in Eng-
land as Black Quarter, or Carbuncular Fever; in Erance, as Gharbon, or
Sang de rate; in Germany as Milzbrand; in Italy as Carbone, or Antrace;
in Spain as Lobado, or Garbunculo; in Holland as Miltvuur; in Brazil as
Carrapato; in America as, Texas Fever.
Anthrax comes from the Greek, av9pa£, coal or charcoal, hence most of
the other derivations.
In June last Mr. Devlin gave an account before the Wagga Stock and
Pasture Board of the disease in question, and the means taken in Erance
and other countries to arrest or prevent its ravages.
So impressed with the feasibility of preventive vaccination were some of
the stock-owners of the Colony that the Minister for Mines appointed the
present Commission to watch and report upon a series of experiments in an
infected part of the country, with the view of determining the value and
efficacy of the new vaccination method.
Having now detailed the history of the researches bearing upon the
disease and its aetiology, I now proceed to the character and life history of
the organism itself, and a word or two on the term microbe may not per-
haps be out of place since it has become so popular.
Up to the last few years the organisms found in air water'in the soil, and
wherever fermentation or putrefaction may be going on, have been variously
called vibriones, microzymes, corpuscles, particles, or micro-organisms, and
still more often loosely spoken of as germs and bacteria. This has been
chiefly owing to the transitory and imperfect state of our knowledge on the
subject, and has led to the more convenient and more generic term, microbe,
first proposed by a surgeon named Sedillot of Strasburg, derived from the
Greek, poepos, little, and /hos, life, meaning a little living thing. This new
term, I may say, has received the literary approval and sanction of Littre
and is now well known in all the European languages.
A microbe then is a minute living thing, but whether animal or vegetable,
it would be difficult indeed to say, seeing that it partakes of the nature, and
is inseparably associated with both. They are now classed by such writers
as Van Tieghem, Sachs, Cohn, and Elugge, amongst the cryptogamia, and
again subdivided, so as to rank among the Algae.
A microbe may be defined as a little living thing, quite invisible to the.
unaided eye, growing with or without air just as it happens, and propagating
its species at ordinary temperatures, if provided with water and nourishment..
Its business in life is to bring about certain changes in the composition of.
matter; some of these changes giving rise to products, which may be the
most deadly poisons, whilst others may be harmless, or perhaps beneficial to
animal life, or even the antidote of the poison it first elaborated.
* Report by Mr. Anthony Willows, M.R.C.V.S.L., on the prevalence of Anthrax in the Lachlan District.
Laid upon the Table of the Legislative Assembly in April, 1883.
23


The microbe which is inseparably connected with the cause of anthrax
assumes the form of a rod or wand, and hence the name, bacillus, which
means a wand or a staff. .This rod appears under the microscope as a trans-
parent, faintly bluish streaky line, generally straight, though sometimes
slightly curved at the tip. Prom measurements made in the Government
Laboratory of these microbes obtained from sheep from Mr. Devlin’s station,
I find them to measure from 7- sVcr to the xAaths of an inch in length, and
about
i(TOOO
th of an inch in thickness.
The media best adapted for its growth and propagation are blood, beef tea,
veal or chicken broth, or urine made neutral or very slightly alkaline. The
temperature most favourable for its rapid growth is 102 j° Pah. [Klein gives
104° Pah.] ; but it lives within a wide range of temperature, and merely waits
for its own particular conditions to breed and multiply. These conditions
have been found by the long and patient investigations of the scientific
discoverers whose names I have already given, and as I describe them, it must
be borne in mind, that the most scrupulous care and extreme cleanliness is
absolutely necessary in every operation connected with the research. With-
out trained hands, and the skill obtained by frequent practice, very often
diametrically opposite results are obtained.
In order to cultivate the bacillus anthracis it is merely necessary to take
a minute speck from the spleen, or a droplet of blood from a sheep infected
with anthrax or Cumberland disease and drop it into a glass tube or bulb
containing about a couple of fluid ounces of carefully prepared beef-tea,
broth, or urine; care, of course, always being taken to be sure there are no
other microbes, i.e., microbes of other kinds, present which may contaminate
and spoil the culture. This is generally effected by having a gas-burner or a
spirit-lamp constantly near, so as to destroy all foreign microbes by heat —
a mode of cremation in fact, and a sure and certain mode of disinfection.
The operation which has just been described is really one of inoculation
(from in, into, and oculos, a'bud, or grafting).
The vessel containing the inoculated liquid is now set aside in a warm
chamber, such as an incubator, where the temperature can be kept up con-
tinuously and constantly for any length of time. In a few hours the liquid
will become cloudy, owing to the development of the bacilli. Now if the
glass vessel be opened, a drop taken out and placed on a slide and cover
glass, and examined by means of a good microscope, it will be found that the
liquid is swarming with myriads of the microbes I describe, namely, the
bacilli of anthrax. If we had left the liquid untouched for, say, several
days it would be seen that the cloudiness would disappear and fall to the
bottom as a sediment. A clear liquid would result below, in which would
be found the microbe in threads or filaments, the latter, but not the microbes,
being visible to the eye.
Taking a drop, no larger than the eye of a fine needle, and inoculating a
fresh tube of broth free likewise from microbes, the same phenomenon may
be again observed, that is to say, after a few hours in the incubator another
and a new colony of microbes are brought into existence.
Prom the new batch a third may be cultivated and a fourth, and so on, ad
infinitum, the hundredth cultivation having the same properties and activity
as the original we -first started from. Such a fluid would be pure virulent
virus of anthrax, fatal alike to sheep and cattle. Such a fluid -would more-
over be termed an artificial culture.
Inoculate a sheep with this deadly product, and in from thirty-six to forty
hours that sheep will surely die, and the same bacillus will again be found
breeding in its blood.
24


And here comes the question of the setiology of the disease, its cause and
origin.
Three hypotheses have been put forward to explain the pathological
action of the microbe :
Ist. That the bacillus attacks the delicate blood corpuscles completely
arresting their functional activity ; whereupon a struggle ensues, in
which, if the corpuscles win the battle, the animal lives, but dies if
the microbe proves victorious.
2nd. That the bacillus gradually appropriates some of the blood serum
for its own nutriment and sustenance, and at the same time secretes
. a poisonous principle resembling an alkaloid, which in turn kills
the sheep.
3rd. That the development of the microbe in the blood circulating in
the system fills or chokes up the blood-vessels, more especially the
capillaries and thus causes death.
4th. That the oxygen of the arterial blood, in which it finds all the con-
ditions necessary to its own existence is greedily seized upon by
the microbe, while the sheep consequently dies of asphyxia.
Both from experiment and from reasoning on the investigation of others,
I am somewhat of opinion that the last-mentioned explanation is the right
one, and when the results of experiments I have in hand are complete, I
may, I think, be able to support my present opinion as to the asphyxia
theory.
From results arrived at, so far, in the Government Laboratory and at the
experimental paddock at Junee, I am enabled to vigorously apply the four-
fold test postulated by Koch, to Cumberland disease :
1. The microbe has been found in the blood lymph and tissues of sheep
that died from the disease. *
2. The microbe has been isolated and cultivated in nutrient media out-
side the body of the sheep, the cultivation having been carried on
. through several generations of the bacillus.
3. A pure cultivation has been used to inoculate sheep, producing the
same disease.
4. In the sheep so operated on, the bacillus anthracis has been found
contained in the blood of the animal.
A most important variation in the mode of cultivating this microbe is a
method whereby its virulent effect is weakened, lessened, or attenuated, as
it is called. When the bacillus anthracis is cultivated under certain
conditions as to nutriment and temperature, such as under the influence of
oxygen, either compressed or uncompressed, or in the presence of a trace of
phenol, or on solid media, such as potato or gelatine, it is found that when
the bacillus arrives at the adult filament stage, spores or daughter cells
begin to form. This spore formation consists of bright shining dots inside
the bacilli themselves, like peas in a pod; the hyaline sheath of the parent
cell then becomes disintegrated, while the spores maintain their relative
position in chains. The temperature at which these spores form is between
60 and 107 degrees Fahrenheit.
By keeping the-bacillus at 106 or 107 degrees for some days in cultivation
the spores themselves disappear, remaining latent but still in existence, the
filament form alone persisting. These, in turn, become degenerate and
attenuated. Taken at the right moment, such an attenuated liquid has the
remarkable effect of producing only a mild attack of the disease. An animal
such as the sheep having been vaccinated with virus such as this, is found to
be proof against the disease in its most virulent form; the immunity or
protection being established for about a year or more. -
25


By a series of cultivation, virulent or non-virulent virus may be produced
at will by the practical biologist. On drying the bacillus and applying some
of the aniline dyes it rapidly becomes stained, so that the microbe is much
better seen and identified. When a mass of bacilli in the filament stage are
stained they present an appearance somewhat resembling a tangled mass of
hair or fine filaments, some photographs of which will be found interesting.
DISCUSSION ON PAPERS READ BY MESSRS. STANLEY AND HAMLET.
A Meeting of the delegates and other gentlemen interested was held at
Doyle’s Hall, Junee, on Wednesday, 3rd October, 1888, for the purpose of
discussing the papers read on the previous evening at Crawley’s Hall. Mr.
J. de Y. Lamb was voted to the chair, and requested some gentlemen to open
the discussion.
Mr. A. Park, M.8.0.V.5., Tasmania, stated that the experiments had
proved conclusively that the disease anthrax could be dealt with by the
cultivated vaccine, and he fully endorsed the opinion of Mr. Stanley and the
late Mr. Anthony Willows, M.E.C.Y.S. Mr. Park believed the vaccination
by M. Pasteur’s agents would prove a preventive. The weed euphorbia
drummondii had nothing to do with the disease.
Mr. J. P. Pawling asked whether it was dangerous to introduce the
vaccine into sheep on sound country. Mr. Park said Dr. Germont might
perhaps explain.
Dr. Oermont said it might not be wise to vaccinate in a country where the
disease did not exist, as there might perhaps be a possibility of a vaccinated
sheep dying, and if not at once burnt, it could contaminate the soil, still the
risk altogether is very small.
Mr. Eater asked what effect climatic influence had on the development of
the disease, and whether the dry weather would destroy the germs.
Professor Kendall, M.E.C.Y.S., said, warm moist spring weather favoured
the growth of bacilli. The spores (seed germs) are practically indestructible,
they lie latent, but retain their vitality through very dry seasons. He added
that, in the case of travelling stock, it was the custom for them to camp on
one particular spot, and that would be what might be termed an infected
spot. He said that the experiments at Junee had been conducted with the
greatest fairness, and he considered Dr. Germont and M. Loir were very
able to deal with the question. Eespecting the question of the protective
nature of the vaccine, ho considered it of the greatest value to the stock-
owners of the Colony. He strongly advised all owners of infected runs to
vaccinate at once, and not wait until the disease developed itself.
The Chairman (for Pr. Oermont ) stated that in Prance the disease is quite
as prevalent in dry as in swampy country. He explained that the bacilli
could not grow in a temperature of less than 65°, nor more than 108° or
110° Fahrenheit, but the spores or seeds retained their vitality beyond
these limits.
Mr. Oaden asked if the bacilli would be found in any part of the animal.
Pr. Oermont stated that the bacilli would be found in any part of the
animal containing blood.
Mr. Hammond: Why, if we take sheep to the mountains, do they not die
of Cumberland ?
26


Dr. Oermont: These mountains are not infected.,. The disease is very
seldom communicated from one sheep to another, and it disappears if the
sheep leave an infected run to go in the mountains ; but the mountains may'
become infected some day. Anthrax is very prevalent in some mountains of
France.
Mr. O. H. Greene : Is the disease infectious and contagious, in the
ordinary sense of the term ?
Mr. Stanley: The disease is to a certain extent both infectious and
contagious, from the fact that the disease is communicated to sound country
by the discharges of infected sheep ; thousands of spores escape from one
dead body.
Mr. Greene thought that the importance of the question demanded a
larger demonstration of the efficacy of the vaccine, though he did not
doubt the result of the present demonstration.
Mr. Stanley explained that the present demonstration was quite sufficient,
but the Board had the point under consideration. Mr. Hammond had
already offered to provide 5,000 sheep, half to be vaccinated, the other half:
to be left alone, and to test the result. All of them are to remain through
the fatal season in an infected paddock.
Mr. Hammond confirmed his offer, and further stated that he was willing
to contribute towards the cost of vaccinating 10,000 sheep.
Mr. Bruce stated there were already orders for the vaccination of 130,000
sheep.
Mr. Greene; "Will M. Pasteur undertake to keep the Colony supplied
with vaccine, if required ?
Dr. Germont; M. Pasteur is willing to leave a competent person in the
Colony to cultivate virus, and he will teach any person named by the
Government.
Mr. Hamlet said very great antiseptic precaution would be necessary to
the success of the process.
Dr. Campbell: How long will the protection .last ?
Dr. Germont: At least twelve months ; some sheep can be protected for
for many years.
Mr. Patrick: His experience showed the spleen comparatively rotten,
while the covering of the spleen of the sheep, which have died during the
demonstration, were not broken.
Dr. Germont■ could not explain. Perhaps the disease Mr. Patrick was
talking of was not anthrax. He could not say without seeing the sheep.
Mr. B. G. Higgins: Sheep, dying in a flock, the spleen presents certain
appearances. Are the appearances the same when the disease is set up
artificially.
Mr. Stanley: Certainly. But it is not absolutely necessary that the
spleen should show such marked evidence of the disease. He had seen a'
sheep die at Mr. Devlin’s, where the disease did not show itself to any extent
in any of the organs or spleen; in fact, in that case, the disease was not
found until the skin was taken off. It was localised in the throat and
neck.
Mr. A. A. Devlin endorsed Mr. Stanley’s assertion. He had seen many
cases in which the spleen was not the principal seat of the disease.
Mr. Stanley stated that the sheep which died yesterday were all inocu-
lated with virus from blood taken from a sheep by Dr. Germont on Mr.
Devlin’s run in May last. The blood had been hermetically sealed, and
remained in his care until Mr. Hamlet took it to the Government Labors-,
tory, where it was cultivated all the time under lock and key by Dr. Germont,
so that there need be no suspicion of a French virus having been used in:
these experiments.
27


Mr. Digging: Is there any danger of infected travelling sheep leaving
disease, which might affect sheep following them ?
Dr. Germont: It may be that such sheep dying, spread spores which will
germinate sooner or later, so it is dangerous.
Mv. Digging said he would like to hear the experience of others on this
point.
Mr. A. J. Beveridge said his experience was, that travelling sheep did not
spread the infection. He had travelled sheep from Wantabadgery to Mimosa.
As soon as the sheep crossed the Cootamundra range the deaths ceased. In
fact whenever the disease showed itself the sheep were immediately shifted
to Mimosa.
Mr. Patrick: "When he owned "Warree Station, and the disease showed
itself, he always shifted the sheep to the Castlereagh (Merrygoen Run) ;
and the progress of the disease was immediately arrested.
Mr. Hammond said he believed his run had originally become contami-
nated by movements of infected sheep through the district.
Mr. Digging said he was of opinion that the disease did not spread by
moving affected flocks to other places.
Mr. Stanley explained that it all depended on the soil and country they
travelled over. On some stony rough country the spores were killed out-
right, while, if distributed in suitable places, the spores developed bacilli
and they perish, or they may reproduce spores living on vegetation apart
from an animal. It is when the spores are eaten with herbage in certain
favourable seasons they prove so fatal to sheep when eaten in large quanti-
ties and with coarse food.
The Chairman proposed a vote of thanks to Mr. Stanley and Mr. Hamlet,
which was cordially received, and the proceedings then terminated.
ANTHRAX OR CUMBERLAND DISEASE,
Be A. A. Devlin, from Material supplied de Du. GrEuitONT.
According to Chabert in 1780 there were three forms of anthrax.
Firstly.—Fievre charhonneuse (that is the true or malignant anthrax).
Secondly.—Essential charhon or anthrax; and
Thirdly.—Symptomatic anthrax.
The second and third are one and the same, and are both symptomatic
anthrax, commonly known as black-leg.
In essential anthrax the tumour is not apparent in the beginning of the
disease, but in symptomatic anthrax it is apparent from the first.
The microbe of essential and symptomatic anthrax was found by Arloing
about 1880.
The microbe is non-aerobic and motile. There is a vaccine prepared by
Arloing against that disease for cattle.
The JEtiology of Anthrax.
Anthrax exists in a great many countries, viz., France, Germany, Austria,
Italy, The Balkans, Russia, India, Central Asia, America, and Australia.
■ In Xogorod in Russia in three years between 1867 and 1870 520 men
died of anthrax, and 50,000 sheep and cattle also succumbed.
28


In Algeria the sheep have great immunity from the disease, hut they lose
that immunity after some few generations if they are imported into France.
The disease may be localised to some paddocks, and to certain spots in
these paddocks. It can also he localised in a stable.
Most scientists say the disease is more prevalent in places where there is
stagnant water, such as swamps, &c., on the banks of rivers or creeks after
floods. On the banks of tanks when the water becomes very low, and in the
summer during the hottest months, when they have been preceded by
abundant rains. In fact, anthrax is observed in every climate—hot, cold,
dry, swampy.
Cause and Nature.
Seeing that the disease is affected by some peculiarity in the soil like in
malaria, the old scientists believed that anthrax was a disease like malaria
or malaria itself. But anthrax also exists in the driest of countries, and
where there are no floods or no inundations of any kind. In the Beauce in
France for instance.
And very often the disease is prevalent on the hills, and not in the
valleys.
Some others suppose the disease is caused by rusty, dusty, or musty hay.
.The accumulation of a great number of sheep in a stable would be, accord-
ing to some authors, the cause of the disease.
The anthrax is frequent in winter, and in some parts of France, Italy, and
Austria when the sheep are housed.
According to Delafond the disease was caused by a plethora. This is not
correct, because the disease is infectious, virulent, and inoculable.
The first inoculation was made in 1823 by Barthelemy with horses and
sheep, and he showed that the virulence of the disease is greater for the
Herbivora than the Carnivora.
He put healthy and diseased animals together, eating the same food,
drinking from the same vessels, and lying upon the same straw, and no
contagion took place.
Gerlach, in 1845, demonstrated that the disease is the same in sheep and
cattle.
He says soil which contains lime is more favourable to the development of
the disease than soil which is devoid of lime.
In 1850 Bayer and Davaine examined the blood of a sheep dead of
anthrax, and found small filaments, twice as long as the red corpuscles, and
motionless. They mention also the agglutinative state of the red corpuscles.
Important experiments were made by the Medical Association of Euro et
Loire in 1852. These experiments showed that this disease in man, in
cattle, sheep, and horses is the same, although called by different names.
It was also shown that dogs, fowls, ducks, and pigeons are not susceptible
to the disease. In 1855 Pollender made the same discovery. Every part
of the body where the blood circulates is infectious, and if inoculated into
another animal susceptible to the disease, death will be the result.
The most susceptible animals to inoculation are first sheep, then rabbits,
then guinea pigs and mice, horses, and then cattle.
Davaine and Koch have made most of their experiments with rabbits,
guinea-pigs, and mice.
In 1857 Braucll found that the filaments appeared in the blood some
hours before death. He believed that they were not the cause of the disease,
but only associated with it.
29


Davaine was the first to say that the filaments were parasitic, and the
cause of the disease. This statement was made after the publication of a
paper by Pasteur, in which he had described the discovery by him of the
microbe of Butyric fermentation.
According to Davaine, the ferment of Butyric fermentation described by
Pasteur was very similar to the filaments of anthrax. This was not true,
but the idea was good.
Davaine made many inoculations of blood containing filaments, and in
every case where filaments were present he reproduced the disease..
The blood is virulent in very small quantities.
The looooovr part of a drop of blood will kill a guinea-pig; but the
incubation of the disease is more or less long, according to the quantity
injected.
Davaine has shown that blood of animals dead of anthrax, if dried, will
retain its virulence for a very long time. After eleven months, if mixed
with water and inoculated into the blood of a susceptible animal, it would
cause death.
Objections against Davaine’s theory were made by Jaillard and Leplat,
who said Davaine was wrong, as they had inoculated (with the blood of a
cow dead of -anthrax three days) thirty rabbits, which died twenty hours
after inoculation, and the blood contained no bacteria, and the filaments
found by Davaine were accidental.
Then the conclusion was that anthrax is not a parasitic disease, that the
bacilli are not the first cause, but are only occasionally found, and the less
-bacteria the more virulent the disease.
Davaino’s answer was: “ Tour disease is not the same as mine; the
period of incubation is not the same. Tour disease is virulent for fowls ;
mine is not. Th q post-mortem symptoms are not the same, the blood is not
in an agglutinous state, and the spleen is not enlarged.”
Owing to the length of time allowed to elapse after the death of the cow
they had inoculated septic and not anthrax fever.
Another objection to Davaine’s theory was that the blood, when dried,
did not always retain its virulence. It was thus very difficult to explain the
permanency of the disease, seeing that the blood in the body of an animal
dead of anthrax, and not opened, lost its virulence in from five to ten days.
Por this reason it was supposed the disease was not parasitic.
Davaine supposed that flies were the agents of contagion.
That may sometimes be if there is an abrasion of the skin, so that they
•inoculate. It has been proved that inoculation can take place this way.
■ The supposition, however, is not sufficient, because it does not explain
why the disease is localised and is confined only to certain paddocks or
stables.
There is no sign of inoculation on sheep dead of anthrax, no local swelling,
or anything else to indicate that any inoculation has taken place, as would
be the case if it were done artificially.
In 1876 Koch discovered the spores of bacillus of anthrax, and he pub-
lished a very important paper on the aetiology of anthrax.
The spores never exist in the blood during the life of an animal, neither do
they if the body is not opened.
If you take the blood from the animal immediately after death and place
it in a tube, either in cultivation or by itself, but exposed to pure air, the
spores will form in about twenty hours at a temperature of from 30 to 35°.
No spores will form below 18 c or above 43 c .
If some blood or some fragment of organ is dried slowly and at a favourable
temperature, the spores may be formed.
30


On the contrary, if the drying is very rapid no spores are formed, and the
virulence is soon lost. If the body of an animal dead of anthrax is opened,
and there is fees access of aie, although putrefaction takes place, the
bacilli of anthrax will grow in spite of the putrefaction.
But if the body is not opened, and there is no access of aie, puteefaction
only takes place, and the bacilli die. Were this not the case, the country
would he teeming tvith bacilli.
In almost every case there is a certain deposit of filaments from the
droppings, the urine, or any bloody discharge, so that access to the air is
obtained for the formation of spores. The spores may be diluted in water
for three weeks, then dried and kept for several years and still retain their
virulence.
According to Koch, the spores kept either in water or dust are the cause
of contamination.
But he tried to infect rabbits and mice by feeding them with food infected
with spores, without any success.
The experiment was not made on either sheep or cattle.
The Natural History of the Bacillus Anthracis.
The bacillus anthracis has three forms—the bacillus, filaments, and spores.
The bacillus is seen principally in the blood, the ends are straight or
rather concave in some specimens, transparent, and appear like glass rods.
They resist potash, chlorhydric, nitric, sulphuric, and acetic acids, therefore
the bacillus anthracis is a vegetable.
The filamentous state exists principally in broth. There are filaments
very long without ramifications, twisted or mixed together. Homogeneous,
without joints. The aspect of the cultivation in broth is special. It is like
a fleecy cloud, and the liquid in which the cultivation is made, except when
the fleecy cloud exists is quite limpid. After some days the cloud falls to
the bottom of the tube, and then disappears, leaving only a small sediment.
These are the spores. If the cultivation is kept at a temperature above 18°,
the spores begin to form after about ten or fifteen hours.
The bacillus anthracis can he cultivated in a medium neutral or alkaline.
A certain amount of moisture is necessary, and it must have free access
of air.
It will grow on the soil sprinkled with animal or vegetable infusion.
A temperature above 50° or 122 Bah. will kill the bacillus very rapidly.
They will live at a temperature of 110 degrees below zero 0 . Below 12° or
533 Bah. filaments will not grow.
The spores are not formed below 18° or 61 Bah., hut if they are already
formed, and if dried, will retain their vitality at a temperature higher than
100° or 212 Bah.
If they are boiled their vitality will be destroyed after boiling for ten
minutes, but sometimes they will retain their vitality after being boiled for
half-an-hour or even an hour, according to some authors.
The spores once formed will retain their vitality without any access of air,
either in water, dust, or soil. They grow only when they get sufficient
moisture, a suitable temperature, free access of air, and alkaline condition of
soil or natural culture medium, in which they are for the time being placed.
Spores are not killed by alcohol or by chemical agents, except after a
long exposure to such agents or in a very strong solution.
The sunlight destroys the spores in a few hours even if they are dry, and
is very destructive and very rapid in its destruction when they commence to
grow.
31


Proof that Bacillus is the cause of Disease.
It was supposed by many scientists that the bacillus was only accidentally
present in the blood. But Pasteur made filiations of a great quantity, both
of blood and cultivations, and in no single instance was he able to produce
the disease with the liquid. Therefore the disease must be caused by some-
thing solid. The agent must bo in the solid and not in the liquid part of
either the blood or cultivation.
As a proof of this, if you take a single drop of blood containing bacillus
anthracis and inoculate a tube of neutral broth with it, and then from this
tube take a drop and inoculate another, and so on for twenty generations,
when you can only have an infinitesmal part of the original drop of blood,
you will find that a drop of the last cultivation is as virulent in its effects, if
inoculated into the blood of any animal inoculable with the disease, as was
the blood from which the first drop was taken.
It will thus be seen that the liquid cultivation contained nothing injurious,
but that the solid, which is the bacillus anthracis, and that alone, whenever
introduced either direct from the blood to ■ another animal or to neutral
broth, and from that to other cultivations of the same nature, and then from
the neutral cultivation to a susceptible animal the disease anthrax, and no
other, is always produced.
Then comes the question, how do animals contract the disease spon-
taneously ?
The explanation by Davaine, that inoculation took place by the flies
coming into contact with abrasions on a healthy animal after being in con-
tact with a diseased one, is not sufficient to account for the very largo
number affected, although in some instances it may be the case.
It was then supposed that anthrax had an internal origin, and was caused
by the food.
To test this, Koch tried, by mixing fragments of spleen of anthrax with
the food of rabbits and mice, to introduce the disease in that way, but the
result was not a success.
Again, Pasteur tried by mixing cultivations, which contained many germs,
with their food to introduce the disease to sheep, with the result that some
of them died of anthrax, and the post-mortem conditions were the same as in
spontaneous anthrax, while others and the greater number escaped the-
disease. He found that when the germs were mixed with ears of barley,
oats, chaff, thistles, or any hard and sharp substance likely'to cause an
abrasion of the skin of the mouth or throat, the mortality was greater than
when the animals were fed on soft succulent food.
Note. —The sheep in this country die most when the seed is on the grass,
and while it is hard and likely to injure the mouth or throat, the death rate
being very considerably reduced directly the first good autumn rain falls.
The question now arises—Whence comes the germ in the natural condition
of infection ?
Pasteur quotes thus : —He. put some sheep in a yard where sheep dead of
anthrax had been buried five years previously, whilst some other sheep were
put into another yard adjoining where no sheep had ever been known to die
of the disease or to have been buried.
Some of the sheep in the former yard where the dead animals were buried
contracted anthrax and died, while those in the second yard were quite
sound, and no deaths took place amongst them.
32


A direct examination of the soil in the yard over the grave of the buried
sheep showed that there were microbes of anthrax mixed with it. The
question now arises, “ How can the germs of the disease from which animals
have died five years previously, and buried 5 feet under the surface, reach
the surface of the soil ” ?
Pasteur, as w T ell as examining the soil, dissected the earth-worms and
examined the matter contained in them, and there found the germs of the
disease anthrax.
It will thus be seen that the germs can be brought to the surface and
deposited with their excrement by earth-worms, and if dry, they will remain
in the dust, and can be inhaled, as in woolsorters’ disease, by animals coming
in contact with them; or, if rain falls, they may be washed on to the grass,
and either remain there until taken up by animals with their food, or under
suitable conditions may reproduce themselves in large or small numbers,
according to circumstances.
Koch raises objections to Pasteur’s conclusions re earth-worms bringing
the spores of anthrax up to the surface from the bodies of animals below it.
One objection taken by that scientist is that the temperature of the soil is
not high enough to produce spores in the body of an animal buried 5 feet
under the ground.
Reply. —The temperature at certain seasons is sufficient to bring about
this result, and, in addition, the fact of the considerable rise in the temper-
ature during the early stages of decomposition is in itself quite sufficient to
bring about the cultivation of the spores.
Pasteur replies to the second objection “ That earth-worms do not bring
the spores to the surface,” and says, “ It is a matter of fact that the spores
of anthrax have been found in earth-worms after dissecting them.”
Koch himself has found spores in the excrement of earth-worms after
mixing spores with the earth and then placing the worms in it, thus showing
that they do take them up even when mixed with the earth in an ordinary
waj’.
How much more then is this the case when the spores are mixed with
organic matter deposited around the body of an animal buried and which
would be an attraction for the worms to congregate and feed upon those
particular organisms which have in reality been nothing more or less than a
medium of cultivation for the bacillus, after exhausting which, the spores
would remain in large numbers.
Another objection of Koch is that the disease is not taken by the throat,
and to test this he made a hole in pieces of potato, filled them with spores, and
passed it down the throat of some sheep, and the result was that if ho gave
a small quantity a few of the sheep died, whereas if he gave it in large quan-
tities there was an increase in the number of deaths.
On the contrary, if you mix the bacilli of anthrax without spores with the
food of animals susceptible of the disease, the bacilli are destroyed in the
stomach, and the animals do not become affected, unless you introduce the
bacilli in exceptionally large quantities, when 19 died out of 22 drenched.
According to Koch, the bacillus anthracis can live on the surface of the
soil like an ordinary vegetable, and it is parasitic only by accident.
In 1881 Buchner put white mice into a box containing spores of anthrax
mixed with dust. The mice inhaled the dust and died of anthrax, thus
confirming the experiment made by Pasteur with sheep in 1878 and 1879.
c
33


Susceptibility of animals to anthrax.
Sheep can ho infected very easily by mixing spores of the disease with
their food, or by subcutaneous injection.
Eodents, mice, guinea-pigs, and rabbits are easily infected by inoculation,
but are not so susceptible as sheep by taking the spores with their food.
Eats are very difficult to inoculate.
Cattle take the disease easily with their food, and are less susceptible to
the inoculation.
Horses take the disease easily, both by inoculation and with their food.
The disease is not very prevalent amongst horses in France, but is so in
Algeria, Eussia, Sardinia, and Australia in certain places.
Pigs and dogs contract the disease very rarely even when inoculated with
the spores.
Cats are more susceptible.
Deer and animals of that kind are very susceptible, and take it very
readily. Bears take the disease in Eussia and Finland.
Birds never contract the disease spontaneously, and very seldom when
inoculated. (Pasteur has experimented to test the question.)
Fish and frogs will contract the disease by inoculation only, if the
temperature is high enough.
Anthrax in mankind.
Malignant pustule is seen amougst shepherds, butchers, glove-makers,
tanners, blacksmiths, veterinary surgeons, boot-makers, upholsterers, wool-
sorters, soap-makers, tallow'-dealers, horn-workers, etc., etc.
Internal anthrax.
Q. Is the meat of an animal dead of anthrax dangerous as food?
At/Not if thoroughly cooked. Even if taken in a fresh raw state the
bacilli may be destroyed in the stomach. Anthrax meat has often been
used as food without accident. But this is not always the case, as Oemter,
in 1876, mentions two cases of death from internal anthrax through eating
diseased meat of a cow dead of anthrax. In one case eighty people had
eaten of the food without accident.
Wool-sorters’ Disease and Sadernkrankheit of Vienna, "Bag Gatherers'
Disease.”
The wool-sorters’ disease was observed in Bradford, and in ten months,
from November, 1879, to September, 1880, there were nine cases of
malignant pustule, with two deaths, and twenty-three cases of wool-sorters’
disease, with nineteen deaths. . Dr. Greenfield made post-mortem examina-
tions, and found oedema round the lung and in the pleura, in the mediastre,
and hemorrhagic effusion in the bronchia. He made inoculations of Guinea-
pigs and found the disease was anthrax, and according to the post-mortem
appearances and the symptoms during life, the disease was contracted through
the lungs by inhalation of the spores.
The men were working mohair and camel’s hair from Asia, from the
province of Yan.
Brauell and Davaine have said that the placenta was a good filter for the
bacteridie, and that it was never found in the foetus. The contrary has
been demonstrated by Straus and Chamberland.


Attenuation of the Virulence of Anthrax.
Pasteur’s method is to prevent the formation of spores, by exposing the
cultivation to a temperature between 42 and 43°.
After one month the bacilli are destroyed; but before being destroyed
they are attenuated more and more, and a peculiarity of this attenuation is
that if you give a suitable temperature to the cultivation, the spores are
formed and retain the degree of virulence possessed by them at the time
they are allowed to form.
Por the first vaccination you must make a choice of microbes at such a
degree of strength that it will protect against a more virulent vaccination of
the attenuated cultivation.
Por the second vaccine you must make a choice.of a cultivation at such a
degree of virulence that it will protect against the most virulent cultivation
of the disease itself.
The spores are very difficult to deal with, and any attenuation of them
would be attended by very great difficulty, as they are either destroyed
altogether in the attempt to attenuate or retain their original virulence.
Burdon-Sanderson, and Dr. Greenfield had noticed that if cattle were
inoculated with the blood of rodents they did not die, and were protected
against a second inoculation, and they believed that by inoculating the blood
of these animals, dead of anthrax, with the blood of healthy cattle,the cattle
were thus protected against an attack of the disease, because the virulence
was attenuated by passing through the blood of rodents.
Klein puts forward the same theory, and believes that the blood bacillus
of sheep or cattle, dead of anthrax, invariably produce death when inoculated
into sheep or cattle, but that after passing through white mice it loses its
virulence for sheep or cattle.
This theory is not borne out by facts. The blood bacillus of rodents dead
of anthrax, if inoculated into sheep, will in almost every instance cause death.
The fact of the inoculation of the rodents blood bacillus into cattle not pro-
ducing death does not prove that any attenuation has taken place by having
passed through the blood of the rodent, because the same results would bo
obtained if the inoculation were made from the blood bacillus of cattle.
Cattle are not very susceptible to the inoculation of anthrax.
Attenuation by Heat.
Toussaint says if you expose blood to a temperature of 55 c for 10 minute s
you can inoculate sheep with it and give them an immunity against the
disease. Blood exposed to a temperature of 50° for 15 minutes for the first
vaccine, and to the same temperature for 10 minutes for the second, a means
proposed by Chauveau. Chauveau has attenuated spdres by exposing them
to a temperature of 80° for an hour and a half, also by compressed oxygen.
Attenuation by antiseptic carbolic acid, one part to 800, gives an attenu-
ation. It is the same with bichromate of potash, 1 to 1,200. These
experiments were made by Chamberland and Eoux.
The Theory of Vaccination. .
Three theories have been given by Pasteur and others.
Pirst it has been supposed that if you cultivate the germ of the disease in
a cultivation of broth or in the body of an animal, the cultivation takes up
the particular nutritive substance contained in the broth or blood required
to support the germs of the particular disease vaccinated.*
• Exploded theory.
35


Secondly—lt has been supposed that the microbes secrete some substance.
Some substance which prevents another growth of the germs of the same
disease either in broth or in the body of an animal.
* Take for instance yeast. If there is too much alcohol contained in beer
the growth of the yeast in the fermentation at once ceases, while, if the
alcohol is withdrawn, the growth at once commences again. If you take a
cultivation of septicaemia and filter the broth, and then inoculate a
rabbit with the broth, you will then protect the rabbit against septicaemia,
showing that there has been some direct or indirect product taken up by the
broth from the germs cultivated in it, which gives immunity against a second
cultivation either in it or an animal into which it has been vaccinated. The
same will apply to symptomatic anthrax or black-leg in cattle. Thirdly,
it is supposed that after an attack of a virulent disease, either contracted
spontaneously or artificially, as by vaccination, the elements of the organism
are trained to struggle against a new outbreak, and are enabled to prevent it
from making any progress.
It is supposed that the white corpuscles of the blood are the agents of
protection, and that they absorb and destroy the germ of the disease when
introduced a second time.
As a matter of fact it is difficult to say what chemical substance is with-
drawn from or added to the organism. As in the case of fowls when the
temperature is reduced so as to allow of their contracting the disease, or
frogs when their temperature is raised for the same purpose.
You can inoculate a pigeon four, five, or even six times without the inocu-
lation taking any effect. But if you inoculate a seventh time, using the same
quantity of virus each time you will produce the disease and death.
The same thing applies to rats. The reason for this has not, up to the
present time, been discovered.
Among sheep the disease is known as splenic apoplexy, it is still more
rapid than among cattle.t Sheep are sometimes stricken as if by lightning,
either in the fold, the paddock, or on the camps. The most experienced can
scarcely notice, in spite of the most careful examination, signs by which dis-
ease may be suspected. If the flock is walking or travelling any diseased
sheep will stay behind, appear careless and inactive, and, seeing that anthrax
usually attacks the most vigorous animals, that fact alone attracts the
attention of the observer. On closer inspection it will be found the breath-
ing is quick, the ears hang down. There is a peculiar twitching of the head,
the nose being as it were jerked towards the chest. The eyes appear very
bright, but the vision soon becomes obscured so that a dog may run up to
them and no notice taken. The same convulsive twitchings appear to extend
over the body and attack the legs, which lose their power of motion. The
animal then falls, and the convulsive twitchings continue until death takes
place.
In some cases there is a considerable discharge of blood from the anus
vulva or sheath, and also a bloody mucous from the nostrils. In other cases
none of these symptoms are apparent. By many this discharge is looked
upon as absolutely necessary to prove the disease anthrax, but post-mortem
examination proves death does take place in many cases from the disease
when there are no external discharges observable. Among cattle the disease
appears to be much more rapid than among horses. Some animal which
never showed signs of disease is found dead; nostrils filled with bloody
discharge. The anus vulva or sheath stained by ejections tinted with blood.
♦Antidote theorv. Vital resistance,
f Symptoms in sheep.


Some others die before any aid can be given them, although assistance may
be attempted immediately upon the first symptoms of uneasiness being
observed. The slowest cases do not last more than from twelve to eighteen
hours.
As in every serious disease the fever chart never begins by the ceasing of
rumination and loss of appetite. Then appear shiverings, local sweats,
extreme sensitiveness of loins, and the chest abdominal pains, as proved by
stamping of the feet, excitement of the head, and plaintive bellowing.
Very quickly the strength is lost, the walk is tottering, and the head
sometimes falls and cannot be raised again. Often a bloody and fetid
diarrhoea is observed.
The pulse is, as among horses, small, quick, nearly imperceptible. The
beatings of the heart sometimes violent and tumultuous, more often nearly
imperceptible.
The breathing is plaintive, sighing, panting. The muzzle is dry, mouth
cold, tongue violet and pending, the teeth grate or grind.
As soon as he falls, the animal becomes swollen, has convulsive motions,
violent and continuous until death takes place.
Notes. —When sheep have been inoculated and a strict watch kept upon
them, although the thermometer indicated a considerable rise in tempera-
ture, the animal continued to feed for some hours, and exhibited no signs of
illness observable by those well experienced and able to detect the slightest
sign. Animals have been noticed feeding for some time after the bacilli
could be seen in the blood. The rise in temperature gave generally a sure
indication of the disease, the temperature either rising or keeping up until
the death struggle took place. In one instance the opposite was noticed,
the temperature commenced to fall four hours before death, and continued
falling, so that when death took place it was only slightly over the normal
height. In all cases of post-mortem examinations, in addition to the post-
mortem appearance, the microscope should be used, as several instances have
been noticed when, from the post-mortem appearances alone, the indications
were not sufficiently marked to enable experts to say (without the micros-
cope) that death was caused by anthrax. After microscopic examination, if
there is any doubt, inoculate another animal with fresh blood and await the
result.
[Sis Sketches,]
Sydney : Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lSSB
D
37


Blooo d from a sheep that died from Anthrax,
showing bacilli and altered disks.
Blood disks from a healthy sheep
PHOTO-LITHOGRAPHED AT the GOVT. PRINTING OFFICE,
SYDNEY. NEW SOUTH WALES.


Spleen taken from a sheep that died from Anthrax, photographed side by side with a spleen from a healthy
sheep. The diseased spleen is that on the left.


Paddock at Junee where the Anthrax demonstration was made.


Temporary Laboratory and Dissecting Shed —Looking North.


Temporary Laboratory and Dissecting Shed —Looking South.


Yard for Inoculated Cattle.
