





REPORT BY COMMITTEE APPOINTED
TO
INVESTIGATE THE POSSIBILITIES
OF
REHABILITATION OF
MINED PHOSPHATE LANDS
TERRITORY OF
NAURU
1966


TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Letters of Transmittal. (iv), (v),
Acknowledgements. (vi)
SECTION ONE (a) INTRODUCTION: 1
(i) Rehabilitation of Nauru. 1
(ii) C.5.1.R.0. Investigation. 1
(iii) Nauruan decision to remain
on island. 1
(iv) Committee appointed. 2
(v) Committee membership. 2
(vi) Activities of Committee. 2
(b) ITINERANT OF COMMITTEE 3
SECTION TWO SUMMART OF CONCLUSIONS 5
SECTION THREE TERMS OF REFERENCE 7
SECTION FOUR BACKGROUND TO REHABILITATION PROPOSALS: 9
(a) Negotiations regarding Nauruan
independence. 9
(b) Description of land conditions. 9
(c) Nauruans* attitude and concern. 10
(d) Psychological effects
of terrain. 10
(e) C.5.1.R.0. and B.P.C.
investigations. 11
(f) C.5.1.R.0. report on
rehabilitation. 11
(g) B.P.C. report on costs. 12
(h) Nauruans' submission. 12
SECTION FIVE AGRICULTURAL ENVIRONMENT AND LAND USE: 14
(a) Climate. 14
(b) Soils. 15
(c) Agricultural situation. 15
(d) Soil and Economic factors. 16


Page
SECTION SIX POPULATION, LAND AND ESSENTIAL SERVICES 17
SECTION SEVEN THE NAURUAN ECONOMY AFTER EXHAUSTION
OF PHOSPHATE DEPOSITS: 18
(a) Population increase. 18
(b) Dietary patterns. 18
(c) Future food consumption. 19
(d) Economic factors. 19
(e) Community Long Term Investment Fund. 20
(f) Private investment. 20
(g) Import expenditure. 21
(h) Employment factors. 22
(i) Future industries. 22
(j) Tourism. 23
(k) Production possibilities. 23
(l) Land tenure. 24
(m) Land use planning. 24
SECTION EIGHT POSSIBILITIES OF TREATMENT OF MINED
PHOSPHATE AREAS: 26
(a) Assessment of situation. 26
(b) Possibilities for treatment - 28
(i) Refilling of worked-out areas. 28
(ii) Levelling of pinnacles. 28
(iii) Construction of airport. 29
(iv) Construction of water supply. 30
(v) Revegetation of pinnacle areas. 32
(c) Benefits of resoiling all worked-
out lands - 37
(i) Benefits; agricultural and
residential. 37
(ii) Environmental advantages. 37
(iii) Production of crops. 37
(iv) Town and land planning. 38
(v) Benefits in relation to costs. 39
(d) Levelling and use of local soil to
refill part of worked-out lands. 40


Page
SECTION NINE ALTERNATIVE POSSIBILITIES OF OBTAINING
LAND BY RECLAMATION:
(a) Levelling and filling reef area. 42
(b) Levelling and filling coastal flats. 4}
SECTION TEN CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS. 44
APPENDICES.
I Details of Committee’s meetings. 45
II Analysis of rainfall (with chart). 47
111 Estimated costs of levelling and
resoiling. 48
IV Details of borings for water supply
(with maps). 54
V Analysis of water storage and
collection works (with chart). 63
VI Analysis of possibilities of water
importation. 67
VII Bibliography. 68


Sydney
1966
Sir,
I have the honour to submit to you, in
accordance with the terms of reference agreed upon between
the Australian delegation on behalf of the Administering
Authority and a delegation from the Nauru Local Government
Council at discussions held in Canberra in May/June 1965* the
report of the Nauru Lands Rehabilitation Committee concerning
the question of restoring the mined out phosphate lands of
the Island of Nauru.
(Signed) G.I. Davey,
Chairman, Nauru Lands
Rehabilitation Committee
The Hon. C.E. Barpes, M.P.,
Minister for Territories,
Parliament House,
CANBERRA..


Sydney
1966
Sir,
In accordance with the terras of reference
agreed upon between the Australian delegation on behalf of the
Administering Authority and a delegation from the Nauru Local
Government Council at discussions held in Canberra in May/June
1965, I have the honour to transmit through you to the Nauru
Legislative Council the report of the Nauru Lands
Rehabilitation Committee concerning the question of restoring
the mined out phosphate lands of the Island of Nauru.
(Signed) G.l# Davey
Chairman, Nauru Lands
Rehabilitation Committee
President,
Nauru Legislative Council,
NAURU, Central Pacific


ACKN QWLEDGMENTS
The Committee takes this opportunity to express its
gratitude to those governmental officers who provided much use-
ful information in the course of the Committee’s investigations.
In particular the Committee would like to thank the Secretary
of the Commonwealth Department of Territories, Mr. G. Warwick
Smith, 0.8. E. and senior officers of the department in Canberra
and Sydney, who provided valuable assistance and facilities for
the meetings of the Committee.
The Committee wishes to acknowledge the most
efficient and competent work done by Mr. Maurice Culnane as
Secretary and Executive Officer of this Committee, and his
invaluable aid based on his detailed knowledge of Nauruan
affairs.
Thanks are also due to the then Administrator at
Nauru, Mr. R.S. Leydin, 0.8. E. and senior Administration
officials who supplied the Committee with much historical and
other advice essential for the Committee’s purposes.
Finally, the Committee is appreciative of the
courtesy shown and the hospitality extended to the Committee
during its stay at Nauru by the Island Manager of the British
Phosphate Commissioners and his officers, and of the valuable
time and assistance given by senior technical officers of the
Commissioners both at Nauru and at the Commissioners' head
office in Melbourne.


SECTION ONE.
(a) INTRODUCTION
(i) The question of rehabilitating the mined, phosphate
areas of Nauru has been raised from time to time over a period
of many years* Referred to in the past variously as
"restoring", ”resoiling", "regenerating",' u rehabilitating",
etc., the question apparently had as its objective some
programme of orderly treatment of those parts of the island
denuded of their topsoil and phosphate. This would provide
fertile areas of land suitable for the growing of coconuts,
pandanus, tomano and other trees, and, in general, make for
a more congenial environment for the Nauruans when the
phosphate deposits were exhausted.-
(ii) In 1954 the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organization, at the request of the Commonwealth
Government, carried out a survey of the possibility of
restoring the worked-out lands at Nauru. Its conclusions
were that while it would be possible to level out the worked
areas and cover them with imported soil; there was no cert-
ainty that the soil would remain on the surface and not be
washed away. This doubt, together with the uncertainty of
adequate water resources to supplement rainfall, led the
investigators to rule out the ultimate success of such a
project.
(iii) Subsequently it was proposed to resettle the
Nauruans in a new home and the matter of rehabilitating the
island was allowed to lapse. However, when in August 1964
negotiations between the Commonwealth Government and the
Nauruans failed to reach a satisfactory conclusion for re-
settling the Nauruans on Curtis Island, near the Queensland
coast, the Nauruans expressed the wish that they remain on
Nauru and not seek another home. This view was reaffirmed
at discussions which the Nauru Local Government Council had
with the Commonwealth Government in June 1965# when the
Nauruan delegation requested that following their decision
to stay on Nauru, the Administering Authority should assume


responsibility for the restoration of the rained areas, at no
cost to the Nauruans.
(iv) The Australian Government was not able to commit the
other partner Governments to any such rehabilitation proposals
"the objectives and costs of which were unknown and the
effectiveness of which was uncertain”. It was agreed, however,
to establish an independent technical committee of experts to
examine the question. Hence, late in 1965, the Minister for
Territories appointed the Committee, the individual members of
which were mutually acceptable to the Nauru Local Government
Council and the Administering Authority.
( v ) The members of the Committee so appointed were
Mr. G.I. Davey Consulting Engineer,
(Chairman) Sydney, N.S.W.
Professor J.N. Lewis Professor of Agricultural
Economics, University of
New England, Armidale, N.S.W.
Mr. W.F. Van Beers Soils and Land Classification
Officer of the F.A.0.,
Rome, Italy.
(vi) The Committee held its first meeting in Sydney on
26th January, 1966. It then conferred with officers of the
Department of Territories in Canberra on 3rd February and with
senior officials of the British Phosphate Commissioners in
Melbourne on 4th February, leaving for Nauru by air on the same
day. During the ten-day visit to Nauru the Committee had
detailed discussions with all the Nauruan members of the newly-
formed Legislative Council, with the Administrator and his
senior officers and with the Island Manager of the British
Phosphate Commissioners and his technical officers. The Committee
also carried out several extensive inspections of the worked-out
and other areas of the Island. A summary listing the various
officials and other persons interviewed by the Committee in
Australia and at Nauru is shown in Appendix I.


(b) ITINERARY CF COMMITTEE
Jan. 26th Sydney First Meeting of the Committee.
Feb. 3rd Canberra The Committee had discussions with the
Secretary (Mr. G. Warwick Smith); the
Assistant Secretary - S. & G.S. -
(Mr. C.E. Reseigh); and the Director
- I.R. & I. - (Mr. R. Marsh), of the
Department of Territories.
Feb. 4th Melbourne Discussions with the Assistant General
Manager - Production - (Mr. T.A. Adams);
informal talks with the Australian
Commissioner (Sir William Dunk), the
General Manager (Mr. J.A. Bissett),
and the Deputy General Manager
(Mr. L.E, Ravenscroft), of the British
Phosphate Commissioners.
p.m. Departed by air for Nauru.
Feb. sth Nauru p.m. Arrived at Nauru. Met by the
Administrator, the Official Secretary,
the Head Chief and Councillors, the
Island Manager of B.P.C. and Mr. R.
Nevile of B.P.C. Melbourne.
Feb. 6th " General inspection of plateau areas
and tour of the island perimeter with
the Assistant Manager - Engineering -
(Mr. L. Withers).
Feb. 7th " p.m. A meeting took place at Domaneab
with all Nauruan members of the Leg-
islative Council.
Feb. Bth " a.m. Meeting with the Island Manager
(Mr. W. Marston); the Assistant
Manager - Engineering - (Mr. L. Withers)
„ and the Resident Civil Engineer
(Mr. B.J. Webb).
p.m. Inspection of the plateau area.
Feb. 9th " p.m. General inspection of old areas
and plateau with Councillors Bernicke,
Doguape and Eoaea.
Feb. 10th " Visit to the Administration Libraiy;
discussion with Director of Education
(Mr. Allison) and visit to Legislative
Council in session.
Feb. 11th " a.m. Discussions with the Administrator.
Feb. 12th " p.m. Committee members made individual
inspections of the Island.
Feb. 14th " a.m. Discussions with the Administrator
and B.P.C. Manager.


Feb. 15th Nauru a.m. Informal meeting at Domaneab
with Nauruan Councillors.
p.m. Departed Nauru by S.S. "Tri-Ellis".
During the voyage informal discussions
took place with the Master, the Chief
Engineer and the Chief Officer.
Feb. 24th a.m. Arrived Geelong.
" " Melbourne Discussions with B.P.C. officials.
March 12th Sydney Committee meeting.
March 17th Canberra Committee meeting.
Meeting with Mr. G. Warwick Smith,
Secretary, Department of Territories.


SECTION TWO
SUMMAHY OF CONCLUSIONS
(a) The Committee, having carefully considered the terms
of reference and the background to those terms in the light
of the submissions tendered by the Nauruans and the dis-
cussions between their representatives and the Australian
officials at Canberra in May/June 1965 » has reached the
following conclusions ;-
(i) that while it would be technically feasible
(within the narrow definition of that ex-
pression) to refill the mined phosphate
areas of Nauru with suitable soil and/or
other materials from external sources, the
veiy many practical considerations involved
rule out such an undertaking as impracticable;
(ii) that it would, nevertheless, be practicable
to undertake certain treatment "of the mined
areas, or parts of them, which would effect-
ively induce a more attractive environment
and would provide lands which would be suit-
able for habitation or other public purposes,
including limited cultivation;
(iii) that any proposals for the Nauruans to con-
tinue to live on Nauru after the exhaustion
of the phosphate deposits must include
provision for an adequate water supply and
facilities for outside communication and
trade;
(iv) that the most effective use of large
sections of the mined areas would be to use
them for the construction, as a single
project, of a water storage system and an
airstrip;
(v) that while it would be impracticable to com-
pletely restore the mined areas to provide
an agricultural economy for the Nauruans,
it would be valuable to revegetate some of
them and to treat other limited areas for
the growing of trees, vegetables, etc.;


(vi) that a system of land-use planning for the
island is most desirable and would probably
lead subsequently to the development of
additional usable land which would become
available as a result of the rehabilitation
proposals.
(b) In the sections of the report which follow, the Committee
discusses in detail the considerations, financial and prac-
tical, which gave rise to these conclusions and gives its
assessment of the effectiveness of the various suggestions
made, together with estimates of the costs involved.


SECTION THREE
TERMS OF REFERENCE
(a) The terms of reference of the Committee were "to examine
(i) whether it would be technically feasible to
refill the mined phosphate areas with suit-
able soil and/or other materials from ex-
ternal sources or to take other steps in
order to render them usable for habitation
purposes and/or cultivation of any kind;
(ii) effective and reasonable ways of under-
taking such restoration, including possible
sources of material suitable for refilling;
(iii) estimated costs of any practicable methods
of achieving restoration in any effective
degree."
(b) The terms of reference also instructed the Committee,
assuming it appeared to be feasible to achieve restoration
along the lines referred to in the paragraph above, to :-
"(i) investigate the water resources of Nauru;
(ii) examine fully the possibility of grow-
ing in the areas to be restored, trees,
vegetables and other plants of a utilit-
arian kind, having regard both to what was
done in this way in the past and what
might be most useful to the Nauruan
people in the future."
(c) The Committee was asked to report its findings to the
Nauru Legislative Council and the Administering Authority by
30th June, 1966.
(d) The word "economic" nowhere appears in the Committee's
terms of reference but it seems clear both from the dis-
cussions preceding the appointment of the Committee and from
the composition of the Committee itself that an evaluation
of possible measures for rehabilitation of mined areas from
an economic point of view is expected. Nevertheless the
Committee's economic appraisal of various steps towards
restoration of denuded lands must inevitably remain incomplete.


It is not possible at this stage to make unequivocal statements
regarding the economic soundness of certain proposed measures
as many of the objectives involved are intangibles which do not
lend themselves to ready evaluation in dollars and cents. The
only values which can be attached to many of these intangible
considerations are those expressed in the actual decision-
making process. Thus the objective of greater visual or
climatic congeniality of the island, for example, is valued
ultimately by what the parties concerned would be prepared to
spend or forego, in order to achieve a specified degree of
amelioration of the environment.
(e) The Committee has understood its function to be primarily
the provision of information concerning technically feasible
methods of treating worked areas, the costs and benefits of
alternative treatments and the implications of such actions,
with a view to assisting the Administering Authority, and the
Nauru Legislative Council to make more informed decisions on
the questions involved. The Committee has also attempted
wherever possible to analyse the relative costs and advantages
of alternative ways of pursuing particular objectives. It
has not sought to impose its own valuations on such objectives
by making firm recommendations for or against the acceptance
of the expenditures involved in specific measures for land
treatment.
(f) In accordance with the above interpretation of its terms
of reference the Committee has concentrated on providing
relevant facts, assessment and analysis and has not presumed
to lay down policy or even policy recommendation. However,
it considered it would be helpful to outline a set of
measures for the treatment of worked-out phosphate areas
which would be reasonable in terms of the costs involved and
the contributions which would be made towards a sound and
flourishing economy. The Committee has in its conclusions
expressed its views on what might represent a reasonable
programme of work for the treatment of mined areas. It has
taken into consideration all the circumstances, particularly
the future requirements of Nauru for residential and rec-
reational space, food production, water supply and communic-
ations. It has further set out a number of recommendations
concerning some of the immediate steps which should be under-
taken if this programme were to be adopted.


SECTION FOUR
BACKGROUND TO REHABILITATION PROPOSALS
(a) The immediate background to the Committee's enquiry
is seen in the negotiations between the Australian Government
and the Nauru Local Government Council in 1964 concerning
resettlement of the Nauruan people on Curtis Island off the
Queensland coast. These negotiations failed to reach agree-
ment on the terms of resettlement. The chief factor in-
fluencing the Nauruan decision not to accept resettlement on
the terms offered appears to have been the desire of the
Nauruans for their new home to be an autonomous and fully
independent State, where their national identity could be
preserved. The Australian Government was unwilling to cede
full sovereignty over Curtis Island and wished to retain
some powers, notably those concerning defence, quarantine
and external affairs. Negotiations ended with the announce-
ment by the Nauruan Local Government Council that it rejected
the specific offer of resettlement on Curtis Island and
considered it in the best interests of the Nauruans to remain
on their own island. The question of rehabilitation of
worked-out phosphate lands was thus raised, bearing as it
did on the capacity of the island to provide a satisfactory
home for the Nauruans whose numbers are increasing at a rate
of more than four per cent per annum.
(b) Some two thirds of the total land area of 5,263
acres comprises worked-out or workable lands, and the denudation
of this area of its thin covering of topsoil and its deep
overlay of phosphate, leaves behind a forbidding and virt-
ually impassable terrain of bare and jagged coral limestone
pinnacles, standing some 15 to 40 feet high. The plateau
area had in the past not been intensively used by the Nauruan
people. The whole population formerly resided and still
resides on the narrow strip of low coconut lands surrounding
the island, comprising some 998 acres, and in the relatively
fertile basin of about 154 acres surrounding the Buada
Lagoon, a small lake at approximately sea level. The phos-
phate lands carried a vegetative cover ranging from sparsely


growing and stunted trees to denser stands of tomano and
wild almond with some coconut trees and pandanus in favoured
areas. The main former uses of the phosphate lands -as a
source of timber for canoes and thatching materials for hut
construction and as a reserve for the hunting of birds, the
only form of wild life on the island - are scarcely relevant
to the present economic circumstances and way of life of the
Nauruan people. The limited food produced on the uncultiv-
ated uplands obviously never made a significant contribution
to the subsistence of the Nauruans. The very porous, thinly
soiled phosphate lands would undoubtedly have been the first
and most seriously affected in the recurring drought periods,
and in any event the output on the coastal frings in favour-
able years would have been inadequate for consumption re-
quirements. Today there is no sign that unmined land on the
slopes of the plateau is being used for any form of product-
ive activity except for a vexy small area which is under
cultivation as a vegetable garden by Chinese members of the
B.P.C. work force. The crops being grown there include melons,
marrows and snake beans. Growth is poor, despite the favour-
able rainfall conditions being experienced, and soil erosion
is apparent. However it is reported that during the Japanese
occupation of the island in the years to 1945* pumpkins
and sweet potatoes were grown on the phosphate lands in some
areas, with the use of nightsoil.
(c) The concern of the Nauruans over the denuded con-
dition of the phosphate-bearing lands after mining is not so
much because of any loss of currently useful production there
but because of loss of opportunities for future utilization
of these areas for habitation, agriculture or other purposes.
It was estimated that these reduced opportunities would be-
come a more serious restraint upon the Nauruan economy as
population density on the island increases substantially above
present levels. Difficulties would also occur when and if
reduced dependence upon imported foodstuffs became necessary
or desirable.
(d) An additional consideration put forward concerns the
effects of exposed pinnacles upon the congeniality of the
island as a place to live. The stark expanse of pinnacles in


worked-out areas is reminiscent of some gigantic prehistoric
burying ground. The pinnacles darken with exposure and, as
they present to the sun a much larger surface area than
level ground, they absorb and subsequently give off much
more heat than the land in its original condition with its
vegetative cover. This, it has been suggested, makes con-
ditions far less pleasant in the immediate vicinity and is
likely to have adverse effects upon precipitation especially
during periods of light cloud cover.
(e) The question of possible rehabilitation of worked-
out phosphate areas has several times received attention in
the past, and it became more pressing when the Nauruans
decided, in 1964, to remain and continue to make the island
their home. Two earlier investigations have been made. The
first was made in 1953/54 by the Land Research and Regional
Survey Section of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organization. The second was carried out by the
British Phosphate Commissioners in 1964/65 at the request of
the Australian Government, following the rejection of the
offer of resettlement on Curtis Island. Furthermore in the
United Nations Trusteeship Council the possibility of re-
filling worked-out areas with imported soil has been suggested.
It has also been the subject of questions from time to time
by representatives who expressed their concern lest the
absorption of the inhabitants into some other community
resulted in fundamental changes in the Nauruan character.
(f) The C.5.1.R.0. study of the then present and potential
land use on Nauru was undertaken at the request of the
Australian Department of Territories. The C.5.1.R.0. was
asked to report, inter alia, on the "physical and economic
possibilities of regenerating worked-out phosphate land so
as to make it useful for agricultural purposes in the future".
The report stated that "it would be possible to level this
worked-out land with the aid of explosives and heavy crushing
equipment and it would be possible to import soil, e.g. as
backloading from the mainland, but there is no certainty
that the soil would stay on the surface and not be washed
down into the crushed coral. Even if the plateau were to be
resurfaced and maintained in this manner, there would still


be the question of an adequate water supply to supplement
rainfall. It is believed that any such scheme would be
fraught with so much uncertainty as to final success and
would be so expensive that it may be ruled out at once as
a practical proposition for the widescale utilization of
these lands."
(s) In 1964 the British Phosphate Commissioners made a
preliminary estimate of the costs of levelling the limestone
pinnacles and of importing and spreading soil, brought to
Nauru as backloading on phosphate ships. They estimated
that this would be $A73*140 per acre, giving a total cost
of $A256 million to restore the 3,500 acres of phosphate
lands. Slightly over half this sum comprised the estimated
costs of procuring, loading and shipping soil from the
Australian mainland or from New Zealand.
A supplementary examination of the comparative costs
of obtaining soil from a Pacific island source, and trans-
porting it by bulk carriers specially chartered for the pur-
pose, was subsequently made by the Commissioners in 1965.
Taking Fauro in the Solomon Islands as a hypothetical source
of soil, the B.P.C. estimated that the costs of procuring,
loading and shipping soil from such an island would be
approximately four percent greater than the costs of back-
loading soil from Australia or New Zealand. The whole oper-
ation of levelling and resoiling the pinnacle areas would
cost an additional $5.6 million on this basis. A detailed
examination of the B.P.C.*s assumptions of requirements for
resoiling and costing procedures has been made by the
Committee.
(h) A submission concerning rehabilitation of the island
was made by the Nauruans during the course of negotiations
which took place from May 30th to June 10th 1965, between a
delegation of the Nauru Local Government Council and
Australian officials representing the Administering Authority.
The Nauruan submission discussed rehabilitation, not in terms
of the restoration of mined areas, but of supplying adequate
land and water resources to provide a satisfactoiy future
home for the Nauruan people. Rehabilitation of this nature
could involve expenditures on the development of natural


resources which would bring the plateau areas to a condition
of far greater potential productivity than before. It was
agreed during these negotiations to establish an independent
technical committee, comprising a civil engineer, a uni-
versity economist and a soils specialist to be provided by
F.A.O. for the purpose of examining and reporting on this
question.


SECTION FIVE
AGRICULTURAL ENVIRONMENT AND LAND USE.
The present and potential land use of a certain
area depends mainly on the prevailing combination and
mutual influence of the following factors
(a) Climate: temperature, rainfall, etc.
(b) Soil; physical, chemical and biological
properties.
(c) Agricultural topography (relief, slope, pos-
Situation: ition), hydrology (groundwater,
flooding), erosion hazard.
(d) Social and Influence on the social environment
Economic Factors: through irrigation, drainage,
flood control, use of fertilizers,
etc. Location, transport and
marketing facilities, etc.
(a) The temperature of the area is veiy favourable for
plant growth. The annual mean is about with no more
than one or two degrees variation in the means of each
month. The daily temperature range varies only by 10° to
o
12 . The relative humidity is 7C % to 75 °j 0 . The percentage
of sunshine is rather The potential evapotranspiration
(i.e. the required quantity of available water for optimum
plant growth to be provided by rainfall, irrigation and/or
soil storage), is not very high; about 0.2 inches per day
or 6 inches per month.
All these factors are favourable for plant growth.
However, the most important climatic factor, rainfall, is
extremely variable. The yearly rainfall varies from 180
inches (1250) to 11 inches (1950). In most years the high-
est rainfall occurs during December, January and February,
but during these months the rainfall can vaiy between more
than 20 inches, (with a probability of once in 10 years),
and less than 1 inch (with a probability of once in 5 years).
Moreover, in some years there is no wet season at all and
once in every 10 to 15 years a drought period (monthly rain-
fall of less than 2 inches) of 12 to 14 months can be ex-
pected. Nowhere in the tropical areas of the world is there
such a variable and unreliable rainfall as in Nauru. For
more detailed data and monthly rainfall probabilities see


Appendix II and enclosed chart.
(b) The very unfavourable rainfall factor is iten-
sified by the prevailing soil conditions, especially as
the plateau soils and coastal flat soils are porous. From
moisture data obtained from B.P.C. it is estimated that the
available water-holding capacity of the plateau soils is
about Q% by volume, or 1 inch of water per foot of soil.
The soils of the coastal flat have probably a still lower
water capacity, but this factor is largely balanced by a
favourable groundwater situation and in most places the
roots of the coconut trees tap the groundwater, if it is
not too saline. The top few inches of soil contain a little
humic matter, which slightly increases the water-holding
capacity and provides nitrogen and a more favourable soil
composition for the supply of other nutrients.
(c) In view of the unfavourable combination of climate
and soils on the plateau only drought resistant trees such
as the tomano (CallophyHum Inophyllon), pandanus and wild
almond can survive. Only in some places, such as near
Anibare Bay, do coconut trees occur. However they grow here
near the edge of the plateau in better water-holding sub-
surface depressions where the subsoil consists of phosphatic
rock instead of coral. (Power, 1905). In these areas the
tomano trees are much larger than elsewhere. If the plateau
were covered with four feet of good soil, with a water-
holding capacity of 2 inches per foot of soil, paw-paw,
starchy food crops or vegetables could be grown in good years,
but the unfavourable climatic factor would still make it
impossible to grow coconuts on the plateau area. Even if
they survived during favourable years they would bear little
or no fruit.
During the wet season the plateau is more or less
green, because in most places there are some leguminous
plants, grasses and shrubs as well as trees. It is reported
that during the Japanese occupation (1942-45) many pumpkins
were grown on the plateau, with the aid of large quantities
of nightsoil. In some scattered areas vegetables are now
grown by Chinese labourers, using built-up beds of surface
soil.


The agricultural situation of the flat
coastal area is fairly good for growing coconuts, partic-
ularly near the edge of the plateau. The groundwater here
supplies water and plant nutrients. The coconut tree is
not drought resistant, but it can stand a fairly high
saline content in the water; the roots are thick and veiy
prolific and grow under favourable conditions up to thirty
feet or more. (From a personal communication of Dr. Phillis
of C.5.1.R.0., based on root excavations in Jamaica).
These coastal flats are less suitable for vegetable pro-
duction because they need good surface soil with a high
content of organic matter and am ample and regular supply
of water and plant nutrients. If dry periods continue for
some months there would be no water, therefore vegetables
could be grown only in the good years. However, the
situation could be much improved with the use of additional
plant topsoil, compost and fertilizers. Favourable soil
and water conditions, especially for growing paw-paws, occur
on the more gradual slopes between the flats and the plateau.
(d) The Nauruans could overcome these unfavourable
conditions of climate and soil by agricultural education,
the use of production incentives, and capital to provide the
necessary irrigation, drainage and fertilizers. The future
land use would therefore largely be determined by their
decision on these matters.
Formerly the Nauruans subsisted mainly on
fish and the products of the coconut and the pandanus.
Because of the poor climatic and soil conditions, it is under-
standable that the Nauruans are not keen gardeners. They
have no agricultural tradition, background or interest
(C.H. Wedgwood, 1956; Report on Research work in Nauru
Island). According to the Nauruans themselves, fishing is
the only occupation in which they appear to excel. (Report
on Nauru, U.N. Visiting Mission, 1962).
The isolated location of the island, far away
from markets or regular boat services, rules out the possib-
ility of improved future land use in the fonn of cash crops.
It must be concluded that if it is decided to produce fruit
and vegetables, experimental gardens, agricultural education
and an extension service will be required.


SECTION SIX
POPULATION. LAND AND ESSENTIAL SERVICES
The population of the island is expanding
and is expected to reach at least 9*ooo by the year 1990.
Such a population will tax the available land resources,
and will result in a density of about ten persons per acre
on the land suitable at present for residential use.
Apart from the necessity of enough living
space, a population of this size can form a viable community
only if it is provided with certain essential services.
Of these two are of major importance. The
first is a water supply and the second communication with
the rest of the world. Water is an essential "lubricant”
of a modern society and ensures adequate health conditions
and the facility for industrial activities. Particular
attention has therefore been given to the provision of a
safe and potable supply at minimum cost.
The only method of rapid physical communic-
ation with the world today is by means of large aircraft
which require an adequate airport. It is fortunate that
circumstances at Nauru are such that there could be a
direct connection between these two essential services,
water supply and airport, as the latter could act as a
catchment area for the former.
The construction of an adequate water supply
and an airport of international standard is discussed in
Sections EIGHT (b) (iii) and (iv). of this Report.


SECTION SEVEN
THE NAURUAN ECONOMY AFTER EXHAUSTION OF
PHOSPHATE DEPOSITS
(a) The indigenous population of Nauru is increasing
at a rapid rate and this is expected to continue as the
large number of Nauruans in lower age groups (born since the
repatriation of Nauruans at the end of World War II) reach
maturity. A projection of population trends made by
demographers of the Australian National University indicated
a likely population by 1990 of 8,000 to 9,000. If population
expansion during the next twenty-five to thirty years were
to enforce resettlement of the Nauruans on a larger island
or their incorporation in the Australian community, the
expenditures involved in rehabilitation of worked-out lands
could, of course, prove to have been incurred unwisely.
The Committee therefore thought it imperative to give some
consideration to the capacity of the island to support and
provide a satisfactory home for a population of 10,000
Nauruans by the turn of the centuiy. Accordingly this
section of the Committee's report examines the likely
residential and occupational pattern on the island with
10,000 inhabitants. Amongst the questions taken up is the
prospective ability of the 'Nauruan community, within the
resources which will be available, to achieve a satisfactory
level of living for all inhabitants.
(b) During the last several decades the Nauruans have
enjoyed a cash economy and their dietary patterns and
consumption of non-food items have undergone far-reaching
changes. Even in 1957 a survey of food intake and
nutritional levels carried out by the Nutrition Section of
the Commonwealth Department of Health 1 revealed that
European, non-indigenous native goods were consumed almost
entirely. This trend towards dependence upon imported
foodstuffs would appear to have continued and even intensified
in the last nine years. The Nauruan diet is a high carbo-
hydrate one, with imported rice and, to a lesser extent,
1 Nancy E. Kirk, Dietary Survey of the U.N. Trust
Territory of Nauru, Canberra, Nutrition Section, Commonwealth
Department of Health, November 1957*


wheaten flour and breakfast cereals providing the most
important sources of energy intake. Relatively very
little island produce is consumed and little attempt is
made by the Nauruans to supplement imported foodstuffs with
locally grown fruits and vegetables. Damage to gardens by
the island’s pig population, most of which are left free to
forage unrestrained around the residential areas, is probably
responsible for the observed shortage of pawpaws and other
fruits and vegetables, which would be expected to do well
on the coastal lands. The Committee was told that domestic
pigs and poultry flocks, although evident everywhere, do not
at present contribute in a major way to the diet of the
Nauruan people.
(c) In all probability, future food consumption habits
will continue to be based around the imported staples, rice
and wheat. The Committee does not consider it likely that
the Nauruans will ever return to the kind of diet which could
be provided from the island's own land resources, with or
without soil importation. There is, however, considerable
scope for production of supplementaiy foodstuffs on the
island, which could make a very desirable contribution towards
enriching and diversifying the diet of the inhabitants.
Increased production of protein-rich livestock products, such
as eggs and poultry meats, fish and to a lesser extent,
pigmeats, will also probably involve a relatively high
import component for animal foods.
(d) The Nauruan economy will also depend heavily upon
imports of plant and equipment, constructional and building
materials, motor vehicles, electrical equipment and other
consumer durables, fuels and oils, textiles and apparel,
medecinal drugs and chemicals and finished consumer products
of many kinds. The capacity of the economy to pay for these
essential imports will probably depend, however, more on the
proceeds of overseas investments made by and on behalf of the
Nauruan people than on overseas earnings from merchandise
exports, receipts of overseas currencies from tourism, etc.
The prospective amounts to be earned by investment of
phosphate royalties, including the amounts credited to the
Nauruan Community Long Term Investment Fund, overshadow the
likely future importance of export income in the balance of
payments situation and constitute a most favourable factor
in the external balance of the economy.


(e) It has "been calculated that at a compound interest
rate of 5 per cent per annum, and with payments of $1.60 per
ton into the Nauruan Community Long Term Investment Fund and
an extraction rate of 2.5 million tons annually, the total
capital sum accumulated by 1990, the date at which deposits
would be exhausted, would amount to about $202 million.
On the basis of an income yield of 5 per cent per annum, this
investment would produce approximately $lO million annually
and this sum would be available to finance Nauru’s overseas
expenditures on imported goods and services. On the basis
of the same rate of contributions from royalty payments
to the Nauruan Community Long Term Investment Fund, viz.
$1.60 per ton, 5 per cent interest rate and an extraction
rate of 1.6 million tons per year, the accumulated sum at
exhaustion of the deposits in years time would amount to
$265 million approximately. The income yield from this sum,
at 5 per cent per annum, would be million annually avail-
able for partial support of the Nauruan community and
specifically for imports and overseas payments (or for
reinvestment if not required in full for this purpose).
The current rate of royalty to the Nauruans includes only
85 cents per ton as payment into the Community Long Term
Investment Fund but the Committee understands that this
rate is expected to rise along with direct royalties to
landowners in future years. The purely hypothetical figure
of $1.60 per ton has been used above to illustrate the order
of magnitude of external receipts from community investments
abroad which could be available after exhaustion of the
phosphate deposits on the island.
(f) In addition it seems reasonable to expect
substantial private investment in overseas portfolios or
equities to take place during the next twenty-five to thirty-
eight years from the increased incomes received by Nauruan
residents from phosphate royalties. The Committee has no
infoimation concerning current average or marginal pro-
pensities of the Nauruans to save, and even if known, these
would possibly be of little value in predicting future rates
of capital accumulation and foreign investment from their
disposable incomes. No estimates have been made, therefore,
of supplementaxy contributions to the future balance of


payments from this source. It will he noted, however that
the prospective investment incomes, cited above, are
minimum estimates and could well be substantially exceeded
if augmented by private capital outflow from Nauru during the
period from now until the phosphate deposits reach the end
of their life. The assumed interest rate or dividend yield
of five per cent per annum may conceivably be exceeded, but
any expenditures by the Nauruans from the capital sum
accumulated would reduce subsequent receipts of overseas
currencies from this source.
(g) The Committee has not made detailed predictions
of necessary future import expenditures. However the ability
of the Nauruan community to live within its prospective
investment income abroad seems quite assured. The sum of
SAIOOO to SAI3OO annually per head, which will be available
from overseas investment at the turn of the century for a
Nauruan population of 10,000, would appear more than
adequate to cover essential imports of foodstuffs, annual
feedstuffs, raw materials, fuels, plant and equipment and
finished consumer goods. It would also appear ample to
provide for all overseas expenditures necessary for such
items as education, overseas travel by Nauruans, overseas
remittances of foreign workers and consultants employed on
Nauru. This may be gauged from the fact that in Australia,
with a relatively high average propensity to import (14.1 per
cent of Gross National Products in 1964-65), the c.i.f. value
of merchandise imports amounted to only $A265 per head in
1964/65. Nauru, in the year 2000, would still be able to
have, from this source alone, a per capita national income
as great as that enjoyed by Australia in 1964-65 if all goods
and services used were imported. If Nauru were successful in
reducing the proportion of imports to total available goods
and services to 50 per cent, she could have by the year 2000
a per capita income twice the current Australian level, even
given population growth from 2800 to 10,000 in the next
thirty-four years and assuming no export income whatever.
This average propensity to import should certainly be within
the power of the Nauruan community to achieve as should be
substantial earnings of overseas currencies from exports,
tourist expenditures and the proceeds of private investments
abroad.


(h) To date import-saving production has not been
stressed on the island nor has the development of local pro-
duction. Most employed Nauruans are engaged in government
eervice. Of 700 Nauruans in employment at 30th June 1965,
worked for the Administration, 140 with the British
Phosphate Commissioners, 39 with the Nauru Co-operative
Society and 66 with the Nauru Local Government Council;
there were 17 others including those self-employed. The
Committee realizes that this occupational distribution is
explainable by the lack of incentive to develop local in-
dustries which existed while resettlement of the Nauruans
was regarded as necessary for their future wellbeing.
However the situation is not without its dangers. Emerging
countries in which the skills developed in indigenous people
were unduly concentrated in white collar occupations, have
not always subsequently enjoyed satisfactory rates of economic
growth. While the policy of providing employment in the
Administration or B.P.C. for all Nauruans able and willing to
work contributes to their short-term welfare, its long-term
implications for the dynamics of the island economy could
be adverse.
(i) Vigorous efforts will be necessary to develop
enterprise, management and supervisory skills in industry
and commerce amongst the indigenous people. Some favourable
signs of development in this direction were noted but much
remains to be done during the next two to three decades if
the economic advancement of Nauru is to proceed satisfactorily.
Protective 'tariff policies may well be necessary in some fields
to encourage development of local industry. Some immediate
possibilities worthy of examination are the manufacture of
cement bricks, tiles and building materials; establishment of
a cordial-bottling plant; filled milk processing, bottling
and distribution (reconstituting imported non-fat milk powder
and adding vegetable fats possibly from coconuts as is done
in the Philippines). All of these enterprises would save
import expenditure, and prima facie, would seem well within
the capacity of the island to operate successfully.


(3) Tourism could also constitute a major industry
and source of additional overseas currencies. The establish-
ment of a full-length sealed airstrip on Nauru would make a
tourist industry possible, provided investment were made in
entertainment and recreational facilities. These should
include modern hotel accommodation or lanai-type apartments
and possibly the construction of a beach at Anibare Bay.
(k) Fish canning and inter-island shipping services have
also been suggested as possible industries to contribute to
economic activity and income on Nauru after the cessation of
phosphate mining. Copra production could also be undertaken
but as by the turn of the centuiy the coastal strip (the
so-called coconut lands) will be intensively occupied for
residential purposes, production of this crop would probably
not be substantial. Restored plateau lends could be used
for copra production within the limits of water available for
supplementary irrigation during dry spells. However, other
competing land uses, such as the production of taro, sweet
potatoes, yams or cassava for pigfeed or irrigated fruit
and vegetable growing for human consumption would probably
outbid copra for this area. A copra yield of half a ton
per acre is regarded as good and would probably be substan-
tially more than what could be achieved on refilled phosphate
land. If yields averaged, say, one quarter of a ton per acre,
400 acres of refilled plateau land would yield only 100 tons
of copra annually, giving a gross income of about $A16,000.
In comparison production of tubers for pigfeed could yield up
to 2,000 tons annually, which would save grain imports to a
value several times this amount. Moreover intensive poultry
production, based on caged laying houses of the Californian
type and modern broiler chicken units, although requiring
little land for island self-sufficiency, would offer much
higher returns to land for part of this area. Intensive
pigmeat production would make similarly modest demands on
Nauru*s land resources and could incidentally support
economic activity in the form of a small abattoir and meat
works with possible development of bacon and smallgoods
production. Growing of orchids for the export market would
be another feasible industry if air services to the United
States call regularly at Nauru after establishment of an
international airport.


The Committee concludes from this preliminary and somewhat
superficial examination of the economic prospects, that given
a water supply and improved communications and with invest-
ment income of the order postulated above available to them,
the Nauruans could enjoy a very satisfactoiy level of living
on the island. Opportunities for gainful employment of the
growing population need not be lacking although vigorous
steps will have to be taken to promote indigenous enterprise
and to establish an institutional framework facilitating
economic development.
(l) Amongst the most obvious current institutional
constraints to economic development are the lack of credit
facilities and land tenure conditions. The Committee con-
siders that special attention will have to be given to the
question of land tenure if this is not to become a serious
handicap to the economic advancement of the Nauruans. Land
use on the island will need to be carefully planned. It
should provide a satisfactory residential situation for 10,000
people, allow for recreational, educational, water conserva-
tion, transport and other public purposes and ensure
availability of land for industry including the tourist
industry, agriculture and horticulture.
(m) Already, the Administrator reports, schools on the
island are suffering from inadequate playing areas and the
location of the present airstrip in the heavily populated
Yaren District limits the scope for provision of relief. In
the Committee*s view, a co-ordinated approach to land use
planning is imperative and should be undertaken as early as
possible. Employment of a well qualified town planning
consultant would be desirable, as what is needed is not a
piecemeal approach to problems as they arise, but careful
and integrated planning of future land needs of Nauru
for all purposes. Achievement of the island*s potential
as a tourist resort, the maintenance of desired standards
of residential areas and the preservation of sufficient areas
for industiy and agriculture will depend heavily on the
preparation and implementation of adequate town plan.


Problems requiring such planning will arise in the immediate
future should the proposed use of plateau lands for water
conservation and construction of an airport and civic centre
be undertaken. A decision to resoil part of the worked-out
areas would immediately give rise to conflicts of interests
amongst landowners and other sections of the community unless
these are resolved by a carefully planned public policy for
the whole of the island’s land resources.


SECTION .EIGHT
POSSIBILITIES FOR TREATMENT OF
MINED PHOSPHATE AREAS
(a) Many industries and the extractive industries in
particular are characterised by external diseconomies or
spillover effects. In mining, in the exploitation of forest
resources and in many other fields of activity the decisions
of individual operators or firms often impose costs,
including curtailed opportunities, on other parties. Dis-
posal of waste products which can result in stream, atmos-
pheric or other environmental pollution is a common case.
The social aspects of such spillover effects have
received increasing attention during recent years. It has
been recognised quite clearly that "what's good for General
Bullmoose is not necessarily good for Uncle Sam". Con-
sequently many regulatory measures have been introduced
requiring that those who carry on extractive industries or
create waste products take steps to avoid or minimise adverse
social consequences of their operations. In beach sand
mineral extraction and in both open cut and underground coal
mining, for example, it is now general for land treatment to
be required. In the beachmining industry in Australia restora-
tion of areas disturbed in mining operations is mandatory.
These practices are designed to preserve the natural environ-
ment of the coastal areas for the general public. Similarly in
forestry there are regulations regarding replanting, cutting
and the destruction of young trees.
There has developed, therefore, a climate of opinion
in which the need for controls to obviate destruction and pol-
lution of the natural environment is accepted, and restorative
treatment of affected land is the responsibility of the ex-
tractive industry. It is not the Committee’s responsibility to
recommend who should bear the cost of any treatment of worked—
out phosphate lands undertaken on Nauru, but it would seem
consistent with the general trend in regulatoiy policies for
extractive industries to require such treatment to be a res-
ponsibility of the phosphate-extractive industry.


Elsewhere in the world phosphate mining appears not
to have "been subject to the same kind of regulatory require-
ments for land restoration or rehabilitation as other kinds of
mining operations. This is undoubtedly because the diffi-
culties and costs involved make treatment of worked-out
phosphate lands generally unecomic, particularly where the
phosphatic material is right at the surface and there is no
overlay of soil which can be conserved for subsequent restora-
tion of exposed areas. Thus the Monsanto Company in the
United States concluded, after a programme of experiments in
conjunction with the University of Tennessee, that in such
areas "the only way of putting this land into its former
condition would be to haul soil in by trucks from some other
location. This we consider as uneconomical and unrealistic
as the costs would be more than the possible value of the land
for agricultural purposes".
This finding should not, of course, be interpreted
as a blanket rule against treatment of worked-out phosphate
lands. Conditions vary and there are some very special
circumstances affecting the Nauruan case, notably the limited
land and other resources of the Island and the fact that
mining operations will lay bare two-thirds of the total land
area. Moreover agricultural use is not the only possible
objective for land restoration, and even if uneconomic for
this purpose, there are many possible alternative methods of
treatment.
Informed decision-making about the treatment of
areas stripped of phosphate calls for consideration of the
full range of alternative treatments. The end-use desired and
the costs involved largely determine the choice of alternatives.
For some purposes, such as water catchment and storage, airport
and road construction, a soil cover will not be necessary.
For other purposes, such as public buildings, residential and
recreational areas, only a modicum of soil cover is needed.
For agricultural production, rehabilitation would require a
deeper covering of soil to be placed on treated areas (together
with, for many types of crops, the provision of supplementary
irrigation water). For greater environmental congeniality
much could be achieved by revegetation of worked-out areas,
without or with a minimum of resoiling treatment.


(•fo) The adequacy of the residual land "base to support
an economically and socially flourishing community, having
regard to other resources available to the Nauruans, is a
major consideration in determining the requirements for, and
the usefulness of, various forms of treatment of worked-out
areas. For this reason the Committee’s report examines a
series of alternative land treatments, designed not so much
to restore land to its original condition but to contribute
usefully to the future of the Nauruan economy:-
(i) complete refilling of worked-out areas by
levelling and spreading imported soil;
(ii) levelling of pinnacles and use of local materials
to resoil part of the worked out areas;
(iii) construction of an airport on worked-out phosphate
land to release land on the flat coastal strip;
(iv) construction of water catchment and storage on
the plateau;
(v) revegetation of exposed limestone pinnacle
areas.
These alternatives are examined as follows:
(i) By the time mining of Nauru’s phosphate deposits is
completed, some 90 million tons of material will have been
removed from the island. Rehabilitation of worked-out lands
by simply importing an x equal quantity of soil to replace
phosphate would be one conceivable method of restoration.
However, as costs would substantially exceed the net value of
the phosphate to be removed, this course has been ruled out
at the outset as not offering a practicable alternative,
(ii) As crushed limestone from the pinnacles is a much
cheaper source of fill than imported soil the most satisfactory
method of restoring areas for habitation, cultivation or any
other purpose requiring a uniform surface and soil cover, would
be first to knock down, level and consolidate the limtstone
pinnacles and then to spread soil over the areas so levelled.
The method envisaged for this operation would involve:-
: the use of two heavy bulldozers to knock down
the pinnacles at about one third of their height


from the base and to grade and traverse areas in
order to crush and consolidate the material from
the broken pinnacles;
: the excavation and crushing of limestone from a
site where excavation is required, involving the
importation and setting up of a large capacity
crushing and screening plant;
; the level filling of areas graded by the bulldozers
with crushed material and screenings;
: the acquisition and shipment of soil to Nauru
either as backloading on phosphate ships from
mainland Australia or New Zealand or on special
bulk-carrier vessels from a Pacific Island;
: the unloading of soil into skips or barges and
landing of it on the island in a specially
constructed boat harbour;
: the cartage of soil to the plateau areas there to
be discharged, spread and compacted.
The estimated costs of these operations have been
detailed in Appendix 111, and the technical problems are
emphasised, particularly those associated with sloping land,
which is analysed on the drawing accompanying the report, and
forms some forty-two per cent of the area of Nauru.
(iii) The provision of an adequate airport can be made only
on the mined phosphate lands. The present airstrip on the
coastal fringe, which was constructed by the Japanese Army during
the 194-2-45 war in the Pacific, is too small in dimension and it
cannot be extended. In any case the land on the coastal fringe
is essential for living space.
A suitable location has been examined. It is
immediately north of the Administration Settlement area, where
it would be possible to build a strip 9,000 feet long and 600
feet wide. It would be formed by considerable cut and fill and
the use of material excavated from the proposed reservoir.
The pavement, which would be liberal in area, would
be drained, and the water gathered into a gallery running to the
water storage tanks. There should be at least 120 acres of
paved catchment.


The airstrip could be constructed in two sections,
the second section to be completed after the working of the
phosphates on the land. The first stage should be s*ooo feet
long.
The area of land required for the airstrip, taxiway
and clearance areas is estimated at 500 acres.
The estimated cost of the works, excluding build-
ings, lighting and navigational aids, is $A8,000,000. One
half of the cost of excavating the water storage is included
in this figure. If the water storage is not constructed, the
estimate would increase to $A10,000,000.
(iv) The water supply for Nauru has been secured for
many years by the importation, in times of need, of fresh
water in the B.P.C. ships. Some of this water has been made
available to the Local Government Council for distribution to
the Nauruans.
From time to time it has been suggested that there
is a possibility of ground water supply, or that desalination
plants could be used to deal with sea water. No consideration
appears to have been given to the collection of rain water
falling on the island and storing it in a reservoir.
The island has an average rainfall of some 78
inches and an uplancl catchment of over 3000 acres. In theory
there is some 20,000 acre feet of water available per annum
which is sufficient to meet the needs of a large population.
Some investigations have been carried out to find
out whether ground water is available. Drillings by the
B.P.C. have indicated that fresh water can be found but only
in very small quantities and the ground water table throughout
the island is only just above sea level. Some details of the
borings done are in Appendix IV.
There does not appear to be any reason why the
uplands should not be used as a catchment area and for the
storage of water.


An examination of the contour plane of the island
indicates that there are two hasins which could he enlarged
hy excavation and either of them could store up to 1,500 acre
feet of water. (See map enclosed with this Report). The
hasin close to Buada lagoon is the more satisfactory. It
would he necessary to line the storage hasin as the limestone
of the island is quite porous as is evident from the way in
which rain falling on the island quickly disappears. The most
economical form of lining would he reinforced gunite (i.e.
sprayed cement mortar).
The storage could he filled from three main catch-
ments, viz.:
(a) The surface of the storage itself;
(h) The paved surface of the proposed airport;
(c) Such areas of the pinnacle country which
drained into a system of galleries driven from
the top water level of the storage into the
limestone.
The gallery construction would include collection
holes drilled from the gallery, a sealed invert and a
grouted interception zone above the invert lining. The
main gallery would run from the airport location to the
storage and carry the water collected from the airport
surface.
A study of the rainfall records available indicates
that a satisfactory water supply for a population of at least
10,000 can be obtained. Details of such a proposal with
certain alternatives are in Appendix V.
Considerable and careful supervision would he
necessary. The present method of collecting roof water,
particularly that used on the latest type houses, should he
continued and in fact he made obligatory, and a salt water
reticulation system should he provided for operating the
sewerage system and to provide for flushing and general
cleaning.


The management of the supply would need to he
careful and thorough to ensure that the maximum amount is
available for spray irrigation whilst not endangering the
safety of the main supply.
A brief study has also been made of the costs of
water imports, as an alternative to construction of a catch-
ment reservoir on the plateau. Delivery of water to the
island as part of a regular shipping service would be
necessary after the cessation of phosphate shipment in the
absence of uplands water catchment. Such delivery would be
combined with the storage of roof runoff and possibly with
some surface storage. The details are in Appendix VT and it
is clear that such a limited supply would be ultimately as
expensive as a local supply of much greater capacity.
The use of a considerable area of the worked out
lands both for storage basin and for collection of water to
galleries is of tremendous importance to the continued
existence of the expanding population on the island.
It should be noted that construction of a large
storage will provide the necessary material for airport
construction and for improvement of suitable land areas.
The creation of a lake with a surface area of 60
acres will also provide for the stocking of fish, and will
enable water sports to be enjoyed in enclosed waters.
The resoiling of large areas of the mined phosphate
land would not be satisfactory, for the likely yield of
water to the galleries would be reduced by the resulting
increase in evaporation.
The estimated cost of a satisfactory supply as
set out in Appendix V is $A20,000,000, or when carried out
in conjunction with the airstrip $A18,000,000.
(v) Probably the least expensive treatment of the mined
phosphate lands would be to accelerate artificially the natural
regeneration of vegetation upon exposed pinnacle areas.
Although this would achieve only some amelioration in the
appearance of the island landscape and perhaps some reduction
in heat radiation and rainfall (by deflecting air currents
rising from the pinnacles), it might be the most rational pro-
gramme for considerable areas on the plateau. It particularly


merits consideration where slopes are steep enough to present
extreme erosion hazards for resoiled areas.
In newly mined areas the pinnacles are white and
glaring. Mechanical extraction of phosphates from between the
pinnacles is completed by hand "scratching" from the sides and
bottoms of the holes. Nevertheless considerable amounts of
phosphate material are left in pockets at the foot of the
pinnacles or adhering in some places to the sides. With the
passage of a few years the exposed pinnacles turn dark and
some vegetation begins to appear. This process of natural
vegetative invasion of mined areas is very slow and even on
the old German workings (areas mined before World War I) the
cover was far from complete. However, the Committee saw the
worked-out areas at an unusually favourable time, i.e. at the
end of the monsoon period and following a year of substantially
above average rainfall.
In the long run even vegetative growth which
substantially perishes in drought will yield organic material
of value to future plant establishment. Seeding of creepers
and legumes amongst the pinnacles would greatly accelerate
this process. Hand planting or aerial broadcasting of wild
almond and tomano seed would also speed up the establishment of
a cover of vegetation. The tomano tree has very useful
characteristics for this purpose. It establishes freely from
seed, especially where some organic materials such as fallen
leaves are present; it is drought resistant, provides
valuable shade, and will establish in small pockets of soil or
phosphate. The similar capacity of the wild almond to estab-
lish on the most unfavourable terrain offered by the pinnacle
areas is noted by Sir Albert Ellis. He observes that "the tree
is remarkably hardy, and the nuts dropped here and there in the
old phosphate workings (of Ocean Island) speedily germinate and
grow well under adverse conditions. The wild almond is thus
helping to revegate what is at present an unsightly feature of
the island". 1 The seed of these trees is too large to be
disseminated over the worked-out areas by wind or birds and the
Committee observed from its inspection of the island that
revegetation was generally most advanced near the fringe of
worked-out areas of any given age.
1 A.F. Ellis, "Ocean Island and Nauiu; Their Stoiy".
P. 25, Angus and Robertson Limited, Sydney.


The following possible ways of accelerating
revegetation hy hand-planting or by mechanically dispersed
seeds should be examined:
Hand-planting of trees in the holes between
pinnacles. The obvious course, if practicable, would be
to perform this task during the manual extraction of
phosphate not recoverable by mechanical grab.
Pelleting of tomano, wild almond, or other approp-
riate seed, in for example small bags of soil or compost
with the addition of fertilisers, if found worthwhile.
Bags could be of hessian, paper or other materials, or
the pellets could be compacted and/or bound with a
light spray of bitumen. The best method for plant
establishment would have to be determined by experimen-
tal trials. Labour costs of distributing seed and a
portion of handplanting young trees in worked areas
could be relatively high because of the extreme diffi-
culties of access to, and traverse over, pinnacle areas.
Better establishment rates might be achieved by planting
young trees in the holes with the addition of small
quantities of soil or other material. This would involve
the establishment of a nursery.
Systematic "potting" of trees in local or imported
soil deposited here and there amongst the pinnacles
during the mining process.
Planting with legumes and creepers to encourage tree
establishment. Rampant growth of legumes and creepers
occurs on the plateau during periods of favourable rain-
fall, indicating the ability of these species to thrive
under conditions of very limited soil and in practically
pure phosphate deposits. These plants might be employed
to condition the pinnacles areas for subsequent tree
establishment; they could also contribute directly to
reduced heat radiation. Trials should be conducted to
assess the influence of a preliminary legume "crop" (or
of several repeated "crops"), on the efficacy of tree
planting or seeding operations.
The erratic nature of rainfall will largely deter-
mine the most suitable method, or combination of methods, of
revegetation. It could rule out the apparently most convenient
and cheapest procedure, i.e. seed placement or tree planting
during working of the phosphate lands. Phosphate extraction


proceeds throughout the year whereas seeding or planting
operation should coincide with the onset of the wet season and
might be deferred with advantage in drought periods.
The costs of covering the pinnacle areas by these
methods would be very small compared with the costs of alter-
native restorative treatment. Even if a tree nursery, seed
packaging or pellet-making plant had to be established and
aerial distribution employed, the costs are unlikely to exceed
a few hundred dollars per acre. Although the introduction of
scattered pockets of soil, (allowing 2 tons per tree), amongst
pinnacles would increase costs, especially if imported soil
were used, the planting of 100 trees to the acre would cost
only about $A2,000 per acre.
An accurate assessment of benefits can be made only
after experimental work on methods of establishing a vegetative
cover over the island has been carried out. If this is
successful the benefits would be almost as great as those
gained from far more ambitious treatment of worked-out areas,
except for access to all parts of the island and some recrea-
tional usee of land. Trees growing on worked-out areas could
provide a home for the noddy birds, whose preservation is
valued very highly by the Nauruan people. They could also pro-
vide the vegetative blanketing of the uplands necessary to
prevent the probable deflection of rainbearing clouds and for
more congenial climatic conditions and appearance of the island.
The Committee cannot give any authoritative assess-
ment of the validity of the claim that exposed pinnacles tend
to reduce rainfall precipitation on the island. Some observers
have suggested that on an island of such limited area the
rainfall and climate generally will necessarily be that of the
surrounding ocean. A study of rainfall records shows that the
aggregate rainfall during the twenty year period 1916-55 is
identical with that for the twenty year period 1946-65. Although
this would suggest that the increase in the area of exposed
pinnacles, now representing about one third of the total plateau
area, has not adversely affected the rainfall, such a conclusion
would be statistically unwarranted. On the other hand, numerous
observers who are resident or who visit the island regularly,
claim that they have frequently seen clouds divide over and


skirt the island, especially when the cloud cover was light
or broken. Reportedly this phenomenon is even more pronounced
at Ocean Island where a larger proportion of the phosphate
deposits have been removed than on Nauru. The observed
deflection of cloud movements is said to occur too regularly to
be due to random influences and is attributed to the presence
of hot air currents rising from denuded phosphate areas and
otherwise dry areas. Although it is not possible to be
conclusive about the matter, on the basis of available evidence,
the Committee finds this latter hypothesis plausible and is
inclined to accept it provisionally.
The seriousness of the potential loss of rainfall
upon the island is dependent upon the extent to which the water
resources of the island are developed. If the Nauruans were
to be dependent only upon roof-catchment and individual storage
tanks for each household, together with the limited ground water
available at virtually sea level (which turns brackish during
extended low rainfall periods), then any marginal reduction
in precipitation during recurrent droughts would seriously affect
the habitability of the island. If, on the other hand, adequate
water storage for domestic, livestock, industrial and limited
irrigation purposes were provided (or if dependable, low cost
imports were arranged), it would be much less significant.
In September 1964 the Nauru Local Government Council
raised with the Acting Administrator the question of using waste
material such as fallen coconut logs, stumps, etc, as filling
for pinnacle areas. No action emanated from these discussions
as there was disagreement as to who should bear the responsibility
for collection and cartage of such debris.
The current practice of the British Phosphate
Commissioners in developing areas for working is to push surface
soil, not required for temporary road construction, and redundant
small timber and vegetation into pinnacle areas. This may not
be the best method for the Nauruans but the practice is the
minimum cost method of disposal. In the Committee’s view all
surface soil should be conserved for use in reclamation of the
pinnacle areas either for the resoiling of levelled areas or
for the systematic revegetation of unrestored pinnacle lands.
Any top soil and waste vegetation not required for land
reclamation should not be dumped indiscriminately, but carefully
husbanded and placed in the pinnacle areas to make the maximum
contribution possible to the establishment of a full vegetative
cover over the island.


(c)(i) Even the direct coste of resoiling operations
are extremely large per unit of area reclaimed. What, however,
is the relationship of costs to the benefits which might be
expected? An examination of this question led the Committee
to the conclusion that direct benefits in the form of additional
agricultural production would be relatively very small.
The benefits for habitation purposes would also
appear to be limited as most of the population could probably be
satisfactorily accommodated on the flat coastal strip and the
hillside outside the 80 foot contour. The value of additional
residential space, created by levelling and resoiling operations,
would depend upon the extent to which the non-phosphate land,
together with the area around Buada Lagoon, could provide
adequate home sites for the future population.
(ii) Other benefits are of an intangible nature, not
readily quantifiable in monetary terms. These include wildlife
conservation and various aspects of environmental congeniality.
Psychological or subjective considerations are relevant, such
as the possible satisfaction to the Nauruans in preserving their
traditional island home in its near-original state. It should
also be considered that land on the plateau, by offering a change
of environment from the flat coastal strip, could well diminish
monotony and add significantly to the psychological satisfaction
of life on a small and remote island.
No objectively determined values can be placed on
these intangible factors by the Committee. Such values ultimately
must be determined in the actual decision-making process. An
analysis of direct benefits can, however, be a useful guide.
(iii) Any estimate of direct agricultural benefits must
recognise that the possible agricultural uses of resoiled areas
would be extremely limited, especially for areas where supplementary
irrigation could not be provided. The frequent incidence of
prolonged droughts, together with the lack of a water table on the
plateau, would drastically restrict the possibilities for pro-
duction of crops, especially tree crops such as coconuts. Even


if coconuts could be successfully cultivated on plateau land
with a covering of four feet of local and imported soil (at a
capital cost of SA2OB million for 3,030 acres) the annual
yield of copra would almost certainly not exceed 800 tons
per year; in the Committee’s view it would probably be much
less. Taking 800 tons as the long-term yield expectation for
purposes of illustration however, the gross value of production
would then amount to about $A130,000 (assuming an f.o.b. price
of SAI63 per ton) or only 1.25 per cent of the annual costs of
resoiling the land (at an interest rate of 5 Per cent). Clearly
the net value of coconut production on resoiled lands (after
deducting production expenses from gross returns) would cover
only a negligible fraction of costs.
Vegetable, fruit and root crops for pigfeed
production would be rather more productive and would also permit
substantial cost savings by reducing the depth of soil cover
necessary to, say, 2 ft. Some of the plateau areas could be used
for intensive production of eggs and poultry and pigmeats as (
well as for specialized high-value crops such as orchids and
other cut flowers suitable for export by air. The land
requirements for self-sufficiency in these foodstuffs which would
also allow for a sizeable export market in the latter commodities
would not be great. Together with the intensive use for
horticulture of the Buada Lagoon area, the resoiling of 300 or
400 acres with local topsoil, stripped from the phosphate lands
before mining, should be more than ample to meet prospective
land requirements for these purposes, especially if supplementary
irrigation were available for such an area. Direct agricultural
benefits from resoiling land in excess of this area would thus
be negligible unless it were used for an export crop such as
copra (which as already indicated would yield a very low rate
of return on the large investment involved in resoiling).
(iv) The value of additional land, obtained for
residential purposes by levelling and spreading imported soil
on worked-out areas, would naturally be governed by the residential
situation, which develops as population increases towards the
10,000 level. This in turn depends largely upon the use of "town"
planning to ensure inter alia a rational use of the non-phosphate
lands for residential and other purposes. Given intelligent
planning of land use of the 1,757 acres of unworked land (996
acres on the coastal belt, 565 °f rocky land and 154 acres around


Buada Lagoon), there should he adequate land for housing a
population of 10,000 in individual family dwellings, without
requiring anyone to live in high-density apartment houses#
With an area of one-quarter to one-third of an acre per holding,
2,500 houses would leave sufficient land on the coastal strip
and other unworked areas for other public purposes such as
schools and recreational areas, commerce, industry and tourist
accommodation. Intensive horticultural, agricultural and live-
stock production could be located around the Buada Lagoon, on
selected portions of the coastal coconut lands and, if necessary
on plateau areas resoiled with local materials# In these
circumstances the values which could be imputed to residential
benefits would also seem small in relation to costs. The
residential situation would have to be much more crowded than
it need be with reasonable planning of the island, to warrant
expenditures of $A24,600 to $A34,600 per acre for this purpose
(basing costs on a one foot cover of imported soil).
(v) In summary, the direct agricultural and residential
benefits from resoiling the worked-out phosphate areas would be
small in relation to the costs involved. No future land use would
offset more than a fraction of the capital costs of resoiling land
with imported soil. It would therefore be unreasonable to incur
expenditures of the magnitude involved in resoiling the whole of
the phosphate lands unless extremely high values were placed on
the achievement of intangible objectives. There appear to be
cheaper alternative treatments available for achieving many of
these objectives, including increased visual congeniality, the
avoidance of possible temperature and rainfall effects from
exposed pinnacles and the conservation of birdlife on the island.
The Committee concludes, therefore, that even if
resoiling of the whole of the worked-out areas with imported
soil were technically feasible in the narrow sense of ’’possible
with present or prospective technology but neglecting entirely
considerations of cost”, it would not make a contribution to
economic and social life on Nauru commensurate with the costs
involved.
The possible dangers arising from the introduction of
soil from foreign sources, which could bring plants, insects
fungi etc. capable of becoming pests and causing great damage
and loss, are not to be overlooked.


(d) The alternative of utilizing only local soils as filling
material has already been discussed to some extent as part of the
preceding alternative, viz.: resoiling the whole of the worked-
out phosphate lands with local and imported materials. It has been
pointed out that, if no imported soil were to be used, it would
still be possible, by conserving the thin covering of soil on the
remaining undeveloped phosphate lands, to cover an area ranging
from 119 acres with four feet of soil (at an estimated cost of
$1.61 million) to 420 acres with one foot of soil (at an estimated
cost of $2.87 million).
If the area reclaimed were intended for residential
use, for public buildings such as schools and hospitals, and/
or a civic centre housing the Legislative Council and Government-
departments, the limited quantity of local soil available could
be eked out over a larger area than 420 acres. Soil need not be
placed under residential and other buildings, parking areas,
pathways and so on, but could be used for landscaping the general
area. For this purpose "potting” of soil in garden beds, for
lawns and tree planting could be sufficient, especially if the
island’s water supply were adequate to use on private and public
gardens.
Assuming, with careful developmental planning of the
whole area, that the soil cover were economized in this manner,
it might be possible to treat an area of 600 to 700 acres by
this method. Costs of land reclamation would thus be integrated
with general developmental costs. An estimate of the separate
costs, is as follows:
Estimated Costs of Landscaping6oo or 700
Acres of Worked-out Phosphate Lands with
Local Topsoil
Acres
treated
Levelling
(a)
Landscaping
Soil Removal,
Storage and
replacement
Total
$Am.
$Am.
$Am.
$Am.
600
2.5
0.6
1.3
4.4
700
2.9
0.7
1.5
4.9
(a) Assumes costs of knocking down pinnacles and
filling with crushed limestone would be
$A.4,150 per acre.


The estimated costs of resoiling 420 acres or of
landscaping 600 or 700 acres of the mined-out fields, using
local topsoil stripped from the unworked phosphate areas, are
very modest in comparison with the costs of resoiling larger
areas for which the use of imported soil would he involved*
Moreover, in the Committee’s view, most if not all the
tangible benefits aimed at by a land restoration programme
could be achieved by the treatment of these more limited areas.
The benefits flowing from additional agricultural, recreational
and residential areas would be substantially achieved by
resoiling or landscaping. The extremely costly programmes
necessary to proceed beyond this stage would result only in
the intangible benefits of congeniality for the island as a
whole.
The Committee considers that conservation of all
surface soil and vegetative material on undeveloped phosphate
lands should immediately be put in hand in order to maximise
the areas which can be treated by using local materials.
Another possible alternative is the levelling and
filling of the remaining worked-out lands with crushed lime-
stone, without resoiling. This would give some benefits in
the form of access, greater congeniality and reduced heat
radiation from limestone exposed by phosphate mining. Compared
with planting in untreated pinnacles, however, it could provide
sites for industrial areas and perhaps for some types of public
building but would nbt put land in a condition suitable for
any form of agricultural production or for residential building.
The cost would be approximately $A4,150 per acre. If 2,609 acres
were so treated (i.e. the whole of the worked-out lands other
than 420 acres covered with local topsoil and 470 acres occupied
by airport, road and reservoir construction) the cost would be
about SAIO.B million.


SECTION NINE
ALTERNATIVE POSSIBILITIES OF OBTAINING
LAND BY RECLAMATION
(a) If the operation of rehabilitating mined-out areas
is seen, as it must be, as the purchase of additional land for
the Nauruan people, then it is necessary to weigh the costs of
reclamation of plateau lands against the alternative methods
of obtaining equivalent areas elsewhere on Nauru (or, if a
suitable alternative home can be found which meets the required
conditions of national autonomy, against the costs of re-
settlement) .
For this reason the Committee considered the
practicability of land reclamation by filling the reef area
fringing the island, or parts of it. The coral reef, which is
covered by the sea at high tide, ranges in width from about
400 to 1,000 feet. It would be technically possible to fill
parts of the reef area with quarried limestone and to cover
it with crushed rock and soil in such a way as to make it
usable for residential areas. The possibilities of reclaiming
land over the reef for agricultural purposes would not appear
to be promising. Salt spray would be unfavourable to most
forms of plant production. Even coconuts which are relatively
tolerant to salt would be better grown elsewhere, especially
as it would be difficult to provide conditions over the reef
which would enable their roots to penetrate down to a fresh
water table.
Moreover, the problems of sea-erosion of land so
built on the reef platform would be most formidable. The reef
fulfils the function of breaking down the energy of the
periodic large seas which even now sometimes inundate parte of
the coastal areas. Evidence of the power of the seas which
sweep the Nauru coast is seen in the flooding of the B.P.C.
"Location" Settlement for indentured labour and the damage to
the very solidly constructed boat harbour on the western side
of the island. A very heavy sea wall or ring of concrete
"tetrapods" would have to be installed to protect reclaimed reef
areas from rapid erosion. Such installations would be very ex-
pensive to erect especially as the work might have to be confined
to low tide periods. A much greater depth of fill would also be
required than on pinnacle areas. In most parts of the island the
flat belt of coconut lands is some 15 to 20 feet above the reef
at the shore, although it generally slopes backwards into


depressed areas and on the northern side into shallow lagoons
at the foot of the plateau. Obviously the costs of land re-
clamation per acre would be much greater on the reef area than
on the worked-out phosphate lands. This method was therefore
rejected by the Committee and is considered to have only limited
application, if any, to the land problems of the island. It could
perhaps be used in the construction of a sandy beach at Anibare
Bay which would increase facilities for any tourist industry to be
developed in the future.
(B) Another way of increasing the area available for
residential and agricultural/horticultural purposes would be by
levelling the coastal strip inside the raised level of gravelly
sands around the extreme perimeter and filling the depressed
areas along the foot of the cliff face including the shallow
lagoons on the northern side of the island. These lagoons are
currently used for fish-farming, the Nauruans catching small
fish of the Ibia species on the reefs and impounding them in the
lagoons along the inside of the coastal strip and in the Buada
Lagoon. Should increased land areas on the coastal fringe be
required in future for residential or cultivation purposes, it
would be possible to fill the coastal lagoons and depressed
areas by levelling the soil on the coastal flats or even by
carting soil from the unworked phosphate areas on the plateau.
The areas involved are small and it is doubtful
whether such measures should be regarded as part of a compre-
hensive programme for rehabilitation of the island or should
simply be left for local action when, and if, considered
desirable.
It is noticeable that coconuts seem to flourish more
along the depressed areas at the back of the coastal strip and
do not thrive near the ocean. This may be because near the sea
the trees are growing some 15 feet or more above the water table,
whereas further back towards the edge of the plateau thqy are
nearer ground-water. It is also noticeable that stands of coco-
nut trees are much too dense for high yields in these depressions
and that fallen nuts, many of which are undersized, lie thickly
around these areas where they have been eaten by rats. Should
encouragement of copra production on the island be desired it is
likely that steps to achieve more productive use of coastal
coconut lands would offer a better alternative than attempts to
establish intensive coconut production on mined-out areas.


SECTION TEN
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The Committee has concluded that any proposal to
resoil the whole of the worked-out phosphate areas is
unrealistic and presents serious technical difficulties because
of the natural slope existing on the island. In fact it would
not be in the best interest of the Nauruans to resoil large
portions of land as they are of far greater value as absorption
areas for water collection.
Considerable works could, however, be carried out
on the denuded areas to provide for facilities essential to the
future livelihood of the increasing population.
The facilities which are recommended and their
estimated costs are:
(a) Water Supply system with a capacity of not less than
acre feet per month.
(b) An airport of international standard for large
aircraft.
The estimated cost of (a) and (b) is $25,260,000
as detailed in Appendix V paragraph 11.
(c) Treatment of areas to provide land suitable for
public purposes and for some residential areas
other than the "fringe" lands.
The estimated cost is $3 ,500,000 based on treating
approximately 500 acres using local soil as set out
in Section 8(d).
(d) The revegetation of all lands not required for other
purposes to improve the "congeniality" of the island.
The estimated cost is $2,240,000, based on the
estimated Section 8 b V for some 1120 acres.
It is therefore estimated that an expenditure of $31,000,000
would provide facilities which would provide a basis for the use-
ful development of the island, and the Committee recommends the
provision of these works.
It is also recommended that steps be taken as soon as
possible to plan the land use of the island completely, so that
a population of ten thousand people may live and work in a complete
and satisfying way.
The Committee considers that investigations and exper-
imental work on water collection galleries, the propagation and
planting of trees and shrubs, and the improvement of farming and
husbandry of animals should also be given urgent priority by the
Administration.
Signed G.I. Davey J.N. Lewis W.F. Van Beers.


APPENDIX I
This appendix sets out the dates of the various
meetings of the Committee, including the visit to Nauru, and
lists the names of the Government and other officials with whom
the Committee had discussions and other individuals who kindly
gave useful infoimation to the Committee.
(a) Dates and places of formal meetings of the Committee
26th January, 1966 Department of Territories,
Sydney
3rd February, 1966 Department of Territories,
Canberra
4th February, 1966 British Phosphate Commissioners’
Head Office, Melbourne
5th-24th February, 1966 At Nauru and en route to
Melbourne
24th February, 1966 British Phosphate Commissioners’
Head Office, Melbourne
12th-13th March, 1966 Department of Territories,
Sydney
17th March, 1966 Department of Territories,
Canberra
(b) Persons and Organizations with whom discussions
were held or who gave infoimation to the Committee
In Canberra - Department of Territories -
Mr. G. WarwiQk Smith, O.B.E. Secretary
Mr. C.E. Reseigh, Assistant Secretary (Social
and General Services Branch)
Mr. R. Marsh, Director (International Relations
and Information Branch)
In Melbourne - Office of the British Phosphate
Commissioners
Sir William Dunk, C.B.E., Australian Commissioner
Mr. J.A. Bissett, C.M.G., General Manager
Mr. L.E. Ravenscroft, Deputy General Manager
Mr. T.A. Adams, Deputy General Manager
(Christmas Island Development)
Mr. R.F. Cox, Assistant Chief Engineer
At Nauru - Office of the Administration
His Honour the Administrator, Mr. R.S. Leydin,
O.B.E.
Mr. R.E. Vizard, Official Secretaiy
Mr. W.N.A. Allison, Director of Education
Mr. J.S. McConnachie, Director of Police


Island Management of the British Phosphate Commiesloners -
Mr. W*B. Marston, Island Manager
Mr. L* Withers, Assistant Manager (Engineering)
Mr* B.J. Webb, Resident Civil Engineer
Mr. W.F. Aveiy, Second Assistant Mechanical and
Electrical Engineer
Mr. R. Nevile, Assistant General Manager
(Production), B.P.C. Head Office, Melbourne
(visiting Nauru)
Elected Members of the Nauru Legislative Council -
Head Chief Hammer Deßoburt, 0.8. E., M.L.C.
Mr. Austin Bemicke, M.L.C.
Mr. Roy Degoregore, M.L.C.
Mr. Edwin Tsitsi, M.L.C.
Mr. James Ategen Bop, M.L.C.
Mr. Joseph Detsimea, M.L.C.
Mr. Agoko Doguape, M.L.C.
Mr. Buraro Detudamo, M.L.C.
Mr. Victor Eoaea, M.L.C.
Others
Rev. Father P. Clivaz, M.S.C., Catholic Mission
On board B.P.C. ship - M.V. "Triellis"
Master - Captain G.G. Hitching
Chief Engineer, V.B. Brown
Chief Officer, J.R. Martin


APPENDIX 111
Estimated Coat of Levelling and Resoiling
The method proposed by the Committee for levelling the
pinnacle areas involves the use of two heavy crawler tractors
fitting with bulldozer blades. The bulldozers working together
would use both wedging and pushing actions to knock down the
top two-thirds of the pinnacles, then cross the areas to rough
level and pack down the broken material. The capital cost of
two heavy type units, which would have to be dismantled to some
extent before shipping to permit unloading with ship’s gear,
would be about $A220,000. The two machines would together deal
effectively with 0.75 acres per 8 hour day. Based on Australian
daily charges of $176 per day for each machine, including all
capital and operating costs, the cost per acre for knocking down
pinnacles would be of the order of $469 per acre, say, for
Nauruan conditions $5OO per acre.
2. The British Phosphate Commissioners have had no
occasion to use heavy type tractors on Nauru but have used
smaller bulldozers for developmental work on the island. The
Committee is convinced that large bulldozers of this capacity
would perform the task of knocking down coral pinnacles
effectively and at a substantially lower cost than using ex-
plosives. This view has been confirmed by consultations with a
demolition expert who had visited Nauru on other business.
3. In order.to level the areas after knocking down the
pinnacles and before resoiling, it woul be necessaiy to cover
the area graded by the dozers with crushed limestone.
Approximately 900 cubic yards of material per acre would be
required, 500 cubic yards as 6 inch metal, 200 cubic yards as
inch metal and a final 200 cubic yards of \ inch to 3/16
inch screenings. Estimated costs of this work are as follows -
$ per acre
Quarrying 900 cubic yards of limestone
@ $1.50 per yard 1*350
Crushing, delivery and spreading of
500 cubic yards of 6 inch metal 1,000
Crushing, delivery and spreading of
200 cubic yards of inch metal 500
Crushing, delivery and spreading of
200 cubic yards of j to 3/16 inch
metal 800
3.650


4. The costs of procuring soil from an external source
and its transport to ship's hold have been estimated by the
British Phosphate Commissioners at $4.34 per ton if obtained
from an island in the Solomons group or $4.59 per ton if ob-
tained near Geelong in Australia. These figures are based on an
annual rate of soil importation of 900,000 tons extending over a
25 year period. Although they appear reasonable on this basis and
are unlikely to be reduced by importing soil from any other
location, they probably underestimate the likely costs for the
quantities needed, if the above method of soil spreading were
used. Moreover the B.P.C. assumed that half of the soil would be
subsoil. Average costs would be $0.50 per ton higher if this were
not the case.
5. The Committee considers that if finely ground limestone
were used as filling, washing in of soil into crevices would be
reduced. The 3,500 tons (cubic yards) of soil per acre would then
be sufficient to provide a soil cover 2 feet in depth (subject to
the technical difficulties discussed below). This would mean total
soil imports of only 9.8 million tons, assuming that -
(i) 470 of the total 3*500 workable acres are used for
airstrip, reservoir and road construction and are
therefore not resoiled; and
(ii) that 800,000 tons of local soil covering under-
developed phosphate areas could be conserved and
used for resoiling part of the island.
The per unit costs of soil procurement and loading would be rather
higher for this quantity than for the 22,500,000 tons assumed by
the British Phosphate Commissioners. This applies particularly in
the case of soil imports from the Solomons, where substantial
overhead costs of a jetty, cantilever loading arm, drying plant,
storage bins and associated workshops, services and housing would
have to be incurred. Accordingly the costs per ton of top soil
loaded have been estimated at -
ss*2o per ton from Geelong
$5.00 per ton from the Solomons


6. The cost of transporting soil to Nauru by phosphate
carrying vessels is chiefly the cost of the resultant slower
turn-around of the ships involved. The B.P.C. estimate of
$1.20 per ton for soil carried from Geelong is considered, for
two main reasons, much too low. Firstly the unloading time of
5 days, on which this is based, is certainly inadequate,
bearing in mind the nature of the operation which involves
unloading soil from the ships’ holds into containers on barges.
An additional eight to nine days for a round voyage is the
expected minimum, allowing for loading and unloading time and
the slower return travel when loaded than in ballast. Secondly
the assumed charter cost of $l2OO per day for a ship of 12,000
tons D.W. (carrying 10,000 tons of soil) is too low as a long-
term expectation. Accordingly the Committee has accepted as a
more likely shipping cost the figure of $2.16 per ton for soil
from Geelong. For soil brought from the Solomons by special
bulk carrier ships, freight costs are estimated at $2.60 per
ton. As total procurement and freight costs for soil obtained
from this source would exceed costs of soil imported from
Geelong or another port on the Australian mainland, the
Committee’s estimates of the aggregate cost of resoiling
worked-out phosphate areas is based on the assumption that soil
would be imported from Australia and not from a Pacific island.
7* The British Phosphate Commissioners’ estimate of
costs of discharging soil at Nauru, carting to fields, spread-
ing and compacting was $2.04 per ton. This figure was
derived by spreading overhead costs of boat harbours on the
westerly and easterly sides of the island and other capital
works necessary over a total quantity of 22.5 million tons.
For a quantity of 9*B million tons and in view of the longer
time necessary to unload each shipload it is considered that
a cost of at least $3.00 per ton (including approximately 70
cents per ton for transport to, and spreading on, the plateau)
would be incurred.
8. Total costs of procuring, shipping, unloading and
spreading imported soil would thus be $10.36 per ton, made
up as follows;-


$ per ton (for
9.8 million tope)
Procurement and loading 5*20
Freight from Geelong to Nauru 2.16
Unloading at Nauru 2/50
Delivery and spreading in phosphate
fields 0»70
10.36
9, An analysis, based on the 2 foot vertical contour
plans of Nauru prepared by the British Phosphate Commissioners,
reveals that of the 3,500 acres of worked or workable phosphate
lands, some 1,500 acres have a elope exceeding 1 in 20. Such a
slope is considered to be the extreme limit at which soil placed
on levelled areas would remain in position without extensive
erosion control measures such as contour terracing or the
construction of suitable retaining walls or banks. Approx-
imately 100 acres of steeply sloping land would be included in
the area to be reclaimed for the proposed airstrip. The site
for the reservoir consists entirely of flat land, i.e., a
basin with a slope less than 1 in 20. Thus of the 3*030 acres
of worked-out lands not required for airstrip and road con-
struction or for the reservoir, 1,400 acres would be too steep
for successful soil placement without special anti-erosion
measures. The erosion hazards involved both during and after
resoiling would present a major technical problem in view of
both the intensity of tropical downpours (four to five inches
of rain in an hour is not uncommon) and the extra suscepti-
bility to washing and sheet erosion of introduced soil spread
on a sloping rock base. The Committee considers that permanent
and major erosion control measures would be necessary on all
land with a slope of 1 in 20 and probably on many areas with
less steep slopes. Accordingly estimates of total resoiling
costs should include the costs of retaining walls or con-
toured rock terraces, estimated at approximately $lO,OOO per
acre.
10. The total per acre costs of reclamation of the
mined-out areas with imported soil would thus be as follows:-


Depth of soil cover
$A per
acre
With slope less
than 1 in 20
With slope exceed-
ing 1 in 20
(a)
1 ft. (1900 tons/
acre)
24,600
34,600
0>)
2 ft. (3500 tons/
acre)
40,400
50,400
(c)
3 ft. (5100 tons/
acre)
55,100
65,100
(a)
4 ft. (67OO tons/
acre)
66,100
76,100
NOTE: Assumed costs of soil, spread on site, are -
(a) $10.60 per ton
(b) $10.36 per ton
(c) $lO per ton
(d) $9.40 per ton.
Cost of levelling and packing with crushed limestone
taken as $4,150 per acre and cost of erosion control
works on land of steeper slope than 1 in 20, $lO,OOO
per acre.
11, The average depth of soil cover on the phosphate
lands is reported by the British Phosphate Commissioners to be
about five inches. Assuming that three inches of this could be
stripped off during development for mining and conserved for land
resoiling operations, the 2,000 acres (approx.) of undeveloped
phosphate lands would yield some 800,000 tons of soil including
all vegetative cover. This would be sufficient to resoil the
following areas:-
Depth of soil
cover
Area covered
with local
soil
(acres)
Estimated
$A per acre
costs (a)
Total area
($ million)
1 ft.
421
6,817
2.87
2 ft.
228
9,079
2.07
3 ft.
159
11,195
1.78
4 ft.
119
13,529
1.61
(a) Including levelling costs of $A4,150 per acre;
removal and storage of soil from unworked
phosphate lands at 70 cents per ton; delivery
of soil from storage area and spreading at 70
cents per ton.


12. Costs of resoiling the remainder of the worked-out
phosphate lands, excluding the 470 acres required for airstrip,
roads and reservoir construction, would be as follows:-
Depth of
soil cover
Area to be
covered with
imported
soil
Estimated
cost in-
cluding
erosion
control
Cost of
erosion
control on
1,400 acres
Total
Acres
$A million
$ million
$ million
1 ft.
2,609
64.2
14.0
78.2
2 ft.
2,802
113.2
14.0
127.2
3 ft.
2,871
158.2
14.0
172.2
4 ft.
2,911
192.4
14.0
206.4
13* By aggregating the costs for varying depths of soil
cover, set out in the two preceding paragraphs, the following
estimates of total costs of resoiling the island (making maximum
use of local materials) are obtained:-
Depth of soil
cover
Total cost of levelling
pinnacles and resoiling
(excluding airport, roads and
reservoir sites)
$A. million
1 ft.
81
2 ft.
129
3 ft.
174
4 ft.
208
14. If the whole 3*500 acres of worked-out phosphate fields
were to be resoiled, total costs would amount to:-
Depth of soil
cover
Additional costs
of 470 acres (a)
Total
$ million
$ million
1 ft.
12.56
94
2 ft.
19.99
149
3 ft.
26.90
201
4 ft.
32.07
240
(a) Based on the assumption that 100 acres of the 470
acres suggested as suitable sites for an airstrip
and a reservoir or required for roads would need
major soil conservation works costing $lO,OOO per
acre.


APPENDIX IV
NAURU
WATER EXPLORATION - B.P.C.
PRELIMINARY REPORT 1965
(See enclosed map and chart.)
INTRODUCTION
Following a consultation between B.P.C. represent-
atives and the Contractors, it was commonly agreed that
preference be given to at least two to three 150* pattern
holes so that aforehand information on the subsoil structure of
the island be obtained when subsequently the deeper 500'
geological holes are attempted.
The following holes, viz: H3* H 7 and H 8 were first
chosen as these had been ready to commence the project. The
basis of selection of the drill points on the island arises
from consideration of pinnacle outcrops, and at the same time
keeping in mind if and where there are forms of natural
depressions.
The attached map of the island shows, in rough
proximity, the positions of all the holes attempted together
with their respective KL’s.
Definitions
Honeycombs: This term is loosely used to describe
cavity formation in the coral, which
is able to take away the air normally
supplied to the borehole at approxim-
ately 300-400 c.p.m.
Small Cavities: This term is loosely used to describe
cavity formation, in the coral, which
is not able to take away the air
normally supplied to the borehole at
approximately 300-400 c.p.m.
Cavern: This term is used to describe under-
ground hollows struck in coral.
HOLE H. 3
Drilling commenced with a 6j' jt) Bit. From 0’ to
21*, Drilling went through a reasonably consistently solid layer
of coral formation at a rate of approximately 28’/Hour. A 3’
deep cavern was struck at this depth where almost all returns
were lost. The extent of it could only be guessed by the amount
of air lost or by how much return was being brought to the surface.
Drilling was continued past the cave for a further 27’ throughout
which depth is was 'felt* by means of the drill rods to contain
small cavities or honeycombs. At this stage the return of air was
lost completely.


Presumably the cuttings, intercepted by the cave in
transit to the surface, would normally build up around the bore
hole in the floor of the cavern and be liable to collapse back
on top of the bit; or making it too difficult to clean out the
hole. The Contractor felt that a certain amount of risk to the
safety of his cutting tool was being run and it was considered
appropriate from this aspect to case the bore.
Prior to casing, an inspection of the hole showed
that at places in soft spots, the tool had drifted off centre
by as much as two to three inches making the bore-hole too
irregular and inconsistent. Subsequent casing using 6 n O.D.
steel pile linings was found too difficult to do.
Reaming attempt using an 8" fb Bit failed when the top
of the pinnacle began to crack. The hole abandoned and Rig
moved to next site at Hole No. H 7»
HOLE No. H7>
Respecting the difficulty encountered when casing the
previous borehole, necessitated the use of the 8" bit to conmence
the hole.
In the first 35’ the pinnacle appeared to contain
pockets of phosphate alluvium, small cavities and honeycombs.
At 49* a cavern 4’ deep was struck and through which most of
the chips were lost. Water was injected into the borehole con-
fluent with the air blast in an effort to stabilize the loose
phosphate alluvium in the bore wall. At 68* another cavern 2'
deep was struck and the return of air and chips were lost
completely. At 72* casing was decided by the same token effec-
ted at H 3. Length of casing used approx. 72’ and the operation
took about 4 hours.
Water table was struck at 54' and found brackish by
taste. From 72* to 83', chips were being obtained together with
a substantial flow of water. Honeycomb formation was again met
between 8j5 1 to 91' where all returns were completely lost.
Drilling was finally taken to a total depth of 124’,
and with no returns being obtained at the surface it was
considered unsafe to continue drilling and the 6" casings were
salvaged before the hole was abandoned.


HOLE No. 8,
Drilled to 8* but stopped when the pinnacle was
found to he a floater. Rig was reset over new site in the
general vicinity and drilling continued.
Honeycomb formation were struck at varying depths
between 47’ and 136*. Two small caverns 2 , 6" deep were struck
at depths 62' and 136* respectively. Bore cased to 114’. In
the process the 6” casing falls into the borehole under its
own weight except at odd places where possibly small ledges
protruding the bore wall had necessitated pushing with the
machine head.
The water table was struck at 92’ and appeared fresh
to taste. The salt counter reading at 1520 ppm. After
redrilling to 114’ the water was again tested and found to have
just turned brackish. At 130' formation of small cavities was
struck and at 136‘6 n a cavern 2*6” deep. The hole decased and
abandoned at 139* •
HOLE No. H.lO. Geological Hole.
The policy adopted here was to drill down as far as
possible with the 8” Bit, to within the safety limit of the
cutting tool and then case the bore before following up with the
si" f> Bit.
Layers of honeycomb and small cavities generally lie
at varying depths throughout the length of the hole, but
predominantly between 8’ and 42‘. The proportion of these
formations to the total depth drilled in 32.75. The fines in
the samples of the chips obtained from 35* to appeared
greenish-grey in colour and emanating a somewhat obnoxious smell
when drilling.
The water table was encountered in a layer of small
cavities or honeycomb at 101*. The water in brackish and the
salt counter reading at 695 oppm. At 30' and 85’ consecutively,
the cutting tool came close to being trapped under formation
collapse.
At 122* going through presumably a layer of very
solid coral, the return of samples and chips were completely
lost. However, drilling continued for a further 65' in the most
careful manner to prevent the occurrence of another possible
formation collapse. The stage was reached when at 187' it was
deemed necessary to case. The 6" casing took nearly 5 hours to
complete before the bore was rerodded and drilling resumed with
a Bit.


The return of air and chips together with a sub-
stantial flow of salty water reappeared immediately after the
drilling resumed.
At 204* to 211* the drilling rate was almost
tripled but slowed up again at 211*. At 236* 6" a small
cavern 18" deep was struck. From 238' onwards to the final
depth of 248', the cutting bit was following what appeared to
be either a dipping crevice or a sloping wall of the last
cavern presumed 18" deep. In the last 10' (238' 248) drilling
was gradually departing from the general direction; and at any
rate the return of samples disappeared that it was pointless
to continue drilling the hole for which purpose it was required.
After withdrawing the casings, the Contractors were
requested to attempt reaming the bore using the 8" ft) bit to
establish the possibility of a future development on the hole
when it is required. Reaming operation extended from 187’ to
192'. The hole abandoned and Rig moved to next site at H 4.
HOLE No. H 4.
The policy adopted at this stage, after failing the
exploratory hole at HlO, was to treat each subsequent hole a
potential geological hole, and attempts be made where possible
to sample all footage.
In the first 8 * the surface pinnacle appeared to be
consistently solid. At 8' a 4' deep cavern was struck and
returns were almost completely lost. The venturi action, at the
top of the borehole with the air blasting at cave level
indicated the extensiveness of the cavern.
Honeycomb formations were found more closely together
at varying depths between 19’ and 40'. Two other honeycomb
formations were encountered further down at 58* and 78*
respectively. The proportion of these formations to the drill
depth is about 20.45.
The water table was struck at 95' and it showed a
salt counter reading of about This is just
susceptible to the taste.
The hole was abandoned at 103 * because it became
too difficult to be cleaned and it was much too irregular
throughout for casing.


HOLE NO. H 5«
The proportion of honeycomb and cavern formations to
the total depth drilled is 16.55• These formations were struck
at to 38', 48* to 54* and 83' to 84* inclusively. The
return of air and samples were completely lost at 30'• Despite
persistent efforts to clean out the borehole at 46’, the
cuttings accumulated to 7* from the bottom of the hole. With
the tool bit drilling under 7' of cuttings made it risky to
change red as this would mean turning off the air blast to the
bit enabling the cuttings to settle back on top of it.
As a remedial measure, half a cubic yard of wet mix
H.E.S. concrete was poured into the bore hole in the hope of
sealing off the cavern formation and thereby promoting the
passage of the returns. However, the remedy was soon defeated
when at 48’ two large caverns were struck.
The water table was struck at 72’ and the first
sample obtained read lOOOppm on the salt counter.
Final depth drilled to 91our later inspection
showed that the borehole had followed two distinct bends at
opposite hand. This of course jeopardized the opportunity of
making the hole a geological one.
Hole abandoned.
SUB HOLE NO. H6D..
Three holes were tried but abandoned at B*, 6' and
23* respectively, being coral floaters, some containing pockets
of phosphate alluvial.
The fourth pinnacle was drilled to a total depth of
149’; 30*9$ of which was honeycombs and caverns including two
strata of soft material at 18* to 19* , and 61* to 67*
inclusively. In these materials drilling rate had almost tripled.
Air return was lost through 4* deep cave struck at 28*.
The borehole cased to 64* and further 3* was later
pushed with the machine head into the soft stratum at 61* to 67* •
Cleaning of the hole and consequent sampling became effective
again until a I3 1 deep cavern was struck at 101*. Water table
was struck at 128* and the sample appeared salty to taste.


Hole abandoned but casing was left in bore hole to
prevent formation collapse.
HOLE NO. H 2.
There being no pinnacle within general vicinity of
site, drilling commenced firstly through a2 1 layer of black
silty topsoil, 11* of phosphate alluvium, 3* through a rock
phosphate floater, 2* of phosphate alluvium again 18 * to 23'
honeycomb in coral, and from 23' to 24 ' into a hard stratum
when at 24 ‘ the hole was abandoned.
As seen drilling through phosphate alluvium near
the surface, the tool bit was smothered under the partially
suspended mass of loose cuttings which surface keeps bobbing
in the escaping air. This was probably how the tool bit was
jammed in several places at hole H.lO. However, the machine
was able to clean out 7* of "the first 13* and the resultant
hole, being oversize, rendered it possible to case with the
8 n I.D. victaulic pipe. The final depth cased was 13' into
the ground and 6’ of which the casing had to be worked in through
the cuttings.
The proportion of honeycomb and small cavity
formations to the final footage drilled is 20.85. The former
being struck at 18'. Water salty.
The theme at this stage was the element of time and
also the fact that it was only possible to case down to the rock
phosphate at 13' and the exposed alluvial below it may prevent
the 8" bit getting much further into the coral; that it was
pointless to waste any more time than was necessary for assess-
ing the quality of water.
The hole abandoned and moved to next site at
Hole HI.
HOLE NO. HI.
Two consecutive drill attempts in the prepared site
were bored each to 6' deep but were abandoned because of the
same difficulty met in drilling through alluvial phosphate at
H 2.
In the meantime while the machine was at H 9 and
H3C, a new site in the general vicinity was being prepared on
a pinnacle found in one of the small pools north of the
lagoon. Coral tailings were used to construct a working
platform and access to the pinnacle.


SUB HOLES 9ft.. B and Ci,
Three drill attempts at 12*, 8* and 6’ in the general
vicinity were tried hut abandoned because they were found un-
suitable.
H9D.
In the fourth attempt drilled through first 13’ of
reasonably solid coral. At 13’ began loosing air returns until
at 18 ’ to 21’, a layer of honeycombs was struck and the returns
were completely lost.
From 22' to 25* struck possibly a rock phosphate
adhering to the coral pinnacle.
At 31 1 drilling went through a hard layer until at
33* stopped to case the bore. At this stage drilling became
risky as the borehole was not cleaning out properly since the
lose of air.
The borehole was cased to 33* and drilling resumed.
The returns reappeared until a layer of honeycombs was met at
38' 6" to 46* when all returns were lost.
At 56* the drilling rate dropped markedly when boring
through a hard layer. A 3* deep cavern was etruck at 68* - 71*
and drilling was discontinued at 78 1 for water sampling. The
water table was found at 62’ which showed a salt counter reading
of 4000 ppm. The'site engineer requested that a further 10’ be
drilled to ascertain whether the borehole has in fact gone into
salt water. Later test on the water showed a salt content at
600 ppm.
At 78‘ a layer of honeycombs or small cavities was
struck and at 85* met a 6* deep cavern.
From 91* to 95* went through large honeycomb formation.
The cavity to solid coral ratio in this borehole is 43*3$* At
93 1 the bore was abandoned.
SUB HOLE NO. H3B.
Drilling through a reasonably solid coral from O’ to
30*. From 30' to 33* boring through what appeared to be a hard
layer of coral when at 33’ the 8" fb carset bit was sheared off the
hammer at the splined shank.


Machine resited over another pinnacle about 35* away.
The loss of the 8" cutter, places a curtailment to all geological
boreholes, and it was here then agreed to continue with the
pattern holes using the 6jjr n ft cutter.
H3C.
From O’ to 20* 6" drilling through reasonably solid
coral and at 20’6” to 21*6” a pocket of alluvial phosphate was
struck. At 25’, 6" cavities; at 35* - 42* 3" layer of small
cavities all returns disappearing at 35'. At 56' returns have
begun to reappear and at 60 1 total reappearance was again noticed.
At 69* 6" to 70* a honeycomb formation was encoun-
tered and again the air and sample returns were starting to
disappear when at 84', a 3' deep cavern was struck and all re-
turns were lost completely. The cavity to solid coral ratio
is 22.45. Boring was taken down to 98* and the drill rods
retracted for water sampling. The water table was found at
88* 6" with the salt counter reading at 3500 ppm* The hole was
abandoned and machine moved to next site at HIC.
SUB HOLE HIC.
A 9" I.D. Fibrolite pipe 2’ 6" long was placed over
the pinnacle, (mentioned above, see previous Hole HI), and back-
filled with coral tailings.
The first 8* was solid coral and underneath alluvial
phosphate. Final depth drilled 25*. Water table was struck in
the coral floater after about 18" drilling. The water blown to
the surface throughout the full depth drilled was quite substan-
tial and upon tests taken at 2* increments, it was shown that the
salt content increases progressively as follows:-
Depth Parts Per Million
6 1600
10 2700
12 4100
14 5100
16 5400
20 8800
25 9000


It was also noticed that a substantial amount of
cuttings was being obtained at the surface with the large flow
of water; this was dangerous as the floater was being under-
mined and any consequential movement may result in the jamming
of the tool bit. The water samples collected showed a tinge of
greenish discolouring and also the drill rods were discoloured
greenish-black. The hole abandoned and machine moved to next
site Hll.
SUB HOLE NO. HE.
Hole No. HIIA was tried but abandoned as this was
only a coral floater. HUB was tried but before any footage
was done the pinnacle cracked up. Another HIIB was attempted.
HUB.
The cavity to solid coral ratio in this bore is
27.75. The honeycomb and small cavity formations were more
confined to between 44’ and 117*. The final depth reached was
123 f , A small pocket of alluvial phosphate was struck at 19*
to 20', and the return of air and chips were lost at 45*. The
water table was struck at 114* in a layer of honeycomb or small
cavities and the salt counter reading was 5000 ppm which was
just susceptible to taste.
The hole was abandoned at 12j5 *.
HOLES Hl2 & 13.
Hole No. Hl2 was drilled to a depth of 20* but
abandoned as unsuitable.
Hole No. Hl3 was drilled to a depth of 18* and the
water struck was very salty. Hole abandoned.
CONCLUSION
The Rotary Percussion type of drilling in this coral
formation appeared to be unsuitable because the latter was found
in all boreholes, to be most inconsistent.


APPENDIX V
WATER SUPPLY REQUIREMENTS FOR NAUHJ ISLAND
1. The requirement is assessed on the basis that the
population is 10,000 and that the population is housed in normal
suburban manner with an intensive irrigation area requiring 34
acre feet per month.
No water is provided for flushing, sewerage etc.,
which would be done with salt water.
2. The estimated rate of demand is 70 gallons per head per
day based on the appended analysis. The consumption per month is
taken at 77 acre feet.
3. The losses by evaporation and leakage taken at 6 feet
per annum or 6 inches per month, and are assessed for a surface
storage system of supply at 33 acre feet per month, and 3 acre
per month otherwise.
4. If irrigation is used, an allowance of 34 acre feet
per month is proposed. Irrigation would require surface storage.
5. The monthly rates of demand would be either:-
80 acre feet per month
110 " " " "
144 " « »» ««
6. The monthly rainfall records for the periods 1916-194-1
and from 1946 to 1965 are available in monthly totals. (See
Appendix II). Mass diagrams have been constructed from these
figures, and are compared with the rates of demand above, on the
basis that the area of 100$ run off on the island is either 180
acres or 400 acres depending on the nature of storage used. In
the case of 180 acres, it is assumed that some water is delivered
to the island by ship, as detailed later.
7» From the mass diagrams the required maximum storage
appears to be:-
For 80 acre feet per month 1080 acre feet
on limited catchment.
110 acre feet on limited
catchment 1600 " "
144 acre feet on limited
catchment 2400 " ”


8. The storage possibilities arej-
(a) From the roofs of domestic buildings
2500 x 600 gallons 53 ac. ft.
(*) From public buildings etc. and fixed storage tanks
50 ac. ft.
(c) Storage reservoir constructed on worked out lands
RL.BO 1600 ac. ft.
(d) ditto RL.7O 1200 ac. ft.
(e) ditto KL.BO - no
excavation 800 ac. ft.
(f) New service reservoirs of 20 x 10 gallon capacity
80 ac. ft.
A combination of (a), (b) and (f) would provide for
a demand of 24 acre ft. per month.
A combination of (a) (b) (c) would provide for a
demand of 130 ac. ft./ month.
A combination of (a) (b) (e) and (f) 70 ac. ft.
per month.
A combination of (a) (b) and (d) would provide for a
demand of 100 ac. ft. per month.
It does appear that a supply can be maintained for
urban purposes, but irrigation is doubtful during one year in
five.
9. The basic requirements for the water supply system ares-
(i) Storage tanks on houses 2500 @ $lOOO $2,500,000
(ii) Storage tanks on public
buildings and service
reservoir $ 200,000
(iii) Surface storage on uplands 1600 ac. ft. $9,800,000
1200 ac. ft. $7,350,000
(iv) Service reservoirs as alternative
to surface storage
(10 @2 x 10 6 gallon) $ 700,000
(v) Ring Main around the island, with
submains to serve Buada Lagoon and
areas such as Administration and
local communities $2,000,000
(vi) Booster pump stations $ 50,000
(vii) Service connections to tenements,
etc. including meters $1,000,000


(viii) For surface storage; galleries
for collection of water includ-
ing gallery from aerodrome site
to storage equivalent to 170 acres $1,700,000
(ix) Chlorination and fluoridation plant $ 10,000
The estimated costs are indicated for each item, and
a full allowance has been made for the items existing on the
island in 1966 which would still he of service in 1996.
10. A possible combination of service reservoir storage
with roof conservation and a surface storage within natural con-
tours has been examined. The surface yield from the proposed
airport, with the delivery of water regularly from Brisbane by
regular shipping service has been taken into account. (See
Appendix VI).
The total estimated cost of such a water supply with
the aerodrome can be compared with other arrangements.
Estimate
Portion of cost of shipping facility $ 250,000
Items (i), (ii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii),
(ix) in paragraph 9 $6,460,000
Capitalized cost of providing annual
import of water of 300,000 tons $4,600,000
Cost of airport assuming no material
available from water reservoir
construction $10,000,000
$21,310,000
Add for unexcavated surface storage to
increase yield $ 2,800,000
The monthly capacity is 24 ac. ft. for $24,110,000
the smaller estimate and 70 ac. ft. for the _-
higher.
11. The comparative estimated cost for a local storage
reservoir fed by run-off from the surface, including the
airport, using a system of galleries for collection is:
Assume storage capacity 1600 ac. ft.


Items (i), (ii), (iii), (v),
(vi), (vii), (viii), (lx) Id
paragraph 9 $17*260,000
Airport $ 8,000,000
$25,260,000
Assume capacity 1200 ac. ft.
$14,810,000
Airport $ 8,500*000
$22,310,000
The respective rates of supply are 130 ac. ft. and
80 ac. ft. per month.
With the larger storage, irrigation would he available
on the average of four years out of five, but when drought
conditions occurred (i.e. when the rainfall in 12 months was less
than 24"), irrigation would have to be reduced.
12. The land required for a water supply with surface
storage is 70 acres.
13* At the estimates indicate, there is an overwhelmingly
advantageous situation if a surface storage of at least 1600 ac.
ft. is adopted.
Daily Rate of Water consumption
N R
1. Drinking and Cooking 5 5
2. Washing (personal) 8 5
3» " (domestic) 15 5
4. Animal requirements 6 6
5. Gardening 20
6. Public purposes, including
hospitals, schools and
small industry 10 10
Gallons per person per day 70 35
N Normal times
R Restricted periods (after twelve months during
which total rainfall does not exceed 20").


APPENDIX VI
STUDY OF PROPOSAL TO SUPPLY WATER TO THE ISLAND OF NAUHJ BY
SHIP DESIGNED FOR THE SPECIAL PURPOSE.
1. On the cessation of the phosphate extraction at
Nauru, the Nauruan community of some 10,000 will require a
regular shipping service for the import of foodstuffs, building
materials, fuels and oil and general requirements including
minor passenger needs.
2. It is proposed to examine the use of a special vessel
capable of performing the above duties and otherwise delivering
300,000 tons per annum of water.
3« Assume that a vessel of special design is used,
which has a dead weight capacity of 10,000 tons, a speed of 17
knots, and operates between Brisbane and Nauru.
4. The round voyage would be some nine days, and at
least 35 voyages a year should be possible. Thus some 350*000
tons dead weight would be delivered of which 300,000 tons would
be water and the balance general cargoes, though incoming cargo
probably would not exceed 20,000 tons.
5* The annual cost of operating such a ship, including
depreciation, is estimated at $700,000, the capital cost being
$3,500,000 including shore facilities.
6. If cargo is charged at rate of $2O per ton the income
would be:
20,000 x 20= $400,000
leaving as cost for water freight $300,000, or
$1 per ton, or $4.45 per 1,000 gallons for freight.
The total cost of 68,000,000 gallons, including
purchase at 20 cents would be $4.80 per 1,000
gallons - or $326,400 which is equivalent to the
annual capital and interest charges on $4,600,000.


APPENDIX VII
BIBLIOGRAPHY
This appendix lists the various reference material
which provided much background and other information to the
Committee.
Department of Territories, Annual Report of the
Canberra
Administration of the
Territory of Nauru 1963-1964.
T.C. Tyrer "Nauru and Ocean Islands
Story". (Wellington, 1965)
Department of Territories, Record of Negotiations
Canberra
between Nauru Local
Government Council and
Australian Delegation,
Canberra May/ June 1965.
Dr. Paul Hambruch "Nauru"
(Ergebnisse der Sudsee -
Expedition 1908-1910).
Albert Ellis "Ocean Island and Nauru,
Their Stoxy" (Sydney 1935).
C.5.1.R.0. Report on Present and
(E. Phillis and _ . . . _ „
H. A. Haantjene) Potential Land Use on
Nauru Island 1954.
United Nations Report on Nauru by the
Trusteeship Council 9
United Nations Visiting
Mission to the Trust
Territoxy of Nauru 1965.
Nancy E. Kirk Dietary Survey of the U.U.
Trust Territory of Nauru,
1957.
Dr• Helen Hughes The Political Economy of
Nauru (Australian National
University, 1964).




















