

Boy IZ
Australasian
Congregational Mnion.
Report of the Proceedings
OF THE
THIRD ASSEMBLY
Held at Sydney, 24th April to Ist May, 1907,
together with the address on
“The Permanent Elements in the Christian
Faith,”
THE PRESIDENT; Rev. A. GOSMAN, D.D.
PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE cASSEMBLY .
Sydney :
Merchant * Co., Ltd.. Printers, 43S Kent Street.




S ustr alasian
Congregational iHnion.
Report of the Proceedings
OF THE
THIRD ASSEMBLY
Held at Sydney, 24th April to Ist May, 1907,
together with the address on
“The Permanent Elements in the Christian
Faith,”
THE PRESIDENT: Rev. A. GOSMAN, D.D.
PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE
Sydney:
Marchant & Co., Ltd., Printers, 435 Kent Street.


***


REV. A. GOSMAN D.D.
Block kindly lent by “ The Sydney Mail."




Australasian
Congregational Mntmt.
THIRD ASSEMBLY
SYDNEY.
APRIL, 1907.
President - Rev. A. GOSMAN, D.D.
CONTENTS,
List of Delegates - - 7
List of Officers 8
Constitution and By-Laws ----- 9
Abstract of Minutes 13
Abstract of Report - - 19
Treasurer’s Statement 22
Public Meetings - 23
Social Functions 23
President’s Address 25




t/5
fl; *-•
.S rt D
R g « ■= l=l . g
•r Mto m-a .2 > oj rt & T 3 <o
3 U r C «) Q n k C w i<
0. <U <n +- r rfa)& !:3 « C w t £rtST: x ® 11 " O
w B c £ "C'SSS 13 o I §
S c 5-2 S ft = “ ° «a!« - S S=s-j=®
§lz 5 =g§ I oih f <••£„<> * . K 1 " 0 |_-
sS ? J ! J i nSzf, <v tu Eg
c /j^ c d u £
. . . . (/> . ... . .. .. t/i
>« ■£ .>> tn > »> >,->> > > .
03 ctf *- 1 <3J <U <u<u<u t ” « B O U 1J
eSxx pc pc §
rx f
» O fe < j
«2» | < «
■'C^o®' L ’fi-^i' r "
S 2 1 I 11 s I g B^^
[U •• .« < £ 2-S ££ 53 § • j.'2 c^o - C - c^
-W JT y& sz uS* K * S gw|| S J o °°c
Ow g a?;nE . . .rt
£ S)ui M l .'S“^ **«=“<<=
““t flj . .m ui .tn . («>(/>.. >" yi •>>> w 5®
B, . « S £SB^BS
ty< S Q
t 2 -J <
§io s *
UJ *j ,c g sfc s-s
,*s f/i . tn 5 <u « C‘3<u
E/j m ”2 t- C <u £ U
-T • ,52 C C > rj .5 rt
*_» < J S Jt=S alg=|i||gS S S J?
B I icc| 0 l°os£»Ftsg^E| M |-e-e s |
B a s -««|ss!b|
\ 4—t “ < g . • • . O O .
in cf
<T"" S>t«>t/i •>>>(« tn > > . e/5 > > . • > > . jfi in >’ •
J 5 E
3
u* <
*+-4 ffi v
S s< , sa. 2 5 l<
t 5 Ss2 c_«< K «= = « £S
n 5 c ' g .S pi -£ , •
’ojcuS£ <; § 3i
£b s t «'2 st= «u«. 2 «3 £g-i2 S S g g
S “-ill I § ijj; H hWM 1
' • • ~7t
Jj
,11 *', ni r. 1 ni <i 5 tu <ri d} fli n'. £l5 *-* *“* .H. H. *-•
cCPCPCPCPCPCPCPCPCPCPCPCpCXcr^^^^^^^.^^.^,^^


Congregational Union of Australasia.
Constituted at Melbourne, 1888. First Assembly, Wellington,
N.Z., 1892; President, Rev. W. Roby Fletcher, M.A., of Adelaide.
Revived at Brisbane, Q., 1903. Second Assembly, Melbourne,
October, 1904; President, Rev. John Fordyce, M.A., D.D., Syd-
ney, N.S.W.
OFFICERS, 1904-1907.
President: Rev. A. Gosman, D.D
Vice-Presidents: Rev. W. Allen (N.S.W.), Rev. J. C. Kirby (S.A.),
Rev. W. J. L. Closs, B.A. (Q.), Rev. W. T. Kench' (W.A.),
Rev. G. W. Sharp (T.), Rev. J. R. Glasson (N.Z.).
Hon. Secretary; Rev. A. J. Griffith, M.A., Brighton Road,
South Brisbane, Q.
Hon. Treasurer: Mr. W. Warren Kerr, 46 William Street,
Melbourne, V.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE, 1904-1907..
N.S.W.—Revs. W. Allen [ex officio), N. J. Cocks, M.A., J.
Fordyce, D.D., T. Roseby, LL.D., R. A. Thompson, 8.A.,
J. H. Toms [convener).
Vic.—Revs. LI. D. Sevan, LL.D., A. Gosman, D.D. [ex officio)
[convener) , J. J. Halley, Messrs. W. W. Kerr, G. G. Mercy,
A. M. Strongman.
S.'A.—Revs. J. C. Kirby [ex officio), G. Rayner [convener), Mr.
W. H. Phillips, Senator J. Vardon.
Q. —Revs. W. J. L. Closs, B.A. [ex officio), A. J. Griffith,' M.A.
[ex officio) [convener), Walter Jones, Jacob Williams, Mr.
G. F. Scott, B.A.
W.A.—Revs. E. Davies, W. T. Kench [ex officio) [convener).
Tas.—Revs. M. Massie, G. W. Sharp [ex officio) [convener) , Mr.
Th. Cane.
N.Z. —Revs. W. Day, J. R. Glasson [ex officio), W. Saunders,
J. Wilkins [convener).
OFFICERS, 1907-J9IO,
President; Rev. J. C. Kirby
Vice-Presidents: Revs. G. Campbell, Dr. Gosman, W. J. L.
Closs, 8.A., W. T. Kench, G. W. Sharp, W. Saunders.
Hon. Secretary; Rev. A. J. Griffith, M.A.
Hon. Treasurer; Mr. W. W. Kerr.


Congregational Union of Australasia*
CONSTITUTION.
Adopted at Sydney, Friday, April 26, 1907
1. Name.
The Congregational Union of Australasia, hereinafter re
ferred to as the Union.
2. Objects.
( ( r) To cultivate the spirit of union among the Congrega-
tional Churches of Australasia; and to foster and exhibit
their substantial unity in doctrine, polity, and work.
(2) To confer in Council upon the common work and inter-
ests of the associated Churches and Unions, and upon
all matters bearing upon the progress of the Kingdom
of God.
3. Proviso.
In constituting the Union it is understood and is hereby
affirmed that the Union shall exercise no legislative or judicial
authority over its constituents.
4. Constituency.
The Union shall consist of the Congregational Unions of
Australasia at present forming its constituency, and of such as
shall be admitted hereafter in accordance with its rules.
5. Representatives.
Each constituent of the Union shall be entitled to appoint six
(6) representatives for every ten (ro) Churches, or portion of ten
(10). Such representatives to consist of an equal number of
ministerial and lay delegates. Each Theological College and
Board of Ministerial Training shall appoint one representative to
the Union. Each official representative of the London Missionary
Society resident within the Commonwealth shall be an ex officio
representative to the Union.
6. Honorary Members.
Any State Union may recommend to th e Executive of the
Australasian Union such names as it considers eligible for hon-
orary membership, and the Executive shall at its discretion sub-
mit such names for election to the Assembly.
7. The Union Assembly.
The Assembly of the Union shall be convened for business
at least once in three years at such time and place as the repre-
sentatives and members may determine.
8. Officers.
The officers of the Union shall be a President, Vice-Presi-
dents, a Secretary, and a Treasurer. The election of these shall
take place in the Assembly by ballot after open nomination.
They hold office until the next following Assembly.
(1) The President shall enter upon his office immediately
after the close of the Assembly at which he is elected.
He shall be expected, in addition to the discharge of
the usual duties of a President, to deliver an address
at tfie Assembly following on a subject to be selected
by himself.


(2) The number of Vice-Presidents shall be regulated by
the number of State Unions that constitute the Union.
Each State Union shall be represented by a Vice-
President, except the one to which the President for
the time being- belongs. *
(3) The Secretary shall transcribe and preserve the records
of the proceedings of the Union; shall conduct its
official correspondence; and shall act as its Executive
officer* in the intervals between the times of the
Assembly.
(4) The Treasurer shall receive all moneys contributed f u
the purposes of the Union ; and shall present an audi-
ted financial statement at each meeting of the As-
sembly.
Should any vacancy arise in the staff of officers in the inter-
val between the meetings of the Assembly, the office shall be
filled by the vote of the Committee.
9. CommiWea.
The affairs of the Union shall be entrusted to the officers of
the Union together with an Executive Committee of twenty-six
{26) members, who shall hold office for three years, or until
the next following Assembly. These members shall be elected
by the Executives of the various State Unions. Each State
shall elect its own Committee-members in the following propor-
tions:—New South Wales, five (5); Victoria, five (5); South
Australia, four (4) ; Queensland, three (3) ; West Australia, three
(3) ; Tasmania, three (3) ; New Zealand, three (3).
Vacancies that may arise in the Committee shall be dealt
with in the same way.
The time for electing the Executive Committee shall be im-
mediately after the holding of the Assembly.
10. Finances.
Each constituent of the Union shall contribute a sum of not
less than two pounds (£2) to its funds every three years, and in
addition, as may be required, in proportion to its representative
members.
11. Preacher.
The Preacher for the successive sessions of the Union shall
be appointed by the Executive Committee.
12. Standing Orders, etc.
The Union shall have power to frame Standing Orders and
Bye-laws for its own guidance at its duly constituted Assemblies.
13. Amendments.
This Constitution shall not be amended or altered, except in
a duly constituted Assembly, and by a two-thirds majority.
Notice of such amendment or alteration must be forwarded to
the Secretary at least three months before the date of the Assem
bly at which it is to be discussed, and shall be at once notified
by the secretary to the members of the Executive. Committee in
each State.


BYE LAWS.
1. Place of Mealing of the Assembly.
The Assembly shall be open to receive invitations from any
constituent Union, but the decision of the place of meeting shall
rest with the Assembly. Should circumstances arise through
which the decision of the Assembly must be set aside, the selec-
tion of the place of meeting shall rest with the Executive Com-
mittee.
2. Time cC Meeting.
The precise date of the sessions of the Assembly shall be
fixed by the Committee of the Union of the entertaining State,
after consultation with the officers of the Australasian Union.
3. Notification of the Assembly.
The Secretary shall forward to each Secretary of the constitu-
ent Unions, at least three months before the meetings of the
Assembly, a notification as to the time and place of its next
session, and (for distribution amongst its representatives) an
agemda of the business, at least three weeks before the date of
its meeting.
4. Reference Committee.
At the commencement of the proceedings of each Assembly,
a Committee shall be appointed consisting of five members and
the Secretary. This Committee shall be called the Committee of
Reference, and to it questions may be submitted concerning bus-
iness not on the agenda, or on which the Assembly requires
advice.- This Committee shall have no power to determine such
questions, but only to deliberate upon them, and report to the
Assembly.
5. Order of Procedure.
The following shall be the order of business in the Assembly
from day to day:
(1) Devotional.
(2) Minutes.
(3) Correspondence.
(4) Admission of Unions, Honorary Members, Etc.
(s) Notices of Motion, and Questions.
(6) Reports of Committees.
(7) Order of the Day.
6. Tima Allowed to Speakers and Others.
The Assembly may from time to time fix a time-limit for
papers and speeches.
7. Resolutions, Etc.
The mover of a resolution shall have the right of reply, but
not the mover of an amendment. One amendment must be dis
posed of before another can be moved on the substantive motion
Every resolution and amendment must be written down and
handed to the President before the question is put.


8. As the members of the Executive Committee reside in
various States, the division belonging to each State shall
termed the “Sectional State Committee” ; it shall appoint its own
convener, who shall be its responsible officer, and to whom the
Secretary of the Union shall address all communications requir-*
ing the Executive Committee’s deliberation. Any question that
has been considered and decided upon by the aggregate majority
vote of all the Sectional State Committees shall be deemed to have
been considered and decided upon by the whole of the Executive
Committee.
9. The travelling expenses of the President, and of the Secre-
tary, to the sessions of the Assembly shall be defrayed by the
Union.
10. The Union “Year” shall be current from each first day
of October to the following thirtieth day of September. Contri-
butions due to the Tnion shall be paid as soon as possible after
the first of October each year.
11. The Auditors of the State Union of which the Treasurer
is a member shall be requested to act as Auditors of the Austra-
lasian Union.
12. The foregoing bye-laws may be amended at each first
business meeting of the Assembly, due notice having been given
to the Secretary before he summons the Assembly, and having
been communicated by him to the members of the Assembly in
the notices calling the Assembly.


Australasian Congregational Union.
THIRD ASSEMBLY, SYDNEY, APRIL, (907.
President: Rev. A. GOSMAN, D.D.
ABSTRACT OF MINUTES.
On Wednesday afternoon, April 24, the delegates to the As-
sembly met in the Pitt-street Congregational Church, when a
public welcome was tendered to them by the New South Wales
Union under the presidency of its chairman, the Rev. F. V. Pratt,
M.A. Acknowledgments of the salutation of the chairman were made
by the Rev. John Barton (V.), Rev. Walter Jones (Q.), Rev. J. C.
Kirby (S.A.), Rev. W. T. Kench (W.A.), Rev. G. W. Sharp (T.),
Rev. J. T. Warlow Davies, M.A. (on behalf of N.Z.), and Rev.
W. Allen (N.S.W.). These gentlemen, in their replies, gave de-
tails showing the position of the denomination in their several
States.
FIRST SESSION.
The first session commenced in the same Church on Thurs-
day morning, at 10, with devotional exercises, led by the Rev.
C. Whyte, M.A. At 10,30 the President entered the chair, and
•called on the Rev. J. T. Warlow Davies, M.A., to offer prayer.
He then addressed some words of greeting to the Assembly. The
■subject of the “Cure of Souls” was the order of the day. The
Rev. G. Rayner (S.A.) read a paper on “Preaching”; and the
Rev. W. Allen followed with a paper on “Personal Dealing.” In
the subsequent discussion Messrs. Devenish, Cunliffe Jones, J.
Pickering, Handel Jones, and W. W. Kerr took part. Mr. Allen
and Mr. Rayner responded.
second session.
Proceedings were resumed at 3 p.m., when the Rev. W. T.
Kench (Vice-President) took the chair. Prayer was offered by
the Rev. G. W. Sharp. The Rev. Jacob Williams (Q.) was elected
minute secretary for the sessions. The Rev. A. J. Griffith, M.A.,
Secretary of the Union, called the roll of delegates, which showed
a total attendance of 87 members. [The names are printed else-
where.] The following were appointed a Committee of Refer-
ence: —Revs. G. Campbell {convener), W. J. L. Closs, 8.A., E.
Davies, Joseph Robertson, M.A., G. W. Sharp, A. H. Wallace.
The following were elected a Committee to consider the matter
■of the publication of the proceedings of the Assembly, and to
report: —Revs. W. L. Patison {convener), Jacob Williams, G.
Rayner, Dr. Roseby, A. B. Rofe, W. T. Kench, and Mr. W. W.
Kerr.
A letter of greeting was read from Miss Griffith, Brisbane, Q.
The letter was cordially received. Greetings were also received
from Rev. R. Dalby, and the Society of Friends. Notices of
motion were received from the Revs. J. C. Kirbv and A T
'Griffith.


The Secretary submitted the Executive Committee’s report,
and after a slight amendment it was adopted.
Mr. W. W. Kerr moved, —“That the incoming Committee‘*&f
the Union be instructed to prepare and embody in thein next
report to the Assembly a brief statement of the origin and history
to date of the Congregational Union of Australasia.”—Carried.
The Treasurer, Mr. W. W. Kerr, read the Financial State-
ment, which was received and adopted.
The Rev. W. L. Patison reported the failure of the negotia-
tions which had been instituted to establish an Australasian Con-
gregational Journal. The report was received with cordial thanks
to Mr. Patison for his efforts.
A letter to the Secretary from the Rev. R. J. Wells, Secretary
of the Congregational Union of England and Wales, was read.
It stated that the next meetings of the International Congrega-
tional Council would be held in Edinburgh from June 30 to July q,
1908, and requested the appointment of delegates.—Passed to the
Reference Committee.
The draft Constitution as prepared by the Secretary was
submitted, and taken clause by clause. The majority of the
clauses were adopted, with some amendments. Clause 5 was
passed to the Reference Committee for consideration and report.
The Bye Laws were also submitted, and after some slight amend-
ments were adopted.
THIRD SESSION.
The Assembly met in Pitt-street Church on Friday, at 10 a.m.
Devotional exercises were conducted by the Rev. H. C. George
(Q.). At 10.30 the President entered the chair. The Rev. G.
Campbell moved, and Dr. Fraser seconded, —“That the warmest
thanks of this Assembly be accorded Dr. Gosman for his address
from the chair on the previous evening - , and that he be requested
to place the MS at the disposal of the Assembly for publication.”
—Carried ; the delegates standing. The Rev. J. Barton moved,
and Dr. Roseby seconded, —“Thaf the warmest thanks of this
Ass'embly be given to the Rev. G. Littlemore for his suggestive
and helpful sermon of Wednesday evening.”—Carried.
The Reference Committee presented its report. Re the Inter-
national Congregational Lffiion, the Committee recommended,—
1. That all communications regarding the appointment of
representatives of the several States be conducted through the
officials of the Australasian Union.
2. That the four representatives of the Australasian Union
be appointed at the present sessions of the Union.
The report was received and adopted.
Re the amendment of clause 5 of the Constitution, the Com-
mittee recommended : —l. That recognised members of Congre-
gational Churches in connection with the State Unions may be
admitted as personal members of the Australasian Union on pay-
ment of five shillings per annum. 2. That any State Union may
recommend to the Executive of the Australasian Union such
names as it considers eligible for honorary membership, and the
Executive shall at its discretion submit such names for election
to the Assembly.—After discussion, the first recommendation
was negatived, and the second adopted. On the motion of the


Rev. A. J. Griffith, seconded by Rev. Jacob Williams, the Consti-
tution as amended was adopted as the Constitution of the Con-
gregational Union of Australasia. [The Constitution is printed
elsewhere.]
Nominations were received for the election of officers of the
Union.
Papers were read on “Christian Ethics and Our Modern Life,”
by the Rev. F. V. Pratt, M.A., and Mr. W. W. Kerr. Discussion
followed, in which Messrs. Devenish, Cunliffe Jones, J. Pickering,
and Dr. Roseby took part.
FOURTH SESSION
The President opened the session with praj-er at 4 p.m.
The minutes of the previous day’s proceedings were read and
confirmed. A cablegram was received, conveying greeting from
the South African Union. Messrs. H. Hunwick and W. Roberts
were appointed scrutineers of the ballot for officers of the Union.
Dr. Gosman left the chair (which was then occupied by the Rev.
W. J. L. Closs, 8.A., Vice-President), and submitted his report
of the Committee which had been appointed at Melbourne, to
frame a scheme of Extra-Mural theological study. He read the
scheme which had been drafted.
Rev. J. Williams moved, and Rev. G. Campbell seconded, —
“That the Assembly’s thanks be accorded Dr. Gosman for the
trouble and care he had taken in framing this Extra-Mural
course. That the Assembly approves of the principle of a uniform
Extra-Mural course for Australasia, and directs that the sug-
gested scheme as submitted be forwarded to the several State
Unions, with the recommendation that they approximate their
Extra-Mural courses as nearly as practicable, in consistency with
local conditions, to a uniform standard.”—Carried.
Resolved that the Revs. Dr. Gosman, Dr. Fraser, and J. C.
Kirby be appointed a Committee to carry on this work. The Rev.
J. Williams reported the founding of a joint College by the Con-
gregationalists and Baptists of Queensland. —The report was
received.
Mr. W. W. Kerr presented the report of the Committee ap-
pointed at Melbourne to consider the question of a Ministers’
Provident Fund for Australasia.
Resolved, —(1) That the report be received and the Com-
mittee thanked for its labours. (2) That the Committee be re-
appointed and requested to enter into direct communication
with the Committees of the several existing Australasian Denom-
inational Ministers’ Provident Societies with the view of ascer-
taining how far it would be possible for them to co-operate in
the inauguration of a general Australasian Ministers’ Provident
Society, and as far as it is possible to secure from them promises
of such co-operation. (3) That the Committee be authorised to
secure from some Australasian Life Assurance Society of un-
doubted standing an offer to accept business from any Australa-
sian Congregational Minister upon the lines indicated in their
report, and that the terms of any such offer be conveyed to each
constituent Union for consultation amongst their ministerial mem-
bers. (4) That the Committee be requested to add to its num-
ber one member at least from each State Union.


The Rev. Joseph King- (London Missionary Society) presented
a report on behalf of that Society. He moved, —“That this As-
sembly of the Cong-regational Union of Australasia expresses
the strong hope that one of the corner stones of Commonwealth
legislation in Papua will be the effective protection of the abor-
iginal inhabitants, and the providing of unhampered opportunity
for such progress as they may be capable of attaining.” The
Rev. Dr. Lawes contributed important information on the sub-
ject in seconding the resolution, which was carried.
Resolved on the motion of the Rev. A. J. Griffith, seconded by
Rev J. King, —“That a cable message be forwarded from this
Assembly to the Morrison Centenary Missionary Conference now
in session in Shanghai, China, sending congratulations and sym-
pathetic greetings.”
Mr. G. P. Doolette, a visitor from London, was introduced
by the Rev. J. Robertson, who moved, —“That Mr. Doolette be
received as a representative, and associated with the Assembly
during the remainder of the sessions.” —This was seconded and
carried. Mr. Doolette briefly acknowledged the welcome.
Rev. F. V. Pratt moved, and Rev. W. J. L. Closs seconded, —
“That this Union take steps to invite the Rev. Dr. Horton, or
some other eminent minister, to visit the Churches of Australa-
sia.” —Carried.
Rev. W. J. L. Closs moved, Mr. Brooke-Smith seconded, —
“That the Executive Committee of the Union be charged with
the carrying out of this resolution.” —Carried.
Rev. W. L. Patison presented the report of the Committee re
the publication of the proceedings of the Assembly. The report
recommended the publication of a booklet of about 40 pages at
a cost of not more than ,£l5, the cost to be divided proportionally
between the several State Unions. The report was received and
adopted.
The ballot for the election of officers was taken during the
afternoon.
WOMEN’S SESSION
A special Women’s Session was held the same afternoon in
the hall of the Y.M.C.A. The lady delegates were present, and
there was also a large attendance of ladies representing the dif-
ferent Sydney Churches and Women’s Societies. Mrs. Benjamin
Palmer presided, and with her on the platform (in addition to the
speakers of the afternoon) were Mesdames Barraclough and
Jaffray of Sydney, Barton and Hamer of Victoria, Roby Fletcher
and Robertson of South Australia, Closs and Griffith of Queens-
land. Mrs. Palmer addressed a very warm welcome to the visi-
tors from other States. Addresses were delivered by Mrs. N. J.
Cocks, M.A., of the N.S.W. Ladies’ Auxiliary to Home Missions,
on women’s work in the Church; by Mrs. W. W. Kerr, of
the Victorian Home Mission, on women’s work for the deno-
mination ; by Lady Renwick, of Sydney, on the work of the Young
Women’s Christian Association, Female Refuge, State Child-
dren’s Relief Board and Fresh Air League; by Mrs. R. Jenkins, of
Sydney, on Women’s Political Organisations ; by Mrs. Halley, of
Victoria, on Foreign Missions; by Mrs. W. S. Buzacott, of Syd-
ney, who also spoke on Foreign Missions; by Miss Crouch, mis-
sionary from Salem, South India; and by Mrs. Sly, of Sydney,
who dealt with the education of little children, especially by the


Kindergarten methods. The spirit evoked by the gathering was
felt to be a certain prophecy of new zeal among- the women of the
churches belonging- to the Australasian Union. Voting for the
officers of the Union by the lady delegates was carried on during
the meeting.
FIFTH SESSION.
Monday, April 29.
The Prtesident entered the chair at 10.30 a.m. The Rev. C.
Whyte, M.A., led in prayer. Minutes of the third and fourth
sessions were read and confirmed.
The result of the ballot was announced, and the President
declared the following elected as officers of the Union for 1907-
1910: —
President, Rev. J. C. Kirby (S.A.) ; Vice-Presidents, Revs. G.
Campbell (N.S.W.), Dr. Gosman (V.), W. J. L. Closs, B.A. (Q.),
W. T. Kench (W.A.), G. W. Sharp (T.), and W. Saunders (N.Z.) ;
Hon. Secretary, Rev. A. J. Griffith, M.A. (Q.) ; Hon. Treasurer,
Mr. W. W. Kerr (V.)
Place of next Meeting.—lnvitations having been received from
South Australia and Tasmania, the Rev. A. J. Griffith moved, and
Rev. W. L. Patison seconded, “ That the Assembly accepts, with
cordial thanks, the invitation of the Tasmanian Congregational
Union to hold its next sessions in Hobart, in January or F ebruary,
1910.” Carried.
Thanks for their invitation were also tendered to the S.A.
Union.
Motions of which notice had been given were then taken: —
Rev. Wm. Allen moved, Mr. Pitts seconded, “ That this
Assembly of the Congregational Union of Australasia expresses its
sympathy with the desire for closer union amongst the evangelical
Churches which has prompted (at the instance of the Presbyterian
Church of Australia) the negotiations between representatives of
the Presbyterian, Anglican, Congregationalist, Methodist, and
Baptist denominations ; and trusts that the issue of these negotia-
tions may be the promotion of ‘the unity of the Spirit in the bond
of peace’ ; in the prevention of over-lapping; in the overtaking
of the spiritual needs of neglected districts ; and in economy of
men and means in the prosecution of Christian work.” Carried.
Rev. A. J. Griffith moved, Rev. W. L. Patison seconded,
“ That this meeting desires to express its thankfulness for the
declaration of the Prime Minister that it is the intention of the
British Government to bring the question of the limitation of
armaments before the coming Hague Conference, and trusts that
some practical scheme having this object in view may be adopted
by the Conference, and that the system of International Arbitra-
tion may be further developed. This meeting hopes also that ar-
rangements may be made for the periodical meeting of the Hague
Conference.” Carried.
Rev. A. J. Griffith moved, Rev. A. H. Wallace seconded,
“That one aim to be kept in mind by this Union is the sending
of an invitation to the International Congregational Council to
hold its sessions in Australia in the year 1916.” Carried.
Resolved that nominations be now received for four delegates
to represent the Australasian Union at the International Congre-
gational Council to be held in Edinburgh in 1908. Nominations
were then received.


Rev. W. L. Patison moved, Rev. W. H. Lewis seconded,
“ That the Committee appointed to deal with the Extra-mural
course be asked to devise some means by which greater uniform-
ity of action might be secured regarding - the reception of candi-
dates for the Extra-mural course of study.” Carried.
The Rev. Joseph King, in speaking upon Foreign
announced the presence of several missionaries from the foreign
field. By permission of the Assembly he introduced the follow-
ing:—Rev. J. W. Hills, of Samoa, and a native Samoan teacher
labouring in New Guinea; Rev. T. Howard Smith, of Peking,
Miss Crouch, of Salem, South India (a delegate to the Assem-
bly) ; Rev. C. F. Rich and Mrs. Rich, with a native boy
from New Guinea; and Rev. W. J. G. Saville, of New Guinea.
The President very cordially welcomed these friends, each of
whom briefly returned acknowledgments. The Rev. Dr. Lawes
addressed the Assembly on the present crisis in New Guinea, and
urged the various constituents of the Union to be ready to forward
any movements that might be initiated to safeguard the natives.
The Rev. W. L. Patison read a paper on Home Mission work,
which was followed by discussion. The heartiest thanks of the
Assembly were tendered to Mr. Patison for his paper.
SIXTH SESSION.
Monday, April 29.
At 3.30 a hymn was sung, and the President asked Rev. J.
Buchan, M.A., to offer prayer.
Mr. Brook-Smith and Rev. A. H. Wallace were appointed
scrutineers of the ballot for the election of delegates to Edinburgh.
The Rev. L. L. Wirt, 8.D., delivered an address on the subject,
“ The Pastor and his Young People.”
The Rev. A. Rivett read a paper on “Work of the Young the
best work for the Young.”
The Rev. J. C. Kirby spoke to the following resolution, which
he moved, —
' “That the Ministers particularly and the Churches generally
should give more attention to the Sunday Schools, and the nur-
ture of the young in Christ in future, than they have done for
many years.”
In the course of his speech Mr. Kirby presented a petition
to the Assembly signed by 578 teachers in five of the States,
praying that the Colleges and other agencies for training Minis-
ters might give a major place in their teachings to the child and
the Sunday School. The petition was received by the Assembly.
Rev. A. S. Devenish, M.A., seconded the resolution. Discussion
followed, and Mr. W. W. Kerr moved as an amendment, —“That
this Assembly commends to the prayerful and serious considera-
tion of the Ministers and members of our Churches the subject
of the religious nurture of the young; and especially the re-
sponsibility of the Church and the parent in relation thereto.”
Dr. Roseby seconded, and was followed by Messrs. Whyte, Binns,
Patison, Closs, Ernest Davies. Mr. Kirby accepted the amend
ment of Mr. Kerr, and this was put as the substantive motion
and carried.
During the debate the President withdrew from the chair,
and invited the Rev. G. W. Sharp, Vice-President, to assume its
duties.


The Chairman, in closing- the session, announced the result
of the ballot for the election of delegates to the International
Congregational Council, Edinburgh, 1908. It was as follows :
Revs. Dr. Gosman, A. J. Griffith, M.A., J. C. Kirby, and Dr.
Roseby.
SEVENTH SESSION.
Tuesday, April 30.
The sessions of this day were held in the Burwood Congrega-
tional Church, Pastor Rev. G. Campbell. At 10 a.m. a devotional
service was conducted by the Rev. J. Buchan, M.A. At 10.30 the
President took the chair. Prayer was offered by the Rev. L. W.
Lee (V.). The minutes of the previous day’s proceedings were
read and confirmed.
The Rev. W. H. Lewis (W.A.) delivered an address on
“Brotherhood.”
The Rev. G. Campbell (N.S.W.) followed with a paper on
“The responsibility of the Laity.”
Discussion followed on the two papers. Votes of thanks were
passed: (1) to the Committee of Arrangements of the N.S.W.
Union, and its Convener, Rev. J. Henwood and to the
hosts and hostesses of the visiting delegates. Mr. Toms replied.
(2) To the representatives of the Pitt-street and Burwood
Churches, for providing accommodation for the Assembly; (3) to
the choirs and their leaders who had assisted in the meetings ;
(4) to the readers of papers, the speakers, and also to the scru-
tineers ; (5) to the Press.
EIGHTH SESSION
Tuesday, April 30.
At 3 p.m. the President resumed the chair. Prayer was
offered by the Rev. R. A. Thompson, B.A. The order of the day
was the discussion of the question, “Can the ‘New Theology’ Live
with the Old?” A paper by the Rev. Dr. Bevan was read by Rev.
J. J. Halley. This was followed by an address by Rev. M. L.
Johnson, B.A. ; and a paper by Rev. A. J. Griffith, M.A. In th®
subsequent discussion the Revs. Dr. Roseby and W. Cunliffe
Jones took part.
Rev. J. J. Halley moved, and Rev. W. L. Patison seconded,—
“That the thanks of the Assembly be accorded to the Secretary
and the Minute Secretary.”—Carried.
On die motion of the Rev. G. Campbell and Rev. A. H. Wal-
lace, the minutes were taken as read and confirmed.
Th e President concluded the proceedings of the Assembly
with earnest acknowledgment of the Divine goodness manifested
during the sessions, and with words of prayer and benediction.
ABSTRACT OF REPORT.
The Committee rejoice in the opportunity, which has now ar-
rived, through the loving kindness of God, for greeting the as-
sembled Union, and presenting to the members the report of its
operations since the close of the sessions of the Second Assembly
in Melbourne in November, 1904.


A tribute of esteem and affection is paid to the memory of the
Rev. F. H. Browne, of Melbourne, and the Rev. Joseph Walter,
formerly of Ipswich, who have now been called to the heavenly
service.
After the last Assembly, the Executive of the various State
Unions were duly communicated with, and members of the Com-
mittee were elected by them. The full Committee consists of 29
members, including- 21 elected and 7ex officio members. [Their
names appear elsewhere.]
A: MATTERS REMITTED TO THE COMMITTEE BY THE
LAST ASSEMBLY.
1. Framing a Constitution.—This matter has received fore-
most, attention, and the draft of such a Constitution will be sub-
mitted to the Assembly.
2. Extra-Mural Course of Theological Study—The President
(as Convener of the Committee appointed to frame a uniform
course for ministerial candidates who cannot take the usual Col-
lege curriculum) drew up a provisional scheme, which has been
submitted to the Unions of Queensland and Western Australia,
but has not so far been adopted by them. It will come up for
consideration during the theological Colleges’ session.
3. Ministerial Transfers.—Upon this matter no action was
taken.
4. Women’s Work.—At Melbourne a scheme of correspon-
dence was arranged for the purpose of obtaining information to
date upon the phases and forms of women’s work done in out
Churches, and through our Churches, in each Statg. It is ex-
pected that a great impetus to this undertaking will be given
at the women’s session this week.
5. Journal.--This matter is again placed in the hands of the
Assembly, and a statement will be submitted by the Rev. W. L.
Patison;
6. Inter-State Homs Mission Work.—The Executive Com-
mittee was instructed to prepare a scheme for Inter-State Mission
work among sparse populations at outposts. The finding of the
Committee was not favourable to the formulation of such a scheme
with any hope of securing practical results. The Officers and
Committee earnestly solicit the deliberation of the Assembly
upon Home Mission work in general, even though that work in
an Inter-State form does not seem at present a under-
taking.
7. Deaconesses. —Upon this matter no action was taken.
8. Inter-denominational Union,—Submitted to the State sec-
tions of the Committee without result.
9. Australasian Ministers’ Provident Fund—The report oi
the appointed Committee on this matter will be submitted at a
later stage.
B: BUSINESS DEALT WITH SINCE THE MELBOURNE
ASSEMBLY.
i. Rev. W. J. Dawson—ln October, 1905, the Queensland
Union intimated that they were approaching Dr. Dawson with the


hope of securing his services in conducting an evangelistic cam-
paign, which should also include all Australia, and proposed that
the Australasian Union should send the formal invitation to Dr.
Dawson. Two States assented to the Queensland proposal. The
Queensland Union is awaiting Dr. Dawson’s reply.
ii. Ygar Books. —A statement of the history and official Con-
stitution of the Union has been inserted annually in the Year
Books of the several State' Unions, and also in that of the Union
of England and Wales. The courtesy of the Editors is gratefully
acknowledged, and the Secretary takes the opportunity of thank-
ing the editors for copies of their Year Books received by him each
year. The possession of them facilitates the work of his office.
iii. Publication of the 1904 Proceedings. —The publication
took place as arranged.
iv. Preacher. —An accident which has recently occurred to the
Rev. Dr. Bevan, and which necessitates his absence on furlough,
prevents him (to his regret) from fulfilling his appointment as
preacher to the present Assembly. The Rev. George Littlemore,
of Strathfield, has kindly consented to fill the post thus rendered
vacant.
v. Third International Congregational Council, Edinburgh,
1308. —A letter conveying information respecting the holding of
this Council has been received by the Secretary from the Rev.
R. J. Wells, Secretary of the English Union, and will be read to
the Assembly.
Conclusion. —The Committee express their earnest expec-
tation that the present sessions will witness the consolidation of
the Union on permanent and efficient lines. Their desire has
been to make it of the highest usefulness in fostering the spirit
of union among our Australasian Churches; in promoting their
common interests ; and in leading on to the closer combination of
their resources for the work of evangelisation and the estab-
lishing of the Kingdom of God.
April 24, 1907.


Statement of Receipts and Expenditure of the Australasian Congregational Union,
FROM 1st NOVEMBER, 1904, TO 31st MARCH. 1907.
RECEIPTS.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
Balance forward Oct., 1904 3 7 9 3 7 9
Contributions towards Printing Report
of Proceedings of Assembly (Mel-
bourne, 1904)—
New South Wales Union 3 0 0
Queensland Union 2 5 0
Victorian Union 3 0 0
EXPENDITURE.
£ s. d.
Printing Report of Proceedings of Assembly
(Melbourne, 1904) 15 14 3
Secretarial Expenses 3 10 0
Treasurer’s Petties, including Stamps and Ex-
change 0 17 6
Stationery, Posters, etc 3 17 6
Balance in Hand ft n 0
Tasmanian Union 1 10 0
New Zealand Union 1 10 0
South Australian Union 2 5 0
West Australian Union 110 0 15 0 0
Subscriptions—
New Zealand Union 1 10 0
South Australian Union 2 10 0
Queensland Union 1 10 0
Victorian Union 2 10 0
Tasmanian Union 1 0 0
New South Wales Union 2 10 0 11 10 0
Bank Exchange Added 0 1 6
£29 19 3
£29 19 3
W. WARREN KERR, Hon. Treasurer, Audited and found correct,
Melbourne, 31st March, 1907. FRED. GEO. WOOD, F.I.A.V.,
, Hon. Auditor.
c . tvt , , . MEMO., 15th APRIL, 1907. Melbourne, i6/4/’o7.
omce 31st March, 1907, subscription from West Australian Union ,£1 10s. has been received; and a printer’s account
has been furnished for ,£5 2s. 6d. These two items leave a balance in hand to date of £ 2 7s. 6d., from which is to
be deducted about £1 for petty expenditure incurred by secretary and treasurer. W. WARREN KERR.


PUBLIC MEETINGS held in the Pitt St. Church.
On Wednesday evening, April 24, the Union sermon was
preached by the Rev. George Littlemore, of Strathfield (N.S.W.),
from the text Joel ii., 28. A Communion Service followed, over
which the Rev. J. J. Halley, of Melbourne, presided
On Thursday evening, April 25, the Rev. Dr. Gosman deliv-
ered his Presidential address, on the subject, —“The Permanent
Elements in the Christian Faith.”
On Friday evening, April 26, a “Citizenship” meeting was
held, presided over by Dr. Gosman, addressed by the Rev. W. J.
L. Closs, 8.A., Ipswich (Q.) on “The Modern Pulpit and the
People” ; and by the Rev. Dr. Roseby on “Modern Society and
the Sunday.”
On Monday evening, April 2Q, a Young People’s Meeting
was held under the presidency of the Rev. G. W. Sharp, of Hobart
(T.), when the Rev. W. T. Kench, of Perth (W.A.) and the Rev.
Joseph Robertson, M.A., of Adelaide, addressed the assembled
gathering.
SOCIAL FUNCTIONS,
The hospitality extended to the visiting delegates by the
Sydney friends evoked continual expressions of appreciation and
enthusiasm. Provision for luncheon was arranged on each of
the session days at one of the noted city restaurants ; except on
Tuesday, April 30, the last day, when th e ladies of the Burwood
Congregational Church were the hostesses, at a most enjoyable
luncheon spread in the school hall of the Church, and presided
over by the Pastor, Rev. G. Campbell. The delegates were en-
tertained at tea in the Pitt-street school hall on Wednesday even-
ing by the ladies of the Churches at Strathfield, Homebush, and
Croydon; on Thursday by those of Killara, Chatswood, and Mos-
man ; on Friday by those of Marrickville, Dulwich Hill, Summer
Hill; on Monday by those of Bourke-street, Jersey-road, and
Redfern; and on Tuesday, the last evening, at Petersham, by
the ladies belonging to that Church. The heartiest acknow-
ledgment of the kindness of the friends was tendered to the
hostesses on each occasion, in speeches characterised by humour,
vivacity, and sincerity.
The members of the two Ladies’ Auxiliaries of N.S.W. Con-
gregationalism (the one to the Home Mission Board, and
that to the L.M.S.) organised a truly brilliant function in the
Y.M.C.A. Hall on Friday afternoon, April 26. It took the form
of a reception from three to four o’clock, at which the whole of
the visiting delegates were present, and most of the Sydney min-
isters, together with a great throng of ladies representing all
the city and suburban Churches. The delegates were received
bv Mrs. B. Palmer and Mrs. Cocks, M.A., on behalf of the Home
Mission ; and bv Mrs. W. S. Buzacott. on behalf of Foreign Mis-
sions. After music, tea. and conversation the gentlemen with-
drew, their thanks having been voiced by Dr. Gosman. The


ladies remained in conference, under the presidency of Mrs. B.
Palmer, and in these proceedings many of the lady delegates to
the Assembly took part. An account of this Conference is gwren
in the record of the minutes.
On Saturday afternoon, April 27, the members of the Assem-
bly, together with their hosts and hostesses, were entertained
at a Garden Parly at “Ginahgulla,” Belle Vue Hill, by the kind
invitation of Sir James and Lady Fairfax. The afternoon was
beautiful, and the sunshine falling upon hill and headland and
harbour revealed the landscape in all its loveliness. The Pres-
ident-elect, the Rev. J. C. Kirby, expressed in fitting terms the
warm appreciation of the friends present for the generous wel-
come extended to them; to which Sir James Fairfax responded
on behalf of Lady Fairfax and himself.
The Petersham Congregational Church Choir organised a
Musical Festival for the delectation of the delegates. It took
place in the Petersham Church on Tuesday evening, April 30-
The Pastor, Rev. VV. Allen, presided and welcomed the Australa-
sian Union to his Church. The programme rendered under the
baton of Mr. G. C. E. Helleman, consisted of high-class music,
executed in a faultless and sympathetic manner by instrumental-
ists and vocalists. The Rev. J. C. Kirby presented the enthusias-
tic thanks of the delegates to the minister, choirmaster, and choir
for the musical treat which all had so richly enjoyed.
The final function of the Third Assembly of the Union took
the form of a harbour excursion, provided by the Sydney friends.
A large party of delegates and other visitors was conveyed in
the steamer “Kukuburra” to Cabarita, where afternoon tea was
served. After the President-elect, Rev. J. C. Kirby, and the
Secretary, Rev. A. J. Griffith, M.A., had spoken in warm terms
in acknowledgment of the generous hospitality accorded through-
out the meetings by the Sydney Churches, the Chairman of the
N.S.W. Union, the Rev. F. V. Pratt, M.A., addressed the gath-
ering in a few words of farewell, to which responses were given
by the Revs. G. W. Sharp, W. J. L. Gloss, 8.A., W. T. Kench,
and" J. J. Halley. The Doxology was sung and the Benediction
was pronounced. With the return journey on the steamer, the
proceedings of the Third Assembly of the Australasian Union
were brought to a happy and successful close. To God be all
the praise !


PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS.
Rev. Dr. GOSMAN.
Permanent Elements in the Christian Faith,
There is no such thing- as rest in the universe. The pulse
of life throbs incessantly, and what we think is matter in repose
is simply motion that transcends our perceptive faculties. But
the ceaseless activity of Nature is not mere mechanical motion,
monotonous and invariable. If in any department it seems to be
so, like the movements of the pendulum attached to the machin-
ery of a clock, it does not take reflection long to see that such
movement is only one of a co-ordination of parts that exist for the
measurement of time. Nature, from the human point of view, is
ever progressing or retrograding. Nothing remains for a mo-
ment what it was a moment before; and the mind of man is never
at rest in its search for causes. He asks more than he can find
answers for. Towards what is the universe tending? What is
the guiding purpose of creation P It is faith rather than know-
ledge that makes him fall back and say, with Tennyson, that
there is “one far-off intent to which the whole creation moves.”
Or he may prefer to look at Nature through the eyes of Goethe,
and to see in its activities the “swift shuttle of life weaving the
garment of deity.”
Man in every department of his being is subject to this law
of change for better or worse. His body passes from infancy
to maturity, from maturity to decrepitude, and at last it falls to
pieces and mingles with the dust from which it was elaborated.
The development of his mind under the ever-expanding influence
of knowledge is a matter of all but universal experience; and
his relation to the unseen and eternal is not the contemplation
of a fixed star in the firmament of his thoughts, but rather like
the panorama of the nearer sky; sometimes flooded with light,
at other times beautiful with the colours of the orient, and, alas !
subject to darkening clouds and threatening storms'.
It need therefore give us no surprise that historic theology
must necessarily come under the evolutionary process, like every-
thing else that forms the materials of human thought. The
Darwinian theory of the origin of species has revolutionised the
whole intellectual world, and theology can no longer take refuge
on a hill apart and thereby think to escape the rising tide; for
the law of evolution has become one of the interpreters of the un-
derlying thought of the universe. For a time theology may ap-
pear to be stable in the midst of surrounding change, like the
tall cliff .which seems to defy the waves that break at its feet, but


disintegration is there all the same. Revolutions in social and
political life do not break out suddenly without an adequate cause.
They are the final outcome of previous contributory causes that
at last make submission on the part of the oppressed intoler-
able. So it is with religious thought, when the new wine bursts
the wine-skins, it is not the act of restless and unstable minds,
but the result of forces that have been in operation, it may be, for
centuries.
By general consent we seem to be in one of those movements
of thought, and especially of religious thought that compel us
to examine the foundations of our faith for the purpose of
strengthening them where they are weak, and of fearlessly re-
moving whatever is superfluous, or that threatens the stability of
the building. Nor if we have the courage which truth inspires,
need we be deterred from this work by the declared deter
mination of some to stick to the old faith no matter what science
or criticism may offer us. If any one is disturbed and unsettled
in his mind by the theological controversies of our times, and,
despairingly confesses that he hardly knows where he is, the
remedy lies at his hand. Within the ample freedom of Congre-
gationalism there are no credal barriers to surmount. With
open and candid mind, and loyal to the truth alone, it is the duty
of each to ascertain for himself what he is under an obligation
to believe. The apostolic injunction has special force in these
times: “Let every one be fully persuaded in his own mind.”
We are thankful for enlightenment from whatever quarter it may
come, but here we call no man Master.
The great majority of Christian people are not insensible to
the fact that important and far-reaching changes are imminent, i f
not in our interpretation of the Bible, yet in the historic creeds
that profess to be based on its teaching. They have not much
to say for themselves, but are like those who watch for the morn-
ing with this deep-seated assurance that the sun has not been
blotted out, nor that God has retired from His world, or Christ
from His Church.
Recognising the fact that there is much anxious inquiry as
to what is most surely believed amongst us, I desire, as far as I
am able, to contribute to the stability of faith by calling the
attention of the members of this Council to w’hat I believe to be
its permanent elements.
The Influence of Science.
It is one of the accepted conclusions of modern thought that
the progress of science within recent times has advanced with
triumphant steps along the whole line of its investigations. The
past boundaries of time and space in which we do our thinking
have been obliterated, and the background of each has become
the illimitable. What we thought we knew of origins has received
a rude shock by the application of the law of continuity, whicn
admits of no break or interference from without in the history
of the globe. If it has not explained how organised existence
came on the back of matter that is assumed to be lifeless, or
how life became that in which intelligence manifested itself, it
has at least shown that the special act theory has no evidence
to support it, and that for the present it must remain outside


the sphere of legitimate science. The social order is being
revolutionised by the application of discoveries to our daily
wants. Disease is being- traced to its natural causes, and nature
is rapidly yielding her secrets to persistent inquirers and willingly
allowing- them to be directed to -the welfare and happiness of
man. Modern life is fast becoming a little more than the appli-
cation of nature’s resources for the purposes of civilisation.
Irrespective of its bearing on theology, the trend of modern
science may be said to have the following characteristics: —(i)
In the first place it can no longer be said that it is hostile to re
ligion. The sound of battle has died away, excepting in the far-
off corners of the field where in due time it will also expire. But
neither is this cessation from hostilities an armed truce, where
each camp is expected to keep and protect its own territory. There
are, it is true, theologians who recommend scientists to keep
within their own proper sphere on the ground that their findings
and those of religion are incommensurable. Religion, it is as-
serted, was meant to teach us knowledge that lies outside the
sphere of science. But even that position is being surrendered
as untenable, for there is a science of religion as well as a
religion of science, and while it may be granted that each has its
respective field of inquiry, their methods must necessarily be the
same. They do not so much overlap as to present different sides
of the same thing, like a coin of the realm, on the one face of
which is the indication of its material value, and on the other
the stamp of its imperial sanction.
(2) The second fact characteristic of modern science is also
equally obvious. Materialism, if it is not already dead, has
been mortally wounded, and its decease is only a matter of time.
It is al 1 but universally admitted that underlying- all mechanical
action there is an organising power or mind. This inner thought
or soul is not something outside the body that comes into it under
certain conditions, and leaves it when the body falls to pieces.
It is that which is inseparably attached to it and that by which
mechanical action is controlled and directed. The action does
not produce the thought, but the thought the action. And what
proof is there for saying that thought which precedes action can-
not survive it when the mechanism of the body can no longer
respond to its calls ? Under such a rational theory as that there
is no room for materialism.
(3) In the third place there is no deeper conviction in the
scientific mind than this, that the Universe is one. From a spec-
ulative thought in ancient philosophy it has become a funda-
mental datum in modern science. In whatever direction we may
turn out thoughts, in whatever department of nature we pursue
our investigations, we are still in the same universe, for its infi-
nite varieties are simply the manifestations of the same underly-
ing unity. From this point of view theology has its proper place
in the circle of the sciences, for it not only acknowledges this
unity as a primary fact, but it sets itself to find out how far that
unity can be comprehended by human thought. But Science has
not only directed her searchlight into the darkest recesses of
the world, the same searching light has been thrown on the
operations of the human mind with the result that something
like a new psychology has recently sprung into existence. The
close and intimate connection between the human organism and


the processes of thought has been investigated with patient dis-
crimination and with some manifest and permanent
is true that some investigators under the influence of hasty in-
duction have denied that matter and mind in the human con-
sciousness are essentially different, and contend for unity which
in a higher generalisation is not denied. But anyhow it is uni-
versally recognised that as matter cannot be expressed in
the terms of mind any more than mind can be expressed in the
terms of matter, a duality in unity must be affirmed. It is life
that weaves organism, and it is the play of the organism that is
the immediate occasion of thought. The engine does not create
the engineer, nor does the organism create thought; it is simply
its instrument through which it finds expression. But the new
psychology has not only sent a flood of light upon our natural or
normal consciousness; it has shown.that there is a subliminal
department in the human mind, in which all past experiences are
stored, of which some can be recovered by active reminiscence,
and of which others break through under exceptional conditions.
This subliminal region is the book of life in which all our past
deeds are written.
But this latent consciousness, as Sir William Hamilton calls
this region of our complex personality, does not exhaust the
powers and capacities of mind. There is also a supra-liminal
sphere of thought into which genius rises ; where the poet revels
in the higher regions of beauty and song, and from which the
prophet looks down through coming ages and reads their history
in the light of past experience. It is not for a moment to be
supposed that these compartments of our nature are outside the
operation of the Divine Spirit, or that the relation of God to the
world or ourselves is outside of us, and occupying a sphere of
its own. The sphere of the divine operation is in the whole
extent of His own creation. The divine thought is expressed on
the rocky strata of the earth, it breathes in every living thing;
our thoughts are the result of His inspiration, and just in pro-
portion as man reflects the image of God, and attains the per-
fection of his own being, is God revealed to us in the only way
that can appeal to our understanding and reason.
Closely connected with this new psychology, there is a class
of phenomena that has not yet come within the well-defined
bounds of accurate science. Whatever may be the future out-
come of hypnotic suggestion, telepathy, thought-reading, faith
healing, Christian science, and spiritism, it is beyond question
that at present they have not got beyond the speculative stage,
in which some may find a passing satisfaction or interest that
if they do not touch the supernatural, they may in time discover
a road into its vast domain.
The proof of immortality cannot be said to be established
as a scientific fact until the demonstration ceases to be occult
and merely personal, and testified to by competent witnesses. In
the meantime theology is not much affected by such studies, and
psychology in the hands of competent investigators is not in the
least likely to have any other effect than to throw additional light
on the great question of personal religion.


The Higher Criticism.
The relation of theology to the best results of modern criti-
cism is a much mor e difficult and delicate subject than its rela-
tion to the progress of science, or to the enlarged outlook of the
new psychology. Between conservative dogmatism on the one
hand and the aerial flights of some of the higher critics on the
other, there is an ample area of well ascertained limits where our
ground is solid, and where we can walk without any sense of in-
security or danger. It is not possible to call in question the fun-
damental principle of the higher criticism, and which must neces-
sarily control its action.
The Bible, whatever else or more it may be, is first of all a
collection of literary documents, whose date, authorship, mean-
ing and purpose have to be ascertained by the application of the
methods of historic criticism now reduced to a science and read
in the light of the intellectual and moral environment in which
they were produced. This knowledge cannot be attained by a
leap or by any a priori assumption, to which everything else
must yield. It is not inspiration first, and criticism subject to
that, for if the inspiration and authority of the Bible are demand-
ed, that demand can only be granted on the basis of impartial
criticism. This inductive method of treating the Scriptures is
by no means now in its infancy, although it can hardly be said
to have attained its maturity. But while it is impossible to say
that all the results are beyond question, there are some general
conclusions to which assent can hardly be said to be a matter of
choice, (i) We may rest assured that no part of the Bible as we
possess it, was written with the purpose of deceiving its readers.
We may have been led to form opinions of certain books which
criticism has compelled us to modify or even relinquish, but the
books themselves were not responsible for any misconceptions we
may have formed. The falsely called Isidorian Decretals, com-
pounded to support the usurpation of the Roman hierarchy, have
been proved to be clumsy forgeries. But none of the books of
the Bible have been placed in the category of discredited author-
ship. Some of them present difficulties both as to date and in-
terpretation, but they are not false, nor written with any intention
to deceive. They have all the ring of genuine coin, although
some of them have the impress of their origin somewhat worn
by Time’s defacing fingers. (2) The composite character of the
Bible, or the question of the disputed authorship of some of
the books, does not to any appreciable extent affect their mean-
ing and purpose, which remains after criticism has done its
work. The fourth gospel and the epistle to the Hebrews are
both literary compositions, but how little are they affected by
the question of authorship or date? If John’s gospel were
proved to belong to the third or even fourth decade of the second
century, that fact, as far as I can see, would not weaken in the
least th'e declared love of God in giving up his only begotten
Son for the world’s salvation. We ask the higher critics to help
us to answer that question, “What saith the Scriptures?” We
expect an intelligent and faithful answer, and I do not think that
we have any ground of complaint that we have been either inten-
tionally misled or misinformed. (3) The theory of the absolute
inerrancy of the Bible, and its inspiration and authority through-


out its entire sweep and contents cannot be maintained with
anything- like consistency or benefit. It is doubtful whether
a theory was ever seriously held by anyone. God did not in time
past speak to us by the prophets to put an arrest upon the freedom
of thought, and the very difficulties of the Bible are favourable”to
intellectual development. The Bible when reasonably interpreted
loses nothing- of its value or its authority. If it has been im-
prisoned in past times under a cramped system of interpreta-
tion, the times are favourable for its emancipation, for a free
Bible is the natural concomitant of free thought. (4) Although
the books of the Bible are of composite character and some
of doubtful authorship, there is a manifest unity of subject and
aim running- through their entire contents. The Old Testament
is made up of history, poetry, and prophecy belonging to dif-
ferent ages, and of different authors and editors, yet throughout
its whole extent it breathes the spirit of Monotheism. Jehovah
is not the titular Deity of the Hebrews, but the God of the
whole earth. He is the only living and true God. Jehovah is,
moreover, a righteous God, demanding righteousness in all His
subjects and worshippers. “The sacrifices of God are a broken
spirit.” “Behold to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken
than the fat of rams.” (I. Sam., XV., 22.) “Jehovah’s righteous
law is against them that do evil, but mercy is extended to the
penitent who implores divine forgiveness. While visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children, upon the third and upon
the fourth generation of them that hate Him, He shows mercy
unto thousands of them that love Him and keep his Command-
ments.” (Ex. XX., 5.)
The history of Israel is not a record of public events like
that of most other nations, it sparkles with a definite expectation
of the coming of One who would fulfil the glowing predictions o*.
their inspired prophets, and be a light for revelation to the
Gentiles and the glory of His people Israel. The New Testament
contains the record of God’s answers to all the vaguely formed
hopes that had gathered round the national heart. The theme
of the gospel and the epistles is the life and teaching of Jesus
Christ, Who gathered up in Himself the hopes and aspirations of
the Old Testament, purified them from all narrow and secular in-
terpretation, and lifted them up into a higher sphere of ethical
and spiritual significance. He founded the Kingdom of Heaven:
laid down the moral conditions required of those who would
enter it, and by His gospel of repentance and faith He liberated
a spiritual force, and sent it out on a mission of universal
conquest.
It is now time for us to indicate our losses, if any, and
especially our gains, in the new order into which we have been
drawn.
The Bible.
The Bible, which stands at the head of all Christian move
ments and is at once their inspiration and hope, demands our
first consideration. No book has suffered more, both from the
hands of friends and foes, than the Bible. It has been battered
and burned, taken captive and enchained, patronised by those
who claim for themselves, and deny the right to all others, of
reading its contents and determining its meaning; its doctrines


and duties have been summarised into creeds and confessions, and
made the basis of salvation on pain of eternal punishment. It
has been worshipped with a devotion that has mistaken the
temple for Him Who is g'reater than the temple, the letter for the
Spirit, the book revealing for the God revealed. Critical eyes
have looked into its contents with microscopic intentness, freely
delivering judgments that for a time excited the fear of some that
its divine authority was being’ weakened and denied. But these
fears are rapidly passing away. It is still the record of a pro-
gressive divine revelation whose whispering word was first heard
over the cradle of the race, taken up in its course by prophet and
poet, expanded in meaning and sent outward with ever-increas-
ing contents until it found full embodiment in the Son of God,
the effulgence of the divine glory, and the very image of His
substance. All Scripture has value only in relation to the supreme
revelation in Christ Jesus, and from that point of view never
in the history of the Church has the Bible stood higher than it
does to-day. It comes to us no longer in the insignia of external
authority, but with the inward evidence of the truth ; but it speaks
with clearness and definiteness to those who are of the truth.
Although we have been compelled to modify our original concep-
tions regarding it in some directions, at considerable sacrifice,
and with a conscious pulling at our heart strings, there is now
not a shadow on its brow, nor a faltering word on its tongue, to
those who submit to be taught by the divine spirit rather than to
listen to the discordant notes of such as seek to have dominion
over our faith.
Creation.
From the attitude of modern theology to the Bible we naturally
turn to the Biblical account of creation, and to the present con-
dition of religious thought on this question. The old conception
of creation as a definite act in time, or a series of acts with
longer or shorter intervals, and in which a certain finished touch
was given to the work at each stage in its progress, has given
place to a very much larger conception of creation as a ceaseless
and continuous activity on the part of God. The mind of man is
expanded and enriched by the thought that God is everywhere
present in his works, and modern theology accepts the doctrine
of the divine immanence with thankfulness and hope. The belief
that God is in every particle of matter, that the power behind
the universe is neither unknown nor unknowable, except in so
far as God Himself cannot be fully understood by human intel-
ligence, and that the life and the thought of the world are the
breath of the divine spirit, is a position to which all true science
points, and which modern theology is only too glad to accept,
for, here, theology is only the religious side of science. This is in
perfect harmony with teachings of Jesus Christ Himself. “My
Father worketh hitherto and I work” clearly indicates that He
looked upon the world as being continually under the govern-
ment of God. The account of creation given in the first chapter
of Genesis is not to be regarded as an evidence of the want of
inspiration. It has, it is true, long dominated the thoughts of
man as a true and literal account of the origin of the world, and
although that belief can no longer be held with intelligence by
educated people, .it still lies in state in the creeds of historic


theology. To regard it simply as the record of men’s thoughts
in an early stage of human progress, the outcome of the religious
thought of the age in which it was written, is in perfect har-
mony with the notion of a progressive revelation under tlje
teaching of the Spirit of God. It was admirably adapted to the
religious wants of the time, by representing the Creator under
the purified light of Monotheism, and free from the hetero-
geneous conceptions of competitive polytheism. Theology gains
immeasurably when it follows the fourth gospel in this matter
rather than the Pentateuch. With his mind steeped in the
thought of his times, but penetrated with Christological concep-
tions, John seems to have anticipated this view of creation as
originating in thought, and sustained throughout by the same
all-pervading life and light. “In the beginning was the logos
(thought) and the logos was with God, and the logos was God.
The same was in the beginning with God. All things were
made by Him (the logos) and without Him was not anything
made that hath been made. In Him was life, and the life was the
light of men.” Historic theology has not been fully alive to
the teaching of the book from which it professes to draw the
materials of its system of doctrine.
Materialism and the mechanical theory of the universe can
find no place in modern thought. It has never had a footing in
any system of theology. When we realise the immanence of
God, not as a speculative thought merely, but of practcial value in
the conduct of life, materialism fades away like the memory of a
troubled dream. With a similar satisfaction we rise above the
demiurgic notion of creation, although there is a sense in which
God must be thought of as transcending the creation which moves
and has its being in Him. So also the immanence of God is far
removed from pantheism, for our own conscious personality lies
at the root of all our thinking; for no system of philosophy can
be either accurate or satisfactory that builds on a defective
analysis of consciousness, eliminating one class of data, and
bringing into undue prominence only those that seem to justify
the particular theory adopted.
From this view of creation, which, after all, is not whol'y
new, we have to consider the origin of man in the light of the
undoubted facts of modern science. There is no evidence what-
ever that the appearance of man upon the globe was due to a
direct act on the part of God, and the account in Genesis cannot
be accepted as the record of a literal transaction. It is open to
doubt whether it was ever intended to be so understood. As a
symbolic representation of man’s origin in the mind of God and
of his relation to the Divine Being, it is without a rival in human
speculation, but, literally interpreted, it loses its poetic and
spiritual meaning, and descends into an area of thought, adapted
to the stage of childhood, but wholly inadequate to the present
condition of intellectual development. We lose nothing by the
modern conception that man has come on the globe at the end
of a long process of organic development, and we gain much in
being brought into sympathetic knowledge with the Divine pro-
cesses of creation. There is nothing degrading or inconsistent
with man’s dignity as bearing the Divine Image, and as being
God’s vice-gerenl on the earth, to regard Him as subject to the
law of development. From a religious point of view, evolution is


simply God’s method of working according to law, and is no more
atheistic than the light of the sun or the phases of the moon.
The difficulties that still impede the path of the evolutionist in
his progress to full proof of the hypothesis, do not in the least
favour the special creation theory, for here the difficulties are
insurmountable to thought, and unsubstantiated by a single il-
lustrative fact. He is as much the child of God at the end of that
long evolutionary process, when the elements of manhood differ-
entiated him from those that sprung from a common origin, as if
he had dropped from Heaven or sprung into existence out of the
earth at the command of God. W’e eliminate the truth so beauti-
fully set forth in poetic symbol when we press the narrative of
man’s creation in Genesis into a narrow literalism, and crush
its life to death. The outstanding truth is that man is God’s
creation and child, the mode of his creation may legitimately be
inquired into both by Science and Theology, but failure to reach
a satisfactory conclusion cannot rob man of his inheritance or of
his heavenly parentage.
Human Freedom.
Modern thought,—l use that phrase for all influences
that have in recent times affected historic theology—
has not in any sense shaken the doctrine of human freedom, or
weakened the foundations of moral obligation. If any one uses
his reasoning - faculties and his will to prove that he possesses
neither the one nor the other, he may be right as far as he is
concerned, for he has put himself beyond the reach either of en-
lightenment or argument. In the meantime we act as if these
were distinctive marks of our humanity, irrespective of the specu-
lative difficulties and a priori data that are paraded to prove that
freedom is impossible. But human freedom, one of the principal
pillars in the theological temple, has not only stood the test of
advancing knowledge, but is receiving a far longer measure of
support from recent investigations in psychology than from the
works of moral philosophers of two or three generations ago.
No act, it is said, can be a moral act that is caused, or that is
spontaneous, or without a cause. But freedom consists neither
jn following the line of natural causation, or being an act
which has nothing behind it, but simply lies in the necessity of
choice, and when that choice is the moral ideal, the life is under
tWa government of that choice, which is the only thing entitled to
the name of freedom. Modern theology, in so far as it rests upon
psychology, is under no necessity to modify its teaching in this
direction. Above all speculation it is evident that there can
be no living religion without the full admission of human free-
dom, and as theology is the science of religious thought, freedom
must enter into its consideration as an indispensable and neces-
sary factor. Modern theology has, however, given greater prom-
inence to this doctrine than some forms of historic theology, es-
pecially those that rest on the teachings of Calvin and his school.
SIN.
The possession of freedom is the possibility of sin, and sin
is one of the outstanding facts of history, based on universal
experience. Historic theology has accepted the accounts of its
origin as given in the book of Genesis, but modern theology,


although somewhat doubtful on the question of its literal intlarpre
tation accepts its underlying- truth, which is, when stripped ofijits
dramatic setting-, that sin is disobedience to the law of God.
Sin is the descent of moral man from conformity to divine law to
lawlessness. Sin is a violation of the law of one’s own nature.
It is the worst form of individualism as ag"ainst the interests of
the community. Sin is defiance of God. Sin in its final develop-
ment is triumphant selfishness, the subjug-ation of the higher
nature to the lower, the enthronement of passion and animal grat-
ification. Modern thought has not weakened, but has greatly
intensified the doctrine of human depravity. It traces its pro-
gress from the first false step in yielding- to some, it may be
trivial, temptation, through all the stages of moral degradation to
the awakening of shame and remorse, and the bitter cry, that rings
through the dark caverns that border the regions of death, that
all is lost.
The solidarity of the race, and the doctrine of heredity, ac-
cepted doctrines of science and modern thought, are also those
of theology illustrating the law that sin is not merely a personal
act, but a social wrong, and may become a world-wide calamity.
If, therefore, there is any justification that modern theology
makes light of sin, it will be because it ignores the fundamental
principle on which it rests, that the teachings of nature are part
of divine revelation; and the laws by which God governs the
world are illustrations of His ceaseless activity.
PUNISHMENT OF SIN.
From sin we naturally turn to its punishment.- It has to be
acknowledged that modern thought, including the growth of
religious sentiment, has considerably lessened the fear of “the
worm that dies not, and the fire that is not quenched.” The
writhing of a lost soul in hell in the quenchless flame of God’s
wrath has little terror for this generation, simply from the fact
that it has ceased to be believed. It is, however, a matter of re-
gret that the religious consciousness has not yet fully grasped
the fact that nature allows no transgression to escape without its
accompanying punishment. With slow but with certain steps the
penalties attached to sin follow the path of the transgressor, and
never fail to overtake him, demonstrating the Scripture doctrine
that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
REDEMPTION.
From sin and its punishment we turn naturally to the doctrine
of redemption, and here, more than anywhere else, we are face to
face with one of the central doctrines of Christianity. That doc-
trine may be said to have a full expression in these words, “that
God was in Christ Jesus reconciling the world unto himself.”
The symbol of this doctrine is the Cross, and that, according to
Paul, is both the power of God and the wisdom of God unto sal-
vation to every one -who believes. The death of Christ as a pro-
pitiatory sacrifice has been held firmly by the Church with only
isolated exceptions, from apostolic times to the present day. The
fact stands unchallenged, but its theory or explanation has un-
dergone many modifications in the course of its history; and
modern writers confess that the objective effects of the atone-


merit, and its relation to sin and forgiveness, are no nearer solu-
tion than centuries ago. When the death of Christ is represented
as a price, the question naturally rises to our lips to whom was
the ransom money paid, and what necessity existed that there,
should be 1 any such payment at all? That it effected some
change in the moral condition of the world is beyond all question.
The preaching of Jesus and the resurrection changed, in the
course of three centuries, pagan Rome from being a persecuting
power, into a Christian State. Exceptional effects must have
exceptional causes, while the effects may be visible the causes
may be outside the boundaries of human knowledge.
The relation of modern thought to this doctrine of the Cross
cannot be said to be antagonistic, but neither is it wholly satisfac-
tory. The explanation may be found in the fact that its modes of
thought and speech are strictly scientific and philosophic, while
theology has partly a language of its own, in which words and
phrases abound that have lost their meaning to this generation.
The scientific atmosphere has not yet fully entered into our re-
ligious thoughts to give a colouring to our theological discus-
sions, and where it does so* there is danger of producing in the
minds of some the suspicion that a change of phraseology is
equivalent to a loosening of spiritual convictions. Modern
thought, as we havfe seen, fully recognises the invariability of
law: that violations of the moral order are followed sooner or
later, by the operation of the law itself, with punishment in pro-
portion to the enormity of the offence. It is also a matter of
ascertained fact that the innocent not infrequently come in the
path of such penalties, and suffer accordingly, although they
have had no share in provoking them. It is also a basal fact in
social ethics that the guilty sometimes escape the full reward
of their deeds until the final reckoning. In the higher reaches
of our corporate existence a whole nation will be willing to sacri-
fice its very existence for the sake of one individual, and con-
versely there are instances in which one man has sacrified his
all for the good of the many; so intimately bound are we one to
another. And this naturally gives rise to the question, for what
purpose does punishment exist? Further, it may be asked on
what ethical principle can the suffering of the innocent be vindi-
cated ? It is readily acknowledged that punishment is first of
all punitive when it is regarded as correction for wrong-doing,
and its justice cannot be called in question. Punishment is also
a vindication of moral government, and the majesty of law. It
is also a significant intimation that the observance of the law is
an insuperable condition of human happiness. As the sea has
bounds that it cannot pass, so punishment is a kind of barrier
wall built on the confines of the moral order to check the progress
of evil and send the waves of human passion and crime back into
the deep. But punishment in its relation to moral government
is not adequately explained thus far. It is beginning to bef
recognised that it is both vicarious and expiatory, as well as
one of God’s methods of bringing the sinner to a knowledge of
Himself. Punishment is the fire in which sin is consumed, but
the fire does not always burn in the heart of those who have
let loose the penalty; and when sin is consumed the claims of
the law are satisfied. In these matters we are not dealt with
individually nor directly, but as a unity, or organic whole, and


individually only as we are effected by th£ operation of the
common law. And here the argument of Paul applies with
singular appropriateness. The sin of one man in its effects
spreads to many: so the righteousness of one has as far-reaching
beneficial effects as the ever-widening circle of evil. If one mam
can sink the moral status of a nation by the operation of the
same social law, one man by timely sacrifices and unquenchable
patriotism, can lift a nation into a higher sphere of moral senti-
ment and action, and at the same time liberate remedial forces
that gather strength in their redemptive course. Truth may be
worsted for a time in an unequal encounter: so may it be with
a righteous cause; but permanent defeat is impossible, for
wickedness is only for a day. but duty is eternal. So far,
modern thoug'ht, if it has not reached this point, is within
easy distance of it, and modern theology has no difficulty in
assenting to the existence and operation of these laws. If
modern thought has not reached the central mystery of the Cross,
‘no more has theology. And if the question is asked why have
such tremendous results followed the preaching of Jesus and the
resurrection as compared with those of the martyrs, the answer
may be found along the line that all effects have their adequate
causes. If humanity is divine, as both historic and modern
theology admit, there is no reason why we should assert an
equality in the individual members of the race. In nature there
are tiny shrubs and tall trees ; little hills and lofty mountains ,
and there are men in whom divinity is at its lowest ebb, while
there are others who are impelled to noble deeds by an enthus-
iasm that is fed by the conscious in-dwelling of the eternal spirit.
Jesus Christ possessed the God-consciousness more than any one
in the history of mankind. His perfect humanity, like a polished
mirror, reflected the divine nature to the extent that whosoever
saw Him saw in Him the image of the Father; and in the
sacrifice of the Son we have not merely human submission to the
divine law, but God’s own submission to His own order. If
we find in common life analogous instances of obedience and
voluntary sacrifice, the value of the suffering of the world’s
Saviour is not in the least diminished, but increased. Is there
not something akin to the sacrifice of the Cross in the man of
science who devotes his strength, his knowledge, and even en-
dangers his own health, to discover the cause of some disease,
and find a remedy? The world would be no place to live in if
parents were not continually sacrificing themselves for their child-
ren, and children for their parents. But one of the most divine
forms of sacrifice is uncomplaining submission to the will of God,
in patient suffering and pain through a long weary life, until
the soul sinks to rest on the bosom of infinite love. There is but
one type, but many examples.
CONVERSION.
I have now to refer somewhat briefly to that spiritual crisis
in the soul known as conversion, or the new-birth, and to indi-
cate to what extent our theological conceptions regarding it
have been affected or modified by modern thought. The fact
of conversion is not only a doctrine of Scripture, but it is also a
fact of experience, and therefore legitimately comes within the
domain of science, and has to be carefully examined and its phe-


nomena classified. It is not in accordance with modern methods
to limit the scientific sphere to matter and motion. In conver-
sion there are three distinct types, only one of which has had
a little light shed upon it by recent writers on psychology. All
three, however, have this in common: the love of God, and His
Son, Jesus Christ. Into their lives Jesus Christ and his salvation
have entered. They have a common faith, and they believe that
mercy has been extended to them, that their sins have been for-
given for Christ’s sake, and that it is their supreme duty to
build up a Christ-like character on the basis of their natural en-
dowments. Of the three types of conversion, the child-like is
the most natural, and most easily yields itself to psychological
explanations. The new-birth in this case is coincident with that
of the body. Its development keeps pace with other movements
along the line of healthy growth. When self-consciousness as-
serts itself this divine factor is part of its contents. Where
children live in a Christian family amid the sweet influences of
the religion of Jesus Christ and in the sanctified atmosphere of
home, where Christ is a present personal power, and not a far-off
vaguely unrealised thought, conversion as a spiritual crisis is
not to be looked for. Nor should it be urged upon such as a
neglected duty accompanied by solemn warnings of the dangers
of neglect. The rapid growth of public sentiment in favour of
making child-life as sunny and sweet as possible has swept away
from their young hearts the fiery horrors that not so long ago
hung over them like a dark cloud charged with the lightnings
of God’s wrath. The Church has been too long in following
the example of the Master, who took them in his arms, and who
has left us this imperishable record : “for of such is the Kingdom
of Heaven.”
Nor is there much difficulty in accounting for the second
type of conversion, which is for the most part a personal and
rational process. There is a natural unrest in the human spirit
which forces itself upon our attention, and will not be put oft
by sophistries. Life is a mystery —a tangled thread, a disap-
pointment, and largely a failure. Who will show us any good r
Like Augustine these anxious enquirers come to the belief that
the soul was made for God, and that it has no repose until
it finds Him. Many paths through the wilderness of thought
are followed only to land in disappointment; but at last the day
dawns. God and Christ are found, and the peace which passeth
all understanding becomes a permanent possession.
It is with the third type of conversion, namely, those that
are apparently sudden, and have no outward circumstances to
account for them, that have come more immediately under the
scrutiny of modern thought, and possibly to some extent modified
our conceptions of the process, but without in the least elimin-
ating the divine spirit either from the process itself or its
consummation. The fact of sudden conversion is too common
to admit of doubt or question. It is a matter of self-conscious-
ness in the case of thousands. Some dream dreams and awake
to newness of life. Some walking in a vain show in the path of
indifference or folly are suddenly brought to a standstill by a
voice they hear, but cannot locate, calling upon them to leave
the broad path, and walk henceforth in the narrow way. Some
with their hands stained with the blood of the martyrs, will be-


come conscious of a sudden illumination which presents to them
the blackness of the past, and invites to a new life of service
ahd sacrifice. At revival or evangelistic services it is not an un-
common thing for a careless, thoughtless world-encrusted sinner,
given over, it may be, to over-indulgence in strong drink, and
who may have been even guilty of the cowardly crime of wife
beating, to stumble into such gatherings and become the subject
of strong religious emotion. He may be seized with trembling,
his countenance will bespeak the fear of the wrath to come that
hangs over his life, and he will need little or no persuasion to
fall upon his knees and beseech God for mercy. Sooner or later
he will pass into peace, and henceforth live in accord with the
new experiences which he has acquired. Historic theology has
for the 1 rtiost part attributed thes e conversions to exceptional
manifestations of the Holy Spirit, and regards them as trium-
phant proofs of the power of divine grace. But it is no denial
either of the work of the divine spirit, or the power of God’s
grace, to have a little light shed upon the process by which a
sinrtfer suddenly passes from darkness to light. In the sub-
liminal consciousness, as it has been called, and to which refer-
'enoe l\hs already been made,' there is stored up all our past
experiences,, for in the inner folds of the memory there is nothing
either forgotten or lost. The subliminal consciousness does not
filwfiys submit to be held down by our normal or every-day ex-
periences. While the outward man may be, like the prodigal, de-
vouring his’substance in riotous living, there is not unfrequently
A process of an opposite character going on in these soul depths,
that cannot be fathomed, and when they assert the mastery,
they J \Vill sweep 1 away the accumulated experiences of years,
change the habits of life that apparently have become metallic
in their and fill-the soul with peace and the music
of joy undreamt of before.
.... , JESUS CHRIST.
•;*' But all doctrines run up into the Christ, and the question
cannot be evaded whether modern thought has to any appreciable
extent modified our conceptions of Him Who is at once the root
and the branches of the Christian faith.
v i. Modern thought cannot be said to have accepted the supei
natural in the person of Christ. In some quarters the possibility
of miracles is admitted, but not the admission that any one has
actually ever taken place. The demand for the most convincing
evidencfe is not unreasonable, but it is somewhat defective logic
t 6 disregard the strong, consistent, circumstantial evidence of
the insurrection of Christ, on the ground that it is contrary to
universal experience; for if it were not so, it would lose much
of its exceptional value. The Christian religion has its mysteries
like other departments of history, but the mysteries of the faith
need not be too positively affirmed or too loosely denied. There
are three slight modifications that have entered modern Christ-
ology under the influence of the scientific spirit of the age; —(i)
The salvation that Jesus offers to the world has a wider range
than simply , calling upon the sinner to flee from the wrath to
come. The spirit of Christ has entered largely into modern legis-
lation, ‘and the modern gospel is a war against social wrong and
every form of 1 injustice. If the brotherhood of man is not yet


fully understood, and in many cases clumsily applied, there
is life in the sentiment, and it is the function of life to grow and
cast off whatever is not conducive to its healthy development
(2) The historic Christ stands out before this generation with a
definiteness and a fulness that belong to no other period in the
history of the Church. If ecce homo has not led up to ecce deus
in all cases it has raised insuperable barriers to the solution
of the great historic problem by myth, illusion or cunning decep-
tion. (3) The greatest change, however, must be admitted to be
the change from an infallible book, and a theology erected
thereon, to the teachings of Christ Himself, not to the rejection
of the Bible, but to the subordination of every part to the central
truth which gives vitality to the sacred writings when viewed as a
progressive revelation of God and of His purposes of mercy to
mankind by the incarnation of the Son.
I feel somewhat reluctant to assent to what has been recently
said by those who have a right to be respectfully heard, that the
surrender of the supernatural in Christ is equal to the abandon
ment of Christianity and the downfall of the Church. But the
abounding influence of Christianity at the present day is beyond
all dispute, notwithstanding that in many quarters the super-
natural, if not positively rejected, does not exist as a strong
active conviction. If the modern mind ever comes to believe
intelligently in the resurrection of Christ it will not be by the
process of denunciation against reasonable doubt, but by the
growth of the Christ-like character in all who-profess His name
and seek to manifest His spirit.
Meantime we Congregationalists profess to be greatly in-
debted to historic theology, but we arte not willing to be bound
by it. Nor have we the presumption for a moment to suppose
that we have reached finality, or that what we profess to believe
is the final standard of orthodoxy for all time. We believe in
having our minds open to receive the truth from whatever quarter
it may come, but no light that has ever dawned upon us has by
contrast thrown into shadow the countenance of Him Whom we
are proud to recognise as the embodiment of truth. We hold
Him in the highest estimation, and pay Him a devotion we with-
hold from all others. We believe that the God-consciousness in
Him rose higher and purer than in any one who in times passed
professed to speak for God. His own testimony to Himself, His
relation to the Father, and His purpose in coming into the world
should count for something in forming an estimate of His char-
acter and work. We are not in the Eden of our childhood or our
dreams, but out in the world of thought and action, and there is
nothing the modern world demands with more urgency than defi-
nite religious teaching. Criticism creates an appetite it cannot
satisfy, and is nothing that will allay this hunger but the
preaching of the living Christ. Let us rise, then, to the height
of our privileges and responsibilities ! Let us with courage and
fidelity preach the everlasting gospel, not in the language of the
schools, but in the speech of the day, for in no other way can
the world be brought back to God, than by our individual lives
being made conformable to the life of Christ, as His life was in
all things conformable to the will of God, to Whom be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.






* : V '.
