

EMPIRE PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION
(WESTERN AUSTRALAN BRANCH)
REPORT
BY
The Honourable F. J. S. Wise M.L.A.
DELEGATE FROM THE WESTERN AUSTRALIAN
BRANCH AT THE EMPIRE PARLIAMENTARY
ASSOCIATION CONFERENCE HELD IN LONDON
OCTOBER, 1948
DELIVERED TO A SPECIAL GENERAL
MEETING OF THE BRANCH, HELD IN
THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY CHAMBER,
ON TUESDAY, 15th FEBRUARY, 1949
PERTH:
By Authority: William H. WYATT, Government Printer
1949.
25109/3/49—200




INTRODUCTION
At a Special General Meeting of Members of the Western
Australian Branch of the Empire Parliamentary Association,
held on Ist July, 1948, the Hon. F. J. S. Wise, M.L.A., Leader
of the Opposition, was unanimously selected as the Delegate
to the Empire Parliamentary Conference in London.
Mr. Wise left Fremantle, in company with the other
Delegates from Australia and New Zealand, by R.M.S.
“Orion” on Ist September, 1948, arriving in England on 25th
September, 1948. He visited the British Zone of Germany,
including the British sector of Berlin, also Scotland, North-
ern Ireland, Wales, and many parts of England. He took part
in the deliberations of the Conference, held in the Grand
Committee Room in Westminster Hall, London, from 18th
to 28th October, 1948.
Mr. Wise left Liverpool by the “Empress of France” on
4th November, arriving in Montreal, Canada, on 11th Novem-
ber, 1948. He left Vancouver, British Columbia, by S.S.
“Aorangi” on 18th November for Sydney, arriving back in
Western Australia by air from Sydney on 16th December,
1948.
On Tuesday, 15th February, 1949, at a Special General
Meeting of the Branch in the Legislative Assembly Chamber,
Mr. Wise was cordially welcomed home by the Joint Presi-
dents (Hon. C. F. J. North, M.L.A., Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly, and Hon. H. Seddon, M.L.C., President of the Legis-
lative Council).
Mr. Wise then delivered the following Address which was
closely and attentively listened to by those present.
At the conclusion of his Address Mr. Wise fully answered
many questions put to him by several Honourable Members,
after which the Honourable the Premier (Hon. D. R. McLarty,
M.L.A.), moved a Vote of Thanks to Mr. Wise, both for his
Address and for the many services he had rendered to the
State whilst abroad.




REPORT BY THE HONOURABLE F. J. S. WISE, M.L.A.
(Delegate of the Western Australian Branch of the Empire
Parliamentary Association)
Parliament House,
PERTH.
15th February, 1949.
It will be recalled that a letter from Sir Howard d’Egville
as Secretary of the Empire Parliamentary Association’
containing an invitation for one member of the Western
Australian Branch to attend a conference of overseas Par-
liamentary delegates was read at a special meeting of this
~r a, n ? L lst Jul y> 1948 - The letter expressly suggested
that the Hon. the Premier be the delegate, but left the mat-
ter to the Branch to decide. The Hon. the Premier having
indicated his inability to make the journey, and the Branch
aving selected me to go, I endeavoured in all circumstances
worthily to represent you and the State of Western Austra-
lia.
Ihe CQntaGe was the first to be held in London since
1935, and was designed to afford opportunities for an inter-
change of views on world and British Commonwealth prob-
lems between overseas delegates and their colleagues in the
Parliament at Westminster.
Looking at the suggested itinerary before leaving Aus-
la la i was hard to understand why, before conferences
start, the delegates were, on arrival in London on
25th September, to be divided into three parties—one sec-
tion to go to British Zone Germany; one to the American
Z.one in Germany; and one to visit Belgium, and Holland.
After early contacts with other delegates it was not long
befoie the method in this plan became apparent.
_ ?, elegates were fr om 37 different Parliaments in
the British Commonwealth, and were a very heterogeneous
collection, 28 of them were not white; some of them were
jet black—m fact I have never seen anyone more black than
ine Rev. Black, the Jamaican representative! They were of
all creeds and castes and languages; some of them, irrespec-
tive of colour, were distinguished scholars of Oxford or of
Cambridge. Some on the other hand were better able to
read and speak in Sanskrit than in English.
Although not yet members of the Association the repre-
sentatives of Eire and of the Indian Parliaments were
invited on all tours, and to all conferences.


India sent 10 delegates and Eire four. Some of the dele-
gates had at some time or another been imprisoned for
offences against the Crown, and these did not include only
coloured people from India! T he Entish
through this conference had planned carefully to ge
gather in travel and as guests of Corporations and cities
and as people who should be bound together by a belief in a
democratic way of life, a polyglot cohection; some from out-
posts loyal to the Crown; some groping their way m then
newly found authority and constitutions; others who like
neither the word “Empire” nor “Crown.”
One comment in lighter vein on these angles is that the
most lusty voiced baritone who seemed to enjoy the National
Anthem whenever it was sung was a Negro delegate from the
Gold Coast. Some others never sang it.
Thus it was by design that delegates were thrown to-
gether for some weeks before conference, to enable them to
get to know each other; to encourage blacks and whites and
browns to mingle together before discussions took place on
migration, population distribution, Empire co-operation, and
other contentious subjects; and to provoke conversation and
friendly argument rather than have heat and bitterness in
the conference room.
Consequently I gained the very strong impression that
the main purpose of the conference, indeed almost the con-
ference itself, had been achieved even before it had been
formally opened by the Prime Minister, The Rt. Hon. C. R.
Attlee, on 19th October.
In this report I will deal with the events and experiences
chronologically.
As one of the group selected to go to tne British Zone
of Germany, it was on the morning of 27th September, after
having been approved by the British Customs and checked
out, that we flew from Blackbushe Airport in Surrey, across
the English coast at Sheerness, over the North Sea and the
famous beaches of Dunkirk, passing over the continuous-
farmed areas of Holland and on to Germany. We landed
and were checked in at the air port of Buckeburg, one of the
dromes used in the famous air lift.
On arrival we were taken by road 10 miles to Lubbecke,
the headquarters of the Army of Occupation, and addressed
for two hours by Gen. Sir Brian Robertson, Sir Cecil Weir
(Economic Adviser) and other prominent members of the
General Staff.


Later on, at Hannover, Dusseldorf and Berlin, we were
treated to illuminating lectures by other generals, and to
avoid making this report too lengthy I will deal with all con-
ferences in a general way.
The quality of the leaders sent by England to control
and rebuild Germany is most pronounced. They are men
of outstanding mental capacity, and are very impressive in
the manner in which they are handling their colossal tasks.
Many of them are men who personally suffered at the hands
of the Germans, and yet bear no malice now in their task
of restoring a nation both economically and in regard to
self-respect.
„ * t he out set we were encouraged to meet all sections
of the German community-military and civil Governors
and Ministers, farmers and tradespeople, artisans and
workers in all industries.
It was pointed out by Sir Brian Robertson just how
colossal was the task of the Army of Occupation.
At the outset there was no transport, no railways no
roads intact, no police, no civil rule, no electricity or power
and no Government—just chaos and confusion everywhere!
Hundreds of thousands of refugees from other countries
who had been slaves, were wandering about drunk with free-
dom and engaging in looting and robbery.
Industry had to be set going; order and authority had
to be created; food production had to be organised, and as
currency had no backing business restoration was difficult
in the extreme.
„o I ? I . the British ’ American and French Zones there were
42 million people, and this number has vastly Increased. The
generals first were dealing with a sullen, miserable people
stunned by defeat, and it took many months before any
response was evident. Pro-Nazis were too bitter to co-
operate, and anti-Nazis still too frightened to declare them-
selves. To institute authority and set up a new sort of
administration out of the disorder was a testing period for
the British and American leaders. Leaders had to be chosen
who could be entrusted with the development and institu-
tion of a way of life they had never experienced.
Tremendous was the task to get co-operation. It is very
obvious that Germany is regarded by America and Britain
as the area in Europe which must be a buffer between Rus-
sian Communism and Christian democracy as a way of life
ft is believed, and firmly believed, by the British generals
and the British Government that to preserve civilisation as


we know it; to prevent Europe from becoming the Balkan
State on the doorstep of England, the battle to democratise
Germany must be won. In addition to that vital aspect it
very necessary to develop a democratic way o ie in
many in lieu of the awful dictatorships which have brought
ruin and misery to the world every 26 years. There is yet
another reason: There is an obvious need to make sure that
Germany will not unite with others for another war.
The generals are proceeding by way of persuasion rather
than by order, hoping that persuasion will be more enduring
than compulsion.
Citizens and leaders in public life are responding now,
and the country is making remarkable economic progress
under the circumstances which include inability to buy raw
material for industry. Food is not now the main problem
in Germany (except in Berlin), production from industry is
the problem.
America is paying about 90 per cent, of the cost of
restoring Germany. All returns from exports are being spent
in buying raw materials. 220 million dollars were gained from
export trade in 1947-48, and 700 million dollars are expected
from exports in 1948-49.
Germany is this year getting —
700-800 million dollars from Congress,
700 million dollars from exports, and
404 million dollars from Marshall Plan.
I commend to Members the reading of the story of the
Marshall Plan for the recovery of Europe, which has been
described as an act unparalleled in history. (Copy attached
as appendix “A.”)
We were enabled to see the destruction caused by Allied
bombers in all its stark aspects. Germany received at the
hands of British and American bombers all she was pro-
mised. The destruction is almost unbelievable. It is esti-
mated that from 66 per cent, to 70 per cent, of such cities as
Dusseldorf, Hannover, Frankfurt, Hamburg and Berlin do
not exist in their pre-war form, while in such areas as the
Ruhr (from Hamm to Dusseldorf) only 250,000 out of a pre-
war one million homes are habitable. I saw the remains of
such towns as Essen and where the town of Wuppertal was
the latter of 60,000 people wiped out in 42 minutes’ bombing.
Berlin is a ghost city and fantastic things are happen-
ing there due to the perfidy and deceit of Soviet Russia.


For those interested I will attach to this report the story
of happenings in a booklet, “From Yalta to Berlin,” which
gives clearly and concisely the story following six years of
war with three years of distrust, unrest and no peace.
(Appendix “B.”)
I do not wish to tire you today with the angles of which
I have written for the Press, which appear to have been
very widely read, but would say simply that the air lift—the
attempt to get food into Berlin across 100 miles of Russian
Zone to feed two million people—is a modern miracle.
It was with great relief that we took off from GatoW
airport (Berlin) to fly via Bukeburg to Edinburgh.
It was a striking contrast in the one day; to be in the
capital of the vanquished in the morning, and in a city of
the victors in the afternoon. It was refreshing to see beauti-
ful Edinburgh, hardly despoiled by war, and with trams and
other amenities, shops, hotels and theatres, functioning as
usual; people appearing to be going about their business as
usual.
Six full days in Scotland were spent in seeing Scottish
industries; housing; meeting civic authorities; the Clyde
industries; the hydro electric undertakings at Loch Lomond
and Loch Sloy.
The night appointments included some very important
functions given by Lord Provosts in their different chambers,
and by the Secretary for State in Edinburgh Castle.
The revival in the Clyde industry is amazing. A full day
was spent in shipyards of the Clyde where not a slip is vacant
and tens of thousands of men are working on ships large
and small to help Britain’s amazing economic revival.
Hundreds of ships of all sizes are being built, and there
are 128 tankers in some stage of construction. There is
much re-conversion and remodelling of war vessels such as
aircraft carriers. Costs are very high.
Glasgow boasts of 40 new industries since the war,
Scotland generally is proud of her industrial revival; her
attempts at slum clearance; her hydro electric undertakings
designed to reticulate power to country districts as well as
city industries. Loch Sloy, 1,000 feet above Loch Lomond, in
a rainfall of 120 inches a year, had had 12 totally fine days
from Ist January to 9th October. This new undertaking
will develop 130,000 K.W.


Belfast in Ulster, famed for her shipbuilding, also is
active. All Northern Ireland is looking for and getting new
industries. Benger’s Food and many other industries are
helping to diversify her primary industries and linen manu-
facture. Here too, great public works are in stages of
development. Sir Basil Brooke and other members of Ulster
Parliament set themselves out to see that day and night we
saw Northern Ireland and her industries.
Perhaps the greatest single new undertaking in the
British Isles which we saw is the £60,000,000 tinplate industry
being developed near Port Talbot in Wales. This amazing
development, to be worked in conjunction with the coalfields
of Wales is being developed by labour from English counties
as well as fully employing local people.
For this enterprise coal is costing 265., ore (60 per cent.)
405., and lime 2s. per ton. I was the official speaker at the
luncheon and stressed the need for British leaders in indus-
try with their colossal capital to take stock of Empire re-
sources and economies.
It is obvious that Britain’s geographic position, its
dependence on the outside world for the major part of its
food, the migration of the people to the Colonies, are
secondary in the race for industrial revival and internal
investments of vasts sums in industry.
It is expected to spend £30,000,000 before any production
is realised. So it is in all the United Kingdom, feverish re-
vival of industry; appeal being made for production for
export; all England building up and attempting side by side
with her industrial activity and production to induce greater
land development and a return to rural life.
This remarkable country of remarkable people who suf-
fered terribly during war years, who are still hard rationed
for many food items are putting up a tremendous fight for
economic recovery. It is very obvious that Great Britain is
anxious not to expend her energy in war production, but to
revive industry and people economically before another war
threatens. The plans and the results are a direct challenge
to migration proposals for Australia and elsewhere from
Great Britain.
In that part of the itinerary planned for travel and civic
functions, every opportunity was given to visit all the city
halls in towns visited. Such irreplaceable structures as the
Marble Civic Buildings of Glasgow; the famous city square
and buildings of Cardiff, Wales, as well as the old halls of
such towns as Belfast and Derry in Northern Ireland —all


are untouched by war damage. In fact, the English cities,
which suffered so much in the early bombings, are a strik-
ing contrast to the German cities, still with their blocked
streets, gaunt skeletons of buildings and heaps of rubble.
British people have already made a garden square in the
heart of Coventry, which was so badly bombed.
Official conferences were held in the Grand Committee
Room in Westminster Hall. In order to enable members to
express their views freely, the sessions were held in private
and no Press representatives were present at any stage.
The principal subjects debated in a strenuous agenda
in official conferences, lasting two weeks, were Migration
and distribution of population within the British Common-
wealth; the future of Parliamentary Government; Foreign
Affairs; Economic Co-operation with the Commonwealth
and Defence.
The Prime Minister opened the conference and read a
speech of welcome. With over 80 delegates and 39 countries
to cater for speaking had to be rationed. A committee
representing all the major countries selected the various
speakers for the different subjects and allotted the time.
Very many representatives of states and countries did
not speak at all during the conference. Many men, quali-
fied by experience and ability, were diffident about speaking
for the five minutes periods on involved and controversial
subjects.
The procedure usually adopted was for a British Minister
to introduce the subject—taking half an hour, and speeches
confined to from 15 to 20 minutes down to five minutes and
the last speaker being a member of the Opposition in Eng-
land, who also had half an hour as a rule and then the
Chairman summed up. In this way we were privileged to
hear the British Prime Minister, Mr. Attlee, Mr. Ernest
Bevin, Mr. A. V. Alexander, Sir Stafford Cripps, Mr. Anthony
Eden, Mr. R. A. Butler, Mr. Noel Baker, Mr. Creech Jones and
others. All very interesting speakers, and all very earnest
and some very strained men. I heard no extempore speakers
of the quality of the late John Curtin, or of J. H. Scullin or
R. G. Menzies.
In vital matters such as Foreign Policy and Defence it
was amazing how closely allied were the views of both Gov-
ernment and Opposition.
In the debate on Foreign Affairs it was obvious that the
cost to Great Britain of her overseas investments which she
sacrificed the world over in the dark days of 1940-42 was


enormous. The days when the British Empire stood alone,
robbed her of her substance in overseas credits and invest-
ments to get goods and food. In the pre-war bid for world
trade with foreign countries Great Britain had hundreds of
millions in railways and all sorts of industries in South
American countries, in fact in many corners of the globe the
investments of Great Britain had helped development. Some
of these countries were not at any stage in the war on
Britain’s side and were only interested in profits from trade.
One could perhaps be pardoned for musing during the
course of such debates on what a different story some of the
colonies might have to tell if many more millions from Bri-
tish investors had, during the last 40 years, been spent where
there never has been any doubt of loyalty to the Crown or
the provision of assets and men and women when war
threatened.
These same countries are squeezing the last ounce today
from the United Kingdom in contracts for food, and are not
particularly anxious to buy some of her goods for which she
must find world markets. Great Britain’s export sales are
more and more.to mean her very industrial existence, and
foreign orders are today competing with Dominion needs.
Britain’s great industrial revival will have to benefit
from the countries she now owes money to, and from the
countries who had her assets for goods during the war.
This must to a degree again prejudice the colonies. She also
has to compete for markets in competition with America.
The complications in Egypt, in Palestine, in China, the
Dutch East Indies, in India and Ceylon are fraught with
grave possibilities and add to the uncertainties of the future.
So much of Europe is Russian dominated, and many former
continental markets have been lost to both Britain, and
other units of the British Commonwealth.
Many dominions and countries of coloured people within
the Empire have for many years been promised self-Govern-
ment (not as promises made by the existing Government in
England) and during the stressful days of the war were told
they would get new constitutions almost immediately. In
countries such as Egypt, India and Ceylon the reactions
against past British domination of Government and trade
are rather startling. The dislike is not only against the
British races as such but against the domination and direc-
tion by white people.
Egypt has commemoration stamps to mark the march-
ing out of British permanent forces and the hauling up over
the capital of the Egyptian flag where the Union Jack flew


for centuries. . Egyptians show their hatred of the British
and have no appreciation of what Britain and Australia
saved her from from Alexandria westward.
India’s anti-British sentiment was most marked at the
conference and during travel. The feeling between India
and Africa was rude and vicious. Indians even walked out
of civic functions when South Africans spoke.
On more than one occasion I stressed the view that an
Empire stocktaking was one of the most vital and urgent
needs of the times.
America, our greatest creditor, does not like our Empire
preferences, other nations do not like them, complications
in international trade agreements give favour to some.
There never was a time when it was more important for the
nations w T ho believe in a democratic way of life to band
together, to take stock of their assets, to trade together in
protection of their way of life and not give further help to
those who bite the hand that feeds them. It is not today
a question of English speaking communities banding to-
gether so much as democratic thinking people uniting.
Three of the notable speeches of the conference were
from Mr. Ernest Bevin, Mr. A. V. Alexander, Minister for
Defence, and Mr. Anthony Eden, on the subject of defence.
I will quote from Mr. Anthony Eden.
“It is indeed a calamity that so soon after the close
of hostilities we should be once again in a period of
acute dissension between the Great Powers.
“Men and women in all lands yearn earnestly for
peace. They ask just that they should be allowed to go
about their daily tasks in security and peace.
“In Britain we have our political differences over
our domestic affairs, but, there are certain things about
which we are all united.
“We are all united in defence of our essential free-
dom; freedom to speak, freedom to write, freedom to
praise and criticise, freedom to worship, and, last and
by no means least, we are united in defence of our
equality before the law. We of the Opposition in Parlia-
ment strongly endorse the action which the British
Government, together with its Western Allies, is taking
in Berlin.”
There is not a shadow of doubt that it is the influence
of one nation, a former ally, that is causing the disturbance
of the world. The long arm of Russia is reaching out to all


corners of the earth and Communism is rife in South Africa,
India and in the remote and small West Indies. The
methods and technique everywhere are the same—civil wars,
violence and killings, wearing down and hindering recon-
struction. Europe is not its own master, and France is in
a dangerous and unhealthy state. People are showing no
resistance to bad influences, morals and morale are low.
There are many millions in Europe who are groping for a
lead to a better way of life, wanting to be taught how to love
and use freedom.
England has become the most exposed part of the Bri-
tish Commonwealth. In spite of this Britain, as I have
stated, is building up her industry and is not encouraging
migration of trained people in any industry or calling.
It was pointed out by Mr. Ernest Bevin that in past
generations Britain has protected the weak and isolated
communities by the very existence of her fleet. The value
of the British fleet to even America has been enormous.
Britain has always borne all the cost.
There are certain strategic and technical factors giving
Britain great concern. The position in Europe to some
appears to be a losing fight, but because it appears to be so
it is still not right to surrender it to Russian Communism.
The firm view of Messrs. Bevin, Butler and Eden is that
a line of defences from the Suez and Middle East through
the Mediterranean and to Great Britain is the most im-
portant in the world. The sources of oil and the Persian
Gulf must be protected somehow. The British Navy could
not function without Persian oil.
My contribution on defence will later appear in abbre-
viated form. The great danger in my view within the next
25 years is the promotion of a Black v. White war.
Within the British Empire there are 450 million coloured
people who are very conscious of the supremacy of the white
races in Government. White races total 70 million. These
are very expressive figures, and no Indian speaker missed
any opportunity of stressing their significance. On the
question of colour, all delegates not white banded together
in argument.
If you will look closely at the news of the disturbances
from Egypt to India, Java to China, you will find the anti-
white propaganda rampant. India is very sensitive about,
and conscious of, the White Australia Policy, and South
Africa’s refusal to grant the franchise to her 200,000 Indians.


I have in a report on migration to the Hon. the Premier,
stressed this matter, and I may be permitted to quote by the
courtesy of the Hon. the Premier.
I do not desire this report to be wearisome, and feel I
must therefore commence to summarize and be prepared to
elaborate any aspects or subject members may desire.
My outstanding impressions at the conference were the
obvious distrust of Russia and her attempts to prevent
restoration in other countries; the unity between all parties
in Great Britain on such subjects as Defence and Foreign
Affairs (no matter how sharply they differ on internal prob-
lems) ; the obvious realisation that all nations in the Bri-
tish Commonwealth should be and could be the greatest
factor in promoting and preserving world peace and, lastly,
the rising intolerance of the coloured people towards the
whites, and the fact that the more highly educated they are
the greater the degree of intolerance existing.
My outstanding impressions outside the conference
rooms were the great attempts being made, and the remark-
able results being achieved by British people in their revival
of industry; the bravery and fortitude of the British house-
wife, especially the middle classes and poorer people, in their
struggle for food and to get the best from the ration; and
the impressive pageantry of the opening of Parliament by
the King on 26th October.
I have already supplied the secretary of the branch
with a record of the colourful and dignified procedure when
the King and Queen, wearing their Crowns, were the symbols
of their rank, rather than the natural human beings we
later met at Buckingham Palace.
The visit to Buckingham Palace was the highlight
where, as natural people, all the Royal Family (excluding
Princess Elizabeth) welcomed the delegates. We were able
to converse with them all; and perhaps the most lasting
impressions as persons would be left with all delegates of
the stately old lady Queen Mary, the fresh and natura)
Princess Margaret, and the worldly and knowledgable Duk(
of Edinburgh.
There is much I could say of my visits officially to manj
English industrial enterprises of immense proportions; oj
the tasks I attempted on behalf of this State; of the visitt
to research stations and industries in England and in
Canada; of the contacts made in Parliaments in Canada,
and the striking representatives of dozens of countries, but I
feel I have spoken long enough.


Participating
Countries
Dollars
1. Austria .. .
100 million
2. Belgium ..
' “1
3. Luxembourg
. . . [ 800
4. Netherlands .
J
5. Denmark . . .
‘ "1
6. Norway . . .
. . . }- 200
7. Sweden . . .
• J
8. France . .
• - . 1,100
Participating
Countries
Dollars
9.
Greece . . . .
]
10.
Turkey
i 275 million
11.
Iceland
10 „
12.
Italy
700
13.
United Kingdom
1
14.
Ireland
r 1,500
J
15.
Portugal . . . .
Not available
16.
Switzerland
Not available
I desire to place on record my deep appreciation of the
work of Sir Howard d’Egville and his assistants. The plans
were carefully prepared, and —although members had little
time to themselves, which would be my only criticism—they
were carried through with expedition and care. All dele-
gates received many courtesies from Sir Howard and his
staff, and to Mr. Cory Williams, those who were under his
care owe a special measure of thanks.
To all members of the branch I extend my grateful
thanks for the opportunity they afforded in selecting me to
go, and I endeavoured in every way, and in every place,
worthily to represent this branch and this great State of
Western Australia.
Appendix “A”
THE MARSHALL PLAN
AMERICA’S EUROPEAN RECOVERY PROGRAMME
April, 1948 to June, 1952
A £A5,312,000,000 PROJECT
“The Most Unsordid Act in History”
EUROPEAN RECOVERY PROGRAMME
SOME FACTS ABOUT AMERICAN OVEASEAS AID
Total estimated amount of Marshall Plan Aid $17,000,000,000
Equivalent in Australian currency £A5,312,000,000
Estimated total of first instalment (15 months) $6,098,000,000
Equivalent in Australian currency £A1,905,500,000
Compare Australia’s National Income for
1946-47 .. £A1,265,000,000
Additional immediate amount for China
(12 months) $463,000,000
Estimated allocations—first instalment


Additional estimated cost of American ad-
ministration and aid in Western Germany
(15 months) $1,100,000,000
Total Marshall Plan aid alone is equivalent to approximately
£37 10s. per head for every man, woman and child in U.S.A.
“One of the great historic undertakings in the annals of
world civilisation.”—Secretary of State, George C. Marshall.
“The question which the European nations must ask
themselves now is whether their own performance is likely
to match the courage and generosity shown by the American
Administration. . . . The ‘peace on earth’ which the Marshall
Plan begins to make possible, is not a peace for the laggards
or the envious or the selfishly nationalistic. It is a peace
which can be wrung from destiny only by men Of goodwill.”
—“The Economist,” London. 27th December, 1947.
UNSORDID ACT
(Reproduced by kind permission from “The Economist,”
London, 10th April, 1948)
Men lose their capacity for astonishment very easily. Let
a thing be mentioned often enough and they begin to accept
it as a normal unsensational fact. Few things have been
mentioned more persistently in the last 10 months than the
chances and the hopes and the possibilities offered by the
Marshall Plan. Insensibly, people have grown used to it. Its
fabulous quality has been stripped away. But since the Plan
is no longer just a hope or a chance but a concrete reality
an Act approved by Congress and signed by the President,
provisional funds already granted, ships already sailing with
supplies from American harbours —it is fitting that the
peoples of Western Europe should attempt to renew their
capacity for wonder, so that they can return to the United
States a gratitude in some way commensurate with the aid
they are about to receive.
For a day or two, the Marshall Plan must be retrieved
from the realm of normal day-to-day developments in inter-
national affairs and be seen for what it is—an act without
peer in history.
In time of peace, in order to aid nations geographically
i emote and politically separate from the Americas, at a time
of great internal shortages, the United States is ready to give
away over five billion dollars worth of commodities as the
first instalment of a wider programme, to give them for
peaceful economic reconstruction and, save for minor excep-
tions, to give them without political conditions of any sort.


A year ago, the project would have been inconceivable —
Congress was then making desperately heavy weather over
only 400 million dollars aid for Greece and Turkey. Ten
years ago, such an initiative would have driven the nation
en masse into the arms of the America Firsters.
Search back as one may through the annals of the United
States or of any other Power, there is no record of a com-
parable act of inspired and generous diplomacy.
So, with their sense of astonishment restored, the
peoples of Western Europe must offer their thanks to the
American nation who, through their Congress, have now
spoken for the Bill. It will be difficult, after this demonstra-
tion of international solidarity, to go on repeating the old
gibes about American isolationism, the old complacent re-
ferences to American political immaturity. In recent months,
the American public, in its eagerness for information, its
sustained interest in foreign affairs, and in its acceptance
of positive and onerous international responsibility, is
rapidly qualifying for the title of the least isolationist and
self-absorbed of peoples. And this development in turn is
due, above all, to the work of a small group of leaders, on
whose vision and devoted labours the successful development
of the Plan has depended, on Mr. Marshall and Mr. Acheson
for the sweep and courage of the initial project, on Mr. Van-
denberg and Mr. Lewis Douglas, among many others, for
the skill and patience—and speed—with which it was piloted
through both Houses of Congress. This last point of speed
is clearly vital.
How often in the last 20 years has the reaction of demo-
cracy come too little and too late; but this time, the initia-
tive has been captured and held by the party of freedom. It
is true that the Russians carry a large measure of responsi-
bility for the breakneck speed (by American standards) of
the debates on the Plan in the House of Representatives, all
of which took place after the Communist coup in Prague.
But there is no reason to suppose that, without the lesson of
Czechoslovakia the House of Representatives would have
given a decision different from the Senate’s, for which the
ground-work had been fully laid before the seizure of
Czechoslovakia, even though the debate might have been
larger and more discordant. Nor has the Bill been loaded
with military and strategic commitments or diverted in any
way from its original fundamentally constructive and paci-
fic purpose. It emerges from its Congressional ordeal as it
went into it—as a Bill for the peaceful economic recon-
struction of Europe.


Nevertheless, there is a warning to Europe in the extent
to which Russian action has speeded up the final phases of
the Marshall debate. For the sake of peace in Europe, it
must be hoped that, as the Plan develops, its pacific charac-
ter will become more and more obvious, Russian opposition
will decline and the effectiveness of Communist opposition
be hamstrung by growing economic prosperity. When in a
year’s time, and two years’ time and three years’ time, the
further appropriations come to be voted by Congress, it
should be assumed that the spur of the Communist menace
may be less sharp than it is today. Under such conditions,
will Congress find the Plan a sufficiently worthwhile end in
itself? Will the prospect of continuing a pacific effort of
international reconstruction be compelling enough to call
forth further dollars?
The answer lies in one thing only—the way in which the
European nations themselves go about their work of re-
covery. Nothing could be more misguided at this moment
than to throw one’s cap in the air and believe that the
“battle for the Marshall Plan” has been fought and won.
The Americans are moving up the heavy guns and the
mechanised units, but the use of European general staff will
make of them cannot yet even be hazarded.
The operation that lies ahead is one that calls for the
last reserves of energy and skill in the Sixteen Nations.
Energy they must exhibit because the bulk of the productive
effort falls on them. Even if all Marshall aid for all four
years is added together, it amounts to only some five per
cent, of the total output necessary to meet the targets laid
down in the Paris Report. And skill is no less essential,
since the use of that five per cent, may make all the differ-
ence between Europe’s present halting, jamming economy
and the reactivation of the whole machine.
As the latest report of the Economic Commission for
Europe points out, the actual recovery of production in
Europe is substantial. What is lacking is the free circulation
and exchange of wealth made possible by active and
balanced trade. The European economy is like a machine
with three or four essential cogs missing. These the Ameri-
can five per cent, is designed to supply. But their restora-
tion is not automatic. In the last two years Europe has
already received some nine billion dollars and will not re-
ceive a larger figure in the next two. If the results in 1949
are to be different from those of 1947, the Sixteen must fulfil
their side of the bargain by solving together in the closest
collaboration the problems which eluded them as long as
they acted separately in sixteen jealous and independent


sovereignties. If they so act, there is a chance of the Plan
succeeding in Europe. If they do not, their failure will spell
the end of Congressional interest and with it, in all
probability, the loss of the later appropriations.
It is too early to judge the likely scale of Europe’s per-
formance. But it is not too early to say, with categorical
certainty, that the success or failure of the Plan now lies
fairly and squarely with the Sixteen Nations. They have
been given the tools. It is now for them to finish the job.
HISTORICAL REVIEW
(1) Secretary of State, G. C. Marshall, first outlined the
Plan in a speech at Harvard University, on sth June,
1947. On that occasion he said;—“Europe’s require-
ments for the next three or four years of foreign food
and other essential products—principally from America
—are so much greater than her present ability to pay
that she must have substantial additional help or face
economic, social and political deterioration of a very
grave character. . . .”
“The Plan will determine the survival of the kind of
world in which democracy, individual liberty, economic
stability and peace can be maintained.”
(2) The Paris Conference of sixteen participating Nations
in July, 1947, established a Committee on European
Economic Co-operation, which drew up an economic
programme for Western Europe.
(3) “The Harriman Report.”
A Report on “European Recovery and American Aid”
by the President’s Committee on Foreign Aid, presented
on 7th November, 1947.
This Report of 286 pages was prepared by a Commit-
tee representative of all phases of American life, under
the Chairmanship of W. Averell Harriman. It deals
with the Plan and its problems in the greatest detail,
from principles and policy, through needs and capaci-
ties, to finance and administration. It sifts economic
arguments and analyses a mass of statistics on the pre-
sent economic situation in Europe and America, includ-
ing food and agriculture, iron and steel, fuel and power,
petroleum and coal, rubber and chemicals, transporta-
tion, machinery, exports and imports, prices, trade and
finance.


Summary
The basic conclusions of the Committee are sum-
marised as follows:
(1) The hope of Western Europe depends primarily
on the industry and straight thinking of its own
people.
(2) The United States has a vital interest —humani-
tarian, economic, strategic, and political—in helping the
participating countries to achieve economic recovery.
(3) The aid which the United States gives will impose
definite sacrifice on this country.
(4) The magnitude of Western Europe’s deficit with
the American Continent in 1948 will be of the order
of seven billion dollars, but when all possibilities of fin-
ancing are taken into consideration, the approximate
need for appropriations past and future to cover the
calendar year of 1948 may be of the order of 5.75 billion
dollars.
(5) The extension of such aid, now or in the future,
calls for anti-inflationary fiscal policies on the part of
this country, and a new agency to administer the aid
extended. Success depends on giving way neither to
over-optimism nor to undue pessimism. The immediate
months and indeed years ahead are not apt to be easy
either for this country or for the European nations. It
is not wise to underestimate the steepness of the climb.
(4) Action by the American Congress.
The Aid to Europe Bill was brought before Congress
by President Truman in November, 1947, and finally
passed by both Houses on 2nd April, 1948. The House
of Representatives approved the measure by 318 votes
to 75, and the Senate by 69 to 17.
Major American assistance will be by means of free
grants, but some will be in the form of loans. It is hoped
that by June, 1952, by a combined process of self-help,
economic co-operation and American aid, Western
Europe will be in a position to pay its own way.
The Agency for putting the plan into operation is
the “Economic Co-operation Administration” under the
general direction of the Department of State. The
Administrator of the plan is Mr. Paul Hoffman.
Some Opinions
“In the whole history of the world, no continent has
ever offered to save another from economic catastrophe.”—
“The London Observer.”


“I believe that the great goals of the Marshall Plan can
be attained if America does her part with understanding and
administrative competence, adequately and on time, and if
the people of Europe, as well as the governments, realise
what is at stake for themselves and the world.” —Will Clay-
ton, Special Adviser to Secretary of State, George C.
Marshall.
“The Marshall Plan is a great and far-reaching concept
—in keeping with the deserved American reputation for
large-scale thinking and action. . . . More important than
the actual financial scope and details of the plan are the
profound implications which lie behind it and the momen-
tous issues and traditions for which it stands.” —Institute of
Public Affairs-Victoria, “Review.” April, 1948.
“It is safe to say that at no time in history has there
been more need for Western Europe and the United States
to stand firmly together. And who will say that, if we apply
to the making of the peace the same spirit which triumphed
in war, we may not see an equally dramatic vindication of
the ideals and principles of free men everywhere?”—The
Harriman Report.
Appendix “B”
FROM YALTA TO BERLIN
It was February, 1945, and Hitler’s Germany was near
its end.
In the East of Europe its armies were being rolled back
by the Russians.
In the West the Americans and British were using their
air strength to spread ruin in the Reich while their land
forces made ready for the last great surge across the Rhine.
With victory clearly in sight, the war leaders of the
Allies met in the Crimean town of Yalta —Winston Churchill
for Great Britain, Franklin D. Roosevelt for the United
States of America, Josef Stalin for the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics.
(For convenience, these Powers are called Britain,
America and Russia from now on in this article.)
The three statesmen agreed broadly on the shape of the
post-war world.
They took many decisions, but those with which this
article chiefly deals concerned the occupation of. Germany.
It was agreed that Russia, America, Britain and France
should each occupy a separate zone of Germany.


Over-all rule would be in the hands of a Central Control
Commission. This would consist of the four Commanders-
in-Chief in Occupied Germany. Its headquarters would be
in the capital, Berlin.
War’s End
On sth May Germany surrendered. On sth June the
Yalta agreement was put into force by a four-Power declara-
tion.
It proclaimed the division of Germany into four zones.
It added that:—“The area of Greater Berlin will be
occupied by forces of each of the four Powers. An Inter-
Allied Governing Authority (in Russian ‘Kommandatura’)
consisting of four Commandants, appointed by their respec-
tive Commanders-in-Chief, will be established to direct
jointly its administration.”
The heads of the three Governments met again on 17th
July, this time at Potsdam, just outside Berlin.
President Truman was in Roosevelt’s place, and, as a
result of the British General Election, Mr. Attlee took over
from Mr. Churchill just before the conference ended on
2nd August.
The boundaries of the four zones had already been fixed.
Berlin was left as a Four-Power area though it was 120 miles
inside the Russian zone. It was divided into four sectors,
each occupied by one Power; but it was to be administered
as a single unit by the four.
At Potsdam, in addition, principles were laid down for
the reform of Germany “on a democratic and peaceful
basis.” For the time being no central German Government
was to be established and administration was to be decen-
tralised.
But, during the occupation Germany shall be treated
as a single economic unit.” Each C-in-C. was to be
supreme in his own zone, but would work jointly in “matters
affecting Geimany as a whole.” They were also to work out
“common policies on all economic questions.” Reparations
would be taken out of German capital but would “leave
enough resources to enable the German people to subsist
without external assistance.”
That agreement, the Potsdam Agreement, was signed on
2nd August, 1945.


Four days later the first atomic bomb was dropped on
Japan, and on 15th August the Far Eastern War, which Rus-
sia entered on Bth August, was also over.
Peace reigned at last over the whole world. At least,
the guns had stopped firing . . .
Discord Begins
In the rubble of Berlin the first notes of discord were
soon heard.
On 16th September, 1945, the American Military Gover-
nor stopped Soviet-controlled publications from entering his
territory because the Russians had already refused to accept
newspapers and magazines from the American Zone.
On 19th September the Soviet authorities charged that
VI and V 2 weapons were being made in the British Zone in
defiance of Potsdam. •
(The British invited Russian newspapermen to see for
themselves that the charges were untrue. There was no
reply to the invitation.)
About that time, too, Moscow broadcast its first accusa-
tion that Britain and America were trying to start a “West-
ern Bloc” against Russia.
The Russians in the meantime had begun to carry out
far-reaching economic changes in their own zone without
consulting their allies or attempting to work out “common
policies.”
Still, at that time there was no reason to suppose that
differences would not be cleared up by the first council of
Foreign Ministers in London in October.
The aim of the five Ministers (Britain, America, Russia,
France and China) was to prepare peace treaties with enemy
countries.
This first meeting produced deadlocks on the peace
treaties with the lesser enemy countries. The Western
Powers would not negotiate on Rumania and Bulgaria (now
within the Russian sphere) until representative governments
had been established there.
Mr. Molotov, for Russia, wished to exclude France from
taking part in making the Balkan treaties, and there was
complete disagreement on the question of Trieste. Break-
down seemed complete. Only the visit of Mr. Bevin and Mr.
Byrnes (then United States Secretary of State) to Moscow in
December got negotiations going again.


“Iron Curtain”
In October, 1945, Britain and America had told Russia
they regretted to hear she had made agreements with Hun-
gary and Rumania without consulting them.
Russia, they said, was flouting Potsdam. They called
for an explanation, but none was given.
About that time the phrase “the Iron Curtain” first
came into use. Newspapers in the West began to accuse
Russia of a plan to swallow all the countries of Eastern
Europe.
Moscow newspapers retorted with attacks on “Capitalist
Imperialism.” Moscow radio said that the reactionary in-
sistence on the preservation of the atomic bomb secret is
actuated by the desire to pursue power diplomacy ...”
Was the atomic bomb at the root of the trouble? To find
out, America said she was ready to have the problem of
atomic control thrashed out by the United Nations Organi-
sation.
The next sharp clash came at the first meeting of the
United Nations Security Council in January, 1946. British
and Russian troops, sent into Persia during the war, were
due to leave by 2nd March. Persia complained to the Coun-
cil that the Russians, in the districts they occupied, were
interfering in her internal affairs and encouraging rebel-
lion.
The British and Americans supported the Persian re-
quest for investigation.
The Russians refused. Unlike Britain, they did not
withdraw their troops by 2nd March.
26 Vetoes
Then they launched countercharges. They complained
to the Council about British actions in Syria, Greece, and
Indonesia.
This was the beginning of the East-West line-up in the
Security Council which has lasted ever since. Throughout,
the Russians have 26 times invoked the use of the “veto”
clause of the United Nations Charter which enables any one
Great Power to prevent the Council from taking any deci-
sion to which it objects.
During the summer of 1946, in the Council of Foreign
Ministers and in the Paris Conference for making peace
treaties with Hitler’s European satellites, there were more
deadlocks.


These treaties, at any rate, did get settled in the autumn
—almost the only real achievement of the period.
In June, 1946, the new Atomic Energy Commission of
UNO held its first meeting in New York.
America proposed the creation of an international
atomic development authority with power to control and
inspect all atomic activities anywhere in the world.
Russia suggested the destruction of all stocks of atomic
weapons then in existence and an agreement forbidding
their production for use.
She would not agree, however, that all atomic plant
everywhere should be opened to UNO inspection.
The present position of the Atomic Energy Commission
is still—stalemate.
Now, back to Germany. Failflre to get the economic
unity laid down at Potsdam had produced an impossible
situation in the West.
The British Zone was costing the British taxpayers
nearly £100,000,000 a year.
Mr. Bevin, in Paris in July, said bluntly that unless unity
was restored other steps would have to be taken.
Mr. Byrnes at once offered an economic fusion of the
British and American Zones. He offered to make a fusion of
all four zones.
The British immediately agreed to four-zone fusion. The
Russians refused. The French hestitated.
At this point Britain and America suggested a Four-
Power negotiation on the whole German question.
Russia refused.
“We Deplore”
In October Mr. Byrnes decided to broadcast a special
statement on the situation. “We deplore the tendency of
. e f ? oV 3, et U ? 10n to regard States friendly to us as unfriendly
to the Soviet Union,” he said. “We want to insist on Euro-
pean reconstruction because we believe European prosperity
will contribute to world prosperity and world peace That
is not dollardemocracy’.”
In me month - Mr. Attlee protested against the
veto~ USB ussia * n United Nations of the power of the


At the same time, the British Government sought to be
a link between Russia and America. But, despite its good
offices, the year ended with new disputes.
Russia accused America of seeking monopolies in the Far
East.
America accused Russia of secretly removing German
plant and workers to Russia in defiance of Potsdam.
America also viewed with alarm the way in which Rus-
sia was imposing undemocratic governments on the small
countries of Eastern Europe.
Except for Czechoslovakia, Russia had virtually ex-
tended her western boundaries half way across Europe. . . .
In hungry Germany the year 1947 began with the fusion,
for all economic purposes, of the British and American
Zones. •
The German winter was a bad one. Disease spread.
Epidemics were feared. In the Russian Zone, the Communist
controlled “Socialist Unity Party” was in charge of local
affairs as far as any Germans were in charge of anything. It
held meetings to blame the German plight on the Western
Powers.
In the Western Zone, on the other hand, the Democratic
parties were in the majority. The Social Demokrats had
voted four to one against merging with the Communists,
and they at their meetings expressed fear of Communist
intentions.
Most Germans, however, knew only that the Occupation
was in a mess. And perhaps they smiled a little—when they
were not too cold to smile—to see their ex-enemies quar-
elling.
Deadlock
Throughout 1947, the “Cold War” between East and West
—as an American commentator christened it—went on in
Germany and in international conference chambers.
March brought Russian protests at the new treaty be-
tween Britain and France. (“Not a Western bloc,” said Mr.
Bevin, after signing it at Dunkirk, “but an attempt towards
universal peace.”)
In April and May the Foreign Minister’s Conference in
Moscow at last really got down to discussing German prob-
lems. That was 20 months after Potsdam.


After two months talking, deadlock was still complete.
The Russians refused all the British and American pro-
posals for restoring economic unity.
In that sultry atmosphere Mr. Marshall, who had suc-
ceeded Mr. Byrnes as American Secretary of State, made an
historic speech on sth June at Harvard University.
Mr. Marshall said that the entire fabric of European
economy was dislocated. Europe could not possibly pay for
the food and manufactures which were vital to her recovery.
America with her vast riches stood ready to help. All
she asked was that the programme should be a joint one,
agreed to by a number of European nations, if not all; and
in a subsequent clarifying statement Mr. Marshall empha-
sised that by Europe he meant “everything West of Asia.”
That was the beginning of Marshall Aid, or the European
Recovery Programme as it is more properly called.
Discussing it at a Paris conference at the beginning of
July, Mr. Molotov said it would lead to American domination
of Europe.
But on 4th July the British and French Governments
sent invitations to 22 European countries to come and dis-
cuss Mr. Marshall’s offer in Paris on 12th July.
Sixteen countries accepted.
Six East European countries stayed away. Czechoslo-
vakia at first accepted, but then declined.
While a programme was being worked out in Paris, the
Moscow Press began a barrage against the Marshall Plan.
It would create in Germany “a military imperial base”
for America.
It was also “a plot to win over the Eastern European
States, particularly nations of the new democracy, from the
influence of the Soviet Union’s foreign policy.”
On 18th September, at the General Assembly of the
United Nations, Mr. Vyshinsky, the Russian spokesman, came
right out with an angry attack on “American capitalist
monopolists and warmongers.”
By that time, however, the Committee on European Co-
operation, as the 16 nations were called, had signed its re-
port in Paris and sent its first programme to Mr. Marshall.


The European Recovery Programme was passed by the
American Congress on 20th June, 1948. The sum of
£1,507,677,557 was voted for the reconstruction of countries
in Europe during the ensuring 15 months.
Before that, on 16th December, 1947, the Council of
Foreign Ministers concluded another fruitless meeting. More
than two years after the war’s end, the Great Powers had
failed to find any major agreement about the world’s ills.
In February of this year the democratic world was
shocked by the Communist coup in Czechoslovakia.
One day Czechoslovakia was a democratic nation as
British people understand the term. The next she had a
Communist-dominated Government without a preliminary
election—and Russia’s “sphere of influence” was solid from
Moscow to the Elbe.
Solid, that is, except for the British, French and Ameri-
can sectors in Berlin.
Almost immediately in Germany’s split capital a
jostling-match began.
In March Marshal Sokolovsky, the Russian Commander-
in-Chief, walked out of a meeting of the Allied Control
Council, declaring that Four-Power rule of Germany had
been made impossible.
Three days later the British, American and French
authorities said their spokesmen would attend no more
meetings of the Council until the situation was cleared up.
A week after that, they announced that they had later
agreed to attend a meeting, but the Russian element, as hosts
of the month, had refused to issue invitations.
It sounded rather silly—as if each side were standing
too much on its dignity. Actually, it was a sign that the
difference between the Powers had now reached crisis-
point.
The Blockade
On 30th March the Russian authorities told the other
Powers in Germany that from Ist April new regulations
would be enforced for railways traffic passing from Berlin,
through the Russian Zone, to the Western Zones.
New identity cards would have to be presented at
various check-points.


The British authorities pointed out that 24 hours’ notice
gave them no chance to make new arrangements.
They asked for fifteen days’ postponement.
The Americans insisted that Potsdam gave them “free
and unrestricted utilisation of established corridors.”
They, too, asked for discussion—and in the meantime
they said Russians would not be allowed to enter American
trains.
The next move was that Britain and America suspended
all passenger trains between their zones and Berlin, and in-
stituted special air services.
And the next was that Russian soldiers established a
post at a cross-roads just inside the British sector of Berlin.
They seized British vehicles and detained drivers.
The British closed the road around the post and de-
manded withdrawal of the intruders.
The Russians later withdrew.
Air Crash
Three days later a British passenger aircraft on the
regular air service to Berlin was in collision with a Russian
fighter over Gatow airport. All the occupants of both air-
craft were killed.
The joint inquiry into this crash broke down when Rus-
sian representatives insisted that only British and Russian
witnesses should be heard. No evidence from Germans, they
said, ought to be admitted.
So, with the world by now watching intently, the Cold
War went on.
By 6th May, with the passenger train problem still un-
solved, the Russians announced new regulations for freight
trains leaving Berlin for the West.
Until these could be brought into force, no further move-
ment of goods could be approved.
In short, something approaching a blockade of the West-
ern sectors of Berlin was already in existence.
On 28th May, Mr. Marshall, American Secretary of State,
appealed in a speech to the Russian Government “to aban-
don certain courses of conduct and action which have kept
the world in a state of uneasiness.”


If it did so, he said, it would produce an entirely new
atmosphere—and there would be no lack of response from
his Government.
Despite that approach, the Russian moves were con-
tinued.
On 4th June, three freight and mail trains were held up
by Russian officials at Marienborn, and five mail wagons
were detached because their labels were held to be incorrect.
On Bth June, the British authorities in Berlin,
apparently planning a small reprisal, asked the Russians “to
accelerate the vacation” of the Radio Berlin building, which,
though Russian-controlled, was in the British sector.
(The Russians refused, and are still there.)
All this time, the British and Americans had been
pleading for currency reforms that would rescue German
trade from the almost worthless Reichsmark.
Unable to get Russian consent to any economic agree-
ment, they had been planning to introduce new currency
into their own fused zones.
The scheme was ready by the beginning of June and
they went ahead with it.
The new currency was issued on 20th June in the West-
ern Zones. The old currency still circulated in the Russian
Zone. What was to be done about Berlin?
The Western Powers proposed that, by a Four-Power
Decree, the Russian Zone currency should be the money of
Berlin.
Marshal Sokolovsky replied by ordering, on his own
authority, that the Russian Zone currency should be the
only legal one throughout the whole city.
The Western Allies refused to admit his right to do this.
They introduced specially stamped notes of their own into
the Western sectors.
Walk-Out
Already, the Russians had brought Four-Power adminis-
tration of Berlin to an end by walking out of the Komman-
datura.
On 24th June, Marshal Sokolovsky stopped all road, rail
and canal traffic between Berlin and the Western Zones.
This completely prevented the sending by land of all
food, coal and other supplies from the Western Zones to the
capital. Only the air routes remained open.


Immediately the Western Powers began to fly supplies
to the blockaded city.
In the British House of Commons Mr. Bevin spoke on
the grave situation. “We shall not surrender,” he said.
In Berlin the three Western Military Governors met
Marshal Sokolovsky on the evening of 3rd July. He said
that the blockade would be lifted in the near future. Other-
wise the situation remained the same.
The Governments of Britain, America and France there-
fore sent almost identical Notes to the Government of Rus-
sia.
The British Note, published on 10th July, warned Mos-
cow in the strongest terms that the blockade was “a clear
violation of agreements” and had created “an extremely
serious international situation.”
It stressed that Britain was occupying her Berlin sector
as a legal right and would not be induced by threats, pres-
sure or other action to leave.
It said Britain was ready to take part in Four-Power
talks on Berlin—but only when the blockade was lifted.
What Next?
The Russian reply was received on the evening of 14th
July.
It “did not object” to Four-Power negotiations, but re-
fused “fulfilment of any preliminary conditions.”
It insisted that any negotiations should deal not only
with Berlin, but with all Germany. It also declared that the
Western Powers had undermined the legal basis of their
right to share in the administration of Berlin, and had made
“null and void” their right to share in its occupation.
Berlin, the Note declared, was part of the Soviet Zone.
All the supply difficulties had been caused by the actions of
the Western Powers.
And so the blockade went on; the great air lift went on,
and was increased.
On 20th July the five Foreign Ministers of the “Western
Union” Governments of Britain, France, Holland, Belgium
and Luxembourg discussed the increasingly serious situation
at the Hague.
Meanwhile General Clay has been to Washington.
On 26th July Mr. Bevin held a meeting at the Foreign
Office attended by the American Ambassadors in Moscow
and London.
And today ?
