

REPORT
ON THE
PHYSICAL CHARACTER AND RESOURCES
OF
GIPPSLAND.
1874.
VICTORIA.
BY THE
SURVEYOR-GENERAL AND THE SECRETARY FOR MINES.
WITH A MAP AND GEOLOGICAL SECTIONS.
MELBOURNE:
BY AUTHORITY: JOHN FERRES, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.




REPORT
ON THE
PHYSICAL CHARACTER AND RESOURCES
OF
GIPPSLAND.
ie -'jC
■vtcto:ri^4-
BY THE
SURVEYOR-GENERAL AND THE SECRETARY FOR MINES.
WITH A MAP AND GEOLOGICAL SECTIONS.
MELBOURNE:
BY AUTHORITY: JOHN FERRES, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.




REPORT.
TO THE HONORABLE J. J. CASEY, M.P., MINISTER OE LANDS
AND AGRICULTURE, ETC., ETC., ETC.
Melbourne, 10th February 1874.
Sir,
In obedience to your instructions we submit the results
of the observations made by us when we bad the honor
to accompany His Excellency Sir George Bowen, the
Governor of the Colony, and yourself in your tour through
Gippsland. In order to a proper understanding of the
statements which follow, it is necessary to give a brief
description of this part of the colony.
Gippsland extends from longitude 145° 50' on the west
to longitude 150° on the east. It is bounded on the west
by the eastern boundaries of the counties of Evelyn and
Mornington ; on the north and north-west by the Great
Dividing Range ; on the north-east by a line from Forest
Hill to Cape Howe, dividing Victoria from New South
Wales ; and on the south-east and south by the sea.
The area of the tract is 13,898 square miles, or
8,894,720 acres. It may be regarded as bounded on the
north-west and west by the Cordillera, and on the south-
east by the sea.
Its extreme length from west to east is two hundred
and fifty miles, and its mean breadth about eighty miles.
A 2


Excepting tlie La Trobe, which runs from west to east,
all the great rivers have excavated deep valleys at right-
angles to the coast-line. These rivers have their sources
in mountains and plateaux, which, over the greater part,
are covered with snow during nine months in the year ;
their tributaries are perennial streams, flowing over beds
of pebbles, boulders, and bars of hard rock, resembling
the trout streams of Scotland. Owing to the direction
of the great valleys being at right-angles to the coast-line,
the climate, even on the sea-coast, is generally cool and
agreeable ; and the moisture-laden winds, which have
uninterrupted course along the valleys, are cast upwards
into colder air when they encounter the Dividing Range,
and there precipitation is constant. Even in the height
of summer, snow lies for weeks in the deep recesses of
the mountains, and when it is melted the bright-green of
the sub-alpine flora marks the sites it has occupied.
Chains of hills and spurs, offshoots of the great range,
border the valleys, the culminating points of some of
which attain a height of 5300 feet. The highest indi-
cates, however, only the altitude of the great plain, for
the most part covered with newer volcanic rocks overlying
tertiary gravels, which once extended from Mount Useful
on the west to the Snowy River on the east. The rivers
fed by the snow and the rains have broken up this once
great plateau ; they have cut deeply into the hard rocks ;
they have carried downwards towards and into the sea
vast quantities of sand, mud, and slime, and the evi-
dences of their work are found in the low level tracts
of tertiary sands and clays which extend from the Moe
Swamp on the west to Ram Head on the east. Work
similar to that which they have done can be seen in any
wayside torrent. But because of the grandeur of the


sculpture in the mountain ranges, the mind is slow to
recognise them as the agents. The mind, untaught by
experience, would seek rather in unknown plutonic forces
the agents which reared the lofty peaks and ranges that
appear as irregular as the waves of the ocean in a storm
when beheld from a great height.
The loftiest mountain height is, however, no more than
a measure of the extent of the denudation to which the
plateau has been subjected within the tertiary period.
The spurs from the great ranges east of the southern
extension of the Cordillera disappear as we approach the
coast. There are no hills of any considerable height
within ten to fifteen miles of it.
Bordering the Ninety-mile Beach there are large lakes
in an extensive area of flat country. It is probable that
at one time, and when the land had not the same configu-
ration as now, each lake had its separate outlet to the sea.
At the present time Lake Wellington, Lake Victoria, and
Lake King, which may be regarded rather as the expan-
sion of rivers than true lakes, discharge their surplus
waters at a point fifty miles east of Lake Wellington.
Between the lakes and the sea there is a tract of sandy
country, varying in breadth from a few hundred yards to
one mile, the sea-margin of which shifts with the winds.
At the entrance to the sea this tract narrows to a single
line of sand-dunes, not more than two hundred yards
wide, and across the entrance there is a shifting bar.*
* As might he expected, the lakes are shallower than the larger rivers which
run into them.
When the bar at the entrance is closed—and it is sometimes closed during
heavy easterly gales—the water rises to a great height in the lakes, and the
country for a distance of one hundred miles back is flooded. It was the custom of
the settlers to cut through the bank when the flood had attained its maximum
height, and the rush of waters very quickly cleared a channel, through which
even large vessels could sail in. —Report of the late Mr. Dawson, Isi February 1855.


Along this coast, in great floods, sufficient to overcome the
stress of the storm-beaten sea, new mouths are opened, if
not in the lakes, certainly in the rivers. The Snowy
River has shifted its mouth many times. In periods of
flood it has again and again sought its old, direct, and
natural course to the sea ; but, during the prevalence of
south-westerly weather, there are heaped up sand and
weed against the natural mouth, and finally it disem-
bogues some seven miles from its proper outlet. It too
has a bar of sand at its mouth. The prevailing winds
have a tendency to shift the mouths of all the streams
towards the east.
The great height above the sea of a considerable por-
tion of Gippsland, the relatively large proportion of water
to land-surface, the form and direction of the great valleys,
and the dense foliage that clothes the upland slopes,
temper the heats of summer, and indirectly by their
agency confer fertility on soils that in other parts of Vic-
toria would be regarded as scarcely suitable for cultivation.
The great ranges on the north-west are not the only
barriers which separate Gippsland from the remainder of
the colony. The way by sea is uncertain, and in bad
weather insecure, because of the difficulty of effecting an
entrance into the lakes ; and the track from Melbourne
towards Sale is almost impracticable in winter. Where
the track crosses a patch of older volcanic rock a little
to the east of the Buneep the soils are deep, and in wet
weather almost prevent the passage of wheeled vehicles.
The spot is well known as the “ Glue-pot.”
And on entering Gippsland, if the traveller should seek
to explore the carbonaceous tract extending towards
Corner Inlet, or the summits of the ranges bordering the
principal rivers, he would find his course stopped by


scrubs and tliickets so dense that only a well-equipped
party would be able to advance a mile or two in the day.
Gippsland, indeed, since the foundation of the colony,
though in area nearly one-ninth of Victoria, has been
practically cut off from regular and ready communication
with the capital and with other parts of the Province ; the
character of its soils has not been made known, its re-
sources have been hidden, its climate has been but imper-
fectly investigated ; and the settler has been debarred
from entering it because of the difficulties of the road and
his want of knowledge of its adaptation for culture.
For a long period after the first entry of settlers into
Gippsland —which took place in 1838 —the only practica-
ble route for stock was south-westwards from New South
Wales*. The lofty ranges of the Cordillera were not
attempted by explorers for many years, and the now well-
known track from Melbourne to Sale was opened only
after many unsuccessful trials. Even at the present time
this immense and fertile tract is usually approached only
by three routes —that from Melbourne to Sale, that from
Maneroo in New South Wales, and that from Omeo to
Bairnsdale.
* Andrew Hutton, a man well known in Gippsland, travelled in 1838 from
Nangutta on the Genoa River to the entrance to the lakes with 500 head of cattle
and five men. They travelled along the coast, crossing the mouth of the Snowy
River. They stayed at the entrance about a week, the natives hunting the party
all the time, and finally driving them away and killing the cattle.
Some two years after McMillan came in from Omeo and Count Strzelecki
came down on McMillan’s tracks.
Wilkinson took up Buchan with 100 head of cattle immediately before McMillan
came down. About the same time Mclntyre took up Gelantipy, also before
McMillan arrived.
When Hutton was hunted away from the entrance, at the time of his first
arrival, he found the wreck of the schooner Shaw, trading from Sydney to Hobart
Town. He buried either four or five of the sailors. This was near the Wingan
River. —From information furnished to Alfred W. Howitt, Esq., P.M., by Andrew
Hutton, 17 th February 1874.


All the country to the north and west of Melbourne
has been explored ; it is easy to reach any part by coach
or rail; and from the official records in the offices of the
Public Departments one can readily gather information
relative to the rocks, soils, and mineral resources ; hut
Gippsland has been cut off from communication with the
seat of government, and comparatively little has been
published respecting its pastures, its mines, or its forests.
Mr. Alfred Howitt, in 1859-60, when he was the leader
of a prospecting party in search of new goldfields, com-
municated, in exhaustive reports, very many interesting
facts respecting the physical geography and geology of
the midland parts of Gippsland ; hut his labors were con-
fined to an examination of the auriferous tracts in the
basins of the Mitchell and the Dargo. Very little has
been published descriptive of those large areas where it
is probable settlers will select land ; and the facts we have
collected will he interesting to many who are desirous
of finding homes in a part of the colony where the
heats of summer are tempered by the cold air of the
mountains.
It is much to he regretted that so little is known of the
meteorology of Gippsland. A few observations have been
made at one or more of the points on the coast, hut no
information is obtainable respecting the climate of that
part of Gippsland bordering on the Great Dividing Range.
In that area there are rich soils, much of the land is well
grassed, and the enclosures which we saw under culti-
vation presented the most favorable aspects ; and it is
not creditable to the colony that vague and probably
incorrect statements respecting the fall of rain, the tem-
perature, and the occurrence of snow storms, cannot be
met by an appeal to accurate records of the weather.


It is our duty to recommend that no time be lost in
instituting a series of meteorological observations in Gipps-
land. Able and willing observers can be found in all the
towns and settlements: and, with a little zeal at the seat
of government, the work would proceed rapidly, and
many of the representations which might deter settlers
from occupying the higher lands, would, we are convinced,
be proved to be untrustworthy or exaggerated.
The route pursued by us may be thus briefly sketched:—
We left Melbourne at 8 a.m. on Thursday the 29th
January, and passing through Oakleigh, Dandenong,
Berwick, Pakenham, and Buneep, arrived at Shady Creek
on the evening of the same day.
At 6 a.m. on the 30th January we started from
Shady Creek on our way to Sale, following the main
road and visiting Westbury, Morwell, Traralgon, and
Rosedale.
Throughout this part of the journey the scenery was
in general tame and rather uninteresting. From Tra-
ralgon, however, we had a view of the Baw-baw Range,
which is indeed a splendid feature in the landscape. It
was not more than twenty-eight miles from us, but the
smoke of bush-fires and the state of the atmosphere
gave it the appearance of being far more distant, and con-
sequently to our view, from the station we occupied, loftier
than it is. Its height has not been measured, but we
should suppose it is not less than 4500 feet above the
level of the sea.
We reached Sale at 6 p.m. on the same day.
During Saturday the 31st January we examined some
of the more interesting features in the vicinity of Sale ;
and at 6.30 a.m. on Sunday the Ist February we went
on board the s.s. Avon , which conveyed us to Bairnsdale.


On our way we called at the Aboriginal Station on the
River Avon, where we saw eighty-five natives.
These are under the care of the Board for the Protection
of Aborigines, and their healthy and cheerful appearance,
their cleanliness, and the condition of the station as a
whole, which, with its pretty flower and fruit gardens, is
an oasis in this otherwise unoccupied district, made a
favorable impression on all the visitors. The Super-
intendent was very active in pointing out the improve-
ments which had been made ; and we are convinced that
the Board has in Mr. Hagenauer a most valuable officer.
The education of the natives is carefully watched by him ;
his assistants, we are sure, are earnest in their efforts to
improve and elevate the young, and to lead them in right
paths; and what we saw of the results of the children’s
skill in various employments leads us to hope that ere
long such establishments as this at Lake Wellington will
not be required. The natives as they grow up will be
employed by the whites, and they will carry to new
situations the discipline and self-control which such unsel-
fish laborers as Mr. Hagenauer are endeavoring to incul-
cate. We were much pleased with the general appearance
of this well-conducted establishment.
At 4 o’clock we arrived at Eagle Point, where we
stopped for a few minutes in order to get a view of the
mountains on the north.
Bairnsdale was reached at 5.30 p.m.
We spent the greater part of Monday the 2nd February
in examining the country around Bairnsdale. It is flat,
but not uninteresting, as there are here some geological
formations of the same character as those which occur
near Melbourne and at Geelong.
Here, and at every other place at which we stopped,


we sought information from the Government officials and
the local authorities respecting the character and capa-
bilities of the country.
Having made all necessary arrangements for our ride
over the mountains, we left Bairnsdale at 3 o’clock on
the 2nd February, and arrived at Tambo at 6 p.m.
Our horses were in good condition, and we determined
to make rather long journeys, in order that engagements
entered into before we left Melbourne might be fulfilled.
We started from Tambo at 7 a.m., and passing through
a district rich in soils and vegetation, reached Noeyang at
11.45 a.m. Some parts of the country from Noeyang to
Ensay are all that a settler could desire, and much of it
presents the appearance of being auriferous.
We arrived at Ensay at 6 p.m. on the 3rd February,
and left at 7.30 a.m. on the 4th February, reaching Bindi
on the same day at 1 o’clock p.m. At this point the
party divided —two following the course of the Tambo
for the purpose of making geological observations —and
the rest taking the ordinary track to Omeo Station.
We arrived at Omeo Station at 7 p.m. on the 4th
February, and left at 6 a.m. on the sth February, reach-
ing the township of Omeo at 10.45 a.m. We inspected
some of the gold-workings in this highly interesting
locality, and received much valuable information from the
President of the Shire Council, the Secretary of the shire,
and others, respecting the methods of mining for gold
as practised at Omeo. We remained for a short time
at the Dry Hill claim, for the purpose of seeing mining
operations as there conducted by the proprietor, Mr.
Fitzgerald.
All the way from Omeo to the Victoria River (Pars-
low’s Inn) the country is very interesting, and in many


parts beautiful. The rocks, the trees, and the grasses,
the contour of the lands, and the sharp contrasts as we
passed from the creek-eaten hills, with their steep slopes,
to the smoother unwatered tracts above, served to engage
attention as we rode from point to point, measuring on
the map as we went the miles of our progress.
Parslow’s Inn is situated on the banks of the Victoria
River. We arrived there at 7 p.m. The weather was
charming, and it was delightful to feel the cool breeze
that met us at this altitude after the fierce heat of the day,
and to carry with us as we rode the scent of clover, and of
flowering shrubs that here make the air heavy at times.
At 4 o’clock a.m„ on the 6th the sky above was clear,
the stars were bright and scintillating, but all around on
every side there was a mist, and along the river a thick
white shifting fog. Over a small waterfall, a short
distance above the inn, the white fog rose as the smoke
of a fire, straight upwards, and continued thus even after
sun-rise. When the white fog was driven away from the
river this smoke-like spire was seen high above the
waterfall. The frost during the night had been intense.
The ground and the roof of the house were white, and
we enjoyed at this early hour the crackling of logs and
boughs on the fire in our breakfast room.
Owing to the fog there was some delay in finding and
bringing the horses to the house, but we were in the
saddle by 6 a.m.
During the previous evening we obtained information
from Mr. Parslow respecting the several routes over the
mountains, and the facts we elicited left us in doubt as to
the possibility of traversing fifty miles over such country
as he described without the necessity of camping out.
Our intention to pass over Mount Feathertop was fixed,


and all suggestions respecting the advantages of a more
easy descent by way of Harrietville were put aside.
We considered well all that we learnt, and we finally
determined to attempt the journey as we had previously
mapped it out.
We made a very early start from Parslow’s Inn, and
those in advance arrived at a small plain—known as the
Flour-hag —at 8 a.m. From Parslow’s to the Flour-hag
there were some rough hills to ascend, hut on the whole
the journey was enjoyed by all. We dismounted and
rested on the plain for a short time, in the belief that the
members of the party behind would soon join us, but in
this we were disappointed. One of the pack-horses —a
horse that had carried His Excellency to Parslow’s—
and disdained any meaner employment —had bucked so
viciously as to scatter the contents of his pack on the
road, and we had to wait some time until the whole
of the party was brought into order. We left Flour-bag
Plain as soon as possible—sending the pack-horses in
front —and we now really commenced the most difficult
work that had yet presented itself. The “ pinches ”so
called are very steep —and some of the heavy horsemen
were unable to decide whether the inconveniences of the
ascent or the descent were most annoying. In some places
the track was strewn with loose fragments of rocks, it
zig-zagged through masses of tangled scrub, and seemed
now and again to be lost altogether —and to descend
towards a point a thousand feet or more below. But
willing horses and patient riders are not deterred by such
difficulties. Good progress was made. At every point
where it was possible to proceed rapidly we put our
horses to their mettle ; and in a short time we left the
steep rocks and the crooked gums behind us, and found a


sideling road winding around the mountains, on the
higher side of which there grow shrubs and flowers, and
on the lower side steeps whose bases the eye could not
penetrate —so far were they below us.
As we made the ascent towards Mount Hotham our
attention was attracted at first by the rocks and the
vegetation. We glanced now and again at the near and
distant heights only to return to the examination of the
strata, which are here well exposed by a sideling cutting
along the slopes of the range.
The track beyond, which appeared in the distance as a
yellow streak on the side of the mountain, was far above
us, and we could only conjecture by what route it was to
be reached. One after another of our fellow-travellers
called out the names of well-known peaks as they ap-
peared in view, and we made hurried guesses respecting
the depth and trend of the ravines whose lower parts
were lost to sight. On the right appeared a mountain
rich in bossy sculptures that attracted all eyes. It glowed
in the sun with all the brightness of the emerald, and
over it—as it seemed like waves—flashed ever and anon
pale tints of carmine and purple. In hollows on its flanks
lay in patches herbage of a vivid green, showing where
the snow had just disappeared—cradles of young glaciers,
that can never mature. The high Bogong plains, sepa-
rated from us by deep chasms and wide valleys, out of
which arose solitary peaks and broken ridges, seemed, as
we gazed on them, to be sleeping ; the slopes were scored,
but not deeply, the even line of the plain was not broken,
and the light of the sun fell on them softly, not making
deep shadows and showing sharp contrasts as in those
parts where the denuding forces had worked fantastic
hollows and carved long straight lines for the discharge
of melted snows.


The Bogong plains were sleeping in the thin folds of
pearl-grey and pale-purple mists that encompassed them ;
and these mists hid from us Mount Kosciusko, Forest
Hill, the Pilot, and the lofty ranges lying to the east-
ward. Towards the south, Tabletop, with his capping
of volcanic rock, stood in the centre of an amphitheatre,
and Mount St. Bernard and the Twins showed their peaks
on the west. Rising to a greater height we beheld, on
the north and north-east, all the lofty eminences whose
springs feed the Murray, and we stopped here satisfied
that nature could afford no grander spectacle. We
took note of the character of the slopes, in many places
precipitous, and falling in an even line three thousand
feet into the stream-beds below. We observed the limits
where the timber ceases to grow and where the shrubs
give place to the snow-grasses. We examined through a
field-glass the slopes on the mountains surrounding Table-
top, where appeared to the naked eye huge land-slips.
These were volcanic cappings that had slid down the
mountain, and—black and bare—they contrasted the rich
colors of the adjacent parts unpleasantly. They reminded
one of the works of man, which are rarely so guided as
to add to the beauties of Nature.
We soon left the track and began to ascend a rounded
smooth height, where beneath our feet there were small
detached pieces of hard sandstone and slate, with snow-
grasses growing up between. Before us appeared a small
cairn or pyramid of stones —we reached it and knew it
to be the summit of Mount Hotham. From this height
even those familiar with the country expressed astonish-
ment at the grandeur of the spectacle. The magnificent
mountains, whose crests seemed to lift themselves as we
ascended, appeared from this point, tier upon tier, far into


the blue distance. The deep gorges, almost lost in haze,
as we gazed downwards, showed, through the haze, some-
thing of their gloomy recesses. Then came the thought
that no mighty convulsions raised these monuments ; and
the mind pained itself in contemplating the vast periods
of time through which the aqueous agencies, the rain and
the snow and the streams, had been at work in excavating
the deep hollows, and carving the buttresses of the
great hills. Yonder tiny rivulet, having its source in
a spot which is usually white with snow, has cut that
deep gorge, the spring at this point has worked a huge
channel, and the running streams far below have broken
through great masses of rock and shaped the mountains
in the forms we see them.
The once vast plateau, which, during a late geological
period, was slowly upraised from the sea to a height
exceeding the altitude of any of the existing peaks, has
not been violently torn by plutonic forces, but has yielded
gradually to the influences of the weather, and has been
slowly broken up by the rains and the brooks.
The narrow ridge extending from Mount Hotham to
the western spur of Mount Feathertop was easily traversed
by our well-conditioned horses ; the day was bright, the
ground was dry, and we did not hesitate to proceed even
briskly in places that in bad weather a timid horseman
would not venture to approach. This ridge, indeed, is
quite narrow enough and dangerous enough to try the
nerves of even experienced travellers. In ascending it
we were astonished at the effects of denudation in one
place. A small peak in front of us, over the eastern slope
of which we passed, presented on the western side what
might be called a fracture—a fracture as sharp and as
jagged as that of a piece of broken porcelain. We


passed over these lofty mountains in good weather —the
sun was shining, and the snows that had lately covered
the gulches had disappeared. In had weather, in mist
and rain, it is a dangerous pass. We have heard from
many of the perils of the ascent. The sleet and hail
sometimes blind the traveller, and he is lost if he fail to keep
the narrow track. In winter, when snow falls, the drifts
extend across the track—not parallel to it —and without
care the traveller would touch a sideling and roll into a
deep gorge.
The atmospheric effects during fog are, as described
to ns, altogether different from those observed in the
Hartz Mountains, but as weird and eldrich. A man
at a little distance is magnified, and he walks a giant.
His horse is no longer a horse, hut a huge creature of
pre-adamite times. The shrubs are distorted and appear
“As strange phantoms rising as the mists arise.”
The peaks seem to shift their places, the path itself is
apparently possessed of motion, and without an expe-
rienced guide and a fair share of courage the stranger
might wander here helplessly until lost in the intricacy
of the ranges.
On one of the slopes as we passed we found the skeletons
of horses that had perished in the snows.
Not only in winter, hut in all seasons of the year, these
lofty heights are liable to he enveloped in mist, to he
drenched with rains, or covered with a fair mantle of
white snow.
We were fortunate in making the ascent when the
weather was charming. The icy air that cooled our
cheeks was delightful. We remembered, however, that
B


it might precede a change in the weather, which would
altogether alter our plans for the journey.
We rested for about an hour at the Springs—the source
of the Kiewa River—named by His Excellency, at your
request, the Diamantina Springs—and thence pursued
our journey to Bright, where we arrived at 7 p.m. on
Friday the 6th February. '
From Bright we proceeded by coach to Beechworth,
thence to Cliiltern where we found a special train in
waiting for us, and reached Melbourne 10.30 p.m. on the
Bth February.
Soils, Timbee, etc.
Our route from Melbourne through Oakleigh, Dande-
nong, Berwick, and thence onwards to Mount Ararat, was
wholly through alienated lands. The road is good, and
we travelled rapidly; but, even with sufficient leisure, we
could have made few observations respecting the soils and
timber of this area that would interest the public. From
Mount Ararat to the Buneep (close to the junction of that
river with the Tarwin), a distance of nine miles, was over
a granite country, Cannibal Hill, a well-known granite
peak, showing rather boldly on the north. We observed
in this part much spear-grass and swamp-hop, with fair
splitting timber—peppermint and messmate on the ridges
and small worthless trees on the flats. From Buneep,
after crossing the river of that name, for a distance of
three miles and a half along the Tarwin flats, the country
is thickly timbered with peppermint, messmate, a few
flooded-gums, and lightwood trees, with much scrubby
undergrowth in parts. These flats are liable to inunda-
tion, but they would yield good crops. From the flats
we commenced the ascent towards the older volcanic


rocks of Brandy Creek. For three miles and a half the
same kinds of timber were seen, blit the soil, perhaps, is
not so good, and the grasses are rather thin.
Throughout this part of the route the view is circum-
scribed.
For a distance of eight miles from the part just de-
scribed the road over the rich chocolate soil showed
marks everywhere of difficulties met and overcome by
travellers in wet weather —holes where wheels had been
buried to the axle, and deep ruts partly filled with dust.
The area of the tract occupied by older volcanic rocks in
this locality is 53,760 acres. It extends as far north as
to embrace the old fern-tree gullies, and southwards to
McDonald’s track, including the heads of the Moe and
Lang-lang rivers. It is a jungle in which the traveller
can make new tracks only with axe and bill-hook. The
timber chiefly noted by us was white-gum on the ridges,
and blackbutt (in other localities called mountain ash)
with fine fern-trees in the gullies. The scrub Seemed to
be principally hazel, musk, wattle, and dogwood.
The extraordinary richness of the vegetation in this
area caused us to make application to the Government
Botanist for information respecting the more prominent
trees and shrubs which completely cover these rich soils,
and, excluding the smaller plants, amongst which are
some rare genera and species. The list is as follows: —
Larger trees. —Called vernacularly “ Whitegum-trees.” Eucalyp-
tus coriacea, E. amygdalina (var. regnans), E. Stuartiana.
“ Bluegum-tree.” Eucalyptus globulus.
« Spotted gum-tree.” Eucalyptus goniocalyx (sometimes passing as
Bluegum-tree.)
“ Redgum-tree.” Eucalyptus rostrata, also more rarely E. tereti-
cornis.
B 2


“ Stringybark-trees.” Eucalyptus obliqua, E. macrorrliyncha, the
latter also sometimes passing as an “ Ironbark-tree.”
u Blackbutt-tree.” Eucalyptus pilularis.
“ Boxgum-trees.” Eucalyptus melliodora, E. viminea, and occasionally
one with broader and grey foliage, E. polyanthemos.
“ Blackwood.” Acacia melanoxylon.
“ Wattles.” Acacia decurrens in various foi’ms.
“ Sassafras.” Atherosperma moschatum (in the deepest gullies only,
with also the following trees, which are not very large), Pittosporum
bicolor, P. undulatum, Persoonia arborea, Pomaderris apetala, P. elliptica,
Zieria Smithii, Hedycarya Cunninghami.
Shrubs of tall size or sometimes small trees : Drimys aromatica
(Pepper-tree), Exocarpus strieta (Native Cherry, usually with pale
purple fruit), Prostanthera lasianthos (Mint-tree), P. rotundifolia, Hy-
menanthera Banksii (Violet-tree), ICunzea peduncularis (tall Weeping
Myrtle), Callistemon salignus (Bottlebrush), Viminaria denudata, Acacia
suaveolens, A. linearis, A. vernicifiua, Coprosma microphylla, Banksia
Cunninghami (Orange Honeysuckle), Grevillea Barklyana (our largest-
leaved species and confined to the deep ravines of West Gippsland),
Correa Lawrenciana forming with Goodenia ovata, Daviesia latifolia
(the so-called Native Hop), Acacia verticillata, Helichrysum ferrugi-
neum, Melaleuca squarrosa, Leptospermum juniperinum, L. lanigerum,
Veronica Derwentia, Rubus parvifolius (the native Raspberry), Bauera
rubioides, Aster stellulatus, and some others in many places a large part
of the dense underwood more or less entwined by Ehrharta tenacissima
(the climbing grass), Caulinia monophylla, Clematis aristata, Lyonsia
straminea, Billardiera scandens, B. longiflora, Tecoma australis, Cassytlia
melantha. Myrsine variabilis, Panax sambucifolius, and Notelasa ligus-
trina (the native olive) grow also into small trees, so also Aster argo-
phyllus (the Musk Aster), Senecio Bedfordi (Duke of Bedford’s tree).
The Beech-tree, Fagus Cunninghami, occurs mostly in the higher
valleys.
Heaths to be met with in these gullies : Sprengelia incarnata,
Styphelia ericoides, S. lanceolata, Epacris lanuginosa, E. obtusifolia,
E. microphylla. Miscellaneous noteworthy plants from the gullies :
Sambucus Gaudichaudi (native Elder), Casuarina distyla (the dwarf
shrubby She-oak), Pimelea axiflora, P. ligustrina, P. pauciflora, Teu-
crium corymbosum, Fieldia australis (parasitical on the fern trees),
Myosotis suaveolens, Cynoglossum latifolium, Veronica notabilis, Hy


drocotyle geranifolia, Solanum aviculare (the poisonous Gunyang or
Kangaroo-Apple), S. vescum (the edible Gunyang), S. armatum (the
Prickly Nightshade), Mentha laxiflora (Native Mint).
Among Grasses one is especially worthy of record : Festuca dives,
which is limited to Victoria, and found only in gullies like these, but
rising to twelve feet and more in height. •
Remarkable rushes and allied plants : Carex fascicularis, Lepido-
sperma elatius, Cyperus venustus, Gahnia erythrocarpa (very tall, with
brilliant red fruits), Dianella Tasmanica, Restio tetraphyllus, Calostro-
phus lateriflorus.
Great leafless Orchid: Dipodium punctatum.
Native Iris : Diplarrhena Morasa.
Ferns: Dicksonia antarctica (stout fern-tree), Alsophila australis
(tall fern-tree), Todea Africana (square fern-tree), Polypodium pustula-
tum, P. rugosulum, P. australe, P. grammitidis, Aspidium coriaceum, A.
decompositum, Asplenium flaccidum, Doodia caudata, Blechnum cartila-
gineum, Lomaria Patersoni, L. fluviatilis, L. lanceolata, Pteris incisa, P.
comans, Davallia dubia, Trichomanes venosum, Hymenophyllum Tun-
bridgense, H. demissum, Gleichenia flabellata, G. circiunata, G. dicarpa,
Tmesipteris Tannensis.
When cleared of timber and brought into cultivation
the whole of these lands will he highly productive. It
would not he difficult nor costly to irrigate some portions;
and, with ready communication with the markets of Mel-
bourne, which the railway about to he constructed will
afford, this and other systems of cultivation, requiring the
expenditure of capital as well as labor, will, no doubt, he
adopted.
In these soils is found a large earthworm, similar to
that discovered near Turton’s Creek. Mr. McCoy in-
forms us that the name of this gigantic worm —often seen
as long as four feet, and thick in proportion—is Megas-
colex Australis (McCoy). The only other known species
of the genus has been found in liot-houses in England—
supposed to have been brought in earth about the roots


of plants from the Cape of Good Hope, or from Ceylon
or India. These were described by the late Dr. Baird.
Our species is distinct, and is remarkable in having a
peculiar smell like tar.
From the eastern boundary of the Brandy Creek lands
to Shady Creek —four miles—we found rather thin loamy
soils, with a sparse growth of wire-grass, the timber being
principally stunted peppermint and messmate.
Crossing Shady Creek and ascending the spur towards
Shady Creek Hotel, and thence thirteen miles to the Moe
at Westbury, we saw no grass fit for stock. The timber is
messmate and peppermint, of no value for conversion.
The road for this distance crosses the heads of numerous
small creeks and gullies, falling into the Biver La Trobe,
which lies on the left at a distance of a mile or a mile and
a half.
At the Moe Swamp we found growing on the flats
small patches of good gum and lightwood. At the point
where the road crosses the neck of the Moe Swamp a
bridge is being erected, which, when completed, will
greatly lessen the difficulties of this part of the road.
From Westbury, after crossing the Narracan Creek
and the Shady Creek, and passing over the Haunted Hill,
we reached the Morwell River at Morwell. In this tract,
and that thence to the boundary of the surveyed lands in
the parish of Traralgon, we noted soils of the like kind
to those immediately west of the Moe, supporting not very
good grass, and trees chiefly of the messmate and pepper-
mint kind.
Two miles to the south of the main road at Morwell,
and on the east bank of the river, settlement to a con-
siderable extent has taken place, but with what results as
regards cultivation we could not ascertain.


The route from this point to Rosedale and thence to
Sale is not of an interesting character.
All the lands from Traralgon to Rosedale have been
taken up, and from Rosedale to Sale the road is bounded
on each side by lands purchased from the Crown.
The River La Trobe, from Traralgon to Lake Wellington,
is bordered by extensive morasses, varying in width from
half a mile to two miles, the aggregate area of which, up
to the junction of the La Trobe and Thomson, cannot be
less than 26,240 acres. These morasses are still in the
possession of the Crown. Though they could be drained,
so as in ordinary seasons to be valuable as pasture lands,
they could not be cultivated with the certainty that the
crops would be reaped. They are in all seasons liable to
inundation.
In what manner such lands should be dealt with has
from time to time engaged the attention of the Govern-
ment ; and in October 1865 a board was appointed to
examine and report on these and other swamps in the
colony, with the view of ascertaining how far and in what
way they could be made productive.
From Sale to the River Avon, both on the north and
the south, all the land has been alienated.
The soils of the tract lying between the La Trobe and
the Avon, and those on the borders of the Macallister
and Thomson, for a distance of sixteen miles from the
point at which they fall into the La Trobe, are rich as
compared with the soils covering rocks of the same age
on the east and the west. This is due mainly to the
character of the rocks whence the detritus and debris
forming the soils have been derived, but in some measure
also to the form of the basins of those rivers in their
lower parts. Vast quantities of mud were spread over


those parts which in past times were again and again
inundated.
The La Trobe and its tributaries and the Avon drain a
large extent of* country, and at one period their waters
must have overspread the country for some considerable
distance above Lake Wellington.
The country between Stratford on the Avon and
Bairnsdale on the Mitchell consists of sandy ridges run-
ning S.S.E. to N.N.W., with stringy-bark on the ridges
and scrubby gums in the hollows. The soils are for the
most part inferior with the exception of a strip, some
sixteen miles in length and five miles in width, bordering
the lower course of the Mitchell, which is good land ; but
all this has been alienated.
From the junction of the La Trobe and the Thomson to
Lake Wellington, a distance of nine miles, the river is
fringed with a narrow belt of timber, reduced in places to
single trees, standing some little distance apart, and has on
each side a morass of an average width of a mile. The
depth of the water in the river varies from fifteen to
eighteen feet. This part of the La Trobe is not beautiful,
but the rather dull green of the bordering morass con-
trasting the occasional patches of rich foliage on the
banks ; the flags and some flowering plants on the margin
of the river, and the strong lights let fall suddenly where
sharp bends, presented forms and colors not
altogether unpleasing.
Where the river extends its delta into Lake Wellington
the water is shallow, and the steamer left a well marked
streak of mud-colored water behind it for some distance
after we entered the lake.
The lake itself is shallow, there being not more than
ten or twelve feet of water in the course pursued by us.


From the mouth of the La Trobe to the mouth of the
Avon the distance across the lake is six miles. The
outline of a low scrub-covered shore, and the still, rather
muddy waters of the lake offered no subjects for investi-
gation ; the distance was hid from us by haze, and it was
with a feeling of satisfaction that we entered the mouth of
the Avon.
Following the course of this river for nearly three
miles, through waters bright and clear, a contrast to the
waters of the lake, we landed on the left side of the river,
on a low bank, and proceeded to the Aboriginal Station.
Here we found good land. On the south-west lay the
Clyde Bank morass, as yet unimproved for all useful
purposes. This tract, about 5120 acres in extent, is, like
the morasses bordering on the La Trobe, still in the posses-
sion of the Crown.
Returning to the mouth of the Avon, we made a
straight course for nine miles to Maclennan’s Straits. On
the northern shores of the lake we saw but low scrub and
an uninteresting outline, and on the south side, dimly, a
low fringe of tea-tree. Maclennan’s Straits are about six
miles in length, and in breadth three chains. Large tea-
trees and lightwoods stand close down to the water, their
rich green foliage overhanging it, and at each bend
making pictures so full of delicacy and beauty that we
regretted each one as it was passed only to wonder the
more at the rare excellence of the coloring of those that
succeeded it. The grace of outline and the contrast of
colors in the foliage bordering these straits, the altered
forms of the shrubs, and the softened colors in those parts
where the waters reflected the foliage, struck each observer
with astonishment and admiration.


The waters of Lake Wellington are fresh, those of
Maclennan’s Straits brackish in the upper part, and salt
near Lake Victoria. In ordinary seasons the tide makes
into Lake Victoria as far as the straits.
Though the waters of Lake Victoria are salt, we ob-
served that they were discolored.
Our course, for a distance of eighteen miles, from
Maclennan’s Straits to McMillan’s Straits, which separate
Raymond Island from the main land, was nearly in a
straight line. The low shores of Lake Victoria, and the
great extent of smooth muddy water would have been
well relieved by the mountain masses on the north and
north-east, if the day had been clear; but the smoke of
bush-fires and the thin vapours that overhung the horizon,
almost entirely concealed these remarkable features. We
caught glimpses, now and then, of lofty pale grey peaks
whose names we could make out from the descriptions of
our companions and by reference to the maps; but the
exquisite views which are obtained from the lake in clear
weather were hidden from us.
In passing through McMillan’s Straits, we saw on
Raymond Island a patch of land, some twelve or fourteen
feet above the general level, with a sparse covering of
crooked and weather-beaten white-gums. The straits are
bordered with stunted timber ; the shores are scrubby
and low, and the aspect is uninteresting.
On leaving McMillan’s Straits, we directed our course
towards the entrance of the lakes, but when we were
informed that an inspection of the works at the entrance
would cause us to lose a day, and that on this day we
would find no one to show us the works in progress, we
reluctantly returned on our path and made for the mouth
of the Mitchell. The distance from the eastern end of


McMillan’s Straits to the mouth of the Mitchell is about
three miles. Following up the Mitchell for four miles,
w e arrived at a bluff known as Eagle Point, where we
landed in order to make barometrical observations, to
examine the strata, and to obtain, if possible, a view of
the mountains.
From Eagle Point to Bairnsdale the distance is six
miles. The river varies in width from two chains and a
half to three chains, and the water is clear and bright.
At Bairnsdale we landed on the same rocks that border
the lakes on the west, north, and east. On the south the
waters of the lakes are separated from the sea by low
mud flats and sand-dunes, that are not, however, altogether
unproductive, and in some parts present features far from
uninteresting. At the entrance to the lakes some lands
are occupied, principally, as we were informed, for marine
residences. #
The Gippsland lakes, as geographical features, are full
of interest. Occupying extensive but shallow depressions
in the great extent of level tertiary country which has its
limits on the north as far as Kangaroo Creek, a tributary
of the Biver Mitchell, on the west in the tributaries of the
La Trobe, and on the east, at Bam Head, these waters may
be regarded as similar to the pools that are left in the
sands° when the tide has receded. The laws which
govern the flux and re-flux of tides do not, however,
govern these. The waters have not diminished nor
drawn back. The land has risen, and because of the rise
of the land there are phenomena presented which the
geologist may study with advantage.
The lakes are being gradually filled with mud and
sediment ; and every year, with the advance of settlement,
the work of filling up will proceed more rapidly.


According to an estimate we have made, the area oi
tlie lakes is 143 square miles ; and the area embraced
by the rivers and creeks draining into them 6059 square
miles. In the summer season, or in seasons in any part
of the year when there are no great floods, the work
done by the rivers in conveying sediment into the lakes
is inconsiderable, but in winter weather, or in any season
when the rivers run bank high, great quantities of mud
and silt are cast into the lakes.
Very remarkable changes have been made in Lake
King. The Mitchell discharges its waters into this lake;
and at one time the embouchure was about fifteen chains
below the punt at Bairnsdale. At the present time the
delta of the Mitchell may be said to commence there.
The course of the river from that spot is nearly parallel to
what must have been at one time the western shore of
the lake, and the delta, or the river with its levee, is
altogether ten miles in length.
From Bairnsdale to Eagle Point the course of the
delta is south; thence it is north-east or towards the
mouth of the River Nicholson, which also falls into Lake
King. When the delta shall have reached a point within
the influence of the storm-waters brought down by the
Nicholson, a bar will be formed and the Mitchell will
make an outlet towards the east. This will in time
separate Jones’s Bay from Lake King, and entirely alter
the features which are now presented.
Another large river, the Tambo, is rapidly forming a
delta in a direction towards Raymond Island, and thus, in
time, there will be four separate lakes where there is now
but one.
The work the rivers are doing is accelerated by the
making of roads and drains, the ploughing of fields,


and by the tracks formed on the hill sides by cattle,
all of which form ready channels for water in times of
storm.
The width of the levee of the River Mitchell at its
mouth is about five chains ; the width increases as you
proceed up the river, and in some places it is as much as
fifteen chains (seven chains and a half on each side).
From Eagle Point to Bairnsdale the river is bordered
on the west by a morass which is separated from it only
by a narrow bank, and on the east by a mound of rich
soil which forms also the western shore of Jones’s Bay.
In none of the rivers or straits was any current percep-
tible. We have had of late, not a drought, but much dry
weather. For several months preceding our visit the fall
of rain was inconsiderable, and the rivers were not dis-
charging as much water as they do generally in the
month of February.
The quantity of water which the rivers—their feeders—
would pour into the lakes, during ordinary weather in
the months of November, December, January, and Feb-
ruary, is, according to estimates formed by us on data
obtained by the late Mr. Dawson, 16,132,500,000 cubic
feet, representing a depth of four feet and half an inch
over the superficial area of the lakes ; and in these
months the quantity of water evaporated would be cer-
tainly not less than 10,959,149,188 cubic feet.
These figures show that if the rivers had been dis-
charging the usual quantities of water they would have
presented a different appearance at the time when we
visited them ; and the lakes, also, would have been unlike
what we saw.
It is, however, not in ordinary seasons, but when bad
weather and floods prevail, that great alterations are


effected at the mouths of the rivers and in the beds of
the lakes.
We regret that we had no opportunity of examining
minutely and carefully all the features presented in the
beds and on the shores of these lakes. A chart showing
the channels in the lakes, the mud and sandbanks which
are constantly shifting, and the outline of the shores,
which are also liable to change, would be of the highest
interest to the geologist, and useful, too, to the navi-
gator.
Along the shores of Lake King there were many plants
growing that were new to us, and it is here the Govern-
ment Botanist found some fine trees of Acronychia, a
genus known in Eastern Australia and New Caledonia,
and remarkable for its splendid wood and the aromatic
property common to this species.
Now that Gippsland is likely in reality to become a
part of Victoria, and not, as heretofore, an almost unknown
territory, and only in some sense related to it, we would
suggest that a careful survey he made of the lakes and
the morasses which lie adjacent to them, and that steps
be taken to reclaim, if practicable, some of the thousands
of acres of rich lands that are now liable to inundation.
The work of the survey of this tract should not be
restricted to the laying down on plans of metes and
bounds ; it should be undertaken by an engineer, assisted
by a geologist, and the objects should be the reclamation
of the waste lands, the improvement of the channels and
river courses, and the investigation of the forces now in
operation which are gradually but surely altering the
physical structure of the Lake country.
Such an enquiry would not be costly, and the results
would be of incalculable value.


From Bairnsdale to Sarsfield, and thence to Tambo, we
noticed some good country, in places well grassed and
with good soils. The timber is chiefly stringy-bark,
white-gum (ordinary Yarra or river gum), and some
honeysuckle and wattle. The whole of the timber in this
area is moderately well grown, indicative of soils that
would repay cultivation.
From Tambo to Ramrod Creek we noted a prevalence
of red-gum, apple-tree, stringy-bark, and a few iron-bark
trees (here misnamed mountain ash). At Ramrod Creek
there appeared, as well as those named, some peppermint
and white-gums.
There are some small plots under cultivation in the
valley.
On the Little Dick Range the timber is chiefly iron-
bark and stringy-bark, with white-gum in the gullies.
At Monkey Creek the forest is thick, consisting of iron-
bark, stringy-bark, white-gum, &c., with a plant wide-
spread, known as native tobacco, the odour of which is
very unpleasant. Here we noticed a beautiful climbing
plant (Kennedya rubicunda) which had twisted itself
around the small saplings. It has a flower of a brick-red
color.
On the track from Monkey Creek to Shady Creek we
saw large white-gums in the gullies, a species of apple-tree,
and some stringy-bark, and on the summit a good deal of
stringy-bark.
Numerous large wattle-trees appeared in places, with
a rather dense undergrowth of shrubs, the mint-tree,
weenth-kalk-kalk (Prostanthera lasianthos), of which the
natives make fire-sticks, being conspicuous amongst
them. We noted here also a golden wattle with a foliage
that, at a little distance, appeared of a slate color. It


very agreeably contrasted the olive green of the other
trees.
From Shady Creek to Noeyang the forest presented
the same general character until we approached the
summit of the range. Within the granite tract the
timber is smaller, and there appeared to be a larger pro-
portion of box-trees, apple-trees, and white-gums.
From Noeyang to Navigation Creek we noted a preva-
lence of stringy-bark on the summit level, thence ascending
the bed of that stream, to the foot of the Fainting Range,
apple-tree and box on the slopes, with white-gum and
peppermint in the narrow flats. The stringy-bark is found
mostly on the southern slopes. It seems here to seek a
place away from the direct influence of the solar rays.
Ascending the Fainting Range we observed a good deal
of iron-bark with some apple-trees and box—the stringy-
bark being rather thinly distributed. On these, the
southern slopes of the range, the trees are larger, and the
undergrowth of shrubs dense. From a sideling on leaving
Navigation Creek, we saw some well-grown wattle-trees,
reminding us of those which lend so much attraction to
parts of the Yarra beyond Coranderrk.
After passing the summit of Fainting Range the trees
are small, principally stringy-bark ; thence to Sandy
Creek the forest is open, almost parklike in places, with
much apple-tree, box, and mountain white-gum, Euca-
lyptus phlebopliylla (different altogether from the Yarra
gum), and with large white-guins in the flats. The
country is well grassed and very suitable for dairying
purposes.
Onwards towards Reedy Flat the mountain white-gum
prevails, with much yellow-box, apple-tree, and common
box. The gum saplings are here a prominent feature.


Asa rule the stringy-bark and iron-bark grow most
luxuriantly on the southern slopes of these ranges : where
at all exposed to the sun the trees are smaller, and they
are seen hut rarely in situations exposed to its full glare.
The forest from Reedy Flat to Ensay is composed
almost entirely of apple-tree, box, and white-gum, stringy-
bark appearing sparsely on the southern slopes.
All around Ensay we saw beautifully rounded hills,
richly clad with grass that in the evening sun appeared of
a brilliant sap-green and emerald-green color. The
white-gums in the flats (which here take the place of the
red-gum of the lower country) with their olive-green
foliage, the rich colors of the well-grassed hills behind
them, and the alternations of the colors due to the effects
of light and shade, made pictures at every point which
were delightful.
All the way from Tambo to Ensay we noted an improve-
ment in the character of the country ; the grass was
greener, the foliage of the trees was brighter, and the
streams murmured and sparkled in their beds as we drew
nigher to their sources.
There appears to be a very large extent of country in
the neighborhood of Ensay which should offer great
attractions for settlers, who could combine the rearing of
stock with the cultivation of the land.
From Ensay to the point where the road crosses the
River Tambo the country is good. The forest is com-
paratively thin, and is composed of box-trees, with apple-
trees principally on the northern slopes of the ranges, and
stringy-bark on the southern slopes. Binncih (wliite-
gum) and a few yellow-box trees were seen on the flats
and low down on the slopes. A few she-oaks appeared
on the hills, and many very beautiful cherry-trees.
c


All through this district we observed that the hill box-
tree grew principally on the slopes, and that the white-
gums were always taller and smaller in diameter on the
flats than on the slopes.
In the river marshes and morasses near Tongio, we saw
on the borders a purple flower whose beauty and lux-
uriance were attractive in a place where bright colors are
uncommon.
The Government Botanist informs us that it is known
as Lytlirum salicaria.
Up to the boundary of the limestone, box and apple-
trees were numerous, but this tract as a whole is lightly
timbered.
On the limestone hills around Bindi station there is no
timber. The summits of the hills are quite hare of
shrubs, hut well grassed throughout. On the rises there
are honeysuckles and she-oak, and on the lower parts
chubby bushy-headed white-gums.
The soil at- Bindi is very good, as appeared from the
vegetation in the garden at the station, which was strong
and healthy.
Advantage has been taken of the natural situation to
bring into it, for purposes of irrigation, the waters of a
neighboring creek ; and, whether due to this or to the
constituents of the soil, the result is surprising. The
growth of the clover and grasses is extremely rich.
On our road to Bindi, our attention was attracted
by the soils of the flats of the Tambo. The flats,
which are about 1600 feet above the level of the sea,
vary in width from a quarter of a mile to one mile, and
they are covered with a considerable depth of excellent
soil, which would well repay the labor and cost of
cultivation.


From Bindi to Omeo station the road lies for one mile
all d a half over limestone, which, like that to the south,
is generally bare of timber. There are a few honey-
suckles on the rises, and white-gums on the lower slopes
of the spurs. The grass is everywhere good. On
touching the granite the change in the character of the
soil and vegetation was at once apparent. Here we saw
stringy-bark, apple-trees (a few), box, and binnak gum on
the river. Beyond the Sheepwash the box has taken pos-
session of the slopes, and the contrast between the pale-
green foliage of the binnak (the white-gum of the rivers),
and the bluish-grey of the box was marked and striking.
Up to and beyond the summit of the Great Dividing
Range, where along the ridges the bare rock is exposed,
the prevailing tree is stringy-bark, with only a few
mountain white-gums. The quality of the timber im-
proves as you ascend, and many of the trees are of good
size; but, on leaving the summit to descend, there is a
rapid falling off both in size and quality. Indeed the
good timber may be said to extend no more than half a
mile from the summit level. On both sides of the
porphyry slopes, towards Omeo station, there is an open
well-grassed forest, with small white-gums and a kind of
eucalyptus known here as Black Sally.
There are numerous springs of water on the slopes
towards the Morass Creek, a tributary of the Mitta-Mitta,
increasing in number with the descent, and forming into
streams about half a mile from the ridge.
The area of well-grassed country in the vicinity of
Omeo is not less than 80,000 acres. The plains—old
lake beds —are destitute of timber. On the margin, and
on the ridge dividing the plains there are a few small
white-gums and saplings. On the banks on the western
C 2


side there are a few honeysuckles. Thence, towards the
Mitta-Mitta, the country is undulating and well-grassed,
with a few small gums. At Smoking Gully the forest of
the southern slope consists of peppermint. At the foot
of the slope, and also on the summit, there are white-
gums, and on some of the rises she-oaks and honeysuckle.
From Smoking Gully to Livingstone Creek the country is
ridgy, in part undulating, but everywhere well grassed.
The forest consists principally of white-gum.
The steep slopes around the township of Omeo are
well grassed, and the timber—chiefly peppermint, a kind
of box (new to us), and large gums in the flats—was
everywhere healthy in appearance. Some small patches
of ground enclosed for corn, near the creek, and the small
gardens in the town, were green, and the growth of every
plant seemed to be luxuriant.
Over nearly every part of the Omeo country we found
kangaroo grass, in many parts high and thick, affording
good feed.
The ridges and slopes from the head of Dry Gully
to Victoria Creek are all well grassed. The forest is
white-gum, with Black Sally in the gullies.
On all the southern slopes, from Dry Gully to Parslow’s,
we observed stringy-bark and peppermint, with rather
poor grass. There is also much low wattle scrub and
bitter-leaf, or native hop.
The northern slopes are not so steep as the southern
slopes are, and they are not so deeply scored by the
storm-waters. They are clothed with a thick sward of
kangaroo grass. In many places we saw varieties of
gum which we could not class.
We diverged from our path in order to see Victoria
Plain. We saw it with the afternoon sun on it. It is


not flat, but slightly undulating; it is in the form of
long low smooth banks or ridges, running parallel to each
other, with hollows not so deeply sculptured as to become
water-courses. The lights thrown across the furrowed
surface —gilding the low ridges and leaving the hollows
in shadow —lent a beauty to this sequestered spot which
under other circumstances it might not present. Set in
a frame of forest—itself destitute of timber and richly
grassed —it made a picture altogether strange and start-
ling, entering upon it as we did suddenly, and with no
idea of the character of the landscape which was to open
to our view.
The soil of this plain is said to be good.
Part of it has been selected. Altogether it embraces
an area of 1500 acres.
Onwards, towards Parslow’s, the grass looked poorer
and the soils thinner. At Parslow’s we found Black
Sally in the flats and gullies; good grass and clover
growing everywhere luxuriantly.
After leaving the Victoria River we passed through a
forest for a distance of eight miles, consisting principally
of Black Sally and mountain white-gum. As we as-
cended, the trees became smaller, and crooked and
stunted; and on reaching a small untimbered well-grassed
plain, known as the Flour-bag, the sub-alpine flora began
to appear, and several specimens were collected.
Continuing the ascent, there appeared in greater pro-
minence scrubs, small gum saplings, and a good many
low distorted gums. On the volcanic plateau the gums
were better; but here again there was found a rather
irregular undergrowth of scrubs. Where the timber
became smaller and thinner, the scrub and flowering


shrubs were higher and of better growth. Then the
shrubs themselves became dwarfed, except in sheltered
hollows ; and, finally, at 5500 feet, we emerged from the
timbered land, and saw around us only snow grasses and
small patches of low distorted scrubby bushes.
Not a blade of kangaroo grass was seen at any point
above 5000 feet.
In the gorges and hollows, at this altitude, there are
some sheltered spots where the shrubs are well grown.
Amongst the plants collected by us in our journey
over these mountains, and examined by the Government
Botanist, there are many rare and beautiful specimens.
On the Flour-bag plain we gathered an everlasting
( Heliclirysum bracteatum —Willdenow), whose brilliant
orange blossoms overtopped the grasses, and mingling with
the white cotton-like blossoms of the Craspedia Richea
(Cassini) and those of the orange-tipped C. Richea
(var. Alpina), made quite a garden on the skirts of the
forest.
On Mount ITotham we found, to the exclusion of other
plants, and growing thickly in patches, or sparsely amongst
the loose stones, Celmisia longifolia (Cassini), with its
greenish-grey leaves and yellowish almost thistle-like
flowers; the greyish-white Antennaria nubigena (Ferd.
von Mueller), its blossoms tipped with a pale purple ; and
in many places, but nowhere thickly until we reached
the slopes, Aciphylla glacialis (Ferd. von Mueller). This
plant belongs to the “ Lovage ” or Ligusticum tribe, and
is, with a second species, peculiar to the Australian Alps.
The Government Botanist thinks it might, perhaps, become
available as an additional culinary esculent for countries
of the cold zone. Horses are fond of this Aciphylla.


You noted this on the spot, and took away with you for
examination a fruiting part of the plant.
Another specimen, also gathered by you, belongs to La
Billardiere’s Pimelea ligustrina , so named in the beginning
of this century, when specimens were collected in Tasmania
during Admiral D’Entrecasteaux’s expedition. Yours is
an alpine variety of that species. The fibre of the bark
is of extreme toughness, and the whole plant is acrid ; but
the bark can be utilized in medicine as a therapeutic sub-
stitute for the bark of Daphne Mezereum.
At the Diamantina Springs, and elsewhere on the slopes
of the lofty ranges, we found, as well as the bright ever-
lasting, everywhere growing in luxuriance and with the
richest blossoms, the snow-white Helipterum punctatum
(De Candolle) —a plant with flowers like a small marigold;
Senecio lautus (Forster), the yellow Euphrasia Scabra
(R. Brown), the blue-purple E. Brownii (Ferd. von
Mueller), the rich green leaves and purple and yellow
blossom of the Brachycome ciliaris (Lessing), the pale-
yellow flower of B. nivalis (Ferd. von Mueller), the
beautiful Wahlenbergia gracilis (Alph. de Candolle), and
Prasophyllum patens (R. Brown).
Amongst other plants collected were Stellaria pungens
(Brogniart), Pultencea fasciculata (Bentham), Oocylobium
alpestre (Ferd. von Mueller), and Crites lancifolia (Ferd.
von Mueller).
Nature in these regions has not been interfered with
by man ; and yet there was something almost artificial in
the aspect of the hollow around the Diamantina Springs.
The richly foliaged shrubs seemed to have been set in
their places in obedience to rules of art, and the flowers
did not much mingle with each other. Through the thick


soft grass rose here a wide patch of rich purple flowers,
there an irregular mass of white blossoms, and beyond a
long bed of pink. On one slope the bright orange of a
large everlasting prevailed, and on the opposite bank
wide patches of white and red mingled with the vivid
green of a plant like anemone. It would not be possible
to find hollows and dells more richly adorned than those
which here face the sun.
The grasses from Mount Hotham to and beyond the
ridge leading to Mount Feathertop are thin and poor, as
compared with those on the slopes, and, at one point,
there is a rather thick scrub, with a few small distorted
eucalyptus shrubs. Feathertop itself is moderately
grassed, but there is no tree or shrub on it.
Making the descent from Feathertop towards Stony
Creek we found no vestige of the snow-grasses after
reaching the level of 5500 feet. Scrub and low bushes
appear below that line, then a low eucalyptus scrub, like
mallee, extending for a mile and a half, which gives place
to distorted and crooked white-gum trees —small and low.
The timber improves at every step in the descent after the
scrub is left, until at length messmate is met with, which
becomes larger and better as we approach a considerable
belt of wattle-trees, at no very great elevation above
Stony Creek. From that point to the river there is the
ordinary gum, box, stringy-bark, and messmate forest.
Mr. Flowitt communicated some curious facts relative
to the distribution of plants foreign to Gippsland. He
informed us that all along the paths over the mountains
that are trodden by pack-horses there is a line of acclima-
tized plants, such as hogweed, clover, &c. The horses
appear to carry the seeds of hogweed and a very little


putch (white) clover wherever they travel. Where
bullock teams traverse, and along tracks where cattle are
driven to market, clover and rye-grass spring up. Cattle
from the Maneroo country carry clover and also the
portulac of Central Australia (brought, most probably,
from New England).
The introduction of foreign animals into Australia will,
perhaps, influence the character of the country more indi-
rectly than directly. The vegetation of vast tracts will
be changed by the seeds distributed by them in their
wanderings.
Geology.
The observations made during our journey have
enabled us to correct some inaccuracies in the geological
maps of the colony, and to indicate several new and
interesting features in the rock formations.
The road from Melbourne to Dandenong is, throughout,
over upper tertiaries, consisting of beds of coarse white
and reddish-brown sands, in places consolidated, similar
to those through which the railway from Melbourne to
Brighton is cut.
At Dandenong we touched the great mass of ternary
granite, which extends thence easterly for sixty-five miles
to the watershed of the Thomson.
On our road to Berwick we observed a patch of upper
Silurian rock not shown on the geological maps, which
appears to belong to a low range, in part covered by
newer tertiaries, extending from the southern boundary
of the granite to the north-western shores of Western
Port Bay. It is, in fact, the remains of an old spur which


once connected the upper Silurians which lie to the east oi
Mount Martha with those east of Berwick. When*
further explorations shall have been made in this tract,:
and the surveys completed, the connection between the
auriferous upper Silurians of the Yarra basin with rocks
of the same age in Mornington will be established.
At Berwick we found a strip of country
broken into well-rounded hills, and with
very rich soils, altogether different in cha-
racter to the sandy tertiaries. It is formed
of a patch of older volcanic rock, similar
in age and composition to that found at
Essendon, Bacchus Marsh, Portarlington,
Flinders, French Island, Phillip Island, and
Griffith’s Point.
A section near Berwick shows the rocks
as represented in the woodcut.
The older volcanic rock is met with again
about six miles east of Buneep, where there
is a dense forest on deep chocolate soil as
rich as can be found anywhere. The
isolated patches which are found on the
Macalister, and the large area occurring
south of Tom’s Cap (probably resting on
mesozoic rocks, as at Griffith’s Point,
Bacchus Marsh, and Portarlington), would
lead one to infer that it underlies to some
extent the tertiary sands in the valley of
the La Trobe.
There are not less than 88,000 acres of
older volcanic rock exposed in Gippsland,
a. Upper tertiary. -b. Older volcanic. -c. Upper Silurian. d. Granite.
every part of which is covered with a deep rich soil.


At McKirley’s Creek, near Crossover Creek, about
seven miles north of the Main Gippsland road, there are
found beds of clay and quartz drift, and seams of lignite
(brown coal), overlying a greenish-grey decomposed
vesicular basalt, resembling, according to the descriptions
furnished, that occurring north-w r est of Melbourne in the
valley of the Moonee Ponds. The area over which the
li<niites extend is not known. As the beds are of con-
siderable thickness, though variable in quality, they may
become of commercial importance when the railway
between Melbourne and Sale is opened.
From Westbury to Rosedale the upper tertiaries over-
lie mesozoic carbonaceous rocks, but we had no oppor-
tunity of examining the latter. To the north-eastward
the mesozoic strata are said to overlie the upper palaeozoic
rocks. The exact relation of these formations to each
other has not yet been worked out; and the key to some
questions which have perplexed enquirers for a length of
time will be found probably in the area here referred to.
It is only in Gippsland that these formations are found to
overlap. Elsewhere they are separated by masses of
intrusive rock.
East of the great patch of older volcanic rock at
Brandy Creek, and thence to Sale, we passed over loams
and sands belonging to the later tertiaries. They are like
the tertiaries of the Wimmera, and the soil is nearly as
good in some places ; but, unlike the Wimmera, the
country is well watered. These tertiaries extend in an
unbroken line from Brandy Creek (nine miles east of
Buneep) to Ram Head, a distance of 182 miles, and in
the aggregate (including the Lakes) cover an area of
2712 square miles.


The tertiaries of the Biver Mitchell are more interest
ing. At Eagle Point, on the right bank of the Mitchelj
we found this section : ,
a. River bank (alluvial). -b. Surface soil—sand and pebbles.-c. Com-
pacted gravel beds—in places cemented by ferruginous infiltrations with pebbles oi
quartz—indurated slates, and porphyries. -d. Horizontal ochreous sand-beds
(marine, probably upper tertiary).
Near Bairnsdale a section across the river shows the
limestone on both sides :
a. Flood-plain of river. -b. Bairnsdale limestone—marine (middle tertiary).
The area occupied by the middle tertiaries is about 37
square miles. They yield good soils, with an abundance
of carbonate of lime.
At Tambo we saw the last of the Gippsland tertiaries.
Here we entered on a country occupied by older silurian,
metamorphosed, and granitic rocks : there being ap-
parently a passage from the sedimentary through the
metamorphosed rocks to a ternary granite. Accurate
surveys and a very careful examination of the rocks are


necessary to a right understanding of their relative
positions. At this point, as elsewhere, we noted, how-
ever, what appeared to be a gradual change in the
character of the strata : well marked sedimentary rocks
of lower silurian age, becoming more and more schistose
and gneissose, until finally the rock became granitic.
A rough section across the river from west to east was
made hurriedly.
The height of the tertiaries above the
river at this point we found by barometric
measurement to be 104*1 feet.
From Tambo to Shady Creek our route
was through a country occupied entirely
by older silurian rocks, in places more
or less altered, and with numerous veins
of quartz. The country is exactly similar
to that in which very productive quartz
reefs have been found, and we are of
opinion that there is here a very large
area well worthy the attention of the
prospector. The rapid rate at which we
travelled prevented us from making
careful observations, but those amongst
us acquainted with auriferous tracts con-
curred in the views we have expressed.
The prospecting of such a district could
not be undertaken by poor men, as the
cost of transporting materials and stores
would be considerable. It might be ad-
vantageous to cut tracks in various direc-
tions, so as to connect the sources of the
Nicholson and the Wentworth with Noe-
yang ; but we are not in a position, from
a. Flood-plain of river. -b. Upper tertiary beds (marine). -c. Indurated lower Silurian (?).
d. Ternary granitic rock, perhaps connected with porphyries.


the limited opportunities we had of inspecting the country,
to say in what direction such tracks should be carried, j
Some of the hills attain here a considerable elevation,
showing rather sharp peaks.
A little north of Shady Creek we entered on a granitic
area, and at Noeyang we found quaternary granite and
felstone.
The section from Shady Creek to
Noeyang is as follows :
Seven miles north of Noeyang the road
crosses the Fainting Range at a point
about 250 feet below the summit. The
rocks of this range, in places, are of some-
what similar character to those observed
near Tambo, but on the whole may per-
haps be regarded as metamorphosed lower
silurians in the first and second stages of
transition, and traversed by numerous
igneous dykes.
Where the River Howitt joins the
Tambo, we found in the beds of the
rivers outcrops of rocks, consisting prin-
cipally of gneissose granite, and gneiss
passing into granite, and in the bed of
the river boulders of granite with biotite,
foliated schists, and masses of felspar and
quartz.
Where planes of bedding were obser-
vable in the rocks in situ the strike was
found to be N. 10° W., with a very high
angle of dip.
In the boulders in the bed of the river
we observed also masses of mica schist.
a. Quaternary granite, felstone, &c., with dykes of greenstone and eurite. -b. Knotted argilla-
ceous mica schist. -c. Indurated greenish and bluish slates and highly miacceous sandstones
(lower silurian).


All our observations seemed to support the supposition
that the divisions on the maps between the lower Silurians,
the metamorphic and crystalline schists, and the granites
and porphyries, are not justified by the facts. It should
he borne in mind, however, that no detailed surveys have
been made in the area we traversed, and that, for all
practical purposes, and exclusive of any theories of meta-
morphism suggested by the appearance of the rocks, the
published maps are fairly accurate. We had very many
opportunities of testing the correctness of the boundaries
as laid down approximately in the geological sketch map,
and, apart from the conjectures above referred to, they
may be trusted as safe guides.
The observations made by us, though accurate as
regards the sites visited, do not exclude the theory that
the silurian rocks, the mica schists, and the granites are
really and truly separate formations. Metamorphism
along the lines of junction of such a character as to lead
to the inference first referred to may consist with com-
plete separation into distinct formations. We have given
as clearly as we can the facts observed, but it is only by
detailed surveys and sections, and by analyses, that the
true geological and mineralogical character of the several
rocks can be determined.
About four miles north-west of Ensay we were shown
a vein of epidote rock (epidosite), a dense mixture of
epidote and quartz with some flesh-colored felspar (ortho-
clase), occurring near the junction of the granite and
metamorphosed schists. One other specimen picked up
on the road in this locality was crystalline on the face
of a joint in a granitic rock. The crystals are small,
divergent, and in color pistachio-green to olive-green.
The specimens have been placed in the collection of the


Mining Department. In a “ wash-out ” which exposed
the underlying rocks, at a point midway between Reedy
Creek and Smoking Gully, we found, within a tract
marked on the map as occupied by metamorpliic schist,
strata bearing a resemblance to lower Silurians. There
were, first, fifteen inches of unaltered sandstone with thin
veins of quartz; second, twelve inches of knotted argil-
laceous mica schist ; third, a’ rather
greater thickness of sandstone with thin
veins of white quartz ; and lastly, another
layer of the same knotted argillaceous
mica schist. The strike was N. 40° W.,
dip N. 50° E. 80°.
For some distance further our route
was through altered lower silurian rocks,
metamorphosed schists, and granitoid
schists, until we reached a point three
miles south of Bindi station, when we
suddenly entered on the Devonian lime-
stones. Well grassed rounded hills, with
smooth slopes, and scanty timber of low
growth on the lower parts of the rises,
are characteristic of this formation. This
limestone is fossiliferous.
A section through Bindi shows the
rocks in this position :
For the purpose of examining the so-
called upper palaeozoic rocks, one of us,
in company with Mr. Alfred Howitt, left
the party and followed the course of the
Tambo for some distance.
Ascending the river, we' found, first,
a granitic rock, in places somewhat
a. Granite, becoming schistose near the altered lower Silurian (?) rocks. -b. Purple clay-
stone, porphyry, and felstone prophyry. -c. Devonian limestone.


schistose ; secondly, altered lower Silurian strata, not
showing a dip anywhere very clearly, massive and much
jointed ; following this there was a considerable thickness
of quartzite, and further up the stream we came upon very
thin purple shales and reddish brown and purple conglo-
merates. In one place a distinct cleavage in the thin
shales, at an angle of about 10° to the plane of bedding,
was noticeable.
The time at our disposal did not admit of our ascending
Mount Tambo, where rocks of a similar lithological
character are said to dip at an angle of 40°.
As far as we can gather, no organic remains of any
kind have been found in these rocks, and their position in
the geological series is therefore unsettled. There appear
to us no sufficient grounds for regarding them as the
equivalents of the sandstones of the Victoria and Sierra
Range. The resemblance is enough to deceive, and that
is all. None of the sections shown to us enabled us to
say in what relation they stand to the Devonian lime-
stones. They may, for auglit that is known to the
contrary, be as old or older than the Devonian lime-
stones.
On regaining the track, we crossed a small tributary of
the Tambo, and commenced the ascent of the Dividing
Range. Here we found fine yellow and white mudstones,
and yellowish-white sandstones, nearly vertical, and almost
bare of soil. The age of these is as uncertain as that of
the thin purple shales in the bed of the Tambo, and can-
not be determined until the organic remains in them—if
there be any —shall have been examined. The summit of
the range was attained at 6.30 p.m. The reading of the
aneroid at this point was 26*400 at 6.30 p.m. on Wed-
nesday the 4th February.
D


On descending the range we saw on
the left, distant about a quarter of a
mile and hearing S. 65° W., bold escarp-
ments of porphyry. At Omeo station
we found no outcrop of rock ; but we
were informed the lofty hills to the north
known as “ The Brothers,” and distant
about three miles, are of porphyry.
Travelling from Omeo' station towards
Omeo township, we passed over about
eight miles of plain before we struck a
low rise of metamorphic schist; and this
rock, with variations in character and
texture, was observed until near Omeo
township, where a rather soft mica-
schist is seen. It is well exposed in
the road-cutting above and parallel
to the river, just before reaching the
township, and seems but slightly cor-
rugated, and with less quartz than is
common.
At Omeo we inspected Mr. Fitzgerald’s
Dry Hill claim, which is worked by hy-
draulic sluicing. The area already ex-
cavated is considerable, and the “face”
•H
appeared to us at least fifty feet in height from the first
floor. The claim is so situated as to have a clear out-
fall, and we were assured that the results are satisfactory
to the owner.
The following section and plan illustrate the mode of
occurrence of auriferous drift in this claim :


The workings in this claim seem to he in the bed of an
ancient tarn or mountain lake. The auriferous gravels,
which consist principally of rounded fragments of gneissose
and micaceous schist, granite belonging to this series,
felstones, and greenstones, with a few boulders of upper
volcanic rock, rest in tolerably regular beds on a false
bottom composed of boulders of igneous rock (shown by
a horizontal black line in the section). 1 hese boulders
have been derived probably from a volcanic cap similar
to those which occur in situ elsewhere in the neighbor-
hood. The boulders are in every stage of decay, from
exfoliation in concentric layers to kaolin or magnesian
clay, varying from white to brown in color, and in touch
from harsh to soapy and tenacious. The beds of the old
lake are now eroded on three sides, and the surrounding
hills are degraded. The mica-schist of the eastern side,
which forms the area around Livingstone township, is
D 2


wearing down more rapidly than that on the western
side, which is gneissose and granitic, and comparatively
hard.
At least four leads of different periods occur in Living-
stone Creek, and probably five or more ancient lake basins
—all of which have been drained by the creeks having
cut through the lower rims—except one, the Livingstone
Swamp.
Miners possessed of the same knowledge and skill as
the owner of the Dry Hill claim would probably find in
the streams in this tract of country similar lake basins
with the like auriferous gravels ; and the plan and section
we have given may perhaps assist prospectors who see
these formations for the first time.
The sculpturing of the hills on the right as we ascended
the steep from the bed of the creek at Dry Hill claim, on
the road to Parslow’s, was so remarkable as to attract the
attention of all. The range, with a generally even slope
to the creek, is carved as if by art. Small watercourses,
active only during rains, at almost equal distances apart
(perhaps not more than 200 or 300 feet), running straight
down hill to the creek, have cut hollows in the range, and
from hollow to hollow there is a smooth curve. The
effect is grotesque ; and it is perhaps only in mica-schists
of similar character, and in the same situation, that
the like symmetrical arrangement of buttresses can be
observed.
Ascending the hill from the creek we saw the same
rather soft mica-schist as we found on approaching Omeo,
but here and there occur intrusive dykes or intercalated
layers of a hornblendic rock.
Purther on we noted knotted argillaceous mica-schist,
with veins of hard dense white quartz, not as yet proved


to be auriferous ; and, after crossing a narrow strip of
granite (sketched on the map we carried with us), we
entered on slightly altered sedimentary rocks (probably
lower silurian), which continued for about four miles.
Following this we found a granitic rock which extended
westwards along our route for about eight miles to Pars-
low’s Inn. On leaving Parslow’s the ascent was over
mica-scliist, with veins of hard dense white quartz, to the
“Flour-bag,” a small well grassed plain where occur
newer volcanic rocks. On leaving this plain the mica-
schist again appeared for a short distance, and thence to
the heights, near Mount Hotliam, we travelled over
plateaux of volcanic rock overlying lower Silurians.
One singular feature in the landscape we had no oppor-
tunity of examining closely—Mount Battery —which, as
described by Mr. Howitt, is a truncated cone, about 800
feet above the river, and standing out from a somewhat
lower ridge which connects it with the main water-shed
between the Oobungra and Bundarrah rivers. From a
distance it has all the appearance of an extinct crater;
but the summit shows that it is not a crater at all. It is
a narrow ridge of columnar basalt, part of one of the
extensive outflows of lava found on the summits of these
mountains. The conical appearance is due to the gradual
wearing away of the mount, and the slopes westward to
the Cobungra are covered with broken fragments of vol-
canic rock of all sizes, all derived from the columnar
basalt. The prisms are seen protruding at all angles
from the broken stones near the summit, and on the lower
slopes the pressure from above has pushed the prisms of
basalt outwards. Although no traces of a crater are
visible, it is quite possible that this may have been a vent.
If so, the upper portions of the cone have been removed


by denudation. Tlie denuding forces
have operated here energetically, and
it is no cause for surprise that craters
are no longer to he found.
It was highly interesting to us to
note the character of the volcanic rocks
in this area; and it was with regret
that we had to leave it without ex-
amining the volcanic breccias on the
slopes of the mountains, the cap of
Tabletop, and the lake that lies at its
base.
The volcanic rocks thin out as the
summit of the range is reached, and
on Mount Hotham we found only
lower silurian rocks. On the road to
Mount Hotham we observed fine sand-
stones, slialy and slaty mudstones, and
silky shales, but nowhere did we see
any graptolites or other organic re-
mains.
From Mount Hotham to Bright our
route was wholly over lower silurian
rocks.
The following is a rough section of
the rocks exposed between Parslow’s
and the River Ovens :
We had the opportunity of examining
many parts of this section very care-
fully, and it is certainly suggestive of
important changes in the physical struc-
ture of the country since the period of
the overflow of the volcanic rocks.
a. Mica schist and gneiss. -b. Granite. -c. Lower silurian. -d. Upper v olcanic. -0000. Auriferous drift underlying
upper volcanic rock.


The geology of the tract of country between Bairns-
dale and Bright presents many features of interest. We
find near Bairnsdale, and throughout the area surrounding
the lakes, upper tertiaries apparently of the same age as
the marine beds at Flemington, the palaeontology of which
has been investigated by Professor McCoy. Next suc-
ceeding; these are marine beds with numerous fossils of
the same character as those found at Curdie’s Creek (west
of Cape Otway) and in a cliff between the Lakes Bullen-
Merri and Gnotuk in the Western District. Mr. Howitt
has examined these beds very carefully, he has collected
a great many fossils, and he is of opinion that they are
the equivalents of the middle tertiaries of the western
parts of Victoria.
Northward from the northern margin of the tertiaries
we enter the great trough of silurian rocks and meta-
morphic schists. We have stated already the conclusions
we have formed respecting these and the gneissose rocks,
mica-schists, and granites with which they are associated,
but we are bound in duty to add that a cursory examina-
tion of them, such as we made, is not sufficient to enable
us to give opinions of any great weight or value. Mr.
Howitt is now surveying, and mapping on the scale of
forty chains to one inch, considerable areas in this part of
the province, and we must wait for the results of his
labors for a solution of many difficult questions discussed
by us on our r.oute. We saw some of the maps and
sections in course of preparation by Mr. Howitt, and we
are confident that this work could not be placed in better
hands. As well as a “ good eye for country,” the capacity
to class and correlate observations over a wide field, he
has also a correct knowledge of the mineralogical com


position of rocks, and by constant reference to authorities
lie can place each one in its proper place.
From Tambo to Parslow’s we passed over a large area
in which thousands of feet of rocks, originally deposited
as sedimentary beds, and appearing in many parts as
sandstones and mudstones, were in other places metamor-
phosed, becoming first indurated with more or less of
hydrous magnesian silicates in the planes of bedding or
cleavage, then schistose, and finally passing into granitoid
rock and granite. Again, we noted vast masses con-
taining abundance of magnesia-mica, the whole indi-
cating changes—mechanical and chemical —which must
have taken place when these rocks were subject to great
heat and pressure. That there should be so much feld-
spar and mica in the altered rocks is no matter for sur-
prise when the mineralogical character of the typical
lower silurian rocks is considered. They are not, as a
rule, very silicious, but rather argillaceous.
The volcanic rocks met with between Parslow’s and
Mount Hotham are of singular interest. We saw no
signs anywhere of any crater or cone. All that remains
is a capping here and there on lower silurian rocks, with
some thickness of auriferous gravel between the volcanic
rock and the upturned edges of the Silurians. The sources
whence the lava flowed appear to have been obliterated
by the denuding forces at all times active in these lofty
regions.
At what time within the recent tertiary period was this
lava erupted ? Is there any connection between it and
the lava flows of the western plains ? And what was the
physical geography of the country when the volcanoes
that gave forth streams of lava over the once great plains,


now nearly altogether eaten away, were burning moun-
tains, making ruddy the skies above them ? These ques-
tions will perhaps be settled when the geology of this
tract shall have been carefully investigated.
An account of a journey through Gippsland would be
incomplete unless reference were made to the metalliferous
minerals, ores, and coals which are found in this part of
the colony.
Osmiridium —a metal belonging to the platinum group <
—has been collected in small quantities near Stockyard
Creek. A few days before we commenced our journey
some of this metal, in rough grains, was sent to the Mining
Department for analysis by Mr. Reginald A. F. Murray,
who is now engaged in making a geological survey of
south-western Gippsland. It is not probable that this
metal is very abundant, but its occurrence in any locality
is worthy of record.
Long before this sample was received, Mr. Patterson,
the assayer for the Bank of Australasia, had obtained
specimens, and had made known the fact that osmiridium
was to be found in the colony.
Before Mr. A. W. Howitt undertook the task of opening
up the goldfield of Gippsland, there were not more than
50 persons engaged in gold mining. At the present time
there are 1581 men employed in alluvial mining, and 943
in quartz mining. These, with the aid of machinery of
various kinds, of the aggregate value of £144,588, raise
yearly 70,000 oz. of gold.
The area of auriferous ground actually opened up, but
not at any one time wholly occupied, is 148 square miles,
and the number of reefs proved to be auriferous is 461. The
tracts within which the already discovered alluvial work-
ings and quartz reefs lie are comparatively small in area ;
Osmiridium.
Gold.


they are, however, spread over a vast extent of country,
and each one is remote from the other. During our
journey we passed over hills and valleys of lower silurian
age that are undoubtedly auriferous ; we saw the volcanic
plateaux underneath which lie gravels already yielding
gold; and we are convinced that, with the extension of
prospecting operations, new and rich fields will be opened
up by the gold miner both on the west and east of the
Tambo, as well as on the flanks of the Great Dividing
Range.
We have in another place recommended that tracks be
cut for the purpose of facilitating explorations in these
parts of Gippsland.
Argentiferous galena is found in the limestones in the
basin of the Snowy River and in other localities towards
the north-east.
From the Dargo River, the Dargo High Plains, the
Thirty-mile Creek, and Donnelly’s Creek, ores, some of
them pyritous, have yielded as much as 18 oz. of silver
per ton.
Black oxyd of tin has been found in the basin of the
River La Trobe, near Mount Fatigue, and near Corner
Inlet. Nearly all the areas occupied by granite yield
more or less of tin-ore ; but up to the present time very
little has been done in Gippsland towards the collecting
and saving of this valuable product.
, All that is known to the Government officials in the
Department of Mines respecting the occurrence of the
ores of copper, lead, antimony, zinc, the metal bismuth,
the ores of manganese and molybdenum, have been
already communicated to the public in various reports,
and it is only necessary to direct attention to these, where
the prospector will find recorded the results of careful


analyses, and also particulars relating to the working of
the mines.
The ores of iron are abundant in many parts of Gipps-
land.
From Bennison’s Flat, near Foster, samples of brown
iron-ore have been obtained, which gave on analysis—
Metallic iron ... 6P4 = 87*72 Fe 2 0 3
Silica ... ... 12T
Titaniferous iron-sand is widely spread in some parts
along the coast, and good samples have been got near
Wilson’s Promontory and in other places adjacent.
When we were at Eagle Point we saw the Mount called
Nowr-nowr. According to the descriptions furnished by
Mr. Howitt, it is a hill of porphyry, traversed by dykes
resembling elvans, and abuts on clay slates of lower
silurian age. On the Silurians there rest the equivalents
of the Bairnsdale limestones (middle tertiary), and above
those newer tertiaries. Great quantities of micaceous
iron-ore are found with the elvans and distributed through
the porphyry. There are large blocks of ore on the
southern slopes which Mr. Howitt says are of good
quality and clean. There is a gentle slope for about a
mile and a half, from the top of the Mount to Boggy
Creek, an arm of Lake Tyers, where there is water deep
enough for good sized vessels. From this point to the
entrance of Lake Tyers the distance is sixteen miles, and
by land to the entrance of the great lakes four miles.
There is said to be an abundance of limestone close to
the mount, and plenty of timber suitable for charcoal.
A specimen of this ore was sent to the Department of
Mines and analysed. The report was not favorable.
The sample contained a good deal of quartz; so much,


indeed, that in smelting the iron would combine with the
silica and form a slag.
If the ore can he obtained pure, or free from an excess
of silica, the iron-smelter might make an experiment at
this place with every prospect of success.
The creeks near Nowr-nowr flow over a solid mass of
red jasper, and some of the fragments in the creek are as
bright as vermilion-colored sealing wax.
Precious stones are found in Gippsland; but no sys-
tematic search has been made for them.
At Stockyard Creek, specimens of the emerald, topaz,
and zircon, have been collected; and sapphires have
been obtained at Cross-over Creek, Upper Boggy Creek,
in the basin of the River La Trobe, and in the basin of the
Tarwin.
As far as we have been able to ascertain, no carbon-
aceous rocks different in age from those occurring at
Cape Patterson and Cape Otway have been discovered;
and no seams of greater thickness than those already
opened in the western fields.
It is not at all improbable, however, that the equivalents
of the Tasmanian Glossopteris beds may be found on the
north-eastern side of the great area of carbonaceous rocks
that extends from Griffith’s Point to Tom’s Cap. If they
occur here at all they will be explored with difficulty, as
there is a considerable thickness of newer rocks to be
pierced before they could be reached.
We have appended to this report a Table showing the
extent of the areas occupied by the several rock for-
mations, and some account of the character of soils
belonging to each, and also the barometrical observations
recorded at various points between Bairnsdale and Myrtle-
ford.


The Omeo Plains, though lying at a great elevation,
will hereafter he profitably occupied. They consist of
elevated land, with a climate not unlike that of the south-
western counties of England, but perhaps more severe
during two or three of the winter months. The soil is a
deep, dark-colored, somewhat tenacious clay, producing a
luxuriant but rather rank vegetation. The climate is too
wet and too cold for sheep of the merino breed, and fluke,
a disease very destructive among these, is said to prevail
throughout the district. The pastures of the plains, in
their unimproved state, are- unquestionably better adapted
to the grazing of cattle than sheep ; but if subdivided and
brought into cultivation, the long-woolled breeds of Great
Britain would undoubtedly thrive admirably upon them.
The climate and the soil give reason to hope that a
proper system of rotation cropping would be found to be
practicable which in many other districts of the colony,
owing to the uncertainty of the weather, could not be
carried out profitably. Root-crops, which are indis-
pensable to proper rotation farming, and the successful
breeding of long-woolled sheep, could be grown there
from year to year without fear of failure through drought.
It is a district that, probably, would be found better
adapted to systems of husbandry resembling those of
Britain than any other parts of Victoria.
The extensive swamps in Gippsland could be drained
and sown with suitable grasses. Thus treated, they would
make good feeding grounds in summer, and become
available for the support of stock when other parts were
dried up. They are not fit for growing grain, but from
no fault of the soil ; the crops might be lost in conse-
quence of their liability to rust and other fungoid


diseases. Root-crops and potatoes, however, might be
grown in such low lands with profit in all ordinary
seasons.
In the lower parts of Grippsland, as a rule, the growth
of grasses for the support of stock should he encouraged ;
but there are many localities where the hop and such
fruits and vegetables as are successfully cultivated in the
southern counties of England might he introduced with
profit and advantage.
In concluding this Report, which is a hastily written
record of observations made during a very rapid journey,
we have to express our regret that many subjects of great
importance are treated briefly, and some not touched
upon at all. If we had had leisure and opportunities for
following up lines of research that presented themselves
frequently during our tour we could have given informa-
tion that would have been of practical importance to the
agriculturist and the miner. We trust, however, that we
have noted some valuable facts, and that what we have
collected may lead to a thorough examination of a part
of the colony that, both as regards its geology and its
features generally, is full of interest.
Gippsland, when there shall he easy communication
between its central parts and the metropolis, will afford,
both to farmers and miners, many new fields for the
profitable exercise of their energies; it will, in future
years, support a large population ; and in its mountains
and lakes the careworn inhabitants of the cities will find
health and recreation.
It combines in its varied landscapes all that is attractive
to the artist and the traveller ; and even if it were not
rich in mineral treasures, and if it afforded no certainty of


profit to the grazier and the farmer, it should still be our
duty to bring it, as soon as possible, into close connection
with other parts of the Province.
In pursuing our enquiries in Gippsland we received aid
and information from all to whom we applied, and to
Mr. Alfred W. Howitt, the Police Magistrate and Warden
at Bairnsdale, we are much indebted for help.
We have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servants,
A. J. SKENE,
R. BROUGH SMYTH.


GIPPSLAND.
Areas of Geological Formations.
1. Upper Tertiary,
including Lakes
S( l'.' ar0 acres,
miles.
2,712=1,735,680
Where not covered by sand-dunes, light moderately good
soil; at some distance from the sea (where there is less
sand), fit- for wheat. All kinds of root crops and maize
grow well in these soils with proper treatment.
2.
Middle Tertiary ..
37= 23,680
Much lime in the soil. Yields excellent crops. Hops,
fruit trees, and vegetables of all kinds grow well.
3.
Oolitic (carbona-
ceous)
1,531= 979,840
Soils similar to those of Barrabool hills, Wannon district,
and Cape Otway. Deep rich soils in the valleys. In
Gippsland this tract is generally heavily timbered.
4.
Upper Palaeozoic..
687= 439,680
Soil sandy, gravelly, and poor. Grass moderately good.
Stringybark on the hills, gum and box near the rivers.
Pittosporum and other umbrageous trees in the deep
gorges of the Mitchell, with curryjongs, &c.
5.
Devonian
65= 41,600
Limestone hills with good soil. Scarcely any timber.
6.
Upper Silurian ..
1,736=1,111,010
Ranges with thin soils. Deeper and better soils in the flats.
7.
Lower Silurian ..
3,548=2,270,720
Ranges with thin soils. Good soils in the river flats,
Grass thin. Stringy-bark, iron-bark, and scrub.
8.
Metamorpliic
235= 150,400
Rugged ranges. Wherever the country is at all level the
soil is good and highly productive.
9.
Newer Volcanic ..
279= 178,560
Soils like those of Keilor Plains and the Werribee, but in
Gippsland these tracts lie at a great elevation.
10.
Older Volcanic ..
138= 88,320
Soils very rich and deep like those of Moonee Ponds and
part of the Bacchus Marsh district. The timber and
scrub dense.
11.
Trap
1,275= 816,000
Mountains rugged and rocky; bare of soil in places ; else-
where soil poor and gritty. Grass of medium quality;
in the best parts, kangaroo grass ; in poor places, wiry
and in tufts. Timber according to elevation and aspect.
Mountain white-gum on Black Mountain tableland,
with stringy-bark and peppermint in tbe gullies. Near
the Snowy River, in deep valleys, box and apple-tree.
As a rule the trap country is not scrubby.
12.
Granite ..
1,655=1,059,200
Light sandy soils. Open forest. Moderately w r ell grassed.
In places timber heavy.
Total
13,898=8,894,720
BAROMETRICAL OBSERVATIONS.
3rd February 1874. inches.
Bruthen, 5.50 a.m. ... ... ... ••• ... ••• 30-010
„ At Hotel 30 020
Bed of Tambo ... ... ... .. ... 30 - 105
„ Hotel again ... ... ... ... .. ... 30 - 040
„ Difference, using means ... ... ... ... '075
McDougall’s, Noeyang, 11.45 a m. ... ... ... ... 29-490
Near Summit of Fainting Range (add, say 250 feet, for summit level),
4.20 p.m. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28530


4th February. inches .
Mr. Birt’s house, Bindi, 12.50 p.m. ... ... ... ... 28-445
First hill after leaving Tambo River, 5.20 p.m. ... ... ... 27-700
Summit of Great Dividing Range, on track to Omeo, 6.30 p.m. ... 26-400
Thursday, sth February.
Omeo Station, 5.45 a.m. ... ... ... ... ... 27-265
Omeo Township, 10.45 a.m. ... ... ... ... ... 27 540
Bed of Creek above Omeo, 4.25 p.m. ... ... ... ... 27 - 425
Parslow’s, 7 p.m. ... ... ... ... ... ... 26-400
Friday, 6th February.
Parslow’s, 4 a.m. ... ... ... ... ... ... 26-425
Flour-bag (Grassy Plain), 8 a.m. ... ... ... ... 25 060
Baldy (Mount Hotham), 12.10 p.m. ... ... ... ... 23-850
Diamantina Springs, 12.30 p.m. ... ... ... ... ... 24-288
Road over Feathertop (highest point of road about 800 feet below
summit of Feathertop), 3.45 p.m. ... ... ... ... 24-175
Saturday, 7th February.
Bright, 8.25 a.m. ... ... ... ... ... ... 28-725
Myrtleford, 2 p.m. ... ... ... ... ... ... 28-960
By Authority : John Ferres, Government Printer, Melbourne.
E




To accompany the Report on the Physical Character and Resources
of Cipps Land by the Surveyor Ceneral and the Secretary for Mines.
February 10th. 1874
Scale; 16 miles to 1 inch.
The Route is shew by the red line.


SKETCH OF A GEOLOGICAL SECTION FROM BAIRNSDALE TO BRIGHT
To accompany RETORT of the Surveyor General and. the Secretary
for Mines on the Physical Character and Resources of Gipps Land
10th Feby". 1874.


