

REPORT
OF THE
TRIAL OF THE CASE
STUART V. MITCHELL & OTHERS,
IN THE
Supreme Court of ®efo §out| Mules,




REPORT
OF THE
TRIAL OF THE CASE
STUART V. MITCHELL & OTHERS,
BEFORE
HIS HONOR MR. JUSTICE THERRY,
AND A JURY OF FOUR,
AT THE
Sydney Sittings of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales, for the Trial of Causes, on the 17th,
18th, 19th, & 20th days of August, 1858.
BY CHARLES ST. J ULIAN.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY F. CUNNINGIIAME,
104, KINS STREET EAST.
373




INTRODUCTION.
This Report has been published at the request of the Agents
for the Plaintiff, in consequence of the numerous applications
made to them, and to the Owners in Europe, for information
as to the proceeds of goods advertised and sold in Sydney, in
November and December last, as having been saved from the
wreck of the Catherine Adamson.
The Reporter—wholly uninterested in the subject-matter
of this suit—has taken every possible care to preserve an
accurate record of the proceedings. Of Counsel’s speeches,
and of the Judge’s interlocutory rulings and final charge, he
has only given abstracts; but he feels confident that he has
omitted nothing of importance. In taking down the evidence,
he has, to economise time and space, pursued the course which
is adopted by Judges, of combining question and answer.
But he has taken this evidence more fully than a Judge would
be at all likely to do, and has been peculiarly careful, as far
as possible, to preserve the exact words of each witness.
In the reports of Counsel’s speeches, the terms defendant
and defendants will he found both used. This might, at first
sight, appear to have been an error of the Reporter; but they
were thus used. This arose from the circumstance of Captain
Williamson being the only defendant who had prominently
acted in the matter litigated upon, although there were sever.al
defendants upon the Record.
The following is an abstract of the pleadings :


Plaintiff— Geoege Stuabt. Defendants— Fbancis Mitchell
the Younger, James Williamson, and Thomas W. Dixon,
trading under the name and style of Mitchell and Company
op Sydney.
Declaeation— First Count, Trover for various articles of
drapery, &c., &c., converted, from the Ist of November last to
the commencement of the action. Second Count, Trover for
goods, not particularised, forming part of the Catherine
Adamson’s cargo. Counts for money payable, money had and
received, and on an account stated.
Particulars of Claim under the Common Counts :
£ s. d.
To proceeds of goods sold by Muriel and Miller 4
on 17th, 19th, and 23rd November, and 2nd V 1664 8 2
December • • • • • J AA
Ditto ditto ditto on 2nd December 44 6 8
Ditto ditto ditto
Ditto ditto ditto
Ditto ditto ditto
Ditto ditto ditto
Ditto ditto ditto
Ditto ditto ditto
Ditto ditto ditto
Ditto ditto ditto
Ditto ditto ditto
sth „ 531 17 3
10th „ 97 13 0
10th „ 48 18 2
10th „ 948 9 6
will} '• 11814 2
16th „ 16 8 8
22nd „ 598 6 10
28th „ 389 17 5
Damages were laid at £5OOO.
Pleas— To the two first Counts, “Not Guilty,” with a
further plea to both that the goods in question were not the
goods of the plaintiff. To the residue of the Declaration,
“ Never Indebted.”
Issue joined by plaintiff upon all these pleas.
Counsel for the Plaintiff—The Attobney-Genebal, Me.
Wise, and Mb. William Noeton. Attorneys Messes.
Noeton, Son, and Baekeb.
Counsel for the Defendants —Mb. Bboadhubst and Mb.
Stephen. Attorney —Mb. Daintbey.


REPORT, &c.
FIRST DAY.
Tuesday, 17th August, 1858.
Mr. Norton having opened the pleadings —
The Attorney-General proceeded to open the case by an
address to the jury, of which the following is the substance ;
The plaintiff, he said, was the master of the ship Catherine
Adamson. The defendants were ship chandlers, carrying on
business in Sydney, and were the owners of the Washington
and the Aquarius, steamers, both employed, as the jury doubt-
less knew, in this harbour. The plaintiff’s ship became a
total wreck on the 21st of October last, near the North Head.
She had a large cargo on board at the time. The ship having
been broken to pieces, part of the cargo sank to the bottom,
while part of it, which was capable of floating, was drifted to
Manly Beach and elsewhere. Such of the cargo as had been
thus washed on shore was looked for by the police and others,
and such portions of it as were found were put aside in various
places, to be sent to Sydney for the benefit of those concerned.
On the morning of the wreck, efforts were made to procure
the assistance of the steam tug Washington; but, in conse-
quence, as was said, of her being wanted to tow vessels to sea,
the defendants would not give the use of her. Large quan-
tities of goods having, however, been saved, the defendants,
or one of them, went down in the steamer, and brought up
these goods to Sydney. Arrangements were made to pay
the defendants for this service in the same manner as if they
had themselves saved the goods, although, as to a part of them,
the only service which had been rendered was the conveyance
to Sydney of the recovered property. Two or three days after
B


tlie wreck of the vessel, her hull was put up for sale at the
instance of the present plaintiff. The defendants became the
purchasers of it for a sum of £194. After the defendants had
been paid, as already mentioned, for the goods previously saved,
a new arrangement was made. As the defendants were the
purchasers of the hull, all of which had by this time disap-
peared, it was arranged that, in securing the remains of the
hull, they should at the same time secure as much as possible
of the remaining cargo, receiving twenty per cent, upon the
value of the rescued property by way of compensation. It
was at the same time agreed by the plaintiff that he would
not employ any other person to perform the like duty. The
defendants were not only desirous of preventing all other
persons from interfering with their own operations, hut they
wished plaintiff to put an advertisement in the paper, warning
all parties against saving the cargo, whether floating or not.
The plaintiff declined to do this. When he (the Attorney-
General) spoke of the plaintiff’s actings in this and other
respects, he referred not only to the action of the plaintiff
himself, but of his agents. It would, doubtless, turn out that
many of the acts as to which he should give evidence were
performed by the plaintiff’s agents, Messrs. Gilchrist, Watt,
and Co., and not by himself. The plaintiff, then, intimated to
the defendants that he could not, in justice to those for whom
he was acting, abstain from employing other persons. He
had been told by the agents for Lloyds of certain persons so
well fitted by experience for this species of work, that it was
his duty to secure their services. The plaintiff, consequently,
recalled his undertaking not to employ any other persons than
the defendants for the recovery of the cargo. At the same
time, however, as this would change the position of the
defendants, he abandoned the arrangement by which their
allowance for salvage was to be limited to twenty-five per
cent., leaving the amount of this allowance an open question.
The letter by which the first agreement was thus vacated was
in these terms: —
Margaret-street, sth November, 1857.
Dear Sirs,—lt will be necessary to hold a survey on the blocks from the
“ Catherine Adamson,” and we will thank you to keep them aside, so that
they can be identified by some of your people, till the survey is held.
We find we are not warranted in refusing to allow parties to act as
salvors while we have no party in charge for us, your position being only
that of salvors at present; and so long as parties are willing to recover
woods and hand them over to us, we cannot refuse to acknowledge them.
As this alters our position with you, we do not hold you to the agreed rat*
of salvage for what you may recover since the 29th, but leave it an open
question as to the rate of remuneration, to he adjusted hereafter; and
such goods as you may hand to us we will hold subject to your claim.
Yours, &c.,
GILCHRIST, WATT, AND CO.
Messrs. Mitchell and Co.


The agreement being thus altered, the defendants went on
under the changed understanding, to recover as much of the
cargo as possible. They did, in fact, recover a large quantity
of goods, which they placed in the hands of Messrs. Muriel
and Miller, auctioneers, for sale. The jury would be told by
His Honor that parties who acted as salvors had no right, of
their own mere motion, to sell the cargo which they had saved.
They had a lien upon them for their salvage in the same
manner as the shipmaster would have for his freight, and they
could detain the goods until this lien was satisfied, but they
could not sell them. However, these goods were placed in
the hands of Muriel and Miller, as he had already stated, and
the plaintiff, not being at all inclined to raise any merely
technical objections, permitted this course to be taken. He
was content to have the goods sold, provided the account sales
were sent to himself or his agents, so that they might know
what was going on, and that, after defendants’ salvage had
been deducted, he or his agents should have the balance handed
over to them. Thus goods were saved, sales effected, and
account sales rendered for all goods sold up to the 29th of
October. Discussions which had arisen as to the rate of
remuneration which should be allowed to the defendants, re-
sulted in a reference to arbitration. There had been a previous
reference, nnder which the defendants’ claim for the goods
first saved had been adjusted. The new reference was made
to the same arbitrators. Unfortunately, however, before the
case had been fully heard, and had become ripe for decision,
one of the arbitrators intimated to the defendants what it was
they proposed to allow. It thus reached the ears of the de-
fendant who had acted all through in this matter, that he
would be allowed only about thirty-three per cent. His Honor
would tell them that, according to British law, no absolute
basis was fixed for salvage. Its proportion to the value of the
goods saved must depend upon many considerations : —the
gross value of these goods—the amount of risk or expense
incurred by the salvors—the time which they had expended—
and various other considerations. Now, the reference was
made in these terms :—■
Sydney, 4th December, 1857.
To the Arbitrators, under Bond of Submission dated 2nd November, in the
case of Salvage Claim ex “ Catherine Adamson.”
Gentlemen, —We have to request that you will award the proportion of
*alvage to be paid on goods recovered from under water from the wreck of
the “ Catherine Adamson,” amounting up to this time to £1574 16s. Bd.
Such award also to apply to all further goods recovered iu like manner,
the rate for said subsequent recoveries to be also determined by you.
f GTLCHRIST, WATT, AND 00.
t MITCHELL AND CO.
B 2


The last words here were very material. Taking the £1574
as a basis for estimating the proportionate expenses incurred
by defendants, an amount of salvage was to be fixed which
would apply to all goods subsequently recovered This sum of
£1574 was taken as the whole value of the goods which had
then been recovered, at a certain amount of labour and ex-
pense If, with the same labour and expense, £l5OOO worth of
goods had been recovered, the per-centage to be allowed to
the defendants by way of salvage would sustain a propor-
tionate reduction. It was of the utmost importance, there-
fore, that this statement as to the amount of goods recovered
at the time should be a true one. But, after the matter had
been in the hands of the arbitrators for a day or two, it was
discovered that a much larger amount of goods had been in
fact recovered than had been thus stated by the defendants.
This having been ascertained by the arbitrators, and told to
the plaintiff’s agents, the following letter was written to the
arbitrators . Sydney, sth December, 1857.
Gentlemen,— Referring to our letter to you of yesterday, we have to
inform you that a considerable further quantity ot goods have since been
saved and sent to the sales-room yesterday, and must therefore be the pro-
ceeds of sales of goods saved by expenses incurred up to that time.
The goods are being sold to-day, but we will not learn the probable
amount of proceeds till the evening. Under these circumstances, it may
be considered proper by you to defer your decision until we can furnish
value of the said goods.
We are, &c.,
GILCHRIST, WATT, AND CO.
To
The Arbitrators in the matter of
Salvage ex “Catherine Adamson.”
On the next day, all parties being before the arbitrators, a
request was made for an account of these goods. The de-
fendant however, refused to give any further information, to
go on with the arbitration, or to take less than fifty per cent.
The result was that the whole thing went off. On the Bth
December Muriel and Miller wrote the following letter to
plaintiff’s agents December. 1857.
Sydney, Bth December, 1857.
Messes. Gilchrist, Watt, and Co.
Gentlemen, —We send you herewith account sale for goods saved from
wreck ot “Catherine Adamson” by Green, and cheque.
'Phis concludes the account sales we are to render you on account of the
« Catherine Adamson,” as Messrs. Mitchell and Cn. have instructed us to
render to them sales for all goods sold subsequent to those you have re-
ceived account y(mrg obedient ly,
MURIEL AND MILLER.
That letter and the continuance of the defendants to recover
goods and effect sales, drew forth the following communica-
tion :


Sydney, 14th December, 1857.
Messrs. Mitchell and Co.
Gentlemen, —As the Attorney of Captain George Stuart, of the ship
“ Catherine Adamson,” I have to request that you will deliver up to me all
the goods saved from the wreck of that vessel brought up to Sydney by
vessels employed by you. or otherwise in your possession, from the 23rd
ultimo to this date, and I hereby otfer to pay you any reasonable claim for
the trouble you have had in recovering the said goods, and I have to re-
quest that you will at once inform me of the amount of your claim.
With regard to the remainder of the goods belonging to the said wreck,
I beg to give you notice that 1 have entered into an agreement with parties
to recover and bring to Sydney all that can be obtained, and that, after
this notice, if you interfere with any portion of the cargo of the said wreck,
I shall not recognise any claim for salvage on your part, hut will imme-
diately take steps to recover the goods.
I will no* consent to any portion of the goods being sold by you, and if
you have sold or shall hereafter sell any portion of the goods recovered
without my authority, I shall hold you responsible for any loss that may
he sustained thereby.
I am the only person in the colony having authority to receive the goods
belonging to the cargo of the “ Catherine Adamson.”
I am, &c.,
JOHN B. WATT.
No notice was taken by the defendants, but, on the 17tli after-
wards, the following letter was received from them :
Sydney, 17th December, 1857.
John Watt, Esq. .
Sir, —We beg to request that you will inform us if you have instructed
John Wheeler and Henry Goodwin and others to impede and obstruct our
operations at the wreck of the “ Catherine Adamson,” as they state such
to be the case.
An immediate answer will oblige,
Sir, your obedient servants,
MITCHELL AND CO.
This was replied to on the same day in the following terms : —•
Sydney, 17th December, 1857.
Messrs. Mitchell and Co.
Gentlemen, — In reply to your letter of this date, I heg to inform you
that I have arranged with John Wheeler and Henry Goodwin to recover
cargo of the “ Catherine Adamson,” as intimated to you in my letter of
14th inst., and have not instructed them to take any other steps. I will
thank you for a reply to my letter of 14th inst., if you have any claim,
And remain, &c.,
JOHN B. WATT, as
Attorney for George Stuart.
Still there was no reply to the letter of the 14th. and on the
19th the following further communication was made to the
defendants :
Sydney, 19th December, 1857.
Messrs. Mitchell and Co.
Geshemen,— Referring to your advertisements of this date in the Sy nay
Morning Harold, I have to request that you will at once deliver to me the
goods saved from the wreck of the “ Catherine Adamson,” and tlie goods
found near the Heads of Port Jackson. I hereby offer to pay you any rea-
sonable claim for the trouble you have had in recove-ing the said goods
prior to my letter to you of 14th inst., and have to request that you will at
once inform me the amount of your claim.


I will not consent to any portion of the goods recovered being sold by
you, and will hold you responsible for any loss that may arise from a sale
by you, or from delay in handing over the goods to me.
Yours, &c.,
GEORGE STUART,
Master of the ship “Catherine Adamson,”
By his Attorney,
J JOHN B. WATT.
On the 21st, having taken all this time for consideration, the
defendants wrote the following reply. It was addressed, as
the jury would see, to Mr. Watt, as the attorney for Captain
Stuart, and was consequently a recognition of his power to
act for plaintiff as such attorney—a dealing with Mr. Watt in
his representative character :
Sydney, 21st December, 1857.
J. B. Watt, Esq., Attorney for
George Stuart, late Master of ship “Catherine Adamson.”
Sir, —In reply to your letter of Saturday, 19th inst , we beg to state that
we are not aware of having any goods of yours in our possession.
If such is the case, we will at once deliver the same to you. on satisfactory
proof of ownership, and payment of salvage as per advertisement referred
to.
We are, Sir, your obedient servants,
MITCHELL AND CO.
To that letter the following reply was given : —•
Sydney, 21st December, 1857.
Messrs. Mitchell and Co.
Gentlemen, — I have this moment received your letter of this date, in
reply to mine of the 14th inst. Will you inform me the amount of claim
for salvage, and I will satisfy you of my right to the possession of the goods,
if you have any doubt of it.
Yours, &c.,
GEORGE STUART,
Master of the “ Catherine Adamson,
By his Attorney, JOHN B. WATT.
To this the defendants made the following rejoinder :
Sydney, 21st December, 1857.
John B. Watt, Esq., Attorney for George Stuart.
Sir, —We have just received your letter of this date, and in reply beg to
state that we claim salvage on the goods in question at the rate of 50
(fifty) per centum on their nett value in their present state, and that it
will be necessary for claimants of said goods to satisfy us as to their right
of possession.
We are, Sir, your obedient servants,
MITCHELL AND CO.
The correspondence was closed by the following letter from
the plaintiff’s agent: —
Sydney, 22nd December, 1857.
Messrs. Mitchell and Co.
Gentlemen, —In reply to your letter of yesterday, I beg to state that I
elaim possession of all goods that you have saved from the wreck of the
“ Catherine Adamson,” or which formed part ot her cargo, as master ot that
ship and the representative of all concerned, and as holding a lien oner these
goods for the freight due thereon■


I also claim all goods recovered by you prior to the 14th inst., as having
been recovered by you under an agreement with me that you should receive
a stipulated per centage as salvors, but which agreement was varied subse-
quently so far as to leave the per centage of salvage open to future adjust-
ment by arbitration. Goods recovered by you since the 14th inst. have
been recovered without my authority, and on which I recognise no right of
salvage to exist.
I remain, &c.,
GEORGE STUART,
Master of the ship “ Catherine Adamson.”
By his Attorney,
JOHN B. WATT.
In reference to the above, I beg to state that the power of Attorney in my
favor lays with Messrs. Norton, Son, and Barker, who will shew it to you
on application.
JOHN B. WATT.
Up to the time that the dispute as to the amount of salvage
arose, there was, as the jury would see, no question whatever
as to the identity of the goods. The defendants had dealt
with them as subject to no other claim than the amount of
their salvage. One transaction for the saving of a portion of
this very cargo had been amicably settled, the defendants
receiving from the plaintiff a very liberal remuneration for
the services which they had rendered. Not only had they
thus treated the rescued goods as part of the Catherine
Adamson’s cargo, hut as to other goods recovered in the same
manner, and from the same quarter, they had most readily
consented, upon the same assumption, to a reference to arbi-
tration. It was not until they found that they would be
unable to accomplish their own ends—to secure fifty per cent,
—that the defendants raised any question whatever as to
proof of ownership. It was the duty of the plaintiff and of
his agents to protect the interests of those who were absent,
and, while disposed to be liberal, there was a very strong de-
termination not to submit to extortion. The defendants, then,
having failed to induce the plaintiff’s agents to betray that
trust which was reposed in the honour of the latter, as British
merchants, had determined upon putting them to a strict proof
of their title. He (the Attorney-General) would admit at once
that mathematical proof of the issue thus raised would be
scarcely possible. But the common law requiied only reason-
able proofs. The cargo of the Catherine Adamson was con-
signed to different people, and many of the marks were
obliterated, so that, when they were got up, their positive
identification was impossible. It was scarcely possible to
afford mathematical proof that these goods had ever been in
the Catherine Adamson at all. What they knew and could
establish was this : that the vessel was wrecked ; that the
defendants had contracted to recover the cargo ; and that they
had caused goods which they had recovered to be sold as from


the Catherine Adamson. Upon proof of these facts, it would
be for the jury to say whether there would not, under the cir-
cumstances, be proof beyond all reasonable doubt that these
goods were a part of the Catherine Adamson’s cargo. He
(the Attorney-General) might here offer remarks, which would
perhaps come better in reply, upon the extraordinary conduct
of the defendants in putting the plaintiff to such proof that
the goods were on board the Catherine Adamson. Lven then
he would be willing to meet the views of the defendants, if
they would abandon all merely technical questions, and ho-
nestly place the original and true issue before the jury. Let
them admit that these goods which they had recovered formed
part of the Catherine Adamson’s cargo, and leave the jury to
say what amount of salvage ought to be allowed. But he
perceived that there was no willingness to accede to this oner.
He trusted that the defendants would be able to explain here-
after the reasons which induced tnem to rely upon a technical
answer, instead of leaving the true question that of salvage
only—for the decision of the jury. On one occasion, it would
be found the defendants caused some of these goods to be
advertised as from the wreck of the Catherine Adamson or
Dunbar. On another occasion they were advertised in still
more vague terms, as goods recovered from the bottom of the
harbour. It would turn out that the Dunbar was wrecked
some months before, and it would be for the jury to say, judg-
ing from the state of the goods, and the position in which
they had been found, whether it was at all probable that they
had come from the earlier wreck. He thought that, if this
question was raised, he should be. able to give scientific
evidence to rebut any such presumption. .He hoped, alter all,
that the defendants would see the propriety, as mercantile
men, and knowing how this case would be watched elsewhere,
of abandoning any such line of defence. The £4OOO or £SOOO
in question here were not of much importance, and, as most
of the goods were doubtless insured, and the individual losses
consequently small, these individual losses would, be of still
less consequence. But in all mercantile transactions, it was
of the most vital importance that perfect good faith should be
preserved. It was important that the honour and credit, of
the mercantile community here should, be kept at a, high
standard, and should be trusted and relied upon in.all parts
of the world. This was of the greatest importance in a mer-
cantile point of view, and he hoped that for the honour ot
themselves and of the country, they would recede from this
line of defence, and enable the jury to try the single issue
which could he honestly raised. On the part of the plamtitt,
notice had been given to the defendants not to get up any
more of the cargo, as well as a notice not to sell. lus Honor


would tell the jury that, in case of a wreck, all parties were
bound to do what they could to save life and property. But
when there was an owner of the cargo, or the agent of such
owner, on the spot, when the property was recoverable without
risk of life, and when the owner or agent was willing to take the
task of this recovery upon himself, His Honor would tell them
that no mere volunteer would be entitled to remuneration for
the recovery of property. The owners of the property could
attach what conditions they thought fit to its recovery. The
defendants, then, would be entitled to no remuneration what-
ever for the recovery of cargo after their receipt of notice
from the plaintiff not to proceed any further in this work.
The defendants had met them with a denial upon the record of
every cause of action which had been alleged. It would he
remembered th it, although these nogociations and transac-
tions began in October, it was not until December that any-
thing was said about the Dunbar. But the defendants must
have known all about the Dunbar in October as well as in
December, and if the objection had been well founded, it would
naturally have been urged then. It was not until the diffi-
culties already mentioned had arisen, and it had been impos-
sible to secure a salvage of fifty per cent., that defendants
began to entertain a conscientious doubt as to whether these
goods were really the goods of the plaintiff. This, too, was
a matter which would require explanation. Perhaps when
they come to see what were the goods that the defendant had
sold, they would find at the same time in what way it was
he had made this discovery.
Mr. Justice Therry enquired whether, as the Attorney-
General objected to the salvage allowance of fifty per cent.,
he was prepared to suggest any other amount as a fair basis.
The Attorney-General replied, that there was not, in
the present instance, any claim for salvage to he decided
upon. The defendants simply put the plaintiff to a strict
proof of his title. The learned gentleman then proceeded
to quote from Cliitty ; as also a case from 9 Ad. and
EL, 337, upon the subject of a shipmaster’s position and
rights in regard to questions of this nature. The master
had a lien for freight upon the goods carried in his ship.
This was a special property in such goods, which would
entitle him to bring trover for them. In some cases a person
having this special property might maintain trover even
against the owner of the goods. There had been at all times
a willingness on the part of the plaintiff to pay the defendants
liberally. If that were the issue the defendants had come
prepared to try, he was willing to make the necessary amend-


merits of the record even then, so that it might he tried fairly.
All that would be insisted upon was that which had been
contended for in the first instance—a true statement of all
the goods recovered ; so that, in arbitrating upon the defen-
dants’ claim for salvage, there might be a fair rateable pro-
portion of the expenses incurred to the value of the recovered
goods. If the preliminary expenses for the recovery of £IOOO
worth of goods were only the same as for the recovery of £IOO
worth, it would be obviously unfair to allow the same percentage
by way of salvage in both cases. When the defendant intima-
ted that he must have fifty per cent., and that, if this was not
allowed, he would not recognise the plaintiff at all, the latter
could not go on. The plaintiff and his agent, as acting for
others, were bound to exercise great care and caution. He
was still willing, as he had before said, that the amount of
salvage should be the issue tendered to the jury. If the pre-
sent plaintiff could not prove his ownership, how were the
consignees to prove it? He (the Attorney-General) did not
know whether the defendants were laboring under the de-
lusion that they could keep this property unless the owners
turned up and established their claim. He believed, if such
was the case, that they would find themselves mistaken—•
that another authority would be very likely to interfere, and
take it out of their hands. What would be the state of things
if such an appropriation of other people’s property was legally
permissible. A vessel might be wrecked within the limits
of a civilized country, within a short distance of a metropolis
possessing all the machinery of civilised, government, and
yet an individual would be enabled to pick up all goods, of
which the identity could not be strictly proved, and to put
the proceeds of them in his own pocket. What was this but
wrecking, in the old acceptation of the term ? It differed only
from such wrecking as they had heard of in other regions, in
the fact of its being done in open daylight. If the defendants
thought to hold this property, he hoped and trusted they
would find themselves mistaken. The register of the Cather-
ine Adamson and other papers had been lost with the vessel,
but he should be able to prove that the plaintiff had acted as
the master of her. If he also proved that the goods in ques-
tion were found by the defendants, and advertised by them,
or with their concurrence, as having been recovered from the
wreck of this ship, they (the jury) would have no difficulty in
arriving at a conclusion that these goods h id formed apart of
the Catherine Adamson’s cargo. He would prove also, from
conversations, and from the nature of the account sales ren-
dered, a recognition of the plaintiff’s right to recover. He
would not at present trouble them further, entertaining, as
he did, a strong hope that, unless the jury received from the


defendants a full explanation and justification of the course
which they had taken, they would mark by their verdict the
sense in which such a course deserved to be regarded.
Mr. Broadhurst would tell his learned friend at once, he
said, that he did not intend to dispute the fact of Captain
Stuart having been master of the Catherine Adamson.
The Attorney-General said, that this was about one of
the smallest facts of the case. He would, however, accept his
learned friend’s admission.
His Honor. —It is admitted, then, that the plaintiff was
captain of the Catherine Adamson at the time of her wreck.
Mr. Broadhurst. —Yes.
Adam Wilson, having been called and sworn, said : — I am
the official assignee of the estate of Muriel and Miller. I saw
Mr. Miller yesterday. I produce the books of the firm.
(Books produced.) I know Mr. Williamson, the defendant.
(The witness proceeded to particularise the books of Muriel
and Miller which he had brought.)
The letters from plaintiff’s agents to the defendants were
called for pursuant to notice; and these letters were either
produced at once or subsequently.
John Henry Miller, examined by Mr. Wise: —I was a part-
ner in the late firm of Muriel and Miller in the latter part ol
1857. I recollect the wreck of the Catherine Adamson in the
month of October of that year. I know Mr. Williamson, of
the firm of Mitchell and Co. Saw Mr. V\ illiamson with refe; -
ence to sales at that time—about the end of October. Had
many conversations with Captain Williamson. At the time
of my first communication with him, with reference to goods
picked up from the Catherine Adainson, as he told me, they
were not then in my store, but on board the Washington.
Captain Williamson did not come to me. I happened to be
on board the Washington, and he spoke to me. The goods
were there, and I believe they had been picked up. I ad-
dressed Captain Williamson about the goods. I asked him
what he was going to do with them. He said, he supposed
they were going to be sold. I asked him, if they were sold,
to let me have the sale. He said he could not make arrange-
ments yet, but he would let me know. I supposed the goods
to have been those of the Catherine Adamson, but do not
remember that I was told anything about it. I helped to


pick some of them up, and put them on board. I had been
down near the wreck on the same morning that the wreck
occurre 1, but could not get very near it; the sea was too high.
I saw goods on shore and in the water at the place of the
wreck. I saw Captain Williamson afterwards —I think next
day— an d asked him if the goods were to be sold by us. I think
I spoke of them as the goods which he bad recovered, and
asked if they were to be sold by us with other goods from the
Catherine Adamson which we had to sell. He knew what
these other goods were. I had goods to sell which had been
recovered by other people, but had no other goods actually in
store. There was a sort of understanding with Mr. Watt—
not an absolute understanding—that we should have goods
to sell which had been found by others. The goods were
drifting all round the spot. I had subsequently an arrange-
ment with Captain Williamson to sell goods—the particular
lot I saw that day. Caused an advertisement to be pub-
lished. (M.S. of first advertisement produced.) This is in
my handwriting. I did not draw it up under Captain Wil-
liamson’s instructions. If you will let me tell the whole
story, you will better comprehend it. It did relate to the
goods I was to sell for him, or to some of them.
By the Judge. —lt related to some of the goods afterwards
sold by us.
Examination resumed : —lt related to some of these goods,
hut I cannot say whether to the first lot or not.
By the Judge. —lt was inserted in accordance with an ar-
rangement made with Captain Williamson through Mr. Watt,
of the firm of Gilchrist, Watt, and Co.
(A number of draft advertisements having been placed in
the hands of the witness, he said also, in answer to a question
from the Judge):—All these related to goods for the sale of
which I had received instructions from Captain Williamson.
By Mr. Wise. —l was in constant communication with Cap-
tain Williamson on the subject of these goods. The first sale,
I think, was about the beginning of November. I have not
the books here to refer to. (The books having been placed in
his hands, the witness said, while examining them)My
partner knows more about these books than I do. The first
sale was, I think, on the 30th of October. It would be on a
Frid ty. That sale realised £1)73 I Is. lOd. That was the
gross amount; this book does not shew expenses. The book
which would shew a sale on the 3rd of November is not here.
We furnished account sales up to a given point, to Gilchrist,


Watt, and Co. If you would allow me to describe these
transactions to the best of my memory, it would save some
trouble. We furnished one budget of account sales to Gil-
christ, Watt, and Co. (Some papers having been placed in
his hands): —They were previous to these. These were not
furnished as account sales, but only as draft account sales.
Mr. Broadhurst.—We have nothing to do with account
sales furnished by Muriel and Miller to Gilchrist, Watt, and
Co., unless they are brought home to us.
Examination resumed:—We sent the account sales by Cap-
tain Williamson’s orders. I cannot tell the dates of the
account sales furnished prior to these. The account sales
themselves will shew. They relate to goods sold subsequently
to the first lot.
By Mr. Broadhurst.—There are no entries of my own in
the books. They were not kept by myself, but by clerks, and
by Mr. Muriel.
By Mr. Wise.—The sales could be better traced by Mr.
Muriel. The account sales will shew the amount of money.
Paid money first to Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. Cannot tell to
what date. The account sales themselves will shew. The
sale book of the 17th of November is not here. (Looks at
advertisement of that date.) That sale appears to have been
on the 17th of November, and all account sales prior to that
date, were rendered to Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. The proceeds
were also paid to them. During that period, I was in con-
stant communication with Captain Williamson. He gave
directions, prior to the 17th of November, to pay and account
to Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. There were sales subsequent to
the 17th of November. The accounts after that were given
to Mitchell and Co., the defendants. Should say about the
22nd of December, but could not remember the date. Pay-
ments were also made to Mitchell and Co. (Advertisements
placed in witness’s hands): —These three advertisements were
inserted by direction of the defendants. I find an advertise-
ment for a sale on “the 22nd instant,’’ meaning December.
Mr. Broadhurst submitted that the defendants were not
bound by the terms of these advertisements, which did not
proceed from themselves, and consequently that they (the
advertisements) were not admissible.
Examination resumed :—The advertisements were not dic-
tated by Captain Williamson. 1 think there were no more


than one, or it may be two, directions respecting these ad-
vertisements in writing. (Examines manuscripts). This is the
only one (producing advertisement Wednesday, 10th Decem-
ber). The original writing 1 believe to be Mitchell and Co.’s;
the alterations are ours. (Reads advertisement.) We had some
other directions in writing, not respecting the advertisements,
but respecting sales and proceeds, which were handed to our
official assignee. Ido not remember any other instructions
in writing than this, although it is quite possible that there
may have been others. The advertisements are in the room
at the time of the sales, but they are seldom read out.
They are seldom cut out and put in the books. I have seen
Captain Williamson attending sales at our rooms, hut not
very often. I used, from time to time, to give instructions as
to advertisements. I did not consult with Williamson about
the advertisements, hut about the sales. He gave the instruc-
tions for sales, and we prepared the advertisements for them.
(Papers placed in his hand). These are the account sales fur-
nished by us to Gilchrist, Watt, and Co., prior to the 17th
November.
His Honor.—How do you claim for sales in November
when you have had the proceeds ?
Mr. Broadhurst. —■ I submit, therefore, that they have
nothing to do with the matter.
Mr. Barker here explained to his Honor the particulars of
the demand, pointing out that no claim was made of the nature
alluded to. Mr. Wise also pointed out that the demand began
from the 17th of November, and that nothing prior to that
date was claimed.
Examination resumed :—The proceeds of sales on and after
the 17th of November were paid to Mitchell and Co. Some
of these related to goods which had been detained for some
time, in consequence of the prosecution of various parties who
had found them.
Mr. Broadhurst submitted that they had nothing whatever
to do with goods which had been accounted for prior to the
17th of November.
The Attorney-General said that the case which he had
opened to the jury was this : —He did not give the evidence
as to these prior transactions as matters ot proof of the pre-
sent demand, but to shew a dealing with the recovered goods
np to a particular day as the goods of the Catherine Adamson.


If this recognition on the part of the defendants was made
out, and if it was not until after a particular day, and yet, in
reference to goods recovered from the same place, that de-
fendants denied the plaintiff's right of ownership, the defen-
dants, he submitted, must then shew why it was that they
drew this line.
Mr. Wise contended that these acts would amount to a
recognition of Captain Stuart as owner of the goods. They
were entitled for this purpose, to shew what were the actings
of the opposite parties, so as to establish their right of action,
(Roscoe, 47.) This evidence had a direct tendency to prove
that the goods in question were the goods of the Catherine
Adamson, and to cast upon the defendants the task of proving
that they were not so.
Mr. Broadhurst submitted that the objection was unan-
swered. There was no tendency, even, in this evidence to
prove that such goods as were found afterwards belonged to
the same party as the goods which were found at an earlier
period. He could not see any connection whatever between
the account sales and the identity of the subsequently re-
covered goods. Suppose three drowned men were picked up,
and in the pocket of one of them was found a watch, while
in the pockets of the other two were found other valuables ;
would proof of ownership as to the watch be any evidence
whatever as to the ownership of the other articles?
His Honor was of opinion that, if these account sales came
to Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. by the direction of the defendants,
and if it was proved that the goods to which they referred
were brought from the same locality as the goods now claimed;
these documents and the transactions which they rep esented
would be some evidence to shew that the subsequently reco-
vered goods also formed apart of the Catherine Adamson’s
cargo. They would be evidence of a general recognition of
the right of Captain Stuart, and therefore admissible.
Examination resumed:—l cannot say what amount was
paid over, subsequent to the 17tli of November. Mr. Muriel
knows that part of the business. (A paper placed in witness’s
hand.) This is in my handwriting, it is dated the Bth of
December, 1857. I cannot say that I saw Captain William-
son immediately before that. I had no special instructions
from him to write this letter; but he gave me general instruc-
tions not to render Messrs. Gilchrist, Watt, and Co any more
account sales. I cannot say how long before this general
direction was given. After the 17th of November, I rendered


Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. no account sales for goods received
from Mitchell and Co. I have, however, since then, rendered
them account sales for goods received from other people.
The cheques ware given to Williamson. I cannot say whether
by myself or Mr. Muriel.
Mr. Broadhurst.—l am ready to admit the amount which
we have received oil account of goods which we rescued from
the bottom of the sea.
Mr. Wise.—And will you admit also that these goods were
sold pursuant to the advertisements ?
Mr. Broadhurst. —No. I must first cross-examine Mr.
Muriel.
Examination resumed :—Sales took place under advertise-
ments subsequent to the 17th of November. I saw some of
the goods myself. I think I saw the bulk of the goods that
were sold. The Dunbar was wrecked about two months
prior to the wreck of the Catherine Adamson.
His Honor.— In what advertisement did the name of the
Dunbar first come in.
Mr. Barker.—ln that of 10th December.
A discussion here arose, as to what the admission by Mr.
Broadhurst amounted to ; which was terminated by the state-
ment of that gentleman, that he admitted the receipt of the
sums named in plaintiff’s particulars of demand, and on the
dates therein named.
Mr. Wise enquired whether it was also admitted that the
receipts were for goods sold under the advertisements.
Mr. Broadhurst replied that the advertisements were not
yet in evidence.
Mr. Wise said that all the manuscripts of these advertise-
ments had been already spoken to, and tendered in evidence,
while one of them, which was in defendant’s handwriting, had
been actually read.
After some further discussion, it was admitted by Mr.
Broadhurst that the advertisements, of which the manuscripts
had been produced, were duly printed and published in the
" Sydney Morning Herald.”


Examination resumed 'The advertisements were paid for
by Muriel and Miller, and charged against the sales.
By Mr. Broadhurst. —l do not mean to say that any par-
ticular directions were given by Williamson as to the form of
the advertisements. He did not dictate their terms. I did
not submit the drafts to him before publication. I do not
remember any particular objections raised by Captain Wil-
liamson, but I believe he raised some quibble as to one or two
of the advertisements. I believe he objected to the advertise-
ment of some of the goods as from the Catherine Adamson.
I think he raised this objection on one or two occasions.
This was subsequent to the 17th of November —soon after
that date—some two or three days. There was some altera-
tion made in the form of advertisement afterwards, but I do
not remember what it was. I think he said that, instead of ad-
vertising the goods as from the Catherine Adamson, we
should have said that they were goods picked up at the
Heads. This is what I call a quibble. He was angry at my
having advertised the goods as from the Catherine Adamson.
We used the name of the Catherine Adamson to attract buy-
ers to the sale.
By Mr. Wise. —This was shortly after the 17th of No-
vember. He atterwards asked me what goods 1 was ad-
vertising as from the Catherine Adamson, because there were
some goods with which he had nothing to do. I think some
of the goods received from Williamson were afterwards adver-
tised as from the Catherine Adamson, because they were
identified by the consignees. Williamson never said in direct
terms, that these goods were not from the Catherine Adam-
son. We furnished him account sales.
Mr. Wise called for the production of these account sales.
Mr. Broadhurst contended that this was not a proper
time to do so.
Mr. Wise argued that there was now an interlocutory
question as to the admissibility of the advertisements; and
these account sales were of importance as shewing admissions
by Williamson of the identity of the goods, correspondent to
the admissions in the advertisements themselves.
Mr. Broadhurst rejoined, that this did not arise out of his
cross-examination It must, therefore, he considered as new,
and he must have liberty to cross-examine upon it.


After some further discussion, Mr. Wise said that he
would resume his examination in chief.
Examination resumed :—From the 17th of November last,
the advertisements were under the general instructions of
Captain Williamson, and we furnished account sales to him.
Mr. Wise again calling for these account sales, they were
produced by Captain Williamson, and handed to the witness.
Examination resumed:—These purport to he account sales;
-—they are so ; some of them are not signed at all, some are
signed by Mr. Muriel, and some by myself.
Mr. Wise tendered the account sales in evidence.
Mr. Broadhurst. — Pro forma, I take the same objections in
reference to their admissibility as I have already taken to
the first account sales.
Mr. Wise here read from the headings, to shew that the
goods were therein treated as part of the Catherine Adamson’s
cargo, and that the sales were mentioned as having been
affected by order of Captain Stuart.
In answer to questions from the Bench, the witness said:—
We were first authorised to use Captain Stuart’s name by
Gilchrist, Watt, and Co., as a mere matter of form. After the
subsequent instructions by defendants, business was con-
tinued in the same way as at first; the only alteration was,
as to handing over the proceeds of sales to the defendants,
instead of to the plaintiff. Nothing was said about the goods
being different, or about altering the headings of the account
sales. Some of the goods came from Williamson’s stores,
and some direct from the Washington.
[The witness was questioned as to the contents of some of
the account sales, and stated that their dates would vary a
day or two from the actual days of sale ; the dates in the
account sales being those on which they were made out.
They were all headed in the same way as account sales of
goods recovered from the Catherine Adamson, and sold by
order of Catherine Adamson. Witness could not, however,
identify these papers as the account sales actually rendered.
Some of the account sales handed to the witness in a bundle,
having become detached, a question arose as to whether the
plaintiff was not bound to put in all these documents as they
had been handed to him when called for. After some discus-


sion, it was agreed that all the documents in question should
be in evidence, although the plaintiff’s counsel maintained
their right to put in these documents as they thought fit. The
receipts of the nett proceeds under these account sales had
been already admitted.]
Examination by Mr. Wise continued : —lt was after somo
dispute with Gilchrist, Watt, and Co., that Williamson com-
plained about the advertisements. He said he could not get
any satisfactory arrangement with them, and told me not to
hand over any more of the proceeds to them. He said that,
instead of advertising the goods as goods from the wreck of
the Catherine Adamson, they should be advertised as goods
picked up at the Heads of Port Jackson. I had, from time to
time, instructions about advertisements. It was some time
subsequent to the 17th of November, and to the dispute with
Mr. Watt, that I had an order to insert the words “or Dunbar.
I only remember receiving this order in one instance. I be-
lieve I acted in accordance with these instructions. On some
of the goods were marks which were recognised, and these
were sold as goods from the Catherine Adamson.
By His Honor.—There were marks on some of the goods
sold as picked up at the Heads, but not marks to identify
them as having been in the Catherine Adamson. In conse-
quence of marks having been advertised, some of the con-
signees came to the office, and said that these were their
goods. I knew nothing at all about them. They were sold.
None were claimed as belonging to the Dunbar. After the
complaint by Williamson as to the terms of the advertise-
ments, I still continued to advertise the goods as from the
Catherine Adamson, having had no specific instructions not
to do so.
[The witness was questioned as to the amounts paid over
to defendants; but, after some discussion, it was finally ad-
mitted that the total nett amount was £4154 13s. Id.; and it
was stated by the Attorney-General, and not disputed, that
the gross amount, which was what plaintiff claimed, was £4456
12s. 10d.]
A draft advertisement having been placed in the hands of
the witness, he said 'This is the advertisement which refers
to the Dunbar, and is for a sale on the 10th of December —a
sale of silver plate, supposed to have come from the Dunbar
or Catherine Adamson, (Account sale placed in witness’s
hands.) I believe that account relates to the sale of Decem-
ber 10th. The account is dated December 18th. December


10th is written at the top, and I believe that to be the day of
the sale. The heading of the account does not correspond
with the instructions. The goods are simply described here
as “ salvage goods.” The advertisements charged for in the
account sales are the advertisements which were inserted.
Mr. Broadhurst enquired whether the examination of the
witness was to be considered as concluded.
His Honor thought it was so.
Mr. Wise, in again tendering the advertisements, contended
that he had aright thus to tender them whenever it seemed to
him that they had been proved. If any argument was to be
held on objections taken against their reception, and if, after
such argument, it was held by the Judge that they were
inadmissible, he had a right to go on and adduce further evi-
dence for the establishment of their admissibility.
Mr. Broadhurst said that this was not the point. Upon
the examination of his learned friend, he had a right of cross-
examination, and he had a right to insist that the examina-
tion should be concluded before bis cross-examination began ;
otherwise, they might go on cross-examining and re-examin-
ing for ever.
His Honor thought it would be most convenient to con-
clude the examination at once.
Mr. Broadhurst said that, to save time, he would waive
his objection.
In answer to a question from a juror, the witness said
that the goods advertised as from the Catherine Adamson,
subsequent to the 17th of November, were not all the goods
received from Captain Williamson.
By Mr. Broadhurst.—The goods advertised as picked up
at the Heads, I sold in such a manner as I thought they
would come most advantageously into the auction room. I
was guided by the same principle in drawing advertisements.
Besides the goods received from Williamson, there were
goods received from others—from Green, from Singleton, and
from the Water Police. The goods of the other parties were sold
at the same time as those of Williamson. There were also goods
identified by Levicks and Piper, by Favenc and Gwynne,
and by others whose names I forget. I cannot say how long
after the 17th of November it was that I had instructions


from which I used the name of the Dunbar in the advertise-
ment. I believe Captain Williamson objected to the heading
of the account sales of the second lot of goods. I think some
remark was made upon the subject, but I cannot remember
what it was. He did not approve of the heading of them.
By Mr. Wise.—The drafts of the account sales were sent to
Gilchrist, Watt, and Co., for their approval. It was to these that
the objections were raised, after the drafts themselves had been
sent. He directed us not to send any more account sales. I
did not advertise any of the goods of Green, or the others,
in the same advertisements with those of Mitchell and Co.,
but they were sold at the same time. Ido not remember any
being thus included in the same advertisement. I. think that
once, some goods belonging to Levicks and Piper -some
whips—not specially advertised, were sold under Mitchell and
Co.’s advertisement. lam not, however, quite sure. I have
no distinct recollection.
Mr. Wise now formally tendered the advertisements in
evidence.
Mr. Broadhurst submitted that they were not. admissible.
So far from there having been any express sanction by Cap-
tain Williamson of the terms of these advertisements, it now
appeared in evidence that they had been drawn in a manner
contrary to his instructions. The instructions given to the
auctioneer were of the most general character, and the latter
did the best he could, in drawing the advertisements, to obtain
a good sale. Here the terms he had used had been expressly
objected to. The account sales were open to the same objec-
tion, but, even if it were not so, he could not see how these
documents, being of a private character, and passing between
the defendant and the auctioneer, could be construed into a
sanction of public advertisements.
Mr. Wise. —There was evidence that Captain Williamson
was occasionally in the sale room ; that he saw the advertise-
ments without giving any positive directions for a change in
their terms. As to one of them, in which the name of the
Dunbar had been nsed, there had been a special direction by
tbe defendant Williamson, which gave additional significance
to the fact, that no such direction had been given as to any of
the others. To this advertisement, at all events, they w'ere
clearly entitled. The objections which the defendant appeared
to have taken to the account sales, had reference to those
submitted to Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. Sufficient cognizance
on the part of Williamson had been proved to render the ad-


vertisements admissible. The other side could disprove this,
if they thought fit, by calling Captain Williamson himself.
His Honor considered that the safest course would be to
receive them. The receipt of the account sales was to be re-
garded in some degree as an adoption of the advertisements.
The advertisements were then put in, and considered as
read, subject to the exclusion of any which might subsequently
appear to have any reference to matters here in issue.
The witness, in answer to questions from His Honor,
statedl saw a lot of goods picked up at the Heads, and be-
lieve they came from the Catherine Adamson. I cannot say
that I saw any picked up for which I subsequently accounted
to Williamson. Previous to the 15th November I did not see
the divers. The divers were at work miles from where the
Catherine Adamson was wrecked. It was after the 15th
November that I saw goods thus picked up first, opposite the
Quarantine Station. I was on board the Washington when I
saw this. I know one of the men by sight; I think his
name is Bhattie. I think he was employed by Captain
Williamson. I did not perceive any dispute between the
divers. Captain Williamson was on board. We have
often talked about the wrecks of the Catherine Adamsson
and Dunbar. We have talked about getting goods lost
with the Dunbar. Williamson pointed out to me where,
he believed, the wreck of the Catherine Adamson was.
I saw goods picked up there, which were afixrwards
sold. There was some wire and tin plate sold on the 22nd
December. I have some indistinct recollection of a cask of
horse-shoes; but I did not see them picked up. I was not
long there when I saw the tin and the wire. There were
other goods, but not on board the Washington. They were
on board another vessel which the divers had there for their
accommodation, and for the reception of the goods which they
might recover. I have seen this vessel as far as a couple
of miles from where the ship struck. I have seen goods re-
peatedly in the vessel’s hold. The schooner—the divers’ ves-
sel—was employed by Captain Williamson. I believe the
goods I saw on board of her were afterwards sold by us. I
went down afterwards in December, but I cannot say how
often, perhaps half-a-dozen times.
By Mr. Broadhurst. —I saw goods picked up on the beach
of Spring Cove on the day after the wreck of the vessel. Saw
some also picked up in the large hay between Spring Cove
and Manly Beach. Most of the goods consisted of cases and


bales, and some of them bore marks which could be identified,
I remember the place where the Dunbar was wrecked. A
south-east gale would carry the wreck to the same spot where
most of these goods were found. I had ocular demonstration
of this, for I saw some part of the wreck of the Dunbar picked
up beyond where we found the wreck of the Catherine Adam-
son. The Dunbar’s wreck took place a little outside of the
South Head. 1 believe that the wind was then from the east
or south-east, and there was a very heavy sea on at the time
of this wreck. I believe the sea was so heavy that any cases
coming into collision with the rocks would have been broken
up- „ „ , „ ,
By His Honor. — l had been to look at the wreck of the
Dunbar. Part of the goods which were got up and sold were
comparatively although saturated with water ; part of
them stunk horribly and were perfectly rotten.
Cross-examination resumed. —I saw some goods in June
last at Cohen’s auction room, having been asked by Captain
Williamson to look at them. They consisted of cloths or
sheetings, and were sound. They were as sound as some that
had been brought to me previously for sale, and more sound
than others. Sound, except where there had been an injury
from chafing. I tore some of the cloth, and found it as sound
as if it had been scarcely in the water at all. I do not re-
member whether Mr. Phelps was there.
Mr. Wise objected that no connection had been shewn be-
tween these goods at Cohen’s and those forming the subject
matter of this action.
Mr. Broadhurst said that the evidence was gone into to
shew that the state of the goods afforded no criterion as to the
time they had been in the water.
By Mr. Wise. —Of the Dunbar I saw a considerable portion
of the hull and part of the cargo. The hull I saw in various
parts of the harbour, and part of the cargo at “ the Spit,” in
Middle Harbour. Saw casks there marked “ Dunbar.” This
is on the same side of the harbour of Port Jackson as that
upon which the Catherine Adamson was lost. I think I saw
some casks of bottled beer. It was taken away and sold. I
do not remember whether £3O was the whole amount realised
in this way from the Dunbar’s wreck. Williamson did not
buy the wreck, but bought the hull of the Dunbar. There
was a terrific sea for two days after the Dunbar’s wreck. The
things were torn about and scattered in all directions. This
was about two months previous to the time I spoke of as that


at which cargo was got up near where the Catherine Adamson
was wrecked.
By His Honor. —I was not aware either in one way or an-
other whether any of the goods to which these account sales
bore reference belonged to the Dunbar or not.
George Wieson called, sworn, and examined. — I was a
passenger on board the Catherine Adamson.. I had some
goods onboard of her; some thrashing machines and other
goods. Among them there were some horse-shoes packed in
two casks. 1 got lamed in the -wreck, and did not go down
the harbour for some time afterwards. I had some communi-
cation with Mitchell and Co. I got my two casks of horse-
shoes from them. I think this was before Christmas, hut I
am not sure. I paid salvage for them —£6. They were got up
by the divers. I paid as salvage half of what I thought at
the time the horse-shoes had cost. Thought at the time that
I had given £l2 for them, hut subsequently found that they
had cost me only £ll. I saw a great quantity of goods in the
store ; Mr. Mitchell shewed them to me. Ido not remember
what he said. The horse-shoes were advertised in the paper
for sale, and I went to see them. I asked Mitchell if he had
not got two casks of horse-shoes, and he said “ Yes. He
asked if I could certify to their being my property, and 1 said
that I could. I do not remember that anything was said
about the ship at all. There were great heaps of goods there.
They were all wet. There was no conversation about them.
I looked round among them to see if T could discover any
belonging, to myself. I do not remember that any ship s name
was mentioned.
Cross-examined:—l had the had luck to come out in the
Catherine Adamson. This was not the first time I came out
to the colony. I came out also in the Spartan. The captain
of the Catherine Adamson came off in the second boat. I left
her in the first. He left her perhaps fifteen minutes after me.
He got snug on hoard the steamer. The passengers were of
course left. The captain did not seem to exert himself either
on hoard the ship or after he left the ship. He never put
himself out of the way. He was a very easy-going man. I
would sail with him again if he had a ship.
By Mr. Wise.—The horse-shoes were given up at once.
They were marked so that I could have sworn to them.. The
captain could not have carried off any of the cargo in his gig,
but the life-boat might have carried more than went in her.
The Court adjourned at this stage until the following
morning.


SECOND DAY.
Wednesday, 18th August, 1858.
John Wheeler, examined by Mr. Wise :—I am a diver, and
have been engaged in diving operations for ten years. I was
employed in Sydney Harbour last year by Mr. Watt. I was
employed in. Middle Harbour at the Catherine Adamson. I
began operations about a fortnight before Christmas. I am
not sure as to the date. I worked there on and off for about
three weeks. I saw that gentleman (pointing to Captain
Williamson) there. I was there in a ketch or a fore-and-aft
schooner. The Washington came down there; also another
steamer, called, I think, the Curious (Aquarius). She came
there after we were at work, and Captain Williamson came
with her. Another schooner was anchored there. We ran
our anchors out there, and they ran theirs out, leaving room
for both to work. .Williamson steamed right into our quarter
ropes. I begged him not to do so, saying that if he broke the
ropes he would drown my mate, who was then under the ship’s
bottom. Williamson said, “D—n your mate ! What do I care
for your mate ! ” I went down myself there, and saw all sorts
of merchandise, as well as the wreck of the ship—the Catherine
Adamson. I. walked 400 yards, sometimes, under the water.
I saw Mr. Williamson’s man down there once. He was en-
gaged, like myself, in sending up bales of goods. There were
goods in the hulk. Mr. Williamson’s men were sending up
goods alongside of us at the same time. They put these
goods on board their schooner. Ido not know what became
of them afterwards. I have seen them get twenty bales a
day. The goods were all adjoining each other pretty well at
the bottom. I have, had a conversation with Williamson.
He said he would give me an order not to take any of the
ship’s stores, as they belonged to him. I said that I did not
come there for the stores, but for the cargo. I saw trousers,
shirts, and things—all sorts of goods. I saw also several
cases of tin under the water. When I left off work I left
Williamson’s men down there. I left off before Christmas. I
cannot say how long. I was two or three weeks at work
there. The other schooner was there mostly every day while
I was there. The steamers kept going and coming. I re-
ceived some money before I began. I cannot read. (Mr. Wise
placed a receipt in the hands of the witness to fix the date,
but he was unable to read it.)
By His Honor. —Our party consisted of eight. There were
nine in the other party.


By Mr. Stephen.—The other schooner was there before we
began work. I do not know the name of Captain AVilliamsons’
schooner. AVhen we went down she was moored over the
wreck of the vessel. AVe were there first in a small boat,
before the other schooner came. The two schooners were there
at the same time, and the other finished mooring first. AVe
did not interfere with Captain AVilliamson’s operations. There
was at least room for four more to work. The rope from our
vessel was not across his bow, but underneath. His divers
did not threaten to cut our rope. lam not prepared with the
date when we left off. I cannot say how much goods we got
up. I believe a hundred and some odd pounds’ worth. The
goods, which I traced all the way from the wreck along the
ground, were boots, single bottles, cases, and other matters.
The largest lots of goods were got away from the wreck. AVe
got the largest quantity 300 or 400 yards from the ship, and
along the edge of the rocks, on the sand, between the wreck
and the Quarantine Ground. lam not prepared to say what
goods Captain AVilliamson’s men got, but I saw them get
several bales and casks from the wreck.
By His Honor. —I should say that others were got by them
farther away from the wreck.
By Mr. AVise. —AVe did not get much, because they ob-
structed us. AVe brought an action against them. They went
down under water before us. AVe allowed them to moor first
because we would not interfere with them.
By His Honor.—l saw them get goods between the rocks
and the wreck. I could see below that they came from the
same hulk. AVe went away because we were obstructed. The
goods they got up were of the same kind as we were getting
Xl p—hale goods, shirts, calicoes, and trousers.
Henry Goodwin, examined by Mr. Norton. —I am a diver,
and was employed by Gilchrist, AVatt, and Co. upon the wreck
of the Catherine Adamson. This was some time before
Christmas —-a week, a fortnight, a month, or three weeks; I
cannot be sure which. I can read. (Receipt handed to him.)
This is my signature. Three weeks before Christmas, I think
it was. AVe worked from the wreck of the Catherine Adamson
right up to the rocks and to the Quarantine Ground. Could
trace cargo there from five fathoms of water to twelve. The
Quarantine Ground is about a-quarter of a mile from the
wreck. It was by drift that the goods went. I was under
water there. Cannot say that I saw any other person under
water there. I went under the bottom of the Catherine


Adamson altogether. I sent up cases, horse-shoes, nails,
guns, brass hinges. The horse-shoes were inside the ship.
There were no bale goods at the wreck. They were drifted
from the wreck to the Quarantine Ground. The goods we got
were mostly wearing apparel. I saw no one under water;
but afterwards, when I was up, I saw, not the length of this
room from me, Captain Williamson’s party get up the same
kind of goods as we were getting up —wearing apparel. They
were put on board their schooner. Saw goods of this kind on
board their schooner, on deck. I could not say what there
was in the hold. I never went on board. I saw mosquito
curtains, trousers, and the same kind of goods as we were
getting.
By His Honor.—We were both getting the same kind of
goods, and at the same place.
Examination resumed :—We worked there three weeks, and
stopped because we were interrupted. Captain Williamson
would not allow us to work. He was down there the principal
part of the time, and was the instigator of the obstructions.
He brought us a written notice not to take up the goods. We
were interfered with in every respect. When we were along-
side the wreck, they would bring a steamboat or a schooner,
or something else, between us and the wreck, and clear us off.
I had no conversation with Williamson about the interference.
I told him it was wrong to interfere, and he cursed us as much
as he could.
By Mr. Broadhurst. —l will swear that I spoke to Captain
Williamson himself. I spoke to him near the Quarantine
Ground. He came and wanted to take away a coil of rope
from us, which we had got at a little distance from the
Catherine Adamson, I told him that he might take it if he
thought proper, but that we had orders not to give it him. We
were afloat, and he came alongside in a whaleboat. This was
about two or three miles from the wreck. We had gone there
to anchor, when he came. We took the coil of rope for moor-
ing. It appears that Captain Williamson claimed the rope as
part of the cargo of the Catherine Adamson. He did not take
the rope, but took part of a wire stay. He did not tell us
that he had purchased the stores, nor did we say that he
could not prove that the things belonged to the Catherine
Adamson. We said nothing of the kind. I will swear it.
We were brought up from Melbourne. Wheeler was one of
my party ; he was my mate. The party consisted of Wheeler,
myself, and men whom I hired. William Reader was one. I do
not know what became of the notice left by Captain William-
c 2


son. It was given to Wheeler, and left with him. I did not
read it, hut heard it read. (Mr. Broadhurst here read a notice
prohibiting getting up the wreck or stores, the word cargo
not being mentioned.) That is the notice ; I will not say for
certain that the word cargo was at all mentioned. I think
that (the notice read by Mr. Broadhurst) is correct. The rope
came out of the ship. We got it among the other goods.
The wearing apparel and other things were got about half-a-
mile from the wreck, close to the Quarantine Ground, in the
same direction where we found the other goods about a
quarter of a mile from the dry rocks. I mean low-water
mark. I never went in the direction of South Head at all.
I could see nothing in that direction.
By His Honor. — l was not aware at the time that Captain
Williamson was entitled to the rope. I got the notice of this
first from Captain Williamson himself. It was inch and a-
half rope, such as is usually in ships’ stores, but it might be
cargo.
Cross-examination resumed:—We were interfered with
mostly every day when under water by Mr. Williamson’s
party. I never inquired the name of his foreman. Whenever
we went near them, they commenced swearing, telling us to
go to Port Phillip again. Not only the men did this, hut
Williamson himself. We never interfered with them at all.
I will swear it. It was a very “had spec” for Captain Wil-
liamson to try and put his boat in between the two vessels
when I was under water, and to drown me. I heard him give
his men orders to cut the rope. I was pulled up before Cap-
tain Williamson cut the rope. His foreman cut it by his
order. He gave the other men orders first, and they would
not do it.
By His Honor. —Our mooring was attached to this rope.
By Mr. Wise. —(Paper put in witness’s hands.) I cannot
read this very well. We received some paper from Captain
Williamson. This looks like it. We received two papers
from him, and I think this is one of them, hut I would not
swear to it. Wheeler took charge of the papers. Whatever
notices were received, Wheeler had. The rope in question was
about 1| inch rope. It looked like running rigging. It was
a new coil, and lay among the other goods. 1 could not tell
whether it was stores or cargo. Our orders were to take
cargo only. The goods we recovered we gave to Gilchrist,
Watt, and Co. We did not try to take anything which be-
longed to the ship. (Mr. Wise here read a notice similar to


that already read by Mr. Broadhurst, except that the word
cargo was mentioned as among the matters which the men
were warned not to recover.) I think that was the notice,
but I am not sure.
William Barker, one of Plaintiff’s Attorneys.—l know
Wheeler the diver. This document (the one read by Mr. Wise)
was given to me by Wheeler, in December last, for the pur-
pose of preparing an affidavit, to be used in an action by
Wheeler and his partner against the defendants.
By Mr. Broadhurst.— That action is still pending. There
are, in fact, cross actions between them and the defendants,
and by the defendants against them. No declaration has been
filed in either, and they may be considered as abandoned.
John Wheeler recalled.—l recollect the papers given to me
by Captain Williamson on the first day he came down. I saw
Mr. Barker afterwards, and left them with him.
By Mr. Broadhurst. —The notice was read to us forbidding
us to touch the ship’s stores. Captain Williamson read the
paper to us which he delivered. I am not aware that any-
thing was read about cargo in the paper which was read
by Captain Williamson. I told him we only came to get the
cargo, and not the stores. Ido not remember hearing a word
about cargo.
By Mr. Wise. —We had three orders: from Prince, Bray,
and Ogg, from Levicks and Piper, and from another firm,
authorising us to get goods, but in his declaration Captain
Williamson forbid us to touch them.
By Mr. Broadhurst. —l never heard Captain Williamson
say anything about having nothing to do with the cargo. I
will swear that Captain Williamson handed us the paper which
he read, and no word about the cargo was read. He left one
about the Dunbar likewise, at the same time.
Joseph Woods Smith.— l am the master of Her Majesty’s
ship Herald.- I have been engaged in surveying this harbour.
I know where the Dunbar was wrecked. I was employed
from the south of that place, from Bondi to the Heads, and
thence inward as far as Bradley’s Head. I was the principal
in this part of the survey, and had an assistant. I had my
quarters at the Quarantine Ground at the time the Dunbar
was wrecked. I saw the results of the wreck next morning.
I know the spot were the Catherine Adamson was wrecked.


I believe the place is called the “ Old Man’s Hat.” (Chart
of the harbour placed in the hands of the witness.) The
wreck of the Dunbar is marked here correctly. The wreck of
the Catherine Adamson occurred there (pointing to its site
on the chart). I was engaged on the survey of the locality
between the two wrecks for nearly a month. Part of my
work was to observe the currents. This was a necessary
branch of my survey. (Another map was here handed up to
His Honor by Captain Williamson, but the judge pointed out
that there was a difference between this and the large chart.
After some discussion upon the irregularity on the part of
Captain Williamson, of handing up this map and speaking to
the judge, it was agreed to let the matter drop.) Plenty of
goods from the wreck of the Dunbar were carried next day
to the point where the Catherine Adamson was wrecked;
chiefly what are termed dry goods. Ido not think any cur-
rent would carry goods from one place to the other. The cur-
rents are all marked on the charts. The flood tide comes up
further south, and passes up the grand harbour towards Syd-
ney. There is a current to the North Harbour, but not a
strong one. I think it highly improbable that any goods
would be carried by the current to where the Catherine Adam-
son was lost, and left there. They would be carried up the
main harbour, or into Middle Harbour. The distance between
the two wrecks is about a mile and three-quarters. Ido not
believe that iron work would ever move from the spot where
it went down. As to bales of drapery goods, the matter
must depend upon their specific gravity. Goods which got
to the bottom in the centre of the channel would be lying, in
fact, in a pool, and would not be likely to move from thence
up hill. There were seventeen fathoms of water in the centre
of this channel. Ido not think that any goods which sank
where the Dunbar was wrecked could, by any means, get to
the spot where the Catherine Adamson was wrecked.
By His Honor.—Light goods might be blown in this direc-
tion by the south-east gales, and might be thus carried to
where the Catherine Adamson was wrecked; but they would
be carried on the surface of the water.
By Mr. Broadhurst.—At the time of the Dunbar’s wreck
there was a very heavy sea. The wind and swell would have
the effect of carrying floating goods before them. Goods
which floated could go in the direction of the Catherine Adam-
son, and sink there. Floating goods might go anywhere. I
saw a mass of floating goods in North Harbour and J 1 iddle
Harbour. Floating goods could not help going that way. It
Was blowing a gale of wind, If floating packages were


smashed against the rocks, and then sank, it was likely that
the goods of the Dunbar would sink about the same spot
where the Catherine Adamson was lost. (Map pointed to.)
I do not know of any eddy caused by the ebb tide about here.
Ido not think it probable that there is such an eddy. If the
specific gravity of goods was such as would cause them to
float, and to drift before the wind, they would, under ordinary
circumstances, continue floating.
By His Honor.—l do not think bale goods would float. If
goods sank, they would not be likely to be raised again to a
higher level. There might be cases where the specific gravity
of particular goods was so much greater than that of the
water at the surface, that they would sink to a considerable
depth; but yet, as the water was more dense at its lower
depths, their specific gravity might be less than the water at
these depths, and consequently they would not reach the bot-
tom, but float, as it were, beneath the surface.
By Mr. Broadhurst.—The goods that floated back again
could not possibly go to the southward. Parts of the wreck
were found scattered very widely, as well as portions of the
cargo—light goods. Saw no bale goods, forming part of the
Dunbar’s wreck, picked up.
The Attorney-General now put in the contract for sale ot
the wreck of the Catherine Adamson. The signature of this
contract was admitted by Mr. Broadhurst.
Hutchinson Hothersell Brown, examined by Mr. Wise.—
I know the plaintiff and defendants. I produce a letter dated
December 4th, and signed by Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. and
Mitchell and Co. We—myself and two others—had acted as
referees in some matters between them, and there was a second
reference, to which this letter relates. (The letter was then
put in and read.) After receiving this letter we went into the
arbitration of the matter. The other arbitrators were Mr.
Henry Fox and Mr. Charles Smith. lam not sure whether
Captain Williamson was there at the time of the second refe-
rence, but we talked the matter over, and ascertained what
the expenses came to. The first reference related to goods
which had been saved from the beach, or which were floating.
This was settled. I see the £1574 referred to here. We were
not aware of other goods having been saved from the wreck,
but became aware of the fact at this inquiry. I cannot say
who told us, but I believe it was some of the witnesses. I
cannot say that Captain Williamson was there, but I believe
that some of the people from Mitchell and Co. s were present.


I cannot say that we told Williamson, but the arbitrators
thought it desirable to inform Mr. Watt of the fact which
they had learned. The £1574 covered all the goods which
had been sold, hut we found that other goods had been brought
up, and we thought it desirable that they should be included
in. the same reference. We waited until these goods were re-
alised, but the reference went off.
Mr. Broadhuest objected to this evidence as irrelevant.
_ The Attorney-General contended that the evidence had a
direct hearing upon the question of ownership. £1574 was
made the basis of the reference, and this was for goods from
the Catherine Adamson. If it was shewn that other goods
were got up under the same circumstances, this would go to
prove that plaintiff had a right of action as to the whole.
The objection was dropped without further discussion.
Examination resumed : —After we met again the goods had
been sold, or were in the course of sale, and an objection was
made by Captain Williamson personally. He objected to our
taking into our consideration any other goods than those
which were included in the second reference, amounting to
£1574 odd, as mentioned in the joint submission. Any other
goods got subsequent to that, he declined to have taken into
account, saying that he would deal with them himself. He
considered that Mr. Watt had no legal claim to them—that he
had himself as good a claim to them as Mr. Watt. He would
deal with them himself, and would account to the parties
legally entitled. The arbitrators then considered that they
could not proceed further. The second arbitration fees were
paid by Mitchell and Co. Application was made for payment
to Gilchrist, Watt, and Co., but they objected, because they
had not caused the reference to go off. They had been willing
to go on. Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. paid for the first reference.
Hxs Honor.— We have nothing to do with that now.
Examination resumed: —l think there was some arrange-
ment made that the parties soould communicate statements in
writing. (Kefers to papers.) Here is Mr. Watt’s letter to
that effect. I find nothing of the kind from Captain Wil-
liamson. I think the arbitrators did not like to confine
him so.
By Mr. Broadhuest. —We acted under an arbitration agree-
ment or bond.


Mr. Broadhurst submitted that they were entitled to have
this instrument placed in evidence.
The Attorney-General. —Put it in if you like.
Mr. Broadhurst. —No ; you should put it in. It is made,
by reference, a part of the letter to the arbitrators already in
evidence.
His Honor. —I must leave the plaintiff’s counsel to manage
their case as they like.
Mr. Broadhurst contended that the instrument in question,
bein 0- referred to in the letter of reference, was virtually in-
corporated with the latter. As this letter was in evidence,
the bond ought consequently to be in evidence also.
The Attorney-General contended that this bond could
have no bearing upon the issue. The present evidence was
o-iven to show admissions on the part of the defendants that
particular lots of goods, portions of those now sued for, had
formed part of the Catherine Adamson’s cargo. It was °t no
importance to the present case to ascertain what were the
terms of the arbitration, or even that there had been any
arbitration at all. The only thing they wanted was the
admission.
Mr. Wise followed on the same side.
His Honor said—Ho you think this a matter worth while
to risk a new trial upon ?
Mr. Wise said it was already in evidence that the arbi-
tration under the bond was finished—the award made and
acted upon. This was a new submission.
His Honor said that there might be something in this bond
to affect the new submission.
The Attorney-General.— That is not the question. Is our
evidence as to the admission sufficient without it.
His Honor. —I cannot say, not having seen the bond.
Mr. Broadhurst —If there is any doubt, I will not risk a
new trial on this point, and I therefore withdraw my objection.
Cross-examination of witness by Mr. Broadhurst.— Persons


appeared before us on the reference, for Gilchrist, Watt, and
Co. on one side, and for Mitchell and Co. on the other. Wil-
liamson said that he went into this arbitration as a matter of
courtesy. That he did not consider, from the opinion which
he had taken, that Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. had any legal
right. He said that, as he had gone into a reference upon the
goods first saved, so also he would go into a reference upon
the goods saved up to that time, but not in relation to any
goods to be saved subsequently. The arbitration was broken
off, because the arbitrators thought that they must take an
account of all or of nothing. They would not go into the
simple question of this £1574, but would have under conside-
ration all the goods actually recovered, or none. I think Mr.
Watt said that he would leave it to the arbitrators, and that
they decided this of themselves. I was Water Police Magis-
trate for many years, and have had considerable experience
in reference to this harbour. Ido not know where the Dunbar
was wrecked. It is difficult to say where this was, but I
know where she was said to have been wrecked. There can
be no doubt she was wrecked before she got to the South
Head. I know also where the Catherine Adamson was
wrecked. I remember the weather at the time of the Dunbar’s
wreck. I was not down there on the morning after the
wreck, but on the following morning. There was a south-east
gale and a heavy swell. If bale goods were dashed against
the South Head, and broken, it is quite probable that they
would float to the Quarantine Ground and to Middle Harbour.
I saw nothing actually recovered from the Dunbar’s wreck—
no bales—none that I can remember. I did not take any par-
ticular notice. I saw some goods sold by Muriel and Miller,
but it was quite impossible to say which ship they belonged
to. I do not like to hazard opinions as to whether goods
found in deep water or near the Quarantine Ground were
likely to belong to one vessel or the other. (Looks at chart.)
It is quite possible that goods may have floated from the place of
one Wreck to that of the other, and sunk there. The direction
that goods would go in would depend very much on the tide.
If goods were held afloat till the tide turned, they might be
brought back, and sink in the direction of the Catherine
Adamson s wreck.
By Mr. Wise. — l can give no reason why any goods from
the Dunbar should sink just where the Catherine Adamson
was wrecked. I should think that those who were looking
after the goods must be the best judges. A pig of ballast or
a keg of nails would not float. Drapery goods would float in
the first instance, but would become saturated and would sink.
After the wreck of the Catherine Adamson I saw many bales
floating.


By His Honor.—lf floating within a mile of the shore, the
hale might still not reach the shore, from being water-logged.
By Mr. Wise.—The Dunbar’s wreck was broken up very
rapidly. There was nothing but a few spars when we arrived.
The reference went off because Captain Williamson, one ot
the principles who signed the letter with which it was
initiated, was not willing that any other goods should he
taken into consideration than those represented by the £1574,
and the arbitrators would not deal with the case unless the
other goods were included.
Samuel Alexander.—(This witness was, in the first in-
stance, questioned as to bis having been in court during the
trial, and admitted that he had been present for a short time,
but added that he was not then aware of witnesses having
been ordered out. IVhen he was made aware of this, he had
retired.) —1 attended a sale of saddlery at Muriel and Miller s
—several lots—after the wreck of the Catherine Adamson. I
had seen some sold before by Martyn and Schroder. This was
a few days after the wreck of the Catherine Adamson. I was
not down at the wreck of that vessel, but I was at Manly
Beach, and saw one little article of saddlery there. The sad-
dlery which I saw sold was of the same description as I had
ordered. I had sent to England for it, and had. received ad-
vices that the goods were to come by the Catherine Adamson.
I was present on several occasions at such sales. The freight
(looking at invoices) was payable in Sydney.
By Mr. Bkoadhukst.—The goods were insured. I never
claimed them.
The Attorney-General submitted that this was unim-
portant.
By Mr Broadhurst. —I can swear, to the best of my belief,
that the goods which I saw at Muriel and Miller’s were goods
which had been sent out to me. Had some goods by the Dunbar
candles, but no saddlery. I saw a small article of saddlery
at the hotel, Manly Beach. Did not know where it was found,
except from what I was told. I recognised it at once. The
sale at Martvn and Schroder’s might be four or five days after
the wreck, *1 saw before the sale the goods which they sold.
Saw them at Gilchrist, Watt, and Co.’s.
Mr. Wise put in two advertisements of sales for the 19th
December, 1857—one for the sale of goods “ from the Catherine
Adamson,” and the other for the sale of goods picked up at


the Heads. Also, the power of attorney, dated 3rd November,
1857, from the present plaintiff to Mr. Watt.
Mr. Noeton put in two orders from Gilchrist, Watt, and
Co. to defendants, for the delivery of goods; the letter of
sth November, 1857, from Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. to defen-
dants ; the joint letter of 4th December, 1857 ; Mr. Watt’s
letter as attorney for Stuart, of 14th December, 1857 ; Defen-
dants’ letter of 17th December, 1857 ; Mr. Watt’s reply of same
date; Mr. Watt’s letter of the 19tli December; defendants’
letter of the 21st December, to Mr. Watt as attorney for Cap-
tain Stuart; Mr. Watt’s reply of same date; the defendants’
rejoinder of the 24th December; Mr. Watt’s letter to defen-
dants, of the 27th December ; and a letter of the Bth Decem-
ber, from Muriel and Miller to Mr. Watt.
The plaintiff’s case was then closed.
James Williamson called, and examined by Mr. Bboad-
hubst.—l am one of tlie firm of Mitchell and Co., the defen-
dants. It is I who have been referred to by the witnesses as
Captain Williamson. I remember the wreck of the Dunbar.
This wreck took place on the 20th of August. I went down
that morning as soon as the report came to Sydney. I have
been a nautical man for more than thirty years. There was, at
the time of the wreck, a heavy gale of wind from the E.S.E.
The effect of this was, to send up a very heavy sea right
across the Heads and on the cliffs. I saw portions of the
wreck right across the harbour. I went down in the steamer
as far as South Reef. I could see nothing from the steamer
but portions of wreck floating about. I could see nothing
like life which I could save, and which was what I principally
booked for. I could see no pieces of wreck large enough to
have any person supported and concealed by them. I landed
Mr. Crook, the Harbour Master, at Watson’s Bay, and I then
went on and brought up in safety a schooner which was lying
in considerable danger at South Reef. I did nothing in
reference to the Dunbar. The sea was so fearfully high that
I could not venture across the harbour with the steamer. I
returned to Sydney. The next day I saw bodies from the
wreck. I searched North Harbour, Middle Harbour, and the
Quarantine Ground ; and went outside the Heads, opposite the
spot where the man was found. There was still a heavy swell
sent in from the E.S.E., but nothing to what there had been
the day before. I saw large quantities of wreck strewed
about the beach in all directions. We afterwards purchased
the wreck.


Mr. Wise objected that the contract for the purchase of the
Dunbar’s wreck was in writing, and ought to be placed in
evidence, if that purchase was to be proved.
In answer to a question from Mr. Broadhurst, the witness
said :—I afterwards recovered for myself portions of the wreck
of the Dunbar.
Mr. Wise again objected.—lf there was a contract, the con-
tract would speak for itself, and would shew if it had any
hearing upon the issue. If there was no contract, they had
nothing to do with the actings of the witness in reference to
the Dunbar’s wreck.
Mr. Broadhurst only wanted evidence, he said, as to the
mere fact of the purchase. He did not care about the terms
on which it was made, and there was no need, therefore, to go
into the contents of the contract.
His Honor thought they might have this.
Mr. Wise said that, if it was admitted the purchase did not
include the cargo, that was all he cared about.
Mr. Broadhurst admitted that the purchase of the cargo
was not included.
Examination resumed:—l am well acquainted with the
harbour. This has been my residence, when not at sea, for
the last twenty-five years. I am acquainted with the effects
of particular winds and weather. I have no doubt that goods
from the wreck of the Dunbar might have drifted to the
place where the men were at work. The Dunbar was wrecked
in the early part of the morning. It was nine or ten o’clock
when I was there. It was then flood tide. I remember that
the vessel which we rescued and brought in, had a quantity of
muslins and printed calicoes entangled in her chain, and stream-
ing inwards. These goods being entangled in the chain,
caused great difficulty in getting in the anchor. This vessel
was at the tail of the reef, and only half sheltered. These
facts impressed upon my memory a recollection that there
was a flood tide, and a verry strong current setting in, pro-
duced by the wind. I know the particular place where the
hulk of the goods forming the subject of this action was
found, and I think it likely that the Dunbar’s goods were
carried there. (Points out place on chart.) This was the
site of the Catherine Adamson’s wreck. Mr. Smith has point-
ed out the wrong point. I know the exact spot. It is exactly


where the figure 5, for fathoms, is marked here, on the inner
North Head. The set of the flood tide, with a swell from the
eastward, would he sure to float goods, that were floatable,
over towards Quarantine Point, in a direct line from the place
where the Dunbar struck. I saw them floating in that direc-
tion. I saw goods picked up, as well as dead bodies, at the
Quarantine Ground, as well as at this little hay (pointing to
chart) between the Quarantine Ground and the inner North
Head. Part of the Dunbar’s wreck was got there, and there
are portions of it there now. I have another reason for be-
lieving that these goods came from the Dunbar. Most of
them were in tin or zinc cases. Originally, no doubt, they
were in outer wooden cases, which were broken up on the
rocks, and the tin or zinc cases then sank. I can account for
the difference between myself and Mr. Smith, as to the site of
the Catherine Adamson’s wreck. The wreck itself cannot be
seen ; it is under water; but part of it which has drifted is
to be seen. The bottom of the ship is still in the place where
she sank. Packages would be likely to be dashed against the
rocks immediately after the Dunbar’s wreck. I saw goods in
all directions. Saw no bales, but believe some rags were
picked up. The wreck of the Catherine Adamson occurred on
the 2-fth of October. I received information that morning of
a vessel having been lost at the Heads. I drove into town as
fast as I could, and I met Mr, Watt. He said he had just
come from the Catherine Adamson, which had been lost at
the Heads. I asked if the Washington had come up. He
said, “ Yes, she has just come.” I asked him, did he want
my steamer. He said, “ I don’t know —I can’t tell you be-
fore one o’clock.” I said, “ You must say yes or no, at once.”
He said, “ I can’t say yes or no.” I said, “ Well, then, I
shall go down on my own account.” I started with the
steamer about eleven o’clock, taking with me Captain
M‘Lerie and a number of the police; likewise Mr. Jones, the
late Colonial Treasurer, and Mr. Donaldson, also an ex-Colonial
Treasurer, as well as a number of others. We arrived at the
Quarantine Ground in about half-an-hour. I saw, in a little
bay immediately outside the Quarantine Ground, masts lying
on the beach. Saw also a number of cases floating into the
Quarantine Ground and Middle Harbour, likewise towards
Manly Beach, and into the little bay to the northward of the
Quarantine Ground. The Catherine Adamson was all to
pieces. I saw no cargo drifting towards the spot from whence
the goods now in question were recovered. They were drift-
ing past this spot. There was a stiff breeze blowing, but not
very much of it. It was blowing from the south-east. There
was a pretty heavy swell, but nothing like when the Dunbar
was wrecked. The swell set inwards towards the Quarantine


(ground. I went into the North Harbour, and to the little
bay to the north of the Quarantine Ground. The men com-
menced getting on hoard as much of the goods as they could.
They worked until about five o’clock. The goods picked up
were generally close to the rocks of the little hay. Many
cases were marked. Some of them were not broken at all.
I have no doubt that all these came from the Catherine Adam-
son. The goods picked up on that day and on the day following
have all been sold. Mr. Grahame, acting for Lloyds’agents,
claimed them. I never raised any question as to their being
part of the goods of the Catherine Adamson. They were put
into our yard. Mr. Grahame came from Mr. Watt next day,
and said he had arranged with Mr. Watt that the latter
should take charge of them as agent of the ship. I said it
was a matter of indifference to me who took charge of them,
so long as my salvage was paid. I saw Captain Stuart and
spoke to him ; hut he never interfered with me, or communi-
cated with me about the recovery of the goods. I never saw
him even with his coat off. Mr. Grahame professed to act for
Lloyds, on behalf of the insurers. He agreed with me that I
was entitled to a salvage, although we came to no terms.
When Gilchrist and Watt came to me, and said it was agreed
that the ship’s agents instead of Lloyds’ agents should take
the matter in hand, I said it was a matter of indifference to
me who took charge, provided my salvage was paid. Mr.
Watt then asked if I had any objection to deliver the goods
to his order. I said no, on condition that he gave a guarantee
to pay my salvage as awarded on arbitration by arbitrators
appointed by both parties. He agreed to this. He advertised
in the papers, and sent orders for goods, which were delivered.
I do not know who advertised, only that there were these
advertisements. (Any evidence as to these advertisements
was objected to by the Attorney-General, and the matter was
not pressed.) The goods were partly delivered upon orders
sent by Messrs. Gilchrist, Watt, and Co., and were partly sent
to Muriel and Miller, by whom they were sold, under instruc-
tions from Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. I bought the wreck at
auction, at Bowden and Threlkeld’s. After I had bought it
—either on the next day or on the day following—l made
arrangements with Mr. Watt, in order to relieve the police
who were stationed there at the expense of the ship. It was
agreed that my men should take charge of all the cargo which
came ashore, provided he (Mr. Watt) did not allow other par-
ties to interfere. I received, subsequently, an announcement
from them, that they could not prevent other parties from in-
terfering. At this time, the only thing that could be seen at
the wreck where the men went down were some cloths and
leather belts entangled in the rigging. Our arrangement had


reference, chiefly, to these goods. That arrangement was
done away with at Watt’s own request, and there was no sub-
sequent arrangement. All the goods arbitrated upon were
those picked up during the first two days. No other goods
were picked up, except those leather belts entangled in the
rigging, and some rags and bales of brown paper. These
were the only goods which we got after the arbitration, until
the middle of the month of November. After they had suc-
ceeded in getting the rigging, the men were employed in get-
ting the chains and anchors, and finding they could not get
them, I hired diving apparatus. The men when under water
discovered many things. The divers are here. I have had
two or three vessels down there, as well as boats. The Archi-
tect, the Clyde, and the Venus were there at different periods
for the use of the divers. I saw several bales of clothing,
silk, bags, and various other goods, brought up from twelve
fathoms water, after we got the diving apparatus. (Witness
here pointed on the chart to the place where he had seen these
goods raised.) The furthest place from the shore where I saw
goods brought up was from three-quarters of a mile to a
mile, and was in the track over which the Dunbar’s goods
passed. Ido not see the slightest chance of goods from the
Catherine Adamson getting there. It was impossible that
goods from cases which were broken on the rocks at the time
of the wreck, and near the wreck, could drift there. I like-
wise saw goods taken out of the wreck of the Catherine
Adamson. The horse-shoes were got out of the wreck. There
are plenty of goods there now. The silver-plate was got a
long way from the wreck. I cannot tell whether it came from
the Catherine Adamson or not. Silver-plate would float a
long way before it would sink. I believe there is still more
iron there, and more copper and other heavy goods. Many of
the goods recovered were, undoubtedly, from the Catherine
Adamson. I never attempted to deny it. All that were found
in or near the wreck were so. I was never, that I remember,
called upon to give up goods got by diving away from the
wreck. (An instrument under seal, referred to as an arbitration
bond, was here read by the Clerk of the Court. It bore date
the 2nd November, 1857, and was a reference to arbitration
by Mr. Watt and the defendants.) I saw some cases and
packages brought up from the deep water, at distances vary-
ing from a few hundred yards to three-quarters of a mile.
The packages were dinted as if beaten on the rocks. They
were all saturated with water. Some stank very much, and
some were very fresh. Most of the packages were broken in
getting them in, but some were got in entire. The last I saw
myself got up must, I think, have been some time in Jan-
uary. We were getting up until February or March. Some


have got things up since—some in June —but I did not see
them. I remember the letter as to a proposed reference. I lie
arrangement was made in consequence of Gilchrist, Watt, and
Co. having acted before as agents for the ship. I had no ob-
jection to their taking charge of the goods recovered subse-
quent to the 15th November. It began by Mr. Watt asking
me what I was going to do. I said, I did not know what to
do. I did not care about being troubled by people coming a
long time afterwards with claims for goods ; and I had no ob-
jection to give him the charge, on his guarantee to hold nim-
self responsible to any party making these claims, and lor e
payment of salvage. I said, at the same time, that i did no
acknowledge any right he had to these goods, and that, 1
their house had been a mushroom house, I would not nave
handed over anything to him ; but, as they were a respectable
house, I should by this means get my salvage, and they
would get their commission. These were the goods wine
had not been disposed of under the arbitration bond, ihe
men began to work on the 15th of November, but until the
end of November no goods came up for sale, except such as
were undoubtedly those of the Catherine Adamson. The hrst
lots of goods were sold by my oonsent, and the proceeds passed
to Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. The others were accounted lor to
myself alone. These were recovered after we got the diving
apparatus for the deep sea, and could not have been otherwise
recovered. The agreement for reference was made by mysell
and Mr. Watt, and a paper was signed. (Letter of 4th Decem-
ber, 1857, handed to witness.) This is the paper. v\ hen 1
signed that paper, which was written by Mr. Watt, I observed
at the same time that it was hard to say where the goods
came from. Up to that time no claim had been made upon
me by Captain Stuart, or by any person claiming to act as
his agent. I dealt with Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. as respectable
merchants, and did not know that they were attorneys lor
Captain Stuart till a month afterwards. This was at the hrst
sale, before the £1570 sale. I told Muriel and Miller after the
first sale, to account to myself alone, and not to render
account sales to Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. _ I told Mr Watt
that I should do so. I distinctly told him that be had no
right to the goods—as a right. He never said that he had.
He never said that he was attorney for Captain Stuart. 1
dealt with them as Gilchrist, Watt, and Co whom I looked
upon as respectable merchants. I told Mr. Watt, as to the
very first goods which were got up, that I did not believe
they were all the Catherine Adamson’s, because some were
very much decomposed. This was about the 15th of Novem-
ber; when we got the diving dresses, I likewise instanced
the case of a water tank which was picked up by the divers


covered over with green slime, while immediately afterwards
other water tanks were picked np perfectly fresh, with the
paint on them, and within a few yards of the same spot. I
never authorised Muriel and Miller to advertise any goods as
from the Catherine Adamson, unless such as they knew to be
from her. I never gave any directions about advertising to
them. I sent the goods to Muriel and Miller for sale, and
left them to advertise and to sell. The advertisement of the
19th December as to T. S. M., was inserted at my express
wish. I knew by the brands that the goods were Mort’s
goods, and they were taken out of the vessel herself. I saw
them brought upon deck. The things of Levicks and Piper,
and the horse-shoes of Wilson, were all taken from the Cather-
ine Adamson. The T. S. M. goods were the only goods on
which the marks were legible. They were sold by the con-
sent of his. house. I gave up the horse-shoes at once when
Wilson said that he was satisfied they were his, on his certi-
ficate to that effect. The church bell was not claimed. The
wreck of the Catherine Adamson is outside the Heads—we
call it outside the Heads—and it can only be reached, to be
worked at, very rarely. Shortly after these men came up,
my men went out with my schooner. I went down in the
IV ashington, and found my men moored over the vessel, with
the Aquarius steamer alongside of her. The place was so
exposed that, if it came on to blow, the vessel must be taken
away, or else she would be lost. The other men were there
with their vessel, and with theif warps across the bow and
stern. They were heaving on the ropes so as to heave our
vessel away from the ship. The men complained. They
said, “ Here’s a pretty go, we can’t get to work for them.” I
said that they should cut the ropes. They replied that they
were afraid of the law. I said that would not puzzle me
much I asked them quietly to slack the rope, and they said
they would not. I then called out to cut the rope. I directed
the Aquaiius to turn astern. They called out that there was
a man, below. I said, “ D—-n the man, what business has he
there. I told them to go away. Afterwards, on their again
refusing to slacken off the ropes, I told the men to cut them.
I never spoke to the men afterwards, except when I delivered
them a notice, on the same or the next evening. They were
disappointed men. I believe the notice you (Mr. Broadhurst)
read was the one which I read. If it had been the other, I
should have noticed the word cargo. The reference to arbi-
tration about the subsequently recovered goods went off
through Mr. Watt. A day was appointed for settling, and
Mr. Watt and the arbitrators met. They were provided with
an account of goods amounting to £1574, which were the
goods on which this reference was made. Mr. Watt wanted


to include other goods, and I would not go on. I said o
Watt, “You want to shuffle, because a large quantity o
o-oods has come up this weekand I said, further, that it
might be a fortnight or three weeks more before more came.
I said, as I had promised to leave the previous matter to the
arbitrators, I had no objection to leave it now for the £lsv4,
and the expenses. At this time there were £3OO or £4oJ
worth more goods, over and above the £1074 recovered,
contended that we could only alter it (the amout of reference)
upon a thing ascertained, that is to say, upon goods sold He
wished to put this amount in to lessen my expenses, i saic,
unless you go to arbitration upon this alone, I will not con-
sent. lam not bound to recognise you at all. I objectd to 0
into a reference as to future and unfound goods, because
could not tell what the expenses would be. I was asked i
would leave all future matters to the arbitrators, and i saic
would leave that an open question The a:rrangement was
made for my convenience, not tor that of Mr. Watt, that t
goods should be handed over to him. It was because Idi
not wish to be troubled by future applications from people tor
goods. I complained frequently of the form ot advertise-
ments. I complained of the use of the Catherine Adamson s
name. I made the same complaint as to the account sales.
I once sent back an account sale for the same reason. y
complaints were made both to Muriel and to Miller. Captain
Stuart left on the 17th November in the Woolloopoooloo. 1
believe I am correct in stating that he never visited the scene
of the wreck from the Sunday until he went. (I his last sen-
tence was objected to by the Attorney-General as irrelevant,
and was not pressed.)
Court adjourned until Thursday.
THIRD DAY.
Thursday, 19th August, 1858.
Captain AVilliamson recalled and cross-examined by the
Attorney-General.— On the morning of the wreck of the
Catherine Adamson I met Mr. Watt, as I was coming into
town, in George-street. He held out his hand, and I stopped
my gig. He said, are you going down with the steamer . X
was aware at this time that Gilchrist, Watt, and Co had been
the agents of the vessel on a previous occasion, or tor some ot


their vessels. The vessels were variously consigned. I knew
he had been down. I had been told so. I took it for granted
that they were the agents of the vessel. I never heard any-
thing afterwards to the contrary. I did not know that they
were constituted the agents. They were said to be the agents.
(Looks at contract for purchase of the hull.) This is not
signed by me. The vessel was bought for me by Mr. Neale,
and the contract was signed by him. I have not seen this
before. I knew the vessel was to be sold by Bowden and
Threlkeld, but I did not know by whose orders. I surmised
it was by the orders of Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. I have no
doubt in the world of it. I know who used to be the agents
tor the Dunbar. It was not Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. I have
known them to be the agents for some of Dunbar’s ships. I
had reason for believing that Smith, Campbell, and Co. would
be the agents for the Dunbar. I bought the Dunbar’s wreck,
but think they did not direct the sale. I should think that
salvors must be allowed, in certain cases, to sell goods. They
must be allowed to sell perishable goods, or tfiey would be
wholly lost. I should not call horse-shoes perishable. The
bell metal and silver plate were very much damaged. Silver
is not known as a perishable commodity, but manufactured
and plated goods are. Plate will corrode by the action of salt
water. While the coating of salt is on plate, it is perishable.
1 should think it would not be perishable when the coating of
salt was taken off. I should think manufactured silver was
perishable. No doubt you can take the salt off. I have no
objection to allow that silver plate is not a very perishable com-
modity. . I think salvors, if acting for the benefit of owners,
nave a right to use their own judgment, and sell goods which
9®, likely to perish and realise nothing. I recognise a
great difference between salvors who save small articles on
the sly, and a person who gets all the goods after they have
been abandoned, and is ready to give them up to the owners
sa Y a S®>. acting openly. The one acts like a man of honour,
the other dishonestly. Mr. Grahame was the first person who
w aS /^ r the " nd erwriters. I did not know Gilchrist,
Yatt, and Co. until afterwards. I asked Watt if he wanted
the use of the steamer, because I knew he had been agent,
and thought it probable that he was still so. I knew that he
had already gone down, and thought that he would be a
likely man to employ my vessel. I agreed with Watt about
salvage, because Grahame told me that he had given up all
his right to Watt. I had many conversations with them
before I signed the arbitration bond. I consented to the sale
of the goods, provided Muriel and Miller kept the proceeds
till my claim for salvage was settled, or I had consented to
the release of these proceeds. If any respectable firm had


stated to me that they were the agents, I would have done the
same. The reason I allowed them to interfere was because I
was told they were the agents, and I had no reason to dis-
believe them. I have no such reason now. When Muriel
and Miller paid my salvage, I did not care whom they paid
the balance to. I mean by that, that I did not care what
mercantile house they paid it to. I am perfectly willing to
give up these goods to the owners now. Ido not give up
these goods now to Gilchrist, Watt, and Co., because they are
not the goods of the Catherine Adamson. The first goods
were the goods of the Catherine Adamson, and they were the
agents. Any respectable house, if they represented them-
selves to be the agents, and I believed them, might have had
the goods or the money. The goods got, altogether, within
the first three days, amounted to about £3OOO. Ido not re-
member the exact amount. When the goods were recovered
I had a communication with Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. about
the rate of remuneration to be allowed for their recovery, and
it was agreed we should enter into this bond.
By His Honor.—We entered into this bond because I named
one amount, and he named another. Therefore I said we had
better leave it to some one.
Mr. Broadhurst said that the gross amount appeared to be
£2163, from the award.
Cross-examination resumed :—I do not remember the pre-
cise amount. Out of this I think I got £3OO or £4OO. The
transaction was then done with and closed. I had no con-
versation after that was closed about future transactions. It
was before that was closed. I think it was either on the day
the vessel was sold, or on the following day, that the conver-
sation took place. This was only in reference to the goods
entangled in the wreck. It was agreed that my men should
go and relieve the police, and take charge of the goods en-
tangled in the wreck. There were some leather belts thus
entangled, which were said to he very valuable. They were
something for machinery coming out to the Dry Dock. It
was agreed that whatever was entangled in the wreck should
he given up on twenty-five per cent, salvage. This was on
the condition that no person should interfere to interrupt my
men. This had reference to all entangled in the wreck and
rigging. Not only leather belts, but five or six tons of cali-
coes. I do not remember the terms of the agreement, but I
did agree that my men should pick up as much of the cargo
as they could, and I was willing to take twenty-five per cent.,
provided he employed no one else. Mr. Watt broke that


agreement off. (The Attorney-General here read Mr. Watt’s
letter of sth November.) The agreement was broken off by
that letter. There is nothing there about leather belts or cali-
coes. There is a general reference to all goods. The agree-
ment was in reference to all goods. The intention was in
reference to the goods entangled, because we then knew of
no other. Before the sth of November I had made arrange-
ments by the employment of men for the recovery of goods,
but had not got diving dresses. After the agreement was
thus broken,—-for some time afterwards, I went on saving the
wreck for myself, and recovering goods for the benefit of
all whom it might concern. I did not begin operations under
that agreement, hut to save the vessel I had purchased. I
did not send men down in consequence of that agreement, hut
to pick up what I had bought. To oblige him, I recovered
what I could for him, and he obliged me by paying twenty-five
per cent. There was a mutual obligation. After this I got
divino- dresses. The total amount received afterwards —from
the 15th or 20th of November to the 7th of June last—from
Muriel and Miller, and Cohen, was £4233 14s. 3d., for goods
picked up at the Heads. This was the whole of the proceeds
received from anybody.
By His Honor.—This was for goods recovered irrespective
of those goods known to he from the Catherine Adamson,
and picked up within the first few days. The agreement with
Watt was never acted upon. It was broken off, I think, the
next day. I recovered no goods under that agreement.
Cross-examination resumed: —I cannot say whether I re-
ceived upwards of £4OOO before the end of December. I
cannot say whether I received £lOOO on the 21st of December.
(The witness was here questioned as to several receipts on
particular days, hut replied, as to these receipts generally,
that he could not say when the payments were made, or what
were their amounts. He did not receive the money himself;
but these facts could he ascertained. A pause then ensued,
while papers were apparently referred to or searched for by
defendants’ counsel and attorney.)
By Mr. Broadhurst. —Muriel and Miller sold all the goods
hut a trifle which were sold by Cohen, after Muriel and Miller
became insolvent. This was after the present action had been
commenced.
The witness was again questioned by the Attorney-General
as to the receipt of paiticular sums on particular days, and


again replied that he could not recollect any of these indivi-
dual payments.
Some discussion having ensued—
The Attorney-General remarked : —“ I will say at once,
I have instructions that a much larger amount has been re-
ceived than is admitted, or than is stated on our particulars.”
Turning to the witness, he said, “We have served you with a
subpoena duces tecum to produce your books. Do you produce
them ? ”
Witness. —I will not produce my hooks.
The Attorney-General. —Then I must apply to the Court.
Mr. Broadhurst submitted that this application came too
late. If the other side wanted the hooks, they ought to have
made the production of them, or the call for such production,
a part of their own case.
His Honor said that it was time enough to ask for the
hooks when they were wanted. The books must he produced,
hut he would not suffer them to he looked at for any other
purpose than for the entries hearing upon the present issue.
The Witness said that he “ could answer without the hooks
for the gross sum received.”
The Attorney-General said that he must have the hooks,
and, what was more, he should now insist upon looking at
them.
The hooks were then sent for. After some discussion, wit-
ness asked for a particular memorandum-hook among the
papers in Court, and it was handed to him. Looking at this
hook, he stated, in answer to the question of the Attorney-
General :
On the 9th of December I received a cheque from Muriel
and Miller for £SOO, for goods recovered at the Heads. On
the 11th, £1057 12s. Id. Afterwards, on the 21st, a cheque for
£IOOO. I was not credited in account with them for £1678 4s.
2d.; at least, no memorandum of it has been made here.
£499 2s. 6d. is mentioned here as credited in account on the
31st of December, on goods purchased. I do. not believe I
have received any other cheque. No mention is made of any
other in this account which has been made out for me. £97


13s. is not mentioned here as having been credited in account.
I got a promissory note for £llOO on account of goods sold,
and this was paid. There are acknowledged receipts of
£4156 before the 31st of December. All these payments were
made before the action was commenced. This is exclusive of
the £97 135., which I cannot say anything about yet. Ido
not recollect any credit for £4Ol 9s. 6d. Try if this amount
and the £97 13s. will not make up the £499 2s. 6d. credited
in account, which I have already admitted. (The Attorney-
General admitted that this was the case. ) I had received no
money before the 9th of December on account of these goods.
That awarded for salvage was paid in another way. These
sums all relate to what was picked up subsequent to the first
few days. A rebate commission of £ll3 13s. 6d. was allowed,
but Muriel and Miller became insolvent, and we never got it.
There is a custom here of dividing the commission between
the auctioneer and the seller. The unfortunate owner or prin-
cipal is charged five per cent., but the auctioneer returns half.
It is nobbed up between the auctioneer and his employer.
The nobbing up on this occasion was between myself and the
auctioneers, only we did not get our share, as they became
insolvent. I believe that this account is correct, but I cannot
say until I see the ledger. The last payment was on the 18th
of February. I stated the total amount as up to June, bo
cause our wrecking was going on up to then. I have received
since then £l2 from Wilson for the cask of horse-shoes, which
seem to stick so in Mr. Wise’s gizzard. I have received £BO
from Wilshire, being fifty per cent, upon some bales of leather.
These were all salvages. Wilson told me that the goods were
out of the Catherine Adamson, and were his, and I had no
reason to doubt him. From Levicks and Piper I also received
£57 2s. 10d., being fifty per cent, on goods. (The witness
here explained that he had been quoting from the wrong side
of the account—the gross value of the goods saved instead of
his salvage upon them. His actual receipts were only half of
those already stated, £6 from Wilson, £4O from Wilshire, and
£2B 11s. sd. from Levicks and Piper.) All these payments have
been made, I believe, since the commencement of the action;
except, perhaps, Wilshire’s. I have other goods on hand.
Pieces of broken machinery and some iron. I got these in
clearing from the wreck. I should be glad if the owners
would take them away. I suppose that, if the owners of all
these goods do not appear, the money will go to my credit at
the Bank. It is as well it should go to my credit as to that
of Mr. Watt, for I have had all the trouble. It would not be
well that I should have all the trouble and Mr. Watt all the
money. I have made no remittance to Lloyds or elsewhere.
Ido not believe that Mr. Watt has done so. lam willing to


give up to any person who has the slightest pretence to a
claim. I do not consider that Mr. Watt has the slightest pre-
tence to a claim. As to the first goods it was different. If
two valuable ships, with the same kinds of cargo, were
wrecked near each other, I should say it would be impossible
to distinguish the goods of each; and, in the absence of any
law to the contrary, any person getting these goods to the
extent of £IOOO can keep the proceeds, in the absence of
owners proving their claims. I have no wish to dispute with
any one who makes out a good claim. It was difficult to
identify the goods when they were got up. It is impossible
now, when they are sold and consumed, to identify them; but
it would be quite possible to make a claim. Let the owners
shew their invoices, and they shall have them. I did not act
at all under the agreement. I did not agree to refer to arbi-
tration, notwithstanding- the agreement had gone off, as to
goods subsequently got. (The Attorney-General here read
to the witness the terms of the second reference.) The
£1567 17s. Bd. had nothing to do with the goods got during
the first three days. I have not thus admitted that I had
recovered goods to that extent from the Catherine Adamson.
It is not so, because I disclaimed it at the time it was written.
There can be two constructions of that letter. At the time
this arbitration was made, and while a settlement was
pending, I had frequent occasion to see Mr. Watt. He asked
me what I was going to do with the goods then recovering.
I said “I don’t want to be bothered by people coming twelve
months after this with their claims. I have no objection to
hand them over to you on your paying my salvage, and you
will get your commission.” He said, “ What about the
salvage ?” I said that Levicks and Piper had allowed fifty
per cent. He said that he thought this was fair, but that
there must be a reference. I agreed. He named the arbi-
trators, and I agreed. He said, “Let’s just write a letter to
that effect.” Mr. Watt drew the letter out, and those who
know Mr. Watt know how carefully he can do these things.
I was too open-hearted. In fact he picked me up. So long
as I thought there was no humbug about the matter of my
getting the fifty per cent., I did not care. I signed the paper
knowing that these were not the Catherine Adamson’s goods,
but I considered that more his affair than mine. I pointed
this out to him. It had been before this time suggested by
me that some of these goods were the Dunbar’s. I called the
attention of Mr. Watt to it immediately after the first goods
were got up. They were all advertised as the Catherine
Adamson’s goods, but I always disputed the fact. When I
signed the agreement I did not think that he would take any
advantage of me. I have never said that, if he would pay me


fifty per cent., I would give over all the goods as goods saved
from the Catherine Adamson. I was willing to give them all
over as goods saved from the Heads, to save myself all risk
and liability to subsequent claimants.
By His Honor. —I pointed out to Mr. Watt at the time I
signed that these were not the Catherine Adamson’s goods.
Cross-examination resumed:—At the time I signed this
paper about the £1575, there were, I believe, other goods coming
up. I could not he certain without reference to the account
sales. We were getting goods all the time when we could
work. I remember being before the arbitrators next day—
the sth of December. I remember a letter being read from
Mr. Watt about other goods, which ought, he said, to be in
the arbitration. (Letter of sth December read by the
Attorney-General.) A letter in those terms was read. When
that letter was read, I said I objected to the matter being put
off any longer. I said, if it was put off again, I should with-
draw altogether. This letter opened my eyes to the conduct
of Mr. Watt. The reference was a mere blind. I made many
remarks. I said that he was acting in a most dishonourable
manner. These other goods were being brought up, and
would be sold immediately, hut there were other expenses
against them which were not made up. Those against the
goods referred were made up. I might have made the pro-
posed addition of goods to the reference a ground for aug-
menting the salvage, but I would not go on because there
was no agreement for a reference as to these goods. I saw he
was dodging, and I refused to go on with the arbitration. It
was not I who refused wholly to go on with the arbitration.
I had no objection to go on as to the £1574, and finish the
affair as I had promised. I see that the letter of reference
alluded to future recoveries. I pointed out to the arbitrators
that this was absurd, because I was not bound to go on. I
might have handed over the matter to my foreman, and he
could have claimed what salvage he liked. lam not claiming
salvage in this action, but I will deliver to owners on pay-
ment of salvage. I may have seen an advertisement in the
Earald of sth December. (Attorney-General reads heading
of advertisement of “Large quantity of goods from the
Catherine Adamson.”) I may have seen this or not. It is
the advertisement of the auctioneer. The use of the name is
to attract attendance. The name of the Dunbar might have
had the same effect, but it had not been used. Mr. Watt did
not tell the arbitrators that he was willing to go on and let
them do as they liked. I heard Captain Browne say so, but
it was not correct. His recollection was imperfect. He said,


for instance, that the arbitrators wrote to Mr. Watt, whereas
it was Mr. Watt who wrote to the arbitrators.
The Attorney-General. —If goods to a larger amount than
£1574 16s. Bd. had been recovered when this statement was
made in the letter of reference, how was it they were not
included ?
Witness. —This was Mr. Watt’s statement, and it was all
that was known of the value of recovered goods then. I
knew the goods were there, but did not know their value.
When I knew the amount I did not put it to account for the
simple reason that, on reading that letter, I excepted to any
further reference of the whole affair, on the ground that Mr.
Watt was humbugging me. He was humbugging me simply
by putting off from day to day, thinking, I suppose, that the
more goods came up the more my salvage would be reduced ;
and the reference had been made for his convenience, not
mine. I cannot swear whether there were or were not goods
sold on that very day. I dare say there were. The account
sales could not be sent down next morning. When I found
that the real intention of the agreement was to be set aside
by the wording of it, I excepted to any further reference ; but,
as I had consented to a reference on the £1574, I would not
withdraw.
By His Honor. —When two parties agree to refer two
matters, neither can withdraw ; but that is a different case, to
my mind.
A Juror suggested that the view of the witness
was, as he conceived, this: The £1574 was made the
basis of the calculation. If at that time the expenses were
estimated at, say, £BOO, the amount of salvage would be
increased even beyond fifty per cent.; but if the amount set
down as the value of the goods was increased, without an
increase in the estimate of expenses, the salvage would be
proportionately reduced.
The books having arrived during the cross-examination—
The Attorney-General requested the witness to refer to
them, and see what were the account sales of the sth
December.
Witness. —You have all the account sales I ever received.
The dates of the account sales are not a very good guide, as
they are not the same as the actual sales, (He here turned
d 2


to the book.) I have no entry of a sale on the sth of Decem-
ber. I have got the date on which we received the money.
There is no account of the days of sale here. On the 9th of
November we received £5OO. There is nothing to shew a
sale by auction on the sth of December to the extent of
£531 17s. 6d. There are no entries of account sales in the
book, but credit is given for the amounts which were actually
received. I cannot tell whether we got credit for £531175. 6d.
The books will not shew this. This (the book before him) is
the ledger. There is no account here with Muriel and Miller.
The accounts here are headed the Catherine Adamson and
Dunbar. (The ledger was here handed to the Attorney-
General at his own request.)
The Attorney-General.- —The heading of this account is
“ Catherine Adamson spec., &c.”
Witness. —It is.
The Attorney-General. —And so on both pages ?
Witness. —Yes.
The Attorney-General. —The heading of the other account
is “ the Dunbar wreck ?”
Witness. —Yes. We can surely make what entries we like.
No doubt it was a speculation. Whether it was profitable or
not is another matter. (The hook was here handed back to
the witness.) It appears that we received in all £4617 7s. 6d.
before the end of December on the Catherine Adamson spec.
There is no connection with the account of the Dunbar’s
wreck, hut it includes the proceeds of all goods recovered
from the Heads. The spec, gets credit for sums of £3OO and
£9B, which we have not yet been paid. It contains a credit
of the salvage paid by Wilson. It all comes to the same
amount as has already been stated. There are many other
hooks. I cannot say whether, in all the others, there is the
same heading as to “ the Catherine Adamson spec.” I believe
they are all so The account was commenced as the Cathe-
rine Adamson speculation, and has never been altered. I
bought the wreck of the vessel. That appears.as the first
entry. The money received was after the dispute with
Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. as to the right to receive it, yet all
the entries were made to the account of “ the Catherine
Adamson spec.” All the amounts were received after this
dispute. The entries are made from the Day Book. It is
very likely that money received for goods which were sup-


posed to belong to other vessels than the Catherine Adamson
would be put down to her account, because the thing was
regarded as the same speculation from the first. I saw no
horseshoes “ streaming inwards,” nor any bales of drapery
goods round the cable of the schooner which we rescued.
Nothing but floating articles. I have no doubt, from the
circumstances of the heavy swell and the current running in,
that the goods of the Dunbar were carried to where these
goods were found. The silver plate was found near the
Quarantine Ground—outside Quarantine Point, near the Sow
and Pigs, a mile and three-quarters from where the Dunbar
was lost. There was no package round them. Ido not say
that the Dunbar’s goods drifted there, and those of the Cathe-
rine Adamson disappeared altogether. The latter were
washed ashore. We recovered a great deal. The other goods
were got at some distance from the Catherine Adamson. I
should say that a great portion of the goods, both of the
Catherine Adamson and of the Dunbar, were likely to be
destroyed. It was unlikely that goods from the Catherine
Adamson would be washed against the rocks and then back
towards South Reef. By my signature to that memorandum,
which was written by Mr. Watt, I, no doubt, recognised £1575
worth of goods as coming from the Catherine Adamson. I
can draw no distinction between these goods and the others.
I was rather entrapped with signing that paper. The entries,
in the books are a very different thing. I never inquired of
the book-keeper how he made the entries. I have not told
you that 1 consented to go into arbitration because Gilchrist,
Watt, and Co. were agents of the vessel. But, by arrange-
ment, I had no objection to pay the proceeds into Watt’s
hands, so that I should get my salvage, and he would get his
commission. If he had given me fifty per cent. I would have
given him the goods, but not as acting by authority or as
agent ; only as a respectable mercantile firm. I said
expressly that l would not recognise them, and that, if they
had been a mushroom house, I would not have had anything
to do with them.
By Mr. Bboadhurst.—When I entered on the first arbitra-
tion I had no doubt in the least that the goods then in ques-
tion were the goods of the Catherine Adamson. I saw. most
of them washed ashore. They were all washed ashore in the
direction of the Quarantine Ground, as was said by the divers
the other day. They were all either floating or stranded.
When I signed the letter of the 4th of December, I expressly
said that I did not believe all the goods were from the Cathe-
rine Adamson. In the account in our ledger, the first item, is
the purchase of the wreck. We have credited ourselves with


the stores purchased, but it is only a supposed value or
amount —£800. The £4617 17s. shewn on the credit side of
the ledger includes salvage, but not the goods arbitrated
upon. It includes £35 received for stores belonging to us. The
amount received for goods (adding it up) was £4163. The
accounts for salvage and stores are mixed up with this
account. (Mr. Wise said that he thought the total for goods
was but £4156 14s. 6d.) I may have made a mistake. The
account was opened because we bought the wreck, and was
continued in the book without any reference to myself.
There is a great convenience in making accounts as simple as
we can. Seeing goods entangled about the schooner’s cable
was one of my reasons, only, for supposing that the cargo of
the Dunbar drifted inwards. I thought so because large
quantities of cargo did drift in the same direction. Also, from
the direction of the wind and sea. The cargo must be some-
where. 1 think it more likely that these goods are from the
Dunbar than from the Catherine Adamson. I think it is
physically impossible that the cargo of the Catherine Adam-
son could have drifted where the most of these goods were
found. I objected to the subsequently found goods being
brought into account with the £1574 for the same reason
as has been stated by one of the jury. The account
was made up with a certain amount of salvage and cer-
tain expenses against it. The charges were with reference
to this amount only. The goods subsequently recovered
might have entailed larger expenses. They did, in fact,
involve more expenses. More than fifty per cent, expenses
might have been incurred. If so, and the basis of £1571 was
acted on, the salvage might have been reduced to less than
the cost. If I had not done what I did, I believe these goods
would have been still at the bottom of the sea. I never pre-
vented the divers from getting goods. They had diving
apparatus, but no steamers or other means of getting goods.
Nothing could be done without the steamers when the wind
chopped round to the southward.
By the Attorney-General. —Many of the goods from the
Dunbar were found in Middle Harbour; large quantities
were found at the Quarantine Ground. Bodies were there
also. All the wreck has not been taken away yet. Parts of
it are still there.
John Ckook, examined by Mr. Stephen. — T am Harbour
Master of the Port of Sydney. I have been twenty-three
years pilot and Assistant Harbour Master. I remember the
wreck of the Dunbar. I went, when l heard of it, to Mitchell’s
place, and told them that I wished the Washington to go


down and see what was the matter, on account of the Govern-
ment. I went as far as Watson’s Bay in her, but the sea was so
heavy that I to!d Captain Williamson he had better not go
outside, but land me there. The portions of cargo I saw on
South Head were passing towards the Quarantine Ground.
It was then flood tide, and that took them across. The wind
was about S.S.E. I went down after that, and saw things
over towards the Quarantine Ground. I saw great portions
also at Middle Head. I believe that the greatest portion of
the things from the Dunbar would go into the Harbour and
towards the Quarantine Ground; especially heavy weights.
The swell goes right across the Pleads. Heavy goods would
therefore drift towards the “Old Man’s Hat,” half-way to
the Quarantine Ground—(pointing on the map to the jury).
The arrows on the map denote the stream of the tide. There
is an eddy towards the Quarantine Ground caused by the two
tides meeting—one from Sydney, and one from North Har-
bour. This would have the effect of bearing over to the
Quarantine Ground and North Harbour. I know where the
Catherine Adamson was wrecked. I was the first there. It
was ebb tide when I started, but flood when I got there.
Goods were passing in in large quantities, going towards the
Quarantine Ground. Goods were picked up by my boat inside
the Quarantine Ground. It was at eleven o’clock. I saw
bales, buckets, and boxes of shoes. I took a box of shoes to
the Washington. They could not have gone to the south-
ward ; it was impossible. They came in the stream round
Quarantine Point. Goods found a quarter of a mile to the
southward of the Catherine Adamson must have been goods
from the Dunbar.
Mr. Wise. —What day are you speaking of?
Witness. —Of the day on which the Catherine Adamson
was wrecked.
Examination continued :—The vessel was broken up imme-
diately. Anything heavy would remain some time at the
bottom where it had sunk, and would then drift in.
By a Juror. —The drawback might take them out some
distance, hut the ground swell would then take them and send
them back to North Harbour.
Examination continued :—When things were once lifted by
the ground swell they would move along continually. The
swell sets into the Harbour continually. Ido not think that


goods from the Catherine Adamson would get to the south-
ward or to the south-west.
The witness being about to state something in support of
this theory, which had occurred twenty-three years ago—
Mr. Wise objected to this evidence as irrelevant.
Mr. Bboadhukst contended that it was admissible by way
of illustration and confirmation of the scientific opinion which
the witness had expressed.
Mr. Stephen having followed on the same side, the objec-
tion was not pressed.
Examination resumed: —Twenty-three years ago I was on
board the Lightship, when I heard cries as if of a person
drowning. I went and found a little vessel on the South Reef,
with a cargo of heavy mahogany. The people on board this
vessel told me that there had been a box on board worth two
or three thousand pounds, and it had got washed overboard.
I pulled across, and between the Old Man’s Hat and the
Quarantine Station, near the edge of the water, I found the
box. They said I might have the whole of the cargo if I
could bring them this box. It contained, I believe, some
deeds. I brought the box to them, and they were quite
pleased. I found the cargo across at the Quarantine Ground.
The current would take tilings from the Dunbar in the same
direction as from this little vessel.
By Mr. Wise. —The wind was south—the same as when the
cutter was wrecked. I can gain nothing by this transaction.
I shall not gain a penny from Captain Williamson. I have a
vessel chartered to Captain Williamson, but I have nothing
to do with the mode in which he employs her. They were
things floating which I saw go in, but I do not confine my
evidence to floating things alone. There is a depth of about
fifteen or twenty fathoms in the centre of the harbour, but it
goes off" gradually. There is no hole—no trough. There is a
bar inside, above the light-ship, but none outside. All the
light cargo of the Catherine Adamson would go into the
Quarantine Ground. The Dunbar’s floating cargo would float
by where the Catherine Adamson was. I suppose the heavy
cargo of the Catherine Adamson is between the Quarantine
Point and the Old Man’s Hat, and all round about. It would,
perhaps, gradually go in with every return of heavy weather.
Waves will not affect so much in forty fathoms of water as in
five or six. The depth at which waves will have an effect is


far more than four or five fathoms. They will have an effect
up to eighteen or nineteen fathoms. They will affect the
bottom to the extent of twenty fathoms. It is so between
the Heads. I have had a weight at the bottom there, and
found it drag in. The thing which I had at the bottom was
connected by a chain with the surface, and might have been
affected by the surface ; but the ground swell will affect any
depth less than twenty fathoms. On the first day I saw
these divers they were three-quarters of a mile from the
Old Man’s Hat, where the Catherine Adamson was wrecked,
away to the south-west. Ido not believe anything would go
to the southward after coming in contact with the harbour.
I mean heavy goods. Light goods might go back with the
tide. The tide would not affect heavy goods at the bottom.
The tide would have an effect to the depth of six fathoms, but
not such as the ground swell. Ido not believe that any por-
tion of the heavy goods of the Catherine Adamson would be
found more than three cables’ length from the northern por-
tion of the harbour. The anchors were about thirty fathoms
from the wreck, so that the ship must have been close in.
The destruction of goods was greater with the Dunbar than
witli the Catherine Adamson, because the former went all at
once. I do not believe that anything would be found where
she went down. All that was floatable in the Catherine
Adamson went away at once. I saw the silver plate found,
I went down in the steamer about some obstruction in the
harbour, and she called at the vessel. This was three-quarters
of a mile south-west from where the Catherine Adamson was
lost. I thought, when you asked about the way goods would
go, you meant would they come up to the south side ? They
might pass south-west 120 fathoms from the rocks, and then
the swell would carry them in. A little might go southerly,
but not so far as Middle Head, or anything of that sort. The
plate was found about three-quarters of a mile from where the
Catherine Adamson was wrecked. I was not there when the
bell was got, and do not know where the horse-shoes were
got up, I had no conversation with Williamson about it,
He said the divers had got some plate. He did not say it was
from the Dunbar. I do not remember anything being said
about the Dunbar.
The witness here pointed out on the map the oourse which
he thought the goods of the Catherine Adamson had taken,
Also the site of the wreck, and the spot where he saw the
men at work.
By Mr. Broadhurst. —I saw little of the hull of the Ca-
therine Adamson; it was all to pieces. X cannot say where


the silver plate came from. No one could tell. There hare
been three wrecks of large ships within the last eighteen
months.
George Green, examined by Mr. Broadhurst. —I am well
acquainted with the harbour of Port Jackson. lam a ship-
wright. I have been engaged in Sydney and about the har-
bour for twenty-five years. I remember the wreck of the
Dunbar. I had to do with it. 1 bought half the wreck. I
went down to the place where she was supposed to be
wrecked, two or three days after. I saw portions of the wreck
all over the harbour—at the Quarantine Ground, in Middle
Harbour, and in North Harbour. I remember the weather at
the time. It was very heavy. The wind was from the south-
ward. This caused a great swell to set in to the harbour,
towards North Harbour. I saw goods on shore and floating
about two or three days after the wreck. I could not recognise
these goods as being the Dunbar’s. From what I saw, and
from my knowledge of the harbour and that kind of weather,
I think it very likely that part of the cargo of the Dunbar
would settle down in deep water off the “ Old Man’s Hat.”
I know Mr. Watt. I remember the wreck of the Catherine
Adamson. I have recovered goods from the wrecks of both
vessels, and I could not say which was which. After the
wreck of the Catherine Adamson, I had an authority to col-
lect, and I did collect some. I advertised them as being goods
from the Catherine Adamson or the Dunbar. There was
nothing, except as to the article claimed by Wilson, to shew
that the goods were more likely to have come from the Ca-
therine Adamson than from the Dunbar. This was picked up
near the Quarantine Ground. I have had conversations with
Mr. Watt several times. He wanted me to collect at one-
fourth ; I claimed half. I got this on what I collected. I
sent the goods for sale, and, prior to the sale coming off, he
agreed to give me half. I refused to give up the goods. I
would not give them up unless I got half value as salvage.
Any one might have them who claimed them, if they paid me
half. Mr. Watt claimed the goods as goods of the Catherine
Adamson. I told him I had my doubts of it. This was
within a month after the wreck. It was Colonel Gibbes who
gave me authority to collect, and not Mr. Watt. On the con-
trary, he told me not to collect.
By the Attorney-General.— l saw an advertisement claim-
the goods of the Catherine Adamson, and cautioning par.
against collecting. After this I saw Mr. Dixon, from
Gilchrist, Watt, and Co., about an authority to collect. He
came to claim the goods.


Mr. Broadhurst objected to this evidence as irrelevant.
The Attorney-General contended that it was admissible.
It had been got out in evidence, during the examination in
chief, that the witness had received an authority to collect
from Colonel Gibbes. He (the Attorney-General) was conse-
quently entitled to get out all about this authority.
Mr. Wise argued that the evidence was admissible upon
another The witness had expressed a belief that
these goods were from the Dunbar. It was therefore open to
them to shew, if they could, that he had made a contradictory
statement.
Mr. Broadhurst, in reply, admitted that he could not object
to any conversations with Colonel Gibbes in reference to. the
authority received from the latter; but anything that might
have passed between the witness and other persons was a
conversation between strangers, not binding the defendants
in any way.
His Honor thought that, if the authority given by Colonel
Gibbes was open to examination, anything which would im-
peach that authority was also open to examination.
The Attorney-General. —We put it on the ground of
credibility.
Mr. Broadhurst.—lt cannot be of service upon that ground.
The person with whom the conversation is said to have been
held has been in Court all along, and could not be called to
contradict.
The Attorney-General.—There is no rule to prevent him
from being called, although it might become a question how
far the value of his evidence might be affected by the fact of
his remaining in Court.
Cross-examination resumed :—I liad conversations with Mr.
Dixon. I applied to Dixon for authority to collect before I
went to Colonel Gibbes. He refused it. I went to Mr. Watt’s
because he advertised that he had something to do with it,
and I saw Mr. Dixon. He applied to Mr. Watt, and then said
they could not give it. After this I collected without autho-
rity. After collecting I saw Dixon, and he said that I had
better give up the goods. I did not hand them over to Gil-
christ, Watt, and Co., but sent them to auction. I took the


cheque to Mr. Watt, and he gave me half, because we had
arranged before this that it should be so.
Mr. Broadhurst objected that what passed between the
witness and Mr. Watt could not be evidence for the plaintiff.
The Attorney-General said that the witness had been
already examined upon this point. They had got out part of
what passed with Mr. Watt.
His Honor thought the evidence was admissible, as they
had already evidence of a negotiation about the price to be
paid for salvage, on which this might bear.
The Attorney-General to witness.—Why did you take the
cheque to Mr. Watt?
Mr. Bhoadhurst objected. What had they to do with the
motives of action of this witness in dealing with Mr. Watt ?
The Attorney-General argued that it went to his credi-
bility. Mr. Green had favoured them with an opinion as to
the probability of the goods carried to this place being those
of the Dunbar. It was important to ascertain whether he had
entertained that opinion always, in order to see what such
opinion might be worth.
His Honor had always thought, he said, that where a per-
son had given two opinions—one in the witness-box and one
elsewhere—they might go into both in order to test his cre-
dibility.
Cross-examination resumed : —I directed the sale by Muriel
and Miller,, auctioneers. (Looks at advertisement.) This is
the advertisement. I complained of it because the goods
ought to have been advertised in my name. (The Attorney-
General said that they were so, and read from the advertise-
ment to shew that such was the case.) Let me see it again.
I know I complained of that advertisement, but I do not ex-
actly know of what just now. I purchased half the wreck of
the Dunbar. I knew Mr. Watt had nothing to do with it. I
only supposed that he had something to do with the Catherine
Adamson from his own statement. I don’t know who were
the agents of the Dunbar. I think I told Mr. Grahame, whom
I supposed to be Lloyds’ agent, that I did not know to which
vessel the goods actually belonged. The Old Man’s Hat is
nearly two miles from where the Dunbar was supposed to be
wrecked—where I saw the scene on the following morning.


I think it very likely that goods found their way there from
the Dunbar. There is a very strong eddy there. They would
he set in by a south-east sea. They would be very likely to
smash against the rocks. No doubt the same eddy would
also retain such of the Catherine Adamson’s goods as were
there already. No doubt both cargoes are at the same place.
I know something about the currents. I believe there is very
little current anywhere in deep water. I think that anything
which went to the bottom in eighteen fathoms would stop
there. When the Wanderer was wrecked between George’s
Head and Middle Head, I picked up her mail at the Quaran-
tine Station. It must have gone, then, in a north-easterly
direction. I see by the chart, hut Ido not know the fact, that
the depth of water is sixteen, seventeen, and eighteen fathoms
across the Heads. Supposing that to be correct, if goods
from the Dunbar went to the bottom, they would decidedly
not find their way across to the Old Man’s Hat. Floating
goods might break on the rocks, and the things inside might
sink. One bale was got up from the bottom, so well pressed
that when it was opened some of the goods were scarcely wet.
The drawback might take goods about 100 yards from the
shore. Iron work could not find its way across the Heads
from the Dunbar to the Catherine Adamson. The same rea-
sonings would apply to the goods of the Catherine Adamson.
If heavy goods were found at the bottom near the Catherine
Adamson, most likely they belonged to that vessel. Light
goods would he as likely to belong to one vessel as to the
other. Of the goods I recovered, some were got at the Old
Man’s Hat, and some towards the Quarantine Ground. I did
not use diving apparatus—only tongs and screw.
By Mr. Broadhurst. —I do not know where the bale was
picked up which was not wet through. It was picked up by
my sons. This bale might have floated a mile or ten miles
before it sank.
By His Honor. —I looked all round the wreck—looked to
the east—got nothing to the south of where the ship sank.
By Mr. Broadhurst. —The Wanderer’s mail was carried
across by the current principally.
Francis Beattie. —l am a mariner, and was in Mitchell
and Co.’s employment at the time of the wreck of the Cathe-
rine Adamson. I had something to do with the wreck.
Superintended the men who were at work there. I was down
in the steamboat on the morning she was lost —a Saturday
morning. I saw a great quantity of cargo floating, going


towards Spring Cove and Collins’s Flat. We got a great
quantity on board the steamer; nearly loaded her, in fact.
Collins’s Flat is north of the Quarantine Ground. I remember
the wreck being purchased. It was bale and case goods that
I saw floating. The farthest from the wreck was a mile and
a-half from where the vessel struck, in a northerly direction,
down to the Quarantine Ground. Bale goods were floating,
although they were very heavy. I was down there about
nine o’clock. Can’t say the state of the tide, but believe it
was flood tide. It was blowing a good breeze from the south-
ward. After Mitchell and Co. purchased the wreck I was
sent down with a gang of men to superintend saving it—to
get the property they had purchased. I was there nearly
four months. I got up from the vessel’s bottom all the
anchors and chains, and some copper and iron. Two casks
of horse-shoes were got up from alongside a piece of the bot-
tom. There were a few other things—part of a bell. There
were divers there. We first commenced diving about the
15th of November. I never went down myself, but I saw the
goods all brought up. The greatest quantity of goods was
got up between a-quarter of a mile and half a mile from the
wreck, in a south-west and south-west-by-west direction.
We got some in the direction where I had seen the bales and
cases floating. The goods we saw floating were not, I think,
likely to be the bulk of the goods, which we afterwards got
out of deep water, and which had sunk after floating from the
Catherine Adamson. This would have been going against
the sea. It is more likely they came from the Dunbar’s
wreck, because the wind was south-east, and all the goods
set towards North Head. I had examined where the Dunbar
was supposed to have sunk. I was there with divers five
days, and did not find the slightest trace of her. I examined
South Reef, working from the inside part of South Reef to
the end, and from the Gap to the Lighthouse, but found
nothing. I remember the state of the weather at the time of
the wreck of the Dunbar. It would be very likely that the
cargo would be carried in the direction of the Old Man’s Hat.
Part certainly was so. I saw it. All the goods which we
recovered from deep water were in tin or zinc cases. They
were all battered as if beaten against the rocks. Some were
good and scarcely stained ; some were stinking. I recovered
goods over a great extent of ground. Some in a soutli-west-
by-south direction from the wreck of the Catherine Adamson.
By the Attorney-General.—l do not say that any of the
Dunbar’s cargo found its way to the Old Man’s Hat. It is
about two and a-quarter miles to the place of. the Catherine
Adamson’s wreck from where the Dunbar is said to have been


lost. I think that the Dunhar was actually wrecked even to
the southward of this. Any heavy cargo which found its
way to the bottom where the wreck took place, and in deep
water, would not find its way to the Old Man’s Hat. Not if
beyond the reach of the waves. Ido not think that any wave
could have an effect to the depth of 100 feet. Goods light
enough to float for a time, until saturated with water, would
go as far as they could. If they sank where they were found,
they must have sunk there because they became saturated
there. I never saw an experiment tried as to how long it
would take to saturate a bale of cotton goods before it would
sink. Some of the goods were as likely to be the Catherine
Adamson’s as the Dunbar’s. The distance between the places
of wreck would not make a difference. We commenced
operations nearly opposite the southern Quarantine Point,
near the wreck, and recovered large quantities of goods.
The men were engaged on some days for four hours, on some
three hours only, and on others but two. The boat kept
moving, following the divers. We got a few goods close to
the wreck. Got some tanks there. (The witness here pointed
upon the chart to the scene of the wreck, and to the area of
their operations.)
Captain Williamson was recalled and further examined as
to the chart, which was placed in his hand, and on which he
pointed out the scene of operations.
The Witness was then re-examined :—The divers, he said,
recovered goods in more or less quantities all round; some-
times they would not recover anything for 300 or 400 yards.
A bale would come up half black and rotten, and the next
would come up quite good. All were equally wet, however.
We extended our operations over towards the Dunbar, and
found some calico. But this was in twelve or fourteen
fathoms of water, and it was too hard work. Pieces of the
wreck were washed on shore. Where we began was about
seven fathoms. It was three-quarters of a mile from the
vessel where we first found goods. Found nothing until we
got that distance, and within a certain line around found a
great quantity.
By His Honor.—We found some loose calico, supposed to
he from the Dunbar, on the sand between the Heads.
By Mr. Broadhcrst. —We searched until the depth of the
water made the work too heavy. Last week we found some
calico on an anchor right between the Heads. This was just


in the direction the goods would go in by a south wind from
the Dunbar.
By His Honor. —The ground around the Catherine Adam-
son was perfectly clear.
By Mr. Broadhurst. —Goods of this sort would float away
from the wreck, and not sink at once.
By His Honor. —I think the nearest bale to the Catherine
Adamson was 300 or 400 yards distant. We found this since;
about six weeks ago. It was a bale. It was not there before,
although we had searched over the ground. The bale was
perfectly clean in the centre.
By Mr. Wise. —lt can’t have come back there, but must
have gone there. It could not go against the sea. The sea
would drive it back to leeward.
By the Attorney-General. — l saw the silver plate fished
up within fifty or sixty yards of the Quarantine Ground. I
saw cases of saddlery got nearly opposite the place where we
first started, in eight or nine fathoms of water—in the direc-
tion of the South Reef, and on a line between that and the
Quarantine Point, three-quarters of a mile from the wreck of
the Catherine Adamson. This was north-west of where the
Catherine Adamson was lost.
By Mr. Broadhurst. —There were so many cases picked up
that I do not distinctly remember any particular cases.
In answer to a question from His Honor, the witness pointed
out upon the map the whereabouts of finding the saddlery.
fourth day.
Friday, 20th August, 1858.
Charles Wiseman, examined by Mr. Stephen. — I am the
commander of the Grafton steamer. I have been accustomed
to steam-vessels, and to the coasts and harbours, since 1838.
I am well acquainted with the set of the tides in different
places—in the harbour of Sydney among others. I remember
perfectly well the wreck of the Dunbar. I came in at seven


o’clock in the morning after her loss. We steered all manner
of courses, as we could not see where we were, owing to the
weather, until in the morning we made the North Head and
got in. For one eighth of a mile outside the Inner South
Reef and extending towards Middle Harbour, I saw indica-
tions of a wreck. I saw indications of the breaking up of a
ship, and seeing also a great quantity of trousers and slops, I
thought it must be an immigrant ship. I was obliged to stop
the vessel to get through it. When I came in between the
Heads it was flood tide, and a heavy sea was rolling, which
threw all these floating articles towards Middle Harbour.
The sea would have prevented them from going to the Inner
North Head, but the ebb tide, which I did not see, might set
them in that direction. The ebb tide would have a tendency
to set towards the Inner North Head all packages not exposed
to the surface of the water. Ido not know where the Cather-
ine Adamson was wrecked.
Mr. Daintry here pointed on the plan to the site of the
wreck in question, and the witness pointed out to the jury on
the plan the set of the currents. What passed in this way
was for the most part inaudible. The witness, counsel, Cap-
tain Williamson, and the jurors were all standing in a cluster,
and question and answer, in reference to the plan, passed
rapidly from one to the other in a low and conversational tone.
A short cross-examination by Mr. Wise was, for the same
reasons, unintelligible.
Mr. Wise, in answer to a question from His Honor a,s to
what the evidence amounted to, said, —“ The witness said at
first that all the goods he saw were coming towards Middle
Harbour in the first instance ; but at the ebb tide the goods
which were water-logged would go out and pass the North
Head, if they were not stopped. He now says that he thinks
there is an eddy there which might stop them.”
Witness to Mr. Wise. —The eddy is caused by this indent
(pointing to plan.) Ido not know the extent of the eddy.
From my practical knowledge of the harbour, I know that
there cannot be an ebb tide without an eddy there.
By His Honor. —lf goods sank inside the South Reef, I
have my doubts whether the swell could have an effect so
deep as to carry them over; but the tide would affect them,
and might cause them to roll.
Cross-examination resumed :—lf goods sank at South Reef,
I do not think they could he carried over to the north side,


because there is another eddy there which would prevent it.
I saw clothing, cases, bedding, and blankets floating. I do
not remember that I saw any bales. We were greatly ex-
cited, and I did not take any very accurate observations. The
ehh would take place about half-past nine. Supposing
that the Catherine Adamson was wrecked at the Old Man’s
Hat, the same operations would affect her cargo also. I
know nothing about the goods found there, whether they are
the goods of the Dunbar or of the (Jatherine Adamson. lam
not for Captain Williamson, nor for any other party in this
case.
The chart was here again placed in the hands of the wit-
ness by Mr. Wise, and another conversation and unintelligi-
ble discussion about localities took place, His Honor, the
jury, the witness, and counsel, all standing in a cluster.
This closed the defendants’ case.
John Brown Watt, having been called by Mr. Wise as a
witness in reply, was, in the first instance, sworn on the voi
dire at the instance of Mr. Broadhurst, and in answer to ques-
tions from that gentleman, made the following statements :
I have not been actually in Court during the trial of this
cause since the witnesses were ordered out. I have been in
communication with Mr. Dixon and Mr. Barker in reference
to the case. I have had no communication as to what the
witnesses have sworn. Mr. Dixon was about to tell me once,
and I stopped him, as I knew I might be called as a witness.
By Mr. Wise.—l have asked no questions as to what Cap-
tain Williamson said.
The witness was then sworn in the cause, and examined by
Mr. Wise.—l am (lie said) a member of the firm of Gilchrist,
Watt, and Co. Captain Stuart went by the Woolloomooloo.
(Looks at letter of 4th December.) This was signed in my
presence by Captain Williamson. No objection was made by
Captain Williamson as to the statement in that letter that
the goods were those of the Catherine Adamson.
By His Plonor.—No remark was made at the time. No
suggestion was made as to their being any other goods.
By Mr. Wise. —No remark was made as to their being more
probably the goods of the Dunbar than those of the Catherine
Adamson, None that I recollect. To the best of my recollection


there was none. I scrawled a rough draft, and we went over
it together; some alterations were made, and then a clean
draft was written. There was no interval between the two.
I have no recollection of its having been even suggested, that
the goods were those of the Dunbar, until I first saw it in an
advertisement in the newspaper. This was after the dispute.
Subsequent to the dispute, Captain Williamson said that lie
did not recognise my right to have anything, to do with it,
but not before. He would not recognise my right because I
would not consent to pay fifty per cent, salvage. The refusal
to recognise my right immediately followed my refusal to pay
this salvage. I did not say that fifty per cent, was not ex-
travagant ; I thought it was. I think I used the words “ too
much” instead of “extravagant.” This was in my own
office. I have paid him some salvage under an award.. This
award was dated 26tli November, hut it was not until some
days afterwards that it was received. I paid £3OO on the
day afterwards, and the balance of £l9 on the following day.
There were some matters pending which caused the delay of
this second payment. There was no real delay whatever
in the payment. He did not, to the best of my recollection,
ever say that he had no objection to hand the matter over to
us because we were not a mushroom house. Ido not believe
that he did say it. He did not ask me for a guarantee. lam
satisfied of this. It is not the case that I jibbed.from the
arbitration of the 4thof December. I was always willing and
desirous to go on with the arbitration.
By Mr. Bkoadhurst. —l do not remember the exact date of
Captain Stuart’s leaving; but he went in the Woolloomooloo.
I was at the wreck with Captain Stuart. I brought him from
it. I never went again with him. He went down again, hut
I did not go with him.
By Mr. Wise. — l have remitted the proceeds of these goods
for the benefit of the actual owners. They have been placed
in the hands of Richards and Son. lam slightly and indi-
rectly interested as a consignee of goods which have not been
settled for, but except in this way I have no individual in-
terest in this action.
By Mr. Broadhtjbst. —l remitted to Mr. Gilchrist to be
handed to the average adjusters, Richards and Son.. Mr. Gil-
christ is my senior partner. The proceeds remitted were
those arising from the first arbitration. The proceeds of the
wreck of the ship I remitted to the owners direct. I received
the proceeds of goods collected by Mr. Green, and I remitted
these proceeds as well as the others to Mr. Gilchrist.


By Mr. Wise.— l made these remittances acting under the
power of attorney from Captain Stuart.
This closed the plaintiff’s case in reply.
Mr. Beoadhurst now proceeded to address the Court and
jury for the defence. A great deal of evidence had, he said,
been introduced into the case, which, although it had been ad-
mitted, had hut little to do with the real question at issue.
To this class of evidence he conceived the jury would give no
attention, when they had been advised hy the presiding judge
what was the question which the plaintiff had to make out.
It _was for the plaintiff to make out his case clearly to the
satisfaction of the jury ; hut the course taken hy his counsel
had been to throw before the jury a mass of rubbishy evi-
dence, from which he asked them to pick out, if they could, a
verdict for his client. There was not here any question whether
the defendants had broken any agreement between them and the
plaintiff. The issue between the parties depended not upon mat-
ter of contract, but upon right of property. The plaintiff came
into Court and said to the defendant, “ You have taken my
goods ; you have pocketed my money.” He must make out
the affirmative of that proposition or fail. This was one of
tlm most elementary principles of the law of evidence ; if the
plaintiff supported his case with evidence which was consis-
tent with two states of facts, he must be nonsuited. (25 Law
Journal, C.P. 94.) He (Mr. Broadhurst) had not moved for
a nonsuit, because under all the circumstances he considered
it more expedient to go into evidence. But, if all the matters
which were now before the jury had appeared in the plaintiff’s
case, he should have moved for a nonsuit. And now that the
whole case was before them, if the jury had fair reason to
doubt that the goods in question belonged to the plaintiff, the
case of the latter must fail. They had all heard the way in
which the learned Attorney-General had opened the case.
No one having heard him could doubt that he felt his case
was one of guess-work, rather than proof. He had complained
that all the documents had been lost. Surely, however, there
were other documents, copies of the original papers, which
could have been procured. And how was it that they had
not before them the hero of the tragedy himself—Captain
Stuart? He or his mate could surely have attended and
given some important evidence in this case. But he had got
safely off to England, caring as little for the Catherine Adam-
son as when she was wrecked. They could have examined
some of the officers and crew, if they had thought fit, as well
as brought copies of the lost documents. But he did not be-


lieve the plaintiff cared a fig about it. The action was really
that of Gilchrist, Watt, and Co, The jury must deal with it,
however, as the action of the plaintiff upon the record. Deal-
ing with it thus, the jury would see that he (Mr. Broadhurst)
was justified in designating all these account sales and other
matters which had been imported into the evidence, as mere
rubbish, because the plaintiff’ had never had anything to do
with them. Assuming, however, for the sake of argument,
that the plaintiff had a locus standi, how could it he asstrmed
that the goods were those of the Catherine Adamson ? Would
not the evidence which had been given as well support a claim
to the goods as belonging to the Dunbar ? So long, as there
was any doubt upon the subjec,t it was enough for him. But
he would ask them, whether there was not a preponderance of
evidence in favour of the conclusion, that the goods were from
the Dunbar ? The divers called by the plaintiff had said that
they saw tanks and horse-shoes which they believed were
taken from the wreck of the Catherine Adamson, hut these
were not the subject of the action. Those divers had not
searched in the same direction as the divers employed by the
defendants. The goods of the Catherine Adamson were not
to he got in that direction. There was the evidence of res-
pectable and competent witnesses, with which the testimony
on the other side would bear no comparison in point of
value —of Williamson, of Crook, of Beattie, and of Wise-
man —which went to shew, beyond all question, that the
goods of the Dunbar would he carried to the very
spot where these were found. In the same manner
as those from the Catherine Adamson would float northward,
so would those of the Dunbar, and would he carried back by
tidal action to the place where these were found. It had been
shewn that it was nearly impossible, and highly improbable,
that the Catherine Adamson’s goods would ever come hack to
this place. It was sheer nonsense to doubt that even the
heaviest goods would not he moved by the irresistible power
of the broad ocean swell through the narrow channel between
the Heads of Port Jackson. If they had no evidence, even,
upon this point, he would have been content to put it to the
jury, as men of common sense, whether a contrary conclusion
would not be absurd. All men of ordinary education and
experience knew the comparative ease with which heavy
articles could be moved below the surface of the water. They
would see divers bringing up from the bottom of the sea,
with little exertion, things which they could not lift without
difficulty above water. They had, however, direct evidence
upon the point. They had heard from Beattie, who was a
clear, straightforward, and disinterested witness, not only a
description of where these goods were got, but of his search


in the vicinity of the Dunbar’s wreck, and of his having
found no heavy goods there at all. What had, then, become
of these heavy goods ? (Mr. Wise here expressed a doubt as
to whether there had been any evidence of a search near the
actual scene of the Dunbar’s wreck, but the evidence of Beattie
upon this point was referred to by Mr. Broadhurst and by
His Honor.) According to the hypothesis which had been
set up and relied upon by the other side, the Dunbar’s heavy
goods ought to he there still. It was clear that they did not
rest there. They must have been carried away, then, by the
heavy swell, in the direction where the light goods floated.
The witness Beattie had told them, in reply to a question from
His Honor, that the nearest bale which he found to the Ca-
therine Adamson was about 300 yards from her, but that he
found this only six weeks ago, and that, when he had pre-
viously searched the same spot, it was not there. It must,
consequently, have drifted there. He had made these obser-
vations to impress upon the attention of the jury the nature
of the evidence of identity, because the plaintiff could not
recover in any event unless he established the identity of
these goods as part of the Catherine Adamson’s cargo. His
learned friend, by the way in which he had put the case for-
ward, had manifested his consciousness that he had not a leg
to stand upon. He had almost made an application to them
ad misericordiam to abandon their defence, and admit the
identity of these goods, and to go merely for the rate of sal-
vage. How had the subsequent evidence helped out his
friend’s case ? He went upon documents, in which, as he said,
the defendants had admitted that these goods were the goods
of the Catherine Adamson. No such admission was ever
made. In the first place a man could not make a binding
admission that certain goods were the property of another,
when he did not know how the fact was. But such admis-
sions as had been made here applied to other goods. To
goods which had been picked up under different circum-
stances. Many of the goods which were picked up were
undoubtedly goods from the Catherine Adamson, and had
been dealt with as such by Captain Williamson himself. But
the defendants never recognised the plaintiff at all; never
made admissions to him or to his agent. Mr. Watt was dealt
with on the assumption that his firm were the agents of the
ship. There was no pretence of a title in Stuart, or in
Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. as his attorneys, until a late stage in
these transactions. Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. professed to act
for the owners while Stuart was still in the colony; and
although the power of attorney which had been given in
evidence was dated the 3rd of November, they still continued,
in the matter of the reference, and subsequently, to act in the


same way. This runaway Captain, who left, it was admitted,
on the 17th November, was, in fact, a perfect stranger to
them all. The whole of the documents had passed between
the two firms, and with the present plaintiff they had nothing
to do. No doubt, by the doctrine of estoppel, a person might
he prevented from raising questions as to a particular state of
things, in reference to which he had made admissions on
which the other party had acted. But that was not the case
here. Except by the doctrine of estoppel, no man was hound
by his admission of any fact not within his own full know-
ledge. His Honor had already told the jury that, although
he admitted the evidence as to admissions, it was for them to
say what was the value of it. Captain Williamson had said
that he was willing to go on as he had begun, not because of
any recognition of the present plaintiff’s rights, or of any
right on the part of Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. as his agents,
but because he had faith in Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. as a firm.
The jury had heard the weak contradictions upon this point
from Mr. Watt. Williamson was partly confirmed by Captain
Browne. But, as had been laid down by the Chief Justice
the other day, it was more likely that a man who swore to
the affirmative, as did Williamson here, should be the witness
of truth than the man whose testimony, like that of Watt,
was of a negative character. The first must have invented,
if he did not speak truly; whereas the latter might have
given erroneous evidence from sheer forgetfulness. Captain
Williamson was willing to trust Gilchrist, Watt, and Co.,
because, as he said, they were not a mushroom house, and
because he was desirous of freeing himself from all difficulty
as to future claims. He would have given the goods up to
them upon payment of his salvage. This was no admission,
except of a willingness to shift the responsibility from the
shoulders of the defendants to those of Gilchrist, Watt, and
Co. That arrangement failing, the matter of salvage was
broken off; and, as to the question, the parties were in the
same position as if the offer had never been made. On that
going off, Mr. Watt had assumed a different attitude. He
assumed, thereupon, to act for Captain Stuart, of whom no
one had ever heard before. The Captain had no more to
do with this action—had no more beneficial interest in
its result —than any one of the jury. As to the letter of
the 4th of November, about which so much had been said,
Mr. Watt signed this in the name of his firm, although, as
he now r said, he was acting under the power of attorney from
Captain Stuart. This was a speculative and fishing action,
but the ruse would not blind the jury. A mass of evidence
had been brought forward to cast dust in their eyes, and to
divert them from the real question. Thus it was with the


advertisements. When they began to advertise, the goods for
sale were undoubtedly those of the Catherine Adamson, and
as to the goods subsequently got up, the title was unchanged.
They had already seen that it was a. general practice on the
part of the auctioneers, to advertise in such a style as seemed
most likely to attract purchasers. So, on they went in this
case, advertising as goods from the Catherine Adamson all
that came up. Captain Williamson had all along objected to
this, in the same manner as he had objected to the heading of
the account sales, which, in one instance, he had actually,
for this reason, returned.
His Honor suggested that the document of the 4th Novem-
ber had this peculiarity. It was not only based upon the
sum of £1575 for the settlement of the salvage due thereon,
but it provided for a settlement of the salvage upon all goods
to he recovered in future.
Mr. Broadhtjrst said that, whatever were the peculiarities
of this agreement, it was one which the defendants could
break off. There might, perhaps, he a cause of action in
Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. against the defendants for not going
on, but what had this to do with the present plaintiff? He
was no party to it. Mr. Watt did not profess to act for him
on that occasion, hut for his own firm. If the defendants
were seeking to base an action against Captain Stuart upon
this agreement, he would have this clear answer—that he
never had had anything to do with the matter. They had
heard the evidence of Captain Williamson and Mr. Watt as
to this letter, and he scarcely thought it worth his while to
comment upon it. A more absurd agreement could not have
been drawn. There was an attempt to bind the parties as to
future transactions without any knowledge as to what these
transactions were likely to be. But even if this agreement
could operate, as against the defendants, in the nature of an
estoppel in reference to Gilchrist, Watt, and Co., this would
not affect the case of the plaintiff. The objections of Captain
Williamson were of this kind: —The first amount had been
got with certain known expenses. But they might go on
afterwards and get little goods with greater expenses. Thus,
if the salvage was fixed in the way proposed, an actual loss
might have been entailed. Whether this objection was right
or wrong, it was yielded to, and the arbitration went off.
Such an admission, that the goods were those of the Catherine
Adamson, would be of little avail when they certainly were
not so. He would earnestly beg of the jury not to imagine
that he wanted a verdict for the defendants on any mere
points of law ; but they would find that the law, as bearing


upon this case, was founded upon principles of equity and
justice between man and man. Captain Stuart said that
these goods were his. What proof had been given of his
property in them ? There was nothing whatever to shew that
he had any individual property in them ? They could have
examined him de bene esse if there had been any pretence for
setting up a claim of this nature. Not being his individual
property, he could only have any rights of ownership over
them as being captain of the Catherine Adamson. But the
Catherine Adamson had ceased to be a ship, and the plaintiff
had ceased to have any command or interest in her when she
was broken up, unless he took measures to assert his property
in the cargo as special bailee. When it was found that he
made no efforts to recover any of this cargo, there was clearly
an abandonment of his right of lien. There wanted no proof
of his abandonment. He never went near the wreck. Even
Mr. Watt, as his attorney, never went near the wreck. The
power of attorney did not provide for any recovery of the
goods themselves, but simply a recovery of proceeds arising
from the sale of the wreck and cargo. (Mr. Broadhurst here
read from the power of attorney in support of his argument.)
It was clear that he took no measures to reinstate himself in
his character of captain, which he had abdicated when he left
the ship in the second boat, but had left the duty of collecting
the cargo to any salvors who might offer, and had then
attempted to appoint people to collect the proceeds. The
plaintiff could not delegate to any attorney his powers as
captain. The jury was asked to place Gilchrist, Watt, and
Co. in the position of Captain Williamson, and, yet, not to
relieve the latter from responsibility. Part of these goods
belonged to the consignees, or original owners of them ; and
such as had been insured and abandoned belonged to the
insurers. The effect of a verdict for the plaintiff would be to
give the proceeds to Gilchrist, Watt, and Co., and to leave
Williamson, who had displayed all this energy, responsible
for the value to the owners and insurers. It would be no
answer to claims from any of these parties that the proceeds
had been paid over to the captain. The captain had not
earned his freight, either actually or constructively. Suppose
the owners of goods by the Dunbar came and claimed these
goods which the defendants had saved, would they not have
as much right to recover under this evidence as the plaintiff
had?. Captain Williamson had never laboured under the
delusion that he had a right to keep all this money to himself.
He (Mr. Broadhurst) thought, as the Attorney-General had
said that this was a case where the Crown could come in, and,
paying salvage, could take the goods or their proceeds!
E


Could the jury say, in this case, that Captain Williamson had
acted piratically ? Had he not acted as a meritorious salvor ?
He had incurred great expenses, and he had made great exer-
tions. He was ready to pay over the proceeds to any one who
had a good claim to them. Why should they take all from
him, and leave him not only unremunerated, but liable to
after claims? Why should they give these proceeds to a cap-
tain who had abdicated his functions, and had run away from
the colony, leaving a do-nothing agent behind him. If it had
been for the jury to decide upon the amount of salvage, which
it was not, they would have found that fifty per cent, was
not an unreasonable amount. (In support of this, the learned
gentleman cited a note in p. 489 of Abbott on Shipping.)
But there was no claim for salvage to be determined here.
The defendants said that the goods were not those of the
plaintiff—that he had not established his right to the proceeds
in their hands. Lie (Mr. Broadhurst) submitted confidently,
but with very great respect, that this was a case wherein the
plaintiff had wholly failed, and that there must be, of
necessity, a verdict for the defendants.
The Attoeney-Geneeal, in reply, said that his learned
friend had put forward his chief defence at the last, and he
had put it forward in such a way as to lead the jury into a
belief that it was one on which he did not strongly rely. At
the heel of the hunt, after having touched upon every other
consideration, he invited the jury to consider whether the
plaintiff had made out his right. He (the Attorney-General)
should have a word to say upon this subject before he sat
down. In the first instance, he would refer to the law in
relation to salvors, to shew the jury what were the rights and
what the duties of persons in this position. (The Attorney-
General here quoted from Atkinson’s Shipping Laws upon
this subject.) The salvor was entitled to reasonable compen-
sation for his services. When the owner was on the spot, the
salvor might come to an arrangement with him. He had a
lien for his salvage, which he could set up if sued by the
owner, and he might retain the goods until this lien was
satisfied, or he might give up the goods, and sue for his sal-
vage. Another course open to him was, to go to the Court
of Admiralty, which would take the matter in hand and fix
the amount of salvage. In no case whatever had a salvor a
right to sell of his own authority, even perishable commo-
dities. if such a sale was necessary, it must be made under
the authority of the Court of Admiralty. Lastly, all right to
a lien for salvage might be forfeited for misconduct. When,
as in the present case, a salvor took upon himself to sell off


the goods he had picked up, it was difficult to see in what his
conduct differed from that of a wrecker. This was a course
of action which would he regarded as misconduct by any
Court in the world; —such misconduct as would deprive him
of all right to compensation. The defendant here had dealt
with a large amount of property just as if it had been his
own. He had sold it off, and put the proceeds in his own
pocket, until some one could shew a legal right to the goods.
The defendant had himself told them that it was impossible
to give any such proof of ownership. The result was an
application of all the proceeds to his own benefit. This,
then, was the position of the defendant. He would now turn
to that of the plaintiff. He was, as had been admitted, the
master of the vessel, and had all the rights of a carrier in
reference to her cargo. The vessel being lost while in pur-
suance of her voyage, the plaintiff’s possessory rights as a
carrier had never been determined. There were numerous
cases to shew that a person having possession of goods as a
carrier was entitled to bring an action of trover against any
person but the actual owner of these goods. He could main-
tain his possessory right against all the world but the owner.
The latter he could only resist when he had a lien for freight.
It mattered not that, as in the present case, the carrier did
not happen to have actual possession. It had been laid down,
over and over again, that either the real owner of goods or a
bailee might maintain an action on their right of possession.
The most common case was that of a consignee sueing for
goods which had not reached his hands, and over which his
only right was that of an agent for their sale, (The Attorney-
General here cited Webb v. Fox, 7 Term Rep. 396, calling
special attention to the judgment, in this case, of Lord Ke-
nyon. He also cited other authorities, the names of which
he did not state, as to the different modes of dealing with
different cargoes, and as to the continuance of the duties and
rights of the master even after the wreck of his vessel.) So
long as it was practicable that any portion of the cargo, either
damaged or not, could be carried to its destination, the rights
and duties of the captain, as a carrier, would still exist. Hence
these rights were still existent so long as it was possible to
recover any of the cargo from the bottom of the sea, and to
bring it to Sydney. The plaintiff here, then, had a right of
action for the recovery of goods forming part of his cargo,
against all the world except the owners of them ; and, assum-
ing the goods taken by the defendant to have formed part of
this cargo, he had acted, in so taking them, as a wrong-doer.
This brought them to what was really the main question in
the case—whether the goods forming the subject matter of
E 2


this action were those of the Catherine Adamson or not. He
had hoped that even at the eleventh hour the other side would
have receded from their pleas upon the record, and have sub-
mitted to the jury the question of what they were entitled to
as salvage. But they had adhered to their determination of
putting the plaintiff to strict proof of his ownership. (The
Attorney-General here cited from 17 C. Bench Bep. 372, the
same case that Mr. Broadhurst had cited from the 25th Law
Journal. It was, he said, much better reported in the fermer
than in the latter work. He proceeded to shew that the cases
were distinguishable, as the suit in the instance cited was for
a breach of contract, and it was for the plaintiff to make the
contract out.) It did not always follow that the same kind
of evidence must be given in every case. In cases where the
property sought to be recovered was such as to admit of po-
sitive identification —as in the case of a promissory note, or
in that of a horse, for instance —clear proofs of ownership
might be fairly exacted. But the law was not so unreason-
able as to require more than the best proofs which the nature
of the case would admit of. (For the rules of law bearing
upon this branch of the case, the Attorney-General cited from
the first of Smith’s Leading Cases, 261, especially calling
attention to the principle there laid down, that all things were
to be presumed against a wrong-doer.) Now, what was the
case here ? He had already called the attention of the jury
to the rights of salvors. What had these defendants done ?
They went down to the wreck after recognising the validity
of the present claim in a variety of ways—after having fully
recognised the -right to interfere with the goods from the
Catherine Adamson—after having entered into a contract
upon this assumption, and after having specially dealt with
some of the goods as having been recovered from the wreck
of the Catherine Adamson. There had been the most full
recognition of these facts and rights by the defendant Wii-,
liamson, not only by a general course of action, but in a
written contract, and in advertisements up to a given date—
up to the time when the agreement went off by which .he
had reckoned upon getting 50 per cent. Notwithstanding
this full recognition, he had subsequently gone on employing
his divers to pick up the goods, and, without any survey upon
them, or any attempt to preserve descriptions of them for the
guidance of future claimants, had proceeded to sell what he
found, and to pocket the proceeds.. The external marks of
the cases or bales were, doubtless, in many cases effaced, but
they might have inspected and described their contents, pre-
serving such a record of these descriptions as would enable
owners to subsequently identity them. Supposing all the


bills of lading and invoices were lost, what had the defendants
done to enable any person to recover the value of their goods?
If the defendants had determined to stretch their authority,
and to sell the goods, they should have held surveys upon
them. They should have invited their brother-merchants to
come in and examine them. Neither Captain Williamson nor
his auctioneers had done anything of this kind. The former
had told them that he retained the proceeds until the true
owners could make out their rights; but he told them also, in
the same breath, that to make out these rights would be
impossible.
Mr. Stephen said that there was distinct evidence of all
such marks as were upon the cases having been advertised.
The Attorney-General said that he was not speaking of
those marks. What lie was commenting upon was that, as to
the bulk of these goods—some £4OOO worth—no description
whatever had been preserved. The defendant’s actings here
were those of a wrong-doer. He had suppressed evidence
which he ought to have preserved. He had even destroyed
evidence which he ought to have preserved. He had taken
it upon himself—in spite of warnings not to do so—to still go
on in this work of collecting goods, and suppressing all evi-
dence as to their identity. But the defendant could not take
advantage of the position in which he had thus placed him-
self—of the suppression of evidence by his own tortious act.
(The Attorney-General here cited an authority for this posi-
tion, but without stating from what book he read.) Thus,
even if it were the fact that two vessels had been wrecked
side by side, and their cargoes, of precisely the same character,
had been fairly intermingled, he was entitled to ask the jury
to presume as against the defendants, that the goods claimed
were those of the vessel which the claimant commanded. If
a defence of this sort was tolerated, what would be the conse-
quence ? Whenever two wrecks occurred in this way, and a
defendant could, by the loose testimony of his friends,
establish a doubt as to the identity of any goods which he
might get up, the same defence might be made in reference
to goods from either vessel. Thus, by taking up cargo and
destroying such evidence of its identity as remained, a man
might safely retain the proceeds and set all claimants at
defiance. But the true principle, he contended, was this: —
That, by acting as he had done, the defendants had laid them-
selves open to a suit by either party. It might be said
that this was an unfortunate position, but it was the actings
of Captain Williamson himself which had placed him in that


position. Not only, he contended, was this a plain rule of
law, hut a rule founded on reason and good sense. He would
now, however, turn to the question of probabilities. In the
first place he would take the defendant’s own actings. On
the very morning of the wreck he had met Mr. "VVatt,
and had talked about this unfortunate occurrence in such a
manner as to shew his perfect knowledge that Gilchrist,
Watt, and Co. had something to do with this vessel. Within
the next three days Williamson recovered and handed over a
large quantity of goods from the wreck, receiving £3OO for
this service, which was a most liberal remuneration. The
plaintiff’s agent desired to he as liberal as possible, but,
having the interests of others to guard, he had no right to he
too liberal. He had, in the first instance, agreed to the sug-
gestion of Captain Williamson himself to allow twenty-five
per cent., and to leave the work of collection in the hands of
Captain Williamson alone. But it occurred to the agent
afterwards that, dealing, as he was, with the property of
other persons, he ought not to limit the work of salvage to
one person. As he was in a position to obtain the
services of experienced divers, he was bound, he thought, to
avail himself of those services, as well, perhaps, as to permit
the exertions of other parties who were willing, at their own
expense and upon the chance of salvage, to save portions of
the cargo. But he was still disposed to deal with Captain
Williamson liberally, and hence proposed that the question
of salvage, as respected him, should be left open to future
adjustment. The defendant had told them that, from the
time this new arrangement was made, he had gone on
recovering upon his own account; but it was plain that he had
gone on under the new agreement. He had raised no ques-
tion of ownership from the first, and he raised no such ques-
tion when these new terms were proposed by Mr. Watt. _lt
was goods recovered under this new arrangement which
formed the subject of the subsequent reference, which
Williamson himself had put an end to. If the goods which
he recovered were not those of the Catherine Adamson, why
did he come to Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. at all ? The de-
fendant’s case was this : that the goods, estimated at £1575,
were never on board the Catherine Adamson at all. Yet, on
the 4tli of November, they found him signing an agreement,
an admission under his own hand, that goods from the Cathe-
rine Adamson had been recovered to that amount. William-
son said he had declared his belief that they were not from
this vessel. Watt had denied that there had been any such
declaration. But the jury would doubtless regard the written
evidence of what was the understanding as a better guide


than the story of either party. If Williamson had really
objected, and had not recognised the goods as from the Cathe-
rine Adamson, what had he to do with the plaintiff's agent at
all ?He had said that he wished to get rid of his responsi-
bility, and to get his fifty per cent, salvage ; not caring, pro-
vided he attained these ends, what was done with the rest.
Why, then, did he not go to some other responsible and
respectable house—say to Smith, Campbell, and Co., who
were the agents for the Dunbar. It was impossible, upon
any explanation consistent with the assumption of Captain
Williamson being a reasonable person, to get out of his
admission that these goods had been recovered from the wreck
of the Catherine Adamson, or to get rid of the fact that he
had made this admission knowingly. If they accepted his
explanation that he had objected to the use of the Catherine
Adamson’s name in the advertisements, how could he explain
away the fact of account sales, similarly drawn up, having
passed between the auctioneers and himself? How could
they explain away the mode in which these transactions had
been recorded in the defendants’ own books, under the heading
of “the Catherine Adamson spec., &c.’’ The goods were
always spoken of as those of the Catherine Adamson, and no
question to the contrary had been raised until the time when
one of the arbitrators called the attention of Mr. Watt to the
fact, which Captain Williamson himself ought to have men-
tioned. Mr. Watt had been deceived as to the amount ot
goods which the defendant had recovered. The object of the
deception was this :—Large preliminary expenses had been
incurred, which were to be made a basis for computing all
future rates of payment. It was the object of the defendant
to keep down the estimated amount of the goods which had
been recovered, and which were to be set against the expenses,
so as to increase the per centage of the expenses to the re-
ceipts, and, consequently, the rate of remuneration which he
was to be allowed. The parties had all met on the day fol-
lowing that on which attention had been drawn to this mis-
representation. Captain Williamson was indignant at this
impeachment of the figures which he had furnished. Ho
wanted to pin Mr. Watt down to these figures, notwith-
standing it had been discovered that the amount of proceeds
thus given was not the true one. Captain Browne had told the
jury that Mr. Watt was willing to leave all to the arbitrators.
It was at this stage that Captain Williamson, for the first
time, refused a recognition of Gilchrist, Watt, and Co., and of
the fact that these goods were from the wreck of the Cathe-
rine Adamson. But he had still recognised this fact in sub-
sequent advertisements; and it was not until the last of these


advertisements that the name of the Dunbar was publicly
used. There was one remarkable fact to which he would
beg to call the special attention of the jury. According to the
defendant the agreement, under which he had undertaken to
save cargo at twenty-five per cent., was made in reference to
certain machinery belts, which were entangled in the rigging
ot the Catherine Adamson, and had undoubtedly formed part
of her cargo. Now, the first item in this very advertisement
of the 10th December, wherein the name of the Dunbar was
for the first time used, was a description of those belts.
There could be no doubt that the “ Indian-rubber vulcanised
machine straps” of the advertisement were the same “ belts”
to which the defendant had made such special reference ; and
yet he had advertised them in such terms as to imply a doubt
whether they had not formed part of the Dunbar’s cargo. It
was clear from this that the defendant’s profession of doubt
was all moonshine. That this doubt only arose when he
found that he should have some difficulty in getting his fifty
per cent., and had come to the determination of enforcing this
demand for fifty per cent, at all hazards.
Mr. Bkoadhurst said that there was no evidence of this
advertisement having come from the defendant.
The Attorney-General said that Miller had spoken of
this advertisement as having emanated from the defendant
himself.
A juror suggested that Miller had spoken, not of this ad-
vertisement, but of another.
The Attorney-General said that, however that might he,
here, at all events, were these machinery straps, taken from
the very rigging of the Catherine Adamson, advertised as if
it was doubtful whether they had come from that vessel or
from the Dunbar. They would find also that it was not until
after the disputes in December that there had been any
thought on the part of the defendant of instructing his auc-
tioneer to advertise the goods sent for sale as goods found
“at the Heads.” This, by the way, gave a still wider range
to the defendant's power of questioning identity. He did not
profess here to know that the goods had come from one of
these two last wrecks, but left it open to question whether
they might not have been the result of any wreck within the
last thirty or forty years. These were the actings of Captain
Williamson, and he would ask the jury whether, independently
of any rules of law, they were such as to entitle that gentle-'


man to any consideration ? If the defendant could sustain
the views which he had endeavoured to impress upon the jury,
and if the Crown did not interfere with his proceedings, the
result would be that he would pocket the proceeds of every-
thing which he could manage to fish up from the neighbour-
hood of the “ Old Man’s Hat.” At first he wanted only his
50 per cent., but now he would get the whole. It was idle to
say that he was prepared to deliver up to the owners, for they
had already seen—-as the defendant had, in fact, admitted—
that, if the present action failed, no identification by the
owners would be possible. The Dunbar had been wrecked
more than two miles and a-half away, in shallow water, and
had been dashed to pieces. The suggestion which the jury
was asked to adopt was, that these goods had travelled two
and a-half or three miles to three or four fathoms’ water off
the Old Man’s Hat, across a gully 120 feet deep. One of the
defendants’ own witnesses, Green, had told them that the
goods could not cross this gully, and their own common-sense,
he submitted, must convince the jury that this was a sound
and correct view. It was absurd to suppose that heavy goods
could travel, not only down hill, but up hill, a distance of
from two to three miles along the bottom of the sea. Mr.
Smith, the master of the Herald—a scientific man as well
as a practical one—a gentleman who had made an accurate
survey of all this ground, had told the jury that this was
impossible, and had given them full reasons for holding that
opinion. Another suggestion was, that the bales did not sink
immediately, but had floated to the neighbourhood where they
were found. The jury were invited to come to this singular
conclusion —that all these bales had just so much buoyancy
in them as would carry them from the scene of the Dunbar’s,
wreck to that of the Catherine Adamson’s. That, on reach-
ing this vicinity, they all became so much saturated with
water that they could float no longer, and so went to the
bottom. Anything, no matter how extraordinary, could be
surmised, but what evidence was there to lead to so extraor-
dinary a conclusion as this ? Going away from mere pre-
sumptions, which must all, he submitted, be taken against
the defendants, what, he would ask, were the probabilities ?’
When one vessel had been wrecked two months before, be-
tween two and three miles from the spot where these goods,
were found, and another had been recently cast away in that;
immediate vicinity, which vessel were the goods found near.-
the last wreck most likely to belong to? Common-sense-
pointed so plainly to a conclusion that these goods must have
belonged to the Catherine Adamson as to warrant a verdict:
for the plaintiff, even if the admissions of Captain Williamsom


were not taken into consideration. His learned friend had
relied much upon the evidence of his practical and scientific
witnesses. One of these practical and scientific gentlemen
having favoured them with his decision 'that a salvor Avas
entitled to sell perishable commodities, had ventured to tell
the jury that silver plate was a perishable article. Now, they
all knew very well that, so far from silver plate being perish-
able, there was only one particular kind of acid which would
act upon it. Everything, of course, was perishable, in the
widest sense of the term. The “Old Man’s Hat” would
doubtless perish some day, and the “ great globe itself”
would, in the fulness of time, pass away. But, of all the
commodities in the world, who ever heard of silver plate being
considered a perishable article, in the commercial sense of the
term? Sugar, flour, salt, and articles of a like character, were
those ordinarily regarded as perishable in this sense. Now, it
was of the utmost importance that the silver plate should have
been kept for identification. From the peculiarities in marks
and patterns which articles of this kind must have possessed,
their recognition would have been certain if they had been
kept. But Captain Williamson had dealt Avitli the silver plate
as an article which was at once perishable and incapable of
identification, and he avowed this dealing. From this fact
alone, the jury must see that they would not be justified in
relying much upon the scientific or practical character of his
evidence. Without at all saying or insinuating that Captain
Williamson had been guilty of falsehood, it must be clear, he
(the Attorney-General) thought, that the evidence of that
gentleman Avas manifestly biassed and coloured in favour of
his own particular views. They must have noticed, too, the
unAvillingness of the defendant Williamson to produce his
books. He had distinctly objected to produce them, and had
tried to avoid doing so by referring first to a memorandum,
and then to a smaller book. But when it Avas found that
nothing of this sort would do, the ledger Avas at length
brought forward. When Captain Williamson Avas asked
about the heading of the account under which the entries
relative to these transactions had been made, he ad-
mitted, as the fact was, that these entries were all under
the head of “ The Catherine Adamson spec., &c.,” but
added that “ the Dunbar Avas there als-o.” If the case had been
suffered to rest upon this evidence, without an inspection of
the book itself, the jury would have been left under the
impression that the accounts of the Dunbar were mixed up
with these entries as to the Catherine Adamson. , But the
book itself shewed that the purchase of the Dunbar’s Avreck,
and the dealings with reference to that vessel, had been


entered as quite a separate transaction. From the defendants’
own hook it appeared that £4156 14s. 6d was the net proceeds
of the goods which the plaintiff now claimed, and he was
entitled to the gross value of those goods, irrespective of any
charges for auctioneers’ commission, or for advertising. Not
only the equities of the parties to this suit were involved in
it. The character of this port—its mercantile honour and
reputation, were at stake. They had to thank this case for
the disclosure of one discreditable practice, which was said to
prevail here —that, to use the defendant’s own phrase, of
charging five per cent, to the owners, in the shape of
auctioneer’s commission, and then, “ nobbing it up” with
the auctioneer to get two and a-half per cent, out of this for
the merchant. It would go forth to the world that, by this
mode of “ nobbing it up” with the auctioneer, the unfortunate
consignors were proportionately victimised. The defendants
did not, in the present instance, profit by this system of
“nobbing it up,” as the auctioneers had gone into the Insolvent
Court, and had not refunded the two and a-half per cent.
The only book which the jury had before them was the
ledger. But there must have been entries relative to these
transactions in many other hooks, and, no doubt, they were
of the same character. If they would have afforded any sup-
port to the defendants’ case, they would have been readily
produced when called for. All this account, too, of the
“ Catherine Adamson spec.” looked very much as if it had
been posted up at the same time. No doubt, it had. been a
very lucrative “ spec.” to the defendants. Whether they
would be able to make it more so by setting the present
plaintiff and the whole world at defiance remained to be seen.
If the plaintiff obtained a verdict, the proceeds of it would
not go to him, or to his agents, but would be divided among
the owners and insurers of these goods. The case was, per-
haps, of no great importance as to the amount wdiich was
involved, but it w 7 as a most important one as affecting the
mercantile character of this community.
His Honor inquired of the jury whether they thought it
necessary that he should read his notes of the evidence.
The Foreman of the jury, after consultation with his col-
leagues, replied in the negative.
Mr. Broadhurst requested that His Honor would call par-
ticular attention to the fact that even Smith’s evidence rvent
to shew that the goods of the Catherine Adamson could not
go south.


His Honor said that the jury had heard all the evidence,
and it was for them to judge of it.
(After an interval of forty minutes for refreshment) —
His Honor proceeded to direct the jury. As they had
relieved him, he said, from the duty of reading his notes, he
would merely, in the first instance, in compliance with the
request of Mr. Broadhurst, draw attention to what Mr. Smith,
master of H. M. S, Herald, had said—that if goods got to the
point where this wreck took place, they would not float back
to the southward.
Mr. Wise called attention to other evidence, which went to
shew that, if the cargo of the Catherine Adamson was ever
(as it must have been) on the spot where these goods were
found, there was no reason whatever why it should be
disturbed.
His Honor said that the jury must deal with the points at
issue, and with the evidence which bore upon them. He need
not specify any particular evidence, as the jury had the whole
of it before them. His Honor was proceeding to state the
issues, when—
Mr. Wise said that they would go upon the general count
for trover.
His Honoe said that, to this count, the defendants had
pleaded, first, that they were not guilty of the conversion;
secondly, that the goods in question were not those of the
plaintiff. The whole question turned upon this latter plea.,
The jury must bear in mind from the first that, although
they had heard so much about salvage, this was altogether
out of the question for the purposes of the present case. The
jury were not required to consider whether the defendants
had any claim for salvage or not. With respect to the rights
of the plaintiff here, it was sufficient for him (the judge) to
rule that the plaintiff, Stuart, had a locus standi and a right,
to sue. Being a carrier, and having a right of action in that
capacity, the plaintiff had authorised Mr. Watt, by power of
attorney, to act on his behalf, and the firm of which he was a
member, by arrangement with Lloyds’ agent, attended to
the interests of the owners of the ship and the owners, of
her cargo. That being the case, a very important question,
arose upon the point of agency. It would be necessary to.
consider the relations between these parties from the coin-


mencement. The evidence referred to two different states of
thinsrs. It was, in part, applicable to the goods covered by
the agreement, inclusive of those then in store, which were
stated to be worth about £500; and, in part, applicable to
other goods which, it was contended by the defendants, were
found subsequent to the date of the interruption of the agree-
ment, and altogether dehors or independent of it. They
would find it necessary to consider whether any of these
goods were of the same kind, or came from the same quarter,
as those on which there had been bygone disputes as to
salvage, and whether there had, in these transactions, been
any recognition of the present plaintiff as one having authority
to deal with these matters.
Mr. Broadhurst pointed out that the power of attorney
was to Mr. Watt alone, and it was with the firm that the
negociations had taken place.
Mr. Wise contended that, although the name of the firm
was used, this was upon the power of attorney held hy its
local representative.
Mr. Broadhurst said that the power of attorney was not
in existence at the time of the first reference to arbitration.
His Honor was proceeding to refer further to the power of
attorney and the actings under it, when—
Mr. Wise said that their argument was this: The firm’s
name was used; yet all the actings were by Mr. Watt. The
firm’s signature was only used as a matter of custom or
usage.
Mr. Broadhurst said that Captain Stuart was in the colony
until after many of these transactions, and no presumption
could exist of Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. having acted for him.
They did not even profess to do so. He would not he hound
hy anything they had done.
Mr. Wise rejoined that they used all these documents
chiefly for the purpose of shewing an admission that the goods
in question came from the Catherine Adamson.
His Honor resumed his charge : —He must rest there with
reference to the power of attorney. No douht it was granted
to Mr. Watt individually, and not to the firm. But they had
heard it urged for the plaintiff—and it was for them to say


what the fact was—that there was evidence in the agreement
of reference, and in the whole dealings between the parties,
of an admission of the plaintiff’s right. It was for them (the
jury) to say whether there had been dealings with these
goods as the goods of Captain Stuart, and with Mr. Watt as
his agent. The first point was this, as to the agency. As to
the first lot of goods, there was an unquestionable recognition
of them as from the vessel in question. It was in order that
they might see what had been the dealings of these parties
with each other from the first that he admitted evidence of
the first arbitration. Then came the second arbitration. The
law presumed continuance, and, unless this inference was
rebutted, it must be held that the agency for the latter goods
was the same as for the former. But Williamson had denied
that he had ever recognised agency. He had only, he said,
dealt with Gilchrist, Watt, and Co. as a respectable firm, in
order to relieve himself from responsibility. This document
—the reference to the second arbitration—was important, _ as
well as the account sales and advertisements, in determining
whether this really was the character in which Williamson did
deal with the firm. The advertising seemed to have gone on
as at first until disputes arose, when Williamson desired an
alteration, describing all these goods “as goods picked up at
the Heads.” These instructions were not literally complied
with. The auctioneer claimed his right to frame the adver-
tisements in such a manner as he might think best calculated
to attract custom.
Mr. Wise said that, as to the advertisement _ on the 19th
December, there was a direct recognition, and plaintiff’s agent
had specially referred to it in writing to the defendants; and
to this letter the defendants had replied.
Hxs Honor said it was for the jury to determine what was
the effect of the advertisements, of the correspondence, and
of the account sales. The main thing here was the question
as to the identitjr of these goods. The conduct of Captain
Williamson should not he dealt with too harshly. The law
was as the Attorney-General had stated it to he ; hut the word
“ wrecker ” could only he properly used when a party had
done a wrong act and was conscious of it. AA'illiamson said—-
“ Here are goods at the bottom of the sea. I have steamers
and boats, and lam myself a nautical man. I can save these
goods from being wholly lost, and why should I not do so ?”
The Attorney-General said that Williamson ought to have
got the goods in, and then have gone to the Court of Admi-
ralty to get an award of salvage. It might be that this


would have been the correct legal course, and he was inclined
to think it would. But it would have been, perhaps, better to
have avoided harsh epithets. If Williamson had acted con-
trary to law, the Attorney-General would, perhaps, deal with
him in some other way, if he thought proper. But it might
he that, though he might have infringed the law, he might
not he conscious that he had done so, especially if he, bond
fide, believed these goods were picked up at the Heads, and it
could not he reasonably ascertained to the cargo of what
vessel they belonged. Here Captain Stuart could only claim
what was shewn to have belonged to the Catherine Adam-
son. It would rest with the owners of the Dunbar or with
the Crown to claim any that might have come from the
Dunbar. The great question, then, was identity. Were they
satisfied that these goods came from the Catherine Adamson ?
Or did they think that they had come from the Dunbar or
some other vessel ? To this question the great body of the
evidence applied. There had been two wrecks within a couple
of months of each other. It was not quite certain where the
Dunbar went down. There was evidence of a search having
been made for five days in what was considered the most
likely direction, without a trace having been found of her.
But there was a great body of evidence to shew that large
quantities of floating goods found their way in the direction
where these goods were picked up. It was very difficult for
any man—nautical or practical as he might be—to ascertain
the operations of nature under water in the case of a wreck
such as that of the Dunbar. The evidence was that the heavy
goods would sink. As to the other goods, the matter was not
at all clear. This was one of those cases in which the jurors
were, as men of the world, called upon to judge upon proba-
bilities, as to which they could have but an imperfect know-
ledge. They had evidence as to probabilities, yet they were
left in a state of great difficulty as to the determination of a
point which they were bound to determine—whether these
goods were from the Catherine Adamson, or from the Dunbar
or some other vessel. They must determine the cape from
what they considered the weight of these probabilities was.
These goods seemed to have been picked up at distances of
from three hundred yards to three-quarters of a mile from the
wreck of the Catherine Adamson, Some were picked up
quite close to her, near the spot at which she had sunk—
some of them heavy goods, such as casks of nails, and pieces
of a broken church bell for Bathurst. Yet there was a con-
siderable amount of evidence presumably in favor of some of
the goods having probably belonged to the Dunbar, and there
would be a difficulty, perhaps, in determining what might


belong to the Dunbar (if any), and, if any, to what amount.
It was said goods from the Dunbar, being water-logged,
might sink, but where or how far they might float before they
sank it was not easy to say. These were matters in which
he (the Judge) could not assist them. They could much
better assist themselves. He (the Judge) knew nothing sci-
entifically about currents and waves, and there was one
gentleman on the jury whom he knew to be conversant with
the harbour and with every part of it. This was not a legal
question, but a question of fact, which came within their own
province.
Mr. Broadhurst pointed out that Beattie had not spoken
of finding goods within three hundred yards in the first
instance. The bale which he had found within that distance
must, as he had said, have been washed there lately.
His Honor said that goods seemed to have been found
everywhere about the wreck, and portions of them were got
three-quarters of a mile south, where it was said, on one side,
that none of the goods from this wreck could possibly go.
Hence, it was argued, they must have come from the Dunbar.
Goods were found in a kind of circle round the ship, and, if
they believed the divers engaged by Messrs. Gilchrist and
Co., hales were hoisted into Captain Williamson’s steamer as
she lay quite over the spot where the Catherine Adamson sank,
and where the divers were employed by Gilchrist and Co. in
getting up her cargo. It was for the jury to determine the
question of probabilities, and it was not necessary that he
should address them further upon that point. He would turn
now to the documents. It was right to make reference to
this letter of the 4th of December, which was a most remark-
able document. (His Honor here read that letter.) Now, in
that document there was an admission that goods to the
extent of £1574 were the goods of the Catherine Adamson,
and there was a provision that this reference should apply to
all further goods recovered in like manner. Captain Wil-
liamson said it would be unjust to limit him to this amount
as a basis, because, as to subsequently recovered goods, there
might be greater expenses incurred, and hence he might be
subjected to an actual loss. The arrangement went off. As
to these £1574 worth of goods, the document alluded to was a
very strong piece of evidence, There was a recognition that
these goods came from the Catherine Adamson. But Captain
Williamson had said that he never meant to recognise Gil-
christ, Watt, and Co. as agents of the Catherine Adamson,
but merely as a respectable house, on which he could rely to


take all the trouble and duty off his hands. _ He must leave
the jury to determine the evidence upon this point, and the
varying statements of Captain Williamson and Mr. Watt.
The latter had no recollection that the name of the Dunbar
had ever been mentioned at all. The jury had heard it stated,
too, that at the very time this £1574 worth of goods were
made the basis of a submission to arbitration, about £SOO
worth more had been got up, and were ready in Mr. Mitchell
and Co.’s stores, or under their charge, for sale. If so, they
belonged to the reference as well as the £1574 worth, because
the terms of the submission being such as to include all goods
which had been received, this would mean all receipts up to
the time when the arbitration itself was held. No doubt it
was very manifest that the true owner never could make out
a claim to these goods by the description of them given in
the advertisements. The names of the consigners or con-
signees, or even the name of the ship, were not given, or
apparent upon them, to mark to what cargo they belonged;
and he could not see how, by any reference to the advertise-
ments at the time, the true owner could ever come in and
identify.
Mr. Broadiiurst said that, as to all the things which had
marks that could be identified, these marks had been adver-
tised and recorded in the account sales.
The Attorney-General said that what he complained of
was the omission to hold any surveys or preserve any descrip-
tions as to the goods which had no external marks.
His Honor said that what the Attorney-General meant was
this : When the cases were broken the goods themselves
ought to be examined, and means adopted to make out and
preserve such a description of them as might serve for future
identification. It was clear that all the goods which had been
advertised and sold, had been described in so general a man-
ner as to render it quite impossible to identify them as goods
from the Catherine Adamson or from the Dunbar. Now that
they had been sold and scattered abroad, it was still more
plainly impossible that they could ever he identified and re-
covered by their owners. But however convinced they might
he, to use a familiar phraze, that Captain Williamson had
made “ a good thing of it,” he could not be interfered with
here, unless they were of opinion that the goods which he had
fished up from the bottom of the sea were the goods of the
Catherine Adamson. These matters were for them to judge
upon as men of the world. They had already heard the


amounts recovered and those claimed. If the juiy should
determine to find for the plaintiff, he would direct them to
find for the gross value of the goods, leaving it for the defen-
dants to move for a reduction to the amount of the nett pro-
ceeds, if they could make out a right before the full Court to
he allowed the charges for sales. The plaintiff said that the
defendants, being wrong-doers, had no right to be allowed
these charges; but by the jury assessing the nett amount
also, the matter might be brought before the full Court, and a
verdict entered in accordance with the determination thus
arrived at without further expense. There was no dispute as
to the nett amount. The Attorney-General had stated it as a
maxim of law, that no parties could go on saving and realis-
ing the goods of another without the consent of the latter,
and that no compensation in the nature of charges of this kind
could be allowed. It would be for the jury to exercise then-
own judgment upon this—to apply their minds to it, and to see
how far it was applicable to the circumstances here. He did
not see that it would be necessary for him to occupy the time
of the jury further. At their own suggestion he abstained
from reading his notes. They must form their own opinion
as to the currents, eddies, and other matters, of which they
had heard so much, and say whether the goods in question
here were those of the Catherine Adamson or of the Dunbar,
always bearing in mind that the plaintiff here could only re-
cover such goods as the jury reasonably believed to belong
to the former vessel. No doubt the case was an important
one not only as to the amount involved, but as to the charac-
ter of the parties and the mercantile reputation of the colony.
The correspondence would, no doubt, have to be considered,
to see how far there had been recognitions from the defen-
dants bearing upon the question here at issue. He would
now leave the case in their hands. He had gone over the
chief points as they had occurred to him. Were they satisfied
as to the agency ?
The Attorney-General said that no question of this sort
was raised.
Mr. Broadhurst said, he was first going to ask His Honor,
whether he intended to direct the jury that Gilchrist, Watt,
and Co. could he considered the agents of Captain Stuart.
There was no question hut that Mr. Watt alone was this
agent, and there could be no transfer of the agency by impli-
cation to the firm, with which alone the defendants had dealt.
The Attorney-General said that there was no question
of this kind for determination. The point in dispute was one


as to identity only. Were these goods a part of the Catherine
Adamson’s cargo or not ?
Mr. Broadhurst said that it was not so. The offers and
as to which there had been so much evidence,
were made in connection with Gilchrist, Watt, and Co., and
not to Mr. Watt, as the agent of the plaintiff.
The Attorney-General said that these were admissions,
no matter to whom they were made, of the goods having come
from the Catherine Adamson.
Mr. Broadhurst admitted this, but it must be taken into
consideration under what circumstances these communica-
tions had passed. It could not be left to the jury that Gil-
christ, Watt, and Co., to whom these admissions, whatever
they amounted to, were made, were the agents of the plaintiff,
when it was clear that this agency was vested in Mr. Watt
alone.
His Honor said that what he would tell them was, that
they were to be regarded as admissions that the goods in
question were the property of the plaintiff, no matter to whom
such admissions were made, whether Gilchrist and Co. were
agents or not.
The jury now retired at twenty-five minutes past 3 p.m.
After the retirement of the jury—
Mr. Broadhurst recalled the attention of His Honor to his
former argument, that the plaintiff had abandoned his position
as captain of the Catherine Adamson, and, by so doing, had
forfeited his right of action. It ought, therefore, he submitted,
to be left to the jury to say—as one fact for their determina-
tion—whether the plaintiff had really abandoned his position.
He wished this question to be put, with a view to ulterior
proceedings if necessary.
The Attorney-General had no objection to its being put
so, if His Honor would, at the same time, tell the jury that
there was no evidence either way, except the presumption
against abandonment arising from the fact of the captain
having left a power of attorney.
Mr. Broadhurst said that, if the powers of the captaincy
had been abdicated, they could not be revived and delegated


by a power of attorney. He was quite satisfied, however, in
having called attention to this point.
His Honor- said that he saw no evidence of abandonment
by the captain, and the power of attorney negatived the pre-
sumption of such abandonment. The goods were at the
bottom of the sea, and the captain could not take possession
of them ; but he did not leave without granting a power of
attorney for the employment of such parties as might be
willing to recover them.
At twenty-six minutes to 4 p.m., the jury returned to Court
with a verdict for the defendants.




