

■
'
"JJ ,7 ’V:




REPORT OF DEPUTATION.
Appointed by the Board of Missions to visit Fiji, under
THE AUTHORITY OF A RESOLUTION PASSED BY THE NEW
South Wales Conference of 1900, as a Deputation
to the Mission Stations and Official Church
Courts in Fiji appertaining to the Australasian
Wesleyan Methodist Church, to make such repre-
sentations ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD, AND SUCH
INQUIRIES CONCERNING THE INTERESTS OF OUR MISSION
in Fiji, as were specified and indicated in Letter
of Instructions, a copy of which is appended hereto.
(See Appendix A).
IN obedience to a further resolution of the Board, that the
General Secretary should visit Samoa and arrive in Fiji
at an earlier date than that arranged for the visit of the other
members of the deputation, he left Sydney on Wednesday,
August 29, 1900, and reached Samoa on September 7th. During
the short period of his stay in that group he was enabled to
consult with the Brethren stationed there, and also with our Native
Ministers, teachers and people who were gathered together at
Apia for the opening services of the new Church recently erected
at that place. He was able also to interview His Excellency
Dr. Solf, the Imperial German Governor, on several occasions,
and to have a brief interview with His Excellency Governor Tilly,
the American Governor of Tutuila. The opening services of the
new Church, and the meetings held in connection therewith, were
very successful, and the cost of the Church, amounting to about
was nearly all contributed by the people, with the exception
of the grant of made by the Board of Missions. Dr.
Brown reports that the work in Samoa was in a very satisfactory


state, and the Missionaries and people were much pleased that the
Board had deputed him to visit them on that occasion. He was
able, in connection with our Missionaries in Samoa, to consult
with the Missionaries of the London Missionary Society, at their
request, with regard to the Samoan Church in Suva, which was
under their direction, and which they desired to transfer to the
care of our Missionaries in Fiji.
The General Secretary left Samoa on September 15 th, and
arrived in Levuka on the 18th. During a short stay there he held
a meeting with the Samoans in that place who were about esta-
blishing another Samoan Church there. The result of this
interview was that they decided to place themselves under the
care of our Missionary of the Ovalau Circuit. On Wednesday,
the 19th, he arrived at Suva, and proceeded in company with the
Chairman of the District to Bau. While awaiting the arrival of
the other two members of the deputation, he visited the Mission
Stations at Rewa, Navuloa, and Bau, lecturing and addressing the
natives on our mission work in New Britain and New Guinea.
He then returned to Suva, and had a long and interesting inter-
view with His Excellency, the Governor, and the Assistant
Colonial Secretary, and arranged for an interview on behalf of the
deputation. While in Suva he delivered a lecture to the foreign
residents, at which His Excellency presided, and a further lecture
to the natives in the Jubilee Church. After visiting the Coolie
Mission, he, in conjunction, with Revs. A. J. Small (Chairman of
the District) and H. H. Nolan, of Rewa, met the Native Minister,
members and adherents of the Samoan Church in Suva, and
arranged with them to recommend to the Synod and Conference
that Kuresa, the Samoan Native Minister, be received as a Native
Minister in connection with our Church during his residence in
Fiji, and that the Samoan Church in Suva be placed under the
care and oversight of the Superintendent Minister of the Rewa
Circuit as a self-supporting church.
On Wednesday, October 10th, the Rev. G. Lane and Mr.
R. S. Callaghan, the other members of the deputation, arrived at
Suva, and on the following day the deputation visited Miss
Dudley and the Coolie Mission in the morning, and finding
urgent need for increased school accommodation, and that Miss
Dudley had already collected about towards the erection of


a schoolroom, we approved, on behalf of the Board, of the imme-
diate erection of such a building, the cost of which to the Board
will not exceed or The deputation then had a long
and important interview with His Excellency the Governor,
according to previous arrangement. We were courteously received
by His Excellency, and informed him of our appointment as a
deputation to visit the Colony to consult with the Missionaries and
people with regard to all matters connected with the maintenance
and extension of the work of our mission in Fiji, and that we were
instructed to present to him the respectful assurance of the loyalty
of the Methodist Church of Australasia, and of the earnest desire of
the Board of Missions to assist His Excellency and the T iji
Government in all plans which have for their object the good
governance and the best interests of the Fijian people. We also
presented to him a copy of the Instructions which were furnished
to us, together with a financial statement showing the receipts and
expenditure of the Fiji District for the past i o years. His Excellency
made a statement dealing at some length with the action taken by
the Government for the good of the people, in supplying many of
the towns with an abundant supply of good water, by the erection
of Provincial Hospitals, and by regulations providing that each
Fijian family should have a separate house, together with other
matters which involved the expenditure for their benefit of at
least two-thirds of the taxes collected from the natives. He also
informed us that the refund to the natives for the past year had
been very much in excess of any previous year. His Excellency
referred to the deputation as being opportune and most important,
and invited us to communicate our opinions and wishes frankly
and freely. We informed His Excellency that we should gladly
avail ourselves of his courteous invitation at some future time, after
we had consulted with the Missionaries in their District Synod,
but for the present we desired to respectfully direct his attention
to the fact that the treatment of Anitioke, one of our teachers, by
one of the Provincial Inspectors, had excited feelings of pain and
indignation in the minds of the Board, and all to whom the facts
were known, as being an act of great injustice. After arranging
with His Excellency for a future interview on Saturday 20th, the
deputation left Suva and arrived at Rewa, where the District
Synod was being held. We were met at the landing-place by the


Missionaries, and a large number of Native Ministers and teachers,
one of the Native Ministers reading and presenting an address of
which the following is the translation :
Rewa, 10th October, 1900.
To the General Secretary , the other two Elders , members of the
Deputation who have come from the Colonies
to see the work of God in Fiji.
We greatly rejoiced when we heard of your appointment; we
have borne the matter in mind continually, and ceased not to pray
that you might safely reach our shores.
And now that you have arrived we offer hearty thanks to God
—thanks that you have come to see God’s work here, and that
you are able to attend the Sessions of our District Synod. Our
hearts are filled with gladness, for your coming is evidence to us
of your regard for the work of God in these Islands.
May we in this good work continue to be mindful one of
another.
This is an expression of gratitude to you, our Elders, the
members of the Deputation.
Your friends,
The Native Ministers of Fiji.
We were heartily welcomed at the Rewa Mission House by
Rev. H. H. and Mrs. Nolan, and the other Missionaries in atten-
dance at the Synod, and on the same evening we attended a large
public meeting of welcome in the Rewa Church, at which about 500
of the Chiefs and people of Rewa were present. At this meeting
we presented the pastoral letter of the President of our Conference,
the Rev. W. H. Beale, and also a message from the President of
the General Conference, the Rev. Dr. Burgess, and our own
greetings. Cordial responses were made by the Chairman of the
District and several of the Native Ministers. On the following
day (Friday, October 10th) we began our attendance at the
Sessions of the District Synod. In order to complete the busi-
ness in the limited time at our disposal, we found it necessary to
have both day and night sittings during the whole period of our


stay in Rewa. In accordance with the instructions received, we
first “ conveyed to the Missionaries, Native Ministers, officers,
members and adherents of our Church the assurance of the great
satisfaction of the Conference with the progress of our Mission in
Fiji, and of the earnest desire of the Conference and the Board of
Missions not only to preserve and maintain our work in that
District, but also tp assist in every possible manner in carrying
out any plans which have for their object the spiritual and tem-
poral good of the Fijian people.” After consultation with the
Missionaries and Native Ministers of our Church in Fiji, we
report as follows with regard to the matters contained in the letter
of Instruction with which we were furnished.
Paragraph 11.
TO CONSULT WITH THE MISSIONARIES, NATIVE MINISTERS, AND
Officers of our Church in Fiji upon the following
MATTERS, WHICH HAVE BEEN REFERRED TO THE BOARD
by the N.S.W. Conference for its consideration
AND REPORT.
Subsection (a). “ That it is desirable that the self-
governing powers of the Mission Districts should be increased.”
This was laid fully before the members of the Synod, which
is composed of the White Missionaries and one Native
Minister from each Circuit, after which the Native Ministers
were requested to consult together among themselves, and to
state their views, and offer suggestions upon the whole ques-
tion. The next day, when the Synod re-assembled, they first
asked for an increase of their allowances, but in answer to ques-
tions asked, they could not suggest any satisfactory plan by which
such an increase could be provided for by the ordinary Circuit
income. They said, “ let each Circuit meet its own expenditure.”
“Perhaps the people would give more.” “If a small Circuit
could only raise a certain sum, then let the Missionary and the
Native Minister be withdrawn, and reduce the staff, and keep
what men we can.” They were then asked particularly to indicate
what Circuit could be left without an European Missionary, but
this they were not able to determine,' though they stated that
Rotuma had been left in charge of a Native Minister for a con-
siderable period without harm resulting, and they also instanced


Lakeba as a Station which has several times been left vacant.
They said, in answer to a question, that they, the Native Ministers,
would willingly let the strong Circuits help the weak ones, but the
Chiefs and people would not agree to money raised in their
Circuit being applied to the help of a weaker Circuit. Some of
the statements made were regarded by us as significant. One
Native Minister said, “ Our quarterages are clear to the people of
the land, they know these come to us, but they do not know what
becomes of the missionary money. We think that if the whole
thing is placed before the people they will give more liberally.”
Another said, “ That is so ; our quarterages and our salaries are
clear to the people, but the missionary contributions are not clear.
The people want to know how these are disbursed. Let it be
placed before the people, and they will be pleased, and seek to
meet expenses. Do not hide anything from us.” The deputation
then placed before the Synod a proposal, which was practically
that adopted by the Conference of 1876 with regard to the
Friendly Islands District (see Appendix C.). This proposal was
to the effect that the Board of Missions should undertake the
entire responsibility of the European staff, and should receive a
moiety, or other fixed amount, of the yearly contributions raised
at the Missionary Meetings, the other moiety or share to be paid
to a Contingent Fund to be established in the District, and
allocated annually to the respective Circuits. All grants from this
Fund, together with all local Circuit Income, to be disbursed by
the respective Quarterly Meetings. The Chairman of the District
then further explained to them the suggested constitution and the
administration of this Fund, and this was readily accepted by the
meeting, and several members said, Why did you not submit this
to us in the first instance. In answer to this the Chairman
replied that we had asked them in the first instance to state a plan
for the better working of the mission finances. They had done
so, and now we stated ours, and asked them which was better.
It was then proposed by Marika, seconded by Josefa, and sup-
ported by Esala from Rotuma, and voted upon by the Native
Ministers in the first instance, and carried unanimously, that we
approve of the scheme now submitted to us by Dr. Brown on
behalf of the deputation, and request the Board of Missions and
Conference to carry it out if it be found practicable and advisable.


This was afterwards unanimously adopted by the Synod as a
whole. A further resolution was then passed appointing a com-
mittee consisting of three European Missionaries and three Native
Ministers, with the Chairman of the District, to consider and
report upon the expenses connected exclusively with the European
staff, and also those connected with the regular circuit and
district work, with a view of determining what proportion of the
yearly contributions should be allocated to the Board for the
support of the European Missionaries. This committee has not
yet reported, and therefore we are unable to make any definite
recommendation on this matter at present. We have to state
that, from the remarks made by the Native Ministers, and from
impressions received by us during our visit, it is, in our opinion,
extremely desirable that some definite steps should be taken to
educate and train the Church officers in the respective Circuits,
with a view to their taking a larger share in the financial adminis-
tration of Circuit and District affairs, and, in our opinion, the
plan proposed by the Conference of 1876 with regard to the
Friendly Islands District, or some modification thereof, is desi-
rable. At the same time, we feel convinced from our observations
and intercourse with the Native Ministers and officers, that at
present they are not competent to take the full charge either of
Circuit finances or District management, and that all steps in the
direction of fuller self-government must be taken with caution and
deliberation. In order to enable the Board and the Conference
to form a correct opinion on this matter, we requested the Synod
to furnish us with a full account of their present system of Circuit
administration. This will be found in Appendix B.
Subsection (b). —“ The employment of greater numbers of
Lay Missionaries (men and women) in accordance with existing
regulations” (see Conf. Minutes, p. 33). We have to report, after
careful consideration of the matter, that, as we have an ordained
Native Ministry in Fiji, we consider it is not desirable to extend
to that District the system of employing men as unordained
Lay Missionaries. The question of Lady Missionaries will be
found dealt with under subsection (i).
Subsection (c). —With regard to “the rule relating to the


appointment of returned Missionaries,” contained in Book of
Laws, par. 398, page in, we recommend that the rule continue
to be observed, and especially that part directing that the wishes
of the Missionaries should be consulted as far as possible.
Subsection (d). “ The general position of the Coolie
Mission, and the best means to be adopted for its efficient control
and development, and the question of a colleague for Miss Dudley.”
We report that there are now in Fiji about 15,000 heathen
Indians, and several thousands more are immediately expected ;
that these people are already doing serious injury to our work,
and that there is an urgent necessity for increasing our staff and
extending our work amongst them, as the efforts now being made
by our Church are utterly inadequate. Miss Dudley has done
good work, especially amongst the Indian women and children
in Suva, and we consider that her temporary adoption of children
for the purpose of giving them Christian training indicates one
very promising sphere of influence ; we are, however, strongly of
opinion that additional help is urgently required, and earnestly
recommend that an experienced Missionary should be obtained
from India, -with two married Indian catechists to assist him. We
quote and endorse the words of the Fiji District Synod on this
matter : “We beg to remind the Conference that for our Austra-
lian Churches this is India , and that before we discuss proposi-
tions for Asiatic missions we ought to Christianise these heathen
Indians in our midst.”
Subsection (e). —“ Higher education of Fijians.” Since the
commencement of our mission, the work of the primary education
of the Fijians has been principally in the hands of our Mission,
and the whole of that work has been done without any help from
the Government. It has, however, long been felt by the Mission-
aries and others that the altered condition of affairs in Fiji
necessitates the establishment of a school or schools at which a
higher education can be given to many of the Fijian youths than
can possibly be imparted under our present system of education.
The financial difficulties, however, have hitherto been considered
insuperable, as the expenditure involved would necessarily be too
heavy for us to incur. In our interviews with His Excellency,


attention was drawn to these facts. It was pointed out to him
that our schools were not only useful in educating teachers for
our own Mission work, but also in educating young men for the
public service of the Colony, and that it was extremely desirable
that further facilities should be afforded us for carrying on this
work. We ventured to ask His Excellency whether, in the event
of our establishing a High school or schools, we might expect any
financial assistance from the Government, as the work would be
for the benefit of the Fijian people at large, and would also be of
great assistance to the Government Public Service. His Excel-
lency replied asking us to submit a scheme, and he would give it
careful and favourable consideration. We therefore submitted to
him the following propositions, subject to the approval of the
Board of Missions and the Conference, “ That we set apart the
property known as Davuilevu for the purpose of a High school
for Fijian boys ; that for the erection of the necessary educational
buildings we endeavour to raise among the adherents of our
Church in the Colonies and in Fiji a sum of money, and that the
Fiji Government be asked whether or not it will supplement the
amount thus raised pound for pound up to ,£l,OOO ; that we also
ask the Fiji Government what sum, if any, it will contribute to
the support of the school on the principle of payment by results ;
and that we inform the Government that in devoting Davuilevu to
this purpose we give up the actual income of £2OO, and a pros-
pective income of more than that amount from the property.
That the school commence with one hundred boys, selected from
all the provinces in Fiji in proportion to the population ; that the
food of the scholars be grown on the school land by labourers
hired for that purpose ; Also, that to prepare boys for entrance to
the High school, and generally to improve the education of the
people, we establish a Superior school in each Circuit under the
direction and care of the Missionary, for the purpose of imparting
higher education. To these schools we would appoint the best
Fijian teachers to be obtained, and the Missionary in charge
would also render all assistance in his power by personal tuition
and oversight if the Government will also make per capita grants to
these schools on the principle of payment by results.” This was sub-
mitted to His Excellency, and we received from him a minute of
“proposed additional annual expenditure on improvement of


Superior Provincial Schools and establishment of High Schools.”
This proposal is to the effect that His Excellency agreed to
recommend to the Secretary for State to the Colonies that our
proposition that the Government should give pound for pound up
to for the erection of school buildings, &c., be granted,
and it further implies that His Excellency would recommend
to the Secretary of State for the Colonies that a sum of at
least a year be granted to provide for the maintenance of
the Provincial schools and High schools, conditional upon the
terms as set forth in Appendix D. After receiving this commu-
nication we had a long conversation with the Assistant Colonial
Secretary, the Hon. W. L. Allardyce, at which we directed his
attention to the fact that the proposed standard to be passed by
the pupils before a grant was made was, in our opinion, much too
high, and that for the first few years at all events it would have to
be considerably reduced, and in this opinion we are glad to say
that Mr. Allardyce fully agreed, and stated that there would be no
difficulty whatever about that matter. We also directed his atten-
tion to the fact that, in our opinion, the proposed grant for the
High School and the Superior Public Schools was inadequate, as
we calculated that the expense to be incurred in the High school
would be very little lower than that expended by us in Navuloa
College, which was about a year, whilst the total additional
expense of ten Superior Public Schools could not be estimated at
less than a year. Careful calculations were made by the
deputation and the Chairman of the District, in conjunction with
Mr. Allardyce, and the matter was then referred back to be con-
sidered, and a scheme formulated by the Chairman and any of the
Missionaries who might be able to assist him, such scheme to be
submitted to the Government and the Board of Missions. With
reference to this matter, we desire to state that we consider it one
of great importance to the prosperity of our work in Fiji, and we
earnestly hope that further inquiries may prove it to be practi-
cable. It is undoubtedly a great opportunity to enable us to
confer lasting obligations upon the Fijian people, and we earnestly
commend it to the favourable consideration of the Board of
Missions and the Conference.
Navuloa College. —The office of Principal of this important
Institution has been vacant since the lamented death of the late


Rev. W. W. Lindsay in February last. The College and Circuit
work, however, has been carried on during the year by native
tutors, under the supervision of the Rev. A. J. Small, the present
Chairman of the District, with very valuable help rendered to
them by Mrs. Lindsay and family, and, so far as we can judge, no
serious injury has resulted, though it is very evident to us that, for the
effective carrying qn of the College, a properly qualified education-
alist as Principal is absolutely necessary. We have to report that
the number in the College at the time of our visit was larger than
in any previous year, no less than 167 students being enrolled.
There were also 87 women, and a large number of children,
making the total number resident in the Institution grounds 461.
It was felt by the Deputation that such an important position as
this could only be properly considered by consultation with the
members of the District Synod, and we have to report that no
subject received more careful consideration than this appointment.
Though there would be little difficulty in obtaining a Principal
from amongst the present Missionaries of the District, we con-
sidered that a properly qualified Educationalist who not only
possesses the requisite knowledge of educational matters, but is
also able to train the students in the art of imparting the know-
ledge which they acquire to others, should, if possible, be secured,
and we recommend the adoption by the Board of the following
resolution which was passed unanimously by the District Synod.
“ Resolved, that having regard to the pressing claims of the
Navuloa Training Institution, and having heard of the qualifica-
tions of the Rev. W. Ernest Bennett, 8.A., for the Principalship,
we respectfully request the Conference to appoint him to that
position ; and that, in the event of Mr. Bennett not being avail-
able, the Conference makes a suitable appointment. That, in the
event of no suitable appointment being found outside the District,
the Conference be requested to appoint the Rev. A. J. Small to
the District Theological Institution of Navuloa.”
We were deeply impressed with the appearance and intelli-
gence of the large number of students representing as they do
the best of our Fijian young men, also with the value and im-
portance of this Institution to the future of our Fijian Church.
Good work has been carried on in past years; but in our opinion
the present state of the Mission and the requirements of the future


demand a higher standard of educational acquirements and
training than has yet been found possible, and we repeat that we
consider it of the utmost importance that a qualified Education-
alist should be appointed.
With regard to “ the appointment of tutor to teach English,”
which had been previously recommended to the Board by the
District Synod, we recommend that this matter be deferred until
the appointment of Principal has been decided.
Subsection (f). —“ As to the employment of Medical or other
Missionaries as duly qualified Missionaries for foreign work only,
but to have no claims for Circuits on their return to the colonies.”
We submit the following considerations :
(i). That there exists a necessity in Fiji and other districts for
the employment of larger numbers of White Missionaries than it
has hitherto been found practicable to appoint.
(2). That the principal difficulties in the appointment of such
Missionaries are, the difficulty of providing suitable Circuits in
the respective Conferences for them on their return to the
Colonial work, and the heavy claims which would be made on
our connexional funds.
(3). That the employment of Lay Missionaries has not, in our
opinion, so far been satisfactory with regard to their standing
amongst the Native Ministers and the people among whom they
labour.
(4). That there are suitable men possessing medical, educa-
tional, or other qualifications, who feel called of God to the
Foreign Mission Field, but who do not feel called to enter our
Colonial Ministry, and who are ready to engage in Mission work
upon a distinct understanding and agreement that they have no
claims for Circuits, or on our connexional funds, on their return to
the Colonies. We consider it very desirable that such Missionaries
should be employed and duly ordained for foreign work only,
and should, while in the mission service, occupy a status equal to
that of other Missionaries in the field. This matter was con-
sidered by the Synod, and the following resolution was passed :
“ That we concur with the proposal for the employment of Medical,


or other Missionaries ordained for foreign work only, but to have
no claims for Circuits on their return to the Colonies.”
Subsection (g). —“ Representation of Mission Districts in the
Annual Conference.” On this matter we have to report that we
do not consider any alteration of the present rules and regulations
on that matter practicablejor desirable.
Subsection (h). —“ The question of the relations of the Fiji
Government with our regular Circuit and Educational work.” On
this matter we report that on our arrival in Fiji we found that in
certain matters the relations existing between some of the Pro-
vincial and District Inspectors and our Missionaries and Native
Ministers were very unsatisfactory. Many things had been done
by two of these Inspectors which had caused great irritation and
annoyance to our Missionaries and people. We do not deem it
necessary to give more than an intimation of the nature of the
complaints which were presented to us. They comprise such
matters as compelling a Native Minister to marry a couple
against his conscience, no divorce certificate having been pro-
duced ; the case of Anitioke already reported to the Board;
the taking away the timbers of several of our churches and using
them for secular purposes; taking away teachers’ lands, and not
providing suitable sites in return ; the appointment of one day on
which the Missionary Meetings of the whole Province should be
conducted, which would make it impracticable to hold many of
the meetings, and fixing the date of meetings without any con-
sultation with the Missionary in charge of the Circuit; one of the
Inspectors taking possession of a new church, ordering his baggage
to be deposited in it, and camping therein, although a good house
had been prepared for him in the village, and food was there
awaiting him; Sunday labour in prisons, and the difficulty of
securing time for the holding of services on the Sabbath with the
prisoners, together with many other matters which were considered
as very unnecessary interference with our Church work.
In conjunction with the Rev. A. J. Small, the Chairman of
the District, we had several interviews with His Excellency. We
congratulated His Excellency on the good work which he was
carrying out for the good of the Fijian people, notably in his


expenditure of large sums of money in providing a supply of pure
water from the mountains for the use of many of the towns in the
Rewa delta, and in other parts of Fiji, where no pure water was
available; also in the establishment of Provincial Hospitals for
the benefit of the Fijian people, and in his earnest efforts to ensure
that each Fijian family should have a separate house, and that the
present custom of two or more families living in the same dwel-
ling should be forbidden and discontinued. We then directed
his attention to the sources of irritation already mentioned, and
we are glad to state that our representations were courteously
received by His Excellency. He acknowledged freely that at
least one of the Inspectors had exceeded his instructions, and
stated that he himself had directed his attention to that fact.
With regard to our complaint about the taking away of Churches
and Church sites, he gave instructions that a circular letter should
be forwarded to all Provincial Inspectors and Commissioners of
Provinces in the colony, stating “ That in future before any
Church site, or house sites, or planting lands, occupied or claimed
by any religious body, is resumed or put to any new use, and
before any material for any disused church is applied to any
secular purpose, reference must first be made to the Governor,
and authorisation obtained from him.” We found His Excellency
extremely anxious to adopt any measures which, in his opinion,
were for the advancement of the best interests of the Fijian
people, more especially those which had for their object the
arresting the decrease in the native population. In connection
with this question of the relations of the Fiji Government with
our regular Circuit and Educational work, we feel bound to state
that we received every consideration from His Excellency, and
also from the Assistant Colonial Secretary, the Honourable W. L.
Allardyce. We fully explained to His Excellency the policy of
our Church with regard to the Fijian people, and directed his
attention specially to the fact that for the last ten years our Church
had expended an average sum of about £l,lOO annually in excess
of the total receipts from Fiji in Educational and Spiritual work.
We also stated that, though the contributions from Fiji might
appear large in the aggregate, yet it would be found that the
average annual sum contributed by our adherents was not more
than about 6d. per head. His Excellency stated that, in his


opinion, the Fijians were quite able to defray all the expenses of
the Mission, and that they ought to do so. There is no doubt
whatever m our minds that the policy and measures adopted by
His Excellency for the advancement of the Fijian race are
undoubtedly beneficial, but we fear that the haste with which
some of these measures are being carried out entails some present
suffering and hardship on the people. We are pleased, however,
in being able to say that, in our opinion, His Excellency under-
stands and, we venture to say, appreciates our work better at the
present time than he may probably have done in the earlier years
of his administration, and that the relations existing between the
Government and the Missionaries in the field are nTore cordial
than they have been in past years.
Subsection (i). —The employment of Missionary Sisters in
Hygienic and Evangelistic work. The duties of Missionary
Sisters consist, in Miss Dudley’s case, of being in charge of a
Home and School for the education of Coolie children, together
with such evangelistic work amongst the women and girls as she is
able to accomplish. In the case of other Sisters, their principal
work is teaching and training girls at the Provincial School at Ba,
or, as at Bau and Rewa, they are more directly employed in evan-
gelistic work and visitation of the villages, and instructing the
people in the simple principles of sanitary law. There is no doubt
that much good has already resulted from the labours of these
Sisters, and we endorse the following resolution adopted by the
Synod on this matter: —“We consider the most important work
for the Missionary Sisters is a combination of teaching the girls
and the visitation of the homes of the people, with a view to the
improvement of the habits of the older women, and the general
health and social elevation of the people.”
Subsection (j). —“The question as to the advisability and
practicability of increasing or reducing the number of White
Missionaries in Fiji.” On this matter we report that, whatever
plan may be found practicable in the future, when the natives
have been trained to undertake more of the responsibility and
duties of self-government, it would, in our opinion, be most disas-
trous to reduce the present staff of White Missionaries. We are


of opinion that should some such plan as we have suggested in a
previous part of this report for the employment of ordained White
Missionaries for foreign work only be found practicable, it is not
only advisable to maintain our present staff, but it may be found
both necessary and desirable to increase the number of White
Missionaries. With regard to the Native Ministers, we cannot
speak in too high terms of commendation of their zeal and devo-
tion to the work in which they are engaged, but we do not con-
sider that they possess at present the necessary qualifications to
enable them to take the entire charge of any of our Circuits. In
our interview with them, as reported under Subsection (a), some
of them expressed the opinion that they would be able to manage
the financial and spiritual work in their respective Circuits; but in
this opinion we certainly do not concur, nor do we think that
opinion is entertained by more than a few of the Native Ministers.
It was very evident to us that the Native Ministers themselves, as
a body, are decidedly opposed to any reduction in the number of
White Missionaries, and that they consider that the effect of the
withdrawal of such from any of our Circuits would be disastrous
to our work. In this opinion the Synod entirely concurred, and
the following resolution on this subject was passed by them :
“ In respect of the question of reducing the number of European
Missionaries engaged in this District, the Synod is strongly
convinced that, in the conditions at present prevailing in Fiji,
a reduction of the European staff would be followed by the most
serious consequences. It is our opinion that, while our Native
Ministers are good and earnest men, the time has not yet arrived
when they may be left with less oversight than is now possible,
and that the withdrawal of a Missionary from any of our Circuits
would be a very dangerous step, the possibility of which causes us
great concern.” We have also to report that this opinion was
expressed to us, not only by Government officials, but by all the
Foreign Residents with whom we conversed on the matter.
Subsection (k). —The form of pledge against yangona and
tobacco. In connection with this matter we report that, in con-
versation with the members of the District Synod, we found a
generally expressed opinion that the form of any pledge should be
of a uniform character in each Circuit, and should have the


approval of the District Synod. We report also that the members
with whom we conversed expressed their full concurrence with the
opinion previously expressed by the General Secretary to the
Board on this matter.
Subsection (l). —With regard to the Instruction contained in
this subsection, that we should consult with the Brethren with
respect to any suggestions or proposals for the increased efficiency
of our Mission work in Fiji, we have great pleasure in reporting
that our intercourse with the Brethren, both European and Native,
in the District was of the most cordial and brotherly character.
We were free and frank in the expressions of our opinions to
them, and we found them equally so with ourselves, both in the
Synod and in our many conversations with individual members.
We directed special attention to the necessity of carefully conser-
ving our landed interests in the Group, more especially in the
proper registration and scheduling of all deeds connected with
our properties. The Rev. George Lane, Custodian of Deeds for
this Conference, went carefully through the Deeds and other
Documents in the District safe, in conjunction with the Chairman
of the District, and made suggestions and gave advice with regard
to their proper Registration and safe custody of these important
Documents. Mr. Lane also visited the Master of Titles for the
Colony at the Land Titles’ Office in Suva, and obtained from him
all necessary information concerning the modes of Transfer and
other dealings with Lands held by us for the use of our Mission
in Fiji, and also secured copies of the Colonial Acts and Regula-
tions relating to such Lands. The Deeds we now hold are for
Lands which have been acquired by purchase from time to time,
and the Titles are all under the Real Property Act of Fiji; but we
do not hold any Deeds for any other Church sites, or for the sites
of any Native Ministers’ or Teachers’ Houses or Garden sites.
Our Rights to these Lands are, however, clearly acknowledged by
the Government and the people so long as they are used by us
for their respective purposes in the work of our Mission.
In concluding this Report, we must express our high apprecia-
tion of the labors of the Missionaries and their native helpers,
past and present, in these Islands, some of the results of which
came under our own observation. The marvellous transformation


of a whole nation from a state of cannibalism, idolatry, and
heathenism to Christianity ; their education in secular and reli-
gious knowledge in our schools; the raising up of so numerous
and devoted a succession of Native Ministers, Catechists, and
Teachers; the diffusion of a spirit of reverence, peaceableness,
and godliness amongst the people generally; the abolition of the
vile, cruel, and superstitious customs of the old heathen times;
and the conversion and edification of tens of thousands of the
Fijian people through the preaching of the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
many of whom, having lived a Christian life, have died triumphant
in the faith, are now “for ever with the Lord,” are results so
manifold and sure, so glorious and enduring, and also so prophetic
of successes to come, that they more than compensate for the
treasures of money, health, and precious lives, which have been
freely expended in the evangelization of the tribes of Fiji. “We
have not laboured in vain, nor spent our strength for nought.”
In verification of this opinion, we give the following extract from
a private letter addressed to the General Secretary of Missions by
His Honor, Chief Justice Berkeley, of Fiji, dated October 3,
1900, which we are sure will be most gratifying to the Board, the
Conference, and our people generally :
“ In the course of my service as a Law Officer, and during the
many times I have temporarily administered the Government of
the Colony, I have been brought into close contact with the
Wesleyan Mission, which enables me to speak authoritatively con-
cerning the work which it has done in Fiji, and in other parts of
the Pacific. Ido not hesitate to say, in that regard, that the debt
which Fiji owes the Wesleyan Missionaries cannot be estimated.
They have been mainly instrumental in converting a race of
bloodthirsty cannibal pagans into a religious, God-fearing people.
They have turned a people who only obeyed the law of the club
into an orderly and law-abiding section of Her Majesty’s subjects.
And this has been done within the memory of people still alive. It
is mainly by the precept and example of the Missionaries that
peace and good order can now be preserved throughout this large
group of Islands by a few Magistrates and a handful of native
constables. To these, too, belong solely the credit for such
secular education as the Fijian possesses. ' Without pecuniary
assistance of any kind from the Government, the Mission has


spread secular education far and wide throughout Fiji. The
Wesleyan Mission has indeed done a noble work in the way of
education amongst the Fijians. Their schools are numbered by
the hundreds, and the children attending these schools by the
thousands, and every schoolhouse is a place where the Fijians on
the Sabbath meet in prayers.. In places where, within the memory
of persons now living, was heard the dread sound of the drum
calling to the cannibal feast, and the clash of spears in the war
dance, is now heard the self-same drum calling the people to Church,
and the sound of psalms and hymns of praise, and thanksgiving.
It requires that one should go among the Fijians and see them in
their home life; that we should spend a Sabbath in a Fijian town
in order fully to appreciate the wonderful change in the direction
of civilization and social progress, that has been wrought by the
Wesleyan Mission in Fiji. It is the intimate knowledge which I
possess in that direction, added to the prominent part which you
have for so many years taken in the great work, which gives such
added interest to me in the lecture by you on the Islands of the
Pacific and their Native Inhabitants.”
(Signed) GEO. BROWN,
GEORGE LANE,
ROBERT S. CALLAGHAN.
Sydney,
December jth, igoo.
19


APPENDIX A.
AUSTRALASIAN WESLEYAN METHODIST CHURCH.
NEW SOUTH WALES CONFERENCE.
Petersham, September 29, 1900.
To the Reverend George Brown, D.D., the Reverend
George Lane, and Mr. R. S. Callaghan.
Gentlemen,
Under the authority of a resolution passed by the New
South Wales Conference of 1900, you are hereby appointed by
the Board of Missions as a Deputation to the Mission Stations
and Official Church Courts in Fiji, appertaining to the Australa-
sion Wesleyan Methodist Church, to make such representations
on behalf of the Board, and such enquiries concerning the inte-
rests of our Mission in Fiji, as are specified and indicated -in the
following.
INSTRUCTIONS.
1. To convey to the Missionaries, Native Ministers, Officers,
Members and Adherents of our Church in Fiji the assurance of
our great satisfaction with the progress of our Church in that
District, and of our earnest desire, not only to preserve and main-
tain our work there, but also to assist in every possible manner in
carrying out any plans which have for their object the spiritual
and temporal good of the Fijian people.
2. To consult with the Missionaries, Native Ministers, and
Officers of our Church in Fiji upon the following matters, which
have been referred to the Board by the N.S.W. Conference for its
consideration and report.
(a) That it is desirable that the self-governing powers of the
Mission Districts should be increased.
(, b) The employment of greater numbers of Lay Missionarie s
(men and women) in accordance with existing regulations. (See
Conf. Mins., p. 33.)


(c) The rule relating to the appointment of returned Mission-
aries. (No. 398, p. in, Book of Laws.)
(, d) The general position of the Coolie Mission, and the best
means to be adopted for its efficient control and development.
The question of a colleague for Miss Dudley to be considered.
(e) Higher education of Fijians, Navuloa Institution, appoint-
ment of Tutor to teach English.
And also to consider and report upon
(/) The question of the employment of Medical or other
Missionaries as duly qualified Missionaries for Foreign Work only,
but to have no claims for Circuits on their return to the Colonies.
(g) Representation of Missionary Districts in the 'Annual
Conference.
{h) The question of the relations of the Fiji Government with
our regular Circuit and Educational work.
{ i) The employment of Missionary Sisters in Hygienic and
Evangelistic work.
(j) The question as to the advisability and practicability of
increasing or reducing the number of White Missionaries in hiji.
{k) The form of the pledge against yangona and tobacco, and
to report to the Board, and
(/) Generally to consult with the Brethren with respect to any
suggestions or proposals for the increased efficiency of our work
in Fiji.
Signed on behalf of the Board of Mission,
W. H. BEALE, President.
APPENDIX B.
THE ORGANIZATION OF FIJI CIRCUITS.
The population of Fiji is scattered among a large number of
villages containing from 25 to 500 people. It is the aim of our
Mission to supply a teacher to every village sufficiently large to
support him.


The Teacher’s Duties are as follows (i) School Teacher,
he holds the village day school; (2) Village Pastor, he has charge
of the religious work and welfare of the village. He is preacher,
class-leader, visitor of the sick, &c., &c.
The teacher is supported by the voluntary contributions of the
people. These contributions are mostly in kind. The food of
the teacher and family is obtained from land set aside for his use
by the people (but planted by himself), and by gifts from them,
monthly and yearly. Account of these food contributions is kept
and scheduled for presentation to the Circuit Quarterly Meeting.
The teacher’s residence is provided by the people. So far as his
other duties allow, the village teacher takes part in all communal
and government work. The village is the unit of our work.
The oversight of teachers is provided for as follows; —Ist,
Three or four, or it may be more, villages are grouped in what is
called a small sub-section, and the teacher in one of them, usually
the largest village of the lot, is appointed elder of the sub-section.
He receives the maximum pay allowed to teachers. Every Wed-
nesday the teachers of the small sub-section meet the elder
teacher to arrange the appointments for the following Sunday.
Local preachers may also attend this meeting, which need not
occupy more than a few minutes. At these meetings, births,
deaths, applications for baptisms and marriage are reported and
recorded, also cases of conversion or misconduct, &c. A number
of these small sub-sections connected together form a section, over
which is placed a Native Minister or a catechist.
The Catechist is a grade between the teachers and Native
Ministers, and represents in some particulars the Home Missionary
of Colonial Circuits. He is a senior teacher, whose earnestness,
ability, and good record have entitled him to promotion. He
renews tickets, holds love feasts, and has oversight of all villages
in his section, but he cannot celebrate marriages, or administer
the Sacraments. In addition to performing the duties of a
teacher in the village where he resides, he visits all others in his
section, and all matters of importance are reported to him. If
his section comprises several sub-sections, the catechists acts as
elder teacher of the sub-section in which he lives, and holds the
weekly meeting therein. But he visits and preaches in all the
villages of his whole section. Once a month all the teachers of
his whole section meet the catechist and transact the business
provided for in the list of questions arranged for monthly meet-
ings. Catechists are chosen by the Quarterly meeting, and their
appointment is confirmed by Synod. They are selected from the
ranks of the teachers, and the position is open to all. They are
paid in the same way as teachers, but their Poll Tax is paid out of
Mission Funds, in order that they may be free to attend to their
own work unimpeded by the claims of the commune.


A catechist’s section is always connected with a Native
Minister, to whom he is an assistant. A district that is not big
enough to have its own Native Minister, and yet when joined to
other districts make a section too unwieldy, or too distant to be
overseen by one Native Minister, is usually in charge of a cate-
chist. ' Catechists and their sections are always under one Native
Minister, but all Native Ministers do not have catechists to assist
them. Sections that can be sufficiently worked by Native
Ministers alone do not possess catechists.
The highest grade of section is that of the Native Minister.
These sections differ in size and population as may be datermined
by geography, tribal relations, &c. The section of Nakorotubu,
in the Ra Circuit, comprises 40 villages, but some of the island
sections contain a much smaller number. Nakorotubu possesses
two catechists in addition to the Native Minister. A Native
Minister’s section corresponds, except financially, to a Colonial
Circuit. If it be a large section, with catechists to assist, the
Native Minister does exactly the same work in his part of it that
they do in theirs, plus the special work of the Minister; he visits
all the villages, holds weekly and monthly- meetings, renews
tickets, &c. If he resides in a small village, the Native Minister
often takes charge of the day school, but as his visitation necessi-
tates frequent absence, it is desirable to place a teacher with him
for that department. The Native Minister corresponds to Colo-
nial Circuit Ministers ; he visits every part of the section,
administer the sacrament, and performs marriages. He is respon-
sible for it all. He suspends teachers who seriously misconduct
themselves pending trial, looks for men to supply vacant places,
he revises the membership roll if not convenient for the missionary
to attend ; the Native Ministers hold annual missionary meetings,
and he holds the sectional quarterly meeting, at which is tran-
sacted all the business that is provided in the form of question
for quarterly meetings. Native Ministers are practically indepen-
dent in their sections. They choose class-leaders, examine candi-
dates for the preacher’s place, and are indeed a supreme executive
agent in their sections. They are always chosen from the ranks
of the catechists.
The aggregation of Native Minister’s section forms a Circuit,
at the head of which is the missionary. The missionary fills
the office and the work of a bishop or general superintendent.
His duties comprise the management of the Circuit Institution,
wherein are trained young men who aspire to be teachers, he visits
at convenient time every part of the Circuit, inspects the day
schools, the children assembling for that purpose at the chief sec-
tional villages. The missionary reviews the minutes of the
sectional quarterly meetings, and presides at the annual Circuit
Meeting which preceded Synod, and at which is gathered up into


Weekly Meeting
Consists of Teachers and
Local Preachers.
Monthly Meeting
Consists usually of Teachers
one record the work of all the sections, and the villages that form
them. He is the driving force of the engine, and at the same
time acts as the fly wheel that steadies its motions. All the multi-
farious matters that arise among the people in a transitional state,
and that the Native Ministers feel unable to settle, are referred to
the missionary. To him the Circuit looks for guidance and inspi-
ration, and it is hard to tell where his duties begin, and where
they end.
The Fiji District contains xo Circuits. The Synod of the
district consists of the English missionaries and one Native
Minister from each Circuit. The latter is elected by his colleagues
at the annual Circuit Meeting, which corresponds to the Colonial
September Quarterly Meeting. There are no non-ministerial
members of the Synod, for the reason that as the Circuits pay
their income to the General Fund, there is no need of Circuit
stewards, there are village and sectional stewards, but there are no
duties for a Circuit steward to perform. Every village possesses a
steward whose duty is to attend to the contributions for the
teacher’s support. Teachers never speak about the contributions
to the people, the stewards do that. Stewards receive the gifts of
the people, and appraise their value, and they praise or blame
as may be required. The stewards are appointed by Quarterly
Meeting on the nomination usually of the people of their villages.
In every section is a principal steward who is supposed to take
cognisance of the total contributions of the people, and report to
the Quarterly Meeting.
only, but Local Preachers
and Stewards may attend
if free to do so.
Sectional Quarterly Meeting Consists of Native Minister,
Catechists, Teachers, Lo-
cal Preachers, Class
Leaders, and Stewards of
the section.
Circuit Quarterly Meeting.. Consists of Missionary, all
Native Ministers & Cate-
chists, and other persons
elected by the sectional
Quarterly Meeting.
Synod ... ... ... ... Consists of Missionaries and
Native Representatives,
one from each Circuit.


NAME OF AGENT.
PLACE.
Village ... ... ... Teacher.
Small Sub-section ... Senior Teachers preside at weekly
meeting.
Catechist’s Section ... Catechist presides at monthly meeting.
Native Minister’s Section Native Minister presides at monthly
and also at sectional quarterly
meeting.
Circuit ... ... ... Missionary presides at Circuit quar-
terly meeting.
APPENDIX C.
FRIENDLY ISLANDS.
In accordance with the unanimous recommendations of the
Friendly Islands District Meeting, the Conference of 1875
accepted, and the General Conference confirmed, the following
Constitution for the Friendly Islands Mission :
I. That the number of English Missionaries be reduced to
five, and that the Missionary Committee continue as now to be
responsible for their allowances.
That the Class and Ticket money raised in each Circuit be
applied to the support of the Native Ministers, Preachers on
Trial and Catechists. Should there be any surplus after meeting
the above charges, it shall be paid into the Home Mission and
Contingent Fund. From this fund deficiencies, if any, shall
be met.
11. That a Home Mission and Contingent Fund be esta-
blished under the following regulations, viz. ;
1. Objects—
1. To render aid in the support of the Native Ministry.
2. To assist in the maintenance of schoolmasters.
3. To pay all the other expenses of the Mission, excepting
the allowances of the Missionaries as afore provided.
11. Income—
That the income of the fund be derived from the following
sources, namely—
One half of the proceeds of the Juvenile Missionary Associa-


lion, and one-fourth* of the proceeds raised by the adults for
Missions.
The other moiety of the Juvenile Missionary Money, and the
three-fourths t of the amount raised by the adults shall be
remitted to the Australasian Wesleyan Missionary Society in aid of
the Foreign Missions.
in. Constitution of the Committee —
The Committee of the fund shall consist of all the Mission-
aries and Native Ministers in the District, and of Laymen equal
in number to the Missionaries and Native Ministers—such Lay-
men must be members of Society, and be chosen by ballot by
the September Quarterly Meeting of the Circuit on the nomina-
tion of the Superintendent. The proportion for each Circuit
shall be arranged at the previous District Meeting. For the year
1876, the number shall be as follows, namely—Tonga Circuit,
six; Haabai, five ; Vavau, five.
The Committee to meet during the sittings of the District
Meeting.
iv. Powers of the Committee—
The Committee shall have power at its Annual, Meeting to
consider and to frame estimates of the expenses of the ensuing
year, to consider and decide upon all applications for grants in
aid of the objects contemplated by the Fund, provided that the
amounts previously estimated for shall, if still required, be paid
before any new grants are made.
All the members of the Committee shall have equal right to
speak and to vote upon every question submitted for consideration.
The Yearly Balance-sheet of accounts of this fund shall be
forwarded to the General Secretary of Missions, together with the
District Minutes and Accounts.
111. That the Day Schools connected with the Mission be
maintained efficiently until adequate provision is made by the
Government for primary education. While the Schools are open
to Government inspection, and are mainly sustained by Church
funds, it is not desirable to interfere with their management.
IV. That henceforth all the Circuit Quarterly Meetings be
constituted according to the law of the Wesleyan Methodist
Church.
V. District Meeting. That, on the first two days of the
Annual District Committee, the Missionaries shall meet by them-
* The Conference of 1876 sanctioned “one-half” instead of “ one-fourth,
t Half, see Resolution, page 39.


selves, when the Secretary shall be chosen, and the business under
questions 3,6, 7, 10, 13, 17, 24, 25, and 35 shall be disposed of.*
The business of the Connexional Funds, and the recommen-
dations to Conference which affect the Missionaries exclusively,
shall also be completed. The Native Ministers and Preachers on
Trial shall then be admitted, when all the rest of the business
shall be considered, and all the Missionaries and Native Ministers
shall have equal rights to take part in the discussions, and also to
vote. The native* Preachers on Trial shall attend, but shall
neither speak nor vote. The business shall be carried on in the
native language.
With reference to the question numbered 3, while the Confer-
ence will for the present allow it to be proposed in the absence of
the native Ministers, it will, nevertheless, be glad when the time
comes that it will be deemed expedient to consider it whilst the
Native Brethren are present.
Question 31 shall be proposed under question 3, and num-
bered subdivision 5. f
VI. Stationing Committee. —That a Committee consisting
of the English Missionaries, including any on Trial, shall prepare
a sheet of Stations to be recommended to the Conference. The
proposed recommendations shall be submitted to the District
Meeting when the Native Ministers are present, who shall be
invited to discuss them, but without taking a vote. After discus-
sion, the Committee shall reconsider its recommendations, and,
when completed, the sheet shall be read to the District Meeting
without further discussion, and forwarded to the Conference.
ORDER OF DISTRICT BUSINESS TO BE PRINTED.
The Conference directs that the new regulations respecting the
order of business in the Friendly Islands District Meeting be
printed and published in the native language.
* The following are the questions referred to : —3. Are there any objec-
tions to any of our Ministers or Preachers on Trial? 6. What Preachers do
we recommend to be received into full connexion ? 7. What Preachers remain
on Trial ? 10. Have the Conference Stations for this year been observed ?
13. How do we recommend our Ministers and Preachers on Trial to be
stationed ? 17. Whom do we appoint as the representative of this District at
the ensuing Conference ? 25. Has the Chairman of the District received any
instructions, observations, or advices from the Committee to be laid before the
Brethren ? 35. When and where shall our next District Meeting be held ?
t Are the Brethren making diligent application to acquire the language of
the people among whom they labour ?


DISTRIBUTION OF MISSION COLLECTIONS IN FRIENDLY
ISLANDS.
In accordance with the recommendation of the Tonga Finan-
cial District Meeting, the Conference agrees to allow one-half of
all the Missionary collections of the adult meetings to be paid into
the Tongan Contingent Fund, instead of one-fourth, as provided
for in resolutions of last year, page 52 in printed Minutes.
APPENDIX D.
Proposed Additional Annual Expenditure on Improvement of
Provincial “Superior” Schools, and Establishment of High
School.
GRANT IN AID, XS OO PER ANNUM
Divided as follows—
Provincial Superior Schools ... ... ,£l7O
High School ... ... ... ... 330
Xs°°
jQ I for X 1 U P to X 1 ) 000 f° r erection of School Buildings, &c.
PROVINCIAL SUPERIOR SCHOOLS.
Grant in aid, be paid on pupils passing final examination,
as detailed below, i.e., entrance examination to High School.
Grant to be paid on a minimum of 15 passes per annum.
If less than 15 pass in any one year, grant to be proportion-
ately reduced. Annual pass examinations to be held in subjects
mentioned below under “ Course of Instruction.”
Sixty-five per cent, of marks to constitute a “ pass.” Any
pupil of suitable age obtaining the above percentage may enter
the High School. The age at which pupils may enter the High
School shall not exceed 14 years.
TEACHERS.
The schools to be under the control of competent Native
Teachers, who should be required to read and write well , to know
arithmetic, comprising—
1. The first four rules, simple and compound.
2. Practice.
3. Addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division of
vulgar fractions.
4. Weights and measures.
Geography as much as possible. They should also, if possible,
be competent to supervise games—such as cricket, &c., and to
give instruction in military drill. Good handwriting, and an intel-


ligent knowledge of arithmetic up to the standard indicated above,
should be looked upon as essentials.
COURSE OF INSTRUCTION.
Reading in Fijian.
Writing —Jackson’s vertical handwriting copy books recom-
mended.
Arithmetic —Nymeration and notation. First four rules in
simple and compound, and weights and measures.
Simple mental arithmetic should be made a special
feature.
Geography—- General features of the earth’s surface._ Seas,
continents, countries, with the chief towns. The more
important mountain ranges, rivers, bays, capes, &c.
The possessions of Great Britain.
Drawing —Simple geometrical patterns. The difference
between right, acute, and obtuse angles, &c. Practice
to the use of the ruler.
Drill —The simple movements of Company drill, march-
ing, &c.
The schools should be supplied with good wall maps, and, if
possible, with drawings of all the better known animals and pro-
ducts of the earth. The maps should have the names of the
places in English spelling, and the teachers should be obliged to
know the English pronunciation.
HIGH SCHOOL.
Grant in aid of per annum to be paid on the pupils
passing Standard iii.
Sixty-five per cent, of marks to constitute a pass. Grant to be
paid on a minimum of 15 passes per annum. If less than 15
pass in any one year, the grant to be proportionately reduced.
Pupils to remain at the school five years, unless able to pass
Standard iii. before the expiration of that time. Pupils to be
divided into three classes, 1., 11., HI. School to be in charge of
a competent European Master, with Native assistants. No pupil
over 14 years of age to be admitted.
COURSE OF INSTRUCTION.
STANDARD I.
Reading in Fijian.
Writing —Jackson’s vertical w r riting copy books recommended.
Geography —More detail than in the Provincial schools.
Perhaps British possessions, Australasia and the Islands
of the Pacific should be made a special feature.


Arithmetic —Up to the standard reached in the Provincial
schools, with the addition of vulgar fractions and simple
proportion.
English —Alphabet, parts of speech, numbers up to 100,
names of months, days of week, and say a couple of
hundred English words. A modified form of Gouin’s
system of teaching languages recommended for this
class.
Drawing —An amplification of that taught in Provincial
school.
Drill— An amplication of that taught in Provincial schools.
Physical drill on Sandow’s method would greatly
improve physique of the students.
STANDARD 11.
Reading —From some simple English Primer
Writing —Should take the form of English transcription in
this class.
Geography —An amplification of that taught in Standard i.,
including, if possible, a little physical geography, theory
of the tides, motion of the earth and other planets, &c.
Arithmetic —Easy mensuration of plane surfaces, square root,
addition and subtraction of decimal fractions, simple
interest.
English— To the end of the first part of Atkinson’s text book.
Drawing , Drill —As in Standard i.
Native Regulations —Half the book.
Bookkeepifig —Dr. and Cr. entries in cash book
STANDARD 111.
Reading —From a more difficult Primer than in Standard ii.
Writing- —Should take the form of English dictation.
Geography —
Arithmetic —Decimal fractions, mensuration of plane sur-
faces, proportional parts, profit and loss, compound
interest, discounts, compound proportion.
English —The whole of Atkinson’s text book. Easy sight
translation, English into Fijian, and vice versa.
Draiving, Drill —As before.
Native Regulations —The whole book.
Bookkeeping , Cash Book— Must be able to bring down
balance, and rule off correctly.


Extracts from thk Minutes of a Meeting of the Board
of Missions heed December 21st, 1900, and January
nth, 1901.
* REPORT OF THE DEPUTATION
TO FIJI.
The Report of the Deputation to Fiji having been placed in
printed form in the hands of all the Members of the Board, it was
resolved to take it as read.
The General Secretary, the Rev. Geo. Lane, and Mr. R. S.
Callaghan, having addressed the Board on paragraph 11, dealing with
the Instructions to the Deputation, and the carrying out of the same,
it was resolved that Subsection (a), dealing with the self-governing
powers of the Mission Districts be referred to the following Sub-
Committee: —The President, the Rev. W. H. Beale, the Rev. J.
E. Carruthers, Mr. Wm, Robson, and the members of the
Deputation.
Subsection (b). — Resolved ; “That in the opinion* of the Board
it is not desirable to extend to Fiji the system of employing men
as unordained Lay Missionaries.”
Subsection (c). —Resolved: “That in the opinion of the
Board it is not desirable to make any alteration in the rule relating
to the appointment of returned Missionaries (Book of Laws, par.
398, page in)” also Resolved : “That in the operation of the
rule, special consideration be given to the wishes of the Mission-
aries, when they desire to return to the Conferences from which
they came out.”
Subsection (d). —Resolved: (i.) “That in view of the in-
creasing heathen Coolie population in Fiji, the serious injury
occasioned thereby to our work, and the inadequacy of the present
agencies of our Church there in this regard, we recommend that
efforts be made to obtain an experienced Missionary from India,
and two married Indian Catechists to assist him.” (f/.) “ That
the General Secretary correspond with our Mission authorities in
London with a view to obtaining information re the above.”
Subsection (e.)— -Resolved : “That the Board approves of the
formation of a scheme for the higher education of the Fijians, and
appoints the President, the Rev. Jas. E. Carruthers, and Mr. Wm.
Robson, together with the members of the Deputation, as a Sub-
committee to prepare the same upon the receipt of the recom-
mendations from Fiji, and report to the Board.”


Navuloa College.— Resolved : “ That the Resolution of the
Fiji District Synod on this matter be adopted, viz.:—‘That having
regard to the pressing claims of the Navuloa Training Institution,
and having heard of the qualifications of the Rev. W. Ernest
Bennett, 8.A., for the Principalship, we respectfully request the
Conference to appoint him to that position; and that in the event
of Mr. Bennett not being available, the Conference make a suit-
able appointment. That in the event of no suitable appointment
being found outside the District, the Conference be requested to
appoint the Rev A. J. Small to the District Theological Institution
of Navuloa.”
Subsection F.—Resolved : ‘ That Nos. I—41 —4 under Subsec-
tion F form a preamble to the Resolution on page 13 of the
Report, and that the whole of this Subsection be a recommen-
dation to Conference.”
Subsection G. —Resolved : “ That the consideration of Sub-
section G be deferred until the presentation of the Report of the
Sub-Committee appointed to consider the question of increased
self-governing powers for the Fijians.”
Subsection J. — Resolved : “ That the Resolution of the Fiji
District Synod be endorsed, viz. :— ‘ In respect to the question of
reducing thp number of European Missionaries engaged in this
District, the Synod is strongly convinced that, in the conditions at
present prevailing in Fiji, a reduction of the European staff would
be followed by the most serious consequences. It is our opinion
that, while our Native Ministers are good and earnest men, the
time has not yet arrived when they may be left with less oversight
than is now possible, and that the withdrawal of a Missionary from
any of our Circuits would be a very dangerous step, the possibility
of which causes us great concern.’ ”
Subsection K. — Resolved: “That the form of any pledge
against tobacco or strong drink should be of a uniform character
in each Circuit, and approved of by the District Synod.”
Resolved : “ That the thanks of the Board be presented to the
Rev. George Brown, D.D., the Rev. George Lane, and Mr. R. S.
Callaghan, the Deputation to Fiji, for their valuable services and
report in relation to the agencies and interests of our Church in Fiji.
It recognizes the delicate and difficult character of the negotiations
and enquiries with which the Deputation was commissioned to
deal, and places on record its appreciation of the skill and wisdom
of the Deputation, alike in its relations to the Civil Authorities of
the Colony and to the officers and members of our Church in
Fiji, and anticipates that in its direct effect upon our ministers
and people in Fiji and its influence upon our Church Councils in
relation to our Mission, the visit will be fraught with lasting good.
32




