





REPORT
BY THE JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE HOUSE
OF LORDS AND THE HOUSE OF COMMONS
appointed to consider the
PETITION OF THE STATE OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Ordered by The House of Lords to be Printed
22nd May, 1935
Ordered by The House of Commons to be Printed
22nd May, 1935
LONDON
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
To be purchased directly from H.M. STATIONERY OFFICE at the following addresses:
Adastral House, Kingsway, London, W.C.2; 120 George Street, Edinburgh 2;
York Street, Manchester 1, 1 St. Andrew's Crescent, Cardiff;
80 Chichester Street, Belfast;
or through any Bookseller
1935
Price 1d. Net
H.L. 75
H.C. 88


REPORT BY THE JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE HOUSE OF
LORDS AND THE HOUSE OF COMMONS APPOINTED
TO CONSIDER THE PETITION OF THE STATE
OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Ordered to report :
That the Committee have met and have heard Counsel on behalf
of the Western Australian Secession Delegation on the one hand,
and the Commonwealth of Australia on the other.
1. The Committee were appointed to report whether the Petition
of the State of Western Australia is proper to be received. They
interpret that duty as going beyond mere investigation of the for-
mal correctness of the Petition or of its genuineness in regard to
the signatures of those who have signed the Petition for and on
behalf of the people of Western Australia, or their authority so
to sign.
2. The Committee do not consider their duty is limited to report-
ing merely on the propriety of the form of the Petition for the
purpose of its reception by Parliament. There is no question as to
the undoubted and ancient right of Parliament to receive what-
ever Petitions it thinks fit, or the historic right of the subjects
of the Crown to present Petitions to Parliament. But these
rights, like the abstract right of Parliament to legislate for the
whole Empire, are only exercised, in relation to the affairs of
the Dominions, in accordance with certain long established and
clearly understood constitutional principles, principles to which
Parliament has more recently given its formal and statutory appro-
val in the Statute of Westminster. It is in the light of these princi-
ples that the Committee conceive it to be their duty to report for the'
information of Parliament whether, in their opinion, the Petition
is one which it is proper for Parliament to receive. That is the
full extent of the responsibility of the Committee.
3. In order to find an answer to this question, the essential
matter for the consideration of the Committee has appeared to be
the prayer of the Petitioners, which is to be found in paragraph 19
of the Petition, and which is in the following terms :
Wherefore the people of Western Australia, as your
Petitioners, humbly pray that (The House of Lords or the
House of Commons as the case may be) will forthwith, or as
soon as reasonably may be, cause to be introduced into,
and duly passed by the said Parliament of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, a Bill for an Act
either by an amendment of the Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution Act or otherwise howsoever to effectuate the
withdrawal of the people of Western Australia from the Federal
Commonwealth of Australia established under and by virtue
The cost of printing and publishing this Report is estimated bv
the Stationery Office at £5 ss. Od , J


of the provisions of the said Act and to effectuate the res-
toration of Western Australia to its former status as a separate
and distinct self-governing colony in the British Empire under
its present constitution, and the people of Western Australia,
as your petitioners, do also humbly pray that any Bill for an
Act as aforesaid may have included therein, inter alia, pro-
visions in the terms of, or in effect similar to the terms of the
following clauses, namely ”
Ihe Petition then proceeds to set out in detail the proposed
clauses of the Bill, but it is here only necessary to quote Clause 1 (a).
On and after a day to be fixed by Proclamation—Western
Australia shall cease to be a State of the Commonwealth of
Australia, and the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution
Act, 1900, and the laws of the Commonwealth made there-
under, shall, subject to the Act, cease to apply or have any
effect in any part of Western Australia \ and the Western
Australian Constitution Act, 1889, and its amendments shall
thereafter continue in full force and effect and free from any
limitations hitherto imposed in any manner whatsoever by the
Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act, 1900.”
The remaining clauses are ancillary. The prayer accordingly is
that, at the request of the Government of the State of Western
Australia, conveying the wishes of the people of Western Australia,
as ascertained by a referendum organised by the State authorities
and without and, indeed, contrary to any request or desire of the
- Commonwealth of Australia, the Parliament of the United Kingdom
should pass a Bill which would sever the Federated Commonwealth
by removing from it one State, viz. the State of Western
Australia.
#»
4. The Petition sets out a summary of the hardships and griev-
ances which are complained of as resulting from Federation. The
Committee, however, have not entered into the merits of the case
into the accuracy of the facts recited in the Petition, or into the
question whether the complaint of grievances set out in the Peti-
tion is justified. They have put these things aside as not directly
relevant to the constitutional issue which they have been called
upon to investigate.
5. Nor have the Committee attempted to examine the extent to
which the people of Western Australia, as citizens of the Com-
monwealth, have availed themselves of the opportunities open to
them under the Commonwealth Constitution for the remedy of
their grievances. They have not endeavoured to ascertain how
far it might have been possible by persuasion or political organiza-
tion to secure a majority in favour of changes in the general policy
of the Commonwealth, in so far as those grievances resulted from
policy; nor whether, in so far as those grievances may have been
inherent m the Constitution, some modification of the Constitu-
tion might perhaps have been obtained in accordance with the


procedure laid down in the Act. Nor, lastly, if the grievances
are not remediable except by fundamental changes which only
the Parliament of the United Kingdom is competent to effect,
have they enquired what effort has been made through the medium
of Commonwealth elections, or in the Commonwealth Legislature,
to induce the Government and Parliament of the Commonwealth
to ask for legislation to amend the Commonwealth Act.
6. The essence, then, of the proposed Bill is that the Parlia-
ment of the United Kingdom should by its enactment enable the
Secession of the State of Western Australia from the Australian
Commonwealth. So to enact is within the legal competence of
the Parliament of the United Kingdom, and of that Parliament
alone. Chapter VIII of the Constitution enacted under Sections
1 to 9 of the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act, 1900,
provides machinery for the alteration by the people of Australia
of the “ Commonwealth Constitution ” as embodied in those Sec-
tions. But there is no provision in the Act for the amendment
of the Sections of the Act which created the Commonwealth as
one ‘ ‘ indissoluble federal Commonwealth under the Crown ’’. The
Act gives no power to any State to secede. The Commonwealth
itself has no power to amend the Constitution to the extent of
enabling any State to secede. It is only by legislation in the
Parliament of the United Kingdom, therefore, that the dissolu-
tion of the Commonwealth or the secession of any of its con-
stituent parts can be effected.
7. It is however a well established convention of the constitutional
practice governing the relations between the Parliament of the
United Kingdom and other Parliaments of the Empire, that the
Parliament of the United Kingdom should not interfere in the
affairs of a Dominion or self-governing State or Colony, save at
the request of the Government or Parliament of such Dominion,
State or Colony, that is to say, in effect that interference should
only take place at the request of such Dominion, State or Colony
speaking with the voice which represents it as a whole and not
merely at the request of a minority. That rule was well established
before 1900, and has been consistently acted upon as an undoubted
Constitutional Convention. It is not necessary to refer to the
numerous authoritative declarations of the principle, which must
be regarded as fundamental in these matters.
8. In the present instance, the Parliament of the United King-
dom is asked to alter the Commonwealth Constitution Act, not
in response to a general demand by the citizens of the Common-
wealth, constitutionally expressed in the Commonwealth Parlia-
ment and transmitted by the Commonwealth Government, but at
the request of the Government of the State of Western Australia,
which, as such, is not concerned with Commonwealth affairs. It
is essential in this connection to keep in mind that Western
Australia, in joining the Commonwealth, surrendered all those


powers, previously enjoyed by it as a self-governing Colony, which
under the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act, 1900, were
vested in the Commonwealth, and that it has since the coming
into operation of that Act, continued to exist as a political entity-
in respect only of the powers which remain vested in the States.
The establishment of the Commonwealth, in fact, set up, within
the geographical limits of Australia, an all-pervading division of
powers between the Commonwealth, on the one hand, as a separate
and integral national authority covering the whole area of Australia,
sovereign within the ambit of its powers, and the States, on the
other hand, as political, entities within that area, each State
sovereign within the ambit of its respective powers. Both Common-
wealth and States are equally independent in respect of the powers
and functions severally assigned to them.
9. This division is one which, in the opinion of the Committee,
cannot be ignored in considering the application of the general
constitutional principles governing the intervention in the affairs of
any self-governing member of the British Empire. It is clearly
only at the request of the Government and Legislature primarily
concerned that the Parliament of the United Kingdom can be
entitled to legislate. In respect of matters appertaining to the
Commonwealth, it could not so legislate without the request of the
Commonwealth authorities; in respect of matters appertaining to
the sphere of State powers it could not so legislate without the
request of the State authorities. The State of Western Australia,
as such, has no locus standi in asking for legislation from the
Parliament of the United Kingdom in regard to the constitution
of the Commonwealth, any more than it would have in asking
for legislation to alter the constitution of another Australian State,
' or than the Commonwealth would have in asking for an amendment
of the constitution of the State of Western Australia.
10. This distinction is recognised and enforced in the Statute
of Westminster. The Preamble to that Statute reaffirms the
established rule that the Parliament of the United Kingdom will
not pass any law extending to a Dominion, as part of the law of
that Dominion, otherwise than at the request of that Dominion;
the Statute is there dealing solely with Dominion affairs. But
in section 9 (2) the Statute .provides for the case of the States, by
enacting that the Parliament of the United Kingdom may deal
with respect to any matters within the authority of the States of
Australia, without any concurrence of the Commonwealth, that
is, it may deal with such matters at the request of the States.
11. The Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Ajct, 1900
begins by reciting that the people of the five original States had
agreed to unite in one indissoluble Federal Commonwealth under
the Crown. Western Australia joined the Federation in accordance
with the option provided by the Act, and the six States
are on the same footing in this connection. The Parliament of the


United Kingdom in enacting the Constitution, was giving effect to
the voice of the people of the continent of Australia, and not to
the voice of any State or States. It is only therefore when invoked
by the voice of the people of Australia that, according to con-
stitutional usage, the Parliament of the United Kingdom can pro-
perly vary or dissolve that Federal Union.
12. It is true that, as things stand, the Parliament of the United
Kingdom alone can pass an Act which would have that result.
It is true also that this Parliament has in law full competence
to do so, even against the wish and without the consent of the
Commonwealth. To do so indeed would not be outside its com-
petence in the strict legal sense. But it would be outside its
competence, if the established constitutional conventions of the
Empire are to be observed, as observed they must be. Only by ob-
servance of this principle can the legal competence of the Parliament
of the United Kingdom to legislate for the internal affairs of any
Dominion or self-governing state or Colony be reconciled with the
fundamental conception of them as autonomous communities. And
apart from theory, it would be easy to state the practical diffi-
culties which would follow from any departure from this principle.
Hence what the Petition prays for is, in that sense, something
which is beyond the jurisdiction claimed by the Parliament of the
United Kingdom.
13. The conclusion, therefore, of the Committee is that inas-
much as the prayer of the Petition of the State of Western Australia
asks for legislative action, which, in their opinion, it would
be constitutionally incompetent for the Parliament of the United
Kingdom to take, except upon the definite request of the
Commonwealth of Australia conveying the clearly expressed wish
of the Australian people as a whole, and inasmuch as this Peti-
tion is presented by the Government of Western Australia, which
as a State, is not concerned with the subject matter of the
proposed legislation, the Petition is not proper to be received.
22nd May, 1935.
(29589 9) Wt. - 1000 5/35 P. St. 0.335








