

SECOND EDITION
REPORT
OF THE
CONFERENCE
PRESIDED OVER BY
THE DUKE OF MANCHESTER,
ON THE QUESTION WHETHER COLONIZATION AND
EMIGRATION MAY BE MADE SELF-SUPPORTING
OR EVEN PROFITABLE TO THOSE INVESTING
CAPITAL THEREIN. [I3TH July, 1869.]
WITH
APPENDIX
EDITED BY
WILLIAM FRESTON.
LONDON:
J. T. WHEELER, BROADWAY, WESTMINSTER.
1869.
Price Sixpence.


“There need be no hesitation in affirming that Colo-
nization in the present state of the World, is the very best
affair of business in which the capital of an old and wealthy
country can possibly engage.”
JOHN STUART MILL.
“ It is necessary, and very interesting to observe, that Colo-
nization has a tendency to increase employment for capital
and labour at home.—When a Hampshire peasant emigrates
to Australia, he very likely enables an operative to live in
Lancashire and Yorkshire. Besides making food in the
Colony for himself, he makes some more to send home for
the manufacturer, who, in his turn, makes clothes or im-
plements for the Colonist.”
EDWARD GIBBON WAKEFIELD.


PREFACE.
In order that this pamphlet may he better understood,
it is necessary to make a few introductory remarks.
The Poor Law has been considered by many persons to
he harsh on the poor man; hut it must he borne in mind
that there are two sides to this question, and that the other
is the ratepayers’.
The total levy under what is called “ The Poor Pate ”
was £10,303,000 in 1867, and £11,061,000 in 1868, show-
ing an increase of £757,000. The aggregate local taxes
raised in 1868, according to Mr. Hunt’s return, are equal to
35. 3§cl in the pound on the rateable value of all England
and Wales, which is returned at £100,613,000 nett. In
the metropolis the .total local rates for 1868 were as
follows:
Middlesex (Metropolis) . . 2,684,061
Surrey ditto . . 694,810
Kent ditto . . 223,906
Total
£3,602,776
2,372,287
Total of 1861
Total Increase
£1,230,489
Pmss/F tfm


It is an undoubted fact that the poor and local rates, in
certain localities, have increased to a most alarming extent,
and are felt to have reached the point at which they have
become oppressive. It is also a fact that whenever, owing
to the vicissitudes of trade, any large number of workmen
are thrown out of employment, in any locality, the Poor
Law relief has always to be supplemented by private charity.
There is something very repulsive about the words “ work-
house” and “pauper.” Lord Houghton lately said, with
some truth, “The real evil of the English Poor Law was that
it was eleemosynary in the worst and lowest sense of the
word. It said, ‘We allow you to live; but to live mise-
rably.’ ” “ But,” he added, “ this country has not learnt a
better state of things by what was going on abroad; the
English principle was not statesmanlike, and it was not
Christianlike —we left the pauper where we found him.”
The ratepayer, the philanthropist, and the unemployed, and
also the mechanic and small capitalist, are all equally inte-
rested in the questions involved in this Report. The whole
population of this country, judging from the amount of
public attention which has been bestowed on the subject,
are anxious to learn, and are much interested in the dis-
covery of some remedy for an admitted evil. Emigration is
acknowledged, by universal consent, to be the panacea for
relieving the distress of the working classes, and reducing
the burdens of the ratepayers. The question next arises,
how is a man without means to cross the seas, and how is
he to support himself and his family in another country P
It must be borne in mind by those who look at the matter
from the ratepayers’ point of view, that a poor man is not
like a bale of goods, that can be shipped abroad and got rid
of: he must eat and drink to live ; he has hopes and fears
to be satisfied and allayed, and he cannot be made to go;


nor would it be right thus to transport a man if it could be
done. And then comes the all-important question, “ where
is the money to come from?” The answer to this question
will be found in this pamphlet. There is another phase of
the emigration question, which is, that the colonies are said
not to want “paupers.” This is quite true in one sense.
Those persons who say so, however, should bear in mind
that there are two classes of destitute persons. One is the
debilitated individual who, through drunkenness or irregu-
larity of life, has become broken-down in body and mind,
and who regards himself as a pensioner on the rates. Such
a person can no more maintain himself in a colony than in
England, and for such there is no help. With that defi-
nition the word “ pauper ” may be altogether discarded.
An artizan, mechanic, miner, or agricultural labourer, in
good health, although for the time being ho may be destitute,
possesses capital in his skill and technical knowledge. Only
take him to some place where his services are wanted, and
his means of earning a livelihood for himself and his family
is instantly restored. Families consisting of such parents
and their children, although the former may not be in the
prime of life, have been proved to make valuable colonists,
and of such are the bulk of the unemployed who are now so
sorely distressed. In the documents printed in the Appendix
to the Report will be found a great deal of information as
to the value of such labour, and how it may be turned
to account.
It is a fact not universally known, and .which will be
interesting to the readers of this pamphlet to learn, that the
emigration from the United Kingdom has been rapidly
falling oft ever since 1863. The Emigration Commissioners
somewhat hastily drew the following conclusion, that
“ fbe decrease of the numbers of emigrants probably arose
from the gradual improvement in the condition of the


people.” It is a question which may he very fairly raised,
whether the reverse is not the case, and want of means the
cause. On this point attention may he called to two facts,
—first, that the number of emigrants crossing the ocean in
steamers now greatly exceeds the number of those who
emigrate in sailing vessels ; and, secondly, although emigra-
tion from these islands is sensibly abating, yet the sums sent
across the Atlantic, to promote emigration, amount yearly to
larger sums; proofs that the generality of persons who seek
new homes abroad do not belong to the utterly destitute, hut
spring from a class every year requiring better treatment,
and disposing of larger means—a class of higher value, and
only to he had at a higher price. See Times newspaper,
July 14th. It will be instructive also to glance at the
occupations of the emigrants who left these shores in 1868,
and the destination of those who have sailed from Liverpool
during the last six months, set out in the Appendix.
The reader will probably be struck with the class of
persons who are emigrating, and the marked preponderance
of those who sailed for the United States. The effect of
the continuance of this on Great Britain and her Colonies
is noticed in the Report,
There is another question of vital importance to consider.
Why do the people go to the United States now instead of
to British Colonies P This opens up a large question. The
relations between Great Britain and her Colonies have been
undergoing a change—that is to say, free Government
has been granted to them, in return for which the Colonists
are expected to assume certain duties and responsibilities
which previously devolved on the Home Government.
Pending these changes, the inducements formerly held out
to persons to emigrate to the Colonies have been modified,
which, in some measure, also accounts for the decrease in
emigration mentioned by the Commissioners.


Has the cost of the voyage any influence on the emi-
grant’s choice ? It is an undoubted fact that the autho-
rities of the United States have formed a correct estimate of
the value of settlers, that they have active agents, and that
they hold out great inducements to the better classes of
emigrants; and, lastly, the passage to America costs less
than to any other place, Canada excepted. That cost has a
great deal to do with the question is proved by the fact of
Canada’s taking the most emigrants next after the United
States. It is also another undoubted fact that there are
millions of acres of land at the Cape of Good Hope, in
British Kaffraria, Natal, the West India Islands, Australia
and New Zealand, and the new territory of the Dominion
of Canada known as the “ Fertile Belt,” capable of pro-
ducing all the articles mentioned in the Report, and from
which emigrants have ample choice to suit every occu-
pation, every disposition, and every constitution, if they
could only do so unfettered by the consideration of the cost
of the voyage. Upon this question the reader will find
information in the documents printed in the appendix.
Another question has been raised, What proof is there
that the class who arc now unemployed and pressing on
the poor rates desire to emigrate ? The reader may be
referred for a practical answer to the result of the efforts of
the Managers of the British Colonial Emigration Fund, the
Rev. J. F. Kitto, Miss Rye, and many others, and the emi-
gration of the Dockyard Labourers. The letters these
people have sent to England, in which they say there
are no workhouses and no stone yards in their new homes,
are quite affecting. If further proof is necessary, it has
been furnished by Mr. Cole, a London guardian, repre-
senting a place which had spent £I,OOO out of the rates in
assisting emigration in one year, who says that they found
the plan had a tendency to draw paupers from other unions.


Why? Because in that union they had a chance of being
sent out.
The guardians of the poor have the power at present to
spend £lO on the emigration of any poor person who is
chargeable to the parish, or who would become chargeable
to the parish or union if he wanted relief. With this power
they could do something, but only in places where such poor
persons can, by obtaining remunerative employment from old
settlers, obtain the necessaries they require, until they can
raise sufficient from land granted to them to support them-
selves—a result to be obtained only on a very limited scale.
The guardians, however, look at the ratepayers’ side of the
question and say, “ What is the use of our spending money, if
the places of those whom we send out are to be filled up with
others ? ” This has proved fatal to the proposal of a Metro-
politan Rate discussed at conferences of the Metropolitan
guardians held in the Westminster Sessions House, and presided
over by Lord Alfred Churchill. It is also conclusive evidence
that a general plan is required which (without attempting
to deal with the pauper in the workhouses, who must be left
to the care of the parish authorities and to private charity)
will strike at the root of the evil, and sap the source from
which the workhouses are recruited. To do this, attention
must be directed to the distressed and unemployed workman,
who, with that feeling of sturdy independence so charac-
teristic of the Englishman, often prefers to starve or commit
suicide sooner than degrade himself to the level of the
pauper. This is the class pointed out by law to be assisted
to emigrate to avoid the workhouse by the words “ who
would become chargeable to the parish or union if he wanted
relief,” and this is the class also whom the colonies desire to
have, and whom the framers of the Report had in their
view when they used the words “ Selected Emigration.”
Mr. Ayrton, M.P., who is a member of the Govern-


merit, has publicly stated that it is from the exercise of the
power confided to the guardians of the poor that pecuniary
assistance is to he obtained, and that they ought to carry
out the law.
What is emigration ? People may talk about emigration
as long as they please, but it is, after all, the outflow of
population in accordance with a natural law, like the
swarming of bees, and must be voluntary. Transplantation,
as Mr. Young calls it, is colonization. Here, at the outset,
arises a difficulty in asking the Home Government to take
up and carry out the operation —Where are the people to
be sent to? The Government have no land excepting in
Labuan and West Australia. The lands in the Colonies
are no longer under the control of the Home Govern-
ment, and the Colonial Governments say they will not
have paupers. Any attempt at wholesale transplantation,
by Government, would at once lead to a complication with
the Colonies.
Emigration of the strong and healthy gives fresh life
blood to colonies. The Americans do not hesitate to esti-
mate the value of every man who sets foot in the United
States at a thousand dollars, and every boy over ten years of
age as worth more than his keep. Can it be doubted for
one moment that every able-bodied man and boy, in good
health, is worth quite as much in either of our colonies;
or that the colonial authorities, who would object to paupers,
would compete for the possession of such emigrants P
Are distressed workmen really benefited by removal to
another country ? This question would appear, at first sight,
not to require an answer, but it must be borne in
mind, that for the very reason that there arc no workhouses
in the Colonies, it would be a wrong and veiy cruel thing
so to deceive the poor here, as to induce them to leave
England and then throw them on to the shore of another


country destitute, without immediate employment or with-
out the means of temporary subsistence, and a plan by
which they can produce sufficient for their own main-
tenance in the future.
Can emigration he made remunerative to those investing
capital therein ?
In considering this question the reader must bear in
mind that emigration is of two kinds. 1. Simple emigration,
such as that of the dockyard labourers to Canada, 2. Emi-
gration in connection with land. As regards the first, no
private capitalist can he expected to undertake what Govern-
ment, through Lord Granville, has declined to do. Unem-
ployed artizans, skilled workmen, and labourers are required
in the colonies, and are objects well worthy of the assistance
of boards of guardians and the benevolent in this country,
and are also sufficiently desirable acquisitions to render it
more than probable that colonists and Colonial Governments
would glad to contribute something towards their
emigration. The organization, however, for finding
out where labour is required, making arrangements
for payment of the expenses of sending out the mechanics or
labourers, receiving and placing them safely in employment
in a new sphere, does not at present exist. The value of
such services in England may be instanced by the operations
of the Free Labour Society, but neither the philanthropist
nor any one else can expect such services to be performed
on a large scale without cost. Would any reasonable
person begrudge the private capitalist a margin of profit in
return for such benevolent services ?
As regards the second —namely, emigration in con-
nection with land. No profit need be expected from the
poor emigrant; the land will pay the profit. It may be
deferred, but it will be cumulative and large, if the selection
of the land and emigrants be both good. Those who doubt


this are referred to the early history of the United States,
and to the unparalelled rise and progress of the Australian
colonies ; and for practical proof to the account of Mr.
Bergtheil’s settlement of German weavers set out in the
Appendix.
The Committee of the National Emigration Aid Society
made what has been called a tour of the Government offices,
and waited upon the Secretaries of State for the Colonies
and the Home Department, and the President of the Poor
Law Board, accompanied by the metropolitan Members of
Parliament; hut, although each of those members of Her
Majesty’s Government expressed his approval of emigration,
and great sympathy with the sufferings of the working
classes, it was apparent that no real result had been
obtained. Meanwhile, the starving condition of the poor
men who were waiting for assistance to emigrate, as the
Duke of Manchester feelingly expressed it, was enough to
make the heart bleed.
A Conference was decided on and held on the 22nd of
June last, the Duke of Manchester in the chair, at which
Sir George Grey, K.C.8., E. B. Eastwick, Esq., M.P., C. 8.,
F.R.S., F.R.A.S., &c., &c., Colonel Maude, Y.C., C. 8.,
George Duddell, Esq., Captain Bedford Pirn, R.N., and
several other gentlemen, took part in an animated discussion
on the question “ whether colonization and emigration may
be made self-supporting, or even profitable, to those
investing capital therein ?”—which was ultimately referred
to a committee composed of gentlemen acquainted with
the subject, of which the Duke consented to be chairman,
and Mr. John Bate (the Secretary of the National Emigra*
tion Aid Society) to be Hon. Sec.
The Report and the documents received by the Com*
mittee are now published for general information. The
solution of a very difficult question may be found in the
combination of some of the proposals set out in the Appendix.


REPORT
Read at a Meeting , at the Rooms of Captain Bedford
Pim, R.N., 4, Westminster Chambers, on July 13 th, 1869.
Upon consideration of the various written suggestions
which have been made (vide Appendix), and of other infor-
mation which they have received verbally, the Committee
report as follows :
That they are of opinion that selected emigration can he
made not only self-supporting, but remunerative to those
investing capital therein; and that capital may be profitably
employed in facilitating the transfer of destitute persons and
their families to places where labour is required, under
proper agreements and contracts with the Colonial Govern-
ments, Poor Law guardians, merchants, and landowners, in
a manner which will be of the utmost benefit to all parties
interested, at the same time supplying an imperial necessity.
They are further of opinion that whatever steps may be
taken should embrace a plan of a general character, and not
one confined to a particular colony or locality. There can
be no doubt as to the unbounded resources of the British
territories, and that British capital can nowhere (not even
in Indian railways, now sanctioned by the Court of Chan-
cery as an investment for trust money) be more safely and
profitably invested than in assisting to bring colonial lands
into cultivation.
The settlement of lands creates population and a demand


for those manufactured goods which now form the export
trade of this country, and, by the same means, actually
cheapens the importation of necessary articles of consump-
tion to this country, such as sugar, cotton, cocoa, coffee, silk,
flax, wool, wheat, maize, linseed, and other products of the
colonies. A well-organized system of emigration would, no
doubt, improve the condition of our home population, by
reducing pauperism to a minimum, encourage our manu-
facturers by speedily opening up new fields for trade and
enterprize, acting and re-acting beneficially both at home
and in the colonies.
The state of the cotton trade in Preston and its vicinity,
indeed throughout Lancashire, is in a wretched condition—
constant failures are reported. In the City article of the
Times newspaper, of sth July, instant, the following ap-
peared:—“The suspension has been announced of Messrs.
George Smith & Sons, of Preston, cotton spinners and
manufacturers. As the house had been established in
Manchester nearly half a century, and enjoyed good credit,
the liabilities are supposed to be large. They employed
about 200 operatives; while the firms of Messrs. R& W.
Jackson and Mr. Bourne, which have also stopped, em-
ployed about 300 each, making a total of 800 thrown out
of employment.” There are rumours of other misfortunes
impending, which will, without doubt, throw out of em-
ployment a vast number of persons, and cause great distress
in that densely populated county during the ensuing winter.
The cry is, that the trade is leaving the country, because
America no longer supplies us with all her cotton, and has
determined to manufacture for herself, and protect her own
manufacturers by prohibitive duties.
The best and only answer to this is, to rise to the emer-
gency, and say, “We have lost the American trade; let us
create a fresh trade by invigorating our colonies through the
infusion of the labour they require, and growing cotton


there,” The same cry of distress is to be heard in the
mining districts. It should not be forgotten that gold,
copper, and other valuable minerals are products of our own
colonies. British skilled labour, for want of organization to
meet the exigencies of the times, is being encouraged to
settle in the United States, precisely as the Flemings,
who introduced the woollen trade, and the French refu-
gees, who introduced the silk trade, were encouraged to
settle in England.
Every man is not designed by nature for an agriculturist,
and, consequently, would not succeed, or, indeed, be happy
in such occupation. The majority of the destitute persons of
our large towns, who would be miserable and helpless during
a Canadian winter, would thrive and prosper in a warm
climate, where they could sustain themselves and their
families without excessive muscular labour : the miner would
succeed best, and would be most valuable, where his practi-
cal technical education and skill would be available in his
special occupation. Hence the necessity of selection. It is
melancholy to reflect that if a small proportion only of the
British capital expended abroad during the last few years in
abortive schemes from which no English person has bene-
fited —but the speculators who projected them—or if a
modicum even of that which has been expended in experi-
mentalizing on and creating engines of destruction, had been
properly applied in assisting our destitute fellow countrymen
to better their position, not only would they have been
spared a vast amount of suffering, but many who have been
brought to poverty, by losses and failures through the high
price of cotton, have been in affluence.
What would have been the effect of the Irish emigra-
tion if it had been assisted and directed to our colonies
instead of betaking itself to the United States? Where
would Fenianism have been ? What will be the ultimate
effect if the whole emigration which is taking place every


day, and is likely to take place from Lancashire, goes to the
United States ?
These are questions of great national importance. The
result of the Irish emigration to America has been seen,
and its effects felt already, and what the result of the other
would be it is easy to foretell; and if the cotton trade goes,
the shipping or carrying trade must follow.
It is not too late now to avoid such disastrous results.
Money invested in the colonies fructifies very fast, and if
the difficulty is grappled with at once an immense profit
could doubtless be returned to those who have the foresight
and courage to take up the British colonies. To these
ideas a practical form, it is suggested that ah Association
should be at once established upon a wide basis, to be called,
say, “ The Association for promoting the Transfer of Labour
and the Settlement of Waste Lands,” to be registered as a
Joint Stock Company. This Association should have power
to purchase, hold, colonize, cultivate, lease, and sell lands in
any of the colonies, also to act as agents for the sale of
lands in the colonies; and also to enter into contracts with
individuals for labour, and with the Colonial Governments
and others for the supply of labour, to be paid for in land
or money; and to make advances for emigration purposes,
by way of loan, under guarantee of colonial governments
and otherwise.
The Association should also have all such powers as
would enable them to carry out all the incidentals of such
a programme, with power to establish branches or agencies
wherever necessary or desirable.
This Association, if formed only on a small scale at first,
with a view to future enlargement, would have a locus
standi, which the Committee do not possess, to open com-
munications with the Colonial Governments as regards lands
and labour; and also with merchants and others having
estates upon which labour is required; and with the Boards


of Guardians throughout the country, as to the unemployed
and destitute persons in their unions, and to ascertain to
what extent they would be prepared to contribute towards
the emigration of such persons; and the Association would
then he in a position to make a definite proposal to the
Government to assist by loan of transports in the transfer of
destitute persons to the places selected.
We have no doubt whatever that such a plan, if
promptly carried out, under proper management, would be
a great success, —not only in supplying one of the wants of
the age, but also as a source of profit to those who may
think fit to subscribe the necessary capital.
This Report was unanimously adopted
July 13th, 1869,
(Signed)
MANCHESTER,
Chairman.


APPENDIX.
COMMUNICATIONS RECEIVED FROM—
1. The Hon. Geo. Verdon, C. 8., Agent-General for Victoria,
Australia.
2. W. C. Mayne, Esq., Agent for the Colony of NevT South
Wales.
3. C. W. Ligar, Esq., Surveyor-General of the Colony of
Victoria.
4. Robert James Mann, Esq., M.D., F.R.S., &c., &c., &c.,
Special Immigration Commissioner of the Natal
Government.
5,6, 7. Enclosures sent by Dr. Mann.
8. J. Bergtheil, Esq., of Natal.
9. G. E. Breffit, Esq., Secretary of the Natal Land Company.
10. Captain Bedford Pim, R.N.
11. Alexander Macgregor, Esq., Secretary of the West
India Committee.
12. Col. F. C. Maude, R.A., C. 8., V.C., &c.. &c
13. R. D. B. Morier, Esq., C. 8., Charge d’ Affaires, Darmstadt.
14. William Freston, Esq.
15. J. H. Richardson, Esq.
16. Alfred Waddington, Esq., of British Columbia.
17. Extract from Captain Palliser’s Report on “The
Fertile Belt,” &c.
18. J. Bate, Esq., Secretary of the National Emigration
Aid Society.


1. Letterfrom the Hon. Georoe Verdon, C. 8., Agent-Generalfor
Victoria, Australia.
8, Victoria Chambers,
Victoria Street, S.W.,
29th June, 1869.
Dear Sir,
The only way known to me by which colonization may
be made self-supporting is by means of land and emigration com-
panies. In America, and in Canada, grants of land have been
made to associations upon the understanding that they make
railways and encourage settlement. By what is called the chequer
system of survey, which gives the blocks to the Company and the
Government alternately, the public is enabled to share the in-
creased value which accrues from the sale and settlement of the
allotments granted to the Company. The Company makes its
profits partly from rents, and partly from the increased value of
its lands which settlement and improvements produce.
I am, &c., &c.,
GEO. VERDON.
2. Letter from W. C. Mayne, Esq., Agent of the Government
of Neiv South Wales.
118, Cannon Street, E.C,,
London, 29th June, 1869.
Dear Sir,
In reply to your letter of the 23rd instant (not received
until yesterday), I have but to say that it appears to me impos-
sible, under practicable and just conditions, to make emigration
self-supporting,—utterly impossible to make it “profitable to
those investing capital therein.” Having regard to what may be
assumed as certain, that, even among the most carefully selected
emigrants, there would be some dishonest, some thriftless, some
incapacitated,—and that there will be some removed from life
during the voyage, or within periods more or less limited after
arrival, —it would, to avoid loss under conditions for repayment,
be necessary to leave a margin to cover such cases; and that
margin could be secured only by charging the honest, the indus-
trious, thrifty, capable, and surviving emigrants with a rate higher
than their cost to those investing capital in the business, —a course
not just, I submit, to those the most deserving. The profit of
emigrating must be looked for by the country sending forth the


emigrants in the relief afforded to itself by the removal of super-
abundant labour pressing on its resources, and by that receiving
them in the gain resulting to it from the supply of labour needed
to develope its resources.
I am, dear Sir,
Faithfully yours,
W. C. MAYNB,
Agent for the Colony of New
South Wales,
3, Letter from C. W. Ltgar, Esq., Surveyor-General of
Victoria, 4, Loyal Exchange Avenue, London r Gated
28th June, 1869,
In reply to your letter of the 22nd instant, I have to
state that as I have no plan by me, and there is not time to pre-
pare the necessary details, I should prefer dealing with general
principles, and avoid mentioning any particular colony in this
early stage of inejuiry.
As I understand the question, its object is to ascertain whether
action could be taken by the Committee to make itself a powerful
agent to equalize, as much as possible, the supply and demand of
the labour market between this country and the colonies, —at the
same time making that agency self-supporting, or even profitable.
Such a medium, I may say, has been long wanting. Hitherto
it has been customary to separate the efforts for the promotion of
emigration from actual colonization or occupation of land. It is
true that the end designed has been to bring the emigrant and
the land together; but the land has not been actually in the
hands of those who sent the emigrant forth. On his arrival in
the colony the connection has ceased, and the value his presence
has given to the land he has gone upon has been received by, and
benefited, those he has gone amongst, and has been in no shape
returned to those who sent him.
Before man touches the wilderness and starts it into life, its
value is merely nominal. If its value be set down at a few shil-
lings per acre by the Colonial Governments, it is because population
is expected, and there is a prospect of its being in demand. In-
trinsically, wild land has no value; but let people be brought near
it, and it instantly acquires a value. How does this come about ?
It is not the labour of the emigrant that causes it; for it occurs
before ho has turned a single sod. It is simply his presence
which makes it a marketable commodity. To whom, then, should


this increase in value really belong? To him who goes out, or to
those who enable him to go ? I consider it should be shared by
both; and it is one of these shares I propose the Committee
should receive to cover its expenses, and pay the investors a rea-
sonable rate of interest, and to provide for the ultimate return of
their capital.
To bring land and labour together must pay,—if both be of a
suitable kind. It pays those who go and those who remain. This
would be clearly seen if we could ask the colonists to return, or
request this country to resign its exports and imports to another
nation. The benefits are not confined to individuals, or to the
commercial portion of our Empire, for the State in its political
character shares in it, —as witnessed by the absence of revolution
and civil commotion. But, however promising an undertaking
may be, it must be conducted on sound principles to ensure
success. There must be no shifting of burdens from this country
to the colonies. Wherever people have become, from whatever
cause, unable to work, or so degraded that they cannot be made
to put forth their hands to labour, —there they should remain.
The institutions under which their present state has occurred
should alone be responsible. It should be borne in mind that it
is as much an element of non-success to bring good lands into
the hands of the idle and worthless as it is to offer bad land to
the industrious and strong.
As the Imperial Government has declined to apply to Par-
liament for a grant of money, and as private charity is nearly
exhausted, it will be necessary for the Committee to get itself
incorporated to raise funds by subscribed capital, or to promote
the formation of a Company for the purpose. The Committee or
Company could purchase lands from the Colonial Governments on
easier terms than could be done by private individuals. The dif-
ference would leave a handsome margin of profit when resold.
But to reap the full advantage of the presence of the people sent
out, only one-half of the land should be parted with at first, —by
reserving every other allotment. The value of the unsold parts
would soon arise, and furnish a very handsome profit,—enabling
the Committee or Company to pay interest in the way of divi-
dends, and meet all expenses. So great could the profit be made
that it would be necessary to fix a maximum rate of interest, in
order to prevent the Committee or Company from becoming solely
a commercial transaction, without reference to the public require-
ments and wants. The surplus profits above all expenses, and the
payment of this maximum rate of interest, should form a fund to
be again employed in the objects of colonization and emigration,
and devoted to nothing else. Lists of persons desirous of emi-
grating should be obtained, and the amount of money that the guar-


dians of the poor were willing to contribute be ascertained.
Communications with the Colonial Governments should be opened,
with the view of learning the extent of available land they are
willing to place under offer to the Committee or Company, the
price, and whether in cash or deferred payments.
A knowledge of such facts as these would enable every one to
judge as to the materials to work upon, and to see what capital is
required.
The first half of the land should be sold in England by auction,
with an undertaking that the proceeds should be expended in the
introduction of labourers and artizans, and their families; the
other half not to be sold until the emigrants had given it an
increased value. When the acquired blocks were large, there
would arise the necessity for town sites; and these could be sold
at high prices, in small building allotments, as soon as required.
The prices at which the land could be sold cannot at present be
named, as I propose they should vary with the original cost; but
that one uniform rate of profit should be charged alike for all the
colonies, based upon the price paid to the colony for the land.
Thus, while to the public there would be a varying rate per acre
charged according to the outlay, there would be one uniform per-
centage of gain to the Committee or Company.
This arrangement would prevent capricious action by the
Committee or Company, be intelligible to the public, command
confidence, and induce the Colonial Governments requiring popu-
lation to sell or part with the land on the most reasonable terms.
I can conceive nothing more probable than that a Committee
or Company, conducting business on broad and generous prin-
ciples, doing valuable services to the country, should draw towards
it, not only the sympathies of the people, but gain the support of
that Govei’nment aid now denied to objects of the kind.
I remain, Sir,
Your obedient, humble servant,
C. W. LIGAR.
4. Letter from Robert James Mann, Esq,, M.D., F.R.S.,
(£c,y die., Special Immigration Commissioner of the Natal Go-
vernment. :
15, Buckingham Street, Strand,
June 29th, 1869.
My dear Sir,
I have been for some years vei’y carefully considering
the question which your Committee is about further to open out, as
I have long seen that what is most needed to establish any large


and efficient measure of settling the waste lands of many of our
colonies in useful and productive occupation is to organize some
plan in which the entire arrangement shall be a matter of business
rather than of philanthropy.
The question of employment of emigrants in colonial fields of
industry as servants and labourers for wages is very narrow com-
pared with the question of enabling men of limited means to get
a living and provide for a family by the cultivation of waste land
by their own hands. In the first there will always be a compara-
tively narrow field of action, and fitful and uncertain success. In
the second, the field of action is without limit, and the success may
be made steady and sure.
Three things are essential, however, to this issue.
Ist. Means to transport needy men and their families to the
new field of industry.
2nd. Means to feed them there for a short period ranging
from 6 to 12 months.
3rd. An organization that will start them in the right way in
their new and unfamiliar operations.
I have no doubt whatever that the entire cost necessary for
these purposes would be fully and gratefully returned, under a
plan of due and careful selection of men bound to a system of
easy annual repayments; and that a further charge to cover any
incidental loss or uncertainty would also be borne.
The means to meet this outlay might certainly, in some in-
stances, be advantageously contributed by the colonies themselves
from their public revenue—a loan being, perhaps, in the first
instance raised, to be covered from the annual repayments of the
assisted settlers within some such period as 30 years. It would,
however, be quite possible, and certainly more fair and satis-
factory, that this loan should be contributed by the three parties
benefiting by the entire proceeding, namely:—lst, the colonial
communities ; 2nd, the mother country; and 3rd, settlers selected
for transport.
Good land must be conveyed in freehold to the settler in any
such arrangement, and it must be made the material guarantee
for the completion of the repayments required.
It would certainly be possible to find the necessary capital as
a mere commercial speculation, contemplating the profitable
investment of money. In this method of procedure the repay-
ments made by the settlers would have to be larger to cover the
value of the land and the interest of the capital. The returns,
however, would of necessity be slow in the first instance in
coming in. They could only begin with the growth of the
settlers’ means through their personal industry. This would,
probably, be the great difficulty.


I think both of these difficulties might be mot to some consi-
derable extent by material measures of assistance being contri-
buted by the Colonial Government.
Thus, at the present time, the Government of Natal has some
four millions of acres of Crown land available for the free settle-
ment of immigrants, and is giving allotments of this land to men
qualified to turn it to good account.
At the present time any man of assured good character, of
right qualifications, and with just enough means to support him-
self and his family until he is able to make the land yield him his
livelihood, receives a free grant of 50 acres of land in Natal, with
surrounding commonage. If he has £250 to work with, he
receives 100 acres, and has the use of 200 more acres, with right
of purchase for 5.?. an acre at the end of five years. If he has
£5OO, he receives a free grant of 200 acres, with a reserve of 400
acres for purchase within five years, for ss. an acre.
Natal possesses great advantages for settlement of this cha-
racter. Ist. A mild genial climate in which the rudest huts are
sufficient shelter at the first; in which much of the soil is very
fertile, and in which the principal season of growth is supplied
with abundant and certain rain. 2nd. A very large diversity of
production, ranging from the sugar, coffee, cotton, and silk of the
tropics to the dairy produce, cattle, horses, wool, and grain crops
of the temperate regions. 3rd. A considerable supply of very
cheap native labour. 4th. Most of the available land is in open
pasture, ready for the plough. sth. The actual necessaries of life
are very cheap.
But, on the other hand, the cost of the passage to Natal is
somewhat large. A man with his wife and a family of three
children cost about £6O to transport them to Natal, and about
another £6O to shelter them and to gire them a fair start to make
a maintenance from the land. A family of this character, whose
land is provided free, ought, therefore, to repay something like
£lO a year for a term of 12 years, in order to cover the charge of
transport and settlement in the colony.
The Natal Government, until very recently, has been contri-
buting two-thirds the cost of the passage of selected immigrants,
in addition to granting them free holdings of land. This contri-
bution has been temporarily suspended in consequence of the
recently depressed state of the public revenue, but the action will
certainly be resumed as soon as the revenue is again in a pros-
perous state, and most justifiably;—for if a loan of £50,000, which
would transport to and settle in the colony 500 families, com-
prising 2,500 individuals, wore taken up by the Government and
issued as a fund for the assistance of immigration, the yearly
charge for the loan would not exceed £3,000; —but the return to


the revenue from the addition of 2,500 prosperous and industrious
settlers would amount, upon the narrowest estimate, to between
£7,000 and £B,OOO per annum. The Colonial Government would
certainly contribute liberal assistance to any well considered
scheme directed to the introduction and settlement on the land of
immigrants of a satisfactory class.
An influential company which holds a very large tract of
excellent land in the colony of Natal has for some time been
making free grants of land in extension of the Government scheme
of immigration, under a plan which is expressed in a printed
memorandum enclosed. I append the copy of an offer which was
recently addressed to the Mayor of Portsmouth by this company
in illustration of the assistance that may be looked for in estab-
lishing any good scheme of industrial colonization upon the plan
of advances to be fully repaid by the recipients of the help. One
of the directors of this company some years back introduced over
200 Germans into Natal, and settled them upon the land at his
own cost. These people were almost exclusively weavers, and were
almost entirely destitute of means. They were placed in the colony
when its resources were very much below what they are at the
present time. Yet every family of those settlers is now possessed
of a good holding of land of its own, in many instances approxi-
mating to 200 acres, which has been purchased and entirely paid
for; and is now in a very much more prosperous condition than it
ever could have held without emigrating. I have myself frequently
visited the settlement of these people and satisfied myself of their
substantial prosperity and good prospects.
I am, my dear Sir,
Very truly yours,
ROBERT JAMES MANN, M.D.,
Special Immigration Commissioner of the
Natal Government.
5. Enclosure No. 1.
COLONY OF NATAL.—ASSISTED IMMIGRATION AND
FREE LAND GRANTS.
The Natal Land and Colonization Company, Limited,
Which possesses considerable tracts of valuable land, spread about
in nearly all parts of the colony, has now completed arrangements
which enable it to give small allotments of land and facilities for
securing passages to tho colony. The outline of these arrange-


merits is comprised in the following statement of the conditions
of these land grants :
1. Applicants must be familiar with farming operations and
the management of stock, and must be of good character. Alto-
gether unexceptionable evidence on these points must be fur-
nished.
2. Applicants must have sufficient means at command to com-
mence the cultivation of their land under the facilities afforded.
3. To applicants of this class, 100 acres of good average land
will be given.
4, The sum of £lO must be paid down on acceptance of the
application to secure a passage to the colony, and a note of hand
must also be given to make a further payment at the end of fifteen
months—
Of £7, if a passage by sailing ship is taken;
Or of £lO, if a passage by steam-ship is preferred.
Embarkation will be made by sailing ship at Gravesend,
and by steamer at Southampton or Plymouth, at the
option of the passenger.
In consideration of these payments, the use of an empty
barrack is also furnished on arrival at Durban, until
the arrangements for proceeding to the allotments
are complete.
5. Beyond this, the experienced agents of the Company will
give the best possible advice in selecting land from the various
sites available, in getting transport to the selected locality, in
hutting there, and in all other matters which may aid the settler
in commencing his operations. All actual cost of these pro-
ceedings must, however, of necessity be borne by the settler.
The influence of the Company will be exerted to guide the settler
in making his expenditure in the most prudent and advisable
way, and in guarding him from unnecessary and wasteful outlay.
6. The settler will have choice of a largo series of sites
offered for his selection by the surveyor of the Company, in Natal.
On some of these sites one allotment only will be made upon each
separate farm; on other sites arrangements will be effected to
locate several settlers together in close contiguity.
7. Each settler will be allowed, within one year of residence,
to take up a further holding of land in continuation of his grant,
to the extent of 200 other acres, upon condition of paying £lO
a year for twelve years—the whole land becoming his own pro-
perty on completion of the last payment.
8. All unavoidable charges for final conveyance of property to
the holder, and for exact surveys, must be borne by the immigrant.
In every case the land will, of necessity, be subject to the con-
ditions on which the original grant from the Crown was made.


9. Tho immigrant will have the option of taking 50 acres of
land instead of 100, and of purchasing 100 acres instead of 200,
by twelve yearly payments of £lO, in certain exceptionally
valuable situations.
10. The immigrant will also have the option of taking 25
acres of land, and of purchasing 50 acres of land, by twelve
yearly payments of .£lO, in coast districts, suitable for coffee
planting, and other tropical growths, if he prefer this to the
upland and more temperate situations, best adapted to general
farming.
11. The settler will be entirely free to give up the Company’s
land, and pursue any other course that may seem to him more
desirable, on the sole condition of his paying his note of hand
given to the Company.
12. Families are held to be especially desirable for settlers; but
they can only be accepted when the parents are able to bear the
entire charge of the passage for the children, as the cost of pas-
sage is so materially increased where many members of one
family have to be shipped. Two children under twelve years of
age are reckoned as a single adult in the matter of passages.
13. The Company contemplates using its influence and
position to complete a further organization for the encouragement
and help of settlers ; but some little time must elapse before this
object can be efficiently and satisfactorily carried out.
By order of the Board,
G. E. BREFFIT,
Secretary.
41, Threadneedle Street, London, E.C.
0. Enclosure No. 2.
Natal Land & Colonization Company Limited,
41, Threadneedle Street, E.C.
London, 22nd April, 1869.
Sir,
The important and patriotic work in which you are
engaged of endeavouring to open out a prosperous future for
portions of the dock-yard labourers who will be thrown out of
employment by tho contemplated reduction of the Government
establishments, suggests to my Board the propriety of addressing
you upon the subject, and of placing before you a plan by which
your object may be advanced, simultaneously with the bestowal
of a direct benefit upon a number of industrious and deserving
families, as well as on a young community that is eager for
accessions to its ranks.
Tho Natal Land and Colonization Company, in whoso name


this communication is made, is at this time engaged in settling
certain valuable lands belonging to it in the Colony of Natal upon
terms that are very advantageous to emigrants. The Company
would be willing, in order to assist in the effort which you are
making, to set aside an estate of 6,000 acres, well suited for the
purpose, and to give to families of assured good character, and
recommended by yourself, an allotment of fifty acres to each
family, and to attach a further portion of fifty acres to each grant,
to be purchased if desired by the holders at 10s. 6c?. per acre,
payable by easy instalments. The Company will also lay out a
village with reserved sites for a church, school, and other public
buildings in the close vicinity of the agricultural allotments, and
will give a village plot to any of the original settlers who desire
it, and who comply with the condition of residence and useful
occupation. The Company will further undertake, in tins case,
should the Colonial Government refuse to do so, to receive the
settler’s in the colony, to transport them to the estate on which
they are to be settled, to assist them in the selection of their allot-
ments, and to advance to them the means to obtain materials for
the erection of their dwellings, provisions, &c., and generally
assist them with aid and advice when required.
But, as it is not within the scope of this Company's arrangements
to incur outlay beyond the gift of land, means must be found to
cover the bare working cost of carrying out this arrangement.
Thus, the lowest estimate that can be made of the charge of
transporting say, 30 families, comprising 150 individuals, or say
120 statute adults, to Natal, would be £l2 10s. per statute adult,
or £1,600. Another sum of £1,500, reckoned as £5O for each family,
would cover the entire charge of reception, settlement upon the
land, and advances above referred to. Therefore £3,000 would be
sufficient for settling 30 families upon freehold land of their
own, in a genial climate, and with a soil yielding freely the most
important necessaries of life. But this sum, for various excellent
reasons that will almost suggest themselves, should not be placed
upon the ground of an actual expenditure. It should be treated
as a loan secured upon the land, and to be entirely repaid by the
settlers themselves by small annual instalments of £5 during
20 years. Such an advance of £3,000 might be well en-
trusted for expenditure to the Colonial Government here and in
the colony, who, in all probability, would undertake to recover the
amount by annual instalments and remit it home. Should they,
however, not be disposed to assist in this manner, this Company
will be prepared to do so.
It may, perhaps, be well hero to state that this proposal is, not
even at the present time, really a matter of experiment. The
experiment has been already tried, and has been attended with
eminent success. In the year 1847 one of the Directors of the


Company—at this time in London, and prepared to give his most
valuable assistance in organizing this arrangement —at his own
personal charge conveyed 37 families of poor weavers out of
employment, consisting of 234 individuals, from Bremen to Natal,
and settled them upon land in that colony, where, within 12
months from leaving Bremen, the whole were comfortably housed
and established. These people are now occupying the grants
originally made to them in the colony, in circumstances of in-
creasing prosperity. The settlement is familiarly and favorably
known as New Germany, and its chief village bears the name of
the gentleman alluded to, who was its virtual and responsible
founder.
It is just possible that the final form of this arrangement
might be one in which the sum available for the transport and
settlement of the families could be made a kind of fixed and per-
manent emigration fund, to be turned over and over again, as
repayments come in, in sending out fresh families. This certainly
appears to me to be the most desirable plan that could be adopted,
and nothing could be more easy than to secure the certainty that
the money should be applied so as to insure the largest prac-
ticable and most economical results.
As this matter is one which has an immediate bearing upon a
large public interest, and some relation to questions of a charitable
and parochial nature which are being anxiously mooted at this
present time, it is proposed, if it meet with your sanction, to
request the Editor of the “ Times ” to print a copy of this commu-
nication in the columns of his Journal.
I have the honor to be,
Your obedient servant,
(Signed) G. E. BEEEEIT,
Secretary.
The Mayor of Portsmouth.
7. Enclosure No. 3.
15, Buckingham Street, Strand,
June 30, 1869,
My dear Sir,
Since writing to you yesterday, I have seen the gen-
tleman to whom I alluded as having sent the large party of
German settlers out to Natal, and he authorizes me to say that he
is confident that proper persons may be sent out to the colonies
altogether as a piece of profitable commercial business; and that
he will at any time be prepared to place his own somewhat large


experience in the matter, and all the exact information he pos-
sesses, at the command of your Committee.
Believe me,
Very truly yours,
J. Bate, Esq. EGBERT JAMES MANN.
8. Letter from Jonas Bergtheil, Esq., late Member for the
City of Pieter mar itzburgh in the Legislative Council, Natal,
and for many years a Member of the Government Emigration
Board, Natal.
48, Clifton Gardens,
12th July, 1869.
Dear Sir,
Time is too short to allow my contributing anything
in the shape of a letter towards your conference, but enclosed I
forward you a sketch on emigration, written by me some time ago,
then intended for publication, but has never been published.
I also send you a letter, on the same subject, addressed by
myself to the Natal Government Agent in London. I have not
the reply at hand, but it was extremely favourable. You can
make what use you like of these documents, and assuring you that
I shall always be happy to assist in the object you have in view.
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
W. Freston, Esq. J. BERGTHEIL.
Ba. Enclosure No. 1.
Contributed by J. Bergtheil, Esq., of Natal.
EMIGRATION TO THE COLONIES.
The subject of assisted emigration is one which is at last
forcing itself upon the attention of the British public, and
which, it is obvious, will also at last force itself upon the serious
attention of the British Government. In the meantime, it may
prove helpful to the good work if one who has had a somewhat
large experience of his own in this particular field asks some
public attention to the views that he has been led to form, and to
the suggestions that he is now able to submit from this vantage-
ground.
The author, as far back as the year 1847, selected some forty-
seven German families and transported them to the colony of
Natal, and settled them there. These families were all very poor,
and comprised some 237 souls, —including men, women, and
children. The heads of the families were principally weavers;


and the whole party had to bo settled in a colony which was at
that time newly established, and which, therefore, afforded but
small facilities for furnishing remunerative occupation for poor
men. The party was finally settled and provided for, principally
at the personal cost of the writer.
The actual position of these people twelve months after their
arrival in the colony is very graphically and truthfully described
in the published accounts which are appended to this paper.
Their condition of general prosperity was pretty much the same
three years ago, when the writer left the colony for a visit to
England. There were at that time two eminently prosperous
and happy settlements, which had sprung from the original one.
Of these, one, of which the central village, comprising a church
and school, bears the writer’s name, was called New Germany;
the other is designated New Hanover. Under these names, they
are familiarly and favourably known to all who have a personal
acquaintance with the young colony.
Since the original foundation of these successful settlements,
the author has continued to take a lively interest in the subject
of emigration. As the member for the capital city of the colony
in the Legislative Council, and as a member of the Government
Emigration Board, he has been able to give careful study to the
subject from a colonial point of view; and during the last three
years ho has had occasion, as a director of the Natal Land and
Colonization Company, no less carefully to consider the difficulties
which are incidental to it from this side of the Great Ocean.
All efforts of the wealthier classes in Great Britain to encou-
rage emigration have been principally caused and stimulated by
the unpleasant fact that they find amongst themselves a large,
poverty-stricken, and therefore wretched and discontented, popu-
lation, —many, and indeed most of them, unemployed artizans.
The parish authorities are led to entertain a favourable regard
for emigration because it is an important and unquestionable part
of their general duty to forward whatever promises to relieve the
pressure upon the workhouses and to reduce the poor-rates.
Philanthropists favour emigration, because they know that by it
they improve the position and prospects of a considerable number
of their fellow-beings. For these several reasons it is that public
meetings for fostering emigration are reported pretty well every
day, and that public sympathy is continually appealed to to raise
funds that are adequate for the transport of considerable numbers
of the poor out of England to now fields of enterprize and
industry.
The colonies generally contribute, more or less, towards the
cost of procuring and transporting emigrants; and, in some in-
stances, compete with each other in bidding for them. But very
few of the colonies are really prepared to receive any material


number of the class which the British Islands are most interested
in sending away. Poor people themselves are also not ready or
anxious to emigrate until absolute necessity impels them to do so.
The main reason for this is the fact that no efficient system of
emigratiou, upon the most acceptable principle, has ever yet been
entered upon. Industrious poor men, of good principle, shrink
from the thought of making application to any charitable source
of aid to emigrate, just as they shrink from seeking assistance
from an union. They very naturally feel that their having been
the objects of “assisted emigration,” in the ordinary sense, would
compromise their character for independence on their arrival in
any colony, and stick to them through their future career very
unpleasantly and undesirably.
Colonists, on their part, do not desire to have a large number
of poor people, for whom they are not able to find remunerative
employment, thrown upon their hands. What they especially
want, and welcome, is not such men as England is most anxious
to expatriate, but men with some little capital at their command.
From the author’s now somewhat lengthened experience in the
practical working of emigration, he has arrived at the conviction
that he is now in a position to indicate certain things which are
essential to make emigration a welcome subject of thought to the
class which can be best spared from the home community, and
an established and permanent operation in the colonial depend-
encies.
Ist. It is matter of the utmost importance that the emigrant
should be enabled to apply for his passage and land, not as an
affair of charity but as an affair of right, and as a thorough
business transaction which contemplates that every penny of
cost that shall be incurred on his account shall be a debt to be
repaid in full, with proper interest for the money employed.
2ndly. The emigrant should be authorized to anticipate finding
his future life, not an existence of toil as a dependent labourer,
but a sphere of independent industry, in which he has before him
the certain prize of at least a small freehold, with a comfortable
cottage, which he can claim as his own.
3rdly. The settlement of the emigrant upon these terms of
independence must be managed in such a way that the colonists
are conscious he is brought as a recruit to their community with
sufficient means to enable him certainly to accomplish his settle-
ment and to hold his own until he has extracted the wherewithal
for the sustenance of himself and his family from the ground.
Under such circumstances only can the colonial communities feel
willing to welcome any number of immigrants that can be sent to
them from the home field.
Now these essential conditions might be readily and certainly
ensured by the conjoint action of the two parties that will imme-


diately find advantage in the transaction, namely the Home and
the Colonial Governments. Thus, for instance, the Natal Govern-
ment at this present time is making a free gift of 50 acres of good
land, with right of purchase of 100 other contiguous acres at a
very moderate price, within a reasonable and convenient term, to
any settler possessed of some £IOO of capital. Now an emigrant
with a wife and three children could be settled upon this land by
a present outlay of £SO for transport, and £6O for first necessary
expenditure, until the land is brought into yielding a sustenance.
Therefore, the sum of £IOO,OOO would send out and comfortably
settle and start one thousand such families.
It would cost the Natal Government to raise this necessary
capital of £lOO,OOO in the London market about £6 per cent., or
£6,000 annually. But with the sub-guarantee of the Home Go-
vernment—or, failing their co-operation, of any constituted
parochial authorities interested in the scheme—the sum could
assuredly be raised for £4 per cent., or £4,000 annual payments.
Any immigrant to whom the contemplated settlement was
secured, would find no difficulty whatever in repaying £4 per
annum to the Colonial Government, which might remain as a
charge upon his property until the full amount of his responsibility
was met; and it is obvious that under such an arrangement his
yearly contributions to the direct and indirect taxes of the State
would more than suffice to create a sinking fund ample for the
final extinction of the loan.
The system thus briefly sketched could be expanded to any
extent that might be deemed desirable and warranted by circum-
stances, literally without cost to any one, without any appeal to
public charity, and without any possible inconvenience or charge
to colonial communities.
If the Home and Colonial Governments, after proper consi-
deration, prove to be too timid or too supine to take up the
necessary action to secure this most desirable result, there is no
reason on earth why it should not be efficiently and advantageously
accomplished without their action by the combined influence and
consent of private companies and parochial authorities.
The Natal Land and Colonization Company is, at this very
instant, offering a free grant of 100 acres of valuable land in the
colony of Natal, with some material assistance towards the charge
of passage, to immigrants capable of paying £lO towards the cost
of the passage, and capable of finding £SO to bear the necessary
expenditure incident to the first start in colonial life.
Now if the Natal Land and Colonization Company, which has
made this important preliminary movement toward a healthy
system of colonization were to raise a special emigration fund of
£IOO.OOO, under the conjoint guarantee of their own credit and


that of some co-operating parochial authority, they could send to
Natal and comfortably settle there as independent and prosperous
colonists one thousand families, such as have been alluded to, and
this might be done under an arrangement which would provide
that the settlers thus benefited should themselves bear the entire
cost and clear it off by twenty annual instalments of repayment.
If, in the first instance, this money under the combined security
were borrowed at the charge of £5 per cent, annual interest, and
£5 per cent, as a sinking fund, the first annual charge would be
£IO,OOO, the second annual charge £9,750, the third annual
charge £9,500, and so on for ensuing years, at a like rate of
diminution.
(Signed) JONAS BERGTHEIL,
Late Member of the Legislative Council
in Natal, and Director of the Natal
Land and Colonization Company,
Bb. Enclosure No. 2. Letter of Mr. Bergthiel to Dr. Mann.
EMIGRATION FROM GERMANY.
Dear Sir,
It is admitted on all hands that Natal is sadly in want
of emigrants.
When I first arrived here I was very sanguine that a sufficient
number might be had from England, Scotland, or Ireland, but, I
confess, I begin somewhat to despair. Germany, on the other hand,
offers every facility for getting a good class of emigrants suitable
foxvjthe requirements of Natal, who are, from their habits, pecu-
liarly adapted for establishing central points.
I am drawing your attention to German emigration, not because
they are a better class of emigrants than the English or Scotch,
—quite the contrary,—but I am afraid Natal cannot afford to
introduce Englishmen whose wants far exceed those of the Ger-
mans. One is as hard working as the other, but the food on
which one would thrive the other would starve. The Germans
thoroughly understand the system of small farming; they live in
communities ; all are trained to bear arms; and are easy subjects
to control. The two latter qualifications are particularly advan-
tageous to a colony like Natal. Another great advantage in Ger-
man emigrants is, that they assist one another.
I am fully convinced that four or five settlements, similar to
the one I established in 1848 near Pine Town, with whose history,
progress, and present position you are well acquainted, would
prove a great boon to the colony.


I would propose that the colony should be allowed to issue,
as an experiment, say £4,000 Debenture Bonds, bearing interest
at 6 per cent. For this sum about 200 adult emigrants—about the
same number that I took out with me in 1848—could be intro-
duced and settled. I propose that each adult should receive, on
his arrival, alternate grants of land of 100 acres, at 10s. per acre,
as also 1 acre of land somewhere in a convenient spot in the
settlement where a church and school could be provided in the
neighbourhood. The expense to Government would be as
follows:
£ s. d.
Passage money for 200 adults, at £l4 . 2800 0 0
Expense of temporary dwellings, forwarding
to settlement, &c., at £6 per head . 1200 0 0
t Total, being £2O per head . .£4OOO 0 O
The emigrant, immediately on receipt of his title, to pass a
mortgage on the land to Government for £6O, being 10s. per acre
for 100 acres, payable as follow:
At the end of the first year ... 1
„ „ second „ . . . 2
„ „ third „ . . . 3
„ ' „ fourth „ . . . 4
n n fifth „ . . .10
„ „ sixth „ . . .15
„ „ seventh „ . . .16
This would repay the Government capital and interest, leaving
a handsome balance for the payment of land, independent of indirect
taxes and prices obtained for intermediate lots by Government.
Your experience in the colony will have shown you that, at all
events, the children of these German emigrants become, as a
general rule, useful and loyal English subjects.
The knowledge of the success of the German settlement by the
Berlin Missionary Society would greatly facilitate this operation.
This is only roughly my idea. If you think anything of it,
will you favour me with a few lines, and I will enter more fully
on the subject.
The annexed sketch will show you how the plan would work.
I am, my dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
To Dr. R. J. Mann, J. BERGTHEIL.
Government Emigration Agent for Natal.


Sketch.
X s. d.
4000 0 0
240 0 0
Government Debentures .
Interest to end of first year
4240 0 0
200 0 0
First year’s payment by emigrants
4040 0 0
242 0 0
Interest, second year
4282 0 0
400 0 0
Second year’s payment
3882 0 0
Interest, third year . . . 232 0 0
4114 0 0
GOO 0 0
Third year’s payment
3514 O 0
211 0 0
Interest, fourth year
3726 0 0
800 0 0
Fourth year’s payment
Interest, fifth year . . . 175 10 0
Fifth year’s payment
Interest, sixth year . . . 66 0 0
Sixth year’s payment
Seventh ditto
Leaving a balance of £4833 10 0
in favour of Government, or payment of 20,000 acres of land
nearly 6s. per acre.


Bc. Enclosure No. 3, forwarded hij Mr. Bergtheil.
THE GERMAN SETTLEMENTS IN NATAL.
Abridged from the Natal Witness of 15 th December, 1848.
In the year 1847, shortly after the establishment of British
rule in Port Natal, Mr. Bergtheil, like many new comers
engaged in business, became the proprietor of the farms Grant-
skloof, Claremont, and West Villa.
With a fertile tract of country, covering upwards of 15,000
acres of land, which nature had not only eminently adapted for
agricultural purposes, but as it were multiplied in quantity by
incessant gentle undulations, it occurred to Mr. Bergtheil
that a plan might be devised, by the introduction of emigrants
from his own country, of turning the property to good account
in every way, instead of allowing it to be idle, as nearly all the
remainder of the colony is at this date. The execution of this
plan involved considerable risk and outlay, to say nothing of
difficulties, which are often greater in prospective uncertainty
than in present reality.
The first risk and outlay having been ventured in the early
part of 1847, Mr. Bergtheil proceeded to Germany for the purpose
of obtaining suitable emigrants for carrying out his plans. Here
his principal difficulty was not any unwillingness on the part of
emigrants to leave their homes, but the perfect ignorance that
prevailed respecting the country to which it was proposed to
take them, and the prejudices and fears engendered by that
ignorance.
With the assistance, however, of Ernest Suffert, Esq., of
Bremen, who is interested in the establishment, Mr. Bergtheil
succeeded in obtaining thirty-five families, including upwards
of two hundred children and adults. The persons engaged were
country mechanics. No unmarried persons were taken except
members of the families. This point was very judiciously insisted
on, as it was considered unnatural to expect unmarried men
without the comforts of home or the ties of kindred about them
to settle down contentedly in a foreign land.
With a view of diffusing information respecting this colony,
M. Bergtheil having failed in procuring a sketch of the country
and its capabilities, published a pamphlet composed of extracts
of articles, letters, and government notices from this paper,
together with a small map kindly furnished by Dr. Stranger, the
Surveyor-General.
The preliminaries having been so far settled to the satis-


faction of all parties, the “ Bertha” was chartered for the
conveyance of the emigrants, who left Bremen Haven on the
19th of November, 1847.
Here, then, were about two hundred souls to be housed, fed>
and, what is far more difficult, comforted and satisfied under the
recollections of home, and the gloomy aspect with uncertainty,
which an ignorance or misapprehension of the character of their
new residence were calculated to impart.
Unfortunately Mr. Bergtheil, who was the main-spring of the
whole machinery, depended upon his friend, resident at Natal,
for making the necessary arrangements for the location of the
families, and had neglected to be present at this particular
juncture. Hearing, however, on reaching Cape Town from
Europe, very unfavourable reports as to the conduct of some of
the emigrants, Mr. Bergtheil proceeded forthwith to superintend
personally the working out of his plan.
On his arrival he found everything at a standstill, and the people
living of course at considerable expense, and what was far worse
and very dangerous to the undertaking, in a state of comparative
idleness; as not having been placed on their respective allot-
ments, or properly supplied with draught-cattle, the purchase of
which had been injudiciously neglected previously to their coming,
their agricultural operations were delayed, and a season almost it
not quite lost.
Allowing four months for the passage, one month for delay,
owing to the absence of Mr. Bergtheil, and one month for
measuring and selecting the several allotments, during which
last we must also include the erection of some kind of buildings—
we leave the history of this settlement for the period of six
months, and introduce the reader to the emigrant on the day
twelvemonth after his embarking for Natal.
Turning off the road to the left as you ride from Pieter-
maritzburg to D’Urban, about 14 miles from the latter town,
you see small droves of cattle, including generally a span of oxen
and a couple of milch cows. As you ascend the first undulation
the homesteads of one or two of the emigrants meet the view.
On your way to the centre station, called the “ pakhuis,”
the little farms appear in every direction. From some of the
elevations about half-a-dozen may be seen at once, most
romantically situated as regards beauty of scenery. All that we
passed had houses with glazed windows, or sashes ready for
glazing, and appeared to contain at least three apartments,—a
temporary out-kitchen is generally a feature in the establishment.
Near the house stands the cattle krall, and round the dwelling
the garden carefully laid out and well stocked with vegetables,
indicating taste, industry and contentment. Besides this, there


is on each property a considerable pumber of acres under
cultivation. In some instances fencing was commenced, and the
garden ground was generally enclosed, although the extent to
which it appeared the emigrants proposed carrying on their
ploughing, rendered the practicability of enclosing very doubtful,
at least at present. We may remark, here, that the planting
of mealies (Indian corn), &c., is not only necessary for ensuring
supplies, but prepares the ground for cotton.
At one house we alighted, and found the husbandmen busy with
the Kaffirs at work in the field. Mr, Bergtheil being the esquire
of the estate, was welcomed in the most cordial manner by the
gude wife, who placed some wholesome refreshments before her
guests with an air of cheerfulness, not so seen described in any of
the countenances delineated in the “Illustrated London News,”
in representation of continental strife.
The repast consisted of homemade bread and homemade
butter. Exulting in the fertility of his little farm, the tenant
showed his garden well stocked with beans of various kinds,
potatoes and other vegetables—the produce of seed brought from
Germany and planted as an experiment. The ploughed land had
been sowed, —one field with oats, another with barley, another
with mealies, with patches of beans and potatoes where the seed
which was not obtainable at the time had run short. The
children of the family were all in health and no traces of sickness
or sorrow appeared.
On our road from this, one of the outermost stations, we passed
others seemingly tenanted by more careful people, who took
greater pride and more pains to improve their homesteads;
these, however, appeared to enjoy the advantage of the assis-
tance of one or two strapping sons.
After about half-an-hour’s ride through the locations, the
beacons of which, marked and numbered, gave an appearance of
civilization in this unfortunately unmeasured country, we arrived
at the principal station.
This establishment includes a comfortable dwelling, with
sufficient apartments for the accommodation of the manager,
with whom resides the amiable and zealous minister and the
doctor, all Germans, of pleasant manners, and admirably well
selected for promoting harmony and order on the estate; attached
to the dwelling is the “ pakhuis,” where supplies are issued as
required by the emigrants.
Owing to a rumoured invasion of the colony by the Zulus
current at the time of our visit, the emigrants had assembled at
the pakhuis and thrown up a palisade with a moat that may serve
as a rendezvous and place of defence should danger ever occur.
The promptitude with which these arrangements were devised


and carried out is highly creditable. Pietermaritzburg, after all
its public meetings, resolutions, and committees of safety appointed
during the last three years, has nothing to compare to the German
laager. His Honor, the Lieutenant-Governor having appointed
Mr. Bergtheil Captain of his own men, the order of enrolment had
been so efficiently attended to that on our arrival prior to the
receipt of the paper containing the Government notice autho-
rizing the formation of the corps, a list had been taken of those
able to bear arras, and showing also the number who had been in
military service, battles, &c., and also those qualified to form a
band if required.
Among the civil arrangements we must not omit to notice
that a schoolmaster is also provided, for whom a schoolroom and
apartment are in course of erection. At present the children
meet daily in the new chapel for instruction.
At present Caffres have been secured at the rate of ss. a month,
while mealies are scarce. From so cursory a visit it is not com-
petent for us to detail more fully all the obstacles to be encoun-
tered ; but the impression made is so favorable to the enlightened
enterprise of the projectors of this settlement that we do not
begrudge the unexpected amount of space it has consumed. One
discouragement, however, we must not omit. To the discredit of
the English name, we must say that it was not the contagion of
heathenism that sent its pestiferous influence to break the peace,
order, and prosperity of this well-organized colony, but the bad
example of our own countrymen, whose public desecration of the
Sabbath, &c., was calculated to inflict irreparable injury on the
moral characters of some of the weaker emigrants.
Space compels us to be as brief as possible in our description
of the most creditable arrangements on the estate.
The day after wo arrived was the Sabbath. It was the anni-
versary of the embarkation of the emigrants. The large bell sent
its airy summonses, to be repeated in echoes through the sur-
rounding dells. Just as the country peasantry in England are
seen flocking from their happy homesteads, so the Germans with
their children in decent attire were seen repairing to the central
station. The new chapel was to be opened, and the Hon. W.
Field, with several of the inhabitants of D’Urban attended on the
occasion. At the appointed hour, the Rev. Mr. Posselt proceeded
to the new place of worship erected within the last six months,
and finished and decorated with simple garlands of flowers by the
children in a style highly beautiful and commendatory.
The Superintendent and family were also present. The new
seraphine added to the solemnity and harmony of the service.
Mr. Posselt delivered an affectionate and impressive sermon from
the words, “ If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget


her cunning.” He referred, with touching eloquence, to the circum-
stances of the Jews, as described in the exquisitely beautiful psalm
in which the text occurs, showed the happiness his hearers enjoyed
even in their foreign homes, of not only being free from the per-
secutor’s arm and scoffer’s taunt, but provided with every facility
for repairing to the Zion they were that day founding. We regret
being compelled to break off the outline.
At the close of the service the emigrants assembled round Mr.
Bergtheil to express their happiness at the arrangements that had
been made, and to congratulate him on his birthday. This last
expression of esteem was conveyed by several of the little girls,
surprising Mr. B. by crowning him with laurels to which was
attached some original congratulatory verses.
We must not forget the collection. After service there Avas a
collection—of friends who had honoured the occasion by coming
from D'Urban —who collected to partake of a hospitable dinner.
Mr. Posselt being at one end of the table, and the day not being
suitable for congratulatory speeches, the decorum which forbade
the expression of what was due is the apology for the neglect.
After the German service the native congregation assembled
for public worship. Most of these wore European clothing.
Thus upwards of 15,000 acres of waste land have been turned
to account, and instead of joining the poverty-stricken rabble of
European mobs, these people are happy.
9. Letter from G. E. Beeffit, Esq., Secretary of Natal Land and
Colonization Company, Limited.
41, Threadneedle Street, E.C.,
London,
6th July, 1869.
Wm. Preston, Esq.,
1, Maida Yale, W.
My dear Sir,
I have the pleasure of acknowledging receipt of your
letter of yesterday, and, in reply, beg to state that, although
I have not had an opportunity of consulting my Directors on the
subject, I have no hesitation in at once answering the question
put to me in the first part of your letter in the affirmative,
that is to say, that this Company will bo prepared to repeat to
your Committee the offer we made to the Mayor of Portsmouth,
referred to by you, for another sot of emigrants.
With regard to the other point named by you, as to whether
this Company would be willing to guarantee the repayment of


certain advances under the circumstances which you suggest,
it is a question if, under their powers, the Directors would be
in a position to undertake to do this without obtaining the special
authority and sanction of their shareholders in General Meeting
for that purpose. I shall, however, have much pleasure in sub-
mitting this point to my Directors, and, without anticipating
any decision they may arrive at regarding it, can only at present
say, that that, and any other proposition which your Committee
may suggest to us, will always be dealt with in the most liberal
spirit by this Company.
I am,
My dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
G. E. BREFFIT,
Secretary.
10. Letter of Captain Bedford Pim, R.N.
4, Westminster Chambers,
Victoria Street, S.W.,
-29th June, 1869.
His Grace the Duke of Manchester,
&c., &c., &c.,
Chairman, Committee of Emigration,
16, Northumberland Street,
Strand, W.C.
My Lord Duke,
As I may possibly be prevented attending the Committee
Meeting next Wednesday, I beg to forward to your Grace, in
writing, the few remarks I proposed to make at that Meeting.
Emigrants may be divided into two classes, viz., —those capable
either wholly or partially of helping themselves ; and those
entirely destitute.
The only means of dealing with the former, in the hope of
diverting them from emigrating to a country where they speedily
become England-haters, is to reduce the passage money to our
colonies to less than at present rules to the United States, and to
make the Colonial Homestead Law at least equally favourable
with that of the American States.
The emigration of the latter involves a free passage, and
work in their new home on arrival. With this class, and this
class only, I now propose to deal.
The first great question is, what part of the world is best
fitted to receive those of our destitute labouring population ready


and willing to emigrate. I answer the Cape of Good Hope,
Brazils, or the West Indies; but I propose to confine myself
exclusively to the West Indies, because it is accessible and
adapted to receive our destitute population, and because I happen
to have gained more colonial} experience there than elsewhere;
while at our late conference I remarked that no gentleman pre-
sent seemed to have any practical acquaintance with this most
beautiful portion of our colonial empire.
As regards accessibility, I may mention that the average
length of passage to St. Thomas is about the same as that to
Quebec, As regards the climate, I know of no part where the
heat is too great for white labour; indeed all statistics go to
prove that [the average duration of the white man’s life is cer-
tainly not less than that of the inhabitants of any other country
under the sun; while, perhaps, the hardest labour in the world,
namely, stoking on board a steamer in the tropics, falls entirely
to the lot of white men. The heavy labour of the Irishman,
competing with the Negro on the Levee, at New Orleans, where
he has not only heat but a virulent form of yellow fever to
contend with, may also be instanced ; while, at the same time, it
must not be forgotten that the original planters were mainly
enabled to cultivate their plantations by the introduction of lads
kidnapped from the north of England and Scotland, many of the
descendants of whom are now to be found scattered over the
islands as landowners and men of mark.
These are important facts as tending to dissipate the bugbear,
that a white man cannot labour in the tropics ; and, in the case of
the destitute emigrant especially important,—indeed a warm
climate is entirely in his favour, —inasmuch as all the necessaries
of life are much more easily raised, and the wants of civilization
reduced to a minimum ; so that the emigrant’s constitution, more
or less debilitated by under feeding and previous habits of life,
will not be overtasked in the effort to make a living for himself
and family, which would not be the case, for example, of the man
sent to Canada, and exposed for six months out of the year to all
the rigours of an arctic winter.
Having shown that the West Indies can be used as a field for
emigration, both as regards its accessibility and climate, I will
now point out the advantages it offers as a labour market to the
destitute emigrant, where he can be secure of housing and feeding
his family, and, if sober and industrious, of accumulating a little
property.
Labour is in great demand all over the West Indies, while
there is a superabundance of land ready for occupation directly
the labourer has proved his fitness to become a colonist.
Thus in Jamaica alone, in spite of the complicated and cumber-


some immigration laws, about 1,000 Coolies a year are imported.
These Coolies are paid Is. per day and their rations, while they
are only required to work a very short time each day, certainly
not more than an emigrant of the class I am speaking of should
be capable of working.
Taking all the West Indian Islands and British Guiana, the
planters could probably absorb at least 10,000 of the very poorest
of our population per annum, but the utmost they would require
could bo readily ascertained from the various West Indian
agencies and firms in London, Liverpool, Bristol, &c.
I would propose that the men be hired for three years, and be
allowed to take out their families; at the end of that time each
man who had strictly fulfilled the terms of his engagement
should have a freehold of 20 acres granted as a bonus. To show
what a boon this would be, not only to the settler, but to the
community amongst whom he was located, I will instance the
amount of population in the three well known places, showing the
room for an expansion of the population. For instance, Guiana
has only 2 inhabitants to the square mile, Trinidad 48, and
Jamaica, one of the oldest of our colonies, 70; while from the
last report it appears that more than a third of the total acreage
of even Jamaica, the most thickly peopled, is available for
the purpose I have sketched out above.
I would, therefore, suggest that a circular be addressed to
all those firms interested in the commerce, enterprise, and well-
fare of the West Indies, making the fullest enquiries respecting
the amount of labour required, the wages, rations, and hours
of working, and the housing of the families on arrival.
I now come to the question of transport, and here I feel
strongly how easily the surplus line-of-battle ships, now rotting
away in our harbours, could be turned into safe and commodious
transports. By taking the guns out; by reducing the crew to say
50; by working the service economically; Ido not hesitate to
say that a squadron of five of these vessels, tested experimentally
for one year, would not even be felt in the navy estimates, whilst
the boon it would confer on givers and receivers is simply in-
calculable. In fact, this matter is at the bottom of the whole
question, and should be perseveringly followed up until the force
of public opinion compels the Government to form an Emigration
Transport Department.
But, in the meantime, while senatorial wisdom continues to
confine itself “to building a monument of blue books in proof of
the impractical nature of English statesmanship,” something
must be done to alleviate the misery of our destitute population,
and this may be effected by the Guardians of the Poor, who,
authorized by the Poor Law Board, should be empowered to pay


the passage money of each statute adult to Guiana, or the island
of his choice, the sole condition being, that his removal to a new
field at the expense of his parish shall absolve that parish from
any further outlay on his behalf.
I feel confident that a great opportunity now offers, both
to invigorate the commerce, the industry, and the population
of our West Indian possessions, and to provide employment for
a class of our people reduced to a state of destitution through
no fault of their own, but who, stimulated by the suffering and
privation they have lately endured, may, in an entirely new sphere
of life, surrounded by a beauty of nature they cannot even
imagine in their present surroundings of squalid misery, begin
a career honourable and lucrative to themselves, highly beneficial
to their adopted country, and conducive to the best interests
of the land of their birth.
In reply to the question, Can emigration be made self-sup-
porting, or even profitable to those who invest their money in
such an enterprise ? I answer, that in the case of our destitute
population, it is the bounden duty of our Government, through
the Colonial Department, to ascertain if work is to be found
in its colonies on the failure of employment at home; through
the Poor Law Board to select carefully and scrupulously those
fitted for the labour before them; and, through the Admiralty,
to see that our fellow-countrymen are conveyed to their desti-
nation in a decent and respectable manner. But, should it bo
found, after every exertion has been made to arouse the autho-
rities to a sense of duty, that no practical response can be
obtained, then I hold that a well considered plan of emigration to
the West Indies can be made, not only self-supporting, but
profitable, by taking a *bond from the emigrant for the due re-
payment of his passage money and expenses, with the addition
of a fair interest on the advance.
I need scarcely say that, looking to the necessity of shortening
this letter as much as possible, it has been quite out of my power
to go into details, but it will afford me real pleasure to amplify
any of the foregoing suggestions so as to make the scheme I
propose of practical benefit to the nation; and I would propose
that, in drafting the result of our late conference, the suggestions
of each contributor should be embodied under the heading of
that section or part to which he has given the most attention,
as Australia, New Zealand, Cape of Good Hope, West Indies,
«fec., &c. By this means nothing will be lost, and from the most
unexpected quarter some good may be obtained.
I am, my Lord Duke,
Yours obediently,
BEDFORD P. PIM,
Captain Royal Navy.


11. Letter from A. Macgregor, Esq., Secretary of the West
India Committee.
West India Committee Rooms,
Walbrook House, July 9, 1869.
Dear Sir,
I was duly favoured with your note of the sth instant,
which I have communicated to several extensive West India pro-
prietors. They are, without exception, of opinion that English
labourers cannot be made available in the West Indies. No
arrangement with any of them is possible The only immigrants
who have proved efficient are Indian coolies. Chinese, and Portu-
guese from Madeira.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
A. MACGREGOR.
Wm. Frbston, Esq.,
1, Maida Yale, W.
13. Colonel F. C. Maude, R.A., Y. 0., C. 8., says as
follows :—
Sir Charles Wentworth Dilke, in his work, “Greater Britain,”
Yol. 11., p. 116, says:—“lt is impossible not to see that the
success of South Australia is but another instance of the triumph
of small proprietors, of whom there are now some 7,000 or 8,000
in the colony.” Yet he says, p. 117, “ . . . . Adelaide is so distant
from Eui'ope that no emigrants come of themselves.” .... He
attributes the success of the colony, therefore, “to the adoption
of the Wakefield land system,” the principle of which is to assist
immigration, and which has in an incredibly short time rendered
South Australia the granary of the Antipodes.
To similar causes may be attributed the rapid and extraor-
dinary increase in the prosperity of portions of the colonies of
New Zealand, Australasia, and Canada, &c.
But it is evident that our colonies have of late years alienated
so much of their land, and received so much of the surplus popu-
lation of the world, as to have become comparatively independent
of both these sources of wealth; and, although we may consider
that their increased prosperity will in future mainly depend upon
the wisdom and liberality with which their several Governments
may continue to alienate their land and attract the population of
other countries, yet it is evident that the power which is wielded
by the wage-paid class in the colonies at present operates to


•prevent any overtures being made from the Colonial Governments,
or assistance from the Colonial Funds, to the surplus population
of Great Britain.
But it is becoming, and will doubtless continue to be, an
Imperial necessity for us to provide an outlet for the surplus
population of this country. The question has been continually
asked, How this can best be done?
1. Private benevolence has been tried and exhausted, according
to the best received methods. The sum which has been collected
during the past year by all the societies and through all sources
falls far short of £lO,OOO, which would, indeed, be an utterly
insufficient amount to exercise a beneficial influence upon the
labour-market, to increase the production of the necessaries of
life, and to diminish pauperism,—which three things we hope that
a comprehensive emig’ration will effect.
2. Government assistance has been pointedly refused, except
that a hope is held out that some aid may be rendered through
the machinery of the poor laws. *
It is evident, therefore, that any scheme of private enterprize
should be so arranged as to work harmoniously with the poor-law
machinery. And I believe that the prejudices of the colonists
would be found an insurmountable barrier to the operation of the
poor laws acting per se; but I hope to show that it is possible to
constitute an organization which would supplement their exertions
and carry them to a successful issue. What I believe is required
is a sort of “ buffer ” or “ conduit,” which should act as a con-
necting link between the raw pauperism of England and the
colonial prejudices of the Antipodes. And, in reply to the prac-
tical question, “How to do it?” I propose—
That a corporate body be formed, with an appropriate title,
and with a charter from Parliament,
They should be empowered to purchase or lease lands from
Colonial Governments, in suitable places, upon which they should
settle selected poor persons with their families. The cost of the
passage of these persons might be distributed over the acreage of
the land, and would form the great item in the cost of such a scheme.
The emigrants could remain as servants of the Corporation, at
such a rate of wages, and with such conditions as to the purchase
of portions of the land upon which they were located, as would
enable them in a moderate time to become proprietors of it; or,
in other cases, assistance should be sought, and would in many
instances be readily obtained, from planters and other persons in
want of labour, who would undertake to recover the amounts thus
advanced by instalments from the wages of the persons sent,—-
even, it has been thought, consenting in some cases to mortgage
their land for this purpose.


It may also be fairly presumed that assistance would in many
cases be rendered by the respective boards of guardians in the
metropolis and the provinces towards the passage-money of such
persons. Powers already exist, under 13 Victoria, cap. 127,
whereby guardians may pay a sum not exceeding £lO for each
emigrant. The reasons that this has remained a dead letter are
the dread on the part of, for the most part, narrow-minded set of
persons of the apparently large outlay, and the natural fear lest
their parish should become swamped by the influx of a destitute
class anxious to avail themselves of the privilege. Again,
according to existing arrangements, all such money so expended
would be lost to the ratepayers of the parish; but, under the
management of the proposed Corporation, almost the whole of it
could be repaid to the lenders. Indeed, the experience of one
colony, New Zealand, shows that 10 per cent, covers all the losses
of collecting such money, even with the rather imperfect ma-
chinery there existing.
Lastly, I would propose the adoption of the chequer principle
in the allotment of lands; by which the land itself may be said
to be made to join in the co-operative principle.
13. Communicated by 1 R. D. B. Morier, Esq., C. 8., &c., &c.,
Charge d'Affaires, Darmstadt.
Dated 22nd February, 1869.
The important meeting of the 10th inst. in aid of the East End
Emigration Fund has taken place, but beyond establishing the
fact that the work imperatively demanding to be done altogether
transcends the limits of private charity, I am unable to see that
the meeting led to any practical results. When we are told that
in Woolwich alone 600 artificers are waiting to be taken across
the seas, and consider that, putting the expenditure at £2O per
man, i.e., per family, £12,000 would be required to effect this dis-
location of labour, we are forced to the conclusion that either the
work must be left undone or that it must bo done by other
machinery than that of almsgiving. The report of Sir Sydney
Waterlow’s Society for building improved dwellings for the poor,
adverted to in the last number of the ‘‘Spectator,” has come in
most opportunely to point out the direction which the efforts of emi-
gration reformers should take. But it is not alone the animus and
philanthropo-economical attitude of Sir Sydney Waterlow’s Society
which I desire to see copied; it is, above all, the invaluable prin-
ciple, Which it has done so much towards successfully establishing,


of private corporations becoming the “ media ” through which the
gigantic force of imperial credit should be brought to bear on the
solution of social questions.
I cannot pretend to olfer any advice as to the form in which
this machinery should be applied to emigration, but I have no
doubt that if the principle were once brought before the public
abundant modes of partial application would be pointed out by
more competent correspondents than myself. I can only build
up a sort of hypothetical skeleton of the body I desire to see
clothing itself with flesh and blood.
Suppose then that a number of persons belonging to the class
we daily see putting down their names for hundreds and thousands
towards the guarantee funds of benevolent enterprises were to
institute themselves into a hand fide mercantile company for the
purpose of enabling the 600 Woolwich artizans, or such portion
of them as were pronounced by a colonial expert as fit for colonial
purposes, to emigrate; suppose that 100 such persons each took
one £lOO share, so as to make up the 2,000 required, and that
each paid up £3O per share, making up £3,000, the Government
advancing the remaining £9,000 on the joint security of the Com-
pany at 3£ per cent. The entire risk must be borne by the Com-
pany ; none by the Government. Securities, therefore, for the
entire amount should be lodged in the hands of the Government.
If the Company charged 5 per cent, interest to the emigrants
(the amount to be paid towards amortisation is a separate atfair,
depending on circumstances, and need not here be taken into
consideration), they would, supposing no losses were incurred,
make about 9£ per cent., on their paid-up capital of £3,000.
But 5 per cent, is very much less than on mercantile principles
could be charged for money lent on individual personal security,
and I would, therefore, propose that for every £2O advanced to an
emigrant he should bind himself to repay in the way of amortisa-
tion 22, 23, 24 or 25, according to the probabilities of the case, so
as to throw the per centage of losses on the capital recovered.
Allowing 2 per cent, to work the concern, and pay for the Homo
and Colonial staff, there would remain to the shareholders per
cent.
You will at once perceive where I would endeavour in time to
bring in the principle of co-operation. Supposing the 600 emi-
grants, or any number of them, were to make themselves mutually
liable, all for each and each for all, on the principle of the
Schultze Delitsch Credit Banks, the risks would be diminished to a
minimum, the premium over the £2O would diminish in proportion,
and even the rate of interest might be lowered.
Of course, I presuppose that such a society would act in union
with an affiliated society in the colony to which it was proposed to


send the emigrants. The individual emigrant should never bo
allowed to get out of sight of his creditor. As to his selection,
the same sort of impassive caution exercised by insurance societies
in estimating the money value of “ lives ’’ should be exercised in
the estimate of the money value of each candidate’s productive
capacities.
14. Communicated by Mb. Freston.
EMIGRATION.
1, Maida Yale, London, W.
The deputations which have waited upon the Secretary of
State for the Colonies, the Home Secretary, and the President of
the Poor Law Board have elicited the feeling of the Government,
with reference to emigration, to be favourable; and it may be
reasonably expected that every facility short of expenditure of
public money requiring a special appeal to Parliament will
be given.
The object now in view is how to produce a plan of emigration
not only self-supporting but also remunerative, as an investment
for capital.
That philanthropy can bo carried out practically upon com-
mercial principles and made to pay, has been proved by the
success of Alderman Sir Sydney Waterlow’s Company for Improving
the Dwellings of the Poor. Life insurance societies are another
instance, and so arc building societies.
The Crown, represented by the Secretary of State for the-
Colonies, has large tracts of waste lands in the Colonies. In
Great Britain and Ireland a redundant population exists (shut in
by the sea) who would voluntarily settle on those lands if they
could get at them. And the Crown, as represented by the President
of the Poor Law Board, has a number of unemployed labourers
whom the industrious classes are now sorely taxed to support, who
could be profitably employed on those waste lands. Wanted the
machinery to effect the combination, Government will not provide
the capital, but will give facilities to private enterprise to do so—
which means, protect the private capitalists and legalize their
proceedings in case of need—as in the case of the Lands Invest-
ments Company, the Lands Drainage Acts, and the private Acts of
certain life insurance companies.
There are three requisites to success—
First.—The best land.
Secondly.—A mixed population.
Thirdly.—Capital.


As regards the first point, I am not qualified to offer an
opinion.
It occurs to mo that the lands selected should bo such as
would be approved by capitalists from situation and with
reference to markets for produce, as likely to acquire permanent
value and to bo readily saleable; and also bo such as by climate,
fertility, ease of cultivation, and readiness of access by water
from England, would be attractive to a superior class of emi-
grants, and cheaply and readily reached. In plain English, just
such lands as “a land jobber” would select for speculation.
2. A mixed population. Class 1. Labourers and their families
and artisans and their families to bo conveyed out upon terms of
agreement, previously made, for certain stipulated service to bo
rendered in clearing land, building, road making, &c. Class 2.
Small capitalists and tradesmen.
As regards Class 1, numbers of superior labourers may bo
selected during the ensuing winter who would be attracted by
the offer of constant work and ultimate advancement to inde-
pendence to move with their families, and who could be relied on
to form a settled and industrious substratum of society. In
addition to this, parishes would (probably readily with the
sanction of the Poor Law Board) constitute in the aggregate
considerable funds to assist out mechanics and others out of work,
who, though not at first the best labourers, could bo made
extremely useful in a place where all labour is valuable.
By means of this labour the lands to be partially cleared and
prepared with roads, &c., for Class 2, who would also be sent out
from England, to whom farms partially cleared would be sold out
and out, or might be let to those who had only sufficient capital
to stock them, with the option of purchase by instalments.
Tradesmen and mechanics would take up the town lands, as they
invariably follow population, and both these sets, namely, the
small capitalists, settlers, and the tradesmen in turn become
employers of labour, and make room for a new succession of
labourers to be brought out from England.
3. Capital. This may be obtained, Ist, from the general
public by way of subscription for shares, and 2ndly, by way of
loans.
The distinctive feature of my plan is, that reliance should not
be placed wholly upon capitalists, but that it should be partially
raised from the classes more particularly interested in and to be
benefited by it.
No one who has mixed much with the working classes can
doubt (although the President of the Board of Trade may bo
sceptical) that the education they have received already has
given them a great desire to better themselves, and that steam-


boats, railways, telegraphs, and newspapers have not only brought
the world closer together than it was fifty years ago (to use a
figurative expression), but people generally know more about,
it, and that there is a greater inclination to visit “ Foreign Parts”
from the highest to the lowest throughout society.
It is also evident that the desire to acquire land is becoming
more and more a dominant feeling. The first impulse of a man
rising from the lower ranks who has saved a little money is to
live in his own house. If any proof of this is needed, it is only
necessary to visit Camborne, or some half-score towns which
could be named; but, as we are in London, it is only necessary to
point to the success of building and land societies.
That there is a great deal of capital in the hands of This class
is evident from the amount in the Savings’ Banks.
My plan would be to establish an agency in every town to
place shares and receive money on loan, upon which a per centage
would be paid according to agreement.
It is evident that a better rate of interest could be safely
offered than is given at present by the Government Savings’ Banks,
and the security would be quite as good. Certain advantages
must, of course, be offered to shareholders to exchange their shares
for land and free passages.
The investors, by way of loan, would be entitled to repayment
in cash upon an agreed notice, or to convert their money into
shares at any time with similar advantages.
Those capitalists who held their shares would be entitled to
the ultimate advantage from the increased value of the land
which has always occurred in every colony.
This plan contemplates settling some agreed area of land to
be obtained by grant in fee-simple, which is the only security for
expenditure in the exportation of labourers and their families
from this country; and each settlement would require a com-
petent leader resembling the chef of a societe en commandite in
France, with competent assistants. Stores must be established
for the supply of every necessary. These stores would be a
great source of comfort to the emigrants, and would be a
source of profit to the promoters. The head quarters must be in
London, from which all directions must emanate.
There is no reason why the plan should not embrace general
emigration to all the colonies, but in the first instance a basis of
operations must be selected as a beginning, and it is submitted
that the Canadian Dominion at the present time is more likely to
meet with favour generally than any other colony.
After all, the success of the plan will depend chiefly upon
the “selection of the land,” and it appears to mo that it is
absolutely essential that some competent person bo sent out to


ncgociate for and secure a suitable block of land, and to arrange
preliminaries witli the Colonial Government; for which purpose
a sum of money must be subscribed by the promoters in the first
instance.
WM. FRESTON,
22nd June, 1869. 1, Maida Vale,
London,W.
15. J. H. Richardson, Esq., 11, Poultry, London,
Wrote a letter, stating that the Government of a Southern
American Border State (not named) was desirous of attracting farmers
from England, Scotland, and Wales, and offered advantages to any
farmer bringing over his labourers with him, and that the money
paid for their passages should be. allowed him from the price of the land.
Mr. Richardson also addressed a second and third letter to Colonel
Maude, which are as follows :
London, July sth, 1869.
Sir,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your favor of the 25th
ultimo, and to thank you for the expression of your valued opinion
in which 1 may say I fully concur. I shall be very glad to see you
here or to call upon you when you are in town, to exchange views on
the subject of my previous letter. In the meantime I beg to make
a suggestion through you to your Committee and Association, (which
I shall also make to the Guardians’ Emigration Meeting,) that in any
plan of emigration that you may finally adopt, or in any Act of Par-
liament that may be suggested by you, that the countries to which
emigrants can be sent should not be limited to our colonies, but should
include the United States, for it will be found that one of the best
fields for such labourers will be the Border Southern and Western
States of America ; and I believe, from what I know of the country
from many years’ residence there, that all able-bodied
willing to work, would be received cordially. lam confident that,
whatever class could be turned to account in our own colonies, would
find a ready livelihood in these States, and that the same assistance
would be extended by the State Governments in protecting them
and in assisting to procure employment for them on their arrival.
Why then should the nearest and most extensive labour market be
overlooked ? Why send the emigrants 14,000 miles, if they can find
employment within 4,000?*
It is of course out of the question that, wherever these emigrants
go, that they should immediately become farmers. Land may be
cheap, hut, even if obtained as a free gift, some capital is required
to work the farms. Our colonies are anxious to obtain settlers with
sufficient capital to farm, but their power to absorb laborers is
* See page 03.—[AW,]


very limited; while we see that the United States are receiving
21,000 emigrants each month, who wend their way to the west and
the south, and find employment there. The reason for this difference
is given in the able essay of Mr. Jenkins, published by your Associa-
tion, which states that, —“It is very essential to observe the difference
between emigration to America and to our colonies. In the latter the
labour market is limited, in the former it is large and constantly
increasing. In the colonies there are few great cities and a moderate
commerce; in the United States there are communities, and a trade
vicing with those of the old world. The consequences are natural.
The great field for emigrants who have just enough money to pay
their passages and no more, must be one in which they will find instant
occupation at a remuneration.”
To the fact that the colonies would soon be overstocked with
labour, is to be added that, with the exception of Canada, the cost of
passage would be three times that to the United States; while the
time lost in the long voyage to New Zealand or Australia is a con-
sideration to the emigrant. The distance has also an importance
beyond the first cost; for it is found that the emigrants assist their
friends and relatives to join them, and their power to do so must
be governed by the price of the passage. For this purpose the
poor Irish and Germans have sent millions of pounds from the United
States to pay the passage of those left behind. The great cost of
removing emigrants to New Zealand and Australia will, in any large
scheme, practically leave Canada as the only competitor of the United
States; and Canada is, for certain reasons, not very popular with the
working-class emigrant. As with our other colonies, its power of
absorbing laborers is limited ; and, though the cost of living is about
the same as in the Western States, the wages are lower. Then the
scarcity of employment in the winter, the severity of the winter and
its duration, lead Englishmen to prefer a more southern climate. Nor
can we wonder that the rigorous winters of Canada are not much
liked by Englishmen, when we find that even hardy Scandinavian
settlers often leave the country for the south-west, and while thousands
of native Canadians are found scattered throughout the States in
various employments, and many farming western lands. The effect of
this opinion of the emigrants is shown by a fact in the Emigration
Commissioners’ Ileport for 1867, that of 27,804 emigrants who ar-
rived in Canada in 1866, only 4303 remained, the rest having left for
the United States. This tendency of the Englishman to seek a home
in the United States should not be overlooked, especially as the
capabilities of the United States to find employment for all the
emigrants we could send them is admitted by those who, for other
reasons, prefer to select our colonies. The old prejudice that, by
sending emigrants there we should be assisting to build up a rival
nation which might some day be an enemy, has a poor foundation;
for, the greater the number of English who emigrate there, the better


will be the feeling towards the mother country. The hostility occa-
sionally manifested arises mainly from the noisy Irish politicians, who,
after all, are but a small class in the whole community ; and nothing
will so effectually balance the unfriendliness of this class as the love
which the English emigrant will cherish for his native country and
transmit to his posterity. But we have been at peace with the United
States for over 50 years, and, those who know both nations best,
believe that this peace will be lasting, and that the two countries will
be drawn into closer bonds of friendship. We are their best and they
our best customer. The Board of Trade returns for 1867 show that
the commerce between the two countries amounted to £62,869,812
exclusive of £6,489,006 in gold and silver, which we received from
them, which is £696,000 more than the value of the precious metals
received by us from Australia,
In stating the objections which some emigrants have to live in
Canada, I do not do so to disparage that country, —which I know,
from observations on the spot, to be a good field for settlers, and which
has a steady demand for labourers, though its labour-market would be
easily glutted. The class that you propose to send to the new coun-
tries will, I think, do well in those new countries. The exodus from
Ireland was composed mainly of this class, but without the intelligence
and trade knowledge and experience of the English; and yet they
were soon absorbed in the United States’ population, and, as shown
by the Emigration Commissioners’ Beport, they have during the last
nineteen years remitted £13,893,000 sterling, or an average of £730,000
per annum, to their poor relatives at home, principally to pay their
passage to America.
Permit me to make one remark on an opinion expressed in the
“ Essay on Emigration,” published by your Association, I cannot
say that the result of my own observations, with respect to the
position of Englishmen in the United States, is the same as that of
the author of that essay. New emigrants, I allow, often make them-
selves unpopular by obstinate adhesion to the old-world way of doing
things, when unsuited to a new country ; but this fault is soon eradi-
cated or toned down by experience. In many manufacturing towns
that are well known to me, the English frequently hold the best
positions as foremen and managers of works. I could instance one
town in which two of the largest calico-printing establishments in the
whole country are under English management; and all the foremen,
the pattern designers, the engravers, the machinists are English, with
one or two exceptions, where they are Americans, while the unskilled
labourers, the rank and file, are Irishmen. Nor is this a rare instance.
I am certain that, with very few exceptions, Englishmen in the States
have the same opportunities for improving their position that the
Americans have.
Respecting the emigration of children, I think that a large number


above the age of ten might be comfortably placed in the western and
border States, and in Canada, principally among the farmers. From
that age children there are always worth more than their board and
clothing; and, in nearly all cases, they would be allowed during the
winter months to attend the free public schools. Great care would
necessarily have to be exercised in the selection of employers; but I
am sure that the clergymen, the justices of the peace, and others,
would lend their assistance to this end, and would afterwards watch
over the interests of the children. A benevolent society in New York
has for many years collected the destitute, orphan, and houseless
children of that city, and, after a short training, lias removed them to
the west and distributed them among the respectable farmers who had
previously bargained to receive them; and, in not a few cases, they
have adopted them as their own children. The plan there h&s worked,
I believe, to the satisfaction of all parties.
In conclusion, I would remark that it would not be necessary to
obtain the consent of the United States’ Government to receive emi-
grants assisted by your scheme; but it would be advisable to secure
the co-operation of the Governments of those individual States willing
to receive the emigrants, and it would be desirable for those States to
form a Labour Exchange and to take steps for the temporary pro-
tection of the emigrants. The Labour Exchange would be estab-
lished at some central town of the State, and to it the wants of the
employers and the wages they could pay would be sent, and a register
would be kept for the use of labourers and employers. The emigrants
would have to be submitted to the State agent here for his approval,
and the passage would have to be paid to the co-operating State; but
these are matters of detail.
I am, Sir,
Yours obediently,
J. H. RICHARDSON.
Colonel Francis C. Maude, C. 8., V.C.
11, Poultry, London, E.C.,
July 9th, 1869.
Dear Sir,
I beg to acknowledge receipt of your note of the 7th
instant. I think I could convince you that emigration to the
United States will benefit the mother country as well as the new
country. Their present tariff is more hostile to our trade than any
future one can be, and yet we see how great the commerce is. With a
little more liberality on their part, which they are now discussing, and
the trade between the countries would be enormously increased. But
the subject is too wide for me to enter into at this time. As I shall


not be able to attend the Meeting of the Guardians, &c., I have
addressed a letter, very similar to that to you, dated the sth July,
to Lord Alfred Churchill, the Chairman of the late Meeting, asking
him to bring the subject before the Meeting. If he should be absent,
or for any reason it should be overlooked, I should feel obliged if you
would see to it. You are quite at liberty to publish or use in any way
either of my letters. The one dated July sth would, I think, bo of
interest to those considering emigration. I shall be glad to see you
when you are in town, but should be glad if you would let me know
the hour you can call, that I may be in the way.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
J. H. RICHARDSON.
Col. Francis C. Maude, C. 8., Y.C.
16. Alfred Waddington, Esq., of British Columbia,
Sent two pamphlets published by him relating to a railroad through
the “Fertile Belt,” in the north-western territory of the Hudson’s
Bay Company, about to be transferred to the dominion of Canada.
This tract is 1,000 miles, or thereabouts, in length, lying between
Canada and British Columbia.
17. Abstract of Blue Booh, dc., on British N. IV. America,
(Fertile Belt, dr.,) —its capabilities for colonization, by
Wm. Freston, Esq., 1, Maida Vale, London.
June 26, 1860.
North-West Territory Resolutions respecting this territory
having passed the House of Assembly, the agreement with the Hud-
son’s Bay Company will shortly be carried out.
“ The necessity of opening up the territory at once was dwelt upon,
as the State of Minnesota, U.S., is pushing forward a new railroad
towards Red River. The Government road from Lake Superior has
•been opened for one-third of its distance already.”—Nee “Times,”
June 25, p. 4.
“The politicians of Ottawa,” says the “Daily Telegraph,” “desire
to see British Columbia joined to the Dominion. The Pacific colonists
desire to see themselves, first of all, connected by a railroad. The
Canadians desire confederation first, and a railroad afterwards. The
result is a l fixd ” —See “D. Telegraph,” 24 th June, 1860.
What is this territory, for which the Canadian Dominion gives
-£300,000? It is that lying on the frontier of the United States, be


tween Canada and British Columbia—the boundary of the United
States from the Red River westward being the parallel of 49° of N.
latitude. This district has been explored by two expeditions
despatched for that purpose by the Imperial Government. The last
under the command of Captain Palliser, reported on that portion lying
between the western shore of Lake Superior and the Pacific Ocean,
which was surveyed during the years 1857, 1858, 1859, and 1860, and
which reports were presented to Parliament on the 19th of May, 1863.
Immediately to the north of Lake Superior is a considerable amount
of alluvial heavily timbered land, but between the western boundary of
that lake and the Red River lies a rocky district presenting few spots
suitable for settlement, added to which the ivinter is severe. From the
commencement of November until May the whole country is icebound,
so that vegetation is perfectly dormant, and the spring is verydingering
owing to the great extent of surface occupied by the large lakes to
the south-east, and by Hudson’s Bay on the north-east.
Lake Superior ajid Lake Winnipeg are each 600 feet above the
level of the sea, and from thence to the Rocky Mountains the central
region may be considered as a plain gradually rising until it gains an
altitude of 3,000 feet at the base of the mountain chain. The surface
of this slope is marked by steppes by which successive and decided
increases of elevation are effected, accompanied by important changes
in the composition of the soil, and consequently in the character of the
vegetation.
The Red River Settlement is in the first of these steppes, say 800
to 900 feet above the sea level. As long ago as 1860 American
squatters and lumberers were rapidly settling up the river, which is
only 140 miles in length within British territory, the best land being
about 10 or 12 miles from the Lake Winnipeg, into which it discharges
its waters. A steamer was plying on that river from the lake up to a
given point. As far back as July, 1857, Mr. Iddings, the Surveyor
of the St. Paul’s (American) Land Company had laid out two town-
ships at Pembina, Minnesota, U.S., at the frontier, one on the left
bank of the Red River to be called Pembina Town (which is now
marked on maps), the other on the opposite side called St. Vincents,
and to be connected by a bridge. The railway spoken of in the
“ Times ” had already received the sanction of a Legislative Act re-
quiring it to be made in ten years, the terminal station being fixed at
St. Vincent's. Captain Palliser speaks very hopefully of the future of
•the Red River Colony, but at that time he considered it too isolated to
make much progress ; and then says, “ In the event of railway commu-
nicationbeing extended as far as Pembina, it would not be unreasonable
then to entertain the prospect that the Imperial Government might
feel justified in encouraging the extension of such railway on the
British side of the (frontier) line to the northward and westward,


through the southern portion of “The Fertile Belt” to the Rocky
Mountains; at all events, as soon as the country showed symptoms of
becoming sufficiently populated to warrant such an effort. The winter
here commences about the 13th November, and lasts until the second
week in April. The harvest for hay is very abundant, commencing in
the beginning of July, and for cereals about the 10th of August.
Soil—vegetable mould, varying from two to four, or five feet in depth.
The drawbacks mentioned are mosquitoes, locusts, i.e. grasshoppers,
and thunderstorms, and the heat in summer is great. The valley of
the Assineboine for 70 miles before it falls into the Red River, affords
lands of surpassing, richness and fertility. The river is navigable by
boats 42 feet in length, drawing three feet of water.
There can be no question, says Captain Palliser, that the natural
ingress to the country is from the south by way of St. Paul’s, Crow-
wing, and Pembina. It appears, therefore, that in the event of hosti-
lities between the Dominion and the United States, this is the key to
the country-—the more so as to the west of the Red River an arid track
of considerable breadth divides the “Fertile Belt” from the United
States.
The next steppe is 1,600 feet above the sea level. Here, strange to
say, there is less snow, and the climate is more favourable. The lands
are rolling and well adapted for sheep. The buffalo is here in vast
herds.
The portion of the Fertile Belt watered by the North Saskatchewan
is the choicest for colonizing. Timber is in sufficient quantity for
building, also limestone, clay for brick-making, ironstone and coal.
The food grown for cattle—goose-grass, peas-grass, vetches, <Scc., pre-
serve their nutritious qualities through the winter, and the buffalo is
killed fat in January and February. The next inducement to settle in
the Valley of the Saskatchewan is the fact that fires have denuded the
territory of forest trees, so that the agriculturist could commence
ploughing at once. At the base of the Rocky Mountains the average
temperature is 15° higher than that of the western portions of Canada.
The result of expeditions in various directions in the Rocky Moun-
tains was to prove that at a reasonable outlay a road could be made
through the passes to connect the plains of the Saskatchewan with the
Columbia Valleys. Mr. Sullivan, the Secretary, says, “In the event
of the requirements of commerce, as far as my experience of mountains
is concerned, I could not point out so extensive a tract of country
where a railway may be brought with comparatively so little expense.
M. Bourgeau, the botanist who accompanied the expedition, in a
separate report says:—“ It remains for me to call the attention of the
English Government to the advantage there would be in establishing
agricultural districts in the vast plains of Rupert’s Land, —and par-
ticularly in the Saskatchewan, in the neighbourhood of Fort Carlton.
This district is much more adapted to the culture of staple crops of


temperate climes, wheat, rye, barley, oats, &c., than one would be
inclined to believe from this high latitude. There, in order to put the
land under cultivation, it would be only necessary to till the better
portions of the soil. The prairies offer natural pasturage as favourable
to the maintenance of numerous herds as if they had been artificially
created. The construction of houses and pioneer development would
involve but little expense; because, in many parts of the country,
independent of wood, one would find fitting stones for building pur-
poses,—in others, clay for bricks. The vetches which grow here are
as fit for the nourishment of cattle as European clover pasturage. It
would be sufficient to shelter domestic animals in winter, and feed
them with hay collected beforehand, to avoid mortality by cold or
wild beasts, and permit the acclimatization of the other domestic farm-
yard animals, the sheep and the pig. The harvest would be the end
of August or first week in September, which is a season when the
temperature is sufficiently high and rain is rare. Beans, peas, and
French beans, cabbages, turnips, carrots, rhubarb, and currants have
been cultivated successfully at the Hudson’s Bay Company’s posts.
Gooseberries and raspberries grow wild. Different kinds of vacci-
naceae are equally indigenous, and have eatable fruits, which will
serve for preserves and confectionery. The only difficulty that wmuld
oppose agricultural settlements is the immense distance to traverse
over country devoid of roads and almost uninhabited. The assistance
of Government, or a company well organized, would be indispensable
to the colonization of this country.”
Here, in the construction of a railway through this country prior
to settlement, is a work which would absorb any quantity of convict
labour, who could be exported via Hudson’s Bay and Lake Winnipeg
at the proper season each year.* This done, there is land enough for
all the paupers of England to cultivate for generations, and the return
would be wheat or flour to feed the manufacturing population of
England.
* This assumes the Nelson Itiver to he navigable hy steamers; upon
this point no satisfactory information has been obtainable. —[2?d.J


18. Communicated by J. Bate, Esq.
Association of persons interested in transplanting the
UNEMPLOYED ABLE-BODIED LABOUR OF THE UNITED KING-
DOM to Land Agriculture in the British Colonies.
10, Northumberland Street, Strand,
London, W.O.
The best means of uniting the interests of the Colonies with Great
Britain in creating new and safe outlets for the employment of capital,
by improving agricultural lands through settling persons thereon, which
in its turn will create a demand for the manufactures of this country.
In the first place, there is little doubt that in Canada, Australia,
and New Zealand blocks of land, suitable for agriculture, may be
obtained free or at a nominal cost from the Colonial Governments,
Secondly, there are tracts of good fertile land and farms now held
by persons settled in the Colonies, who would be willing to mortgage
their lands to those who will plant labour upon them, paying the usual
colonial rate of interest, and who would enter into a guarantee to
repay the principal by instalments within a term of years, thus causing
capital to reproduce itself, since the labour applied to the land will
quickly increase its yield, and supply the needs for and of an
increasing population of all classes.
To work such an association effectually it will be necessary to have
agents in each of the Colonies (begin wdth two or three colonies only)
whose duty it shall be to negotiate with those desiring labour upon
mortgage, and who shall enter into agreements for its supply, receive
and transfer the labour sent out to the person by whom it is required,
and to collect the interest and principal as it falls due. By this
process capital will be constantly re-available, lending money to plant
labour, labour in its turn increasing production and population,
which again will want capital to still further extend operations upon
the soil.
In cases where the security of land is ample, money might
be occasionally advanced to a limited extent for the erection of
farm-buildings or the purchase of implements for use on the farm, but
this must depend upon the report of the agent, as to the state in
which it is, situation and the quality of land, and its accessibility to a
market.
Where blocks of land are granted to the association by the
Colonial Government under conditions of settlement, the association
might very properly and advantageously undertake to colonize by
selecting the best site for the township and sending out families
of suitable callings as pioneers, taking their bond of service, and
giving each an interest in a small portion of the land of which he
shall not have the fee-simple until he have repaid either in money or


by labour the expense incurred in sending him out, and the cost of
such tools and implements he may have been supplied with for his
own use.
Operations might be commenced first in Canada, Ontario Province,
Natal, or one of the Australian Colonies.
As regards the first, the Commissioner for Ontario, Mr. White,*
now in this country, might be able to advise and to afford valuable
assistance, upon his return, in indicating the locality where a suitable
block of land may be obtained for the purpose of settlement, and if
necessary, arrangements might be made for planting pioneer parties
(infamilies ) upon it early next spring.
The great facility which the Passage Warrant System of Emigration
in Victoria affords for sending out families, might also be availed of
as a means of settling land in that colony. And it is not improbable
that arrangements could be made through Mr. Ligar and Mr. Verdon
for obtaining a large location of land on cither side of a contemplated
railroad, or otherwise.
Occupations of Emigrants.
“Of the 196,325 emigrants from the United Kingdom, in 1868,
94,766 arc distinguished in the list as males above twelve years of age ;
49,255 are described, generally, as ‘labourers;’ the next largest
number is that of the miners and quarrymen, who were 8,500; 7,258
were farmers; 7,171 gentlemen, professional men, merchants, &c.;
2,553 carpenters and joiners; 1,261 agricultural labourers, gardeners,
carters, &c. ; 951 tailors; 790 clerks; 712 smiths, besides 165 black-
smiths, 31 silversmiths, and 6 locksmiths; 772 were bricklayers,
masons, plasterers, slaters, &c.; 444 engineers, 419 shopkeepers,
shopmen, warehousemen, &c.; 412 domestic servants; 384 boot and
shoe makers; 381 spinners and weavers; 333 painters, paper-hangers,
plumbers, and glaziers; 289 coal miners; 278 seamen; 271 braziers,
tinsmiths, whitesmiths, &c.; 229 bakers, confectioners, &c. ; 115
coopers; 111 printers; 104 butchers, poulterers, &c. Various other
trades have their representatives in the list; but none of them are
described as sending forth so many as a hundred in 1868. Of the
57,014 females above twelve years old, 23,517 are not described;
other 23,598 are described as married women ; 8,592 were domestic or
farm servants; 868 gentlewomen and governesses; 335 milliners,
dressmakers, or needlewomen ; 13 shopwomen. Of the 38,417 children
under twelve, 8,096 were infants not a year old. The age of 6,128
emigrants is not stated.” —Vide Government Returns.
* Mr. White stated verbally that he would be prepared to advise a
grant of 00,000 acres upon certain conditions, but that an Act of the
Colonial Parliament would be necessary, —[£d.]


To learn whore emigrants are going to, look at the
Emigration from Liverpool.
“ The emigration from the Mersey during the last six months was as
follows:—thirty-six ships, with 23,081 passengers (under the Act), of
whom 8,706 were English, 907 Scotch, 5,302 Irish, and 8,716
foreigners. Of the ships, twenty-seven went to the United States,
with 18,319 passengers, of whom 6,532 were English, 899 Scotch,
5,195 Irish, and 5,702 foreigners. The sailings to Canada were nine
ships, with 6,312 passengers, of whom 2,183 were English, 8 Scotch,
107 Irish, and 3,014 foreigners. The following vessels sailed not under
the Act: —To the United States, five ships, with 339 passengers;
to Victoria, three, with 139 passengers; to the West Indies, three, with
21 passengers; to South America, five, with 98 passengers; to the
East Indies, one, with 50 passengers; and to Africa, one, with
17 passengers. During the quarter ending June, there sailed, under
the Act, 76,484 passengers; and, not under the Act, I,927making
a total of 78,411, which, when compared with the same quarter
of last year, shows an increase of 21,156. The total number of
passengers that sailed from the Mersey, during the last six months,
was 99,200.” —Vide Government Returns.
THE IRISH EMIGRANT IN AMERICA.
To the Editor of the Times.
I beg to place at your disposal for publication a letter
which I lately received from an American friend, of the highest
authority and experience on such subjects, to whom I had addressed
queries regarding the position which the Irish emigrant was capable
of attaining in the United States in comparison with that of other
European emigrants.
I am, Sir,
Yours obediently,
J. C.
“Your favour of the 25th ult, is at hand. With reference to the
inquiries you make touching Irish farmers in our country, I may state
that I submitted your questions to a Western gentleman of much
experience and observation. He replies that the most successful
farmers in the west are those who have removed from our own older
States in the east, these having enjoyed educational advantages, and
understanding generally the value of economy and industry. He


thinks that next to these the Scotch and Irish immigrants furnish the
largest proportion of examples of thrift. The Irish are about as
successful as any class of farmers who come from other countries;
the north of Ireland people deserving particular commendation.
A good many Irishmen of a coarse, low type stop in the neigh-
bourhood of our large cities, many of them earning a precarious
subsistence by employment in public w'orks; but of the Irishmen
who turn their attention to agriculture no discrimination can fairly
be made against them on the score of industry or enterprise. The
proportion of tenant farmers with us is small as compared with
other countries. Land has been cheap enough to stimulate individual
ambition to the endeavour to own the home occupied, and in the
accomplishment of this purpose Irishmen have generally done as well
as others. There is this distinction to be made between Irishmen and
Germans—the Germans will not labour on the public wmrks; the
Irish labourer comes here without means, and is tempted by immediate
employment at high wages. Opening works in new sections, exposing
the surface of the land, is a fruitful cause of malaria. Hence the life
of these Irish labourers if of very short duration. A vast proportion
of the unmarried Irish labourers who have come to this country
within the past 20 years are dead. They come as single (unmarried)
men. They are set to work in large bodies, without the protection
which the household affords. Nobody is personally interested in their
welfare, and one of our most intelligent public men stated to me that
he was quite satisfied that the average life of the adult Irish arriving
in this country engaged on public works is about six years. The
educated Irish descendants of the immigrant compose a useful and
thrifty class of all our communities.” —Vide Times Newspaper, 9th
August, 1869.


