

P2TH
MEETINGS AND SERVICES
HELD IN CONNECTION WITH THE
Congregational Union antr fission
VICTORIA.
MAY, 1860.




REPORT, &c.
FIRST MEETING OF MINISTERS AND DELEGATES.
TUESDAY
MORNING,
Mat 1, 1860.
The first meeting of Ministers and Delegates
was held at the Lonsdale-street Church, at half-
past ten o’clock.
The Rev. R. Fletcher (of St. Kilda,) pre-
sided, and the proceedings were commenced by
singing, after which the Chairman read a psalm
and offered prayer.
The Chairman then said for the information of
those present he would state the circumstances
out of which the meeting had arisen. The Home
Mission had been in existence for some years ;
its object being to procure and sustain ministers
wherever they were needed, but no organised
Union between the ministers and churches at
present existed. It was thought that an associa-
tion which would be both a Union and Mission
should be foimed. There were many ends
which such an association might accomplish.
The necessity for training ministers within the
colony was felt by every one, and if the churches
were to combine a commencement might be
made. There were other works which much
needed doing, many of which would be men-
tioned at these meetings, and which such an as-
sociation might undertake. The Committee of
the Home Mission (by which this meeting had
been convened) had drawn up a scheme, and
would submit a Constitution for the new Society,
but it would be for the meeting to accept, alter,
or reject it—as it thought fit. That was but a
preliminary meeting ; the Constitution would be
read that day, but would not be discussed until
to-morrow. It would then be for any member
to suggest additional matters for consideration.
It was then resolved that the Rev. Mr. Odkll
and Messrs. Haller and Langton be a busi-
ness Committee to arrange for the conduct of
the meetings.
Geelong Church—Rev. J. C. McMichael;
Messrs. Inglis, Youlden, Port, Hendy, Davis,
and Poulton.
Hawthorn Church —Rev. J. Mirams ; Messrs.
Joshua Walker, S. Dailey, and J. Mirams.
Janefield Church—Rev, R. J. Hills; Messrs.
Emms, Clay, and Tidd.
Kew Church—Rev. R. Connebee; Messrs.
French, and Day.
Kyneton Church—Mr. Tarquen.
Lonsdale street Church—Rev. Thomas Odell;
Messrs. Dunn, Edgar, Dobson, Fulton, and
M ‘Pherson.
Maryborough Congregation—Rev. J. Johnson.
Oxford street Church —Rev. W. B. Landells ;
Messrs. Wilkinson, Goodhugh, Huckson, Fowler,
Bates, F. J. Richardson, Stillwell, and Dr.
Embling.
Portland Church—Rev. J. Sleigh.
Prahran Church—Rev. W. Moss; Mr. B.
Hick, Dr. Stokes, Messrs. A. T. Moody, R.
Blackwell, G. S. Searle, J. Dunn, and Dr.
Dukes.
Queenscliffe Congregation—Mr. Adamson.
Richmond Church —Rev. J. P. Sunderland ;
Messrs. Bachelor, Russell, Luke, and H. Brooks.
St. Kilda Church—Rev. R. Fletcher; Messrs.
Smith, Rolfe, Roach, Leslie, and Murray.
Sandhurst Church—Rev. W. R. Fletcher;
Messrs. Stevenson, and Hughes.
Victoria Parade Church—Messrs. Haller,
Barlow, and Langton.
Williamstown Church—Rev. W. C. Robinson;
Messrs. Ingles, G. White, Blakemore, and Hen-
derson.
Rev. W. Hopkins, Student.
From 40 to 50 of the above were in attendance
at each sitting, some not being present on any
occasion.
ROLL.
The programme of proceedings for the pro-
posed series of meetings was read, and sug-
gestions made with reference to some to; ics of
interest not included.
The Secretary proceeded to make up the “Roll
of Churches, Ministers and Delegates,” as fol-
lows :
Beech worth Church—Rev. T. H. Jackson.
The draft of the proposed Constitution was
then read.
Brighton Church—Rev. W. R. Lewis; Messrs.
Vernon, and Baines.
Carlton Church—Rev. J. Firth; Mr. Simmonds.
Castlemaine Church—Rev. E. Day ; Messrs.
R. Blackwell, and Newcomb.
NEW CONGREGATIONAL HYMN-BOOK.
Upon the suggestion of the Chairman, the
question of the adoption of this as the “One
Hymn-Book” of the Denomination was brought
under consideration.
Daylesford Church—Rev. J. Summers; Messrs.
Westwood, andFairthom.
Dunolly Church—Rev. J. Beer.
Emerald Hill Church —Rev. J. E. Vetch;
Messrs. Dempster, and Hart.
Rev. W. B. Landells stated that in his church
the book was already adopted, and would be
generally used. He said that he had compared
the hymns with those in the “ Hymn-Book,” and
Forest Creek Church—Rev. J. Pitman.


was of opinion that it is vastly superior to all bringing it into use, the following resolution
previous collections, and worthy of general adop- was unanimously passed :
tion. The difficulty of introducing it is small, That the present meeting, consisting of ministers and
That the present meeting, consisting of ministers and
delegates of churches, having talien into consideration the
use of the New Congregational Hymn Book as the organ of
our psalmody, do recommend its speedy adoption by all
the churches, on account of its superior character, and of the
manifold advantages connected with the general use of “One
Hymn Book."
since a fresh supply of books is continually re-
quired, and the new books could gradually be
supplied.
Rev. J. Beer expressed his approval of the
book, though, for himself, he must confess
that he should have liked it still better had there
been some Scripture chants in it.
The relation of the Denomination to the local
Press, and the circulation of its home literature
was then taken up. A variety of suggestions
were made, and the results of various efforts
stated. No formal action was taken in the
matter, but the general feeling of the meeting
was in favour of supporting the Christian Times,
as the general organ of the Evangelical Churches,
rather than to seek the establishment of one of
a denominational character; and that at present
there was no better way of obtaining magazines
and books for the churches than through a book-
seller.
Mr. Russell was glad to hear Scripture chants
approved by a minister.
Rev. J. L. Poore said he was acquainted with
the history of the book. It was compiled by a
committee, and then proofs were sent to 100
ministers and other gentlemen, each of whom
was requested to give his opinion upon the reten-
tion or rejection of any of the hymns. The
decision by the majority was unfavourable to
the retention of the chants, which had been
originally included. Great care had been taken
to verify the authorship of the hymns, and no
alteration had been allowed.
Several of the ministers having reported the
adoption of the book by their churches, and
others having intimated the intention of speedily
It was arranged to meet each morning at 9
o’clock, for devotional exercises. Business to
commence at half-past 10. The meeting then
adjourned.
PRAYER
MEETING.
UNITED
ducted in large proportion by non-ministerial
brethren. Brevity, variety, and earnestness in
all the parts of the service sustained the in-
terest till its close.
On Tuesday evening, at Victoria Parade
Church, a large attendance was convened.
With tire exception of one brief address, the
exercises were strictly devotional, and con-
MINISTERS
AND DELEGATES.
SECOND MEETING OF
WEDNESDAY
MORNING, May 2
tact the independency of their several churches,
they, at the same time, felt the need of some
joint representation of their distinctive prin-
ciples, united expressionn of their concurrent
opinions, and combined defence of their com-
mon rights. Upon these grounds he seconded
the motion of Mr. Poore.
The resolution having unanimously passed, Mr.
Poore, in proceeding to read the clauses seriatim,
observed that, while not disposed to call any
man master, Congregationalists were not alto-
gether negligent of precedents and authority, and
he therefore had, in presenting the document in
his hand, stated it to be, to a very great extent,
a rescript. It had been long tried and brought
to its present state of efficiency by the improve-
ments which experience had suggested, and
although having an appearance of complication,
was practically, as he could assure them, very
simple and facile in its working. Having been
for some years the secretary of a district, com-
prising nearly half the association, he hail be-
come perfectly familiar with all its details, ihe
scheme was all comprehended in two words—
Love and Labour.
At the conclusion of the devotional meeting at
10.30, the business of the morning was preceded
by singing the 221st hymn, reading the 67 th
Psalm by the chairman, and prayer by Rev. J.
C. M ‘Michael.
CONSTITUTION
The Rev. J. L. Poore then rose to move the re-
ception for consideration of the Constitution of the
Union and M ission, which was read on the previous
day. He said “We are a Union, and we have a
Mission.” The object of the present proceeding,
therefore, was not to originate what did not at
present exist, but to organise, and consolidate,
and render more efficient what was already in
operation. The Congregational Union of Eng-
land aud Wales was simply a union, and actually
existed only while in session twice a-year. The
Scottish Congregational Union was a mission ;
the Lancashire County Association was also a
mission, and the constitution he now submitted
for the consideration of the brethren was almost
a rescript of that of the Lancashire County As-
sociation.
Mr. Haller seconded the motion. He said
The great principle of “Love to all who love
Christ” constrained them to seek the fellow-
ship of all true disciples of the Saviour, and
must especially induce the desire for communion
and co-operation among themselves. Valuing
as they did, and determining to maintain in-
Upon some of the clauses discussions ensued.
Verbal alterations and one or two other amend-
ments were made, and a new clause added. After
which, the Constitution thus amended, was unani-
mously adopted.


CONSTITUTION,
I. The Society shall be called The Congrega-
tional Union and Mission of Victoria.
11. It shall consist of Evaugelical Churches of
the Congregational Order situated within the
colony of Victoria.
111. This Union fully recognises the right of
every separate Church to maintain perfect Inde-
pendence in the Government and Administration
of its own affairs, and therefore it shall not in
any case assume Legislative authority or right
of interference.
IV. The following objects shall be contem-
plated by the Union.
1. The promotion of Evangelical Religion
in connection with Congregational principles of
Church Government by Missionary and other
operations.
2. The formation of Congregational Churches
—and aiding them when necessary by pecuniary
assistance for a time.
3. The introduction into the colony of
accredited Congregational Ministers, and the pro-
motion of measures for educating young men
suitable for the work of the Ministry.
4. The cultivation of brotherly affection and
cordial co-operation among the associated
churches and ministers.
5. The maintenance of fraternal intercourse
and occasional correspondence with Congrega-
tional Christians in other parts.
6. The procuring of statistical information
respecting the state of the Denomination and of
Religion generally, in the various districts of the
colony.
7. The maintenance and enlargement of
Religious Liberty, Rights, and Privileges.
V. The Funds of the Association shall be pro-
vided by contributions from the Churches, and
by individual subscriptions, donations and
bequests. Every Church shall be required, as
a condition of membership, to make at least one
contribution in the course of each year.
VI. To make the Union more effective the
country shall, from time to time, as population
increases and churches multiply, be divided into
districts of convenient size. For the present
there shall be
The Melbourne district.
The Geelong district.
The Mount Alexander district.
The Ballaarat district.
The Beechworth district.
The Portland district.
VII. The supreme control of the affairs of the
Society, shall be vested in a body, to be called
the General Council, which shall consist of repre-
sentative and special members.
1. The Representative Members shall consist
of the Pastors and Delegates of the Associated
Churches, each Church consisting of not more
than thirty members, being entitled to send two
delegates, with an additional delegate for every
twenty members above the first thirty.
2 The Special members shall be :
1. The Professors of any Collegiate In-
stitution within the colony, for train-
ing ministers for the Denomination,
being members of Congregational
Chinches.
2. All Ministers and Evangelists, wholly
or partially supported by the Mission,
not being Pastors.
3. All Ministers of the Gospel of the Con-
gregational order, not having pastoral
charges, and resident within the
colony, who shall have been admitted
to membership by a vote of the
General Council.
4. All special members shall be annual
subscribers.
VIII. The General Council shall annually elect
a Chairman, a Treasurer, one or more Secre-
taries, and an Executive Committee.
IX. The Treasurer shall receive all contribu-
tions, and discharge all the Society’s obligations,
under the direction of the Executive Committee,
and shall present to the Annual Meeting, a state-
ment of the accounts duly audited. He shall
also furnish at the same time, a list of such
Churches as may not have made any payment to
the Funds during the year.
X. It shall be the duty of the Secretaries, to
summon all meetings of the Executive Committee
and General Council. The General Council shall
be convened by a letter addressed to each special
Member, to the Pastor of every Church in the
Union, and to one of the Deacons or Delegates
of such Churches as may be at the time without
a pastor. The notices shall be sent at least a
month before the time of meeting. The Secre-
taries shall take account of all the members
present at the meetings of the General Council
and Executive Committee, make a record of all
the transactions, and present to the Annual
Meeting, the Executive Committee’s report of
the proceedings of the year.
XI. The Executive Committee shall consist of
the Chairman, Treasurer, General Secretaries,
the Secretaries of the several districts, and twelve
Members of the General Council, who shall be
elected at each Annual Meeting. The duties of
the Executive Committee shall be to take measures
from time to time to obtain the Funds of the
Society, and to apply the Society’s money to the
following purposes: —
1. To defraying the charges, in whole, or in
part, of bringing ministers out from Britain or
elsewhere.
2. In engaging ministers or evangelists to
labour in suitable spheres.
3. To assist weak Churches by grants in
aid, according to their necessities and the state
of the funds.
4. To purchase, in special cases, as in new
townships or other eligible localities, land suit-
able for places of worship.
5. To defray travelling and other expenses in-
curred in carrying on the business of the Mission.
The Executive Committee shall meet once a
month, or oftener, if necessary.
XII. The members of the General Council ■
resident in each district shall constitute a Dis-
trict Committee within their own bounds. They
shall meet once a year, or oftener, in such parts
of the district as may seem to them suitable.
'1 heir duties shall be :
1. To promote union and intercourse among
the Churches.


2. To ascertain the state and progress of the and report thereon for the guidance of the Coun-
seyeral stations and churches within their dis- cil. A similar course shall be pursued in refer-
trict, receiving pecuniary aid from the Mission,
and to report on the same to the Executive
Committee.
3. To look out new spheres of Evangelistic
labour in their district.
4. To adopt such local measures as may be
practicable to provide these spheres with reli-
gious ordinances.
5. To correspond with the Executive Com-
mittee with a view to further the work, and
obtain their co-operation and assistance where
needed.
6. To appoint a Secretary for its own use,
who shall keep minutes of its proceedings, and
shall transmit to the Executive Committee an
annual report of the district one month before
the annual meeting of the Union.
XIII. Every Church or Congregation re-
ceiving pecuniary assistance from the Union,
when about to choose a minister, shall be expected
to give information of its proceedings to the Ex-
ecutive Committee in order to have its concurrence
in the measure, and to the maintenance of a cor-
dial understanding between such Church or Con-
gregation and the responsible conductors of the
Association. The neglect or refusal so to do
shall be regarded as an intimation that further
aid from the Mission funds is declined.
XIV. A dmission of Churches or special mem-
bers to the Union shall take place only at meet-
ings of the General Council. Each Church or
qualified individual shall be proposed by two
members of the General Council, and the ques-
tion of admission shall be decided by the vote of
the meeting.
XV. Any Church in membership with the
Union neglecting for one year to send a contri-
bution to the funds, after having been reminded
by the Treasurer of the omission, shall lose its
membership. But if a contribution for the past
year, and also for the current year, shall be
transmitted within twelve months after the omis-
sion has been notified to the General Council,
upon a statement to that effect being made by
the Treasurer, the Church shall again be received
into the Union.
XVI. Any two or more members of the General
Council may give notice in writing addressed to
the Secretaries that they object to any particular
Church continuing in connection with the Union.
The Secretaries shall without delay send a copy
of such notice, with the names of the objectors,
to the Pastor and one or more of the Deacons of
the Church to which objection is taken. And if,
at the meeting of the General Council, the ac-
cused defend their right of membership, a com-
mittee shall be appointed to investigate the case,
The Rev. R. Fletcher was elected by ballot
chairman, the Hon. George Rolfe treasurer, and
the Revs. W. R. Lewis and J. P. Sunderland
secretaries for the ensuing year.
The following members of the Council were
chosen by ballot as the elective members of the
Executive Committee:—
Connebee, Rev. R,
Dunn. Mr. J.
Goodhugh, Mr.
ence to special members.
XVII. As the meetings of the representatives
of the Churches of the denomination will afford
suitable opportunities for asserting and giving
public expression to the general opinion of the
body on subjects connected with morals, educa-
tion, liberty of conscience, and legislation bearing
more or less on the interests of religion, it shall
be competent for any member to bring matters
of this kind before the General Council, but not
until the regular business of the Union shall
have been disposed of. But it shall be at the
option of the Council whether any matter of
this kind proposed for discussion shall be enter-
tained or not.
XYIII. The General Council shall meet for
the despatch of business once at least in every
year, and, if practicable, twice. All arrange-
ments as to time, place, and the number and
order of public services shall be made by the
Executive Committee, subject to any instructions
given by the General Council. Special meetings
of the General Council may be convened by the
Secretaries on their receiving a written requi-
sition to that effect signed by twelve member’s.
XIX. The order of proceeding at each Annual
Meeting of the General Council shall be as
follows :
1. Devotional Exercises.
2. Chairman’s Introductory Remarks.
3. Minutes of previous Meeting read.
4. Report of the Executive Committee pre-
sented.
5. Treasurer’s Statement of Finances.
6. Business arising out of Report to be
transacted.
7. Officers for the next year to be appointed,
viz. :
Chairman.
Treasurer.
Secretaries,
Executive Committee.
Auditors.
8. New Churches and Special Members
received.
9. Any General Motions considered, those
of which previous notice had been given to take
precedence.
10. Any Supplementary Business transacted.
11. Concluding Devotional Exercises.
XX. If any member or members desire to
propose any alteration in the Constitution of the
Union, notice shall be given to the Secretaries of
such intention full two months before a General
Meeting of the Council, and the Secretaries
shall insert the same in the circular calling such
meeting.
Haller, Mr.
Landells, Rev, W. B.
Langton, Mr. E,
Mirams, Rev. J.
Moss, Rev. W.
Odell, Rev. T.
Poore, Rev. J. L.
Robinson, Rev. W. C.
Russell, Mr.


UNITED COMMUNION SERVICE.
Wednesday evening, at Oxford-street Church,
above five hundred members of the several
churches united in showing forth the Lord’s
death. The service, in some of its features,
unprecedented in Victoria, was deeply interest-
ing and impressive, and, we doubt not, will
occasion the “night to be remembered” by
those who were privileged to attend The pre-
sence of upwards of twenty congregational
ministers at this meetings, as well as that of the
previous evening, together with so large a num-
ber of office-bearers and representatives of the
churches, was highly gratifying, not only as en-
hancing the interest of the assemblies, but as
proving the great advance of the denomination
in the colony.
MINISTERS
AND DELEGATES.
THIRD MEETING OF
MORNING, May 3.
THURSDAY
The Delegates again assembled for devotion at
nine, and proceeded to business at half-past ten
o’clock.
the other, the State establishes schools of its own
on a broader and less sectarian basis—the reli-
gious instruction bestowed in which, is the same,
as to its nature and amount, as that afforded in
the National Schools of Ireland. Holding, as we
do, the principle that it is not the function of the
State to aid, directly or indirectly, in the propa-
gation of religious truth or error, we must con-
demn the first, or Denominational system. That
it has been made subservient to purely sectarian
purposes there can be no question. Monies voted
by Parliament for purposes of education have been
applied to the advancement of the interests of
particular religious bodies. Places called schools
have been built at the public expense, which are
nothing more nor less than churches ; in one
case the purpose of the building being evidenced
by the fact that it was built in the form of a
cross. By the Church of England, the Roman
Catholics, and the Wesleyans, this system has
been most strongly supported, and to those
bodies has it been of most advantage. The
system, however, does not seem to be gene-
rally approved; and beyond the limits of the
denominations just named, it is doubtful, whether,
if the denominational system were to be abolished
to-morrow, there would be any who would de-
plore its loss. As I have said, it stands con-
demned by one of our fundamental principles,
and we cannot therefore but rejoice when it ceases
to exist. The National System is not open to
such serious objections. To be sure it professes
to give religious instruction of a certain kind,
but then the denominational jobbery and favouri-
tism to which the other system has given rise
cannot be attributed to the National System. If
we must have either of the existing systems, I
think we should be unanimous in choosing the
National: but if we are to judge of them in the
light of our principles, I feel equally sure we
must condemn both. Under the National System
certain scripture lessons are taught. The teacher
is to inculcate love, kindness, forbearance, and
so on, giving as the reason that we ought to
imitate Christ; but if the child be of an in-
quiring mind, and wish to know why he should
imitate Christ, the teacher’s mouth is directly
shut by the regulations, for he could not answer
the question without expressing some sectarian,
or at least denominational view ; and all such
views of religious truth are prohibited in the
schools. Teaching of this kind is doubly objec-
tionable : it is lame and impotent as far as
DAY-SCHOOL EDUCATION.
Mr. Langton read the following paper ;
The instruction of youth is generally regarded as
one of the duties of the Christian Church. That
instruction in things sacred is such, will be ad-
mitted on all hands ; but that the Church was
established to teach men reading, writing, and
arithmetic, most of us would deny. Probably
we should all agree in regarding secular instruc-
tion as one of those things which, individually, we
should do all in our power to promote. But we
scarcely ever hear of a proposal to provide secu-
lar teaching without the scheme embracing the
religious element as well; and thus has the sub-
ject of education become one of those on which
Church Assemblies, Conferences, and Congrega-
tional Unions, feel bound to give a deliverance ;
and it is partly in consequence of this feeling that
we are asked to consider it to-day. But there is
one excellent reason why we should entertain
this subject at the present time, and that is be-
cause some legislation on it is inevitable. Pro-
bably we are not agreed as to whether the State
should interfere in the matter at all. But
whether we approve it or no, we have every rea-
son to believe that a general act authorising such
interference, will at no very distant date become
law. And, since an opinion upon the merits or
demerits of the different plans submitted is looked
for from the various religious bodies, we may,
without committing ourselves to State interfer-
ence, use our influence to make any legislation
which may result, if not as beneficial, at least as
little mischievous, as possible. In England there
are a great many schools, sustained either by en-
dowments, or by voluntary means, which are en-
tirely independent of the State. These supply
much of the educational requirements of the
poorer classes in towns. In this colony we have
nothing of the kind. We have no endowments ;
we are not old enough for them ; and I have
never heard of any schools of a public or general
character supported by voluntary means. What-
ever has been done to supply the want, which
the Free and Voluntary Schools supply in Eng-
land, has been done chiefly by the State. Two
systems have been, and are in existence. By the
one, the State bestows grants on different reli-
gious bodies, which are to be applied by those
bodies to the education of their youth. And by


Christianity is concerned ; and it is sectarian as j thirds laymen, and not more than one-half mem-
far as it concerns all other religions : for the child hers of one denomination. Mr. Fellows not only
of a conscientious Jew could not attend a school
in which such lessons were given. And thus we
have one of the same objections to this system
as we had to the other, viz.: that the public
money is applied to the support of institutions,
in the benefit of which some of the public cannot
share. It may be said that provision is made for
religious instruction, by certain hours being set
apart for the attendance of such ministers, or
religious teachers, as the parents of the children
may devise ; but I find, by the report of the
National Board, for 1858, that, out of 140 scnools,
but 26 had been attended by ministers, for pur-
poses of instruction. The existing systems then
appear objectionable on many grounds. It is
proposed to terminate them both, and to sub-
stitute one uniform system in their place ; and it
is with the character of the proposed substitute
that we are mainly concerned. Two bills, to
accomplish this change, have been introduced
during the present session, one in either house :
that in the Council by Mr. Fellows, and that in
the Assembly, by Mr. Michie. The bill of the
latter gentleman appears very roughly drawn,
and seems insufficient for the purpose at which
it aims. The bill of Mr. Fellows’ is much more
elaborate and complete, and, with the exception
of those clauses bearing on religion, might be
adopted with advantage. Under the bill of Mr.
Fellows’, the two systems now in force are
abolished ; the property of the National Board is
transferred to the Board to be appointed under
this act; the property vested in Denominational
trustees, must be either applied to the purpose
for which it was granted, or likewise transferred
to the new board; school districts are created ;
in these, schools are to be sustained by the rate-
payers, and a rate levied for the purpose; the
schools are to be managed by a local committee,
elected by the ratepayers, which committee must
consist of members of different denominations;
the religious teaching is to be the same as that
now given in the National Schools, with the same
provision for instruction by ministers; and it is
compulsory on parents and guardians to educate
their children. A comparison of those provisions
of the two bills which bear upon religion, will
help us to form a tolerably accurate idea of what
is proposed to be done:—The central board,
under Mr. Fellows’ bill, is to be nominated by
the Governor, but is to consist of three members
of each of the denominations which now partici-
pate in the denominational school grant, and
three members of “ other persuasionsso that
the Congregational body has to congratulate
itself that it belongs to “other persuasions.”
This central board, by Mr. Michie’s bill, is left
entirely to the Governor in Council. In this re-
spect the plan of the latter seems much the best,
for under that of Mr. Fellows most of the abuses
now existing under the denominational system
would be continued; and each member of the
board, since he would be appointed because of
his denominational sympathies, would lose no
opportunity of giving those sympathies full play.
The local boards of management are, under both
bills, to be elected by the ratepayers of the
school district—Mr. Michie’s bill requiring that
such board shall not consist of less than two-
provides for religious instruction, but specifies
the nature and amount of such instruction to be
given in the schools, viz., the lessons of the Na-
tional Society, and the Bible without note or
comment: provision is also made for religious
instruction by ministers. Mr. Michie remits the
whole question of religious teaching to the local
boards. This seems to me the most objection-
able feature in Mr. Michie’s bill. What these
boards would become under such an arrangement
can be better imagined than described. Fancy
a municipal council, like that of East Colling-
wood for instance, having, in addition to the
elements of discord and misrule already existing,
the odium iheologicum thrust into its midst!
Should this clause ever become law, the necessity
of education would be exemplified with a ven-
geance ! Mr. Fellows’ bill disqualifies ministers
and preachers from becoming either local mana-
gers or inspectors. This, of course, is a kind of
corollary to the provision for religious instruc-
tion. But on what principle such an indignity
and injustice—amounting, as it does, to a denial
of civil rights —should be perpetrated on a re-
spectable and valuable body of citizens, I am at
a loss to conceive. It is but another proof that
when the State begins to meddle with matters
beyond its province, it always does injury in
some quarter.—lt is for this council to express an
opinion upon this important subject. Although
the character of my paper was to be suggestive,
yet I make no apology for giving my own views
on the matter. I think we should prefer Mr.
Fellows’ bill, and seek to get all reference to
religion struck out from it. This may startle
some; but I have very little faith in the religious
instruction bestowed at day-schools, and still
less in that which the State undertakes to im-
part. Sectarian views must be inculcated, and
injustice follows as a consequence; and Ido not
think there is any equivalent for this. If the
State must do something in this way—and while
I regret the necessity, I am afraid that if Govern-
ment did not do it, much of it would not be done
at all—yet, if the State must do something, let
its work be as simple as possible. Let provision
be made for imparting the elements of know-
ledge. It would be a great thing if all the rising
generation could read and write; and these quali-
fications, coupled with a knowledge of arith-
metic, geography, &c., the State might impart
without violating any man’s creed, or unjustly ex-
pending the public money. As to the compulsory
clauses, lam indifferent. I cannot sympathise
with those who see in such provisions “gross
infringemets of the liberty of the subject.” We
grossly infringe the liberty of the subject when
we take a drunkard to the watchhouse, or pre-
vent a man using his premises for such purposes
as to make them a nuisance to the neighbour-
hood. I rather agree with Sir Thomas More:—
‘ ‘ If we suffer our children to be ill educated, and
their morals corrupted from childhood, and then
punish them for those crimes to which their
early training inclined them; what else can be
said of this but that we first make thieves and
then punish them ?” Society, it seems to me,
has a perfect right to say to one of its members:
—“We will not have a nest of vipers nursed in


our midst. If you will not do your duty to your among the Congregational Churches in this
children, and fit them to become decent and colony, must be regarded more in the light of
orderly citizens, we will try what we can do and
charge the cost upon you. ” But yet I find that
in the United States, or at least in New England,
for the support of the common schools, the rate-
payers levy upon themselves a larger sum than
they are required to do by law; but whether the
bulk of the people of this colony are as well able
to appreciate education as the descendants of the
Pilgrim Fathers, I cannot say. It is, however,
with the religious aspect of the question that this
council is chiefly concerned, and I beg its atten-
tion to that.
Rev. E. Day said he did not like the separa-
tion of the sacred and the secular, but could not
approve of the State meddling with religion in
any way.
Rev. R. Cosstnebee had perused the two bills,
and had come to a different conclusion, as to
their merits, from that of Mr. Langton. He
thought Mr. Fellows’ bill most objectionable, and
Mr. Michie’s much less so. The only clause in
the latter bill which bore upon religion, was that
which required the local board to be formed of
not less than two-thirds laymen, and not more
than half of members of one denomination.
Mr. Langton said the previous speaker was
under a misapprehension. The fact was as he
had stated. Mr. Michie’s bill remitted the settle-
ment of the question, ‘ ‘ What religious teaching
should take place in the schools,” to the local
boards, which might be expected to become per-
fect Bedlams in consequence.
Rev. W. Moss approved of the views of the
author of the paper.
T. Embling, Esq., M.L.A., could not agree
with Mr. Langton. He thought that some reli-
gious teaching should be insisted on under any
system of national education.
Rev. J. Beer would be satisfied if only the
Bible were used as a lesson book.
Mr. Langton then moved—
That, in the opinion of this Council, legislation on the
subject of education should be confined exclusively to pro-
viding secular instruction; and that the Chairman, Messrs.
Day, M‘Miohael, Landells, Connebee, Eolfe, and Haller, with
the mover, be a committee to take what steps they may deem
necessa-y, to give effect to the foregoing opinion; Mr. Lang-
ton to be convener.
Mr. Langton said that he fully sympathised
with Mr. Day’s remarks, and if private
schools were to be established would advocate
some religious instruction being given. But
the subject now before the meeting was—
What shall the State do ? He said empha-
tically, whatever it did, let it leave religion
alone. If the State ceased to meddle in this
way, the Christian Church would know exactly
what it had to do. Members of churches were
prone to believe that the people were being in-
structed in religion in these Government schools,
when there was no warrant for such a conviction.
Let the State confine itself to the secular, and
the Church was quite competent to take charge
of the sacred.
Rev. W. Moss seconded the resolution, which
was carried, with only two dissentients.
EDUCATION OE A COLONIAL MINISTRY.
[The present paper on the subject of a Christian
Ministry, proposed to be established and sustained
suggesting thought, and directing enquiry, than
of supplying a finished production.]
The Rev. W. B. Landells then read the
following paper :
The importance of an educated Ministry, in
connection with the preaching of the Gospel,
cannot be disputed—the exposition of divine
truth—the defence of that truth against all op-
position, and its diffusion throughout the world,
demand an agency thoroughly trained and fur-
nished for their successful accomplishment. By
an educated Ministry, we mean a ministry in
which the intellect and heart are subjected to
the influence of a well regulated discipline, so
that every faculty shall be invigorated, toned,
and bent in the direction of its future enterprize,
together with the possession of the varied mental
and moral acquisitions which the work requires.
Such a Ministry is opposed neither to the pos-
session and development of personal piety on the
one hand, nor on the other, to the operations of
God’s Holy Spirit. On the contrary, the thorough
education of the intellect and heart, will greatly
conduce to the elevation and enriching of man’s
spiritual nature, and at the same time bring the
soul under a deeper consciousness of its need of
spiritual help and blessing.
In connection with God’s work of enlightening,
instructing, and saving man, there has always
been an agency of this kind required, and conse-
quently employed—an agency disciplined, and
thus fitted for its accomplishment. Sometimes,
as in the case of prophets, it has been one super-
naturally endowed for the work ; but such en-
dowment, implying, in its very bestowment,
the necessity of right and thorough qualification
for it. Sometimes, as in the case of the schools
of the prophets, it has been one embodying a
course of systematic training under prophetic
men, in order that the office of religious in-
struction, if not of inspired utterance, might be
supplied with a constant succession of such men.
The institution, there can be no doubt, was a
Divine one—both in its appointment and in its
varied sanctions.
If, then, under the olden economy, we have
the divinely recognised elements of such an edu-
cated or disciplined agency for sustaining and
diffusing divine truth, may we not reasonably
expect their fuller recognition under the present
dispensation, in which teaching or instruction
occupies so much larger a sphere of operation.
What meant the tarrying of the disciples in
Jerusalem, until they should be endued with
power from on high ? What meant the Pente-
costal visitation in its gifts of tongues, in its
powers of healing, in its new manhood of intel-
lect and heart, but the divine substitution of
powers, and discipline, and acquisitions, both
mental and spiritual, of which they had been
previously destitute, and without which they
could not be fitted for their noble and mighty
work? Such qualifications were miraculously
received; such a schooling of the intellect and
the heart as that which was then obtained, came
direct from Heaven; but the miraculous gifts
which were thus secured were only for a limited
period, to be speedily succeeded by a trainin o-
which, to a very great extent, was to be secured


through human appliances and effort. In the
case, then, of prophets and apostles, there
were a supernatural preparation and training
for their work, because the nature of their work
demanded such a kind of fitness, and because as
yet no human appliances had been called into
existence for this object. But in the case of the
Schools of the Prophets over which prophetic
men presided, and in the case of coadj utorship in
the Apostolic Mission with which Apostles were
associated, we discover the first germs of a human
training and discipline, not severed from the
spirit’s influence and teaching, but subordinated
to both.
Take the case of Apollos. He was an eloquent
man and mighty in the Scriptures. Instructed in
the way of the Lord, he was brought to a cordial
faith in the Gospel, and animated by an earnest
tlesire to advocate its cause, he commenced
preaching the Truth. But lacking a comprehen-
sive and satisfactory acquaintance with Chris-
tianity, he was received into the fellowship of
Aquila and Priscilla. They undertook his reli-
gious education, —expounded unto him the way
of God more perfectly ; and thus, through the
discipline and instruction which he secured, he
became fitted for occupying a noble position in
the defence and preaching of the Gospel. Nor
must we overlook the studies of Timothy, under
the direction of the Apostle Paul—studies which
were prosecuted, even amid the active and con-
tinuous labours of the ministry. How emphatic
are the exhortations of the Apostle upon this
point. “Till I come,” says he, “give attend-
ance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine ;
neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was
given thee by prophecy, and the laying on of
the hands of the presbytery,”—or, as we are
somewhat inclined to regard the latter part of
of this statement, ‘ ‘ which was bestowed upon thee
through specific instruction—confirmed by the ap-
proval and decision of the presbytery.” Again,
he says—“ Meditate on these things ; give thy-
self wholly to them, that thy profiting may ap-
pear unto all.” Again—“ Hold fast the form of
sound words, which thou hast heard of me.”
And further —“ Continue then in the things
which thou hast learned, and hast been assured
of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them. ”
From such considerations as these there can be
no doubt that, in the very first days of Chris-
tianity, and that too under the supervision of
Apostolic men, a course of instruction and train-
ing was recognised and employed, to fit indi-
viduals for the preaching of the Gospel and the
work of the ministry.
Now this Divinely recognised instmmentnlity—
an educated ministry—has occupied amongst us
Nonconformists—or, if you like the term better,
Congregationalists—a position of commanding
prominency. Throughout the whole of our history
it has never been lost sight of; but always—in
our weakness and in our strength,—within the
humble domicile of an ejected and persecuted
ministry, as well as when we have been able, in
days of greater freedom, to rear our turretted
halls of divinity—under all circumstances the
ministerial institution has been an essential ele-
ment of our denominational existence. We have
only to think of the Doolittles, and the Jollys,
and the Doddridges, and the Winters, and the
Scotts, who gave themselves up to this important
work. We have only to glance our eye over the
county history of England to find among the
olden or more modern records of such counties
the proofs of the existence of such institutions.
It may be very humble and obscure, but,
at the same time, true and genuine institutions
for the work of the ministry. And here let it be
said, without the imputation of denominational
egotism, that the orthodoxy of religious principle
and polity, for which the denomination, as a
whole, has been continually distinguished, may,
to a very great extent, be attributed to the per-
petuation of those domiciliary institutions for
the ministering of the Gospel. It may, there-
fore, be said in truth, that wherever Con-
gregationalism has taken root in the soil of
a country, there has sprung up as one of its
most important objects of culture an edu-
cated ministry. England, throughout its length
and breadth, is dotted with such institutions.
In Scotland, they have found a dwelling-place
beneath the shadow of its national universities;
independent, yet not despising them as almce
matres from which they obtain nourishment and
strength. Even Ireland has received them, and
there they have become a tower of strength to
conservate the truth as it struggles upward to
life and light amid the foul atmosphere of Popish
superstition and error. Into the New World
they have long been transplanted. There the
Pilgrim Fathers watched over them with a
jealous care. The colonies have witnessed their
establishment. Canada and New Brunswick
now have their collegiate halls of divinity. And
so they must accompany Independency all the
world over, if she is to rise up to the fulness of
her strength, and occupy that commanding posi-
tion for which her principles and her polity,
her spirit of deep-seated liberty, and her adap-
tation to universal humanity, so well qualify her
to sustain.
A collegiate institution to secure an educated
ministry must therefore, sooner or later, be asso-
ciated with our denominational existence in this
colony. It will be a sign of our consolidated
condition, as well as an effectual means of pro-
moting it. It is impossible to overrate the ad-
vantages which its establishment would secure.
The churches, in looking out for and providing the
young men for its curriculum of study, as well as
in gathering together the necessary funds re-
quired by the institution, would be greatly bene-
fitted by the sustainment of the responsibility,
and the new kind of activity which it would de-
mand. A ministry selected from the young men
of our churches would be one bound by the
strongest ties to Colonial service of every kind,
whether it be the simple preaching of the Gos-
pel, or the establishment and maintenance of
Christian institutions throughout the land. The
course of study would gradually shape itself into
the precise form which our denominational in-
terests in the colony require, and thus become a
source of more efficient training than could pos-
sibly be obtained from the father-land ; besides
this, the aid of such an institution, the outgrowth
of the denomination as the means of meeting
its ever-increasing demands could be more satis-
factorily met than can possibly be done in our
present condition. If then it be admitted, that


an educated ministry is not only not opposed to
the Word of God, but sanctioned by its principles
and examples; if such a ministry has always
existed as an essential element of our Indepen-
dent history, and belongs to its very genius and
spirit; if it has been a means of consolidation
and outgrowth wherever Independency has been
established ; and if there be felt the conviction, :
that here as well as elsewhere, an educated min- j
istry must eventually be provided, it may be
worthy of our consideration to inquire whether I
or not the time has arrived when the necessary
measures for its establishment may not be taken.
And without hesitation, we affirm that the time
has come, when it is not only desirable for the
initiative upon this subject to be taken, but
when it is absolutely necessary that it should
be done.
The difficulties of obtaining from the father-
land ministerial supplies for this colony have, up
to the present moment, been very great—so great
have they been, that, but for the indomitable
energy and perseverance of our brother, Mr.
Poore, they would have been altogether insur-
mountable. We do not hesitate to state, that it
is owing to his unconquerable zeal and devoted-
ness, so large a ministerial supply has been
already secured. And when we consider the
delicate as well as difficult task he has had to
perform, too strong an expression of satisfaction
cannot be uttered, as to the manner in which it
has been accomplished. But while we say this,
have we not all at the same time felt the convic-
tion continually gathering strength, in our minds,
that such a system of supply must not be re-
garded as the one best fitted to reach permanently
the necessities of our position, and to subserve
our colonial wants. Mr. Poore himself, it is
believed, thoroughly concurs in such a con-
clusion. It is here a fitting place to utter, and
it is done most cordially, our thanks to him for
his varied labours, and to the honoured brethren
who at his invitation have come to this land to
mingle in our fellowship, and to co-operate with
us in our noble enterprise. To a higher order of
service, shall it be said, our brother Mr. Poore,
must ultimately commit himself, with his charac
teristic energy and zeal, one which our growing
strength, our multiplied wants, and the estab-
lishment of a collegiate institution will necessitate.
But here let me not anticipate. Our present
system of ministerial supply, has it not almost
become effete ? Can we confidently depend for
the future upon such ministerial help ? And even
if in England there be a general awakening
throughout the land to the great interests of
religion, will not such a revival of religion in-
crease the difficulty, and render the scanty
supplies which wc have received still more in-
sufficient, by increasing the demand for minis-
terial service at home ? We see then, in all this,
the imperative necessity for establishing at once
a Collegiate Institution, to provide as speedily as
possible for our future need. And in connection
with such an institution, we see a noble work for
our brother to undertake and accomplish. The
gradual and judicious opening up of new spheres of
labour, assisted it may be by coadjutors, who shall
entirely give themselves up to such evangelistic
work, and through whose exertions there shall be
provided spheres of labours for the students of
> such an institution at the close of their collegiate
3 | career. It is in such a light as this that we look
3 at the establishment of our Hall of Divinity, as
- supplying the only legitimate mode of working
I : up successfully the results of evangelistic labour
i in this colony and the means of permanently
i i supplying the cqnstantly recurring vacancies in
, | our churches.
- i Notwithstanding, however, the pressing neces-
e sity for the existence of a collegiate institution,
r it may be asked, Is its establishment practicable !
y : Have we the young men—pious, gifted, devoted
. —for such a work ! —the professors to lead them
e successfully through their collegiate career?-
e | the funds to sustain with healthy vigour the
t various objects of the institution? —and the
d gentlemen wise and energetic to manage its
affairs ? These are important questions : but we
think they may receive a satisfactory solution,
p I. We think we have the young men who
,t possess the requisite qualities of mind and heart,
e of body and soul, for an efficient ministry.
’. There is in connection with our respective con-
i'- gregations, a class of young men of whom it
it need only be said, that it just requires the
L- Spirit of God to stir up in their breasts the feel-
n ing of deep solicitude for the souls of men in
ie order to secure a race of highly gifted and de-
;o voted ministers of the truth. At the present
m moment, it is supposed that we have five or six,
it at least, —pious, devoted, energetic young men,
s, qualified for study,—who would, if the necessary
e- inducements were held out, constitute the nucleus
s, of a collegiate institution such as is now sought to
e- be established; nor can it be doubted, that
y through the exercise of a wise and encouraging
r e supervision on the part of ministers, a continual
is supply of similar young men could be secured for
i- the future exigencies of such an institution.
,d 11. We think we have the professors ;at least,
ir it may be confidently affirmed, that there is one
sn (Rev. R. Fletcher) who could most efficiently fill
io the Chair of Divinity and Biblical Criticism, and
;h take the presidency of the institution, whose heart
of has been long set upon the realisation of so import-
e, ant an object. With regard to the other depart-
c ments of collegiate study—the Classics, Mathe-
ig matics, and Natural Philosophy—some one might
b- be found, who would, at least, undertake the
e. temporary supervision of such departments, if
it not its permanent and exclusive direction,
st 111. We think there are the Funds.
or This will be acknowledged to be the greatest
;n practical difficulty; and yet, after all, it will
ig very much depend upon the extent of our pecu-
of niary necessities. Now, whilst it is of great im-
n- portance to have ultimately an institution
by worthy of the denomination in its principles and
n- mission, there is no absolute necessity that such
:s- should be the starting point in its establishment,
is, The histoiy of some of our collegiate insti-
ce tutious at home, and amongst the rest the
as alma mater of him who reads this paper, might
on furnish us with some very useful suggestions on
or th’s point, In an humble erection, in the village
he of Idle, transferred from an older foundation at
of Heckmondwick, continued for many years of
ill growing usefulness the Idle Academy, as it was
tic originally called—now the chartered college of
be Airedale, near Bradford. But whilst the desig-
of | nation of “ Idle students ’was not a very plea-


Bant one to hear, yet, amongst these students some
of the brightest and noblest of the men that have
tilled our pulpits are to be found. Let the sim-
ple mentioning of the names, James Parsons of
\ ork, John Kelly of Liverpool, and others, suffice.
And why not, in the formation of our collegiate
institution, start from a similar point? We need
purchase no land—erect no superstructure. With
little additional cost sufficient accommodation
could, at the first, be provided beneath the roof
of its theological professor. And if this be found
to be practicable, the chief difficulty would
be at once overcome. The cost of board
and lodgings of the students, the salaries of
the professors, which, at the outset, need be
little more than nominal would constitute nearly
the whole of the outlay ; and a Collegiate Insti-
tution thus started, with six students, need not
cost more than seven or eight hundred pounds
per annum. To provide apparatus, class books,
library, ike. , must be the result of specific efforts
in which, there can be no doubt, we should ob-
tain considerable help amongst our friends in
England. This rough estimate of cost, besides
all the other elements of consideration, could be
more satisfactorily accomplished through the
medium of a committee of inquiry.
Thus brethren and delegates of the Churches,
it has been attempted in a series of suggestive
remarks, to bring before your consideration, this
important subject of an educated ministry. It
is one which has for a long time engaged my own
thoughts. And when it first shaped itself to my
mind, an Evening Hall of Education for the young
men of our churches and congregations, appeared
to me the best form of preparing for a Collegiate In-
stitution. Subsequently, however, and that chiefly
from the fact of there being already young men
prepared to enter upon a course of educational
training, the conviction has forced itself upon me,
that the better course would be to try to bring
at once into existence, no matter how embryal
the form, a Theological Hall. The time seems to
me most auspicious for making the attempt, now
that we have been led, I trust by the Spirit of
God, to consolidate our denominational interests,
and thus to commence a new and a more interest-
ing chapter in our united history. If we can
bring our undivided energies and influence to
bear upon this important object, we shall secure
its successful accomplishment. And though it
may at first assume a very feeble form of life,
and have to struggle with many difficulties, yet
with the divine benediction resting upon it, it
shall ultimately rise to the noblest manhood, and
be a source of strength and blessing to Congrega-
tionalism in Victoria.
_ Lev. J. L. Poore said he had occupied much
time yesterday, and did not wish to intrude long
to-day ; but the duty of supplementing Mr. L’s.
paper had been assigned to him by the commit-
tee. When the author of a paper begs you to
take his remarks for crude hints, you may al-
ways expect a good paper; and those they had
heard that morning were such. It reminded
him of the old country, and his satisfaction
was very great. It seemed as if long-cher-
ished hopes were about being realised. When
he was asked to come here to do a sort of bishop’s
work, he said, “Well, gentlemen, come weal,
come woe, I’ll try it for seven years.” Those
years had not expired, but he felt that day that
the work was well nigh done. He agreed with
the author of the paper that the plan of bringing
ministers from England was nearly exhausted.
It was time they thought of raising a ministry in
the colony. When he went back to England
some years ago, he experienced great difficulty
in procuring ministers, but he would go again
if it were necessary, although he hoped the
necessity would not arise. Victoria was his
home, and he wished to stop here. But we
must have ministers, unless we were prepared to
withdraw from our undertaking, and to leave the
field to others. Three years would elapse before
any trained here would be ready for service. So
that more must come from England. He thanked
God that he had been the means of bringing
some good men to the colony ; but his rejoicing
was sadly marred and broken, when he thought
of the failures some had made. But even Moses
was at faidt in selecting some of the men whom
he sent to spy out the land. We must, then, set
about raising up a ministry from among the
C'lurches themselves. Some people said he
(the speaker) was sanguine; he was not; —
(laughter)—he only forecast. Mr. Landells
was sanguine, or he would not think of educat-
ing young men so easily. Many years ago,
his (Mr. Ps’.) deacons came to him and said
his chapel must be enlarged, and he then showed
them the plans he had prepared five years before,
(laughter) and he was only ‘ ‘ forecasting” in the
same way when he spoke of the College. We
should get some more ministers from England—
one he hoped soon for the Parade. He thought
the natural position for a theological hall was
near the University; since at that institution the
student could study the' ‘ ‘ Humanities but we
must provide “Divinity” professors, Bev. R.
Fletcher might have been, more than once, if at
liberty, appointed tutor of such an institution in
England, and he came here to undertake some-
thing of the kind, and would do it well. He
(Mr. P.) did not agree with the new plan of non-
residence of students. He was under the care of
Dr. Halley, and could testify to the excellent
influence which Mrs. Halley exercised upon the
students. An establishment of the kind required
need not be a costly one. He thought £l5OO a-
year would pay all the expenses; and that amount
did not appear to him difficult to obtain. With
the present, or rather past inefficient arrangements
of the Home Mission, £6OO a-year was raised.
The treasurer was not a sanguine man; he sees
£lOOO, and he (the speaker) thought it safe to go
a little further. The tutor must be relieved
from pastoral duties, and should have £5OO a-
year and a residence. Most probably £2OO out
of that might be obtained from the Colonial
Missionary Society. But besides money, books
would be required; not a large library, but a
good one,-—about 2000 or 3000 well - selected
books. More than one minister present had
brought rather a large collection with him to
this colony, in view of some such undertaking.
To establish such an institution would involve at
least three years’ hard work ; and if it was to be
done, they must make up their minds to such an
effort. He believed assistance in the shape of
books might be obtained from New York and
Boston. The Pilgrim Fathers obtained supplies


of books and other help from England in estab-
lishing their colleges, and he thought their de-
scendants would gladly help us in such a work.
From England, although we could not obtain
ministers, we might get money. Thus it seemed
to him the object was within our reach, and if
the churches girded themselves up to the task,
it would be done. When he was a youth at
Highbury College he used to read with wonder
and respect the names of the men who had been
benefactors to that institution. It was a noble
and holy purpose to apply money to; it could
not be given for a better object, since such an
institution would confer blessings on the colony
for ages yet to come. He concluded by moving—
That the cordial thanks of this meeting be presented to
the Rev. W. B. Landells for his very interesting paper, and
that its many valuable suggestions be commended to a com-
mittee consisting of the Chairman, Revs. Landells, Poore,
Odell, Connebee, M‘Michael; and Messrs. Rolfe, Enabling,
I.angton, R. 0. Dunn, and Russell, with instructions to them
to take immediate measures for realising the object proposed.
Eev. T. Odell seconded the resolution, and
remarked that the paper of Mr. Landells ought
to be condensed and published, and it would be
generally read. He liked the reference in the
paper to Mr. Poore’s labours, and he thought, in
connection with those labours, that the present
assembly should send to England a report which
would counteract the influence of certain other
reports which individuals had forwarded.
Eev. E. Connebee had personally experienced
some inconvenience from the lack of provision
for pulpit supplies and for training ministers.
In his own church there were some young men
whom he thought suitable. One young man,
who had been studying for the bar, gave up his
intention, and was now a student for the minis-
try. Some regular provision for such cases was
needed, and he thought Mr. Poore’s plan suit-
able. It seemed to him a more certain source of
supply than looking abroad, since some who
came here found their health fail. Menio, ‘ygbbn
trained here, would obtain colonial experience
before entering on their ministry. Such an in-
stitution, too, would provide a permanent not an
occasional supply.
Hon. G. Eolfe thought the plan feasible. He
would be glad to contribute towards carrying it
out.
The resolution was then put and carried
unanimously.
EVANGELISTIC LABOUR.
Eev. E. Day, in introducing this subject, said
he had no paper, but the matter had had his
careful consideration. Mr. Poore’s labours had
been directed to places where ministers could be
supported. There were other places for which
something should be done. All had heard of
“rushes” on the diggings. Men were wanted
to follow these rushes, as, in most cases, the
people were for a time utterly destitute of all
religious ordinances. If suitable men could be
obtained for such a work, he (Mr. Day) thought
they would soon be sustained by the people
amongst whom they laboured. Then there were
other places, where the population was so scanty
that regular ministers could not be settled.
There were members of the churches who could
supply their places, but not regularly. The
Wesleyan system worked well in this respect,
but the Independents could not do much by
local preachers. But if a minister was appointed
to take up a district, ministering first at one
place and then at another, he would, with some
assistance from lay agency, do much to meet
such cases. He thought men might be found in
the churches, who, after some six or twelve
months training, would be fit for such a work.
As to support, the mission might sustain them
entirely, not allowing them to draw any thing from
the people, and then let collections be made at
the different places for the mission. Thus the minis-
ter would not be hampered by money considera-
tions, and, in a short time, might become a set-
tled pastor and be sustained by the people
themselves.
Eev. T. H. Jackson was located in a district
far separated from all others, and had felt the
difficulty Mr. Day had described. Could he
have a minister associated with himself, much
might be accomplished; and places which he
could do nothing for now could be reached. He
should prefer the plan of settling two ministers
in one district, to that of employing evangelists ;
but he approved of many of Mr. Day’s remarks.
Around Beechworth was a large district, most of
which was entirely neglected; but he thought a
minister associated with himself would soon find
encouragement and would be supported.
Eev. J. L. Poore thought Mr. Jackson’s sug-
gestion the most feasible. Itinerancy did not
seem to be liked by Independent ministers. In
South Australia it had been tried, and had not
answered well. He thought assisted mininisers
best, and if the country pastors had coadjutors
or assistants, fresh spheres of labour would be
opened up, and in course of time, the assistant
would become a settled pastor.
Eev. T. Johnson had come to the same con-
clusion as Mr. Jackson. He thought two men
located in one spot would best reach the case.
Maryborough was nearly deserted; but he could
not leave his people, although Inglewood so
sadly needed help. Lamplough and Back Creek,
two very populous places, demanded our atten-
tion. He thought it would be a dereliction of
duty on the part of this society if something
were not done for the scattered population of
the gold-fields. For his part, he was glad
to do what the committee assigned him, and
should very cheerfully co-operate in any such
work.
Eev. W. E., Fletcher was glad of this con-
versation if it should only stimulate the country
ministers to look around them. Near Sandhurst,
there were, at least, half-a-dozen places which
could be serviceably occupied if some assistance
were given. He thought young men might be
found in the country districts, who would be-
come students at the proposed college, and
meanwhile assist in the way described. The
Wesleyans had seventeen places of worship on
the Bendigo gold-fields, and only two ministers.
Eev. W. B. Landells fully sympathised with
the brethren on the gold-fields, and thought a
modification of Mr. Jackson’s plan would answer
well. In reference to Mr. Fletcher’s remarks
about young men, he thought the ministers
should turn their attention more to that matter.
He (Mr. Landells) had a class of young men,
two of whom had oflered themselves as mis-
sionaries.


Revs. J. Summers and J. Pitman agreed with
the previous speakers. It was then moved hy
Mr. Haller, seconded by Mr, Rolfe, and unani-
mously resolved—
That the Executive Committee be instructed to adopt some
measures for providing ministerial service for tire rushes on
our gold-fields.
The meeting then adjourned.
MEETING OF THE HOME MISSION.
THURSDAY EVENING, May 3.
The Annual Meeting of the Congregational Home
Mission, took place in the Independent Church,
Lennox-street, Richmond, the Hon. G. Rolfe pre-
siding on the occasion. There was a numerous and
attentive audience; and the various ministers in
connection with the body mustered largely from
various parts of the colony. On the platform we
observed the Revs. Messrs. Odell, Pitman, Moss,
Vetch, Mirams, M‘Michael, Landells, Connebee,
Day, Jackson, Robinson, Poore, W. R. Fletcher,
Summers, Hopkins, Lewis, Sunderland, Sleigh,
Johnson, and Beer. The proceedings commenced
with singing the 669th Hymn, which was fol-
lowed by prayer from Rev. J. Mirams.
The Chairman expressed his pleasure in oc-
cupying the position in which he had been placed,
though as Treasurer it might be considered not
exactly in order. It would be a matter of re-
joicing to all of them, to find that after upwards
of three years struggling, they had arrived at
the position they were now occupying. They
had’met with many difficulties, and outlived many
prejudices ; they had felt the want of sympathy
from those whom they expected would have
joined in the objects of their mission. He
congratulated them on the glorious results of
the unceasing efforts of their friend Mr.
Poore, (applause), without whose energy and de-
termination they might have remained an almost
unrecognised body: and through whose exer-
tions there were now so many ministers in
connection with the Mission in Victoria. There
was much to be done ; but as they were now well
organised he did not doubt that great results for
good would follow.
Rev. W. R. Lewis (secretary) read the sub-
joined report, several portions of which elicited
the unqualified approbation of the meeting.
report.
“ The committee of the Congregational Home
Mission in meeting its constituents, does so with
thankfulness to God, for the grace by which they
have been enabled to accomplish so much for the
advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, and by
which the ministers, assisted by the society, have
been sustained in their toils.
“ The past year has been one of serious depres-
sion in trade, which has been felt by our recently
gathered congregations in the mining districts,
and the attractions of new gold-fields have drawn
away many, by whom our agents would have
been cheered and supported in their labours.
Whilst, therefore, feeling that we have deep cause
for gx-atitude, we cannot but sympathise with
those who have been thus tried.
“ The intex-ior towns of the colony have special
claims on our missionaxy efforts, but they also
present special difficulties in the way of supply-
ing their religious wants. Where large popula-
tions are x’apidly gathex’ed wholly because of the
gold in the soil, they sometimes as rapidly dis-
perse, and until other interests are developed to
give fixity to the people, great fluctuations may
be expected, and serious inconvenience suffered
by ministers settled in such districts. We may,
therefore, be called upon to help churches, which,
under ordinary circumstances, would have been
self-sustaining.
“The efforts of the society have been chiefly
directed to the gold-fields, though not to the ex-
clusion of other districts.
“ Beechworth. —ln the north-east of the
colony, about 170 miles from Melbourne, is the
township of an extensive gold region, where, if
possible, we should locate two other ministers.
At present this town is greatly depressed, and
its population seriously diminished; yet, the
Rev. T. H. Jackson has not laboured without en-
couraging tokens of the Divine approval. He
holds several meetings for prayer in the town,
and preaches at various stations from two to nine
miles distant. The chapel, which is built of
stone, is free of debt, and put in trust. A debt of
£2OO remains on the minister’s house, which is
being liquidated at the rate of £75 per annum.
“ Brighton. —The cause in this suburban dis-
trict is in a very encouraging state. The congre-
gation is gradually on the increase. During the
year fourteeen membei’s have been added to the
church The Sabbath-school is vigoi'ously con-
ducted by an efficient staff of devoted teachers.
The other institutions connected with the chui’ch
are well sustained. The people ai’e making
efforts to x-emove a portion of the debt of .£5OO
remaining upon their place of woi’ship.
“ Carlton. —The Church at Carlton applied
for, and has received a small amount of pecu-
niary assistance, and asks still further aid. The
Rev, H. Thomas having been compelled to retui’n
to England on account of failing health, the
Rev. J. Firth has engaged to supply the pulpit
for three months. The congregation numbers
about 120, and the Sunday-school has an attend-
ance of 140 childi'en. A system of visitation
thi'oughout the neighbourhood is earned on by
the members of the church.
“ Dunolly. —The Rev. J. Beer was settled just
prior to our last annual meeting; since which
time, notwithstanding the depopulated state of
the town, he has succeeded in erecting a neat
and commodious chapel, which was opened for
worship on March 11th, by the Rev. J. L. Poore.
Just now gi’eat difficulties are felt, as members
are removing to new gold-fields. The Sunday-
school is continued, and the minister anxiously
watches evei’y opportunity of extending his
usefulness.
“ Daylesford, in the Jim Crow Ranges, has a
mixed mining and agricultural population.
Until your agent (the Rev. J. Summers), went


thither- the town was utterly without religious
ordinances, the Sabbath was but little regarded;
there was no call to worship, the children were
neglected, and the dead were buried without any
minister to speak words of consolation or warning
to survivors. But now a congregation has been
gathered, a school established ; places of business
ore closed on the Sabbath, a commodious and sub-
stantial church is nearly completed, and by
labours abundant, the minister has gained the
respect and confidence of the district.
“ Emerald Hill.—ln July last the Rev. J. E.
Vetch accepted the call of a few friends to
minister to them, and to endeavour to raise a con-
gregation on Emerald Hill. A Church was formed,
but after a few months he felt it necessary to
resign his pastorate, and with the majority of the
people has commenced worship in the hall of the
Mechanics’ Institute.
“Maryborough. —The Rev. Thos. Johnson
shortly after his arrival from England went to
Maryborough, and although the population has
been diminished, and ministers of other denomi-
nations have been settled in the town since he com-
menced his ministi-y; and have consequently
drawn off the adherents of their respective
churches, —yet success has crowned his efforts ;
he has been wholly sustained by the people of
his charge. A very excellent church has been
erected, and was opened for worship on April the
first by the Rev. J. L. Poore. A Sunday-school
has been gathered, other agencies for good are
employed, and a minister’s house is about^to
be erected.
“ Portland, a town on the sea board in the
west of the colony, has been the sphere of the
labours of the Rev. J. Sleigh. He is about to
leave, and the church has applied for continued
assistance. It is feeble and will require the ex-
ercise of much judgment and kindly advice.
“At Williamstown the ministry of the word
has been sustained during the past year without
any assistance from the funds of this Society,
FINANCIAL
RECEIPTS.
1860, May 1.
Balance from 1858-59 £l5 14 7
Contributions of Churches :
Beech worth Church 6 10 0
Brighton do 19 9 0
Castlemaine do. 39 10 04
Collingwood do. (Oxford-street) 24 9 10|
Haylesford do. ... ••• 214 6
Geelong do. (M‘Killop-street) 20 0 0
Melbourne do. (Lonsdale-street) 710 2
Do. (Victoria Parade) 23 12 6
Portland do 2 0 0
Prahran do. ... ... ••• 9 15 0
Richmond do. ... ... 27 8 0
St. Kihla do 60 7 2
Williamstown do 4 7 6
East St. Kihla Ladies’ Working
party ••• ••• ••• ••• 16 13 6
Subscriptions and donations ... 193 6 6
£473 8 44
The church consists of forty-two members; and
there are seventy children attending the Sabbath-
school.
“ Ballaarat. —The church is without a pastor,
and has placed itself under the care of the Rev. J.
L. Poore, who has engaged to provide supplies
for the pulpit until a suitable minister is ob-
tained.
“ Queenscliffe and Schnapper Point have
been regularly supplied. Applications have been
received from other places for Sabbath services,
and some most eligible openings are presented;
but owing to the fewness of ministers, it is found
impossible to meet these demands. ‘ Pray ye,
therefore, the Lord of the harvest, that He would
send forth more labourers.*
“ Not only have we to speak of the want of
ministers, but to deplore the departure of some
who were helpful in the work of the Lord. The
Rev. H. Thomas and the Rev. J. Hill have, by
failing health, been compelled to return to Eng-
“ When the Rev. Thomas Binney left this
colony for England in August last, the Committee
made application through him to the Colonial
Missionary Society of England to send out ten
additional ministers, and guaranteed one thousand
pounds towards the expenses of their voyage out.
but up to the time of the departure of the
February mail, none had been found willing to
come to our help. To obtain ministers from
England is both difficult and costly, and attended
with many risks; and we are thus compelled to
consider the duty of calling forth godly youth in
our Churches to the work of the ministry, and of
providing means for their education.”
The Chairman, as Treasurer, presented the
financial account, of which the following is an
abstract. The comparatively small sum re-
quired in effecting so large an amount of good
indicates that the help was afforded to those
who were disposed to help themselves
STATEMENT.
EXPENDITURE.
1860, May 1.
Assistance to Churches:—
Beechworth £25 0 0
Brighton 50 0 0
Carlton 25 0 0
Haylesford 50 0 0
Dunolly 47 13 0
Emerald Hill ... ... ... 35 0 0
Portland 50 0 0
Travelling expenses of ministers ... 50 0 0
Expenses in Melbourne of do. ... 22 18 0
Assistance to student 10 0 0
Debt of old society ... 20 0 0
Printing and incidentals 54 16 0
Balance in treasurer’s hands ... 33 1 4|
£473 8 4 1


Bates
5
0
0
Baines
10
0
0
Brookes
5
0
0
Battersby -
1
1
0
Britten
1
0
0
Callender, Caldwell and Co.
2
2
0
Dunn
1
1
0
Figges
1
0
0
Frazer
1
0
0
Fulton
.3
3
0
Haller
3
2
0
Barker, G.
50
0
0
Haigh, B.
5
0
0
Houghton
1
0
0
Jackson, S.
5
5
0
Laing
3
3
0
Langton
2
0
0
Lee
2
10
0
Peterson, W.
20
0
0
Poore, J. L.
2
0
0
Port, J., Geelong -
10
0
0
Rolfe, G.
10
0
0
Sargood, F. J.
10
0
0
Sargood, F. T.
10
0
0
Snow
5
0
0
Sutherland, A.
2
2
0
Wilkinson
1
1
0
Whittingham Brothers
1
0
0
Wilkinson, It.
5
0
0
Wisewould
5
0
0
With regard to one item, £16135. 6d., the Treasurer
explained that it had been collected by the labours
of some few ladies in St. Kilda in aid of the Home
Mission. It had occupied but little of their time,
but had given them an immensity of pleasure,
and he strongly recommended their example to
the ladies of other congregations.
DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS.
£ s. d.
Messrs. Barlow - - - 5 0 0
£lBB 10 0
Rev. J. L. Poore moved the adoption of the
report. It was a wholesome report, speaking of
work done, successes gained, and payments
made, leaving a small balance in hand. The
past year had been a busy one, the report
showing that their ministers had laboured
with diligence and success. During the past
year Williamstown had fully supported its
pastor, Brighton during the coming year would
not need any aid, and Maryborough had never
received any. Wherever the gospel was preached
free from sectarianism and with a living power,
the people were ready to receive the Word with
joy and gladness. In one year they had to re-
port the establishment of eight new mission sta-
tions, and the erection of three chapels. That
at Dunolly had been opened five or six weeks;
and at Maryborough an elegant chapel had been
erected, though when Mr. Johnson went there he
could not find a single Independent; and yet an
Independent congregation had been gathered,
because their principles (not always recognised
as such) were spreading in the colony, for they
commend themselves to liberal and free men.
(Applause.) He was continually receiving appli-
cations for ministers from largely populated
localities, and many places on the gold-fields
offered great scope for the extension of the
Church, if ministers, true-hearted earnest men,
could be found. During the past year he had
been over nearly the whole colony, and had
visited Daylesford, Portland, Sandhurst, and
Back Creek. Ballaarat, with a vast population,
had no minister; there was a small congregation
there, and abundant scope among a willing and
earnest people. He himself might be called a
pluralist, being recognised as the minister at Bal-
laarat and Victoria Parade, and that he was obliged
to do, as there was no other to attend to them.
He had lately been at Hamilton, at a very fertile
place called Muddy Creek. Some of his hearers
might remember the appeals of Mr. Ferguson,
Independent minister at Bicester, in Oxfordshire,
respecting the poverty of the labourers at Laun-
ton, who managed to keep themselves and
families in existence on Bs. per week. A few
years ago, some of the poor people who belonged
to Mr. Ferguson’s church managed to get out to
this country, and obtained work at Port Fairy,
Belfast, and Geelong. Twelve months after this,
some of them met together in Melbourne, pur-
chased land at the Muddy Creek, where they
were now settled on their farms of fifty or sixty
acres each. When at Hamilton, he went to see
them on a Sabbath morning. There was no vil-
lage, and he could only see three cottages ; but
there was a bluestone chapel, where he found
forty-five adults and forty children engaged in
worship. They had erected the place them-
selves ; and two members from the church at
Bicester conducted their services. They edify
one another with psalms, and hymns, and
spiritual songs; and if any one has a word
of exhortation, he says it. On the Tues-
day evening, he preached a sermon there to
ninety people ; they were hungry for the word,
and anxious to have a minister among them.
When their church was to be built, they wanted
a neighbouring minister to lay the foundation
stone, which he was disposed to do till he
found that they were Independents, when he
declined. They require a minister at Hamilton
and many other agricultural localities, and
there were many out-lying places where one
could be profitably employed, and at the new
rushes on Back Creek, Inglewood, Lamplough.
No doubt those who went to such places would
have to endure some slight hardships, as good
soldiers of Jesus Christ, but at no distant day
they would reap a glorious harvest, as their
friends now present who had already settled
down in such localities would testify. The
Mission expected to be able to raise £lOOO this
year, and could ministers be obtained to take up
distant and difficult spheres of labour, they might
have a larger income. Their hope was in the
ministry trained and fitted for the work in the
land where it was to be exercised. The getting
of ministers from home was difficult, costly, and
attended with many risks. Their hope was in
the godly youth of the churches in the land, who
were acclimated, who would not have unbounded
expectations, and who knew what kind of work
they had to do. Trusting that next year would
tell of still greater labours and larger successes,
he moved, “That the report be now adopted,
printed, and circulated, under the direction of
the committee.”
Rev. T. H. Jackson (of Beechworth), felt uu-


mingled pleasure in seconding the adoption of
the report. More than two years ago, when he
first went to Beechworth, there was no church,
but about half-a-dozen Congregationalists rallied
around him and took a public room, where he
preached for a considerable time till additions to
the congregation warranted further steps. First
of all they built a house for the minister by
borrowing the money, to be paid in the shape of
rent, which he engaged for a period to pay.
This plan he could commend to others
of his brethren who might recently have taken
charges. They had also commenced a stone
building, which had been carried out very suc-
cessfully, and was paid for when it was done.
This was intended for a school-house when
the chapel they now had in contemplation should
be built. There were now 39 communicants in
actual communion with the church, but through
the rushes to other diggings as many more who had
previously attended had been attracted to other
localities. Beechworth was at present suffering
from depression, but as it was the centre of a
large district, comprising 50,000 or 110,000 inhabi-
tants, it would recover. He trusted that the
outlying districts would eventually be occupied
by ministers who could operate on the surround-
ing country. At present three places were
ministered to in that way, but there were dis-
tricts where 10,000, 15,000, and even 20,000
people were scattered abroad without any means
of grace at all. As an instance of the readiness
with which a minister was welcomed by the
people, he mentioned that one of the Protestant
ministers at Beechworth who had gone to the
neighbourhood of the Buckland to perform a
marriage ceremony, having to stop over the
Sunday, circulated an intimation that he would
preach at a large room in the hotel. After the
sermon a gentleman in the room—a digger—rose,
and having explained that the minister could not
be there without considerable expense, pro-
posed a collection on the spot, which resulted
in the handing over of £lB to the preacher, accom-
panied with a request that he would come again.
Since then the people had made preparations to-
wards the erection of a building to meet in, but
there was no minister to take the charge. In
this, and many similar localities, the people would
gladly rally round a minister. Victoria he re-
garded as the most important missionary field in
the world, the population was more or less imbued
with Christian truth, having received religious
education in the mother country, and by cherish-
ing these early associations, and extending the
means of grace, they would be the means under
God, of bringing more souls to God’s glory, than
a missionary in a foreign country, supported at
ten times the expense, would do in fifty years.
It was a humiliating fact that, whilst money
could l>e provided, ministers for the work cannot
be found, though they were in superfluity in
England. Their reluctance to come out, probably
arose from some unfounded prejudice against
this country ; and the only remedy was in the
hands of God, to turn and dispose their hearts
to the work. The Lord had laid it upon him in
a most remarkable manner to come to this country,
and it was a source of encouragement and con-
solation that he could look back with joy at
having done so.
Rev. W. R. Fletcher supported the motion.
The report showed what had been done : what
they were doing ; and what things remain to be
accomplished. Many of them who had not seen
the diggings, would be surprised to look at the
Bendigo Valley, covered with its thousands of
tents ; and to know that the diggings townships
had Churches, Banks, and Town Halls, better
in some respects than those in Melbourne,
and these places one hundred years hence
would be great centres for the neighbouring
districts. Instead of the gold-fields having been
worked out, they were only scratched on the
surface. Here a man felt himself much more a
man than in England, —if ten godly men wished
to have a church, they would build one in less
than two years. He had heard the story of
an enthusiastic Scotchman who came to this
country bringing with him a single plant of his
native thistle, which having planted in his gar-
den, the seeds spread, and now covered the
greater part of the colony. The same prin-
ciple was at work in the establishment of their
churches ; they went to one of those large
gold-fields, where, occupying a position small at
first, they became gradually larger, stronger,
and there seemed to be a spreading abroad of
their church. The speaker described the estab-
lishment of several causes in his neighbourhood,
during the past year, which would be flourishing
churches ere long. He concluded by expressing
a hope that they would do something in their
day and generation towards making this noble
land more noble still.
The Chairman then put the following resolu-
tion, which was carried unanimously.
That the report now read be adopted, printed and circu-
lated under the direction of the Committee.
Rev. J. C. M‘Michael (of Geelong), in pro-
posing the second resolution, could not speak of
the difficulties, trials, and disappointments
which pressed on his brethren who laboured
on the gold-fields, and in the pastoral districts.
Since he came to the colony his position had
been one of comparative comfort; and he
made a point of never meeting difficulties
half-way: they always looked larger in the
distance, and when they came near to him he
got over them as fast as he could. r lhe path
of Providence had clearly directed him to this
place. In England he occupied a large and
important sphere of labour, his church having
nearly three hundred members, and his chapel
would hold nine hundred; while his Sunday-
school was equally interesting, and had large
classes in connection with it. He had, however,
nothing to regret, but everything to rejoice over,
in coming to this Colony. The resolution in-
trusted to him was, —
That this meeting -would gratefully acknowledge the good-
ness of God in the very considerable amount of success
which has attended the operations of the society; and
would sympathise with and encourage, and where n ecessary,
aid, those devoted brethren who are occupying their several
spheres of labour.
He congratulated his brethren on the happy re-
sults of their communion thus far; their meetings
during the week had taken him back in spirit to
Lancashire Congregational Unions, and York-
shire Home Missions. It made one feel at home,
to see twenty-two of their ministers sitting down
in communion one with another. Their work was


important with regard to the doctrines. They
should lay a right foundation ; preach the
Gospel in all its integrity, spirituality, purity,
and power—Christ crucified, and nothing else.
The old puritan theology, which he would not
exchange for all the new lights of the present
generation. These truths were incorporated with
the principles of Congregationalism, and made
them acceptable to the independent feelings of
the people of this colony, when properly worked
out by godly and spiritually-minded men. In
order to do this, they wanted ministers ; and as
neither Mr. Binneynor Mr. James had been able
to prevail on any one to come from England,
they must depend upon the young men in the
colonial churches, who were trained to the diffi-
culties of the colony, and would not be dismayed
at having to rough it in the bush. Thus they
would raise an indigenous ministry to go forth
from the centres of population to evangelise the
neighbouring districts. This subject had been
under the consideration of the ministers and
delegates assembled together during the last few
days; and he trusted that the scheme they
would send forth, would meet with the hearty co-
operation of all the churches ; and if there were
any young men present willing to do God’s
work, they would make their names immortal
in the history of the colony, and bring forth
fruit unto everlasting life.
Rev. J. P. Sunderland, in seconding the re-
solution, referred to the sweet and refreshing
communion they had all experienced during the
past few days, it woidd be still sweeter to those
of them who had been labouring in difficult and
isolated positions; he considered it a most happy
thought that had originated with brother Poore,
that all the ministers of the Congregational Union
in Victoria, should be invited to the Annual
Meeting of the Home Mission, to have conference
and deliberation, and prayer on those subjects,
which would promote the glory of their common
Loi’d. The result so far, while astonishing their
own minds, had filled their hearts with devout
gratitude to God. They all remembered the great
and glorious meetings in the father-land, in con-
nection with Foreign Missions; the romance
about them seemed to attract crowds of people,
while it was difficult to get an audience on the
subject of Home Missions. In many places in
this country, there were 20,000, 30,000, and even
40,000 people assembled in new localities, seeking
for gold with intensity and earnestness, and there
was a solemn responsibility resting on the church
to follow these men, their brethren, with the
gospel of Jesus Christ, setting the gold that
perisheth not before their minds. He was
sure that all of them would unite cordially
in expressing sympathy for their brethren at
a distance. A previous speaker had tried
to remove some of their ignorance respect-
ing the gold-fields, who might not be
aware that some of those then in the meeting
had worked on them having been in the holes
trying to get gold, and were therefore not
so ignorant on the subject as might be ima-
gined. With regard to the moving state of the
population, he could also encourage his brethren
from the country, for those in town had not un-
frequently visits from their members, telling
tlum they were going to Beech worth or Castle-
maine, so that their hearts bled in town,
while their country brethren got the benefit;
thus, as they mutually suffered, they could
mutually sympathise ; but besides sympa-
thy they required encouragement, and cer-
tainly they would be encouraged by their visit
to Melbourne; they had been cheered by the
communion which they had enjoyed with the
Christians friends in town. They had not to go
to lodging houses; and it was to be hoped that
the friends who had entertained them would find
that they had got angels unawares in their houses.
With regard to their difficulties, he would advise
them to do what Mr. M‘Michael did—step over
them, or under them, or at any rate get away
from them, as best they could. They would
often see that to every cloud there was a
silver lining, if they could only get under the
cloud to look at it. These brethren require
the aid of the friends present, who, he trusted,
would experience that most blessed of all truths,
“It is more blessed to give than to receive.” It
might be humiliating to some to have to ask
help from a distance, but he would counsel them
to cultivate the grace of humility, and in a short
time they might be building their churches and
getting comfortable houses (some of those in
town had not got houses yet). It is said that
three removes are as bad as a fire, but his expe-
rience disproved the truth of the saying, as he had
moved more than fifty times, and yet he had pre-
served some of his original household articles. I) ur-
ing the past year the churches of the colony (some
of them of their poverty) had contributed to the
help of those at a distance, and he thought there
was a great and glorious future for all of them.
Their brethren at a distance were occupying
centres which would gather strength and in-
crease in influence, and, year after year, they
would hear of their greater successes in the
cause of their Heavenly Father. During the
week the Union had been deliberating upon
many important points, concerning the education
of the ministry and for the consolidation of the
mission. Hitherto they had been separated and
disorganised, but now they were becoming a
compact body, and God had been shedding a
gladdening shower of love on all. They were
being linked, not by any coercive power, but by
the golden cord of love. They had bound them-
selves together to put down disorder and to pro-
mote unity and strength. To do the work that
God had given them to do. The speaker con-
cluded by intimating that a collection would be
made towards the funds of the Home Mission.
The resolution was carried unanimously, and a
collection made.
The Chairman intimated that a plan had
occured to several gentlemen for raising £lOOO
next year, by 100 gentlemen coming forward
and pledging themselves either to give or get
£lO each.
Rev. J. Beer, of Dunolly, moved the third
resolution: —
Thnt this meeting is painfully aware of the destitute con
dition, in respect to religious ministration of many parts of
the interior of the country, in the mining, agricultural and
pastoral districts; and recognising it as the duty of Congre-
gationalists to take their full share in supplying this
destitution, would call upon the churches for continued and
enlarged contributions.


He stated that about thirteen months ago when
he went to Dunolly the people met for worship
in a canvas tent, which shortly after his arrival
was blown down during a gale of wind. He
immediately set to work to provide a place to
preach in, and got a galvanized iron store in a
suitable locality, of which he obtained the gra-
tuitous use. When he went to Maryborough to
thank the owner, that gentleman —who was
a Jew—replied that he could not but feel too
happy to let him have it for such a purpose.
The iron store had been rather a warm place
during the summer, and he could honestly
assure them he had had some very melting
seasons as they would suppose when he told
them that the thermometer was 115° in the
shade. They had now a more comfortable place,
and he had only to regret that the Inglewood
rush had taken away a great number of his
people. Sandy Creek, or Tarnagulla, from which
some immense cakes of gold had lately been ex-
hibited in Melbourne, was a thriving township.
It was forty miles from his charge, and there was
no resident minister there. He regarded it as a
most important sphere of labour, and one that
should soon be taken up. A minister there would
soon gather a congregation round him. Fourteen
miles from Sandy Creek and twenty-five from I)un-
olly the great Inglewood rush was situated. It was
a very large and populous place, of some three or
four miles in length, and half-a-mile wide,
covered with tents and iron buildings, reminding
him of the feast of Tabernacles. The Methodists
and Welsh people were there first in the field
with their chapels, which together would hold
350 or 400, out of a population of 25,000 souls !
Truly there, the field was white unto the harvest
in a spiritual sense. It was not desirable to erect
churches at such rushes. The man who was
wanted there was one who would go among them
well supplied with tracts for distribution, and
with bibles for sale, living and labouring among
them. He would readily get a canvas tent, in
which they could meet, till it was seen if the
place was to be permanently settled. Ingle-
wood, Lamplough, and other places, demanded
their serious consideration, not only as Congre-
gationalists, but as Christian men. Again,
there was a small agricultural place on the
Bet Bet Creek, on the Loddon, where the number
of small farmers were settled, requiring a minister,
but he could not help them without neglecting
his own charge, which would soon be scattered
in his absence. They would all thus be aware
of the spiritual destitution prevailing in many
parts of the country, and it was their duty as
Congregationalists to take their full share in
supplying these places with the truth, because
they believed their principles to be right, of
Scriptural authority—-divine in their origin, and
adapted to every form of human society. He
trusted that each of them would recognize his
individual responsibility, that whatsoever his
hands found to do, it should be done with all his
might. Then their churches would be better
and more beneficially attended, and their Sunday
schools would be better taught—then their young
men would be going forth, and burning with
zeal to save sinners. Then they would not have to
resort to high-pressure means to obtain funds :
they would labour and pray for fertilizing rain,
with which the wilderness should be gladdened,
and the desert made to blossom as a garden.
Rev. T, Odell, in seconding the resolution,
included the pastoral with the mining and agri-
cultural interests referred to in the resolution.
He had never gone into an agricultural or pastoral
district in the colony, but he found a good
audience. Much could be done in this direction ;
but as yet the Congregationalists had not done
anything. Many of the early Squatters having
come from north of the Tweed, the Presbyterians
had been particularly successful among them.
Whilst in the country, a lady assured him
that he (the speaker) was the only minister she
had seen for seven years ? To preach the Gos-
pel in such districts, earnest men were required ;
and a most devout and heartfelt confidence in
the promises which God had left on record in his
book; with more earnest and fervent prayer for
their fulfilment. The speaker then referred to
a passage in Isaiah, where the prophet heard the
voice of the Lord, saying, “ Whom shall I send:
and who will go for us ?” and he responded,
“Here am I, send me.” If in their churches
they could realise God’s presence, then would
they also be disposed to say with the prophet,
“ Here am I; let me go to do thy work.”
The resolution was carried unanimously.
The Rev. W. B. Landells pronounced the
benediction, after which the meeting terminated
FOURTH MEETING OF
MINISTERS
AND DELEGATES.
FRIDAY
MORNING,
May 4.
The meeting having been constituted in the
usual manner, and the preliminary business dis-
posed of, the subject next in order was—
which he found it extremely difficult to enter
upon, or to put in a shape satisfactory to his
own mind ; but as he felt what he was about to
propose to be imperatively called for, and as he
was sustained in his views by the concurrence of
some others whom he had consulted, he would
not shrink from the task, onerous as it was.
The delegates present had already heard that
in consequence of letters which had been sent
to England, the supply of ministers for Aus-
tralia had all but ceased. He had received a
letter from one of his former flock, stating that
they (the friends whom he had left) had heard
STATISTICS.
The Rev. W. B. Landells presented a sche-
dule for obtaining statistical returns. After dis-
cussion upon which, it was resolved —
That the Executive Committee be requested to take imme-
diate steps to obtain the information required by the schedule
of statistics now accepted by this Council.
MISSION OF THE REV. J. L. POORE.
The Rev J. C. M‘Michael then rose, and said
that he had a matter to bring before the assembly,


that he was very uncomfortable at Geelong, a
statement which had not a shadow of truth for
its support. A friend of his just returned from
a visit to England had received a letter while
there most unjust in its complaints and charges
against Mr. Poore, which letter, much to his
(Mr. M‘M.’s) regret, was destroyed. Some mem-
ber of the committee had also received letters
from England referring to similar communica-
tions from Australia, one of which it appeared
had been inserted in the Patriot newspaper.
Agreeing as he, the speaker, did with all that
was stated in the admirable paper read by Mr.
Landells, as to the difficulty and delicacy of the
mission with which Mr. Poore had been en-
trusted, and the judicious and successful manner
in which he had fulfilled that mission, he felt it
to be a grievous thina that the mind of a bro-
ther, to whom the denomination and the colony
owed so much, should be grieved and wounded
by misrepresentations so unfounded and calum-
nies so base. Being himself, moreover, one of
the ministers whom Mr. Poore had induced to
come out, he was anxious most emphatically and
indignantly to deny the allegation of his being a
deceived and disappointed man. He had there-
fore prepared, and would now propose for adop-
tion the following resolution :
‘ ‘ It having come to the knowledge of this
Council that there have been published in England
certain statements to the effect that the ministers
who were sent to Australia by the Colonial
Missionary Society, and particularly those who
left home on the representations of the R,ev. J.
L. Poore, were deceived and disappointed,—this
Council deem it their duty emphatically to state
that such representations, as far as this colony is
concerned, are untrue. The Brethren who left
their churches in England to come hither having
found important spheres where the need of
labourers was great; where the field of use-
fulness is widening; where an encouraging
amount of success has been realised, and where
adequate support has been furnished.
“They would further express their belief that,
while such as may come hither with the expecta-
tion of finding churches fully organised and
ready to receive them, may meet with disappoint-
ment ; those, on the other hand, who come in a
missionary spirit, expecting to begin the work
of gathering congregations and organising
churches, will find every encouragement, and
more than a probability of large success.
‘ ‘ And this Council desires to express a decided
and unqualified conviction that the Rev. J. L.
Poore has prosecuted his work in a manner de-
serving the warmest thanks of the friends of
Congregationalism in this colony.
“Signed on behalf of this Council,
“Richard Fletcher, Chairman.
“ William R. Lewis. ) „ , .
“J. R Sunderland, { Secretaries.
Rev. W. Moss was anxious to second the resolu-
tion, fully concurring in the sentiments expressed
by the mover. Though not one of the ministers
introduced by Mr. Poore, he had been now for
some years acquainted with him, and had received
much brotherly kindness and valuable help from
him.
Rev. J. L. P oore acknowledged the expression of
kindly feeling, avowed that he had not been very
deeply affected by the occurrence, and read an ex-
tract from a letter he had written to England as
indicative of his views and feelings on the matter.
Rev. J. C. M ‘Michael then stated that a docu-
ment was in course of preparation, to which the
ministers whom Mr. Poore had been instrumental
in settling in the colony might affix their signa-
tures. In accordance with which intimation, the
following declaration was subsequently signed;—
“We, the undersigned, having come to this
colony more or less upon the representations of
the Rev. J. L. Poore, and also being members of
this Council, entirely concur in the foregoing
resolution.
“ J. C. McMichael, Geelong,
“ Wm. Roby Fletcher. M.A., Sandhurst,
“Wm. Robinson, Williamstown,
“ Joseph Beer, DunoUy,
“ James Edward Vetch. Emerald Hill,
“ T. Hinton Jackson, Beechworth,
‘‘James Sleigh, Portland,
“ Thomas Johnson, Maryborough,
“ John Summers, Daylesford,
“ William R. Lewis, Brighton.
“John Firth, Carlton.”
It was then resolved—
That the Chairman correspond with the friends at Adelaide
respecting the above.
MODEL TRUST DEED.
The Rev. E. Day brought under the notice of
council the bearing of the Freehold Property
Bill, now before the Legislature, upon the Trust
Properties of the denomination, with especial
reference to the adoption of a model trust deed.
The rev. gentleman expounded the matter very
fully, and replied to various questions suggested
by the present or prospective state of various
properties of the churches. After which, upon
the motion of the Rev. W. B. Landells, seconded
by the Rev. E. Day, it was resolved—
That the printing and circulation of the Model Deed be
left to the discretion of the Executive Committee.
The Chairman closed the proceedings in the
usual manner, and the Council adjourned for
six months.
PUBLIC MEETING OF THE CONGREGATIONAL UNION,
HELD AT MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE, MELBOURNE.
FRIDAY EVENING, May 4.
A numerous audience again assembled, the The Chairman stated that two series of meet-
chair being occupied by the Rev. R. Fletcher, of ings had been held during the week, in the
St. Kilda. mornings and evenings, the latter being open to
After an opening prayer by] the Rev. J. P. the public. There had been two devotional
Sunderland, meetings—a prayer-meeting at Victoria Parade


Chapel, on Tuesday, and a united Com-
munion at Oxford-street Chapel, on Wed-
nesday evening. Last evening the an-
niversary meeting of the Home Mission was
held, a society designed to extend the gospel in
connection with their principles throughout the
colony. They had also been holding parallel
with these a series of meetings, composed of
ministers and delegates from the several
churches, at which nearly all the churches in
Victoria had been represented. This had given
them an opportunity for much delightful frater-
nal intercourse, and a further opportunity for
informing themselves more accurately of the
positions and opinions of their brethren
all over the colony. In arranging for these
meetings, there had been two principal
objects in view, viz., the organisation of the
body, and the initiation of measures for training
an indigenous ministry. Two Unions had pre-
viously existed, but had become defunct, he
scarcely knew how. For a year or two they had
been without a Congregational Union,
but, as during that time the churches had
multiplied considerably, a renewed effort
for organisation had now been made, and
he was glad to say most successfully. There
was a great distinction between the present Union
and the former, which had no practical operation
except when the parties were in session. In the
intervening periods nothing was going on. But
the present Union blended the idea of a Congre-
gational Union and Home Missionary Society,
combining the functions and objects of both.
It was also so constructed by District Com-
mittees in different parts of the country as to
bring all the Congregational bodies in the colony
into organic connection with the centre, so that
they could act together, both for the promotion
of fraternal union, and the extension of the
Gospel. This was the system acted upon in
Scotland and the counties of England, and there
could be little doubt that it would succeed here.
All of them that had had experience of its opera-
tion elsewhere rejoiced exceedingly at what had
been now accomplished here, believing it was an
augury for good, and the beginning of a new era
in their operations in the colony. In addition to
this, an important discussion had taken place on the
subject of the Education of Ministers, and mea-
sures were now in progress to found a colo-
nial College, or some other arrangement for the
purpose of educating young men in the colony.
The discussions on these subjects had been most
earnest, and the results most practical; and it
was thought desirable, in addition to these busi-
ness matters, to have one meeting for the purpose
of allowing their friends an opportunity of saying
something about Congregational principles. Gen-
tlemen had, therefore, been appointed to speak
to several topics of that kind, and no doubt
their remarks would be both interesting and in-
structive. It should be their endeavour to live
in harmony and love with other Denominations ;
their was nothing in their views to hinder them
from the most cordial expression of good will to
all, and he trusted that there would be nothing
said to wound the feelings of members of any
other Church, but that their own views would be
stated without asperity, and without sectarianism.
He then called upon the Rev. R. Connebee
to address the meeting upon the first topic.
The History of Congregationalism.
The Rev. Richard Connebee said, we meet
to give expression to our sentiments as
Christians of the Congregational faith and
order. We believe that these sentiments are
not generally known, nor adequately appre-
ciated, even by the members of our churches.
We therefore rejoice that, at the close
of a series of meetings, having for their object
both the consolidation and extension of Congre-
gationalism in Victoria, an opportunity is thus
afforded of assembling, to stir each other up by
way of remembrance in reference to those things
which are most surely believed among us. A
short declaration of these things I have been re-
quested to submit to you, which I do with
unfeigned pleasure, as a work of love towards
that body with which lam connected. Let
others ennoble Truth by arraying her in costly
robes if they will, and decking her with orna-
ments and jewels, let us be content to have the
honour of adorning this heavenly virgin, although
it be only by a single flower from the garden of
the Lord.
At once then, and unhesitatingly, we take the
highest possible ground for our religious prin-
ciples and practices. We affirm, that our churches
are founded upon the model, as far as we have been
enabled to ascertain it, presented to us in the New
Testament, which, alone, is our standard of
appeal. Without reference to any existing parties,
our inquiry in the formation of a church is,—
What saith the Scriptures ? To the law and to
the testimony. The Bible alone is the authority
we acknowledge. It is the ecclesiastical polity
of the New Testament which we seek to develope
in our churches, for we believe it is there or no-
where that an authoritative standard is to be
obtained.
The Founder of our holy religion, knowing the
wants and capabilities of human nature, has
thought fit by precept,—or by scriptural prece-
dent, which is of equal authority—to direct, that
when any number of believers live sufficiently
near to each other to render personal intercourse
practicable, they shall unite as a society for the
celebration of Christian ordinances, for mutual
intercourse, and for spreading the light of Divine
Truth around them. That, as the necessary
avocations of life must occupy a large proportion
of their time, they shall choose one or more, who,
by common consent, shall be set apart to the
work of pastor or bishop, for we find intimations
in several passages of the New Testament, that
there was sometimes a plurality of bishops in
one church ; but never do we meet with a single
hint, that a plurality of churches were placed
under the care of one bishop. In the 20th
chapter of the Acts of the Apostles we read,
that from Miletus Paul sent to Ephesus and
called the elders irgecrSvTfgovs “and said unto
them, Take heed unto yourselves, and to all the
flock over which the Holy Ghost hath made you
emiTKoirovs (bishops).” They had just been termed
presbyters, and now the same men are termed
bishops, most clearly demonstrating that these
terms are synonymous or convertible, and that


they refer to the same order of men. then receive no favour by reason of their direct
.Now as in every such society where one or more antagonism to the principle that the Chnst-
Now as in every such society where one or more
may be chosen by common consent to the over-
sight of the flock, there must be some pecuniary
concerns to arrange, such as providing for the
worship of God in decency and in order, a com-
fortable maintenance for the pastor, or pastors,
and supplying suitable relief to the poor, it has
been directed by scriptural precedent, that
other persons shall be chosen from the general
body who are called in scripture—deacons, who
shall take charge of the temporal affairs of the
church. Of their election and appointment, you
will find an account in the 6th chapter of the
Acts of the Apostles. The duty of the presbyter
or bishop is to attend to the spiritual concerns of
the flock, and the deacons to those that are tem-
poral, and thus ample provision is made for
every want that may occur, for every exigency
that may arise.
We will suppose the church to be now formed
according to the New Testament model, and the
election of the pastor and deacons to be com-
pleted. It is further directed that the members
of whom it is composed shall admit to their com-
munion those, who making a credible profession
of faith in Christ, shall desire to join their society
•—and that as respects all other believers who are
united whether in their vicinity or elsewhere in
similar associations, they shall love them as
brethren, —as opportunity offers, shall give ex-
pression to their brotherly esteem, and be ready
to co-operate with them in promoting the cause of
their common Christianity.
This appears to us to be the description, and
the whole of the description presented in the
New Testament of the nature and organisation of
particular churches, and of their relations to each
other. A society united on the principles just
mentioned is a Congregational or New Testament
Church. Where there is another society or-
ganised in a similar manner, that is another
church, and there are as many churches in the
world as there are societies of this kind. When
a single assembly is spoken of in scripture, it is
called a church ; when a larger number of be-
lievers who do not all meet in one place are
spoken of, they are called churches, —not a
church, of which particular societies are integral
parts. We never read in the New Testament of
the Church of Asia, or the Church of Galatia,
but when Christians living in these provinces are
collectively referred to, we read always of the
churches in Asia, the churches in Galatia, &c.
Nor is there the least intimation in the New Tes-
tament of any kind of dependence subsisting
between distinct societies, of subjection to a
common head or hierarchy, or of any other kind
of connection than that which necessarily springs
from community of faith, and the exercise of
brotherly love.
With respect to the progress and gradual
development of these principles, it must suffice
us to say, that they prevailed during the first
and purest ages of Christianity. For three
centuries the church continued separate from
the world—managed its own affairs, and relied
upon its own resources. We dwell not on the
dark ages, during which the church was shorn of
her glory and robbed of her strength. Con-
gregational or Independent principles could
antagonism to the principle that the Christ-
ian Church should be handed over to the juris-
diction of the civil magistrate, who now annexed
to his kingly authority, supreme power in all
spiritual affairs. We, therefore, pass on to the
end of the sixteenth century, when our principles
assumed a tangible form, and our body became a
recognised section of the Christian world.
In the year 1580, Robert Brown, who was de-
scended from an ancient and honourable family
in Rutlandshire, began zealously to propagate
the principles of Apostolic Independency, in the
city of Norwich. Being much persecuted, he loft
England and settled in Middleburgh, in Zealand,
with many of his people, where they were
allowed to worship God according to the dictates
of their conscience. He, however, died in prison
in 1630. But so far from the seeds of Indepen-
dency proving unproductive, we find from a
speech delivered by Sir Walter Raleigh in 1592,
that in England alone, Brown’s followers
amounted to not less than 20,000 persons.
During that year an Independent Church was
formed in Islington, although for many yeai s
previously, meetings of this body were held pri-
vately in the woods of Islington. For informa-
tion respecting the early history of this church
I refer you to the opening chapters of a deeply
interesting little work by the Rev. John Stough-
ton, entitled “ Spiritual Heroes,” from which I
find that two members of this, our first church
in London, suffered death at Tyburn, on 31st
March 1593, for writing and publishing a book
entitled, “ A Brief Dissection of the False
Church . ” Their death-warrant was signed by
Queen Elizabeth, who, after their execution,
asked Dr. Reynolds what he thought of those two
men, Henry Barnard and John Greenwood ?
Whereupon he answered, that he was persuaded
that if they had lived they would have been two
as worthy instruments for the Church of God as i
have been raised up in this age ! She demanded
of the Earl of Cumberland—who was present j
when they suffered—what end they made ? “A !
very godly end,” he replied, “and prayed ear-
nestly for your Majesty and the State.” (Ap-
plause).
The number of Independents in England in-
creasing so rapidly, it was found necessary to
relax the severity with which they had been :
treated, and, subject to certain restrictions, they 1
were allowed to hold meetings for worship, I
During the Commonwealth our principles ob- ;
tained a much firmer footing, many of the chap-
lains of Oliver Cromwell being Independents.
Amongst these were Dr. John Owen, Dr. Thomas
Goodwin, Gale, Home, Charnock, Bridge, Nye,
Caryl, and Greenhill.
I must now conduct you to the reign of
the second Charles—to the year 1662—when
there was an amazing number of pious and
exemplary men in the Church of England—
men of masculine minds—men of exalted devo-
tion —in short, men who were among the
greatest divines of any age or of any country.
You will not imagine this to be an exaggerated
statement when I tell you that amongst them
were John Howe, Dr. Bates, Richard Baxter, Mat-
thew Pool, Philip Henry, John Flavel, and a host
of men like them. At the beginning of the year


1662, all these men were in the Church of Eng- Minister, shall after 24th March, 1665, be found
land; but on the 24th August in that year, all on any pretence whatever, within five miles of any
of them came out of it. The occasion of their city, town, or borough, sending members to Par.
thus acting was the passing of the Act of Uni-
formity. This work of intolerance passed through
Parliament in the month of May, and came into
operation on Bartholemew’s Day, August 24th,
1662. That law enjoined on all clergymen to
profess their unfeigned assent and consent to
everything contained in the book of Common
Prayer, to repudiate the Solemn League and
Covenant, and further, to declare that it was
unlawful to take up arms against the King,
Upwards of 2000 good men could not give their
whole assent and consent to all and everything con-
tained in the book of Common Prayer, and with
their families went forth into the world, exposed to
persecution, suffering, and death. (Applause).
Many of them possessed livings and benefices of
the value of £5OO per annum. But suppose we
reckon that on an average each received only
£2OO per annum: then these 2000 servants of
Christ gave up annually the sum of £400,000 for
conscience’-sake. These ejected ministers being
silenced in public, held private meetings for wor-
ship in their families; consequently, on 30th
June, 1663, an Act was passed, called the “Con-
venticle Act,” which enacted that if more than
five persons besides the members of a family met
together for religious exercises any where but in
the Church of England, the offenders should, in
the first place, be fined £5, or be imprisoned three
months; in the second, pay £lO, or suffer im-
prisonment for six months; and in the third,
forfeit £lOO, or be transported for seven years.
The consequence was that the gaols were quickly
filled with Protestant Nonconformists—Calamy,
Baxter, Philip Henry, and a host of others who
feared God rather than men, were taken from
their families, and thrust into the filthiest dun-
geons. And so great was the severity of the
times—and I am speaking of times scarcely two
centuries ago—that many were afraid to pray in
their family if more than four were present,
and some even scrupled to ask a blessing on
their meals ifjfive sat at table, lest they should
suffer imprisonment under the Conventicle Act.
Thus good men, holding our views of Church
government, were persecuted almost to despera-
tion, while under the first King who insisted
upon having the word ‘‘religious” annexed to
his name in the Liturgy (I refer to Charles II.),
the common people gave themselves up to every
species of Thereupon followed un-
usual drought; the fields were dried up, and
resembled the highroads; murrain appeared
amongst the cattle; men looked upon each other
in silence, and muttered “ The plague.” In
London alone 10,000 persons died every week,
and before its ravages were ended more than
120,000 fell victims to this scourge. This pesti-
lence lasted nearly three-quarters of a year,
during the whole of which time those Noncon-
formist ministers who had their liberty were
most active in visiting the sick and the dying.
But the Prime Minister and his followers, in-
stead of mourning over the people’s sins, poured
all their vengeance on these holy men; and be-
cause they sought to bind up a nation’s wounds,
a bill was introduced into Parliament, and became
law, which enacted that if any Nonconformist
city, town, or borough, sending members to Par-
liament he shall forfeit £4O, or be committed to
prison for six calendar months. One’s heart sickens,
and we cannot proceed further in the enumeration
of such outrages on the consciences and the rights
of men. Suffice it to say, our forefathers were
faithful unto death, Mr. White has preserved the
names of sixty thousand persons who suffered for
conscience’ sake- -suffered for holding the prin-
ciples we hold, five thousand of whom died in prison;
and from the restoration of Charles 11., to the time
of the Revolution, not improperly called the
glorious Revolution of 1688, (applause) property
was either taken from them, or destroyed to the
extent of fourteen millions sterling. Dear brethren,
we ought to know these things, and our children
ought to know them. These noble minded men
were our forefathers, the founders of most of our
early churches at home, and we profess to be
their children. How unworthy are we of so
exalted an honour. Cod is in effect saying to us,
“Co to your homes, and your comforts this
evening, and think of your privileges. You enjoy
liberty, can walk where you like, and can assemble
to worship God when you like. Your fathers
enjoyed not the privileges you enjoy, I have been
working out this for you through their sufferings
and death. ‘ Other men have laboured, and ye
have entered into their labours.’”
At the time of the Revolution, Presbyterianism
in England obtained the ascendancy in point of
numbers, over Congregationalism. But Arianism
making its appearance in the former body, its
blighting influence was not wholly unfelt by the
latter. In numerous cases however, we find that
Presbyterian Churches in England, on the removal
of those ministers, who had been tinctured with
Arianism, chose as their successors men of the
congregational faith and order, which circumstance
tended greatly to increase the number of those
who professed independent principles. During
the middle of the last century, a death-like
slumber stole over nearly the whole of the churches
in Britain, which was, however, removed by the
zealous and devoted labours of George White-
field. To him under God, we are chiefly indebted
for the revival of spiritual religion, which then
took place in our churches, and for the vast ad-
dition made to our numbers. Never at any
preceding period has our body been in a more
healthful, or more flourishing condition than at
the present moment. Never have we possessed
so many of pious, devoted, eminent ministers
as we now possess; and never have out churches
been so numerous, and powerful as they are at
this time. We thank God and take courage ;we
are not unmindful of the solemn, the momentous
duties which devolve upon us, in this the land of
our adoption, by virtue of our connexion with the
men who have gone before us. We honour the
memory of those whose sufferings we have been
contemplating this evening. But let us do more;
let us honour their principles. Religious truth is
the holiest, the most sacred thing in the earth.
Let us therefore contend earnestly for the truth,
which we believe to have been once delivered to
the Saints.
The first great principle we are solemnly bound
to uphold is the non-interference of the State in


nil matters of religion. Very diversified was Sovereign, or with disobedience to jast and right-
the idiosyncrasy of the men whose sufferings we eons law. _ Have not our forefathers ever stood
have revised. Baxter was controversial; Howe foremost in the van of civil liberty. Whose
nnln, nml contemplative : Owen was pro- firmness secured Britain its Bill of Eights?
was calm and contemplative ; Owen was pro-
found ; Bates was ornamental and figurative; one
was ardent, another gentle; one bold,another bland.
But however diversified their attainments, all
were characterised by the same distinguishing
feature —the firmness with which they contended
for the Spirituality of the Church of God, and for
its entire severance from all connection with the
State. Let us exhibit the same holy decision
for God, and for the purity of his Church. And
happy are we to find in the declaration of our
Congregational Union at home, that the ninth
article enunciated by that body, of our church
order, is to the following effect—“ The power
of a Christian Church is purely spiritual, and
should in no way be corrupted by union
with temporal or civil power. Mark, I
pray you, the words “ in no way.” Touch not,
taste not, handle not. Gratifying, as no doubt
it would be, to our love of social distinction, to
receive some hundreds of pounds sterling per
annum, either from the State or from profits
arising from lands originally granted by the State,
yet, as it is the duty of the Christian, in his in-
dividual capacity, to approach not too closely to
the line of demarcation which should ever sepa-
rate him from the world, so we believe it to be
equally the duty of the Christian Church, in her
collective capacity, to come out a d be separate,
and touch not the unclean thing ; to court not
the world’s smiles,—to receive not the world s
bribes. All honour, therefore, to those brethren
who, possessing but little of this world s wealth,
nevertheless sternly refuse to admit the Baby-
lonish garment and the wedge of gold into the
camp of God. Let them enjoy the holy consola-
tion that, in their rejection of civil aid, they are
precisely in the same situation as the first Clnis-
tians, who relied solely on the resources of the
church for support. Therefore, in rejecting
State Aid, our’s is not the guilt of innovation,
our’s is not the madness of expediency. If avc are
wrong we are not alone ; we have as much alii-
ance with the State, as Tertullian, Polycarp, and
Ignatius ; as Peter and James and John,
The second great principle which as Congrega-
tion alists we are bound to uphold, and which is a
corollary from that we have just enunciated, is, the.
supremacy of Christ as the only head of the
Church. One of the Acts of Henry VIII.
declares that the King for the time being is
the supreme governor of the Church. Queen
Elizabeth, by virtue of her office, said to the Bishop
of Ely, “I who made you, can unmake you.
Janies I. directed the clergy what to preach;
Charles 11. instructed them how to preach ;
and Queen Anne once rescinded the united de-
cision of all the bishops together. Now, our
Nonconformist fathers could concede this autho-
rity to no earthly sovereign. They said, as we
say, “ One is our Master, even Christ. We ren-
der to Caesar,” &c. We embrace no principle ex-
cept that which God has revealed. We practise
no forms except those which God has authorised.
Here we care for no earthly power. Here we heed
no earthly menace. Thou art our King O God
And, in pursuing this course, happy for us
that no man can charge us with disloyalty to our
Was it not the firmness of Protestant N oncon-
formists? When the Brunswick dynasty was
threatened, who rallied around it when those
who ought to have been firm were fickle? Were
they not Protestant Nonconformists ? The tree
of liberty our fathers planted. It was trained by
their hands, and nurtured by their blood. Have we
ever declined our share of the public burdens, or
has the torch of discord ever been found in our
hand ? We demand an answer at our country’s
tribunal, and its silence says “ In none of these
things have we offended,”
The last principle we shall mention for which
as Congregate malists it becomes us to contend,
is, the right of private judgment in all matters
of religion. That my religion as a member of
the community is not a thing with which you
have any right to interfere. It lies wholly be-
tween me and my Maker ; and if I am a loyal
subject and a good citizen, you have no right to
touch a hair of my head by way of injuring me
on account of any religious principle I hold. This
is the right of private judgment. Our Noncon-
formist forefathers, suffered and died for it, and
we are solemnly bound to imitate them in our ad-
herence to the same great principle : Prove all
things, hold fast that which is good.
Let us then gratefully embalm the memory of
those who have gone before us, and who have
struggled for the attainment of our religious
liberties. Let us for a moment look at the re-
sults of their achievements. Hear the testi-1
mony of Hume ; ‘ ‘ The precious spark of liberty I
has been kindled and preserved by the Puritans
alone, and to this sect, the English owe the
whole freedom of their Constitution.” And
Lord Brougham on his celebrated motion for
inquiry into the cause of the death of the mis-1
sionary Smith, spoke as follows: “The Inde-|
pendents as a body of men are to be held inj
lasting veneration for the unshaken fortitude I
with which at all times they have maintained!
their attachment to civil liberty; men to whose
ancestors England will ever acknowledge a
boundless debt of gratitude as long as freedom!
is prized among us. For they, 1 fearlessly con- j
fess it, with the zeal of martyrs, the purity of j
early Christians, the skill and of the
most renowned warriors, obtained for England i
the free Constitution she now enjoys.”
Such, Sir, is the testimony borne to our fore-
fathers, and to the principles they held by men
not the most distinguished for their attachment
to Evangelical religion. So far from being
ashamed of our ancestors, we glory in them, as
those who are to be held in everlasting remem-
brance. Through them and through men of
kindred minds, learning has advanced. Enter-
prise has put forth her energies. The true
science of government is understood. Freedom
has steadily progressed, and her institutions have
been placed on a broad and immovable basis.
Above all, pure and undefiled religion has ap-
peared amongst us, not only outside the cloister,
or in the sequestered valley, but on the theatre of
this wide world of ours, battling with its foes, in
the face of popes, inquisitors, and despots of


every grade. It has come to Australia. Here
it asserts its primeval claim. Here it challenges
investigation as it has ever done. Here it de-
mands attention. And moving onward in its
majestic march scatters blessings as it proceeds.
The ripple produced in the great waters of
human activity by the Puritans and early
Nonconformists, has now become as mighty
waves sweeping like a sea of glory over the
face of the whole earth. Roll on ye heavenly
billows, until despotism, and bigotry, and every
thing that opposes the progress of the truth, as it
is in Jesus, shall be lost, and shall disappear for
ever.
The Rev. E. Day, of Castlemaine, addressed
himself to the second topic—
The Leading Principles of Congregationalism.
It had been remarked, he said, that Congrega-
tionalism had not been taken up frequently in their
pulpits. When he commenced his ministry in a
mining district, and saw around him the people
anxious to hear the gospel, he thought the great
business for him to attend to was to preach
the simple gospel to them, resolving to know
nothing save Jesus Christ and him crucified—not
that he was indifferent to the principles of Congre-
gationalism for he loved them; but at the
place where he preached, persons of all creeds
assembled, and it would be easily perceived, that
if he began to talk of their great principles to
such, it would drive them away : whereas, if
they could be brought to love the truth,
and profit by it under his ministry, they
would probably in time become attached to
Congregationalism, but if they did not he would
not be very much concerned : he was more con-
cerned about the great truth. It was too much
the case, that in speaking of Congregationalism,
or any other system, it was apt to be described
as better than anything else, and a corresponding
in difference was always manifested for other
systems, but he was going to do nothing of the
kind. It had been said that the word Indepen-
dent, applied to their external, and the
word Congregationalist to their internal as-
pect. The word Independent meant that they
were free of foreign and external control, each
church governing itself without interference or
dictation. In dealing with the various portions
of the topic, the speaker referred to the pilgrim
fathers, who, driven from their native land for
conscience’ sake, when stepping ashore from the
May Flower, entered into a solemn covenant
to frame such just and equitable laws, constitu-
tions, acts, statutes, and ordinances as should be
productive of the general good of the colony, to
which they promised all due submission and
obedience. Here was a voluntary association;
here they saw something in harmony with com-
mon sense. They had also taken advantage of
the patent which had been granted to them by
the Government of England to settle in Virginia.
Now they, the Congregationalists, had the Scrip-
tures granted to them as their patent, and it
told them to form themselves into Christian
associations, for the purpose of assisting and in-
structing one another. There was nothing in the
New Testament at all opposed to their principles,
nor anything in those principles not counte-
nanced and warranted by God’s Truth. Even
the apostles did not appoint a successor in the
place of Judas without the consent of the breth-
ren ; and when the deacons were appointed,
the apostles did not select them, —the brethren
were invited to look out seven suitable men. In
like manner, Congregationalists claimed and
exercised the right of choosing their own bishops
and deacons. The success which had from time
to time attended efforts conducted on those
principles shewed that God had set the seal of
his approbation on them, and confirmed their
convictions that their constitution and polity were
in Accordance with Holy Writ.
Rev. W. Moss was the next speaker. He
said he felt it due to himself, to the subject, and
to the meeting, to state that he had been called
upon to address them at very short notice, in
consequence of the Rev. Mr. Johnson, to whom
that part had been assigned, having returned to
Maryborough. With reference to the distinctive
principles of Congregationalism, Dr. Harris had
said, that “ the strength of the Congregational
churches did not consist in the number of their
members, the wealth of their adherents, or the
extent of their political interests; but in the purity
and divinity of their principlesand this was
true of their churches in this day and in this land.
It was therefore most important that they should
fairly understand those principles, so that they
might hold them with a firm grasp, and be able
at any time to give their reasons for maintaining
them, and to show that they were in accordance
with God’s revealed Word. First, then, they
held the Bible, and the Bible alone, as the foun-
dation of their faith and practice ; the Scriptures
were their sole authority in all matters of re-
ligious belief and Christian conduct. They asked
not what was contained in any “ Confession of
Faith,” “ Decrees of Council,” or-writings of the
Fathers. “To the Word and to the testimony !”
was their motto. The right of private judgment
also, was in accordance with the spirit of the
age, from which they had nothing to fear.
Every man had a right to examine the Bible for
himself: his religion was a matter between
himself and his Creator. The purity of their
communion must be manifested before men by
their being spiritually-minded; and developing in
their daily walk and conversation, an intelligent,
vigorous, and manly piety. The power of their
principles for promoting effective union had been
fully exemplified at the meetings which had been
held during the week, and the constitution
which they had adopted. He believed that the
Union they had formed, and the Home Mission
re-organised in connection with it, would do
much to evangelise the land and spread abroad
the influence of Christianity. If they would
prove themselves worthy sons of their noble
sires, and men of the times in which
they lived, and the place which they should oc-
cupy in the world’s history; they must hold fast
to, and extend pure and undefiled religion in the
form of Congregationalism.
Congregationalism and Liberty.
In introducing this the third topic, F. Hallek,
Esq., said that as the subject he was called
upon to speak to had been already exhausted
by the friends who preceded him, he would
only throw out a few stray thoughts. The


Rev. Mr. Day had stated that in the pulpit he Church of England, would be freed from their
i i i i • a j.l n 1 n«/l 4- It n - 4Vin Ttvoolrinrf nr tho f nnr>HAi»«
confined himself to the preaching of the Gospel,
without touching upon our principles. Now
(continued the speaker) I am happy to say that
no man can teach the Gospel without teaching
our principles. Had not our Lord inculcated the
precept that we were to love all men, and to do
unto others as we desired they should do unto
us ? Were not these principles the very founda-
tion of true liberty ? and were they not in oppo-
sition to all Church establishments? Was not
the history of Established Churches the history
of persecution? The speaker mentioned some
striking instances, amongst others the fate of the
excellent John Bunyan, and of the Rev. Dr.
Leighton, a Scotch clergyman, who came to
London and preached in one of the churches.
But because he wrote against the tyranny of the
Bishops in Archbishop Laud’s time, his ears were
cut off, his nose slit, and he was then cast into
prison. Neither had Established Churches ceased
to persecute. In the north of Germany, those
who held our principles were constantly fined and
imprisoned, and when a deputation of the Evan-
gelical Alliance in England enquired why these
people were punished, the answer was that they
were excellent persons, but that they would not
conform to the Established Church. In Sweden
six women had been expatriated for the same
reason ; and eminent Christians of all denomina-
tions in England had protested against this,
which showed that our principles were making
way. There was not a single text in the New
Testament in support of Church Establishments,
or of the interference of the civil magistrate in
matters of religion. But the apostolical com-
mand was, “ Let him that is taught in the Word
communicate to him that teaches all good things. ”
This, then, is the Divine law for the support of
the ministry; but legislators presume to make
better laws than those of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and not only so, but they vote money
to support contradictory creeds ; and thus
were guilty of immorality. One of the things to
be specially noticed in these Legislators was,
that they pretended to be very anxious to support
religion, but they always did it by voting, not
their own, but other people’s money. It re-
minded him of what Mr. O’Connell once said to
Lord Stanley on this point. He said ‘ ‘ while the
noble Lord points me piously to look to heaven,
he puts his hand into my pockets, and takes my
money.” Now, our principles will not allow us
to do this, for it is opposed to the gospel, and I
may refer to Hume, the Historian, for the course
we have pursued, who says, ‘ ‘ Of all Christian
sects, the Independents were the first, who during
prosperity and adversity, always adopted the
principle of toleration.” We have one comfort
as regards the principles we maintain, concerning
the voluntary support of the ministry, and the
non-interference of the civil magistrate, in matters
of religion, namely, that their triumph is certain.
Good Dr. Chalmers had hardly published his
work upon the lawfulness of Church Establish-
ments, when he and his brethren had to leave
the Established Church of Scotland, and act upon
the voluntary principle, and a glorious work they
have done. In England, sounds were now heard
indicating the approaching storm, and the
Speaker tr.isted the Evangelical clergy of the
bondage, and that the breaking of the thunder-
cloud would result in showers of blessing upon
their labours. He would now only advert with
delight to the fact, that Independents were al-
ways favourable to Christian Union, were ready
to give the right hand of fellowship to all of
every name, who loved the Lord Jesus Christ,
and he trusted that they would always be dis-
tinguished by this spirit, and ever cordially
combine with other churches, for the furtherance
of the gospel.
Rev. W. C. Robinson, in presenting the sub-
j ect of ‘ ‘ Congregationalism, in relation to liberty, ”
did not intend to condemn other systems, but to
show in what respect their principles gave rise to
the desire for liberty. In stating that, in the
history of Congregationalism, liberty had ever
stood associated with it. He would not confound
liberty with religion ; one related to the internal
man, while the other was external. Liberty was
the right to think, to feel, to act as we deem
right, so long as that right does not interfere with
the liberties of others. Christ had taught the
true law of liberty, in the words of the “ Golden
Rule,” and into this liberty all Christians ought
to enter, exercising their judgment in choosing
the right and neglecting the wrong. Men were
breathing the Congregational atmosphere without
knowing it: it had entered into their constitution,
and was becoming part and parcel of themselves.
This was manifested by their supporting those
principles by their voluntary contributions, and
associations. Self-government was another part of
liberty, for if a man could not govern himself,
how could he enjoy liberty : then there was the
supremacy of conscience: was this unassailable ? did
no man fear a bishop’s frown, or stand in awe of a
conference ? Man had the right to think : on free
thought the success of independency rested.
Congregationalism and Education.
Mr. Edward Langton pointed out the re-
lation between “ Congregationalism and Educa-
tion.” So much had been said on the subject of
education lately, that it was looked upon
as a most intolerable bore; but as so large
a number of ministers and delegates of their
churches, had been meeting to promote the well-
being of the Denomination, it seemed to him a
favourable opportunity for expressing an opinion
upon the important subject of Education. The
speaker rapidly glanced at the progress of Edu-
cation, and its present position, in relation to the
Church. He pointed out the evils of the bill
recently introduced by Mr. Fellows, on this
subject. Under its sanction, religious instruction
wmdd still be given, and sectarian distinctions
perpetuated : with these most insidious proposals
before the countiy, it behoved them to be very
careful of their principles : they need not fear any
direct attack upon them, the danger was from
insidious .and disguised assault. He thought it
would be one of the duties of the Congregational
Union,, to give expression to their opinion upon
the subject, and to see that the principles for
which, as they had this evening heard, their
forefathers had laboured, and suffered, and died,
should be respected, and no legislative impedi-
ment to their progress be permitted.
The Chairman said, that so far as his own


views and feelings went, he had found the prin- which we were acting politically : and the more
ciples of Congregationalism in harmony with their views were un lerstood and adopted, the
scripture. They had enabled him to act with more clearly would this harmony and coincidence
freedom and pleasure, without violating the
liberty of his neighbours. They were facile,
and easy of adaptation. At home they were
tolerated: they were permitted to preach,
and they had the liberty of prophesying
and free action ; still the Nonconformist minister
had not the same position socially, as the
ministers of the establishment; there was a
prevalent notion of his inferiority, a brand
was upon him, which was repugnant to the
principles of liberty and inequality. But here
ail were upon a level. When he put his
foot on these shores, he felt, that as a min-
ister, he was a free man. There was a fine
harmony and coincidence between their Con-
gregational principles, and the principles under
more clearly would this harmony and coincidence
be seen and felt. For once in the history of
Congregationalism in this Colony, they had
taken the liberty of stating their views.
He hoped nothing had been said which
would grate upon the feelings of any one;
and trusted that the future history of the colony,
would exhibit a holy rivalry, only as to who shall
accomplish the greatest amount of good. A vast
portion of the country had still to be taken up
by the various churches. He exhorted the
audience to be zealous in loving the truth, and
endeavouring to extend to all the knowledge of
salvation.
After a vote of thanks to the Chairman, the
meeting closed.
Wm, (Joodhutfh A Co., Priirterß, Flinders Pane East, Melbourne.


