

REPORT
of the
Resolutions, Proceedings, and Debates
of the
Interstate Conference
on
Forestry
held at
Perth, November, 1917.
1918.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
k 5102/18
PERTH:
BY AUTHORITY: FRED. WM. SIMPSON, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1918,


44 1 hold every man a debtor to his profession,
from the which as men of course do seek to receive
countenance and profit, so ought they of duty to
endeavour themselves by way of amends to be a help
and ornament thereunto/' — Bacon*


CONTENTS.
Page.
Summary of Resolutions agreed to by the Conference ... ... ... ... ... ... 4
Vice President’s Address... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6
Report of Proceedings ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9to 114
Papers read —
“The Trees of Western Australia” by Mr. J. H. Maiden, 1.5.0., F.R.S., Government Botanist of
New South Wales ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11
“ An Attempt to secure on Uniform nomenclature for Australian Timbers,” by Mr. Maiden ... 17
“ The Forest Policy in New South Wales ” by the Hon. W. G. Ashford, Minister for Lands and Forests 22
“The Introduction of the Remarkable Pine ( pinus iiisignis ) into South Australia, and its successful
utilisation,” by Mr. Walter Gill, Conservator of Forests, South Australia ... ... ... 24
“ Forest Reservation necessary for Australia,” by Mr. N. W. Jolly, Director of Forests, Queensland 2G
“ Forest Working Plans and the Imoortance of Stanlardising a system of Forest Statistics throughout
the Commonwealth,” by Mr. C. E. Lane-Poole, Conservator of Forests, Western Australia ” ... 28
“ Australian Forestry—New South Wales experience in a State undertaking, with conclusions and
suggestions thereon,” by Mr. R. Dalrymple Hay, Chief Commissioner of Forests, New South
Wales ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33
“Education in Forestry and Forestry Research,” by Mr. Jolly ... ... ... ... 58
“ Working Plan of the Forest of Kuitpo, South Australia,” by Mr. H. H. Corbin ... ... ... 74
“Appendix to Working Plan of Forest of Kuitpo,” by Mr. H. H. Corbin, Lecturer in Forestry,
Adelaide University ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 83
“ Sylvicultural Notes on the Hoop Pine and Queensland Cedar,” by Mr. Jolly ... ... ... 92
“Report of Timber Tests, 1917—Investigation Nos. 1 and 2,” by Mr. Alfred Tomlinson, M.Cs., Assoc.
M.lnst. C.E., M.C.1., Acting Professor of Mining and Engineering, University of Western
Australia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 99
Reports of Sub-Committees appointed to consider Forestry Statistics and Nomenclature ... ... 91
» » » „ Nomenclature of Trees ... ... ... ... 91


LIST OF RESOLUTIONS PASSED BY CONFERENCE.
I - NOMENCLATURE OF AUSTRALIAN TREES.
Page
40. On the motion of Mr. Hay, seconded by Mr. Lane-Poole.
“ That a sub-committee be appointed to consider the question of the duplication of the common names of trees
and to endeavour to bring forward for the consideration of Conference a feasible solution of the difficulty.'’
XI AUSTRALIAN FOREST SCHOOL AND FOREST PRODUCTS LABORATORY.
67. On the motion of Mr. Jolly, seconded by Mr. Lane-Poole.
“ That it be a recommendation from this Forestry Conference that the Commonwealth establish an institution
for education in forestry and forestry research work.
111-COMPILATION OF EXISTING DATA WITH A VIEW TO THE ESTABLISHMENT
OF A FOREST PRODUCTS LABORATORY.
67. On the motion of Mr. Jolly, seconded by Hon. W. G. Ashford.
“ That it is desirable that a complete compilation of data be made as requested by the Executive Committee of
the Advisory Council of Science and Industry.”
67. On the motion of Hon. W. G. Ashford, seconded by Mr. Gill.
“ That in the opinion of this Conference Mr. H. H. Corbin be appointed to carry out this duty and to compile the
data asked for by the Advisory Council.”
67. On the motion of Mr. Lane-Poole, seconded by Mr. Jolly,
“ That Conference is of opinion that the heads of the several Forestry Departments in the Commonwealth be ap-
pointed to supply the data to Mr. Corbin.”
IV—MISLEADING INFORMATION RELATING TO FOREST STATISTICS IN COMMONWEALTH
YEAR BOOK.
70. On the motion of Mr. Lane-Poole, seconded by Mr. Jolly.
“ That steps be taken for the purpose of correcting the figures in the Commonwealth Year Book, regarding the
areas of forest and the lines upon which that work should be accomplished, should be a report from the sub-committee.”
V.—THE AREA CAPABLE OF GROWING FORESTS IN AUSTRALIA IS WHOLLY INADEQUATE.
71. On the motion of Mr. Lane-Poole, seconded by Mr. Jolly.
“ That having in view the entirely inadequate area of country in the Commonwealth capable of producing valuable
forest, that this Conference is of opinion that all prime forest areas should be permanently reserved.
71. On the motion of Hon. W. G. Ashford, seconded by Mr. Gill.
“ That having in view the seriousness of the position, this Conference resolves that a statement be prepared by
the State authorities With the request that it be brought before the next Premiers Conference.
VI. RECESS SECRETARY.
105. On the motion of Mr. Jolly, seconded by Mr. Lane-Poole.
“ That Mr. R. A. O’Keefe be standing Secretary to carry out the Conference proposals and suggestions when in
recess.”
VII. NEXT CONFERENCE.
106. On the motion of Mr. Jolly, seconded by Mr. Gill.
“ That the Conference be held in Tasmania in September next if convenient to that State, and, if not, in Queens-
land.”


FORESTRY CONFERENCE, NOVEMBER, 1917.
President:
The Right Hon. Sir Ronald Crauford Munro Ferguson, P C l .. G.C.M.G., LL.D., Governor-General.
VISITING DELEGATES.
Minister for Lands. New South Wales ... ... ... ... ... Hon. W. G. Ashford, M.P.
Secretary to the Minister ... ... ... ... ... ... ... R. A. O’Keefe, Esq.
Chief Commissioner of Forests, New South Wales R. Dalrymple Hay, Esq.
Minister for Lands, South Australia ... ... ... ... ... Hon. A. W. Styles, M.P.
Conservator of Forests, South Australia ... ... ... ... W. Gill, Esq,
Lecturer in Forestry, South Australia ... ... H. H. Corbin, Esq.
Director of Forestry, Queensland N. W. Jolly, Esq.
LOCAL DELEGATES.
Minister for Forests, Western Australia ... ... ... ... Hon. R. T. Robinson, K.C.
Under Secretary for Forests. Western Australia ... ... ... H. S. King, Esq.
Conservator of Forests, Western Australia ... ... ... ... C. E. Lane-Poole, Esq.
Botanist and Plant Pathologist, Western Australia ... ... ... Dr. F. Stoward.
UNOFFICIAL LIST.
Rt. Hon. Sir W. G. Ellison-Macartney, P C l .. K.C.M.G.. His Excellency the Governor.
His Grace Archbishop Riley.
His Grace Archbishop Clune.
Hon. Walter Kingsmill, M.L.C.. President of the Forest League.
Sir Henry Briggs, M.L.C., President, Legislative Council.
Hon. Geo. Taylor, ML.A., Speaker, Legislative Assembly.
Representative of the Architects’ Association.
Represensative of the Surveyors’ Institute.
E. A. Mann, Esq., Representative of the Advisory Council of Science and Industry.
M. Alphonse Mathey, Chevalier de la Leg ; on d’ Honneur, Conservateur des Eaux et Forets a Dijon, Cote D’or,
France.
Representative of the University.
Representative of the Chamber of Commerce.
Representative of the Chamber of Manufactures.
P. O’Loghlen, M.L.A., President Timber Workers’ Union.
Representative of the Saw Millers’ Association. •
Represensative of the Australian Natives’ Association.
Representative of the All British Association.
R. C. Clifton, Esq., Under Secretary for Lands.
Cecil Andrews, Esq., Direction of Education.
F. B. Allen, Esq., Director of Technical School.
J. Thompson, Esq., Engineer-in-Chief.
W. B. Hardwick, Esq., Chief Architect.
E. S. Hume, Esq., Chief Mechanical Engineer.
Secretary—A. H. Fairey.




INTERSTATE FORESTRY CONFERENCE, 1917.
The Interstate Forestry Conference of 1917 was
opened at the Technical School, Perth, at 10 a.m. on
Thursday, 15th November.
The following representatives were present:—
Hon. W. G. Ashford, M.P., Minister for Lands,
New South Wales.
R. A. O’Keeff, Esq., Secretary to the Minister.
R. Dalrymple Hay, Esq., Chief Commissioner
of Forests, New South Wales.
H. Mackay, Esq., Conservator of Forests, Vic-
toria,
Hon. A. W. Styles, M.P., Minister for Lands,
South Australia.
W. Gill, Esq., Conservator of Forests, South
Australia.
H. H. Corbin, Esq., Lecturer in Forestry, South
Australia.
M. W. Jolly, Esq., Director of Forestry, Queens-
land.
Hon. R. T. Robinson, K.C., Minister for
Forests, Western Australia.
H. S. King, Esq., Under Secretary for Forests,
Western Australia.
C. E. Lane-Poole, Esq., Conservator of Forests,
Western Australia.
Dr. F. Steward, Botanist and Plant Pathologist,
Western Australia.
The Hon. R. T. ROBINSON, K.C., M.L.A., Mini-
ster for Woods and Forests, Western Australia, an-
nounced that the- first business was to elect a Chair-
man of Conference, who should preside in the ab-
sence of the President, His Excellency the Right
Hon. Sir Ronald Crauford Munro-Ferguson, Gover-
nor General.
On the motion of the Hon. W. G. ASHFORD,
M.P., Minister for Lands, New South Wales, it was
unanimously resolved that Hon. R. T. Robinson
should be appointed vice-President of the Conference,
and would occupy the Chair.
The Hon. R. T. ROBINSON in reply said: —“I
thank you for the courtesy and honour you have
done me in appointing me vice-President of the
Interstate Forestry Conference, 1917. I do not
think at this stage that I need do more than thank
you very heartily for this honour, in as much as
the formal opening of proceedings will take place
at Parliament House to-morrow afternoon, under
the auspices of His Excellency the Governor Gen-
eral in person. I cannot, however, refrain from re-
peating the words that I used when you did me the
honour of meeting me in my own room on Saturday
last, when I had the felicity of welcoming you to
Western Australia, and to emphasise the fact that
this Conference now sitting has marked in the his-
tory of Western Australia an epoch in the forestry
movement. You gentlemen have come here from the
length and breadth of Australia to make your scien-
tific deliberations in our capital city, hard by those
forests to which we are beginning to look with pride.
We in Western Australia trust that the slight glance
which you have had the opportunity of giving at the
Forests in the Karri and the Jarrah areas will im-
press you with their great possibilities, and may per-
chance enable you to advise us and Australia gener-
ally as to their uses. One cannot fail to feel that
a conference of scientific gentlemen who are perform-
ing the actual work of forestry, and conferring to-
gether year by year must be fraught with the great-
est benefit to the forests controlled by the Govern-
ments of Australian States, and also of their real
valuation. Ministers, however capable they may be,
and however much they may have studied the sub-
ject are necessarily after all but amateurs, whilst you
gentlemen have been brought up in the science from
your boyhood upwards, and in the study of forestry.
Hence Ministers are in a position to learn very much
indeed from you, and we consider it a very great
privilege that we should have an opportunity of meet-
ing you here, and of obtaining your respective
views at first hand. True, many of you gentlemen
contribute erudite papers that come to our hands for
perusal. There is a great deal, however, to be made
ol: the advantage of hearing the authors of such
papers reading them, and by their tone and demean-
our imparting to their words that meaning and in-
dividuality which convey a great deal more than
the mere written words themselves, and I am fully
confident that our intercourse throughout this con-
ference cannot but be for the greatest possible good.
I think we had best now consider the order of the
business on the Agenda Paper, and at this point I
should be glad to know if it is your wish that the
Press shall remain and report your proceedings.”
Question put and passed.
At this stage the vice-President announced the
receipt of the following letter from the Executive
Committee of the Advisory Council of Science and
Industry, dated Government Laboratory, Perth, 14th
November, 1917, and addressed to the President of
the Interstate Forestry Conference: —
Sir, —The above Committee, who have obtained permis-
sion for me to represent them at your conference, have
requested me to bring the following matter before you:
The Executive Committee are of opinion that it would
be of great value in connection with proposals which have
already been made towards the establishment of a Forest
Products Laboratory in Australia if a complete compila-
tion was made of all existing data, whether published
or unpublished, which may be available in the Common
wealth regarding results of investigations into Aus-
tralian Forest Products.
My Committee desires to ascertain the feeling of your
Conference as to whether such a compilation would be
useful and is desirable, and if so, will your Conference
make suggestions for steps to be taken with regard to
such a compilation, and indicate how the executive com-
mittee of the Commonwealth Advisory Council of Science
and Industry may assist in such work. I-do not know
whether you will consider it necessary for me to bring
the matter before your Conference personally, or whether
this communication will suffice, but I should esteem it a
great favour if you would comply with the request of
my committee, and would indicate how and when the
matter should be brought forward,
I have the honour to be Sir,
Your obedient servant,
(Sgd.) E. A. MANN,
Member of the Executive Committee of Science and
Industry.


It was resolved on the motion of Mr. LANE-
POOLE, seconded by Mr. H. H. CORBIN, that the
communication from the Advisory Council be brought
up in connection with Mr. Jolly’s paper later on.
The Hon. R. T. ROBINSON, K.C., M.L.A., Minis-
ter for Woods and Forests, Western Australia, vice-
President of the Conference, then read the following
paper entitled; —
THE PLACE OF FORESTRY IN NATIONAL
ECONOMICS.
(By the Hon. R. T. Robinson, K.C., M.L.A., Minis-
ter for Woods and Forests, W.A.)
I welcome this opportunity to address a confer-
ence of masters in the ancient and honourable craft
of forestry as something more than a mere func-
tion in the ordinary course of my Ministerial duties.
I regard it as a privilege in as much as I am ad-
dressing those who are intimately acquainted with
all that pertains to matters in which I claim to be
no more than an amateur, but, I hope and trust, an
amateur who has long passed the dilettante stage
and who is seriously impressed with the supreme
value and importance of the issues which are in-
volved in scientific and economic forestry.
You, by hard training, are in a position to speak
with authority on every one of the many facets of
the science of forestry, and long and varied experi-
ence in executive positions has furnished you with
an intimate knowledge and a just appreciation of
the economic aspects of forest endowments.
My studies in political economy, and the conse-
quent endeavours to connect economic cause with
economic effect have found no more striking illus-
tration than that which arises from a consideration
of forestry matters as thrown into high relief in the
brilliant white light of the experience of the ages.
There is no sphere in social and economic life in
which the action of the present —be it wise or fool-
ish —is so clearly reflected in future conditions as in
that which touches forest resources. History
bristles with instances, and all of these point with
unerring and warning finger in one direction, and
in one direction only.
The community which is so wisely guided that it
only uses its forest wealth reaps its reward in in-
creased economic independence, while the nation
which abuses its forests falls upon the unpleasant
times wffiich are the inevitable Nemesis of wasteful
and wilful prodigality. There are no exceptions to
this basic economic law, and to-day the stress and
strain of a catastrophic world war are bringing fur-
ther proofs of its truth into startling prominence.
England, trusting to her mercantile marine and
in the belief that the trident of Neptune had been
forged for her special use and permanent benefit,
permitted her forests to be levelled, and now she is
feverishly engaged in replanting them.
Other nations which are still squandering their
forests with a wanton disregard of the future, warned
by the lessons taught by the war, are seriously con-
templating or have already inaugurated the only
policy which can be regarded as adequate.
Australia has for long been jeopardising her
forests. However, I believe that I am right in say-
ing that in every State the authorities are now alive
to the perils of the situation.
But at the present moment, unfortunately, some
of the States are unable to do what they would like
to do in this direction, for they are suffering from
the sore stringency which impelled Charles I. to
make a raid upon the forest revenues of his realm.
They are experiencing
“That eternal want of cash
That vexes public men.”
This may delay the good work for a little time.
It has been said and with much truth, by an
authoritative writer on forestry question, that our
civilisation is built on wood. This gentleman re-
minds us that from the cradle to the coffin, in some
shape or other, wood surrounds us as a convenience
or a necessity.
It enters largely into all our structures. It serves
to ornament and furnish them. Without it literature
would practically cease.
Every ounce of gold raised in Australia requires
wood in the mining, and the same may be said of
the baser metals and of coal.
There is hardly a utensil, a tool, or even a machine
in the construction of which wood does not play a
part, if it is only to furnish the pattern.
In Germany, if Wolff’s Intelligence Bureau has,
by chance, told the truth for once, the daily bread
of the Kaiser’s subjects owes much of its stiffness
and not a little of its flavour to powdered wood.
In short, the staple forest product plays a foremost
part in every avenue of industrial and social activity.
Let me turn for a moment to this State of Western
Australia as a concrete example of the part borne
in public and private economy by a great natural
forest inheritance.
I say without hesitation or fear of contradiction
that without our forest the development of the
colony would have been impossible.
The earlv colonists were, from the necessities of
■ * '
the' case, large importers, and they had only one way
of paying for these imports, that is they had to pay
in exports.
The presence of gold was unsuspected, the pas-
toral industry is one that takes years before it
reaches a condition to make itself felt. The young
colony had nothing in fact to send away in payment
of its debts except its timbers.
This State began exporting timber in 1836, seven
years after its foundation, and up to the end of
1915, we had sent it away to a value of over
£14,000,000. To this must be added £2,500,000, the
value of the sandalwood exports.
It was only in 1902 that wheat became an article
of regular export. And the mention of wheat re-
minds me of the debt our early farmers owe to one
item of our forest product —sandalwood.
This State alone in the Commonwealth grows san-
dalwood, and in the early days its existence in and
near to what we now call our wheat belt, made farm-
ing possible, in many cases, and prevented financial
disaster from overtaking numbers of struggling
pioneers.
When farm operations were not pressing there
were always the sandalwood areas to visit and bring
in what always found a ready and a profitable mar-
ket.
It is quite impossible for me to state in figures the
total value of the produce of our forests to date.
There are many items regarding which no statistics
are available, and there are others in which they are
by no means full.
But putting the various items together regarding
which our information is reliable, I find that at a
conservative estimate our timber areas have yielded
more than £25,000,000.


When the smallness of our population is taken
into consideration, the importance of the role which
our forests have played in the national economy be-
comes abundantly evident.
An old writer on economics—Adam Smith, if my
memory serves me right- -remarks that gold is al-
ways found in inhospitable situations where man’s
efforts to become suddenly rich are handicapped by
stern disabilities.
This statement has, as a general thing, some solid
foundation in fact, but there are sometimes mitigat-
ing elements. In this State, for instance, Nature has
kindly placed at and near to our principal goldfields
a plentiful supply of firewood. For years past our
mulga belts have been responding to the gold-miners’
call for fuel to the extent of over 500,000 tons per
annum.
Large as has been the contributions of our forests
in the past to the national well being, I confidently
look forward to their contributing in still greater
proportion in the future to the development and
progress of this State.
Hitherto the forests here have yielded marvel-
lously little beyond raw timber.
Tanning materials, it is true, have figures in our
products, notably mallet bark, but the trade in that
is in danger of collapse owing to unwise exploita-
tion, due as much to the apathy and negligence of
the authorities as to the cupidity of the exploiters.
Outside of timber and tanning agents our forest
possibilities remain unexplored. The foundation by
the Federal authorities of an Advisory Council of
Science and Industry may be taken as an indication
that better things may be expected.
The Council, I understand, contemplates the es-
tablishment of Forest Products Laboratories, and
such institutions are, I hold, absolutely essential if
our latent forest wealth is to be utilised.
I don’t know whether a Laboratory is to be
located here, but I do know that the extent and im-
portance of our forest resources indicate beyond the
shadow of a doubt that Western Australia has a
claim to a laboratory which cannot lightly be set
aside.
This State offers a field for scientific investigation
equalled it may be, but certainly not excelled by any
State in the Commonwealth. The State Government
of Western Australia has already pressed the matter
upon the Federal authorities and the Advisory Coun-
cil, and it will continue to press the question.
There is no State so much in need of development
as this is, none whose natural resources present
more tempting prospects, and for these reasons, if
for no other, we regard a Forest Products Labora-
tory within our borders as a vital necessity to our
making the most of the talent that has been en-
trusted to our care.
Let me mention one or two of the avenues await-
ing research. In addition to tan barks, regarding
which our Forest Department has a good deal of
information awaiting systematic digestion, there are
the questions of oils, gums, resins, and perfumes
calling for investigation.
Again there is the very important matter of paper
making.
I hold strongly the view that our forests and
scrub lands contain materials which, under scien-
tific treatment, may become the basis of a trade in
paper pulp.
Experiments have already been conducted by the
Imperial Institute, London, into a fibrous plant
from our central coastal regions, and specimens of
the paper made from it have been exhibited in this
city.
I believe, gentlemen of the Forest Services, when
I speak about Forest Products Laboratories and
their influence on the general economic position, I
am touching on a subject in which you are all deeply
interested.
A decade or so ago an American chemist, speak-
ing at such a conference as this, in one of the
Southern States, said “The time is coming when the
getting of raw lumber out of a forest will only be
an incident in the business of a lumberman.”
There was prophetic insight in the remark, and
the Laboratories at Wisconsin and Montreal by their
work have given happy realisation to the far-seeing
chemist’s prophecy.
I repeat that for the full discovery and utilisation
of our forest resources a Forest Products Labora-
tory is a prime necessity.
The future and what it holds is, we are told, upon
the knees of the gods. And what the future con-
tains for us is likely to remain there unless we
mortals by energy, patience, and determination
compel the careless immortals of Olympus to part
with their knowledge.
Since you last met there has been published a
“Discussion of Australian Forestry” by Mr. D. E.
Hutchins. To any other audience than this I would
explain who Mr. Hutchins is and why he wrote and
the nature of the authority with which he speaks.
But this course is quite unnecessary with you, for,
I think, you all know him well and fully appreciate
his eminent services to the science of forestry.
1 feel that Australia is peculiarly his debtor. He
has told the Australian people much it sadly stood
in need of knowing, and he has pointed out in un-
mistakable language to Australian politicians their
many sins of omission and commission.
Mr. Hutchins’ visit and report have been of in-
calculable service to Australian forestry, and I am
of opinion that this will become more and more
apparent as the years pass.
What I most admire about Mr. Hutchins’ criticism
is that it is not wholly destructive. Any one can
find fault, and the less he knows about the subject
the louder as a rule are his complaints, but only
the man who is intimately acquainted with the matter
can indulge in constructive criticism.
This is where the great value of his re-
port comes in. He does not content 'him-
self with mere fault-finding, he tells us
how to remedy our errors and points out the path
along which we should travel.
Let me quote one example of his healthy helpful
criticism; “Forest economics have not been studied
in Australia any more than in England,” he writes
and then he goes on to say, “In other countries, not
in this anomalous condition, Forest Economy is
studied and taught. There are chairs of forest eco-
nomy at Universities in Europe, America, and
Japan. Australia should have at least one such.
And it would be fitting that that should be in Vic-
toria, which has long been at the head of Australian
forestry. In the early years of this country, Vic-
toria was spending as much on forestry as all the


other Australian States put together. To-day, Vic-
toria has by far the highest forest expenditure, and,
except South Australia, it is the only State that is
doing anything in practical constructive forestry.”
I am aware that since he wrote, New South Wales
has initiated a school of a high order with facilities
for practical work, and in doing so, the mother
State has given point to Mr. Hutchins’ remarks.
In the interests of a sound forest policy and as a
matter that is closely allied to the public economics
of forestry, I hold strongly that the Commonwealth
in special schools aided by the universities, should
be able to impart a complete education to her for-
esters of all ranks.
When the term “national economy” is used in re-
gard to any matter, it is too often assumed that the
financial aspect alone is being considered.
The assumption falls short of the truth some-
times. It does so when forest economy is concerned.
There is an aspect of forestry which is of high im-
portance and yet is not immediately connected with
cash values.
Whatever is good for the national welfare has an
economic bearing, which cannot readily be translated
into currency, but has an economic value all the
same.
Certain of the nations on the continent of Europe
clearly recognise this, and such recognition finds ex-
pression in the fact that in many cities —Paris and
Brussels may be cited—the national forests in the
vicinity have become the great recreation resorts of
the city dwellers.
From a public standpoint this is in every way
praiseworthy. The people find health in the forests
and health, after all is said and done, is the main-
spring of wealth.
The great jarrah and karri forests of this State
are too far away from the metropolitan area to be
utilised in this way, but we have now under contem-
plation a scheme which, in operation in the years to
come, is destined to have its healthful influence on
the people.
In this matter we recognise that the aesthetic and
recreative, as instanced in forests for popular use
and entertainment, have a distinct economic value as
everything that tends to promote the public well-
being is nationally, a good thing.
Our great scheme for supplying the goldfields with
water involves a catchment area of 200,000 acres.
When the work was in progress this large tract of
forest land was ringbarked.
I content myself with mentioning the fact. In a
Conference such as this, comment is as unnecessary
as it would be painful. It is proposed to reforest this
area afresh, largely with native species, but also
introducing some exotics as well.
When this has been done a grievous forestry sin
will have been atoned for, and a place of resort for
the dwellers in the metropolitan area will be pro-
vided for all time.
Speaking at the Conference in Adelaide last year,
His Excellency the Governor-General pointed out
that the authorities all over Australia owed it to pos-
terity to protect, foster, and in every way conserve
the great national forest asset.
In all ages and in all countries the natural re-
sources have for a time at least been squandered
without thought of the future. This is perhaps only
what is to be expected, for as long as their exploita-
tion is left unrestricted in private hands waste will
continue.
For private enterprise and private interest know
only the immediate future, and has only one aim in
the use of these resources, namely, to obtain from
them the greatest possible personal and present
gain.
To remedy this unsatisfactory state of affairs
legal enactment and regulation are necessary, and
in a country like ours, where liberty is as the breath
in the national nostrils, such enactments are only
possible when the community is fully convinced that
they are necessary in the common good.
And prejudices have to be broken down and sus-
picions allayed, and the person whose business is the
conversion of timber into cash has to be assured that
the proposed changes are not inimical to his per-
manent interests.
New South Wales has grasped the situation in its
true bearings and has acted, for last year a very ex-
cellent Forest Act was put upon her Statute-book.
Others, of the Eastern States are, I understand, con-
templating similar action, and for ourselves, I may
say that a Forest Bill is now in draft, and I hope to
be able to place it before Parliament at no distant
date.
In legislating about our forests are we doing any
new thing? By no means. Under pressure of cir-
cumstances whose trend and effects are obvious to all,
we seek only to re-enact some of the wise regula-
tions which shrewd Norman kings put in force some
seven centuries ago.
When the Forest laws of the Normans became a
dead letter in England, and public utility was
swamped in a rushing tide of self interest, the great
English forests perished, and to-day the country be-
moans the fact and is hastening to repair, if pos-
sible, the damage.
If the English replanting scheme is carried to com-
pletion the time will again come when it may again
be said of the forester, as it was centuries ago:—
“He knew each lane and every alley green,
Dingle and bushy dell of these wild woods,
And every rocky bourne from side to side
His daily walks and ancient neighbourhood.”
The history of British forests contains a lesson for
Australia which should not be passed lightly by.
At the present time the forests of this State suffer
severely from want of sufficient legal provision to
conduct them as they should be conducted. The rev-
enue from them now passes into the consolidated
fund, in place of being to a very large proportion
spent upon their protection and regeneration.
The full economic value of forests to a nation is
only beginning to be realised in Australia, and as re-
alisation deepens so will appreciation of them in-
crease.
Take farming for example. This State, in the
years to come, is destined to be a great wheat pro-
ducer. Our wheat belt is within or close to the
forested areas, and this juxtaposition is singularly
fortunate.
Careful and prolonged experiments have estab-
lished it beyond doubt that the temperature within
a forest is lower than in bare open country.
It follows that precipitation within and near the
forests must be greater than if the district was free
of timber. So the farmer directly, and through him


the State indirectly, benefits from the proximity of
forests. In hilly country particularly the forests
also tend to conserve rainfall and to equalise the
flow of springs and streams.
The Mundaring catchment area, already men-
tioned, is a case and a speaking ease in point. The
ring-barked area no longer holds up a large share
of the rainfall, giving it off gradually and clean
and fresh.
To-day the surplus rain runs off it as off an iron
roof. And since the timber was killed there has
been a very noticeable admixture of salt in the
water coming from the catchment area. In men-
tioning this I have, in addition to the aesthetic and
recreative arguments, given you another reason why
the catchment area I have named should be freshly
reforested with as little delay as possible.
The forests and all that pertains to them have a
peculiar attraction for me, and if I have addressed
you at some length this must be my excuse.
Let me in conclusion assure you again that this
State fully appreciates the compliment you paid it
and its forests when last year you decided that your
next meeting should be here.
You have a very fine, and, may I say, a compre-
hensive programme which exhibits the' healthy qual-
ity of ambition.
Such Conferences as this are of the essence of
professional work, and they are in the direction of
that thoroughness and efficiency which modern con-
ditions are more and more insistently demanding.
Your deliberations I am certain will be productive
of much good to the science of forestry and greatly
to the benefit of the soundest item in Australia’s
long list of natural resources.
Let me recall the words of the old poet who in
the days when England had forests and was sensible
of their value to the country and protected and fos-
tered them with a jealous care.
“Than a tree a grander child earth bears not.
What are the boasted palaces of man,
Imperial city, or triumphal arch,
To forests of immeasurable extent,
Which time confirms, which centuries waste
not?”
And these lines, gentlemen, recall to my mind a
curious instance of the influence of the forest on
poetic fancy, which should not be forgotten. British
poetry, unlike that of France, is singularly reticent
about forests, and such of our singers as have de-
voted more than a passing word to them, belong
mostly to the Elizabethan and earlier eras —to the
days in fact when England was well forested.
When the forests ceased to be, English poets
ceased to sing of them. Permit me in closing to ex-
press my earnest hope and belief that this, your first
Conference in this State, will be productive of much
of value to the science you have made your own, and
therefore to this Commonwealth of ours. (Ap-
plause!)
Before proceeding with the other papers, I desire
to state that we have with us at this Conference M.
Alphonse Mathey, Chevalier de la Legion d’ Honneur,
Conservateur des Eaux et Forets a Dijon, Cote D’or,
France. M. Mathey is, as you are aware, one of the
most eminent of the Foresters of France, and he has
had the opportunity, together with yourselves of
visiting some of the forest country of Western Aus-
tralia. I may say that he has come to us at a moment
when we most appreciate and need some connection
with his own great country. You are aware that the
devastated regions of France and Belgium and even
England, Ireland, and Scotland will require an ex-
penditure of millions of pounds of building timber.
Already our American cousins are on the spot en-
deavouring to place their lumber, and it is essen-
tial that we should have our own representatives there
also. Yet Australia has had no direct forestry re-
presentative there, but by one of those extraordinary
vicissitudes of Fate we have in our midst, one to
whom France and Belgium will listen, and he will
take back with him records that in France will be
associated imperishably with our jarrah and other
hardwoods. Before long I feel sure we shall see the
Australian hardwood firmly established in France.
You will, I feel sure, listen with the greatest interest
to the observations that M. Mathey will make. I
have asked him to address you, and he has consented
to do so, though I regret that personally I shall not
be able to follow his remarks as closely as some of
our learned foresters. I know, however, that M.
Mathey is in earnest, and that he has now forged a
link between Australia and France that will last for
all time.
COLONEL MATHEY, Conservator of Forests,
Dijon, France : It gives me great pleasure to
be able at this Interstate Forestry Conference
to express' my heartfelt appreciation of the
great kindness that Australia has shown to me.
To begin with, when I landed in Australia the
Governor-General extended to me the hospitality
of his house, and there I formed the highest
opinion of this man. He, if I may say so,
has the true forester’s soul. He it was who urged
me to go to Western Australia. Again, in Melbourne,
I received such kindness and help from Sir John
Forrest, that I am quite unable to thank him suffic-
iently for what he did for me. From the East I came
to Perth, and there I was received by the Premier, Mr.
Lefroy, and was assisted in every way possible. In
Mr. Kobinson, the Minister for Forests, I found
something entirely unique in all my forestry experi-
ence, a Minister for Forests who knows trees. I
cannot say how greatly this surprised me. I feel
that in his hands the vast forest wealth of Western
Australia will be safeguarded. I have to thank Mr.
King, the Under Secretary for Forests, for making
my stay in Perth so pleasant. And now I turn to
you my comrades, the Foresters of Australia. You
did me a great honour in including me in your tour
through the wonderful forests of this State. I was
stupified and thunderstruck at the immensity of the
Jarrah and Karri forests. Conserve these, gentle-
men, I beg you. When this ghastly war ends these
hardwoods will be more and more in demand. You
must make reserves of all the real forest country. If
I may be allowed to say so your sawmillers are per-
haps wasting the timber too much. I know that this
is unavoidable in a State whose timber industry is
an export one. We in Europe will require all that
you can send us, and I feel sure that as time goes on
more and more waste will be utilised, and those trees
which at present are not turned to account will also
find a market. It was a great pleasure to me to con-
verse with you during our tour in the forests. It was
a constant surprise to me to see how much your heads
ol the various forest States had accomplished, and
accomplished with practically no assistance. You,
gentlemen, are like generals without officers. It is


essential that you train men. These trained men will
be able to draw up Forest Working Plans. These
Working Plans will be simple and tenative to begin
with, but as your trained staff develops its knowledge
of the sylviculture of your forests, they can be fur-
ther’ developed.
One rather sad matter I must touch on, and that is,
that in spite of the glorious and botanically unique
flora of Western Australia, there is no English book
on this flora, and, helas, that I should have to say
it, the only work is in German. A book describing
the species illustrated with plates would, besides add-
ing to the scientific knowledge of the world, be of
the greatest assistance to you all in teaching the peo-
ple the value and beauty of your forests. You have
in your midst a man of training, experience and
great learning, who will, 1 feel sure, fill this gap. I
refer to Dr. Steward. I am not here to make a long
speech, and I will therefore conclude in wishing you
every success in your deliberations, which I feel sure
will result in much good to Forestry. I want to thank
you all once more for your kindness to me, and also I
want to thank Australia in the name of France, for
all that she has done for my country. Vive L’ Aus-
tralie. (Applause.)
Mr. R. DALRYMPLE HAY, Chief Commis-
sioner of Forests, New South Wales, pointed out that
the destruction of the forests in the early days had
to be attributed to the pioneer. He found practically
a wild land, and in order to make progress he had
to clear a holding, and thus a great deal of the
forest was destroyed, and then, again, wood had no
value at the time; but a sad feature surrounding
the whole business was that when the time arrived
for discrimination there was no one who would
stand up and say, “This destruction has gone far
enough.” He thought that the educative programme
that lay before foresters in Australia was of very
considerable extent. They had to uneducate the
people in regard to measures they had been forced to
adopt through necessity. The early pioneer had per-
force to destroy trees, and his successors became
imbued with the necessity for continuing it. So
much so that to-day when the Australian boy is out
for a holiday there is no pastime he prefers to that
of felling a tree. The function of the forester was
largely to educate people to a greater regard for
trees, and such conferences as these should do a
great deal to assist in the evolution of the public
mind in regard to forests. They had before them
a large amount of educational work, and although
conferences were the means by which foresters
helped one another in constructive work they were
also important factors in educating the public against
destructive work.
At this stage the Vice-President withdrew and
the Chair was occupied by the Hon. W. G. Ash-
ford, M.P.
Mr. M. W. JOLLY, Director of Forests, Queens-
land, stated that Australian forests had suffered
from Anglo-Saxon ideas. In the early days some of
the forests had to go, as otherwise there would have
been no settlement, and without settlement forests
were of little value. Unfortunately in Queensland a
Forestry Department was not established until com-
paratively recently, and, there being no organisation
to protect the interests of Forestry, such a large pro-
portion of the forest land was alienated that Queens-
land is going to have great difficulty in finding suffi-
cient natural forests with which to supply future
needs. Consequently their policy was to hold tightly
to all the good forest land that was left to the
Crown.
The Vice-President had read some extracts from
the work of Mr. Hutchins, and in this connection
he would like to state that Mr. Hutchins had not
given the Queensland Forest Service as much credit
as was its due. Queensland was quite prepared to
admit the errors of the past, but he thought it right
that some of the misconceptions should be removed.
Mr. Hutchins had stated that Queensland had made
do Forest Surveys, whereas for the past six years
they had been doing almost nothing else. As a result
they had valued almost the whole of the hoop and
bunya pine forests remaining to the Crown, and to-
day can give a good reliable estimate of the resources
in these species. That surely was something to have
accomplished.
Also Mr. Hutchins wrote at length on the lack of
Forest expenditure. Certainly, Queensland had not
expended much on her forests, but that was due
largely to the lack of sylvicultural knowledge. Forest
management is built up almost entirely on sylvicul-
ture, and they were going to learn how to treat their
forests as fast as they could, but until they had
learned more he did not feel justified in recommend-
ing heavy expenditure on Forestry. For some time
to come their work must be largely experimental and
he, personally, had never asked for a large vote for
Forestry, as they were not in a position to expend
the revenue derived from the forests wisely. Queens-
land’s hoop pine forests were perhaps the most
valuable of the softwood areas of Australia. Nature
had put and had kept them there, but as they are now
being cut over, natural re-production is not coming
fast enough. The undergirth timber of course being
retained for future needs, but that was not sufficient
to keep pace with the future growth of the State,
and as a possible safeguard in some instances the
minimum girth had been raised. The problem was,
were they going to obtain sufficient regeneration by
expensive plantations, which would cost anything
from £4 to £8 per acre, or by helping nature in the
best possible way? During the past year a very
heavy seed crop was recorded, but the winter season
was so dry that of the thousands of millions of seed-
lings that had germinated in the forest, ninety-five
per cent, had disappeared. They had to learn how
to protect the seedlings that nature produced, and to
bring them through safely, but until it was shown
that they could not do that, he did not see that
large and expensive plantations should be started.
They were doing their best with the resources
available, and when the had the forest school and
men capable of handling forests, success must surely
follow.
It was decided on the suggested of Mr. ASH-
FORD (Vice-Chairman) that as members of the
conference had had no opportunity of reading some
of the papers, all the papers should first be read
and discussion thereon proceeded with on the mor-
row.
In the absence of the author, Dr. F. Steward,
Botanist and Plant Pathologist, Western Australia,
read the paper entitled “The Trees of Western
Australia,” by Mr. J. H. Maiden, F.R.S., Govern-
ment Botanist, New South Wales: —


THE TREES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
By J. H. Maiden, 1.5.0., F.R.S., F.L.S.
The subject is too vast to deal with on an occasion
like this, except in the form of notes and pointers.
The trees of Western Australia have long had a
fascination for me; their botanical interest is un-
bounded; we know more of their uses from day to
day.
My paper is not suitable to be orally read in its
entirety, but I hope that, when printed, it will be
found to contain information useful in a collected
form, and that some of the notes will lead to further
investigation. It is proper to begin with references
to the literature of the subject, and so I submit
A SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY.
(i.) Bentham, G.
“Flora Australiensis,” 7 vols., Bvo. (1863-1878.)
This is the sacred book of Australian botanists. It
is a work that has done more than any other to in-
form the world in regard to Australian plants. It is
one that can never be superseded, although much has
been and will continue to be built upon it as a foun-
dation. It is an indispensable work if only because
its references to types are unique. The Eucalypts
enumerated in it are 135, while the Western Aus-
tralian Eucalypts, known as the publication of vol.
iii. (1866) which contains an account of them, were
42.
(ii.) Mueller, F. von.
“Report on the Forest Resources of Western Aus-
tralia.” (L. Reeve & Co., London, 1879), 4to, pp.
30 with 20 plates. This work, chiefly useful for its
plates, figures 17 Eucalypts, and they were precur-
sors of those a little later depicted in the Eucalypto-
graphia. They are: —
*marginata (Jarrah).
*caXophylla (Red Gum).
ficifolia.
* diversicolor (Karri).
*loxophelba (foecunda ) (York Gum).
*redunca (Wandoo).
*cornuta (Yate).
*gomphocephala (Tuart).
*rostrata
rudis (Flooded Gum).
decipiens.
microtheca,
oleosa.
*salmonophloia (Salmon Gum). '
*salubris (Gimlet Gum).
angustissima.
megacarpa.
pyriformis.
Only those marked with an asterisk (*) are of
practical importance to Western Australia at the
present time.
Mueller spells Jarrah “Yarrah” in this work, also
calls it “Mahogany Euealypt.”
Amongst timber-trees not Eucalypts, he enumer-
ates: —Three “Shea-oaks” (Casuarina), viz.:—
(1.) C. Fraseriana, Miq., which he recommends
for furniture and shingles.
(2.) C. glauca, Sieb. This is an interior species;
he says “timber hard and durable.”
(3.) C. Decaisneana, F. Y. M. This is the desert
species.
(4.) Agonis flexuosa Schauer. “Peppermint.”
(5.) Melaleuca leucadendron L. The tropical
Paper-bark.
(6.) Frenela verrucosa A. Cunn. “The most
widely diffused Cypress Pine of W.A,”
(7.) Banksia verticillata R. Br. “The River
Banksia.” He also mentions as producing
good sized trees in W.A.
B. littoralis R. Br.
B. attenuata R. Br. (Narrow-leaved Banksia)
B. Menziesii R. Br.
B. ilicifolia R. Br. (Prickly-leaved Banksia).
B. grandis Willd.
B. dentata Willd. (On the North-West Coast)
He then mentions:—
Santalum cygnorum Miq. (Sandalwood) and
three wattles.
Acacia acuminata Benth. “The raspberry-scented
Acacia.” (The so-called Jam.)
Acacia saligna Wendl. A Coastal species valu-
able for its tan-yield.
Acacia microbotrya Benth. “The Badjong
Acacia” . . . which yields an enormous quan-
tity of superior gum. He adds that some
other Wattles would be “acceptable for horti-
cultural export trade.”
Then we have chapters on —
(1.) Chemical and microscopical examination of
Eucalyptus wood.
(2.) Cultural measures to enrich the West Aus-
tralian forests.
(3.) Initiatory measures suggested for estab-
lishing forest administration in West
Australia, the whole interesting as illus-
trative of the broad functions of the Aus-
tralian botanist a little more than a gen-
eration ago.
(iii.) u General information respecting the present
condition of the forests and timber trade of the
southern part of the colony, with some remarks
and suggestions on future conservation and
management of the timber areas, from various
authorities.”
Perth, 1882. Published by authority, 4to, pp. 27
with two maps, one showing the general position of
timber forests, and the other showing the areas occu-
pied by Jarrab, Karri, White Gum, Tooart, York
Gum, and Red Gum.
There are also two pleasing tinted lithos. of Jarrah
and Karri forests which, however, do not bring out
the points of those trees. This work, which is an-
onymous, is generally bound up with Mueller’s
“Forest Resources.”
In page 5 of this work we have the White Gum
{redunca, but labelled viminalis, the Eastern White
Gum, in error), stated to occupy 10,000 square miles;
the Jarrah, 2,300 square miles; the Tuart, 500 square
miles; the Red Gum, 800 square miles; the York
Gum, 2,400 square miles. No doubt accurate figures
are now available. Then we have reports as to the
durability of Jarrah.
Mr. George Simpson, of Bunbury (page 10), des-
cribes “three distinct varieties of Jarrah” from the
practical sawyer’s point of view.
1. “The Salmon-bark, mottled like the King of
fish.” At page 21 Mr. J. S. Harris speaks of it as
occurring in the “Ranges south of Busselton, at a
distance of 14 miles in a rich ironstone soil occasion-
ally rocky.”
2. “Plum-pudding wood,” from its mottled ap-
pearance when cut into scantlings.
3. “The Rough Bark.” “Its bark is very coarse
and twice as thick at least as that of the Salmon-
bark.”


There are other notes in regard to forests and
forest products.
(iv.) Mueller. “Eucalyptographia.” A descriptive
atlas of the Eucalypts of Australia.” 4to, 100
plates, 1879-84.
This work figures the following W.A. species:
alba,
buprestium,
calophylla,
clavigera,
eornuta,
deeipiens,
diversicolor,
doratoxylom,
erythrocorys,
erythronema,
ficifolia,
foecunda,
gamophylla,
gomphocephala,
gracilis,
incrassata,
macrocarpa,
marginata,
megaearpa,
mierotheca,
oecidentalis,
Oldfieldii,
oleosa,
pachyphylla,
patens,
Preissiana,
pruinosa,
pyriformis,
redunca,
rostrata,
rudis,
salmonophloia,
salubris,
santalifolia (or rather
pachyloma),
sepulcralis,
tetraptera,
tetrodonta,
Todtiana,
uncinata,
obcordata (platypus).
(v.) Maiden, J. H. “A Critical Revision of the
Genus Eucalyptus.” 4 to 1903. Up to date
(October, 1917). 33 Parts have been published,
and the W.A. species figured are indicated be-
low at page 5.
(vi.) Julius, G. A. “W.A. Timber-tests, 1906. The
physical characteristics of the hardwoods of
Eastern Australia.”
fcp. 74 plates. 2nd edition, 1908.
A supplement, with 21 plates, containing the 1907
tests, was also published. 2nd edition, 1908.
Then we have, by the same author, “Notes re tim-
bers of Western Australia, suitable for railways, en-
gineering works, and constructional purposes gener-
ally,” with a number of excellent photo illustrations
and a map. The brief descriptions of the “principal
trees and timbers” given at page 6, refer to Jarrah,
Karri, Red Gum, Blackbutt, Wandoo, York Gum,
Red Gum. (In addition, Yate, Salmon Gum, and
Morrell, together with five non-Eucalypts, were
dealt with in the original work.)
THE BOTANICAL FASCINATION OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
First of all, it is the most intensely Australian of
all the States, so far as its vegetation is concerned.
The original ancestors of our flora are regarded to
have originated in Western Australia, the South-
West containing the fons et origo of the Australian
element. Of course it has changed during the ages,
but the Western Australian flora as we know it, is
the oldest and purest, and affords a delfght to the
“t’other-sider” that the Western Australian, who
takes it all as a matter of course, may fail to realise.
And that State, being the largest and least populous
of the federation, it follows that Western Australia
is a grand National Park or Botanic Garden, to the
delight of the botanist. The huge masses of showy
inflorescence and of highly specialised plants are not
equalled in any other State, and if it were not that
my audience consists of those highly utilitarian per-
sons called foresters, I would like to expatiate on
this charming subject.
PERIODICITY OF FLOWERING OF
EUCALYPTS.
Phenology .
Allow me to bring under your notice another mat-
ter of importance concerning trees. I invite your
attention to a paper of mine, “A plea for the study
of phenological phenomena in Australia, 1 ” in the
Proceedings of the Royal Society of New South
Wales, Yol. xliii., page 157 (1909).
Phenology as a word is not very well known, even
yet; it means “first appearance,” a record of the first
appearance in any district of the bursting of the
leaf-buds, of the flower-buds, of the setting of fruit
of any plant, be it a tree or other. What is the use?
I quote some of the uses I cited in the paper, stress-
ing the importance of the information to bee-keepers
and land-clearers (ring-barkers) for agricultural and
pastoral purposes. I have before me an American
paper on the “Phenology of Weeds,” and surely this
information should be available if we wish to deal
intelligently, and therefore economically, with such
pests.
THE HORTICULTURAL VALUE OF CERTAIN
W.A. TREES AND SHRUBS.
In list “B” below I have indicated a number of
Eucalypts specially valuable for horticultural pur-
poses. Most Eucalypts have the filaments (flowers)
white or cream-coloured, but some (and the majority
are found in W.A.) are different, being pink of
various shades to crimson and scarlet, while others
are yellow. Some are bizarre, having a large or
peculiar fruit. All that I have mentioned are in
demand in the other Australian States, the United
States, South and North Africa, and other sub-
tropical countries, and I am satisfied that in the
collection of such seeds Western Australia has a
potential minor industry not to be neglected. In the
big enterprise of the development of the Jarrah in-
dustry the small industries should not be overlooked.
The collection of seeds of the species I have indi-
cated is not likely to be rushed, for it requires care-
ful men to embark on it, but I am satisfied it is
worthy of serious attention. The seed firms in the
various States do not take it up; they are engaged
with more immediate money-making lines, and it is
open to other people to take it up, perhaps as a
side-line.
The species are found in different districts, and
hence will be collected through reliable agents, and
an absolute guarantee as to origin is necessary. At
first remarkably high prices will be paid for seeds
of named ornamental and bizarre species; later on,
the prices will go down; but I am satisfied that they
will always be remunerative. Only reliable men
could ever get a reputation for such seeds.
I am not referring to the supply of seeds of West
Australia’s beautiful flora as a whole; the Euca-
lypts are a class by themselves, and should be special-
ised in.
To West Australians the “Flowering Gum” means
Eucalyptus ficifolia, which only grows naturally in
the South-West, although there is a beautiful avenue
in King’s Park, Perth. Of course all Gums flower,
but this is perhaps the showiest, and good seed
always fetches a high price. But of late years hy-


brids between E. ficifolia and E. calophylla have
come on the market. They are larger plants and
hardier, but being pinks and purples, have not the
gorgeousness of the orange-reds and scarlets of the
true E. ficifolia. I have defined these forms in a
paper in the Proceedings of the Linnean Society of
New South Wales, vol. 41, p. 185 (1916), to which
I refer you, for the subject is very interesting.
I will further content myself with drawing atten-
tion to the commercial value of the seeds of many
W.A. Wattles, provided they are true to name, and
to one W.A. tree which is not a timber tree, but one
of the most gorgeous orange-yellow flowering trees
in the world. I allude to Nuytsia floribunda , the
Cabbage tree or tree Mistletoe.
The seeds germinate quite readily, but the young
plants are harder to rear than babies.
In the year 1829 William Baxter, a botanical col-
lector, whose partnership with my predecessor,
Charles Fraser, ended in a violent quarrel, brought
a plant from King George’s Sound in the “Lucy
Ann” and landed it at the Sydney Botanic Gardens.
It lived about fifty-four years, dying in 1883. (The
late Mr. R. D. Fitzgerald figured a spray of it in
the N.S.W. Horticultural Magazine for January,
1867.) As he failed to replace this plant, which
flowered every year and was one of the “lions” of
this garden, my predecessor, Mr. Charles Moore, for
many years had a standing offer of £5O to anyone
who would replace it. A number of attempts were
made, and the offer finally lapsed. Through the
kindness of a Perth friend I very seriously tried to
replace it in 1909 and 1910, but the experiments
failed. My view is that modem horticulturalists
ought not to be beaten at their own game by our
great-grandfathers who, with the poor accommoda-
tion of a tiny and ill-found coasting vessel, per-
formed the feat. It is up to Western Australians
to master the propagation of their own tree, and
also that of the Sandalwood (another parasitic tree),
which is becoming exterminated because it is grubbed
up by the roots by sandalwood getters.
The Quaker philanthropist, Mr. James Backhouse,
records it in the extracts from the Fifth Part of his
Letters, page 30 (1839), and says “the gayest tree
is Nuytsia ( Loranthus ) floribunda, which sometimes
rises to forty or fifty feet in height, and attains to
six or eight feet in circumference, and is called in
the colony Cabbage tree because of a faint resem-
blance of the branches in texture to cabbage stalks.
Its top, at this season (Ist January), is one mass of
golden, orange, or yellow flowers, while the lower
portion, clothed with fleshy, linear, leaves, is a
pleasant green.”
W. H. Harvey thus speakes of it in Hooker’s
Journal of Botany, Vol. VI., p. 219 (1854)
“I have not dug out a Nuytsia, but I think it
highly probable that there is underground at-
tachment to the roots of other plants. No one,
as I am informed, has ever found ripe fruit,
and Drummond has looked for it long and
closely. The tree increases by underground
suckers, which are sent to a great distance.
Wherever you see a Nuytsia, there are myriads
of young stems rising round it. They are leaf-
less, and look like somewhat succulent Jaek-
sonias, no true leaves being formed till the plant
becomes a tree. It is a very deformed-looking
tree at best, but gay enough when in blossom;
its leaves, too, are of a very beautiful tender
green. They call it Cabbage-tree”
There are many notes on it by J. J. Fletcher in
the Proceedings of the Linnean Society of New
South Wales, Vol. 33, p. 867 (1908), chiefly in his
paper on Polycotyledony.
I make no apology for drawing the attention of
this Conference to this remarkable tree. Until it is
established by the plant-cultivator, it is a perpetual
challenge to us.
A BOTANICAL OR FOREST SURVEY; A
CURVING BOUNDARY.
First of all let me explain what a Curving Boun-
dary is by this map (not produced).
The use of such a term is an endeavour to replace
a vague statement that a tree is found on the Eastern
Goldfields or in the South-West by a graphic re-
cord of where it really occurs.
We mark on the map, by a blue cross, or other
indication, where a certain kind of tree (a species
or variety) has been found, and the more or less
curved line which indicates the outer line which joins
these crosses in the curving boundary.
In other words, at a particular date, it indicates
the territory within which the tree is found. It
serves as a basis for a more accurate record, for
obviously we are always learning. In a work of this
kind the forester and the botanist are mutually help-
ful, for unless the botanist checks the record, the •
forester may be led to give erroneous estimates of
the distribution of a particular tree, and we ought,
as regards our Australian trees, to do what we can
to dispense with vague generalisations as to the areas
and constituents of our forests. While we establish
the Curving Boundary, we concurrently obtain a
good deal of information as to the distribution of
particular trees within that boundary.
To some extent the trees in Western Australia are
gregarious, but many are not so, and different species
have varying amounts of denseness of distribution.
So that the problem is one of some complexity, but
it has to be worked out. Every man who has goods
to sell has to say wdiat he has got and where the
goods are. Thus we must have the Botanical Survey,
or to save the feelings of persons who look upon the
botanist as an academic person, call it the Forest
Survey. Not one of our Australian States has pro-
gressed much in the direction of making such a Sur-
vey, so that Western Australia, with its vast areas
and sparse population need not feel ashamed of itself
in this respect.
It must be borne in mind that the very foundation
of forestry in any state is this particular Forest
Survey. The term is not sufficiently explicit, as it
may mean many things, but the accurate indication
of the whereabouts of the trees in any State is a
condition precedent to the forester being able to get
on with his Working Plan. You may stunt the op-
portunities of the botanist as much as you like, but
in this matter he sits firmly as the rock of Gibral-
tar, when he says, “No botanical survey, no proper
forest administration.”
THE BIGGEST AUSTRALIAN TREES.
I have brought some facts under notice in my
Forest Flora of New South Wales, Vol. 11., page 161,
chiefly referring to those of Victoria; as regards the


New South Wales Blackbutt, see Yol. IV., page 6,
and the Tallow Wood, Yol. IY., page 123. The
largest Western Australia tree is the Karri {Euca-
lyptus div er si color), and I have given some pub-
lished figures at Yol. 11., page 299, of my Critical
Revision of the Genus Eucalyptus. It is desirable
that we should have measurements by surveyors or
other competent observers of the heights and girths
of definite Karri trees, and the ascertainment of such
data should be the business of the forestry staffs of
all the States. We ought to know the sizes of our
primeval vegetation, even if these biggest trees,
when removed by fire or other catastrophe, may
never be succeeded by others which can be permitted
to attain equal magnitude.
FUEL FOR THE GOLDFIELDS.
Because of the very wide distances that separate
coal and coke from the goldfields, the forests in
Western Australia are exploited for fuel to an ex-
tent and in a direction that is unknown in the East-
ern States. Thus new problems offer themselves, one
being the accumulation of data in regard to the rate
of growth of various trees, another being the reduc-
tion of waste to a minimum. At present bark, leaves,
and branches are left on the ground; it will be a mat-
ter of consideration as to whether tanning extracts
can be prepared from the bark, charcoal from the
larger branches, and oil from the leaves —some oils
to be used for gold-saving and others for curative
purposes.
WATER-STORING TISSUES IN TREES.
Such trees may be not only water-bearing as re-
gards their stems, but may have succulent roots,
which are sometimes eaten by the aborigines. In
the North-West, the Gouty stem {Adansonia Gre-
gorii) is a feature of the landscape. In regions of
low rainfall, which are especially extensive in West-
ern Australia, it is desirable to know as many of the
arboreal stores of water as possible.
In moderately dry and very dry country the abor-
igines, and white men on occasion, dig up the roots
of certain trees, and obtain sufficient water there-
from. The trees usually employed are certain Mallees
or dwarf Eucalypts, particularly E. dumosa, A.
Cunn., E. oleosa F.v.M., also Hakea leucoptera
F.v.M., and Camarina Decaisneana F.v.M. (a De-
sert Oak).
LIST OF TREES.
I believe that eventually all trees will be found
to be useful, but in regard to a number of them our
eyes have not yet been opened. In Western Aus-
tralia the useful trees are Euca-
lypts, and I submit three lists of them —
(a) The principal trees.
(b) Those of inferior importance.
(e) Those of the Nor-West.
In a report I published in 1914, I gave 214 as the
number of Australian species of Eucalyptus; the
number at the present time is about 230; in the pre-
sent three lists, those of Western Australia are given
underneath.
The number following the botanical name indicates
that Part of my Critical Revision in which the species
has been dealt with; it so happens that Western Aus-
tralia species preponderate in the Parts which re-
main to be published.
E. signifies that it is endemic, and'this applies to
a very high percentage of Western Australian trees.
H. species of special horticultural interest; the
trade in such seeds should be carefully fostered.
D. dry country species.
A.—THE PRINCIPAL TREES.
accedens W.V.F.,, 34, E., “ Powder bark.” Closely allied
to the “ Wandoo ” from which it can be readily separated
by its surface of white powder.
calophylla, R. Br. E., H., “Red Gum.” “ Kardan,” or
“ Kurdan ” of the Pinjarra tribe ; “ Marey ” or
“ Marri ” of those of the Lower Blackwood.
Campaspe, S. le M. Moore, 16, E., D. A “White Gum”
of the Coolgardie District.
celastroides, Turcz, 3, E., D., A “ Blackbutt ” The term
Blackbutt is applied to a number of trees on the Eastern
Goldfields.
Clelanid, Maiden 16, E., D. A “ Blackbutt.” ’ Its range
requires to be worked out.
cornuta, Labill, E. “ Yate.” “ Yeit ” (the old spelling,
it is of aboriginal origin.
diversicolor, F. v. M., 20, E. “Karri.”
Dundasi, Maiden, E., D. A “ Blackbutt.” Its range
requires to be worked out.
foecunda, Schauer, 4, E. “York Gum,” “ Ooragmandee ”
(Murchison tribes), “Yatthae” (? tribe).
gomphocephala, DC., 21, E. “ Tuart.”
gracilis, F.V.M., 3, D. A “ Blackbutt.”
Guilfoylei, Maiden, 20, E. “Yellow Tingle Tingle.” This
and the “ Red Tingle Tingle ” are only known from the
Denmark district at present.
intertexta, R. T. Baker, D. A “White Gum.” From near
the South Australian border.
Jacksoni, Maiden, E. “Red Tingle Tingle.”
marginata, Sm., 8, E. “Jarrah” (from Yarrah). Jerrile
(Augustus Gregory tribe ?).
microtheca, F.v.M., 11. A “White Gum,” or “Powder
Bark ”in W.A. It has a rough bark in the other States.
Found on the Murchison.
Mundijongensis, Maiden, E. Rare, as far as is know at
present.
occldentalis, Endl., E. “ Swamp Yate ” The aboriginal
name is “ Mallat (Lort Stokes) or “ Mallert ” (Drum-
mond), and is now used as a vernacular for a variety
( astringens) under the name of “ Mallet.”
oleosa, F.V.M., var. longicornis, 15, “ Morrel,” “ Poot.”
var. glauca, 15, “ Goldfields Morrel.” The normal
E. oleosa is a small tree.
patens, Benth, 20, E. “ The Blackbutt.”
redunca, Schauer, var. elata, 34, E. “White Gum.”
“ Wandoo.” (Aboriginal, now a vernacular.) The
normal E. redunca is a shrub or Marlock.
salmonophloia , F.v.M. M., 17, E., D. “ Salmon Gum.”
“ Wuruk.” (South-east districts.)
salubris, F.v.M., E. “ Gimlet ” “ Gnardarup ” (Lort
Stokes).
Todtiana, F.vAT., 20, E.
Total 24
Following are brief notes on some of the trees in
the preceding list.
The Karri ( Eucalyptus diversicolor ) is a moisture-
loving species, fond of depressions. It grows straight,
and corresponds in habitat to the Blue Gum ( saligna)
of Eastern New South Wales and Queensland. Its
range is much less extensive than that of the Jarrah;
it occurs from near Cape Naturaliste to the Leeuwin,
and along the South-West coast from the Warren
River to Albany, and around the Porongorups, about
thirty miles to the north-east of Albany. As sawn
stuff it is much like Jarrah in appearance, but does
not equal it in durability; at the same time it is a
valuable timber for many purposes, e.g., manufacture
of railway stock.
The Red Gum {E. calophylla) is a charmingly
picturesque tree, very abundant from Perth to Albany
and in the South-West generally. It is reputed to
flower every alternate year and it yields the best
honey. In bark and general appearance it resembles
the Bloodwoods of the East. Red Gum is a pale-
coloured timber, with abundant gum-veins and
pockets of gum (Kino), in this respect also resembl-
ing Bloodwood. Sometimes this Kino is so abundant
that it can be cheaply collected. I do not think there
is much future for it as an astringent medicine, as it
has so many competitors, but I very much hope that
a future is before it in the tanning industry and a


partial decolourisation of it will be solved by the
chemist by and by. I noticed fruit eases made with
Jarrah ends and Red Gum sides. At a little distance
the pale wood in a fruit case resembles Pine.
As to the Yate ( E . cornuta) f an early writer spoke
of it as having “a dark, rough, netted bark, and is
always welcomed by the travelled as growing in good
soil and among grass.” An old Yate is a large tree
and has a dark, fissured bark reminding an easterner
of Ironbark; there is no true Ironbark in Western
Australia. It is a South-Western species, and it is
reputed one of the toughest timbers in the State. I
personally saw a good deal of evidence in this direc-
tion in the way of cart-shafts, swingle trees, and
farming implements generally.
The York Gum {E. foecunda ) obtained its name
because it is abundant near this town, but it extends
more to the South-West, and northerly as far as the
Murchison. It has a thin, flaky-fibrous bark, is es-
teemed for wheelwrights’ work, naves, felloes, and
spokes. In my experience it has a short trunk, and
hence would not be much seen in the mills. The
branches are smooth.
The Tuart {Eucalyptus gomphocephala) is con-
fined to a narrow coastal strip from a few miles north
of Perth to Geographe Bay, and is characteristic of
the limestone. It reminds an easterner a good deal
of the so-called Apple {Eucalyptus Stuartiana) of
Victoria, New South Wales, and Queensland, in habit,
bark, and timber; its timber is, however, superior to
that of its eastern congener, being comparable to the
Grey Box {E. hemiphloia ) of the above States. It
is a specially heavy, hard, interlocked wood.
Jarrah {Eucalyptus marginata), the most widely
diffused of the commercial timbers, extends from
Gingin, on the Midland Railway, a few miles north of
Perth, then, going south, following the range to
Geographe Bay, the Leeuwin, and the South-West
generally. Its rough eastern boundary, going south,
is, say, Werribee railway station, Marradong,
Darkan, hence to the Tone River, thence nearly due
east of just south of the Stirling Range. It delights
in well-drained stony ranges. It is the king of West-
ern Australian timbers, and is undoubtedly most
valuable where durability is required.
The Mat-topped Yate {E. occidentalis) is one of
several Eucalypts represented both by a shrubby and
tree form. It has a number of varieties; some of
which are not' of primary importance at present. It
is a species in regard to which additional information
is required. I gave a good deal of attention to the
subject in my travels and found it to be an erect
tree with a flat top, the bark blackish and furrowed
(on the lower half of the trunk), then flaky and
feathery with black twisted strips, like a French
fowl, for approximately the remaining half, then
with smooth branches. I have reason to suppose that
some non-botanical writers have confused the two
Yates (this and E. cornuta ).
There is a smooth-barked form of the Flat-topped
Yate, which goes under the name of “Mallet” or “Mal-
lert.” It has a very astringent bark, and hence it has
considerable commercial value. I called its variety
astringens , but its relations to the Flat-topped Yate
require careful scrutiny, and it may turn out that it
is worthy of specific rank.
Mallet bark is contained in a north and south strip
of the south-western part of the State, say, 40 miles
on each side of the Great Southern railway from
Beverley or Brookton to Mount Barker, or at all
events it does not pay to cart it further from the
railway. It is a most valuable tanning 1 bark and was
shipped to Europe in small pieces or ground before
the War.
The W.A. Blackbutt ( E . patens ) —not to be con-
fused with the Eastern Blackbutt ( E . pilularis ) —is
interspersed amongst the Jarrah and Karri, but
chiefly amongst the latter, as it likes similar situa-
tions. It is pale coloured, durable underground, and
is also esteemed for railway wagons, farm imple-
ments, etc.
The Wandoo ( E . redunca ) is often locally known
as White Gum, but as such a name for a durable
timber is very largely discredited in Australia, the
name Wandoo should be encouraged as much as
possible. The typical form of E. redunca is a scrub
known as “Black Marlock,” but the tree-like form,
known as variety elata , is known as Wandoo. Its
distribution has been referred to at page 5. It
often occurs on sour lands. A swelling out of the
trunk, near the ground, is often characteristic, and
these tumour-like excrescences often contain a watery
liquid. The brownish, very durable timber, is most
valuable, but it is more faulty than Jarrah as a
milling timber, though much esteemed for local
use.
The drier country largely supports Salmon Gum
(Eucalyptus salmonophloia), Gimlet ( E . saluhris),
Morrell (a variety of E. oleosa). All are durable,
and make excellent fuel. They are for obvious rea-
sons most worked on the Eastern Goldfields, where
they are in great demand for mining timber and
firewood.
B. Shrubs or small trees not yielding merchant-
able timber, or, if large trees, timber of low value
angustissima, 19, E.
annulata, E.
*buprestium, 8, E.
caesia, 22, E., H.
calycogona, 3, D.
concohr, 14, E., D.
Cooperiana, E.
corrugata, 16, E., D.
decipiens, 14, “ Swamp Gum,” “ Flooded Gum,” “ Moitch”
(near Albany).
*decurva, 16, E.
dipier a, 16, E., D.
*doratoxylon, 16, E. “ Bell Gum.”
*erythrocorys, E., H.
eryihronerm , 22, E., H.
*endesmioides, D.
*falcata, 16, E.
fidfolia, E., H.
Flocktoniae, 16, E,
Forrestiana, 22, E,
gamophyUa.
goniantha, 16, E,
Oriffithsii, 16, E., D.
grossa, 16, E.
haematoxylon, E.
incrassata, 4.
Kruseana, E.
Lehmanni, E., H.
Heptopoda , 17, E., D.
he Souefii, 16, E.
*macrandra, 1 E.
*macrocarpa, 18, E., H.
megacar pa, 18, E.
micranthera, 20, E.
Oldfieldii, 17, E.
oleosa, 15, S.
orbifolia, 17, E.
*pachyloma, 7.
pachyphylla, 17.
*platypus, E. “Moort” (of aboriginal origin). E. platypus
var. nutans has crimson flowers and has no little horti-
cultural value.
polycarpa (pyrophora).
*Preissiana, 18, E., H.
pyriformis, 17, E., H., D.
rudis. “Blue Gum,” “Flooded Gum.”


sepulcralis, 8, E., H.
Sheathiana , E., H.
*spathulata, E.
striaticalyx, E.
Stricklandi, 16, E., H.
terminalis.
*tetragona, E., H.
tetraptera, 22, E., H.
torquata, E., H.
*uncinata, 14, D.
Websteriana, E., D.
Woodwardi, 16, E.
The word “Marloek” (Maalock is an old spelling)
is confined to Western Australia, and means a thicket
more or less dense. It may include the tree Mallee
of the more Eastern States, i.e., a dwarf Eucalypt
with a thickened stocky stem more or less embedded
in the light sandy soil. There are various qualifying
adjectives, such as Black, White. A few species
have their own special names, e.g., Moort (for E.
platypus) in addition to general one of Marloek.
The term is mostly in use in the southern part of
the State. To give a list of Marlocks would be to
include most of the dwarf species, but I have in my
travels personally heard it applied to those in the
preceding list marked *.
C. The Trees of the Nor’-West.
I do not propose to deal with the tropical or Nor’-
West timbers in this paper, and in the meantime I
am taking steps with the view to cause the publica-
tion of authentic information on the flora of the
Nor’-West, which will enable us to approach con-
sideration of the timbers in an intelligent manner.
A list of the Eucalypts follows: —
Tropical or Nor’-West.
alba, 25.
argiUacea, E.
brachyandra, 30.
clavigera.
confluens, E.
dichromophloia .
Foelschiana.
Houseana, E.
lirata, E.
melanophloia, 12.
miniata, 22.
Mooreana, E.
odontocarpa, S.
oligantha, 14, E.
papuana F.v.M.
perfoliata, E.
ptychocarpa, H.
rostrata.
setosa.
tetradonta.
SPECIES OF EUCALYPTUS IN REGARD TO
WHICH WE REQUIRE MORE BOTANI-
CAL MATERIAL.
Following are the points necessary for a perfect
description of a Eucalyptus tree: —
Habitat, e.g., river banks, sand plains.
Habit, e.g., straight trunk, pendulous branches.
Bark, e.g., smooth, flaky at butt, branches
smooth.
Timber, e.g., sap-wood thin, white; timber deep
red.
Juvenile leaves. —Usually called “suckers.”
Mature leaves. —The ordinary foliage.
Flower-buds. —Flowers.
Fruits. —Often called by senders “nuts” or
“seeds.” The tree seeds are inside the
fruits, and are something of the size of
gunpowder.
Many of the mistakes and imperfect descriptions
have arisen through the botanist trying to “make
do” with imperfect material and good-naturedly
running a risk to satisfy a correspondent. Of course
the botanist can do with much less information or
material in regard to trees concerning which he has
already acquired information.
We require material of the following West Aus-
tralian species to complete our descriptions:—
angustissima —Juvenile leaves, ripe buds, flowers.
argillacea —Juvenile leaves, fruits.
buprestium —Juvenile leaves, buds.
caesia —Juvenile leaves.
Campaspe —Juvenile leaves.
confluens —Juvenile leaves, buds, flowers.
Cooperiana —Juvenile leaves, flowers, fruit. Is it a shrub
or a tree ?
corrugata —Juvenile leaves.
diptera —Juvenile leaves.
doratoxylon —Juvenile leaves.
Flocktoniae —Juvenile leaves.
Forrestiana —Juvenile leaves.
gamophylla —Juvenile leaves.
goniantha —Juvenile leaves, fruits. Is it a tree or a shrub ?
grossa —Juvenile leaves, ripe fruits.
Houseana —Fruits.
KnLseana —Juvenile leaves.
micranthera —Juvenile leaves, fruits. Is it a tree or a shrub ?
orbifolia —Fruits.
pachyphylla —Juvenile leaves.
Preissiana —Juvenile leaves.
sepulcralis —Juvenile leaves, ripe fruits.
Sheathiana —Juvenile leaves, fruits.
Slricklandi, Juvenile leaves, fruits. Is it a tree or a shrub ?
etraptera —Juvenile leaves.
—Juvenile leaves.
Following are some notes on a few non-Euealypts;
a few additional notes have already been given under
“ Bibliography”: —
SOME MINOR WESTERN AUSTRALIAN
TREES.
The Wattles {Acacia).
The Wattles of Western Australia have not an
economic importance commensurate with their num-
bers, their remarkable beauty and special botanical
intrest.
Mueller has mentioned probably the three of
greatest. The “Jam” {A. acuminata) is indispens-
able for posts in the drier districts in which it grows,
while A. saligna yields a useful, though not the best
Australian tan-bark.
A. microbotrya, which yielded a gum of some com-
mercial importance half a century ago, is of less in-
terest in this direction now, partly because there is
less of it, and partly because the gradual scarcity of
soluble gums led to inventions of gum substitutes,
most of which have wheaten flour as a base.
HOW MANY WATTLES IN WESTERN
AUSTRALIA?
As with Wattles, so with Eucalypts, t am engaged
in certain work which will enable very close esti-
mates of described species to be made in the near
future.
As regards the non-tropieal West Australian
Wattles, Bentham gave the number at 106. Mueller
(2nd Census) raised it to 129. Taking this as a
basis, we have a record in the National Herbarium,
Sydney, of 66 more, and I have a list of seven species
new or not recorded from West Australia, making
202 in all. Some species are doubtless uncertain, so
that, in 1917, it would be a very close estimate to say
that we know of a couple of hundred wattles in non-
tropieal Western Australia. In my paper on Nor’-
West Wattles, I have recorded 54. Some extend
beyond the tropics. It will be a close estimate to say
that we know of two hundred and fifty Wattles in
the area we know as Western Australia. In Ben-
tham and Mueller the tropical Western Australian
species were included in the non-political area called
“N.A, or North Australia,”


In a Report on Australian Vegetation I prepared
for visiting members of the British Association for
the Advancement of Science in 1914, I estimated the
known number of Australian Wattles at 412. I
have shown how the number is changing as regards
Western Australia. Old names are revived, a few
in use are suppressed, and new ones are being dis-
covered. I think the number of our species does not
fall very far short of 500, and I am working in the
direction of preparing a Census of them, and also
of submitting an improved general classification.
It is surpising how imperfect is the material in
the best herbaria of so many Australian Wattles.
Of some we have only flowering specimens, of some
we have only specimens with pods (in a few cases
the pods are loose and therefore uncertain). Our
object is to get flowering and fruiting (pod) speci-
mens matched as regards every species, and the
forester, who spends most of his time in the coun-
try, can help the botanist in this work, if its urgency
is pointed out to him.
The Honeysuckles {Banksia). —Mueller has al-
ready given a list of seven of them, but they are of
inferior importance to the forester, although the
timber of some species is often used by carpenters
in country towns and in homesteads.
The Cypress Pines Callitris {Frenela). —The
most important forests of Cypress Pine appear to
be in West Kimberley, and are too distant to be de-
veloped at the present time.
The Myrtles {Agonis fleruosa) have been already
mentioned, but they have no importance from the
point of view of the sawmiller. Agonis of various
species will, however, become of increasing import-
ance in street planting in marine situations and in
reclamation works.
The She-Oaks ( Casuarina ). —Three have been
already referred to.
The Sandalwood {Santalum cygnorum) is a small,
dry-country species, which yields a pale-coloured
aromatic wood, largely exported to Singapore for
oil-distillation, the sawdust being used in various
ways for burning to produce an odour esteemed by
the Chinese and others.
Mr. R. DALRYMPLE HAY read a paper en-
titled :
AN ATTEMPT TO SECURE AN UNIFORM
NOMENCLATURE FOR AUSTRA LIAN-
TIMBERS.
By Mr. J. H.. MAIDEN, 1.5.0., F.R.S., F.L.S.
The desirability of securing a uniform nomen-
clature for Australian timbers is one that appeals
to every student of the subject. I was present at
a debate at the Sydney Conference some years ago,
and at the Adelaide Conference of 1916 (the report
of which only came into my hands a few weeks ago),
I observe another somewhat desultory discussion.
This is said in no unkind spirit, for ground has been
cleared, and opinion is now unanimous that the ex-
isting state of things calls for reform. After con-
sultation with our Chief Forestry Commissioner
(Mr. Hay), and at his instigation, I am addressing
you. I am seized with the difficulty of the problem,
yet we ought to get to grips with it, and obviously
the best method is to put a proposal in writing in
order that supplements and amendments may also
be put in writing, and thus progress may be made.
I very much regret that my own paper, which is
submitted with all deference, cannot have been
printed and in the hands of every member of the
Conference months ago. I beg leave to suggest that
every paper submitted to future conferences should
be so treated, to prevent mental indigestion and
occupation of the scanty time of the Conference in
listening to them, and possibly misunderstanding
them, when each member should have studied their
contents and have considered his attitude (perhaps
to be modified after debate) at his leisure, long
before he enters the Conference-room. All papers
should be taken as read, and all that an author
should be required to do (other than reply to critics)
is to read a brief abstract of his paper; and even of
that, printed slips should be supplied.
I have been honorary secretary of an important
scientific society for nearly a quarter of a century,
and I can say that nearly all the most valuable con-
tributions to a debate ensue when members know in
advance what they are expected to discuss.
I would suggest that we begin with only a few
names at first, and leave the brush timbers for sub-
sequent consideration; the latter mainly concern
New South Wales and Queensland.
The commercial timbers I have chosen are Eu-
calypts, and are taken from official publications pub-
lished in each of the States. I do not presume to
say that they are lists which would now be pub-
lished by the Forest Departments concerned, but
they will serve ray present purpose.
Each Forest Department might supply the others
with pieces of a size to be agreed upon, say twelve
to twenty (number to be decided upon) of the prin-
cipal commercial timbers of each State, labelled as
to common and vernacular names, and with brief
notes of characters and chief uses.
Some idea of the quantity available of each timber
should be given, as this will help to settle questions
as to the relative importance of certain timbers.
THE PRINCIPAL COMMERCIAL TIMBERS.
Western Australia. —List taken from G. A.
Julius's works:—
Jarrah ( marginata ).
Karri ( diversicolor ).
Tuart {gomphocephala) .
Blackbutt {patens).
Wandoo {redunca, var. elata).
York Gum ( foecunda ).
Red Gum (calophylla) .
Yate ( cor nut a ).
Salmon Gum (salmonophloia) .
MorrelJ {oleosa, var. longicornis).
South Australia.— List taken from J. Ednie
Brown's pamphlet, “Timber trees of South Aus-
tralia" (specimens exhibited at the Melbourne In-
ternational Exhibition, 1880): —
Red Gum {rostrata).
Blue Gum {leucoxylon) .
Sugar Gum ( corynocalyx) {cladocalyx).
Box {hemiphloia).
Peppermint {odorata).
Stringybark ( ohliqua) .
Spotted Gum {goniocialyx) {elceophora).
Yellow Gum ( Gunnii) {ovata).
[Where there is a second name, it indicates the
present accepted botanical one.]


—
Western
Australia.
South
Australia.
Victoria.
Tasmania.
New South
Wales.
Queensland.
Jarrah
Karri
Tuart
Wandoo
York Gum
Yate
Salmon Gum
Morrell
Sugar Gum
marginata
diversicolor
gomphocephala
redunca var.
foecunda
cornuta
salmondphloia
oleosa var.
cladocalyx
punctata
propinqua
Grey Gum
Red Box
• . •
polyanihemos
...
propinqua
polyanihemos
microcorys
microcorys
Tallow Wood
Bloodwood
...
\ z
corymbosa
...
corymbosa
—
Victoria. —“Official Report of the Carriage Tim-
ber Board to the Minister for Railways, 1884”: —
Blue Gum (globulus).
Ironbark (leucoxylon) : (sideroxylon is
meant).
Bastard Box (goniocalyx).
Mountain Ash (regnans).
Mahogany ( b otryaides).
As this list is too brief, I have selected a few_
others from Mueller’s “Key to the System of Vic-
torian Plants”: —
Blackbutt (pilularis).
Messmate (obliqua).
Peppermint (amygdalina).
Red Box (polyanthemos).
Ironbark ( leucoxylon : sideroxylon ).
W oolly-butt ( longif olia).
Spotted Gum (goniocalyx).
Red Gum (rostrata).
Bloodwood (corymbosa).
Tasmania. —“Tasmanian Timbers: their qualities
and uses,” by A. 0. Green (Proc. Roy. Soc. Tas.,
1902). I have only enumerated the principal
ones: —
Blue Gum (globulus).
Stringybark (obliqua).
Peppermint (amygdalina).
Swamp Gum (regnans) (perhaps some is
ovata).
Ironbark (Sieberiana).
New South Wales. —Maiden’s Notes on the Com-
mercial Timbers of New South Wales” (2nd Edn.,
1904). (For Stringybarks and Ironbarks, see
List 3): —
Mountain Ash No. 1 (obliqua, alpine form),
(gig ante a).
Mountain Ash No. 2 (Sieberiana).
Blackbutt (pilularis).
Yellow Stringybark (Muelleriana).
White Mahogany (acmenioides).
Tallow Wood (microcorys).
Spotted Gum ( maculata).
Grey Box (hemiphloia).
Red Mahogany (resinif era).
Grey Gum ( punctata and propinqua)
Red Gum ( rostrata ).
Red Forest Gum (tereticornis).
Blue Gum ( saligna).
Woolly-butt ( longifolia).
Bloodwood ( corymb osa).
Red Box (polyanthemos).
Queensland. —“Notes on the Principal Timbers of
Queensland, ”byN. W. Jolly ( Forestry Bulletin, No.
2, 1917).
Grey Ironbark (paniculata).
Narrow-leaved Ironbark ( crebra ).
Red Ironbark (siderophloia) .
Spotted Gum (maculata).
Tallow Wood (microcorys).
Blackbutt ( pilularis).
Blue Gum ( tereticornis).
Flooded Gum or Woolly-butt (saligna).
Grey Gum (propinqua).
Red Stringybark (resinifera).
Yellow Stringybark (acmenioides).
White Stringybark (eugenioides).
Gum-topped Box (hemiphloia).
The term “Gum,” as applied to timber, is used
in the United States as a term of inferiority and
depreciation, and no doubt the same idea has to some
extent crossed over to Europe; it would be desirable
for the High Commissioner, or the Agents General,
to ascertain to what extent the use of it, as part of a
name, might prejudicially influence markets in the
northern hemisphere.
I have taken most of the timbers in the preceding
State lists, and exhibit them in four tables. It may
be premised that some of the timbers in the lists
are quite below the standard required in timber for
export.
List i. —Practical unanimity in the use of common names.
It will be observed that most of the timbers in
this list are from Western Australia, since many of
the trees in that State are endemic. In one case,
where we have an apparent exception, E. punctata
is simply an addition to the more widely developed
E. propinqua, and the two timbers have no known
difference.


—
Western
Australia.
South
Australia.
Victoria.
Tasmania,
New South
Wales.
Queensland.
Yellow Gum
Swamp Gum
Red Stringy-bark
Red Mahogany ... ...
Stringy-bark (or Mess- j
mate)
Brown or Grey or Gum-
topped Box
Spotted Gum ... \ \
Bastard Box ... J
ovata
obliqua
hemiphloia
obliqua
ovata
obliqua
resinifera
obliqua
hemiphloia
resinifera
hemiphloia
...
...
goniocalyx
—
Western
Australia,
South
Australia.
Victoria.
Tasmania,
New South
Wales
Queensland
White Stringy-bark
Red or Coast Stringy-bark
Red or Mountain Stringy -
bark
...
...
...
eugenioides
capitellata
macrorrhyncha
eugenioides
White or She or Grey
Ironbark
Narrow-leaved Red Iron-
bark
Broad-leaved Red Iron-
bark
Red Ironbark or Ironbark
Mahogany
White Mahogany
...
...
sideroxylon
botryoides
paniculata
crebra
siderophloia
sideroxylon
acmenioides
paniculata
crebra
siderophloia
—
Western
Australia.
South
Australia.
Victoria.
Tasmania.
New South
Wales
Queensland.
Blackbutt
Red Gum
'patens
calophyUa
•
rostrata
pilularis
rostrata
pilularis
rostrata
pilularis
Blue Gum
leucoxylon
globulus
globulus
tereticomis
saligna
tereticornis
Peppermint
Mountain Ash
...
odorata
amygdalina
amygdalina
regnans
gigantea
Spotted Gum
. . .
elceophora
goniocalyx
Sieberiana
maculaia
maculaia
Woolly-butt
Yellow Stringy-bark
. .
...
longifolia
Muelleriana
...
longifolia
Muelleriana
saligna
acmei ioides
Ironbark ...
...
sideroxylon
Sieberiana
List 2. —More than one vernacular name for the same timber.
As regards E. ovata, South Australia’s available
amount for export is negligible; Tasmania has plenty,
if an oversea market can be obtained for it. But the
name of Swamp Gum must be changed.
E. resinifera has been known in Europe as Red
Mahogany for nearly a century; the name Red
Stringybark is comparatively recent, while it does
not seem so desirable. Of the two, I recommend the
former, but this timber is referred to in a recom-
mendation which follows.
E. obliqua is usually known as Stringybark or
Messmate. Evidently neither name is approved for
export, as the name Tasmanian Oak (which is mis-
leading) has some vogue, and delegates might be
asked for suggestions.
E. hemiploia is known as Box, but descriptive ad-
jectives of the tree are often added.
E. goniocalyx goes under the name of Spotted
Gum (Victoria), and the name Bastard Box, while
applied to it, is also applied by the more ignorant
timber-getters to large numbers of widely different
species. Most districts have their favourite Bastard
Boxes, which does not imply any idea of cross-polli-
nation, but is simply an indication that a particular
tree does not fall in with the namer’s ideal of a
Box.
List 3. — Stringybarks, Ironbarks, and Mahoganies.
These timbers are practically only supplied by
New South Wales and Queensland, and the question
of nomenclature can be left to the Forestry authori-
ties of those States. I do not think that the Stringy-
barks will form important exports; the Ironbarks are
very important.
Mahogany. A word as to the Mahoganies, a term
originally applied to certain red timbers resembling
in appearance the Mahogany of Central America,
though far heavier. It is now generally applied to
E. resinifera, but to a less extent to E. botryoides
and E. robusta. White Mahogany is an unfortunate
term that has been applied over a rather wide area
to the pale-coloured timber of E. acmenioides.
List 4.— The same vernacular name in use for two or more timbers.


In most cases probably no commercial result will
be attained by specifying a preference for a partic-
ular botanical name for a certain vernacular, because
the vernacular names will be dealt with in the system
to be presently proposed of merging certain verna-
culars.
Blackhutt. E. pilularis has by far the greater
claim.
Bed Gum. E. rostrata, the Murray Red Gum, has
a claim that is quite irresistible. The timber of E.
tereticornis is to all intents and purposes the sam'e,
and I presently suggest both to go forward as Jarrah.
The timber of E. calophylla is pale-coloured and
totally different to that of E. rostrata. It belongs to
the Bloodwood class, and while a useful timber for
local purposes, it is not likely that it will be an
important factor in the export trade (except for
containers, e.g., fruit cases), at all events for the
present.
Blue Gum. E. leucoxylon and E. globulus are pale-
coloured, and I suggest below that they should come
under the commercial name of Box. E. saligna and
E. tereticornis are red timbers suggested to go as
Jarrah.
Peppermint. E. odorata is a red timber, and if
there is any available for export it could be included
in Jarrah, while E. amygdalina is an inferior Black-
butt.
Mountain Ash. This name is not suitable for over-
seas trade because it is preoccupied, in Europe and
America, but E. regnans, E. gigantea, and E.
Sieberiana (of which E. gigantea is by far the most
valuable), could, go forward as Blackbutt.
Spotted Gum. E. maculata, from the eastern
States, is a tough timber, valuable for bent-work,
and a substitute for American Hickory. It could go
forward under its present name; if, however, this
is not considered desirable, the name Australian
Hickory might, be considered. A useful, though in-
ferior timber (E. goniocalyx and the closely allied
E. elaeophora could go forward as Blackbutt.
Woolly Butt. This name belongs by long priority
to E. longifolia rather than to E. saligna, but both
are valuable red timbers, and could go as Jarrah.
Yellow Stringybark. The name is much more
widely applied to E. Muelleriana than to E. acmeni-
oides, but both are Blaekbutts.
Ironbark. This is a name for a well-defined group
of timbers dealt with below. E. sideroxylon is one,
though not the most valuable.
E.'Sieberiana has a rugged bark, but is not recog-
nised as an Ironbark on the mainland; indeed there
are no true Ironbarks in Tasmania. The proper
place for E. Sieberiana is with the Blaekbutts as
already indicated.
THE QUESTION OF SUPPRESSION OF
NAMES UNDER A SINGLE VERNA-
CULAR.
This is a very difficult branch of the subject, but
it will have to be faced for the purposes of both the
Overseas and Interstate trade, since local names
are far too numerous. I will give examples.
Jarrah. At page 1194 of the Agriculture Gazette
of New South Wales for 1905, I suggested that the
name of Jarrah be used as an inclusive name for
three groups of New South Wales timbers (in addi-
tion to true Jarrah), viz.:—
a Grey Gums, Forest Mahogany, Woolly Butt
and Blue Gum.
b Red Box (and three less known Boxes).
c Red Gums (rostrata and tereticornis).
As a matter of fact, something of the same sort
was, and doubtless is, going on in England, for on
my visit to England in more than one town I saw
both Blue Gum ( saligna ) and Red Mahogany (resin-
if era), most valuable timbers, masquerading under
the name of Jarrah, The timbers enumerated as
a, h, c, with the real Jarrah, would form the com-
mercial Jarrah, and other timbers could be added
to the list from time to time if considered desirable,
or their number could be reduced.
Blackbutt. Op. cit., page 1194, I suggested
that this should include the eastern Blackbutt, E.
pilularis, E. acmenioides, the eastern White Mahog-
any, or Yellow Stringybark of Queensland, and E.
goniocalyx, the New South Wales Mountain Gum,
called also Spotted Gum in Victoria. E. patens, the
Western Australian Blackbutt, could probably come
in here, but I know less of this timber.
Box (or Bale Box) ( loc. cit.) would include E.
hemipTiloia, E. melliodora and less well known Boxes,
and the pale-coloured E. leucoxylon and E. globulus
would here find a place.
Summary. —l therefore propose the following
terms for the Overseas trade: —
(1) Ironbark.
(2) Jarrah.
(3) Blackbutt.
(4) Box.
(5) Spotted Gum.
(6) Tallow Wood.
Nos. 1-4 each includes a number of kinds of tim-
bers, Nos. 5 and 6 only one each. In the aggregate
they include a large number of the best, and inferior
ones should not be admitted. Some others, although
locally valuable, such as the Bloodwoods, would
probably never be exported because of gum-veins
and pockets.
There still remains the difficulty of dealing with a
number of timbers which seem difficult to classify.
For example, Karri resembles Jarrah, but it cannot
be exported as Jarrah; better simply export it as
Karri, but in doing this we must be careful not to
make the list of hardwoods for the export-list too
long. Then Tuart could be exported as such, but
probably better as Box. I see no important export
trade in the rest of the Western Australian timbers
in List 1, valuable as they are locally for the develop-
ment of the State. It will be observed that I have
dropped detailed consideration of some timbers.
Timber Committee. —There would require to be
established an expert timber Committee, on which all
the Forest Departments would have representation,
and this would be in touch with the Customs Depart-
ment. One of its functions would be to state the
various timbers which are from time to time to be
approved for export under what names. For ex-
ample the name Jarrah means a timber of a certain
standard, and the Committee would not permit any
to pass under that name which would lower the stand-
ard agreed upon.
Timber Grading. —When you have correct nomen-
clature, and when you have got over your difficulty
of suppression of unnecessary local names (for ex-
port purposes) you would still have to devise rules
for grading. For example, as regards Ironbark, you
might have Red Ironbark and Pale Ironbark, and of
the former you might have, say, three qualities, 1,2,
3. This would be an important part of the work of
the Timber Committee, and standard timbers, ap-
proved both as to name and to various qualities,


would be placed conveniently at every place of ex-
port, and in other suitable places. Provision would
doubtless be made for branding timber to briefly in-
dicate names and qualities.
And now let me put forth a plea for dealing Avith
timber standards in a scientific way. The school-
master is abroad, botany and “Nature study” are
taught in most elementary schools, and the next
generation will have little difficulty in the use of
botanical names, at all events as checks, although I
believe local names will have their vogue, just as they
do in long-settled countries.
The “Everlasting Gum-tree” {Eucalyptus) . —It
is an old joke, amongst wags and ignorant men, to
laugh at the botanist, and to poke fun at the names
(sometimes long, sometimes awkward, I confess) that
he has attached to his plants, but the laugh is with
the latter, because he knows he stands on the solid
foundation of accuracy and truth. And the harmless
and necessary botanist who has more correspondents
as regards nomenclature than even the forester, is
even of some assistance to that officer, e.g. } in check-
ing his estimates as to the kinds of trees and the
number of them, in a given area. In my long experi-
ence I have often shown a forester that he has
labelled his goods wrongly, and that the deductions
he has based on error may have serious financial re-
sults.
We, in Australia, have the problem of Eucalyptus,
which many people look upon as the most difficult of
any large group of plants in the world. It is this
inherent difficulty that has had a fascination for me.
Eucalypts are more or less spread over three millions
of square miles, and no man may claim that he knows
more than a little about them.
Yet Eucalypts are the chief stock-in-trade of the
forester. lie cannot ignore them, even if he would
like to do so, and he must remember that, while it is
the function of the botanist to assist him in the eluci-
dation of them, the forester has a reciprocal duty.
Some Notes on Forest Botany. —l have been so
instrumental in guiding the direction of the study of
economic botany in Australia, that I can without
egotism claim to be the oldest living worker. Amongst
other things I have been working for over thirty
years for an improved nomenclature of Australian
timbers, and I therefore hope that what I have said
may receive sympathetic consideration. My more
academic work has been largely undertaken with the
view to elucidate economic points. The botany of
the public official in Australia is from the nature-of
things economic. I therefore regret the sneer at the
botanist and morphologist, from which the reported
proceedings of your conferences have not been en-
tirely free.
As regards the timbers and other forest products
of Australia I am no amateur. When in 1881 I was
appointed to organise a Technological Museum for
New South Wales, it was an era in which Australian
timbers for international exhibitions, consisting of
sleepers, girders, etc., were French polished! and
their faces sometimes ornamented with paintings of
flowers. When as a Commissioner for International
Exhibitions I protested against certain timbers being
shown in the incompatible position of frame-work of
show-cases, I was listened to with courtesy, but in-
difference, by my fellow Commissioners, who had not
grasped the fact that a timber-exhibit was one thing
and a show-case was another. Hampered by a rigid
tradition, every difficulty was unconsciously thrown
in the way of showing our timbers in the right way.
The nomenclature and the alleged characters of cer-
tain timbers were in a state of confusion. I first set
about to compile my “Useful Native Plants of Aus-
tralia’* (1889), a pioneer work, intended to see where
we were. I had previously (1886) caused a botanical
collector to be appointed, the first in Australia for
Australian economic botany.
The first germinal idea to make economic botany in
Australia a serious scientific study was when 1 deter-
mined, ab ovo, to form a standard reference collec-
tion of timbers, barks, and other forest products,
with the products linked up to herbarium material,
so that if doubt should at any time arise as to the
determination of a timber, etc., the corresponding
herbarium specimens could be appealed to. In the
formation of that timber collection the collector above
referred to did good work. Printed forms on paper
of special quality were used, and filled in in the bush,
with all necessary details, columns being left for
botanical determinations and subsequent observa-
tions.
Another idea, fraught with important results, was
the construction of a still for the distillation of Euca-
lyptus and other leaves of ascertained botanical
origin—an entirely new departure. Particulars of
such a still had been furnished me by Dr. Thomas L.
Bancroft, of Queensland, who had distilled oils, but
as Curator of the Technological Museum I was not
able to get the still constructed, and did not accom-
plish this feat until I became Superintendent of
Technical Education, and enlisted the good offices of
Mr. Owen Blacket, then Lecturer in Engineering at
the Technical College, the still and its appurten-
ances being constructed as part of the work of the
engineering classes. The Collector furnished the
first bags of leaves, and I left the work to my assist-
ants, Messrs. Baker and Smith, whom I had trained,
and who have since successfully developed this work.
W hen 1 was appointed to the Botanic Gardens, my
work on economic botany was but diverted into other
channels. You in Western Australia and other States
will have to work on the lines I have proved to be the
only true and practical ones, with this difference,
that no one in 1917 will have to expend time and
energy in enunciating the fundamental principles
which had both to be enunciated and evolved in 1881.
1 established the principle that a piece of timber
or bark is just as much a part of the plant for the
purpose of diagnosis and for the elucidation of other
information, as a flower or a fruit, and although only
an institution here and there can have a large collec-
tion of botanically named logs, and other bulky speci-
mens, one on a much smaller scale can acquire a set
of axe-cuts of timber and bark connected up to her-
barium material, and which will not take up an in-
ordinate amount of room. Catalogue your economic
botany notes, see how much or how little is known
of each tree; collect timbers and catalogue them, but
only collect them if you connect them with herbarium
specimens, and so can speak accurately in regard to
them. Every Forest Department should have such
a collection at its command, irrespective of the local
Technological Museum, which, in addition to Forest
products must take cognizance of other vegetable
products, of animal products, minerals, and rocks,
and of all kinds of raw and manufactured products.


In going into these practical details, I have not de-
parted from my subject—how to secure a uniform
nomenclature for Australian timbers. I began by
pointing out the difficulties, and I conclude with a
similar observation. The only way of coping with
the work (and the details will vary as our knowledge
increases) is by the application of scientific methods.
The Vice-President resumed the chair at 12.15
p.m., and referred to the gathering that was to take
place at 2.36 p.m. on the following day at Parlia-
ment House, when His Excellency the Governor
General was to declare the Forrestry Conference
officially open, in the presence of a large gathering
of invited guests.
Mr. W. G. ASHFORD, M.P., then read the fol-
lowing paper entitled —“The Forest Policy of New
South Wales”: —
THE FOREST POLICY IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
By the HONOURABLE W. G. ASHFORD,
Minister for Lands and Forests, New South Wales.
The establishment of a definite and permanent
“forest policy,” and the passing of a statutory law
which makes the observance of such a policy possible
and assured, mark a distinct era in the history of
Forestry in New South Wales, and I may perhaps
not be going too far in my deductions if 1 add that
this evolution has also an important bearing upon
many phases of the subject as a national interest in
Australia.
What has now been done in New South Wales
followed after many years of political dallying with
the question, frequently interspersed with periods of
absolute neglect. One Government would proclaim its
interest in the subject and appreciation of the im-
portance of the timber industry; its successors would
ignore the matter entirely or regard the recommenda-
tions and ambitions of Forestry experts as a direct
menace to programmes of land settlement. It was
no wonder that between the conflicting views of poli-
tical administrators the Forestry department became
the sport of parties, and its officers, lacking the en-
couragement of even a possible continuity of system,
were in the depths of discouragement more often
than they were justified in feeling optimistic. Hap-
pily, however, those conditions have changed and,
without a revocation by Parliament of the Forestry
Act of 1916—which, of course, is hardly conceivable
—they cannot recur.
It is to me a matter of sincere gratification that it
fell to my lot some four years ago to set about mak-
ing the very desirable change that has been effected.
As a member of the Holman (Labour) Government
of the day, forestry administration came under my
ministerial control, and I confess that I knew little
if anything about the ethics of the question, although
realising in a general way the importance of it, and
the need for drastic action if the forest wealth of
the State was to be retrieved from complete spolia-
tion. The facts placed before me, and the searching
personal inquiries I made in regard to them, im-
pressed me with the magnitude of the prospects
under a firm and stable system of management, no
less than they disclosed to my entire satisfaction the
folly of expecting to achieve anything worth while
under the then existing spasmodic methods of admin-
istration.
It was made very manifest that the fundamental
requirements of State Forestry might be placed
under three heading’s:—
1. Stable and expert management.
2. Assured continuity of policy.
3. A fixed system of finance.
Each of which must be inter-dependent. To bring
about this reform an entire reversal of conditions
was imperative, entailing the revocation of existing
legislation and the carrying into law of a new Act.
It was not until towards the end of 1915, and then
not without constant and forceful representation,
that I was able to convince my colleagues in the Hol-
man Cabinet of the pressing necessity for going to
Parliament with definite proposals and obtaining the
statutory authority for establishing a new regime.
However, the end was attained, and the Forestry Act
which became law on Ist November, 1916, was the
result.
In that manner we laid the foundation for a com-
prehensive “Forest policy,” and substituted an up-
to-date and almost non-political measure for the pre-
viously existing Act of 1908 (passed by the Wade
Liberal Government), which, while it had afforded
relief in matters of administration, was incomplete
so far as creating any useful policy was concerned.
The material points gained in the 1916 Act may be
summarised as —
1. Control of State forest and all forestry mat-
ters by a Board of Commissioners who shall
be untrammelled by political interference
excepting in distinct measures of govern-
mental policy.
2. Executive and administrative powers enabling
the Commissioners to lay down a settled
policy and maintain continuity in their
operations thereunder.
3. The allocation of not less than 5,000,000
acres of the public estate as State Forests.
4. The allotment to the Commissioners of 50 per
cent, of forestry revenue for re-expenditure
upon forest works.
Provision is made for the constitution of a Commis-
sion consisting of three members, but, owing to cir-
cumstances over which we have no control, only the
Chief Commissioner has, as yet, been appointed. The
other members of the Board, who will be selected
at the earliest possible date, will be an Expert
Forester possessing particular qualifications, and a
Business Expert widely experienced in the timber
industry, and when fully constituted the Commission
will divide its business under the headings of (a)
Administration and Finance; (b) Forest manage-
ment; (c) Commercial development.
. Pending the completion of the personnel of the
Board, the Chief Commissioner has been assisted (in
order to meet statutory requirements) by two mem-
bers of the Government, and during the eleven
months since the Act came into force a mass of pre-
liminary departmental organisation has been effected
upon lines which are elastic in the sense that they are
capable of expansion and suitable for permanent
adoption. Some of the machinery has already neces-
sarily been put into operation, covering the bases of
administration, training, forest management, com-
mercial development, survey and engineering, forest
investigation and research, statistics and aecount-
anc}q and publicity.


Regulations under the Act, which are essential to
the administration and for the maintenance of the
“forest policy” have received Executive approval and
were brought into effect on Ist August, 1917. In this
way a vast amount of fundamental, work has been
done, and there is no reason to doubt that the com-
plete organisation will be in operation by the middle
of next year.
Having the foregoing general description of the
ground-work before you, interest will attach to the
special application of the new policy. This, so far,
has been entered upon in three principal directions,
namely, administration, organisation of forests, and
commercial development, and as I have previously
spoken of the administrative method, I propose now
to explain in some detail the remaining sections.
1. Organisation of Forests. —In consequence of
many conflicting issues arising out of past neglect,
it was thought expedient to deal with the forest re-
sources of New South Wales, much as we should
have preferred one uniform system, in the following
way:—
(a.) State forests and timber reserves are to be
intensively managed under a system of
“working plans,”
(b) Forests on Crown lands held under lease-
hold tenures —under a special licensing
system; and
(c.) Forests on unoccupied Crown lands —under
a general licensing system.
Comprehensive machinery has, therefore, been de-
vised to meet all three conditions, and supervision has
been organised with special regard to each.
Generally speaking, the classified forests will be
under the supervision or direction of trained expert
officers, while those that are not classified will be
placed in charge of Rangers, the entire management
of each district being the responsibility of an experi-
enced Forester. In order that the duties in each case
may be systematically performed a complete code of
rules and directions has been prepared and issued.
The whole scheme of Forestry administration and
policy is, in fact, laid down and explained in various
publications —the Act and Regulations, a booklet
dealing with “Forestry on Leaseholds” and a Forest-
ers Manual—copies of which are available for mem-
bers of the conference, who may desire to have them.
One difficulty of long standing that has caused
much dissatisfaction, owing to inequities, has been
removed by the new policy, and that is the adminis-
tration of forests on Crown lands held under lease-
hold tenures. Under the past policy, which left these
holdings under the dual control of the Land Settle-
ment and the Forestry administrations, there was
never ending conflict and dissatisfaction. This has
been healed by drawing a reasonable line of distinc-
tion between the needs of the lessee and the require-
ments of the public under a classification of such
tenures, which provides for and defines the propor-
tion of the forest that is to be reserved for the les-
sees’ own use as a wood lot and the part from which
and the conditions under which timber for public re-
quirements may be taken. The terms are outlined in
the booklet “Forestry on Leaseholds” to which I
have referred. They impose on the lessee certain
obligations for which he obtains compensating ad-
vantages, and while this affords him an interest in
the conservation of the forest, it relieves him from
uncertainty on the point of preservation, and as to
which authority under the law is to govern his ac-
tions as a tenant.
The work of allocating the State Forests and Tim-
ber Reserves was of such magnitude that it was com-
menced in anticipation of the passing of the Act,
and kept a staff of expert officers busy for two years.
As a result of their reports we have completed a
classification which provides about 5,000,000 acres of
“State Forests,” consisting of the absolutely best
land for forestry purposes, quite irrespective of set-
tlement value, and certain areas aggregating about
a million acres of the next best land, to be held as
“Timber Reserves.”
Following the determination of the State Forests,
areas are to be comprehensively surveyed—externally
to fix the boundaries, and internally as to topography
and forest value —specially trained surveyors being
employed. Although this is a large undertaking, in-
volving much careful detail work, it is absolutely es-
sential as a preliminary to drawing up “working
plans” by which the measure of conservation, im-
provement and utilisation in respect of each forest
is laid down irrevocably for a definite period of years,
at the expiration of which the plan may be taken
under review and re-enacted with or without amend-
ment for a further term. The efficacy of the working
plan of course depends almost entirely upon the com-
pleteness and accuracy of the forest survey and the
report which accompanies it, which in turn is sub-
jected to minute expert analysis and consideration;
but it is by the adoption of such a system that
forestry development is standardised, and a con-
tinuity of policy becomes practicable and possible.
One of the first steps taken after the surveys are
complete is to provide for the opening up of the
State Forests by designing accessible roads, after
which they are divided into convenient working units,
and when this has been done a careful study is made
of the possibilities of and facilities for protection
against fire. A scheme of fire protection is next
worked out, and in the more important State Forests
there will not only be resident overseers, but also
caches for the storage in convenient spots of neces-
sary fire-fighting tools.
The new policy aims at bringing the State Forests
under intensive management such as would be dic-
tated by the interests of private ownership, thus fos-
tering and increasing their productive capacity.
Many of the forests were leased for grazing pur-
poses, and often under conditions of tenure which do
not satisfy forestry requirements, but as the Commis-
sioners are bound by the Act to respect existing
rights, it is only by negotiation and consent that
amendment can be secured in such cases. They are
not, however, under any obligation to renew any
tenure beyond its present currency, and there is
always available the alternative of resumption of a
lease if the lessee will not agree to conditions which
are considered necessary for the future well-being of
the forest. So far the experience is that lessees con-
cur in the wishes of the Commissioners and no diffi-
culty has been encountered in making satisfactory
compromises. It is, nevertheless, an important fea-
ture of the new law that notwithstanding any pre-
viously-created settlement interest in what are now
proclaimed State Forests, the Commissioners have


absolute control so far as administering them and de-
termining tenures beyond the date of expiration of
existing leases.
2. Commercial Development. —The Act gives the
Commissioners very full powers to deal with forestry
as a commercial proposition and for the development
and marketing of forest products. Although the
Commissioner has not yet been appointed who will
attend to such matters, a very substantial commence-
ment was made early this year in that branch of the
Commission’s responsibilities, when they entered dir-
ectly into competition on the open market for the
conversion of timber and tendering for Government
supplies. To enable this to be done two sawmills
were acquired by purchase in February last, and
since then contracts have been secured by competi-
tive tendering for the supply of about 1,250,000 sup.
ft. of sawn, hewn, and round timber for various
public undertakings. What this means, from the
viewpoint of public policy and national interest,
may best be explained by the statement that the
Commissioners’ tenders were on an average 2s. fid.
per 100 sup. ft. less than was previously paid to
private contractors for similar supplies, and the
saving to the public departments concerned amounted
td £1,560. Then, as regards the sawmills, similar
satisfactory results have been obtained, and the
Auditor General has drawn up a balance sheet which
shows that upon a turnover of £10,720 and after
meeting all charges of management, interest, etc. —
accounting, in fact, for all the considerations that
enter, into the profit and loss account of any business
undertaking—the net return was a profit of a small
fraction less than 15 per cent. This, I think, may
well be quoted as a satisfactory and encouraging in-
auguration of commercial enterprise under the new
forest policy.
I do not think that I shall be suspected of pes-
simism if, apropos to the question of finance and
business, I express fears that for a year or two the
Commissioners will feel the pressure of financial de-
pression arising from the war conditions, and that
it may not be possible for them while the war lasts
to develop their policy so far as they have planned
to do. As I have explained in my earlier remarks,
provision is made in the Act by which 50 per cent,
of the forestry revenue is absolutely ear-marked
for their use, and this will enable them to steadily
pursue works incidental to the organisation of the
forests, and in addition to this they will be able to
proceed within the limit of their resources with the
completion of a scheme already inaugurated for the
training of their officers and future applicants for
employment, and will solidify and extend the sys-
tematisation of forest work. If that can be accom-
plished during the period of stress a splendid base
will have been established for the extension of
activities and the full application of the policy when
conditions again become normal.
That, Mr. President and Gentlemen, is, I think, a
fair summary of the New South Wales legislation
and the policy contingent upon it, which are designed
to remove forestry in New South Wales from the
sphere of uncertainty and the grade of a political
plaything, and create a department which, by the
application of science, experience, and sound com-
mercial method, shall establish the State’s share of
Australian forestry as an important factor in the
timber industry of the world, and help to make the
Commonwealth self-supporting in that regard, while
at the same time enabling the community at large
to realise in full the value and ever-accruing profits
of an immense natural asset. It only remains for
me to say that, on behalf of the Government of
New South Wales and the Forestry Commissioners,
I extend to you, Gentlemen, and the other forestry
experts in your several States, a very cordial invi-
tation to visit us whenever you can conveniently do
so. We shall delight in meeting you in our own
forests, shall afford you every facility for seeing
what we have done and knowing what we propose
to do, and, above all, we shall sincerely welcome your
criticism and any advice you may be generous enough
to give. I thank you, Mr. President and Gentlemen,
for the opportunity you have given me of addressing
you and of hearing your views and experiences on
the many phases of this important subject of For-
estry. I trust and do not doubt that the delibera-
tions of this conference will result in the achievement
of much that will hereafter be applied to the common
cause of the advancement of Australian forestry.
The Conference then adjourned until 2.30 p.m.
On resuming at 2.30, Mr. WALTER GILL, Con-
servator of Forests, South Australia, read a paper
entitled: —
THE INTRODUCTION OF THE REMARKABLE
PINE (PINUS INSIGNIS) INTO SOUTH
AUSTRALIA AND ITS SUCCESSFUL UTIL-
ISATION.
By WALTER GILL, F.L.S.,
Conservator of Forests, South Australia.
The Remarkable Pine was introduced into Aus-
tralia by the late celebrated botanist Baron Sir F.
Von Mueller, K.C.M.G., F.L.S., etc., who adopted
the name Pinus insignis as its scientific designation,
and it has been widely known in South Australia
by this name only ever since. Mr. D. E. Hutchins
in his work on Australian Forestry states, “I follow
Yon Mueller in leaving undisturbed the old well
established botanical name for the insignis pine.
Mueller says “Professor Don having named and de-
scribed this tree under two names simultaneously
the name (insignis) given by Douglas may remain.”
The author of The Pinetum Britannicum says: —
“We have retained the name ‘insignis’ in preference
to that of radiata although the latter had the ad-
vantage of slight priority in publication, because the
former was applied to the more usual character of
the species, the latter to a more developed and less
frequent stage of the growth.” J. G. Lemmon, late
botanist to the Californian Board of Forestry, in
his “Handbook of West American Cone Bearers,”
referring to this tree under the name “Monterey
Pine,” states that it occurs from Pescadero near
San Francisco southward to Monterey and San
Simeon Bays, particularly abundant on Point Pinos,
on which the city of Pacific Grove has arisen. He
describes the tree as follows“ Largest trees 80 to
100 feet high with black bark very hard, and two


—
P. insignis.
P. Strobuss.
Co-efficient of elasticity ... :
97850
85093
Modulus of rupture
740
626
Resistance to longitudinal pres-
sure
417
339
Resistance to indentation pres-
sure
105
74
Weight of cubic foot in lbs.,
average
28-51
24-02
to three inches thick. Foliage, bright green leaves in
threes, four to six inches long; cones chestnut brown,
widely variable obliquely oval or longer, three to
seven inches long, two to four inches thick at the
base; scales on the outer side, especially at the base
in the larger form, swelled out into nearly hemi-
spherical tubercules or knobs one-quarter to one-
half inch high and twice as broad, becoming devoid
of prickles.”
Several years ago I wrote to Herbert Stone, Esq.,
F.L.S., a well-known timber expert in London, and
author of a valuable book on commercial timbers,
forwarding two specimens of the wood of Pinus
insignis, asking his opinion of this timber, and
received the following reply:—-
“From records accessible at the moment I find
that P. insignis though held to be inferior to Pinus
Sylvestris (Norway Pine), ‘Deal,’ or even Picea ex-
celsa ‘Spruce,’ is superior to Picea alba and much
superior to Pinus Strobus, the American White Pine
which of late years has been thrust so much into
notice on this side of the water. Hough’s figures
are as follows: —
He gives no figures for P. sylvestris, but the White
Pine is now so well known that the comparison may
be of use. It appears from these data that P. in-
signis has an advantage over the White Pine of
nearly liy 2 per cent, in point of elasticity; it will
carry nearly 12 per cent, more load before break-
ing; it has about 12*4 per cent, more capacity of
resistance to crushing, and is nearly per cent,
harder. The reputation of the White Pine is as
follows: —‘the most useful and indispensable tree of
the American forests, affording a timber of the
greatest value for many uses such as for finishing
interior work, doors, sash and blinds, shingles, etc.,
indeed, builders would hardly know what to do with-
out White Pine in many places’ (Hough, American
Woods). Another opinion is ‘that it is used in
America for the construction of bridges, barrels,
carpentry, etc.’ (A. . Mathey, Flore Forestiere).
Reasoning from these, and having regard to the
comparative tests, I should feel safe in assuming
that there is a large field of usefulness for the wood
of Pinus insignis, and that it could replace White
Pine and Spruce in most cases, and Norway Pine in
many.”
As a practical test of the value of the timber, I
had a tree of only 10 years growth cut up in April,
1891. It was grown on sandy and comparatively
poor soil, resting on gravel over clay subsoil in
Wirrabara Forest. An ordinary kitchen table 3ft.
10in. by 2ft. was one of the articles made from the
timber, and it is in good order to this day, having
been made up 25 years ago. Some of this tree was
also used for making a neat picket fence. A small
size chest of drawers was also made from this tim-
ber from a tree from the Bundaleer Forest, 14 years
old, and up to the present time it is in excellent
order, though it is 22 years since it was made.
About seven years ago a handsome chest of drawers
fitted with a mirror; and a large kitchen table sft.
by 3ft.; as well as a cabinet with a glass front, were
also made from the timber of one half of the bottom
log seven feet long of a pine tree grown in the
Wirrabara Forest in 29 years. All these articles
were shown at various Industrial Exhibitions and
aroused considerable interest. Trees of suitable size
when cut in half make good ladders which have
lasted many years. Made into wheelbarrows the
wood proves very serviceable; it also serves well for
the sides and bottoms of drays and wagons, and
owing to its secreting very little resin, it usually
makes good butter boxes. It has proved very satis-
factory both in constructing the frame work of
houses, stables and sheds, and also as weather board-
ing for floors or ceilings, and, when varnished, has
a most effective appearance. But whilst being suit-
able for all these purposes it is especially adapted
for case making owing to the fact that it will not
split easily This allows of its being nailed and re-
nailed after opening without the incessant splitting
which so often breaks up cases of other pine timber.
The frequent danger of splitting while handling for
stowing on shipboard or during the various stages
of transit, thereby losing much of tbe contents of
the eases, is also avoided by the resistance which
the tough and tenacious nature of the timber gives
to the jarring inseparable from the careless dump-
ing of the cases on wharves and jetties so con-
stantly experienced.
Conservative estimates based on measurements
taken in 1906, through a plantation 24 years old in
the Wirrabara Forest, showed that the average an-
nual increment was 160 cubic feet, or, say, 2,000
super, feet per acre. Some years later a survey was
made of a plantation at Bundaleer, on a specially
suitable site, where it was ascertained that the total
volume per acre was 72,000 super, feet equivalent to
2,769 super, feet, average four annual increment per
acre, for 26 years’ growth; and still more recently
a survey of trees at Mount Mclntyre Forest Planta-
tions showed a total volume of 88,308 super, feet per
acre, giving an average annual increment of 2,943
super, feet for 30 years.
As a strong prejudice existed against this
special pine, it was found necessary to take suitable
action to clearly demonstrate its value, and there-
fore, in 1903, a small sawmill was started at Wirra-
bara Forest, which is 120 miles directly north from
Adelaide, primarily to supply the needs of the local
apple growers. For the last 14 years it has been
running each year during the season when cases are
required; and the more the eases are circulated the
greater has been the demand, until the total number
of eases cut there has increased from 4,338 in 1903
to 230,269 in 1917. Sample cases exhibited at the
Annual Agricultural Show in Adelaide drew the at-
tention of some of the Renmark fruit growers to the
value of this timber, with the result that a demand
arose for eases for the dried fruit produced there, as
well as for the apple cases wanted by the local men
at Wirrabra. The quantity of timber available at
Wirrabara being too limited to justify the expendi-
ture needed for a fully equipped mill equal to the
delivery of a large number of cases within a short
time, it was found desirable to start a small mill at
Bundaleer Forest in order to assist in meeting the


increasing demand caused by the requirements of the
River trade, and at this mill 46,850 cases have been
cut. Consequent on the purchase by the Government
of an estate in the South-East near Mount Gambier
on which there was a considerable quantity of Re-
markable Pines, a departmental arrangement was
made by which a portion of it was transferred to the
Forest Department for case cutting, and a mill was
started there at Moorak, where during three and a-
half years 229,335 cases of various kinds were cut,
some of the timber being obtained from the adjacent
Mount Gambier Forest Reserve. The period during
which this mill was working gave an advantageous
opportunity for the pines at Wirrabara to increase
their growth for future requirements, as during that
time only light work was carried out there. This
mill was ultimately shifted to the Mount Mclntyre
Forest Plantations, where the highest record of suc-
cessful conversion has been secured, as in two years
it has been working—between 1915-17 —100,000 odd
cases have been cut off six acres, and the stand of
timber has been proved by actual cutting to have
been over 100,000 super, feet per acre or 3,030 super,
feet per acre average annual increment for 33 years
growth. The total receipts from these cases, allow-
ing for a small balance still unsold at the end of the
financial year quoted, were £4,324, the expenditure
being £2,324, leaving a balance to revenue of £2,000.
Briefly summarising the results of converting this
timber at the various mills, it may be stated that
from 1903 to 1917, 596,529 eases have been cut for
which £20,150 13s. 9d. has been received, the cost
having been £15,895, leaving £4,255 to revenue.
During the conversion of this timber it has been
found that the apple and orange cases form the most
economical medium of utilisation, as they admit of
sections being cut as narrow as four inches and three
inches, and the use of cleats, which I have adopted
as a means of joining half ends of the cases, has
proved invaluable in using the small trees, and at the
same time finding timber for ends, which has often
been a matter of some difficulty where pines have
been closely planted because only the outside rows
are usually large enough to give the size needed. The
prices received at first for these eases were not as
good as their quality warranted, but latterly a de-
cided improvement has taken place, as the value of
the timber has been better appreciated. This pine
has not been used to any extent for house building
in South Australia, but in New Zealand it has proved
its adaptability for that also, as on the authority of
the Journal of Agriculture it w T as first employed in
house building 37 years ago when Mr. Cathcart
Wason had some 20-year old trees converted into
timber. With this material several houses and out-
buildings were erected in the vicinity of Barr Hill,
in Canterbury. These are still standing and the tim-
ber which has been kept painted is still in an excel-
lent state of preservation.
It is expected that timber grown in South Aus-
tralia will shortly also be used for house building,
as much of it is quite as good, when properly milled,
as some of the timber from the Baltic and also as
good as much of the Oregon; and on a recent in-
spection of the pine plantations at Wirrabara by a
representative party of the timber merchants of the
State a favourable opinion was expressed as to the
prospect of utilising it in this direction.
The remarks made in these pages claim to be
merely a plain statement of facts which form in
themselves a complete vindication of the excellence
of this timber against the unwarranted condemnation
to which it has been so long subjected owing to the
puerile ignorance of its detractors.
Mr. JOLLY asked Mr. GILL what proportion, of
the £4,255 which his paper described as having been
passed to revenue as the result of converting timber
at the various South Australian mills was due to
the mill and what proportion was due to the wood.
Mr. GILL said that no allowance had been made
for the original cost of the plantations, as the work
was done more as an experiment than anything else.
They had not lost anything, and they still had the
plant to the good, and the value of the timber recog-
nised, and the latter was after all the main point.
Mr. N. W. JOLLY, Director of Forestry, Queens-
read a paper entitled:- —
FOREST RESERVATION NECESSARY FOR
AUSTRALIA.
By N. W. JOLLY,
Director of Forestry, Queensland,
The practice of Forestry has for its object, amongst
other things, the provision and maintenance of a
steady supply of timber necessary to the life of the
people of the world. Each nation, however, is con-
cerned primarily with its own existence, and, in view
of the events of the past three years, it will be a
foolish and short-sighted country that does not at-
tempt in the future to make itself as self-supporting
as possible.
Timber is one of the natural products indispensa-
ble to the life of a modern state and, consequently,
energetic measures should be taken in Australia to
grow all the supplies necessary. In the absence of Fed-
eral control over every aspect of Forestry, except,
perhaps, the most important, viz., the tariff, this duty
devolves upon the various State Governments, and
hence an investigation into the probable area of State
Forests necessary for the future development of Aus-
tralia becomes an important subject to which the at-
tention of this and succeeding conferences should be
devoted.
At the outset it may be mentioned that the various
references which have been made, verbally and in
writing, to the the huge and unlimited timber re-
sources of Australia appear not to have the slight-
est foundation in fact, and consequently to be preju-
dicial to the success of the Forestry movement, which
is dependent to a certain extent on a realisation of
the seriousness of the position. As evidence of this,
as regards Queensland, it is only necessary to state
that whereas the annual cut of timber in the United
States of America exceeds forty thousand million
superficial feet (very largely softwoods), the total
stand of hoop and bunya pine trees over 72in. girth
in the Crown forests of Queensland is of the order
of one thousand million feet, while the annual cut
averages about forty million. These figures obviously
emphasise the absurdity of many of the opinions ex-
pressed.
The method to be adopted to arrive at the extent
of reservation necessary for Australia will naturally


be the cause of considerable discussion. The method
most commonly adopted is that of fixing an arbitrary
percentage of the total area of the continent, or of
the area suitable for close settlement, the percentage
being based more or less on European standards.
This generally leads to proposals to reserve an area
greater than the area of commercially valuable for-
ests which Australia now possesses. Apart from
this anomalous result, however, it is not by any
means self-evident why a percentage basis should be
adopted, for to my knowledge it has never been es-
tablished that, for health, climatic and economic
reasons, the percentage of forest should not fall be-
low a definite minimum.
As Forestry is concerned very largely with the
supply of timber, it appears to me that we should
try to arrive at some indication of the probable needs
of Australia as a whole, assuming that our country
is going to develop as we all wish. In this connec-
tion the official statements showing the present con-
sumption of timber in Australia are, I believe, some-
what unreliable, as is shown by the following fig-
ures :
Bulletin No. 10 (Production), issued by the Com-
monwealth Bureau of Census and Statistics, states
on page 73 that the quantity of local timber sawn
and hewn in Queensland / for ]914 was about
] superficial feet (presumably output
measurement), but this is approximately the figure
supplied by the State Statistician to the Queensland
Forest Office as representing the output of the saw-
mills only. Apparently the large trade in log, pole,
mining, fencing, sleeper and other hewn timber is
not included in the Commonwealth figures, and after
allowing for these items and also for the waste in
sawing—varying from 15 to 50 per cent. —one is
justified in assuming that the quantity of log timber
cut in the Queensland forests is of the order of
300.000. superficial feet.
It has been calculated, I believe, that in New South
Wales the local cut is about 500,000,000 superficial
feet, and if only 400,000,000 feet be allowed for all
the remaining States, the total for the Commonwealth
will be 1,200,000,000. In addition, in normal times
about 400,000,000 feet of timber —mostly sawn —was
imported, and this would mean approximately
600.000. feet of logs. Unless more accurate in-
formation can be given by members of the Confer-
ence, it might then be assumed for the sake of argu-
ment that the present needs of Australia require a
log yield of between fifteen hundred and two thous-
and million feet.
What is to be the future demand, the supply of
which we have to take the initial steps to provide?
Naturally it depends largely on the future increase
of population and manufacturing industries, but it
is perhaps not optimistic to expect for Australia
at the end of the next 60 or 70 years a population of
25.000. using quite 10,000,000,000 superficial feet
of log timber per annum.
The area necessary to yield this quantity of timber
must depend on the average increment which will be
realised from the forest reserves, a figure which it
is, of course, quite impossible to determine at present.
Comparative figures may, however, be interesting. I
have seen exceptional spruce forests in France which
yielded regularly betwen 1,300 and 1,400 superficial
feet per acre, and have compiled a working plan for
a German forest in a good situation under which the
yield of all species—hard and soft woods —was fixed
at 800 superficial feet. Probably for the whole of
Germany an average annual increment of from four
to five hundred feet would not be exceeded.
It may be argued that under our genial climatic
conditions considerably greater rates of growth will
be obtained than under European conditions. This
is true to a certain extent, but should not be miscon-
strued. The average annual increment of Finns
insignis in South Australia in a picked locality has
been as great as, and may well exceed, 2,500 feet
per acre for the first 26 years. For the same period
spruce in Europe would not produce more than half
of this, but over a period of 80 years, spruce on
first quality areas yields an average increment of
2,400. What will be yielded by Finns insignis over
a much longer period than 30 years has yet to be
determined.
The very fast growth of some species of Eucalypts
places them far beyond European species as far as
the individual tree is concerned, but it should
be remembered that owing to the more open
and wide spreading crowns of Eucalypts the
number of trees to the acre is frequently
considerably less than that carried by an acre
of, say, European beech, and that consequently
the average increment per acre is brought much
nearer the European figures. Also a large propor-
tion of the forest areas left to the Crown in Queens-
land, and perhaps also elsewhere, is situated in
localities which cannot be described as first quality.
Again, the slow growing cypress pine forests and the
eucalyptus forests of the drier belts absorb an ap-
preciable area of the forest reserves, and thus de-
crease the average increment, while it will take many
decades to bring the wild forests of Australia into
their optimum condition. Viewing all factors, I con-
sider it unsafe to calculate on the basis of a greater
annual increment than 400 feet to the acre, accord-
ing to which the reservation necessary would amount
to 25,000,000 acres.
The area thus arrived at is very much less than that
laid down by Mr. D. E. Hutchins in his “Discussion
of Australian Forestry,” where the area of reserves
for extra-tropical Australia alone was placed at
74,000,000 acres. No doubt Mr. Hutchins’ forest
area could be obtained by including much of the
wooded country which is so common in the less
moist parts of the continent, but, as is well known,
the tree growth in such localities is frequently
stunted, deformed and hollow, and of very little value
from a Forestry standpoint. If no account be taken
of this inferior forest it is, I think, quite impossible
to obtain anything approaching 74,000,000 acres of
good natural forest in extra-tropical Australia while
the 43,000,000 acres suggested for Queensland are
certainly not obtainable and probably never were in
existence.
It is not improbable that, if after discussion and
investigation the area of 25,000,000 acres arrived at
in the rough calculations given above is found to be
a sound figure to adopt, a little difficulty will be
found in securing same, though, in my opinion, it
is not beyond our possibilities.
In the foregoing the subject has been treated from
the point of view of local timber supply alone. Apart?
from supplying timber, forests have to perform other
functions which are, however, more of local import-
ance and of interest to the State or locality directly


affected. In some cases certainly the regulation of
stream flow by the preservation of a forest canopy
may affect more than one State and call for joint
action, but any forest areas which it may be necessary
to preserve for this or any other subsidiary reason
should be regarded as additional to the minimum
fixed for the supply of timber, unless, of course,
they are to be regarded as a source of timber supply
also.
Similarly no consideration has been given to the
export trade, not that such a trade is not to be de-
sired, but because it is considered essential first of all
to provide for Australia’s needs. Any States desir-
ing to foster export would naturally take steps to
reserve increased areas.
The allocation to the various States of the
25,000,000 acres, or any other fixed minimum decided
upon, might be discussed by the members of the
Conference. Naturally the determinations of the
Conference are not binding on the various govern-
ments concerned, but e\ery effort should be made
by each State to meet its responsibilities and to
dedicate for Forestry purposes the area allotted to
it. As any alienation of State Forests so dedicated
would affect not only the State driectly concerned,
but also Australia as a whole, it is a matter for con-
sideration whether all proposed alienations should
not be referred to the Federal Parliament before
being allowed. Such a proposal would naturally
meet with much opposition, but nevertheless appears
to be worthy of serious thought.
An investigation of the early records of plantation
work in South Australia and the results now appar-
ent, shows that over a large part of that State it is
not possible to produce hardwood forests which can
compare with those of other States, while on the
other hand, one or two species of softwoods can be
grown with highly satisfactory results. If South
Australia could be assured that the Forestry policy
of other States would result in its hardwood require-
ments being supplied at a cost loAver than that of
locally grown hardwood there would be no necessity
for its Forestry Department to worry about hard-
wood forests except perhaps in a few specially fav-
oured localities, and its attention could be concen-
trated upon the production of the more profitable
crops. Examples of a similar nature affecting other
States could be quoted showing the necessity for
viewing the Forestry situation from the standpoint
of the whole of Australia rather than of the individ-
ual States. The production of paper pulp, about
which much is heard at present, is an important
case in point. One or two States will probably be
found to be in a much better position than the
others to undertake the supply of this national neces-
sity, and after enquiry by competent authorities
has disclosed* the position, the efforts of whatever
States are chosen could be concentrated on the prob-
lem.
In conclusion, I would suggest that it needs no
elaboration to indicate the numerous problems which
confront us in every direction, and that no more suit-
able institution could undertake their investigation
than an Australian Institute of Forestry, Education,
and Research.
Mr. C. LANE-POOLE, Conservator of Forests,
Western Australia, read his paper on —•
FOREST WORKING- PLANS AND THE IMPORT-
ANCE OF STANDARDISING A SYSTEM OF
FOREST STATISTICS THROUGHOUT THE
COMMONWEALTH.
By Mr. C. E. LANE-POOLE, Conservator of
Forests, Western Australia.
There are many forms of property vested in the
Crown, and among these there is none so important
as the forests of the State.
The forests differ from all other Crown property
in that they do not belong to this generation alone,
but to all future generations.
The generation of to-day has a right to make use
of that quantity of timber which, under proper man-
agement, will be replaced by the growth of the
forests. In other words, we may use only the forest
interest, and the forest capital must be left intact,
for it is the property of all future generations.
This basic principle has been recognised from the
earliest times wffierever the timber requirements of
the population living around a forest area has been
found to exceed the annual increment of the forest.
In such cases the State has been obliged to inter-
vene, recognising that while the claim of one gen-
eration to supply its timber requirements must re-
ceive every consideration, the cutting of the timber
must on no account be allowed to be carried out in
such a manner as to destroy an asset which is the
property of the nation.
The State then lays down rules for cutting, which
are based on the rate of growth of the forest. This
is a working plan in its simplest form, and such
plans have existed from the earliest times.
Pliny lays down a plan for working chestnut
coppice for the supply of vine rods to the vine-
yards. We read in Justinian’s Pandects that the
timber must be cut on conservative lines as would
be cut by a father of a family working his own
private forest. The coppice was to be worked on an
eight years rotation, and standards were reserved
and could only be cut by the State.
The objects of a Forest Working Plan may be
numerous, but generally speaking they can be placed
under two main headings:—
A. The felling and utilisation annually of that
amount of timber which the forest can
yield annually and for ever, so that each
year the amount felled may be replaced
by the growth of the forest.
B. The reproduction of the best species in the
shortest time possible in the areas that
have been cut out.
These two basic principles are at the root of all
Working Plans; on them depends the future of
the forests and the timber industry.
A Working Plan, then, is the method by which
the Forest property may be safeguarded; but when
the history of European Forestry is reviewed we
find that great difficulty was experienced in every
country.
Well-conceived Forest working plans failed
through the fact that they were not sufficiently pro-
tected under the laws of the country.
They were often merely regulations made by a far-
seeing forester who was able during his lifetime
to see that the provisions were carried out; but a


forest does not grow in the lifetime of a man, and
unless the working plan is protected there is a dan-
ger of its being drastically altered through a change
in the forest authority.
Again, it was found that without a change in the
authority governing the forests, it all too frequently
occurred that a change in the rule or government of
the country was followed by a reversal of forest
policy, the cessation of the operations of the work-
ing plans, and the destruction of the forests.
This latter danger, viz., lack of continuity of forest
policy through the continually changing Government
of the country, is of course far greater than the
danger of the new forester reversing a plan.
A forester might revise and amend the plan, but
he would never recommend the cessation of its opera-
tions or so alter it that the destruction of the forest
would ensue.
It is the ceaselessly changing Government control
that we have to fear and to guard against, and this
can only be done by bringing the Forest Working
Plans under a Legislative Act, so that the forester
has the full force of the law behind him.
Even so, there is a risk that a future Government
may repeal or amend such an Act; at the same time
it will bo generally conceded than an amending Act
which would result in the denudation of the forest
lands —a fact which would be brought forcibly be-
fore the Government by the forestry authority—
would stand little chance of receiving the assent of
Parliament.
In order to emphasise the importance of protect-
ing forest working plans with the full force of law,
I will describe to you what occurred in another
colony.
That colony possessed a small area of valuable in-
digenous forest. The Government, recognising its
importance, appointed a very distinguished and
learned French forester as head of the Forest De-
partment.
This man collected a mass of forest statistics bear-
ing on the growth of the various timbers that made
up the virgin forests, and with this data to go on
he laid down a working plan regulating the cutting
of timber in the forest.
His data showed him that the trees of a certain
diameter and over might be regarded as mature, and
therefore should be cut; further, that it took 40 years
for trees of a diameter class immediately below the
mature class to reach maturity. He therefore fixed
the rotation of the forest at 40 years. He also found
that it took four rotations, or an average of 160
years, for a seedling to become a mature tree.
The Conservator based his plan on these data.
He divided the total area of forest into a number of
series or working circles, and each of these he
divided into 40 annual cutting sections. Each series
was a forest unit, and the felling of timber was re-
stricted to the cutting section marked off as being
the one for that particular year, so that after a lapse
of 40 years, when the timber workers will have
worked over the whole series, they would return to
the first cutting section, in which they would find
that the timber which 40 years before was too small
and immature for felling was now fit for the axe.
The working plan was a model one in every way,
and the Conservator had left no detail unprovided
for in the carrying out of its provisions. I saw the
forest 30 years after the inception of the plan and
found that the Conservator had been correct in
nearly all his estimates as to the growth of the
various species, and that under his plan the forest
had yielded practically all that it could produce for
the timber industry.
The Conservator had evidently been a power in
the land and had brought up his foresters in the
way they should go, and his plan was regarded as
a law in the country. Yet the plan was in reality
only a departmental measure, and there was nothing
in the Forest Act to protect it; and this brings me
to the point which I wish to particularly emphasise.
The population of wood workers living around the
forest when the plan was first put into operation
was just sufficient to absorb the timber that the
forest could produce. In 20 years, however, the
population had increased, the boys growing up had
learnt but one trade or calling—the use of the
felling axe, the broad axe, and the pit saw. They
grew to man’s estate and, under the law of the land,
were entitled to a say in the management of the
country’s affairs.
The timber workers became a power politically:
they clamoured for more bush to work. What cared
they for future generations, so long as they could
live by plying the trade they had been born to!
Their votes were cast in favour of a candidate for
parliamentary honours who promised them more
bush. They got it. In one year the cutting sections
were doubled, and they have remained doubled ever
since.
The immediate effect of this was to greatly in-
crease the prosperity of the district; twice as much
timber was cut, more mills started working every-
where, and everyone had more than enough to eat and
drink.
No one was so popular as the new member, he
was in everyone’s estimation a heaven-sent genius.
Had he not been able to announce in the House that
he had actually doubled the Forest revenue in one
year, that he only had to pursue the policy he had
adopted to establish a forest revenue of one million
pounds; further, had he not caused an influx of
population into the district, and were there not four
new mills running, and, lastly and not least, let
everyone look at the new port he had opened whence
timber cut from the eastern end of the forest could
be shipped.
The only dissenting voice was that of the forester,
and it was drowned in the tumultuous shouts of joy
of the community. Let us see what the politician
i eally accomplished when he broke the Conservator’s
working plan. He doubled the area of cutting sec-
tions, that is to say, he decreased the number of cut-
ting sections from 40 to 20, or the rotation of the
forest from 40 to 20 years.
Unfortunately, the politician could not at the same
time double the rate of growth of the trees —this is
fixed by laws over which he has no control.
The effect of halving the rotation will be that, at
the end of 20 years, the timber left in the first sec-
tion will not have reached maturity, and the Gov-
ernment will then be faced with two alternatives:—
1. The reduction of the minimum girth so as
to allow the cutting of the immature
timber.
2. The closing of the forest for 20 years so as
to allow the trees to put on the necessary
growth and so reach maturity.


The first alternative will result in the destruction
of the forests and the timber industry. The second
will result in the closing of the timber industry for
20 years, and the exodus of the population who have
found their living in the forest.
The second is the right course, but the vote of the
timber workers will doubtless result in the first being
adopted.
The effect, then, of the incidence of the heaven-
sent legislator into the realms of forestry was, in
the first place, to double the area of the working
sections and, therefore, to temporarily increase the
prosperity of the district; the final effect will be to
destroy the forests and kill the timber indusry.
The far-reaching effect of the disastrous policy
will not end here. The farming population many
miles away from the forests in a district with a very
light rainfall will feel the effects also.
They have been used to depending on the river for
their water, and, with its aid and Government-con-
structed irrigation canals, have made an arid country
productive.
But soon the source of this river will be denuded
of the forests which, like a great sponge, regulated
the water supply of the plains, taking up the excess
in winter and giving it back in the summer.
In lieu of the perennial river, the farmer of the
plains will find himself faced with devastating floods
in the winter and a dry river-bed in the summer.
Not only, then, will the timber industry have been
destroyed, but the farming industry dependent on
the river, whose mother was the forest, will also
vanish.
How could all this have been avoided? The answer
is, by protecting the forest working plan. In the
instance I have related, the Conservator’s plan was
only a departmental measure which was at the
mercy of the local member. Had that plan been
protected by a Forest Act, then it would have re-
quired an amending Act to break it. Both Houses
of Parliament would have had to review it, and the
voice of the forester would have been heard; his
report would have been called for and tabled, and
in the face of it the amending Act would have been
defeated.
Thus it is that France, the mother of European
forestry, protects her “Reglements Sexploitation.”
The approval of the Directeur General des Eaux et
Forets is necessary before the forester can revise a
plan, and the consent of Parliament is necessary be-
fore a plan can be broken.
While the protection of working plans is necessary
under any form of government, it will, I think be
generally conceded that such protection is more neces-
sary in self-governing colonies than in crown colonies.
It is unnecessary for me to explain this; the reasons
are all too apparent.
It came, therefore, as a great surprise to me that
in no State of the Commonwealth was provision made
under any of the Forest Acts for working plans. The
Director of Forests, Queensland, has added to his ex-
cellent timber regulations a provision relating to
working plans, but the skeleton Act of that State is
silent on the subject.
In my short visit to South Australia, Victoria, and
New South Wales I saw on every hand in the forest
work executed in the early days the evidence of the
lack of working plans.
In the indigenous forest work of a sylvicultural
nature had often been begun without any definite
plan at all, and apparently only to relieve unemploy-
ment. Good as the work had been it had been dropped
as soon as labour conditions were once more normal.
This applied also to plantations; everywhere were
to be seen scattered plantations of small areas, none
of which was large enough to be worked economic-
ally from the of view of supervision. While
from the conversion standpoint none was capable of
keeping even a small mill going continuously or
offered any hope of yielding a sustained supply of
timber for an industry to absorb.
In one State 1 saw a plantation which had been
devastated by fire; from the few remaining trees 1
would judge it to have been a fine plantation, begun
on a well conceived plan. I was informed that
money had failed, the extension of the plan-
tation ceased, the staff was dismissed, scrub
grew over the fire breaks, and one day a bush fire
came along and destroyed everything. During this
period of forest neglect in one district, doubtless poli-
tical forestry was focussed on another electorate and
another plantation started.
All this lack of continuity of forest policy; this
shandy-gaff of forestry and polities can only be
guarded against by sound forest working plans, and
these plans must be protected by all the force that
the laws of the State can bring to bear.
We may put fine forest legislation on the statute
book. We may reserve all the timber lands in the
State. We may make such reserves permanent; but
without protected working plans all our work is of
little avail.
I will not attempt in this brief paper to go into the
various types of working plans. The Forests of the
Commonwealth vary in each State, and the working
plans will differ according to the sylvicultural re-
quirements of the forest being dealt with.
Here in Western Australia in the main Jarrah
and Karri belts, and also in the Tuart country there
is no doubt that the Plan should be worked on a
“clear felling system.” Our timber industry, how-
ever, is mainly an export one, and the mills are tak-
ing the best timber, with the result that for many
years to come the system of cutting must of necessity
be “selection.”
I hope, however, as years go on and our popula-
tion and local timber market increases to convert the
system gradually from selection to clear felling.
Though the working plans must necessarily differ
with each State, and each type of forest, all the plans
must be based on a foundation of forest statistics.
Whether we are dealing with the Brush forests of
Northern New South Wales, or the open gimlet and
salmon gum forests of the Western Australian Gold-
fields, forest statistics are required.
We must know the rate of growth, both in height
and in girth, of the various species that make up the
forest, in order to arrive at the annual increment in
volume per tree and per acre, and so obtain the
figure which the French forester calls the possibility
of the forest—the amount of timber that can be cut
in one year and which we know will be replaced by
the growth of the timber over the whole area of forest
in the same period of time.
I may, perhaps, be looking rather far ahead, but
I think a time will come when the forest wealth of the
Commonwealth will be regarded as of such import-
ance that it will be managed under one organisation
for the benefit of all States for all time.
When this occurs it would be of the greatest ad-


vantage if the Chief Working Plans officer found one
system of collecting forest statistics instead of seven
different systems.
Even should this unification of forest departments
not occur there is every advantage in laying down
one system of collecting statistics.
The annual forest conferences have already re-
sulted in a marked co-operation between the foresters
in each State, and in the matter of forest statistics
co-operation will be to the advantage of every State.
A forester in Western Australia would derive great
benefit from a comparison of his jarrah data with the
data collected by a forester working in the iron-
bark country of Victoria or New South Wales, un-
less, however, the data are based on a similar system
of collecting forest statistics the comparison would be
far less valuable.
The collection of statistics here offer the same
difficulties as in the tropical forest. Our forests' are
made up of trees the growth of which, for the most
part, cannot be analysed by the usual stem analysis
system, owing to the fact that the rings on the cross
sections are unreadable, we have no option but to
adopt the sample plot method.
I will now describe the system I have inaugurated
here. I wish to make it clear that there is nothing
new about the system, it is a very old one and has
been found to answer well in France, Algeria, West
Africa, India, and South Africa. It is necessary to
modify it to suit the local conditions or the type of
forest being dealt with, but the main principle should
be the same.
My object in describing it is that it may form the
basis of a discussion so that this conference may
arrive at a uniform system of collecting forest statis-
tics throughout the Commonwealth.
Nothing whatever is known in this State as to the
rate of growth of the main timber species. Estimates
of the age of maturity of jarrah and karri differ as
widely as forty and eight hundred years. There was
nothing for it but to set to work and collect forest
statistics.
I accordingly had 25 sample plots set out in the
various types of forest. The area of each plot was
in most eases five acres, though in Karri regrowth
near the Leeuwin four one-acre plots were measured.
In each plot every tree was measured. The girth
taken, at breast height, viz., 4ft. 3in., and the height
to the top twigs for trees that had not yet made a
definite bole, and to the first branch for trees that
had.
Each tree was numbered by means of little galvan-
ised iron tags, which had previously been serially
stamped with numbers from one to 999. The tags were
tied to the tree by means of light wire, care being
taken to allow enough room for girth growth.
The place where the girth measurement was taken
was also marked with paint or tar. But here a diffi-
culty was met with, some of the timbers, karri, for
instance, has a deciduous bark and jarrah has a very
rough bark which is hard to mark with any paint.
I propose obviating this by using a 4in. nail and
driving it into the tree at a given distance above the
exact spot where the girth measurement was taken.
This should prove a safer system. Here are the in-
structions and the forms in use for the work.
These are copies of forms already filled up in con-
nection with Plot 17, as it seemed to me that in this
way the object of the forms would be rendered
clearer.
Form No. 1 gives the Forest District, the Field
Book No., the Lithograph No., the date of first mea-
surement, and the age of the stand, if known. Then
follows a brief history of the forest. In the case of
Plot 17 it will be seen that the forest around was
milled over in 1881 and was cleared up in 1893-04.
Then follows a description of the plot, and finally
the object of the measurement is given, viz., “To find
the rate of growth of Karri.”
Form No. 2 is intended to receive all the notes re-
garding the sylvicultural operations, and also notes
regarding any event likely to affect the growth of the
trees, fires, droughts, etc.
Form No. 3 gives the position of the block with a
rough sketch taken from the Field Book. On the
back of this form a lithograph of the locality on the
usual 80-chain to the inch scale, is pasted. This is
useful, as it enables an officer to see the general
locality of the sample plot in relation to the sur-
rounding country.
Form No. 4 requires little explanation. The mea-
surements obtained by the field officers are written in
the Field Book, and this form is used to transcribe all
the data. The form before you is only one page of
course, and there might be 50 such pages for a big
plot embracing thousands of trees.
The three first forms give all the information re-
garding the plot, and the fourth gives the measure-
ments which are taken at given intervals of time.
The information regarding each plot is thus col-
lected together, so that it is readily accessible at any
time. Again, the information regarding all the plots
in the country may be collected into volumes, with an
index at the beginning, giving the number of the
plots, the district, the object of the measurement, the
volume, and the page.
FOREST STATISTICS.
Sample Plots.
General Instructions.
1. Each plot to receive a number.
2. The object of measurements.
3. The size of the plot which will vary according to
the nature of the forest, and the object to be
achieved to be stated. (In Western Australia
1 to 5 acres in Jarrah, Karri and Tuart where
growth statistics are required.)
4. The plot should be chosen carefully so as to re-
present an average of the type of forest that is
being dealt with.
5. The boundaries of the plot to be blazed and comer
pegs to be inserted, bearing the number of the
plot, and usual direction trenches cut.
6. Position of the plot to be plotted on a map and
distance and bearing to a surveyed point noted.
7. Girth of trees to be measured at 4ft. 3in. from
the ground (on sloping ground on upper side)
in inches and eighths.
8. The point of measurement to be marked with
paint or tar, the upper edge of the paint line
being the point. In case of trees with decidu-
ous bark, a nail to be driven exactly two feet
above the point of measurement.
9. |A small galvanised label with number stamped on
it to be affixed to the tree with wire or a nail.
Care must be taken to allow enough wire for
increase in girth.


10. Height of tree to be measured to first limb in the
case of trees that have made their main trunk
or bole, and to the topmost twig in the ease of
saplings and poles, the trunk of which is not
yet determinable.
11. Whether the tree is dominant, sub-dominant,
dominated or suppressed will be noted in the
remark column on Form 3. Letters D, sd, d,
s would be sufficient.
12. Measurements to be taken every five years.
Form No. 1.
Western Australia.
Sample Plot No. 17.
Name of Plot—Karridale.
Field Book No. —Breen, A.
Lithograph No. —440/80.
Date of first measurement —Nov., 1916. By J. Breen
and Donovan.
Age of crop if known.
Past history of the forest —Karridale milling was be-
gun in 1881, but the patch at Karridale was not
completely cut out until 1893 or 1894, when
Mr. Davies ("Concessionaire) had the area be-
tween the mill and coast hill cleared. 1893-94
may be taken as date of regrowth. (Ext. from
M. 3151/16.)
Description of the Plot —One acre. A good patch
of young Karri and fairly even.
Object of measurement —To find the rate of growth of
Karri.
Form No. 2.
Western Australia.
Sample Plot No.
Sylvicultural and other operations carried out from
year to year, also any event likely to affect the growth
of the trees, such as fires, drought, etc.
Form No. 3.
Western Australia.
Sample Plot No. 17.
Position of Plot.
Karridale: Litho. 440/80.
Situated —From a peg 205 links to the South of P.O.
Reserve along the Augusta road, with bearing 118° 45'
for 1,578 links to the South-East corner peg of the sam-
ple acre.
Karridale.
Friday, 24th November, 1916.
Sketch Plan.


Girth at 4ft. 3in.
, and Height.
I
No
of
Tree.
Species.
1916.
19
•
19
•
19
19
Remarks.
G.
H.
G.
1 H.
G.
H.
G.
t H.
G.
1 H
! H -
1
Karri
37*
I
1 ...
...
i
2
do.
44
3
do.
: 51*
...
4
do.
...
43'
5
do.
...
34
6
do.
18
7
do.
52
8
do.
15 *
9
do.
...
! 30*
I
10
do.
34'
11
do.
...
53
12
do.
38*
...
13
14
15
10
do.
do.
do.
do
57
61
9*
47|
... j
...
...
...
...
...
17
18
19
20
21
22
do.
do.
do.
do.
do.
do.
...
32
42
42
29
38
5U
...
...
23
24
25
do.
do.
do.
...
21*
48' |
51*
::: |
...
...
:::
26
do.
40
1
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Department of Woods and Forests.
Form No. 4,
Sample Plot No. 17.
GIRTH AND HEIGHT MEASUREMENT.
(Cut-out Karri at Karridale.)
Mr. R. DALRYMPLE HAY, Chief Commissioner
of Forests, New South Wales read a paper on —
AUSTRALIAN FORESTRY NEW SOUTH
WALES’ EXPERIENCE IN A STATE UNDER-
TAKING, WITH CONCLUSIONS AND SUG-
GESTIONS THEREON.
By R. DALRYMPLE HAY,
Chief Commissioner of Forests, New South Wales.
Mr. President and Gentlemen , —
At previous Conferences we have, more or less
empirically, discussed Australian forestry and many
of the questions which the subject embraces. These
discussions have been valuable and instructive. They
have given us much matter for consideration, and
sometimes they have provided the groundwork for
action; but for purposes of record and reference they
have been in some respects inconclusive.
With such a premise I venture to suggest that we
have now reached a stage of deliberation at which
it is opportune to definitely state the conclusions to
which we have been guided by our experiences in
forestry development, and to place upon record such
deductions as we collectively may make after dis-
cussion and consideration of those experiences and
conclusions.
The object of a Conference such as this is that
each one of us, by full and free interchange of ex-
perience and opinion, shall improve our knowledge,
enhance the value of our work to the respective
States, and thereby contribute to the greater and
better development of forestry as it exists in Aus-
tralia.
It will, I think, be conceded that forestry practice
in Australia has been largely on elementary lines.
We have been feeling our way, and our work has
been mainly that of experimentalists endeavouring
to ascertain the best methods of applying principles
under widely different conditions.
The aim of each of us has been to lay down a
system best calculated to meet our respective needs;
but, in part, this work has been more or less ham-
pered by inadequate means, and it is therefore not
disparaging if we have to admit that some of it is
incomplete, or, at least, inconclusive in results. Still,
in each State, something has been accomplished;
some discovery has been made; some useful end has
been attained.
The development of forestry is not the work of a
day; it is a task of years, and it demands of the
forester patience and persistence, and a large mea-
sure of intelligent observation. There are, indeed,
few undertakings in which evolution is more gradual,
or in which a mistake once made takes longer to
rectify. Of course we experience failures; but, by
studying the records of failure and avoiding repe-
tition of them, we find the road to ultimate success.


Especially will this be so if, when assembled in Con-
ference, we make available the facts of our doings
and undoings, and not only systematically preserve
them for reference, but regard them as beacons to
guide us in our future progress.
In this spirit I have set down a statement of the
work done, and some of the principal conclusions
reached in the course of about 25 years’ experience
in the development of forestry in New South Wales,
and I also present certain aspects of the question in
their wider and more national bearing as affecting
Australian forestry generally.
In regard to matters of State practice, you are no
doubt aware that in New South Wales paramount
attention is devoted to the improvement and develop-
ment of native forests, but we have had compara-
tively small recourse to planting as a means to that
end, and we are indeed fortunate in being able to
replenish the greater proportion of the State s indi-
genous forests without resort to planting methods, es-
pecially as we have a short planting season and a
very dear labour market. We have not been able to
do any planting for less than £5 per acre, and the
average is nearer £B, which in normal circumstances
approaches the range of prohibitive cost. The land
that can be devoted to afforestation is principally
waste land, heavily cumbered with useless growths,
so that in a dear labour market the cost of clearing
it becomes a heavy initial tax. Furthermore, we
have not the advantage of a long winter season which
ordinarily entails a dearth of other field employment.
My conclusions upon the planting question must,
therefore, be received with due regard to the limita-
tion of experience in this branch of forestry work.
The largest effort in this direction has been outside
the influence of the labour market. As an experiment
in forestry, combined with a philanthropic measure
of prison reform, we have in operation a scheme by
which good conduct prisoners are employed in forest
work. By this means we have laid down in planta-
tions of conifers about 700 acres of waste land in the
mid-northern coastal region, but interesting and use-
ful as this may be from a reformative and prison-
labour point of view, the burdens imposed by its
penalogical requirements outbalance, in the forester’s
mind, the gain derived from cheap labour.
On a maintenance basis the cost of each prisoner-
workman is a fraction under 3s. a day; but, when to
this is added the cost of transport, housing, and
supervision under the semi-penal system, which all
has to be included in arriving at the capital cost, the
total expense of these plantations is a little more than
£8 per acre, and as an economic planting proposition
it is not attractive.
What has been done towards the development of
native forests is, however, not without value for com-
parison and future guidance. About £IOO,OOO has
been spent upon work of this character, and although
in the initial stages much of it was indifferently done
by inexperienced men, it was subsequently perfected
and has been profitable in its productive results. Of
not less importance is the valuable aid this experience
gave us when laying down a silvicultural system for
State forestry in New South Wales.
This system has been almost exclusively applied to
the regeneration of forests of reduced economic value,
which has been deteriorated by over cutting, wasteful
conversion, or fire damage, and recently the principle
of clear-cutting in the course of the improvement
work, and conversion of any saleable waste, has been
largely followed. The processes include cleaning,
thinning, ring-barking, and burning-off, carried out
under the direction of skilled officers in compliance
with specifications which have now been fairly well
standardised for each class of forest.
On the basis of about 200,000 acres of forest
treated, the average cost has been found to be ap-
proximately 10s. an acre, which, compared with our
experience in planting at a cost of from £5 to £8
per acre, is a strikingly moderate expenditure for
replenishment, especially as we derive from it a
reliable prospect of timber in much improved quality
compared with the average yield under natural con-
ditions, and at least 300 per cent, greater in volume.
This means that one acre of forest under artificial
treatment, and at a cost which is not prohibitive,
can be made to yield as much as three acres in the
natural state, and that, I think, is an important
contribution to the store of knowledge on Australian
forestry.
The following figures of cost from actual under-
takings are instructive:—
The Murray State Forests. —Area treated, 125,680
acres without conversion; cost, £41,970; average
cost, 6s. Bd. per acre.
Mitchell’s Island State Forest. —Area treated, 100
acres; cost, £213; receipts from conversion and sales,
£138; difference, £75; representing nett cost of 15s.
per acre.
Kiwarrak State Forest. —Area treated, 598 acres;
cost, £1,055; receipts from conversion and sales,
£679; difference, £376; representing nett cost of 12s.
6d. per acre.
Ravensivorth State Forest. —Area treated, 1,182
acres; cost, £752; receipts from conversion and sales,
£422; difference, £330; representing nett cost of ss.
7d. per acre.
Castlereagh State Forest. —Area treated, 500 acres;
cost, £566; receipts from conversion and sales, £130;
difference, £436; representing nett cost of 17s. sd.
per acre.
Cessnock Timber Reserve. —Area treated, 80 acres;
cost, £88; receipts from conversion and sales, £4B;
difference, £4O; representing nett cost of 10s. per
acre.
The types of forest treated and the results obtained
at different periods are shown in the accompanying
series of photographs ;
Series I—Coastal Hardwood—Wyong State For-
est.
1. Type of forest before treatment.
2. Re-growth 18 months after treatment.
3. Re-growth 12 years after treatment.
Series II. —Ironbark —Castlereagh State Forest
(near Windsor).
1. Type of forest before treatment.
2. Re-growth 18 months after treatment.
Series Hl.—Red Gum —Murray River State For-
ests.
1. Type of forest before treatment.
2. Re-growth 3 years after treatment.
3. Re-growth 20 years after treatment.
Valuable lessons learnt from experience in the
treatment of native forests are: —
(1.) That silvicultural work can be more econo-
mically performed if co-ordinated with a
general scheme of management; and,


(2.) The necessity for organising forests and
governing them by some form of working
plan.
The essential preliminary to organisation is a
forest survey to determine the topography, forest
values, and facilities for working and protecting the
forest, and to afford a knowledge of all the factors
involved in management. This is considered of such
importance in New South Wales that six trained
surveyors are now engaged on the work, and others
are under training for it. As fast as the surveys
are completed, the forests are being organised; and
working plans to govern them, based on the present
range of silvical knowledge, are being laid down;
and in order to obtain more accurate yield-tables for
future use in perfecting these working plans, an
extensive system of plot measurements has been
established to determine average volume expansion,
or increment, for different species of trees under
varying climatic conditions. Examples of forest
surveys, and of working plans based upon them, are
presented for the information of members of the
Conference.
Of course we have made mistakes, but we are
learning something every day, particularly in the
direction of economising methods. In thinning, for
example, and the destruction of superfluous or use-
less growths, we have learnt to reduce cost by using
poison in varying degrees of strength, thus obviating
a large amount of heavy work hitherto performed
by grubbing.
In fire protection, we formerly went to large
expense in endeavouring to keep the forests clean;
but in later practice find that by organising exterior
and sectional breaks, and keeping these clean, it is
not difficult, with the added precaution of patrol in
the dangerous season, to provide an equal, if not
better, measure of protection at less cost.
And as a final, but vastly important, example, we
have learnt the economy of employing none but
skilled men on forest work, even if we have to pay
a higher wage for their services. In fact, we have
it brought home to us that an efficient and economic
system of forestry compels the employment of men
who have been trained for their duties. In the earlier
stages of experience this was not so insistent, but
now that we have progressed, we find it imperative.
There is, and perhaps always will be, much diver-
sity of opinion as to the degree of training necessary
for Australian forestry work, but after very thor-
ough consideration of the subject, a scheme suitable
to the requirements of New South Wales has been
adopted.
As a preliminary, an elementary course is being
provided, and it will have to be attended by all
candidates who seek employment in supernumerary
positions such as rangers, guards, overseers, and fore-
men. They will be required to obtain a certificate
in the groundwork of forestry laws and regulations;
forest book-keeping and accountancy; mensuration
and timber measurement; elementary nursery prac-
tice; practical forest botany and knowledge of
species; characteristics and identification of native
timbers; elementary land surveying, use of the pris-
matic compass, chain, etc., and mapping; adminis-
trative rules and practice. Arrangements have been
made for this course to be conducted by one of the
large Business Training Colleges in Sydney, under
the auspices and direction of the Forestry Commis-
sion.
For the purposes of higher education we are
establishing a State School of Forestry. This will
be placed under the direction of a carefully-selected
and highly qualified principal, and provision will be
made for a three-years’ diploma course in the theory
and practice of forestry and of instruction in the
higher branches of the subject. Complementary
to this will be periodical short courses for the tech-
nical training of officers already in the service, and
especially for those who wish to specialise in any
branch of work. The buildings for this institution
are in course of erection upon a specially favourable
site in the heart of the Strickland State Forest, on
the northern railway line, about midway between
Sydney and Newcastle.
To complete a satisfactory comprehensive scheme,
this Forest has already been surveyed and is now be-
ing organised. It will be set apart for the sole use
of the school and it will be placed under the manage-
ment of the School Board. In this way provision is
made upon such a scale as to preclude the probability
of any lack of that practical demonstration and train-
ing which are such necessary complements to an edu-
cational system.
By these means the efficiency of the present ser-
vice will be greatly increased, and a regular succes-
sion of well-trained men will be provided to fill what-
ever vacancies may occur in the staff or may arise
from the expansion of State forestry in the future.
Next I would put forward that the commercial as-
pects of State forestry have not been sufficiently con-
sidered. The development of the country and spread
of population is enhancing the intrinsic value of tim-
ber and giving trees a more pronounced value. Do
we sufficiently realise this? The charging of merely
nominal royalties for timber owned by the State was
a corollary of forest neglect, but financial as well as
economic considerations are involved in forestry re-
form, r The marketing of forest products is not a
question of politics; it is an important factor in
business management, as much governed by the law
of supply and demand as any other commodity. Have
we not given away sufficient of our forest wealth, and
is it not the time to seriously consider whether it
should not in future be sold at fair market value?
Let me relate New South Wales’ experience with
regard to royalties. The timber industry there has
always been represented as a poor one staggering
under the burden of State royalty. When royalties
were first imposed in 1902, we were told that the in-
dustry would be ruined, and the same argument was
used as a political lever when they were increased in
1909. Recently circumstances forced us to enter the
trade for the supply of material for State purposes,
and we did so with some trepidation. To-day we are
converting raw timber from the forests and making
good profit on it after debiting royalties, which were
yesterday the only profit. We have taken over two
sawmills, which are worked under the same debit,
and in open competition with the trade. In the first
audit these undertakings show a reduction of 2s. 6d.
per 100 sup. ft. in the ordinary cost of Government
timber, and a nett profit of 15 per cent, in the trans-
action of supplying it. In this way we tested the
burden of royalties and found them inequitable to the
State. We had no hesitation in increasing them 50
per cent,


Throughout the Commonwealth the States Com-
mand the sources of timber supply, and the question
intrudes: should there not be national minimum
royalties or sale values for woods of comparative
quality? The cost of production and special demand
will always regulate the maximum; but common sense
and mutual interest should determine the minimum.
I advance this aspect of forest finance as one that
appeals for co-ordinate consideration.
Another branch of forest work is research. Here
again we come to commercialism in forestry, and
great as the interest and importance of such work is,
and wide as the field which New South Wales pro-
vides, scientific investigation of the commercial poten-
tialities of the products and by-products of its woods
has so far been entirely neglected. We have made a
beginning with this work both by laboratory experi-
ments which give promise of the disclosure of chemi-
cal properties in certain of woods, and by research
on a commercial basis which indicates that many of
the hardwoods are capable of yielding by-products of
appreciable value. In this particular direction the
experimentalists have evolved a process for the car-
bonisation and distillation of wood by which 80 per
cent, of the elements of value are recovered by a
simple process. The plant used is inexpensive and
may be located wherever the raw material is found,
thus saving cost of carriage.
I emphasise that this work in New South Wales
is in its infancy; but the following results from the
treatment of ten varieties of hardwood are instructive
and, I think, fully justify the continuation and ex-
tension of the investigation. The average return on
the basis of one ton of waste wood, gives:—Char-
coal, 6.32 cwt.; wood-tar, 3.85 gallons; pyroligneous
acid, 71.2 gallons; pitch, 1.91 b.
The average cost of a ton of raw material cut to
size and delivered at the retort is 95., and of treat-
ment 10s., against which the value of the by-products
averages £2 2s. Bd. a ton. If it be possible to main-
tain such an average much will have been done to
solve the problem of forest waste, and a vigorous and
useful industry will be established in the production
of commercially valuable material.
Coming to matters of Federal concern, we as
foresters have a mutual interest in forest laws. The
evolution of forest legislation in Australia is instruc-
tive, because in some measure it provides an indica-
tion of the general neglect of the question. When
the forests were of the greatest extent and value they
were governed, if at all, by regulations, which were
usually framed under land settlement Acts and failed
to meet the requirements of forestry. It was not
until the decrease in the extent and value of the
forests became alarmingly evident, that legislative
action providing for their control was introduced.
It is mild criticism to say that this reversal of pru-
dential foresight was as remarkable as it is difficult
to understand.
The earliest Australian forest law was “The South
Australian Woods and Forest Act of 1882/’ a mea-
sure which more especially redounds to the credit of
that State, as South Australia had less forest wealth
than any other part of the Commonwealth. The
most richly endowed States were the last to awake to
the importance of the question, and there was a lapse
of twenty-four years before the example of South
Australia was followed by the Queensland “State
Forests and National Parks Act” of 1906. Then in
1907 a useful protective and administrative Act was
passed in Victoria, and two years after New South
Wales followed with a somewhat similar measure.
In each of these Acts the outstanding object was
to provide for protection by reservation, not man-
agement, and New South Wales is the only State that
has so far fully made up the deficiency.
I am convinced that to attempt forest control and
management without adequate statutory powers is to
court failure. If I were asked to express an opinion
on the principal cause of forestry failure in Aus-
tralia, I would unhesitatingly say “insufficient con-
trol.” I would go further and say that management
without unfettered expert control can only be a pre-
tence and its success impossible. The three most im-
portant requirements to be provided in forest legis-
lation in ray experience! are (1) permanent forests,
(2) full control in management , and (3) finance , and
each of these is embodied in the New South Wales
Act of 1916, which is a statutory declaration of the
conclusions reached in that State after 25 years of
stress and trial.
Another subject which I think calls particularly
for Interstate, if not Federal, action is the naming
of Australian timber. The problem is a difficult one,
but I venture to think that it is not impossible of
solution. I had the honour at preceding conferences
of drawing attention to the anomalies which existed
in Australian vernacular names, but I fear that the
suggestions then put forward will fail to completely
remove them, because the difficulty of coming to an
agreement on the basis of common names is so greatly
complicated by custom, by the confusion of vernacu-
lars, and by botanical variations which exist in the
same or in closely allied species. But we all agree on
the wisdom of avoiding confusion and know that the
interest of commerce demands it. Could we not as an
alternative course compile a list of all the principal
commercial timber trees of Australia, and see how
far they can be grouped under common names and
symbols? We would by so doing at least furnish a
key to represent groups, as well as individual trees
that cannot well be grouped, and thus enable a buyer
to know what he is ordering. For instance, the com-
mercial ironbarks, stringybarks, blue gums, red gums,
mountain ashes, etc., might be dealt with somewhat
as follows: —
Ironbark, symbol I B.
I B (g) Grey ironbark E. paniculata Habitat, New South Wales.
L B (r) Red
E. sideroxylon „
E. crebra ~
(narrow-leaved) „
E. siderophloia „
(broad-leaved) „
New South Wales
and
Queensland
In this group we would have to decide whether the with the ironbarks, under the symbol 18, or with
Victorian ironbark (E. leucoxylon) and the Tas- other groups under the symbols adopted for th§m.
manian ironbrak ( E . siberiana ) should be included


Stringyhark, symbol S B.
S B (w) White stringybark E. eugenioides Habitat, N.S.W., V.
S B (r) Red ~ E. macrorrhyncha ~ V., N.S.W.
S B fb) Brown ~ E. capitellata „ V., N.S.W., S.A.
SB (y) Yellow „ E. Muelleriana „ V. N.S.W.
In this group we should have to decide whether
there are any other commercial timbers that should
reasonably be classed as stringybark, and be included
under the symbol S B, and so on. It is not necessary
at this stage to elaborate the illustration, but I be-
lieve that confusion may be avoided by the use of a
key of this character, and that this solution of the
difficulty would be appreciated by those who deal in
Australian timber. The subject is one of great im-
portance to commerce, and it demands, I think, the
fullest consideration of this Conference.
In the foregoing, Mr. President and Gentlemen, I
have endeavoured to give you a full, if somewhat
general, impression of what is being done in New
South Wales, the conclusions based thereupon which
guide us in our policy, and of my views on some as-
pects of the Australian forest question. I would
add only that I and those associated with me in the
N.S.W. Forestry Commission are convinced that suc-
cessful undertakings will in a large measure depend
upon public understanding and appreciation of what
is being done, with the resultant advantage of public
co-operation in many desirable and useful directions.
A campaign of publicity has therefore been com-
menced, which is calculated to interest and educate
the people, whether it be children in the schools, mer-
chants in their offices, or men and women in their
country homesteads. Paragraphs and short articles
written to popular taste, and published in the press
throughout the State, constitute the widest scope of
efforts in this direction, and we have received the
ready co-operation and assistance of editors and
newspaper owners in publishing the matters we put
before them. We are also publishing for educational
purposes handbooks and other publications, and hope
shortly to have a simple lesson on forestry included
in the weekly time-table of the State schools. In the
same spirit demonstration forests are being estab-
lished in the vicinity of centres of population to
arouse local interest and make the methods, the rea-
sons for, and the results of forestry work so apparent
to the man in the street, and the man on the land,
that they will be brought to realise the potentiality
of the forests, and be led to assist us in our endeavour
to foster them as an asset of importance.
Public interest in this question is slowly but surely
being aroused, and a? far as New South Wales is
concerned, I believe that the era of neglect with its
sad record of waste and misuse has passed, never
to recur again. Regrettable as it was, it will not have
been in vain if our experiences from it have led us
to a better and wiser future.
The VICE-PRESIDENT suggested an adjourn-
ment until 11 a.m. on the following day (Friday),
in order to give delegates the opportunity of meet-
ing His Excellency the Governor General upon his
arrival at the Central Station, Perth, where arrange-
ments had been made for the formal opening of the
Trans-Australian Railway.
FRIDAY, 16th NOVEMBER, 11 a.m.
The Conference on resuming on Friday morning
after participating in the functions connected with
the opening of the Trans-Australian Railway at 9,30
a.m., at the instance of the vice-President, extended
a welcome to the Hon. A. W. Styles, M.P., Minister
for Lands, South Australia, who had accompanied
the Governor General to this State.
The VICE-PRESIDENT referred to the fact that
with Mr. Styles the neighbouring State was well re-
presented, he being the official head of the Forestry
Department, and emphasised the benefit to be derived
from his presence together with those of his officials
in the economic working of the forests of Western
Australia.
Mr. STYLES (in reply) expressed his apprecia-
tion of tlie kindly sentiments with which he had been
welcomed. The sole reason for his presence was due
to the fact that the Government of which he was a
member felt that such an important Conference
should have one of his State’s Ministers present at
its sessions. The Government of South Australia
were taking a very keen interest in forestry, and were
pleased that it had already been recognised that they
had in the officers of the Department in Adelaide
two gentlemen who were doing excellent sendee in
their particular States. Then, too, the distance was
not so very great especially when the great import-
ance that is attached to the work of forestry was
taken into consideration. In conclusion, he trusted
that he might be of assistance in the deliberations of
the Conference. (Applause!)
Mr. HAY mentioned that he had prepared some
notes on Mr. Maiden’s papers, the information in
which was of extreme interest and value.
Mr. CORBIN considered that it would be useful
if Mr. Lane-Poole had any information concerning
several matters touched upon by Mr. Maiden, such
as rainfall and other general information of value
to forestry generally.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said that Mr. Maiden’s paper
on “The Trees of Western Australia” was a valuable
contribution to systematic botany. It must be re-
membered that Mr. Maiden has spent his life in
studying this particular braneh of science, and especi-
ally the myrtaceae and leguminosae, and therefore
it is an exceedingly valuable contribution, particu-
larly. in this State, where, as Colonel Mathey told
us yesterday, the only authoritative publication was
one written by a German and published in German.
Mr. Maiden’s contribution is, however, a beginning
in the right direction.
Mr. CORBIN asked if the information could be
supplemented by data concerning rainfall, etc.
Mr. LANE-POOLE was afraid that his resi-
dence here had been too short to enable much
to be done in that direction. He considered
that the best mode of dealing with the subject
would be in the form of a paper upon rain-
fall and sylviculture. Mr. Jolly had told them that
these were matters of long study, hence it would


not be right for him to elaborate on Mr. Maiden’s
purely technical paper. He would be glad if Mr.
Corbin would mention the particular tree he had
in mind. There were others' present who knew the
country better than the speaker, and the region in
which the tree in question grows as well as the rain-
fall. The only portion of the State he was acquainted
with was the South-West, where the rainfall varied
from 30 inches to 82 inches, which fell at Jarrahdale
last year.
Mr. CORBIN was conscious that at a conference
of this description one could not go into great detail.
The import of his suggestion was that in time to come
they would be able to obtain the information re-
ferred to by Mr. Jolly in his paper. He felt that it
was very important in a country like South Austra-
lia to institute experiments with different kinds of
trees. He mentioned the Finns insignis to show
what possibility they may be missing in the way of
other trees. It would be an advantageous thing to
reserve an area of the forest giants in their present
condition so that they will not disappear from the
face of the earth and be irrevocably lost. He did
not know if it would be possible, but he merely sug-
gested it. After seeing the enormous karri trees, and
realising that most of them might be swept away
and lost, it struck him that it would be useful if
such a patch could be preserved.
The VICE-PRESIDENT said that was the only
good thing that past government had accomplished
I hey reserved ‘‘Class A” areas —and that very area
of 2,000 acres where the Karri was situated. “Class
A ’ means that they cannot be interfered with ex-
cept by Parliament itself.
Mr. CORBIN considered that was very gratifying
intelligence—There were one or two other matters
that he would like information upon, but possibly
that would be obtained later.
Mr. JOLLY wished to emphasise the importance
of Mr. Corbin’s suggestion that they should be fur-
nished with papers on the various trees, their habi-
tat and rainfall requirements. He had often found
tremendous difficulty in dealing with the question
of exotics, and it was remarkable how few
were the publications which afforded matter of in-
terest to the forester. When it came to a matter of
trying to apply certain trees to one’s own climate
the papers were silent, and he trusted that Mr. Lane-
Poole would provide something for the next confer-
ence on these points. Regarding the reservation of
special areas, it was recognised that a State forest
had been proclaimed, but what he understood from
M3r. Corbin’s remarks was that an area of, say, 100
acres should be preserved from exploitation. He
knew of one forest in France where there was a
small area set apart and absolutely closed. That
area was a model to all foresters as to what the
country had produced in the past and will produce
in the future. If only 100 to 200 acres could be pre-
served from cutting, future generations could realise
what one forest State had* produced.
Mr. HILL felt highly interested in Mr. Maiden’s
paper, as he had been associated with that scientist
so closely in the past. There were one or two matters
that he would like information upon. E. Marginata
and diversicolor they had known for 30 to 40 years.
The habits of these trees had been studied, and they
had been grown in South Australia, where they were
fairly familiar with what could be done and more
especially with what could not be done with them.
There were four others, namely, E. saluhris, E. sal-
monophloia, E. redunca , and E. loxophleha, as re-
gards which details of the rainfall and habitat would
be acceptable, and would be of service in South Aus-
tralia.
Mr. LANE-POOLE, referring to Mr. Jolly’s
remarks as to the preserving of an area of country,
said the area of Karri forest they had visited near
Big Brook was a national park for all time, and no
cutting would be carried out on it. It could only be
alienated by Act of Parliament.
Dr. STO WARD said there were the Western Aus-
tralian species of Eucalyptus enumerated in the
Flora Australiensis , and in addition those of Diels,
Fitzgerald, and others. A revision of the described
species was in progress, and there was the possibility
ol the discovery of new ones in the near future, but
not many of these, he thought, would be likely to
possess great value from the point of view of prac-
tical forestry. Systematic botanical survey together
with ecological study would contribute invaluably to
the forestry and agricultural interests of the State.
Mr. HAY referred to the possibility of their econ-
omic value.
Dr. STOWARD stated there was the possibility of
the utilisation of certain of the Eucalypts of the
Mallee type for oil production, provided these were
sufficiently abundant and the collection of oil-bearing
material economical.
Mr. HAY asked if there had been any work on
portrayal.
Dr. STOWARD replied that there was not as yet.
That had been principally done by Mr. Maiden.
Mr. HAY thought after examining the excellent
carving upon the timber specimens exhibited upon
the wall of the Conference room, that there was some
standard work on the trees of Western Australia,
the carvings referred to were of an extremely fin-
ished character.
Mr. CECIL ANDREWS said that the carving of
Western Australian woods were the work of the
Instructor of the Technical School, Mr. Howett.
The VICE-PRESIDENT hoped they would have
an opportunity of visiting Mr. Howett’s workshop
before the Conference closed, and inspecting some of
his carved furniture work upon which he had spent
some years.
Mr. HAY stated that in New South Wales for
about 12 years they had been engaged upon botani-
cal survey work and preparing information that was
constantly becoming more valuable as well as estab-
lishing records that should have been compiled long
ago.
Dr. STOWARD referred to one or two species
described by W. V. Fitzgerald, notably the Powder
Bark Wandoo, a tree which should be of economic
value. It grows in the Darling Ranges, and is per-
haps liable to be confused with the Wandoo.
Mr. CORBIN said that reference was made to
water storing on page 4of Mr. Maiden’s paper. He
was wondering whether there were areas on which
there were trees fit for stock to use in times of
famine and drought. Some time ago he had tried to
introduce the idea into South Australia in order that
they might have a standby when all other forms of
stock feed had failed, and which they could nurse
during years of plenty so that a sufficiently large
quantity could be saved for use during drought.


Mr. H. S. KING said that there had never been
any reserve for feeding stock, but there was the
Mulga Tree upon which stock, especially in the
Murchison and North-West were sustained in dry
times.
Dr. STOWARD stated that in the Wheat Belt
was found occasionally a plant known as Codono-
carpus cotinif olius. Turner, he thought, in his book,
placed some value on it as a fodder. He would like
to know if any members present had any knowledge
of it.
Mr. GILL mentioned that there were shrubs of
that species which grew in the Mallee country and
the ranges, especially the Flinders Range in the
North of South Australia. But he had not heard that
any special attention was paid to them as a fodder
—or that they were regarded as such. It was an in-
teresting tree which grew to 14 or 15 feet and some-
times higher.
At this stage the Vice-President read a letter from
the Royal Society signed by Professor Dakin, notify-
ing that a special meeting of the Royal Society
would be held on the following Tuesday in the Phy-
sics Lecture Hall at the University, at which the
speakers would include Mr. R. Dalrymple Hay, of
New South Wales, and Mr. W. Gill, of South Aus-
tralia, and inviting the presence of delegates, to the
Forestry Conference.
Resolved that the invitation be accepted.
Discussion then proceeded upon Mr. J. H. Mai-
den’s paper, entitled “An attempt to secure an uni-
form nomenclature for Australian Timbers.”
Mr. HAY had had a conversation with Mr. Maiden
about the duplication of names, and he at once sug-
gested that this Conference should deal with the
matter. He thought that Mr. Maiden in his effort
to discover a solution had allowed his enthusiasm
to override the commercial aspect, and he felt sure
that the suggestion he had made to overcome the
difficulty by grouping a number of timbers under
the name of Jarrah was one that would not be
acceptable to the Conference. He felt sure that
if Mr. Maiden were here he would be the
first to admit that there was no intention to
complicate commercial possibilities. Later on, when
his own paper came up for discussion he would
have some suggestions to put before the Conference
which might arrive at a solution. It was a question
he had given a great deal of thought to, and he re-
alised which rather concerned the States on the East
side of the Continent with their large variety of
woods, than the Western States. When it did come
up it was possible that after they had discussed it
from various points of view, some good would be
accomplished by appointing a small committee to
go into his suggestion and elaborate it so that a con-
crete proposition might be presented to conference
on this most important question.
The VICE-PRESIDENT understood that Mr.
Hay did not mean that the discussion should be held
over.
Mr. HAY considered that the discussion should be
confined to Mr. Maiden’s suggestion, and that a re-
solution of the kind he had just indicated should be
adopted for the appointment of a committee.
Mr. JOLLY said he supported Mr. Hay in his
opinion that Mr. Maiden had not taken sufficient
account of the commercial aspect, and agreed that it
was quite impossible to class the various species in
the groups suggested. Western Australia naturally
would not consider the suggestion that the term
Jarrah should include Queensland Flooded Gum and
South Australian Red Gum, while no doubt South
Australia would strongly object to their Red Gum
being called Jarrah.
Mr. Maiden had stated that the name Mountain
Ash was already appropriated in European markets,
and should be avoided if possible, but at the same
time he did not take much exception to Mahogany.
Mr. Jolly thought that if any name was pre-occupied
in Europe it was Mahogany and Australian hard-
woods could not be classed with the true Mahogany,
which is of quite a different nature. Rosewood, and
perhaps Red Cedar might be called Mahogany, but
the name should be avoided unless the interests of
the trade required that it should be adopted.
Mr. HAY: Why not “Australian Mahogany” and
“Ash?”
Mr. JOLLY considered that they should keep
mahogany away from the Eucalypts.
Mr. HAY stated that it was practically known as
Australian Mahogany.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said that is what it was called
originally; it was the first name given to it, and on
the Range there was a place called Mahogany Creek
from that fact, but he was quite of the opinion that
it was the wrong name.
Mr. JOLLY said that in dealing with the export
trade they should avoid it unless they found it to
be commercially necessary. Mr. Maiden had also
referred to Tasmanian Oak, which used to be called
Stringy Bark. This was a case where if the name
“Oak” would sell the timber and “Stringy Bark”
would not, it would be better to cross “Stringy Bark”
out. A name helps to sell a timber.
Mr. HAY asked if it mattered how many names
they gave a timber provided they could avoid con-
fusion and that the buyer knows what he is getting.
If he ordered Queensland Red Stringy Bark and
knew he was getting it, that was all that they as
foresters were cencerned about, but they must not
confuse it with some other Stringy Bark. That
seemed to be the only solution.
Mr. J OLLY said that they must consider the
trade. For instance, in North Queensland, there was
a tree called Water Gum. The very name killed it.
It was an excellent w T ood, a species of Eugenia, a
genus which had not come on the market. It grew in
well watered places. He was speaking to an ex-
porter who told him he would put it on the market
as Atherton Yellow Gum. He had written last
year to the Railway Commissioner in Adelaide, who
had used some of it, and he had reported most highly
of it. Its qualities were such that Mr. Jolly had
suggested that it should be used in connection
with ship building, as it was moderately light
and very durable. Some logs of it had been lying
for 20 or 30 years in the scrub, which showed that
it was durable. It was also fairly strong, though not
as strong perhaps as teak. That was a case in point,
and although the department might adopt the name


of Water Gum the trade might employ another.
However, they seemed to be all agreed that it would
be impossible to accept Mr. Maiden’s suggestion.
Mr. CORBIN pointed out that at the last Forestry
Conference it was resolved that it was desirable to
establish uniformity in nomenclature of trees, and
that a committee should be appointed to which should
be referred a list of all the trees in the respective
States, such lists to be forwarded to the Minister
in Victoria, and as soon as possible that he should
convene a conference and finalise the nomenclature.
He was anxious to know if anything had been done
in this connection which might save the time of
members of the present Conference.
Mr. HAY stated that New South Wales had com-
piled their lists and waited for them to be called
for. It was recognised that the Conference had
shouldered its responsibility to a large extent.
The VICE-PRESIDENT asked if Mr. Corbin
agreed with Mr. Maiden’s proposal.
Mr. CORBIN replied that he did not entirely. He
W’ould like to ask Mr. Maiden’s reason for altering
the name of the Sugar Gum which had a tremendous
distribution. Mr. Maiden called it euc cladocalyx.
Mr. LANE-POOLE; So far as the matter
concerns Western Australia, a reference to
page 4 will show that there were only two
trees about which there was any confusion.
That is to say, Blackbutt {E. patens) and red gum
( E . calophylla). Neither was commercially valuable,
and so from the West Australian point of view the
question of nomenclature did not really affect them
so much. Red gum yielded a tannin, but he did
not think the exportation of tannin was going to
rival that of the timber of Victoria and New South
\\ ales. At the same time he fully appreciated what
Mr. Maiden had tried to do. He saw that we seemed
to be in a hole in regard to the question of nomencla-
ture. Apparently the resolutions at the last Confer-
ence w r ere abortive inasmuch as recommendations
were made and w T ere not carried out, and Mr. Maiden
has tried to come to our assistance. It was Mr.
Hutchins who, in writing of botany and forestry,
said that they had as much relation as horse-racing
and zoology. He agreed with Mr. Hay that a sub-
committee should be appointed to deal with \the
question. The various departments of all the States
should co-operate regarding the common names of
their trees. He would second Mr. Hay’s proposal
to form a sub-committee to go into that question
and try to see if some way could be found to meet
the difficulty.
Mr. HAY, in referring to the question of Red
Gum yielding a Kino, mentioned that New South
Wales had a Red Gum useful for medicinal pur-
poses. And assuming that Red Gum Kinos were
marketable, it should be made clear which kind the
trader was dealing with. Unless they made it clear
confusion might result, and it would be bad business
for all concerned, as they did not know what the
future was going to bring forward. His own opinion
was that they should not bother their heads at pre-
sent about anything except the known commercial
woods of Australia, and when they had a fairly
complete list to serve the purposes of the conference
they should group them. At the moment he did
not wish to make a concrete proposal.
Mr. ASHFORD considered that a discussion
would help considerably.
The VICE-PRESIDENT suggested that the sub-
committee should be framed and could afterwards
meet.
Resolved on the motion of Mr. HAY, seconded
by Mr. LANE-POOLE, that a sub-committee be ap-
pointed to consider the question of the duplication
of the common names of trees, and to endeavour to
bring forward for the consideration of Conference
a feasible solution of the difficulty.
Mr. LANE-POOLE considered that that would
knock Red Gums out.
Mr. HAY differed. They had Jarrah. He would
like to see a representative from each State on the
committee, but if possible not too large a committee.
Victoria was not represented, and he felt they could
not get a full representation in her absence. He
would move —“That a sub-committee, consisting of
the mover, Messrs. Lane-Poole, Jolly and Gill, be ap-
pointed.” After all was said and done, whatever
proposal was brought forward had to be submitted
to the Conference and they were only breaking
ground as it were.
The Hon. Mr. STYLES second the motion as
being the best way to get over the difficulty. Such
a sub-committee may be able to devise ways and
means to overcome those obstacles which they cer-
tainly ought to strive to overcome. There was no
doubt that little had been done in connection with
the resolutions of the last Conference owing to the
fact that it seemed impossible to have been every-
body’s business with the usual result that the resolu-
tion had gone by default. There was no doubt a
great deal of confusion to-day in regard to the dupli-
cation of those names, and it was only those who
were engaged in commercial pursuits that recognised
the difficulties which not only the manufacturers
but the general public were suffering due to the
fact that there were woods in some instances known
by half a dozen different names, with the result
that the public were somewhat disturbed in mind as
to what they had really got in their possession. As
an instance, some little time ago his attention was
called to the fact that a certain party possessed a
beautiful piece of furniture made out of a wood
believed to be Stringy Bark from Tasmania. An
authority w’as brought in who pronounced it real
English Oak, but when they got to the bottom of the
difficulty and obtained a real expert opinion they
found that the person who had been responsible for
sending this magnificent furniture had suggested in
all good faith that it was a wood that came from the
North-East portion of Queensland, a locality that
was considered to be so far distant that no one would
journey there to discover if such good wood existed
there. The Conference should consider some means
for over-coming these obstacles and bring them as
nearly in line as possible, and formulate a list that
would be acceptable to both Western and Eastern
members.
Motion put and carried.
Discussion then proceeded on the Hon. W. G.
Ashford’s paper —“The New Forest Policy of New
South Wales.”
Mr, ASHFORD said that possibly some misap-
prehension might exist as to the forest area they


were actually making and the industrial undertaking
that is now the work of the State. In regard to the
latter aspect, a small State sawmill has been estab-
lished, which while of commercial value in its rela-
tion to the Railways and the Department of Works,
enabled us to learn the ins and outs of the trade. He
thought the Conference would agree that while it may
be desirable to develop highly on the scientific side,
the basis of the industry must be to make it a com-
mercial proposition. It was essential to see that the
State was not exploited by any combination that
might be in existence and the inside know-
ledge that would be obtained of the timber industry
in working their mill, rather than the actual profits
that they anticipated making from the industry it-
self would warrant its establishment. He did not
wish any false impression to be left on the minds of
the Conference. It was a socialistic measure. They
intended to develop the forests themselves. That
would be rather a political than an administrative
policy. He personally believed that there was an-
other method of getting over the difficulty in the pro-
duction of timber. They might undertake direct con-
version, but there was a possibility, if the
Government laid down a defined policy, in-
stead of actually calling for contracts for the
supply of timber, they might call for contracts for
the cutting of timber in the forest. He men-
tioned that because with the experience they
were gaining it was possible they could get their
forests exploited by private enterprise, in conjunc-
tion with the Government who would have a definite
order for a certain amount of timber, and might
allow the establishment of a sawmill outside the
control of any combine. They had a combine in
New South Wales. He did not know if there was
one in this State or not, but in New South Wales
the principals in it were making fairly handsome pro-
fits. The Commission would have to formulate the
policy in the future.
The VICE-PRESIDENT gathered that the State
sawmills supplied the Railway Department with tim-
ber.
Mr. ASHFORD said they supplied a portion of
it only. They went into the open market and ten-
dered together with other private milling concerns
for a certain supply of timber. The State mill being
only a miniature concern, only tenders for the small
proportion of the necessities of the Railway Commis-
sion.
The VICE-PRESIDENT asked whether it was
contemplated now or later on to join in competition
with private enterprise for the purpose of supplying
the general public.
Mr. ASHFORD said that they did not so intend
at the moment. The development up to the present
had been in the direction of ascertaining the correct
method of handling the forests from the commercial
point of view. They were doing that to assist others
in the path of uprightness, and to see that they did
not obtain higher prices than the circumstances war-
ranted. He might also mention that they had running
at the present time a State share farming proposi-
tion, and around that State share farm instead of
establishing a small mill themselves they called ten-
ders for cutting timber on the land, about 20,000
acres, and supplying settlers with timber at 10s. per
hundred foot, whereas if they had gone into the
market and bought it they would be paying up to
255. It may be that by calling for tenders for cut-
ting the timber it would allow of others —knowing
they have a definite contract ahead and a definite
amount to cut —to establish their saw-milling enter-
prise in the forests. It was purely a political matter
whether there is to be further development in the saw-
milling industry of New South Wales. They were not
tied to any definite policy. After visiting the forests of
Western Australia, one of the regrets he had was
that there were timber concessions which precluded
the State from a defined forest policy, such as would
meet with the success that was deserved. It seemed
to him that the State had a full right to a fair re-
turn from the forest areas. He understood, however,
that in the forests themselves were large grants over
the forests and also the land —from which but little
revenue was derived. The difficulty seemed to be
that the State mills had to pay excess royalty com-
pared to what the private concerns paid for the
timber on their own land. He was not questioning
the matter of policy. He believed there was difficulty
ahead of them for ten years to come as there were
definite concessions over forest areas that would pre-
vent the Government entering into competition un-
less some such arrangement as was suggested were
come to —and he realised that the zone system
would be absolutely unfair, as would on the other
hand an export duty in connection with the Harbour
Trust. In New South Wales there were three differ-
ent systems, State Forests, Crown Lands, and Lands
leased. The Government had control of the timber
on the land. There was no rights over the timber in
any of the leases, but they did at one time give exclu-
sive rights over a given period, a policy that they
were doing away with. The leases were leases of the
land only. The Government controlled the forests
which were not the assets of the holder of the land.
The VICE-PRESIDENT remarked that in West-
ern Australia the converse was the case.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD said that it was recognised
that there must be the two interests, not only the
grazing but the forestry interest, and if they desired
to discuss it he did not wish them to discuss it on
the false basis that the lessee has any right to the
forest, he has only the right to the land while the
Government has absolute control over the timber,
Mr. LANE-POOLE said he would like to sound a
note of warning. This was a difficulty that he had
seen in several other countries, and for himself it
was a matter of congratulation that he had nothing
to do with the State sawmills in this country. The
State sawmills were working like a private concern,
and paid royalty on the same basis as any company
which took up timbered land. He considered that
the forester’s duty was to produce the timber, and
not to mill it, and that if the State policy were to
embark on the sawmilling business, then the business
should be entirely separate from the Forest Depart-
ment. As a rule the man in charge of the sawmilling
business was a shrewd business man, a man who has
made good, and therefore a strong man, and all busi-
ness men are naturally selfish people. Hence it is
that the future of the forests do not concern them.
Their sole idea is to exploit the timber and make
money out of it in the shortest possible time. Such
a business man when included in a forestry commis-
sion, strong man as he is likely to be, is able to in-
fluence the Commission very strongly, and might in-
deed over-ride the opinion and advice of the expert
forester. There would then be the situation of the
State forest being run for the purpose of sawmilling


and not for the purpose for which they all thought
they ought to be run, namely, for the preservation of
the timber for all generations with a proper conti-
nuity of policy, so that the timber industry may be
supplied with timber for all time. In regard to the
other points in Mr. Hay’s paper, he thought they
should be left to the special committee.
Mr. JOLLY desired to support Mr. Lane-Poole
in sounding a note of warning in regard to the saw-
milling side being represented on the commission.
The danger was a very great one. The saw-
miller is out to cut the timber out as fast as he
possibly can. There was an example of that in
Queensland recently when the Works Department
started a State mill. The Forestry Department had
a Pine reserve which they had surveyed well and
thoroughly, and which was estimated to contain sev-
enty millions of feet of mature Hoop Pine, with ap-
proximately three times as much undergirth as
overgirth timber. He had laid down a rough work-
ing plan, which fixed a maximum cut of 4%, millions
super, feet of pine. Other species were disregarded.
They would keep below it if necessary, but that was
the maximum. The area was fiSed upon as one
for the State mill to operate upon. They proposed
to erect a mill and to cut fifteen million feet a year.
He saw that they did not, but that was because they
were a separate department, and the Forestry De-
partment had the strength with them. Now, if the
head of the Works Department had been on the
forestry Commission, he might have caused con-
siderable difficulty, and might have insisted on cut-
ting out the area in five years instead of in 15 years,
and the result would have been that the mill would
have been abandoned and settlement broken up in the
usual way. New South Wales would be well advised
to watch this aspect of the case. There was
a point lie would like explained by Hon. Mr.
Ashford in his paper, where he states on page 3, re-
ferring to the organisation of forests —(a) State
forests and timber reserves are to be intensively man-
aged under a system of working plans; (b) forests
on Crown Lands held under leasehold tenures, under
a special licensing system; and (c) forests on un-
occupied Crown land under a general licensing sys-
tem. He had been through the New South Wales
regulations, but was not quite clear as to whether
the license system prevailed throughout. Appar-
ently the Commission laid down a working plan
which defined that a certain amount of timber would
be cut every year. But how was it to be disposed
of, under a licensing system, or would it be sold by
auction ?
Mr. HAY replied that it might be sold in both
ways, in the discretion of the Commissioner. It
might be put up to competition or sold by auction
straight out.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD said that it did not matter
so long as the State received a fair return.
Mr. JOLLY said that in Queensland, although the
word “license” was mentioned in the 1904 regulations
it was dropped out of use, and everything was sold
under agreements. He noticed that New South Wales
still retained the minimum girths and minimum royal-
ties. In the Queensland State Forest Regulations of
1914 they had dropped minimum girths and royalties.
The Regulations provided that the Director
of Forests, who has not the power pos-
sessed in New South Wales, should sell the tim-
ber under agreement. He would fix his own royal-
ties and his own girths if necessary. That seemed
to be a much more elastic system than New South
Wales possessed, and it absolutely cuts out the licen-
sing system which he considers to be one of the weak
points of Australian policy. Under the general licens-
ing system men were cutting against one another,
and that was not a good thing for the forest. In
New South Wales apparently they had cut out the
exclusive rights.
Mr. HAY said that feature was under the old
Act.
Mr. JOLLY said that in Queensland they sold
only the exclusive right. If they had a forest of,
say, 5,000 acres, they might put it up in one block,
or in blocks of 100 or 200 or more acres, as condi-
tions required. But on each area they sold the ex-
clusive right to cut a certain quantity of timber.
He considered that was the only way to sell it.
Mr. HAY considered that it was only a matter
of a name. In New South Wales they sold the ex-
clusive licenses.
Mr. HAY inquired how they managed in Queens-
land in the mining industry where a lot of small
timber was required for fuel, spokes, and fencing
material.
Mr. JOLLY pointed out that generally mining tim-
ber was cut in districts Avhere there were no State
forests, but even then it was usually sold under
agreement, though firewood was extracted under
license.
Mr. HAY said that was what the general system
in New South Wales applied to.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD said they might have licenses
over the rest of it for firewood or sleepers.
Mr. JOLLY said that if they could separate buyers
in that way they would do so, but they would not per-
mit two men to cut milling timber on the same area.
That is what was meant in Queensland by exclusive
rights. The paper was of great interest to the Con-
ference and showed that great progress had been
made, the most important step being the appoint-
ment of the Commissioner, although in Queensland
perhaps they were ahead in some ways in the work-
ing of the State forests. But he trusted that all the
other States would copy the system, although he did
not suppose they would, still he hoped they would.
Concerning the profit on sawmilling which the com-
mission had made, he would like to know if the situa-
tion of the mill was such that, under the fixed royalty
system in vogue, it was in a more favourable or less
favourable position than its competitors.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD said the mill was not in as
favourable a position as many of the mills working
in competition. The latter had the advantage of
water carriage, while the State mill had only rail
carriage.
Mr. HAY said that the State sawmill was paying
a fixed minimum rate of royalty which was 50 per
cent, higher than other sawmills were paying in
January last. As a matter of fact the State mill was
situated where it suited the settler to bring logs,
and they were paying 3s. a hundred because they
were meeting a local necessity and not because


they particularly wanted that timber, but they were
paying it also because that was the price they got at
the mills which were privately owned.
Hon. Mr. STYLES regretted that it had not been
his privilege to read, mark, learn, and inwardly
digest the paper supplied by the Hon. Mr. Ashford,
but from a casual glance at it, whilst sitting there,
he was quite satisfied that the Conference was sup-
plied with food for thought. It had not been his
pleasure to have had a very long ministerial con-
nection with the Forestry Department, but after the
few months that he had been engaged in this work
he was satisfied that the opinions expressed by Mr.
Jolly were such as should meet with their
approval as they did with his, and he felt
that the sooner they got in line with the
progressive methods of New South Wales in
their new Forestry policy the better it
would be for all the States concerned. He con-
gratulated the Hon. Mr. Ashford heartily in having
so persistently carried on the work which has brought
to completion a policy which he, for one, was pre-
pared to say he envied him in his administration.
At the same time all the States had gone along
for years and years in preparing their forests, and
now they were up against a very ticklish proposition
as to what they were going to do with the forests.
He had not heard it whispered in South Australia
that the Government should go into the State saw-
milling business, but he did recognise that to the
extent that they had entered into commercial pur-
suits they had been able to work on very profitable
lines. It seemed to him, however, that there was in
the forest policy of New South Wales a distinct
advancement, and he would return from the Con-
ference with a feeling of gratitude at having had the
opportunity of associating himself with those who
had made forestry their life-long study and become
expert in the work, and where capable of instructing
their several Ministers and Governments. He was
particularly glad that the Hon. Mr. Ashford had
submitted his paper and he hoped that it would have
the effect of awakening a cord within the delegates of
the Conference that would encourage them to ascer-
tain whether it is not possible for the rest of the
States to make a similarly progressive move through-
out the Commonwealth. He was not conversant with
all the details regarding the policy of the other
States, but he recognised that in South Australia
they were lagging a little behind, not because they
wished to lag behind, but because circumstances over
which they had no control had kept them a little
in the back ground. He was satisfied that one of
the best blessings that have fallen upon Western
Australia in regard to forestry work had been the
advent of the Governor General. His Excellency
infused new interests in forestry work. His officers
in South Australia, who were present, would agree
with him that His Excellency’s personal work in
the forests of South Australia had done much to
give them that necessary food for thought which,
in conjunction with the paper before the conference,
would be of inestimable value in preparing their
forestry policy. He desired to express his thanks to
the Hon. Mr. Ashford for his paper and to promise
him that it would not be laid aside, but would be
carefully read and studied by himself in conjunction
with the officers in the endeavour to get nearer to
their friends in New South Wales in that direction.
(Applause!)
Mr. CORBIN also wished to support the congrat-
ulations tendered to the Hon. Mr. Ashford by other
members, and he also desired to express emphatically
his agreement with the word of warning offered by
Mr. Lane-Poole to the effect that sawmilling opera-
tions on a big scale are undesirable when undertaken
by the State Forest Department. They were
obviously much better done by private enter-
prise under certain conditions. In South Aus-
tralia they had some propositions in the forest
which no private enterprise would take up. The
country in certain spots had a certain quantity of
timber on it, but it would not yield sufficient profit
for private persons to come along with a mill and
work through the area. In such cases they have to
consider what should be done, and they decided to
put in a mill with a view if possible to pay expenses.
That was to say some of the country which they
hoped to treat and must cut over before it could be
treated and was too poor to carry a mill
under a private sawmiller. The Forest Staff
was far too busy with the special work of
producing timber to go into the big business of saw-
milling. He gathered that Mr. Ashford’s sawmilling
operations were not at present carried out with any
other view than that of getting data, getting at costs
and figures to ascertain exactly the value of the
forest, having sawn some of the timber and put it
upon the open market. At the same time a sawmill-
ing plant in the forest is a very useful piece of ap-
paratus, inasmuch as if necessary they could start
in if they found that private enterprise would not
go in, and they could keep going along with their
sylvicultural work following the miller. Mr. Ashford
was testing possibilities. At the same time the Gov-
ernment could step in and do the whole of the saw-
milling. It seemed to him to be a powerful weapon
that Mr. Ashford held in his hand, but it was hardly
necessary. Since the war began a few sawmills
started in South Australia with the idea of making
money as fast as they could, and they had no in-
terest in replenishing the forest. They could not al-
ways get a private sawmiller in to do work ahead of
sylvicultural work. When their timber was suffi-
ciently worth the private sawmiller coming in, they
would welcome him in South Australia. In the
meantime they were getting data on which to
base their royalty in future, and he thought they
should keep going that way and leave the State mil-
ling to one side for the present.
The VICE-PRESIDENT desired to add his quota
of praise to New South Wales for the lead they had
shown in connection with Legislative control, and
giving power to the forester to do what he wanted
to do. Whilst much in the past was to be deplored,
they were all alive now to the duties they owed to the
community and posterity in connection with the
forest. He had not had the privilege of seeing the
New South Wales Act, but he had seen the old Act
and did not think much of it.
Mr. HAY: Nor did we.
The VICE-PRESIDENT (continuing) said that
Mr. Ashford must have agreed with him and that
was the reason, no doubt, for his new Bill. In South


Australia they were always watching what was going
on in the Eastern States just as they themselves were
watched, in order that they might learn from one
another, and although the lines of division between
them were arbitrary they should look at their timbers
from the Australian point of view. He hoped to
see the day in the not far distant future when the
forest policy in each State would be upon similar
lines. They had always looked up to South Aus-
tralia in connection with constructive forest policy.
South Australia stood in the fore front of the Com-
monwealth in connection with the actual construc-
tive work carried out in the forests, and they must
have been able to accomplish that without much
legislation. The legislation which was coming will
be as a coping stone on the forestry fabric of Aus-
tralian forestry. New South Wales had copied
Queensland in some respects and had adopted the
principle of sales by auction or tender all round.
So far the system was working well although every
innovation raised the hostility of the sawmillers and
the hewers. Many of these had been dealt with, be-
cause he had found that when they came into close
contact with the sawmillers and the hewers and
explained matters to them and offered reasons their
objections vanished. Personally he had noticed that
most of the objections became more violent at elec-
tion time; unfortunately perhaps for himself there
was no sawmilling in his constituency, and hence
he was able to sit well back and the result was that
their regulations stood. Somewhat different condi-
tions surrounded the West Australian forests to those
obtaining in other States. In the old days the tim-
ber was handled by a system of what was known
as concessions, many of which were running at the
present day and some of which have still 25 or 30
years’ currency.
Mr. LANE-POOLE remarked that 14 years was
the longest period.
The VICE-PRESIDENT was glad to hear that,
but he would like to make it quite clear that while
the concessions extended to the whole of the timber
there was no concession over the land. There were
certain safeguards in those concessions which pre-
vented the destruction on spoliation of timber from
which it might be gathered that those who prepared
the concessions in the years gone by had some
thought for those who came after them. In the
Bill that was to be brought forward and which was
on the stocks they had taken examples from every
part of the world where timber was dealt with. The
construction of a new Bill was difficult, particularly
where, as here, they had the established fact of
State sawmills. For many years a plant had been
in operation for the needs of the Railway Depart-
ment, but the State sawmills were in open com-
petition with private enterprise and were trying to
sell timber all over the world. They were not, how-
ever, the creation of the present Government, but
were rather a legacy from a previous Government.
In time of war such as we are now passing through
when money was as valuable as they all hoped
timber would be in the days to come, they could not
possibly formulate a policy in connection with the
sawmills beyond conserving them as business men
or as a trustee who handled an inheritance and found
certain things to his hand of which he had to make
the best possible use. They were in a measure ham-
pered by the existence of the sawmills, but the
general feature of the Bill to which he .referred was
to divest forestry of political control, give effect to
the views of the Conservator of Forests, as had
been done in New South Wales in connection with
their Commissioner. Whilst subject as he might be
to various Ministers from time to time the forests
as far as general detail was concerned, would be
left in scientific and educative hands. The proposed
Bill was as large a measure as that of New South
Wales, and though it was only in draft at the moment
he purposed taking advantage of the New South
W'ales experience by asking them to criticise the
notes they had at the present stage upon the prin-
ciple that they in Australia were not mere States
only, but were working for one common end, and
he was looking on New South Wales from this view
point as though they were part and parcel of this
State. He felt that this Conference, which consisted
of the Ministers concerned as well as the official
operative foresters concerned in this particular in-
dustry, could do much to bring about the consolida-
tion of Australian interests. When one looked at
the question from that point of view the word
“jarrah,” which is as symbolic of Western Australia
as the swan they flew on their national flag, will
never be adopted by any State of the Common-
wealth as we alone possess that variety. He had
remained silent during their discussion of Mr.
Maiden’s paper, but felt pleased that for academic
reasons they were unable to adopt the suggestion
made by that scientist, and he really thought that
were Australians to speak their mind his proposal
would be blown to smithereens. Whether the de-
cision was in favour of it or the reverse, the fact
remained that it was a trade name, sacred to West-
ern Australia, and they would stand by that name
with all the forces that this State commanded. It
is all the more gratifying that conference had taken
its own view, and that harsher words need not be
said on a matter peculiarly West Australian. At
2.30 the Governor General would formally open the
Conference, and he would ask Messrs. Ashford and
Styles to be present at Parliament House, when the
Governor General would doubtless make a speech of
value to all foresters, and from that time on would,
he trusted, occupy the chair at the Conference and
take part in their deliberations.
Mr. GILL desired to cordially congratulate Mr.
Ashford on the excellence of his paper. He quite
appreciated the up lift he had given the forestry. He
also desired to congratulate Mr. Hay on the posi-
tion he now occupied. He looked back with great
pleasure upon his association with him, and remem-
bered the time when he had to speak about forestry
with bated breath. Now, “he doth bestride this world
as a Colossus.”
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD said that possibly the criti-
cism of Mr. Lane-Poole and Mr. Jolly in regard to
State sawmills were just as subject to a wrong con-
struction as the efforts they had made in New South
Wales, which he had described in his paper,
in establishing a sawmill, might have in regard to
the forest. In the growing and maintaining of forests
there was the commercial possibility to be considered.
While some of them might believe only in the botani-
cal or scientific side of the forests they were
really made to be destroyed profitably, and he


wished to say that the first basis to be considered
in the establishment of a forestry policy was the
immense work which it would bring eventually to
the State. Realising that, he felt that in appointing
the Commission and establishing sawmills, they were
doing so not only for the great advantage it would
give them in administration (that both Mr. Lane-
Poole and Mr. Jolly took partial exception to),
but he realised that they would be producing
a revenue for the State of which they have
been deprived all too long. It was his duty to formu-
late a policy whereby the wealth could be produced
and enjoyed by the whole of the State, and not by a
few private individuals. No one could doubt Mr.
Hay’s sincerity as forester. We propose to bring in
a scientific man also. What his critics took exception
to was the presence of a commercial man on the com-
mission. The chief Commissioner was the general
supervisor, who would watch that the forests were
preserved and that mature timber was utilised. The
scientific man was there to a certain extent as a
silviculurist, as the lever of production, and to see
that the best methods would be taken for preserving
growths. The commercial man in his opinion, should
be a member of the commission to establish the
wealth and value of forest products. There
would be forestry working plans adopted, which
would be just as thoroughly observed by the
State as by any company. There would be
the same rules, the same charges, and the same
conditions. He might add that if they said that
could not be done by a commission they meant that
private exploiters (he did not use the term in an
offensive sense) could get at the commission for its
own benefit, and allow them to exploit the forest.
However, in establishing the commission in New
South Wales, they had an extra safeguard which
must have some little political significance. Mr. Hay
had already preserved hundreds of millions of feet
of timber which would otherwise have been de-
stroyed, but when his term ceases they might
appoint a scientific man to his position. Parliament
might appoint a Commissioner who would have the
power to spoil years of good work. No method could
be laid down by any Parliament that could absolutely
prevent that. However, he was convinced that the
Chief Commissioner should not be a commercial man.
Parliament had sufficient sense to prevent that tak-
ing place. The Chief Commissioner had power to
override the other two Commissioners. If the whole
Commission could not decide a point after 24 hours,
the Chief Commissioner could override the other two
in the powers he has under the Act to-day. That
shows that the position was thoroughly protected.
Personally he gave way in forestry matters to men
who were trained in that science. Their Bill,
although a socialistic measure was such that they
could carry out any undertaking, while such power
was given to the Chief Commissioner as a safe-
guard in regard to the policy of Forestry in New
South Wales.
{Lunch adjournment.)
2.30 p.m.
The Conference resumed its session at the Legis-
lative Council Chamber, Parliament House, for the
purpose of meeting and welcoming His Excellency
the Governor General, and inviting him to act as
President of the Forestry Conference.
His Excellency having taken his seat, the MlNlS-
TER FOR WOODS AND FORESTS, Western Aus-
tralia (Hon. R. T. Robinson, K.C., M.L.A.), said:
The Ministers of Forests of Australia, Your Excel-
lency, and the foresters themselves assembled here
in our State, in an Interstate Conference upon fores-
try affairs, have elected you as their President, and
asked me to convey to Your Excellency that you
would accept the office, and thus confer great honour
on the Conference. I may say that we in Western
Australia feel gratified that you, as the Governor
General of Australia, should be here to-day, but we
are more than pleased that you are here in your capa-
city as a qualified practical and educated forester.
It is in that role that we prefer to look upon you
when we see you in the Chair, because we know
your world wide reputation both by education and
practical administration, as evidenced in your career
in the old land. While saying that perhaps you will
permit me as this is the official opening of the Fores-
try Conference, to repeat that we are glad to have
here with us the Ministers for Forests as well as
the Interstate delegates, several of whom have tra-
velled far distances in order to be present. Surely
this Conference on Forestry matters will do much
more than political gatherings to consolidate our
land of Australia, because we are enabled to com-
pare notes and to see what is being done
in each other’s States, and to profit by the
advice and knowledge and experience of those
who are further advanced in the science. I
would like also to refer to the presence on
this occasion of M. Mathey, the Conservator of
Forests of France, one of the foremost foresters of
that land, whom we look upon as the principal light
of that country—for we look up to France, indeed all
England does in forestry—and the fact that M.
Mathey is here to give us his advice is good for us
and surely good for Australia. Our friends, and our
other allies, the clever people of America, have al-
ready sent their Commissioners to devastated France
and shattered Belgium, and who are close to the
firing line to-day in the endeavour to capture the
trade for American lumber. M. Mathey is here and
has seen our forests and will be able upon his return
to tell his countrymen something of the hardwoods
of Australia and of Western Australia. We in
Western Australia, in common with those in the
Eastern States of the Commonwealth in the days
that have gone by, have regarded our forests, as I
feel sure Your Excellency would not have them re-
garded. In most of the States it has been the habit
in the forests to see how rapidly the trees could be
cut down and turned into marketable timber. You,
Your Excellency, have been at great pains in Aus-
tralia to kindle an enthusiasm for forestry, and we
in Western Australia have begun to realise'that our
greatest tangible asset lies in the forests of the coun-
try, and we have begun to realise that while our
forests are being cut and marketable timber is being
produced, we must look to a regeneration of trees to
take the places of those that have been cut down in
the days that are to come. And we have set out none
too soon as you must have observed during your visit
through the forests. I feel sure that Your Excellency
will agree with me that those who set out to try and
sell their woods to other countries should first see
that they are used in their own buildings in their
own States. Those who come to this country from
Europe, from France, and from Belgium and who
observe our use of American and Baltic timbers,
when they see how largely we use American and Bal-
tic wood, think that the other woods we have are no


good, and that we are very foolish persons, but I
prefer to think that the people are foolish, because
the hardwoods of Western Australia are unequalled
in the world. Visitors from other countries have ob-
served that Western Australia is noted for its iron
roofs which are used both by the improvident and
also by the moderately rich, but we are gradually
getting our people here to use our local timber for
roofing purposes and the visit of Your Excellency
and the interest you have evinced in these things will
do much. I, personally, have taken considerable in-
terest in forestry as an amateur and am told that I
am a faddist, but I can rely on having your Txcel-
leney’s weight behind me, so if I be a faddist, I
shall be in good company. The foresters assembled
in conference desire that Your Excellency will open
the Conference and accept the Presidential chair and
if possible, be with us at some of the debates and
discussions and enable us to have the benefit of your
ripe experience. The object of this Conference is
to make for the efficiency of our forests for office
management, economical management, and scientific
management so that we may use our forests in such
a way that they will last for all time and that the
capital shall not be eaten away as it has been eaten
by those who went before us. May I ask Your Ex-
cellency to accept the position and act as our Pre-
sident. (Applause.)
Hon. M*. ASHFORD: I also desire to extend a
welcome to Your Excellency in coming to this Con-
ference in Western Australia and would add my
request that you accept the position of President of
the conference. Your Excellency has heard Mr.
Robinson discourse on the necessity for a forest po-
licy, and for the need that we in Australia possess
for—that is for those of us to-day in the political
arena —forgetting the past in the pleasure of look-
in forward to the future and the better conditions
that we all hope to impose upon the forest interests
of the Commonwealth. This is the second occasion
that we have had the honour of Your Excellency’s
presence in presiding over our annual deliberation. I
am sure Your Excellency, as well as all those pre-
sent to-day, realise that there is a connecting link
between the interests of the foresters of Australia,
made more especially manifest to-day by the official
connection of East and West, declared by Your Ex-
cellency this morning whereby East and West is
bonded by a great steel line where previously we
had been separated by a long stretch of ocean. It
is due to that reason, possibly that is the only reason
to-day that this conference is being held in Western
Australia. We foresters here to-day feel with Your
Excellency how essentially this State is now a part
of the dominion. Indeed we have almost begun to
look upon Western Australia as part of New South
Wales —I say it is with a certain amount of reason
—so much at home have we felt, so absolutely at
home in the City of Perth. We have had the op-
portunity of visiting the forests of the South-West
and while this may not be the time or place to dilate
on their wealth, still I may hope that the time that
Your Excellency may spend here may include the
same opportunity as we have had of seeing the
forests as I am sure you will receive the same royal
welcome that has been extended to us. I feel de-
lighted, Your Excellency, to be here myself, and I
would express my deep appreciation in the honour
you have done us in accepting the position of Pre-
sident for the second occasion at our Annual Con-
ference.
Hon. Mr. STYLES: It is indeed a great pleasure
for me to be able to associate myself, Your Excel-
lency, with this gathering to-day. I noticed when
reading the report of the last Conference that it
would appear as though there were a doubting
Thomas at that Conference when the question was
being considered as to where the next gathering
should be held. It was suggested in
Adelaide 12 months ago that it should be
in Western Australia. But doubting Thomas said,
“Why go over there. It will take too long.” And
another delegate said “The Trans-Australian rail-
way will be ready by that time.” I will not mention
the name of another delegate who said he did not
think it would be. But happily the line is complete
and Your Excellency formally opened it this morn-
ing, and next to having that there we shall be more
than pleased to have you yourself once again with
us associated with the Forestry Conference of Aus-
tralia. We indeed owe much to Your Excellency
by reason of the interest you have always displayed
in forestry matters. Mr. Robinson suggested that
he had been called a faddist, but one would not
mind being a faddist when one realised that the
leader of forestry in Australia is Your Excellency.
Not only is Your Excellency Governor General, but
you hold a world-wide reputation as an experienced
and practical forester, and speaking for myself I
should be only too pleased as a mere apprentice in
forestry if I should be called a faddist because I
shall shelter under Your Excellency’s wing. Already
there is a new feeling abroad in Western Australia
regarding forestry matters. The people are
awakened, and in that awakening they realise they
have a duty to perform, not only for themselves
and to themselves, but also to those who come after
them, and it is because of the practical thought
that you have given to the people of Australia since
you first arrived here that this new feeling has started
and has become uppermost in the minds of thinking
men and women in all the States of the Common-
wealth to-day, with the result that we are prepared
now to assist in a progressive movement towards
establishing forestry on a basis of everlasting good
for the Commonwealth and for humanity. The
magnifieient effort that Your Excellency has achieved
we shall always highly appreciate, and this Confer-
ence is another evidence of that spirit of co-opera-
tion which is helping the Australian States along the
road to national efficiency, and in welcoming you,
Your Excellency, as our President, once again to the
Forestry Conference now assembled in Western Aus-
tralia we feel that you, by accepting the honourable
position of President, will by that Act convey a
message to the Australian people that will help them
to a better understanding and to know and to carry
out the duty which lies before them with regard to
the great question of forestry. I am extremely glad
to know that you will act as President of the Con-
ference, and as an Australian and a South Austra-
lian, may I assure your Excellency that if Western
Australia has the same happy end to the Conference
as South Australia had, that I shall be well satis-
fied, and that although the distance we have travelled
to this State is a long one it has nevertheless induced
Mr. Jolly, the Hon. Mr. Ashford, and other Eastern
Foresters to this Conference, and that this Confer-
ence will not have been in vain and that Western


Australia and Australia will benefit by our coming
together.
HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR GEN-
ERAL: It would have been very gratifying to me
had I been able to reach this State in time and take
part in the forest excursion which was very pro-
perly the preliminary step to this Conference. I
had indeed hoped to have been here a little earlier.
However, when I visited Western Australia on the
last occasion I had the most generous facilities placed
at my disposal by the Government whereby I was
enabled to see the karri forests as well as a portion
of the Geraldton area. To those who have not been
in the woodlands of Western Australia before the
various tours which have been undertaken must have
come as a revelation to them. I may say that it
is no new thing for me to take part in a forestry
gathering. I have been trained in forestry, not
perhaps in the sense that Mr. Lane-Poole and other
gentlemen here have been trained, but I have been
associated with it since I bought my first trees and
put them in as far back as the year 1873, and I have
never ceased from that time until the present to
pick up what forestry knowledge I could as I went
along, and indeed it is due to the help of the experts
that I can speak with any authority on the subject
at all, but I have often had the privilege of presiding
at such conferences as these, and indeed I may say
that we are arriving at the stage now when the con-
ferences are beginning to be followed by works.
As I read the other day the work of these confer-
ences depends on what is the actual work done. It
is by the output of our silent profession that we
should be judged. I attended the Adelaide Con-
ference on the last occasion and a great deal followed
upon that. Mr. Ashford and I were visiting the
woods together for three or four days in Cumber-
umba. It was a long distance from the railway
station, but we had a most interesting time, and I
found that Mr. Ashford knew his subject as I used
to know forestry in Scotland. But he did not say
very much about it. I do not think he has been
guilty of making speeches upon it, but he made a
most excellent speech yesterday when he set out to
show what had been done in New South Wales, and
when those things have been done there is a bright
prospect for forestry. A great many people said at
the Adelaide Conference that certain preliminary
steps had to be taken throughout Australia before
they got properly to work, but that after all is
exactly what we have been doing since Australia was
first discovered, and the result has been that we have
worked onward. It seems surprising that such a
quantity of material like Baltic pine can come in
here, and I doubt whether there are 30 years’ life
in our upstanding forests, and so far as timber for
construction purposes after the war is concerned,
unless we husband our resources and unless we are
prepared to grow the equivalent of Baltic timber
here instead of importing it, there is but a sorry
prospect. A great deal of ground must be covered
before we can get to work properly in Aus-
tralia. There is the question of the estab-
lishment of the forests schools, covered in Mr.
Ashford’s paper upon New South Wales, and of the
large reserves which are set apart in that State, and
above all the fact that the woods are placed under
permanent control under commissions. The advan-
tage of public property in goods as compared with
private property is that you get continuously good
management. I have been in Parliament for a long
time, not in Australia, but on the other side of the
world, and I feel sure that you could not get con-
tinuously good management out of the Parliament
in the old country, and I think it is a solid policy
that places the woodlands under competent persons
who would have that policy agreed to by Parlia-
ment and the Government. No one but Parliament
and the Government can lay down a general line of
policy. It is their sphere to make the necessary pro-
visions and to give necessary supply where you allo-
cate it, as in New South Wales, from the revenue
of the woodland, and where there is comparatively
little revenue as in South Australia, out of the con-
solidated fund. At any rate that is the sphere of
Parliament, but if Parliament and the Government
go beyond that and try to direct the policy of forest-
ers from day to day we shall never get on. In ap-
pointing responsible management, Mr. Ashford’s idea
was to have a good man of business. That is the
first essential, a man that knows something about
forestry, and in that way I think there seems to be
great hope of getting forward, and the last Confer-
ence helped this enormously by getting one State
to carry out the policy initiated by Mr. Ashford, and
to stimulate the other States similarly. South Aus-
tralia has the least national resources in wood of any
State of the Commonwealth, but it has shown a
wonderful amount of energy in making that pro-
vision which Nature denied her, and much of the
working of the new plantations in South Australia
is directed especially to what corresponds to Baltic
timber, which is much needed there. I do not think
she wasted much money, but she has done a great
deal of work as the result of the conference. The
University helped, the Government helped, and the
department helped. Here at this Conference we
meet in this State, where the revenue from wood
forms a more important feature of the general re-
venue of the State perhaps than any other, and you,
gentlemen, who are visiting the State have an op-
portunity of seeing what those areas are. I remem-
ber in the Karri country, when I saw the finest tree
I ever saw in my life. There were 90 tons of wood
in it, and it was a perfect model of a tree. I never
saw one more beautiful, not even excepting the more
valuable Jarrah areas. Reference was made yester-
day to supplying firewood to the goldfields, and the
question of reafforestating in the desert, where the
fuel is grown is an equation in the problem of scien-
tific research. In many parts of the world railways
are run efficiently with woodfuel. The value of the
Karri and the Jarrah and the other woods that grow
in such luxuriance in the South-West is one thing,
but it would take many acres in the Kalgoorlie area
to grow a tree of 90 tons, still the question was an
important one. That of firewood, and this State
of Western Australia has been very fortunate in hav-
ing at last realised the need for making an appoint-
ment of a thoroughly trained expert officer, and Aus-
tralia has been fortunate also in the possession of
such writers as Mr. Hutchins, whose book seems to
me to be a very valuable addition to our literature
on Forestry. I may say it has been a very pleasant
thing for me to meet again M. Mathey from France,
and I desire to give him a hearty welcome among
the foresters of this State. I may say that the Gov-
ernment’s activities here have been various and many
in connection with forests, and my hope is that the


work of the Conference may bear fruit in Western
Australia as well as in Australia, like the last Con-
ference in Adelaide. In Australia —it is otherwise
in the old country —the Government does a lot.
There is much to be said on the advantage of healthy
competition in the shape of Government forests, muni-
cipal forests and private forests, I do not say
that we should be entirely dependent on the Govern-
ment, but that entirely depends upon how the Gov-
ernment realises its responsibilities and acts up to
them, but unless a Government manages its forestry
business on certain lines, such as an efficient private
business is run, and upon the highest standard of
forestry set by countries where forestry has been a
profession for many generations, we shall continue to
have great waste in our forests, and they may not
make anything out of them at all. Nevertheless un-
der government, Federal, State, Municipal, or Shire
Council, you do get the advantage of that continu-
ous management which you do not get in the private
forests. In the private forests in Europe they are
often as well or better managed than the Government
plot. That arises from custom and knowledge. In
my own country the State has done virtually nothing.
The whole of the forestry work of Scotland has been
done by a dozen land owners and their foresters. In
England they are fewer in number, while in Ireland
there are only two or three. The best work you
find in these private forests. Several land owners in
Scotland have each individually planted more and
better than the Government of the United Kingdom
has done. But here we have to look upon the matter
almost entirely as a business for the State, and it is
a sphere in which the Australian Government are
supreme in the allocation of the lands. That the
Government should allocate the choice of lands be-
tween agriculture and sylviculture is one of the first
articles of the forester’s creed. A great many of the
best forests have been ruined by the settlement of
half a dozen settlers or a dozen settlers. If there
had been any decent allocation of land it would have
been different, and great areas would have been
spared. The allocation of land for the definite pur-
poses of agriculture and sylviculture is a matter
that is becoming more and more appreciated, but
I do not think it is entirely appreciated per-
haps even yet. The forest fellings have been
done in a rather haphazard way, and it would be
an advantage if conditions were imposed on the saw-
millers and timber merchants who acquire right from
the Government to follow certain prescribed rules.
That is highly important, otherwise the ground would
become good for neither agriculture or sylviculture.
Of course there is the question of fires, and the
American jingle of “if you burn and don’t succeed,
burn, burn, burn again.” This is the practice that
goes on along the north shore of Lake Superior.
The forest had been burnt before 1877 when I saw
it, and the consequence is that there is nothing left
but bare land, humus and everything had dis-
appeared. I know of many forests where there is
not sufficient land to allocate as between sylviculture
and agriculture. When you make forestry reserves,
you have to plan those reserves on a working foot-
ing, and that is the work of an expert. I personally
laid out my woods in two rotations. The one rota-
tion was for 38 years and the other was for 80 years,
but all that has been upset by the war, so far as any
labour can be got. But it pays to cut your wood
at present rates. I have a lease of 70 acres of larch
and it has been planted for 34 years. It cost £5
or £6 an acre to plant. It had been growing for
35 years and I got £97 an acre for it, but if I had
sold the land alone in the open market at the time
before planting I would not have got 30s. an acre
for it. It was useless for pasture and useless for
sport, but it would grow timber. I made £7,000
off the 70 acres, and it is very encouraging to know
how a well managed plantation pays. I have other
plantations, but not of that class of land. That
shows the difference between good and bad manage-
ment in the selection of land and the selection of
trees, and I may say that in the North of Scotland
there is no better land than in the South-West por-
tion of Western Australia. I notice that Mr. Maiden
has contributed papers to this Conference, and I
think we should recognise the great work he has
done in trying to get us to understand the import-
ance of the classification of timber. This country
is unexcelled in the worth and variety of its hard-
wood. In fact nothing but the best Spanish mahog-
any, or Italian wallnut can compare with our tim-
bers, but there are a dozen or 20 timbers in Australia
which are first class hardwood and which are pos-
sessed by no other country in the world, and every
State has its own name for them. There is this,
that, and the other kind of gum. I heard of a tree
in Papua which had no less than 12 names within an
area of as many miles. The confusion in names is
appalling, and I would ask Mr. Maiden and you
gentlemen to insist on a classification o ftimbers to
enable us to know where we stand in Australasia so
that people will know what they are buying exactly.
Hon. Mr. ROBINSON: That matter has already
been under discussion.
HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR GEN-
ERAL: It is very gratifying to hear that, and it
should be a great thing for statistical purposes. It
must be borne in mind that the ravages that have
fallen upon Europe will absorb in re-construction
work all the timbers in the world. Russia, which
has the only great timber preserves in Europe, will
be fully occupied with repairing her own damage,
and she burns wood on her railway for fuel. The
rest of the world cannot count on any supply from
Russia. It is most important to have statistics of
public information of the timbers in the different
countries in the world, and the uses for which the
timber is required, whether for paper pulping or
any of the new demands on timber. It would be a
great advantage if we had something like this little
volume which I brought with me called “The Trans-
actions of the R. S. Arbor Society, not a publica-
tion filled with superfluous articles but a sort of
magazine which would keep us in touch throughout
the year with one another in between these confer-
ences, which I hope we may look upon as an annual
occurrence. There are a great many matters that
can only be properly gone into by a central research
bureau. As I said in Adelaide once before I would
say here now, that one of the best establishments
of the kind that I have seen in the Harris Street
Museum, an institution to which the man from the
bush can resort and talk over matters of interest
with the scientists who have charge of the museum,
and that is a necessary establishment between the
central research bureau and those who want to* obtain
information. Where you are making your scien-
tific inquiries you do not want a public attendance,


and there could he no better model for what I mean
than the Harris-Smith Museum, and I hope to see
one of them established in each capital city
of Australia. Probably the best way would be to
give cheap or free expert advice and have drawn
up sets of forest plans to encourage people to pursue
proper methods. It would be an excellent thing for
instance if station owners would conduct experiments
with trees and obtain an insight into the commercial
value of certain trees whose performance cannot be
judged of in a particular area until they have been
tried. They could help us by taking up agreed
experiments from the growth of certain species of
valuable trees which the experts wish to introduce
into this or that part of the State. I feel sure a
man of enterprise and patriotism might do a good
deal to help the Government of a country in bringing
the forests into proper order. I think also that it
is a mistake to discourage the private nursery too
much. Judging from European lines I should say
it is a good thing to give a free distribution of
trees, but not for the purpose of ornament that
leads to considerable waste and discourages a private
trader. I find a private nurseryman a very valuable
element. He has enterprise and knowledge, and is not
bound to follow the same road as the Government
official is often condemned to follow’, and I doubt
if money spent on free distribution of ornamental
trees is worth the sacrifice. If you want private
individuals to plant commercially the question is,
can you not relieve them of some of the burdens on
their lands or whether you will give free trees or
free seeds, but at present forestry is hard up. and
there is no justification for free distribution of trees.
In Germany there are 4,000,000 people growing
timber or manufacturing timber, and in Switzerland
the proportion of the population so employed is
still higher, and the question of preventing waste
depends upon markets opening and the machinery
used. I have tried manufacturing my wood, but
I am not going to manufacture any more. At the
end of the war we shall be confronted with many
activities in house building and otherwise; also in
ship building, although the latter does not take so
much wood as it used to. Nevertheless ship-yards
are great users of timber. It would be a fine thing
to see a 10,000-ton boat built of Australian wood,
and until w r e build our ow 7 n ships we cannot say
that we hold a great position on the seas. I hope
also that we shall find a fresh use of our timber and
in the shortage which will follow on the war, there
will be a shortage of by-products, of essences and
of oils which we can get from any of our gums,
and which we can profitably produce. We can do
much with science, knowledge, and method, and
wise expenditure where that expenditure is required.
We may put away vain regrets and pointless dis-
cussion. In no sphere are precision, constant care,
and trained intelligence more essential than in for-
estry. Every fault to-day may become a grave
error when viewed 60 years hence. The values that
are involved are so great that no excuse is made for
the man who has made a fault. The woods in the
United Kingdom—l do not know that a greater
criticism can be made than the fact that the wood-
lands of the United Kingdom of 4,000,000 acres are
run at a dead loss, whereas if they were decently
managed they would return £4,000,000 a year, and
jf they were in Germany they would yield £8,000,000.
We should aim at a regular system of affores-
tation. I have in mind a forest survey in
Scotland, which I am concerned with. It was
five or six years ago laid out, an area of 40,000
or 50,000 acres for survey, and we accepted it
as a model for what I hope will be 4,000,000 or
5,000,000 acres later on. It will be a forest after
the war, but we found it impossible to work out a
plan until we had put everthing down on paper, and
it took, I think, about 121 pages to put down ex-
actly what had to be done. I think it would be a
good thing if six or eight members of the Forestry
Conference could visit South Africa and India where
tropical forestry flourished, and if we could send
delegates to these two countries it would be a
good plan. What I mean can be best under-
stood when I say that the whole of the forestry sys-
tem in Scotland was changed by two or three ex-
cursions to Germany, Switzerland, France, and
Scandinavia. We should go out and learn what
they are doing in other countries, because looking
inwards we learn but little, and therefore we should
go out and see what others are doing and I think
those two countries I have mentioned would be the
two best spheres for our investigation. Despite the
past I bid you be of good cheer. I soon found out
after I began to go about the woods here the good
that was being effected by my many forestry friends
and the results that were achieved as a result of
these conferences. There is a great deal of scientific
work being done, and finally the war is rousing the
nation from a false sense of security, and we see
our very existence in the issue. We are brought
into the main current of this world’s affairs. We are
brought into closer touch with the great nations of
the world with relation to our relative weakness and
immense responsibility such as there was no occasion
for before. We can foresee a more strenuous time
ahead in the commercial and the national rivalries
of the world. To fit Australia for her place in the
world we know we have a part to perform, and it is
up to us to play that part. I thank you for having
given me so kind a reception here and let me add
that it does give me real satisfaction to know that
this Conference has taken advantage of the recently
completed Trans-Australian railway *fo assemble in
this State where everything points to due care being
taken in future to maintain those forests as a main-
stay of the revenue of the State. (Applause.)
On the motion of the Minister for Woods and
Forests, W.A., the Conference adjourned until the
following morning at 10 o’clock at the Technical
School, Perth.
SATURDAY, 17TH NOVEMBER, 1917.
10 a.m.
Discussion on the Hon. W. G. Ashford’s paper
was proceeded with.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said that the New South
Wales Act which had recently been put on the Stat-
ute Book was the strongest measure that had hitherto
been attempted in any self-governing colony, and
he took his hat off to Mr. Hay and to Mr. Ashford
for having been instrumental in its passage. After


all the long years that Mr. Hay had had to steer
through stormy waters it must be gratifying to him
to find himself in calmer water. His remarks regard-
ing the State sawmilling enterprise must not be taken
as cavilling criticism, he was merely sounding a note
of warning. He had seen such ventures in other
colonies, and therefore he thought it his duty in the
light of his experience to sound that note of warning.
Whether it should be the policy of the State to enter
upon the sawmilling industry or not should not enter
into discussion here. As to whether the Forestry
Department should control the sawmilling he held
emphatically that the foresters’ function is to grow
and the millers’ duty to saw the timber. Mr. Ash-
ford’s remarks would lead one to believe
that his (Mr. Lane-Poole’s) conception of the
forester’s duty is to maintain in the forest
botanical specimens, but as they all knew the
first thing the forester learns when be takes a course
at a forestry school is that forestry begins with the
axe, not the seed bed. The forester’s duty is to see
that only a certain quantity of timber is used
annually, and that that quantity of timber is
placed in the forest by the natural growth of the
trees. He has to work out the rotation and the
variation and see that the sawmiller does not over-
utilise the timber. It must be apparent to everyone
that those two functions, that of the forester
and the sawmiller were quite separate, and it
was very difficult to see how they could be amal-
gamated under one head. In New South Wales
the proposed commission was to consist of the Ad-
ministrator, the business sawmiller, and an expert
forester. He felt sure that, as Mr. Ashford had
said, while Mr. Hay was chief commissioner over
the forests of New South Wales their future was
assured. But after all the tree did not grow in the
life of a man, and the red gum on the Murray River
when it reached maturity would not find Mr. Hay
as Commissioner, indeed several other commissioners
would have followed in his footsteps. Mr. Ashford
had told them when the chief commissioner was
appointed, it was a political appointment. Was it
not possible that the sawmiller would take the post
of the chief commissioner. I tremble to think of the
future of the* red gum forests under the hands
of the business commissioner—and even put-
ting aside that —if the next chief commissioner
had not the wide knowledge that Mr. Hay
had of the whole situation, was it not likely
that the expert forester might be over-ruled by
the business sawmiller, and in a contingency if
the business man, the saw miller, put up a particu-
larly good ease and demonstrates how much money
can be made and the chief commissioner is not a
man of sufficient ballast and does not recognise
every aspect of the question, would it not be more
than likely that the chief commissioner when he had
to make a decision between the opinion of the expert
forester and of the sawmiller, that he would incline
towards the business man. He thought that was
the only weak point, if he might say so, in the Act.
The other points that Mr. Jolly brought up, the
perpetuation of the licensing system is not important
because that was simply a matter of a name. License
and permit were one and the same thing. The ques-
tion of selling by auction must come. The Act as
it stood at present made provision on such a wide
scale that probably New South Wales would find
it advisable later on to adopt the system of sale
by auction so as to obtain a better value for the
timber. He was quite in agreement with Mr. Jolly
that the minimum or flat royalty was calculated to
operate very harshly against those mills which were
situated at a distance from port, or where timber
was scarce and would advantage the mills that were
better placed. The only way for the State to get the
most money out of timber was to sell it by auction.
Mr. HAY regretted that owing to his temporary
absence he had not heard all Mr. Lane-Poole’s re-
marks, but he thought he could remove any miscon-
ception by explaining what the policy in New South
Wales was. As a forest commission the commis-
sioners were not particularly keen on entering upon
State sawmilling, but this was forced on the Gov-
ernment by a combination of producers in the timber
industry who had got such a hold of the trade that
the Government found it impossible to obtain timber
from its own forest land for Government purposes
except at gilt-edged prices. The Government there-
fore decided upon framing an Act which would pro-
vide for the direct supply of timber either raw or
manufactured. When it was decided to acquire
sawmills and when they were acquired it was decided
that the working of the sawmills, and the enterprise
of converting timber for Government purposes,
should be established as an industrial under-
taking under the management of the Forestry
Commission. Those sawmills and the whole of
that industrial undertaking for the supply of
timber is exactly in the same position as though
it w T ere managed by an outside trader. It was sub-
ject to exactly the same rule, the same laws, and
charges as any other producing interest. Since it was
established it was found that in some directions it
was a wise course to pursue outside the question
of cheapening timber for Government purposes, be-
cause it gave them an insight into the working of
the industry that they on the forestry side had not
before gained, and put them in the position which
enabled them to say to people in a trade in regard to
any alterations in the system of working the forests
they were asked to do anything that they would
not do themselves. The suggested danger of the
forests being worked to the sacrifice of forest in-
terests, and to the gain of the commercial side
he would like to make clear. The forests that are
being drawn upon by the State sawmills are not
under the control of the industrial undertaking, but
under that of a district forest officer. The conditions
of working laid down in the working plan and the in-
dustrial side pays as much attention to that working
plan as any outside firm. There is no danger of the
forests being overworked unless the plans are dis-
garded and the Commission is responsible foi*
the plans. Under the Act when the working plan is
laid down and approved by the Commission, it can
not be altered by anyone except the Commission, so
there was very little danger in the direction that
Mr. Lane-Pool foresaw. So far that has been only
partly organised and brought under plan, and as far
as it has been the manager of the State Sawmills
who is responsible for the industrial side is bound by
the conditions of the plan and cannot depart from it
any more than can the outside man. It would thus
be seen that the principle is a fairly soqnd one. If


there was to be depreciation in the forest it would
be chargeable to the Commission and not the indus-
trial undertaking.
Mr. JOLLY did not wish to duplicate Mr. Lane-
Poole’s remark, but he emphasised a point that Mr.
Hay had dealt with. He says the working of the
sawmill undertakings are bound by the working
plans which are the work of the Commission.
That is of course as it should be, but the weakness
lies in the drawing up of a working plan by a Com-
mission, not composed of foresters only. Under the
present proposal the Commission is to be composed
of two foresters and one business man. But if later
it should be composed of one forester and two busi-
ness men the possibility would be that the working
plan would be at fault, and if the chairman was a
business man also he would certainly incline to the
business aspect to the detriment of the forestry as-
pect.
The VICE-CHAIRMAN (Mr. Styles) asked what
the Act stated as to the constitution of the Com-
mission.
Mr. JOLLY said that matter rested with the Gov-
ernor-in-Council of the day.
The VICE-CHAIRMAN asked would it be pos-
sible that the business man should be the chief com-
missioner.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD said that he did not wish
to weary the Conference, but would like to touch
on some of the phases dealt with by Mr. Jolly and
Mr. Lane-Poole, as regarded the management of the
forest. Possibly everyone present thoroughly
agreed with the scientific men. That was his own
first consideration, but if they produced the timber
they would require some continuity of policy for
growing the timber. What he felt was that it might
go forth from this Conference that New South
Wales had entered upon a definite undertaking and
it might appear to the public that they were only
interested in the growing of trees and not in the
commercial aspect, and the public will want to know
that in the growing of trees there was going to be
a commercial proposition for the State. For ex-
ample, you might assume that Mr. Lane-Poole was
appointed for, say, seven years, and he might lay
down the best forestry regulations during the term
of his office, but the Government would always
maintain the right of the appointment of the
Commissioner, or Commissioners, or Directors of
Forestry. The Government would always maintain
that the scientific side was more strongly considered
than the other side. Assume that Mr. Poole was
appointed here and Mr. Jolly might reign in Queens-
land for seven years. They might both grow forests
during their time and they might wish their ap-
pointment to continue. On the other hand it is
quite possible that they might both die—we hope,
of course, they will not —everything depended upon
the w T ay in which the Act was drafted. Another
forester might come along and alter the policy en-
tirely. It might be said that the Government or
the Forest Commission had an entire right to get the
best results from their forests. He believed that the
Government has the right under the auction system
to get the highest price on royalty. Supposing there
were a combination of timber millers so that there
would be no competition—that would be the position
to-day if the matter was put up by auction. We
know that through the action of a certain firm
that men will not tender for large supplies. He
was not speaking offensively, but he understood that
certain firms had control of the whole of the timber
mills and they might say that they would bid only Is.
They had an instance of this in regard to the sup-
ply of turpentine piles to the Harbour Trust. It
was a matter of history and he had no doubt that the
Harbour Trust were paying too much for their
piles, and that the Government should get £1 more
royalty for that kind of timber. The Government
tendered for a limited quantity which resulted in
cutting down the price by at least £3. If they could
save to the State £4 on one single pile they must
realise that a combination existed. The Government
had that power in the Bill and it would be well if
Western Australia provided similar power in their
Act. The case would be different if it was possible
to get decent competition. He believed in having
the right inserted in an Act, although he hoped they
would not have much occasion to use their power.
He wished to see forestry developed in Western
Australia and he believed in unification.
The VICE-PRESIDENT said so would he if he
were in New South Wales.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD said he understood the Viee-
President’s position. He was entirely in the interests
of Australian forestry, and would prefer to take
the ground that they had unification. It was purely
in the interests of trying to see that the other States,
whatever policy they laid down, should get an Act
with sufficient power should the occasion arise.
Mr. JOLLY did not desire to prolong the discus-
sion, but he appreciated Mr. Ashford’s remarks in
reference to a ring preventing the State from get-
ting its proper royalty, but he did not think that
New South Wales need have any fear. The State
had control and the Forestry Department had the
selling of the timber. It was up to the Forestry
Department to value the product correctly. In
Queensland a reserve price was put on their sales,
and if they did their duty that price was fixed on a
sound basis. They went into all the costs, and were
prepared to accept the log value on trucks as a fair
basis for the calculation of the stumpage value, but
if a ring should be formed and no bids received, the
timber would remain in the forest until the ring
came to its senses.
The VICE-PRESIDENT: Mr. Ashford carried the
matter further than that, and was looking at the
effect upon the general public. The ring, as it was
called, put up the price of timber to penalise the
public while he acting on behalf of the public, wisely
tried to prevent that. His legislation was more pre-
ventative than wanting to use it and enter into State
trading.
Mr, HAY pointed out that although that was the
case in Queensland, and they received a fair value for
the timber as a raw product, the time might come
when the State itself was the biggest consumer, and
would want to buy back the timber at a reasonable
price, but supposing the seller fixed an unreason-
able price, the State would find itself in a difficulty.


Mr. JOLLY explained that their sales were as a
rule short term sales. If at any time they found the
margin between the prices of log and sawn timber
too much, they would probably raise their price. He
thought that the prices of Australian timber would
be regulated by the prices of the imported.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD said that although the royal-
ties in New South Wales was not put on, they had
increased the price 2s. 100 feet super, at Newcastle.
Mr. LANE-POOLE thought that their still ap-
peared to be a misconception with regard to the func-
tions of the forester. His duty it was to know all
about milling and growing timber. He must know.
Once he knew the cost figures he put the upset price
on the timber, and if undue profit is being made then
the upset price was regulated by the open markets of
the world. The timber man could not put a higher
price on his product than the people would pay for
it.
The VICE-PRESIDENT said that he could in his
own State.
Mr. LANE-POOLE did not think so with the enor-
mous importation of timber that went on in Western
Australia. They competed in the open market
here, and had to compete against the world’s timber.
If it was a question of supplying the timber to the
Public Works or the Railway Department, he did
not see why they should not have mills for their
own timber, as they have had in Western Australia
for many years, before the big State sawmilling con-
cerns started in competition with the timber mer-
chants. The function of the forester was not as Mr.
Ashford seemed to think, keeping botanical speci-
mens in the forests. That was a misconception that
Mr. Hutchins made clear when he said that “forestry
and botany are as much akin as horse-racing and
zoology.”
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD said that what he had stated
was that botanical specimens should be kept in the
forest.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said that from the public point
of view the commercial side was the important side.
It was the only side also that the forester
deals with, and he has to see that the timber
supply continues for all time, because the in-
dustry is not one for to-day, but for all time,
In order that he may do that he has to know all
about timber, not only the sylvicultural, not only the
scientific side, but all the commercial side as well.
In regard to the question of working plans, and fores-
try being a play thing of political government in
democratic countries, he thought the idea was to
obviate that by appointing a Commission. When he
(Mr. Lane-Poole’s) paper was discussed, the ques-
tion of working plans would be considered, and if
it were possible for a Government to appoint an en-
tirely unsuitable commissioner and thereby break the
working plan established by a suitable commissioner,
then the forests would disappear. They must protect
their working plans, and the only way to do so was
to introduce into the Act a section under which those
working plans cannot be broken except by the assent
of both Houses of Parliament.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD said that the head of the
Forestry Department would have to show during his
seven years tenure of office, which would be carried
out under most difficult circumstances, the absolute
benefit of the proper working plan, and he would
have to make it popular with the people. As a matter
of fact the result of Mr. Hay’s working plan could
not be realised fully until after that gentleman was
long dead.
Mr. LANE-POOLE felt that they must be pro-
tected by a forest Act, and probably the matter
would come up in his paper dealing with working
plans. He was under the impression that the object
of the New South Wales Act was to take the matter
out of political control.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD; That is the intention.
Mr. LANE-POOLE believed that if the business
man had control of the commission disaster would
follow.
The VICE-PRESIDENT said that he had allowed
free discussion on account of the importance of the
question, and he felt that they should not stand
strictly upon Parliamentary forms in discussing
these details, and he hoped that fell in with the views
of the Conference. At the same time lie was of
course prepared to pull members up on a motion
the discussion should cease. Otherwise the trained
men should have a free hand in the discussion.
Mr. GILL thought Mr. Ashford had expressed the
idea that it was desirable in the event of a ring so
mis-managing matters as to make everything in the
way of timber sales objectionable, that the State
should come in and do the work. In those circum-
stances he considered that the acquisition of a steam
plant was of great importance, but even from the
point of view of improving their own forests or
erecting residences and carrying out other useful
works, assistance from the mill would justify the
possession of it. He knew from experience that no
large estate in England would be without machine
power.
Mr. HAY said that the scheme in New South
Wales was largely experimental, and if it had no
other effect than that of inducing Western Australia
to include the same powers in its Forest Act it will
have done good for Western Australia.
The VICE-PRESIDENT asked when reference
was made to an industrial Act did that relate to the
establishment of State trading concerns.
Mr. HAY: Yes.
The VICE-PRESIDENT asked if the State trad-
ing concerns could be established in New South
Wales without the consent of Parliament.
Mr. HAY said they could under that Act.
The VICE-PRESIDENT said that in Western
Australia they could not do that, and a further dif-
ference was that there were already in this State
in existence the State sawmills. He quite realised
the day must come when they would get rid of the
sawmills and when the foresters would be subject
to the conditions that had been described. To show
how much he personally valued their observations


lie had sent a memorandum asking each of the gentle-
men of the Conference to peruse a copy of the notes
of the proposed Western Australian Bill, knowing
full well their criticism would be invaluable.
Hon. Mr. STYLES suggested that the Vice-Presi-
dent should also supply copy of the notes to South
Australia.
The VICE-PRESIDENT would do so, and if
nothing else came out of the conference he wished
to assure them that the information supplied by
the £Tew South Wales delegates combined with what
they had already prepared in the way of a Forest
Bill would stand Western Australia in good stead
when they got towards that mark, when they would
introduce forestry legislation into Parliament. He
anticipated that they were going even one better
than New South Wales, and with the experience in
that State something helpful would be provided for
Western Australia.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD expressed his desire to do
everything possible to assist.
The VICE-PRESIDENT in thanking Mr. Ash-
ford related that up to the present moment they
have not seen a copy of the New South Wales Bill.
They only had the old measure, which he regarded
as of little value, hence the notes for the Bill had
been compiled independently of the present New
South Wales Act, and therefore the comparison
would be all the more valuable.
At this stage the Vice-President withdrew and the
Hon. Mr. Styles took the Chair.
Mr. WALTER GILL, Conservator of Forests,
South Australia, read a paper entitled, “The Intro-
duction of the Remarkable Pine (Pinus Insignis)
into South Australia and its Successful Utilisation.”
(See page 24).
The Hon. Mr. ASHFORD had listened with in-
terest to Mr. Gill’s paper and would be glad if he
could possibly give statistics showing the prices of
fruit cases before it was made a forest under-
taking and the prices to-day, with a com-
parison of the prices existing in the other States.
He would also like the actual working costs of that
forest and expenditure year by year in the forest
until it became revenue producing. He would per-
sonally like to have that information. In New South
Wales they paid Is. sd. for a fruit case. That was
the general price. He understood in Adelaide it
was Is. 2d.
Mr. GILL had no information in respect to prices
prior to their work, which had been in the nature
of a demonstration and proved the value of the
timber more than anything else.
The Hon. Mr. ASHFORD: The value of the tim-
ber was already proved. If the case was useful
for the purpose of putting fruit in the ques-
tion was whether that case was of a lower
Value than another case equally suitable The actual
test of the forest is most interesting, and it would
be interesting to have the actual cost year by year
if you have got it during the time that certain clear-
ing work was done and whether they had been able
to utilise some of the smaller stuff and made sales
from that and also the value at the end of the term
of the actual forest growth. It may perhaps have
been advisable to have netted a commercial loss. He
assumed this from reading the figures and that it
must have been a saving to the fruit growers of a
considerable amount of money. That would be con-
crete evidence in the public mind of the value of
planting the Pinus insignis.
Hon. Mr. STYLES said it would be of great
interest if Mr. Gill could elaborate his paper to that
extent, though possibly he might not have the figures
with him.
Mr. GILL said that the trouble was that he could
not give particulars over a long period of years
that had passe'd. He had set out the classes of
clearing and planting which had been somewhat in-
creased of late, but owing to the rise in wages, not
to a material extent. It was out of the question
to give the prices obtaining in previous years from
the commencement of the forest work, because his
department had never been able to obtain sufficient
clerical assistance to keep proper records. It was
only during the past six or seven years that they
received a vote at all commensurate and he had
no records as a consequence other than those kept in
accordance with Audit Department’s requirements
hence he had not the data which he should have at
the present time.
The CHAIRMAN said that they would know from
the records that they were selling cases at so much
per case.
Mir. GILL said they could give a return per acre
taking the general run all round, but in some instances
the return would not be so good as in other years.
They knew they were getting a return equivalent to
what they had in Victoria, that is the equivalent of
£IOO per acre, while the last and best record they
had was of the plantation of six acres that he had
cut through during the last two years, and we have
over £3OO to credit, but there was no allowance made
for the preliminary costs, and he knew from another
source that the Ballarat water trust had obtained from
some of their plantations a return of £BO an acre. The
reason for taking up the milling was one entirely
connected with the absolute necessity of proving the
value of the timber and they had gained the informa-
tion that the eases they had made of the material
used were unexcelled by any class of timber that the
world had ever grown in the way of pine. He wished
to pay a tribute to the valuable assistance rendered
by Mr. Corbin and Mr. Jolly in checking the measure-
ments taken by him some years ago and they knew
fairly well what the average return might be ex-
pected to be. He did not think there was the least
doubt whatever that under suitable conditions and
upon suitable land —he would not say the best land
in every sense of the word—but on good land they
might reasonably expect a good return. Mr. Thomas
Playford had said that good timber could not be
grown on bad land. The trouble in connection with
his department had been the absolutely fallacious
idea that had been held that any rubbish w T as good
enough for the forester to grow trees upon. But it
did not follow that land which was good for tree
growing was good for crop growing or that land
suitable for crops was suitable for trees. He knew
admirable land where good wheat crops were growing


but on which it would be impossible to grow timber
thus it was that the two industries did not clash with
each other. Still the main trouble had been that the
general opinion was, and Mr. Hutchins has referred
to it —that any rough country was good enough for
tree growing. In Europe land that was suitable for
growing a fair class of timber would be inferior from
the cropping point of view, but there the constant
frequency of the rainfall was another factor. They
in Australia in some portions possess a rainfall
equivalent to that of England, but with this distinc-
tive difference that in Australia it came as it were
in a lump, and thereby discounted its full value. In
England small quantities fell from day to day, and
so it was that there were many things possible of
achievement there by reason of the soil being in the
condition it was, that permitted of tree growth which
would be impossible in Australia, where the evap-
orative agencies imparted a dry character to the soil.
On the details of the cost, he had a good amount
of data that he could give germane to the question
but as he did not expect the inquiry, he had not
prepared anything, but could give an average of the
return of trees which was interesting in itself. They
were compiled from records kept by the inspector
connected with the mill from the year 1903. This
official has rendered valuable assistance to the de-
partment and no one appreciated his work more
thoroughly than we did. In introducing a matter
of this sort to the public, they ran the risk of meeting
with heavy prejudice on the part of the public
against what was new timber. It had been stated
that there was no trade in the world so conservative
as the timber trade. A great many of those engaged
in it possessing practical and sterling experience. Of
course in the earlier stage of their work they did
not get anything like the price that the value of the
commodities demanded on account of the public pre-
judice against them. However, owing to recent de-
velopments, the value of the timber has increased
and it is satisfactory to note that the re-
turns were better than they had been. The prices ob-
tained were not arbitrarily arrived at, but by public
tender. Tenders were called for given cases of given
measurements, with the result that the last prices
were considerably higher than the first, to the extent
of 50 per cent., and sometimes more. For example,
a tree 50ft. 2in, 1910, containing 272 super, feet was
£2 11s. To-day it was worth £4 10s. Bd. Another tree
at 63 feet, 302 super, feet, in 1910, would be valued
at £2 16s. 7d.; to-day at £5 os. Bd.
Mr. HAY asked what would be the value in the
log as raw product.
Mr. GILL was unable to work that out without
the details at hand.
Mr. HAY considered that Mr. Gill was putting up
a good argument for conversion.
Mr. GILL considered the argument was a sound
one. but then the prejudice has been so heavily
against us that no one would look at the log. One
milling firm had come to them to supply timber from
the nearest reserve 50 miles away. He had supplied
them with 20,000 feet in the log, and per hundred
super, he was getting between Bs. and 9s.
Hon. Mr. STYLES pointed out that the war con-
ditions had given the trade an uplift.
Mr. GILL admitted that was so. The sources pre-
viously opened had been shut, and that had brought
about the recognition of the value of their timber.
However, no one regretted more than he did the
absence of the details that should have been kept
in the early stages of the department, and unfortu-
nately the class of accounts required by the Audit
Department precluded the data that foresters wanted,
and as he had not had the extra clerical assistance
to keep the records that should be kept, he was with-
out them. He could not lay any blame to himself,
they were all aware of the difficulty he had waded
through for 13 years, and before this Conference he
was ashamed to say that they had left undone the
things they ought to have done. Nevertheless the
fault was not his, and his critics had always recog-
nised that.
Hon. Mr. STYLES mentioned that that was not
peculiar to South Australia.
Mr. GILL: The Hon. Mr. Thos. Price, when Pre-
mier, had formally stated that he knew he had had
a hard row to hoe.
Mr. HAY: That is a feature that applied to all
of the States.
Hon. Mr. STYLES: There were none of them
righteous.
Mr. GILL said that if there was anything fur-
ther that he could prepare for the Conference, he
should be glad to do it. He had case prices.
Mr. JOLLY thought that if Mr. Gill could pre-
pare a statement it could be attached to the report.
Mr. GILL had a statement of the profit and loss
roughed out. He believed if everything was reck-
oned up due to the fact that he had had such poor
prices at the inception of his work that they would
not stand more than fairly square. Still they had
not lost, and with the present prices he was abso-
lutely sure that they could show a very fair profit,
but taking it broadly they have not more than
£4,000 to £5,000 return after all their work, as the
balance between expenditure and receipts. On the
other hand, however, they should look at what had
been proved. It was more an experiment than any-
thing else, but it was a basis upon which they
could realise that the work was well worth carrying
out and the profits satisfactory, and if carefully
worked they could produce a limited number of soft
woods to supply their requirements. The exhibition
of the cases at one show drew the attention of their
Renmark friends who were anxious to have them.
They recognised that the material was of superior
character and the details given in the paper could be
borne out by any test. In connection with the
toughness of the timber —he referred to a 281 b. case
of currants—the head of a dry goods department in
Adelaide had assured him that he had challenged
the packers and others who said that the cases should
be bound. He said, “You can take one of those
cases and throw it anywhere you like, and if it is
properly nailed, all the action you may take will
not result in any breakage.’' They made the test
and there was no fracture shown, and immediately
the exporters said that they would take the 281 b.
cases without the necessary adjunct of the iron band
around them, but when they came to the 561 b. case,
that was a different matter. That seemed to be ab-
solute proof of the toughness and strength of the
timber. But he would not for a moment confine its


value to case work. The wood took a high polish
and has been manufactured into various attractive
furniture. The Hon. Mr. Bice had said, “That tim-
ber is far too good for cases.” They recognised that
growing it as they did was wider apart than the stand-
ard of perfection required—it must be remembered,
however, that had their timbers been planted as
closely as the type demanded—the trees would not
have reached sufficient age in his time to enable him
to demonstrate their value. Everyone knew that the
closer the trees were planted the better the timber was.
As to what extent the closeness of the planting was
going to affect its commercial value, well, if they
were not going to get any more than for a less perfect
type, why spend the extra money? The real ques-
tion was what did the public demand and what were
they going to get for their stuff. Writers on fores-
try had pointed out that if the demand for small
things was too slight or amounted to nothing—why
plant what was undesirable. If in the future they
were to realise that the expenditure was justified
they should expend more money to produce a better
class article than they had done.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD in looking through the paper
found that it was shown that on six acres there was
a case value of £333 an acre, extending over 33
years, or roughly £lO a year. The costs would be a
very poor proportion of that amount. Certain tim-
bers could be made a commercial proposition. He
assumed that deducting the working costs would
leave a profit of about £5 an acre over the whole
of that period. He wished to show the value of
commercial plantation, and the paper showed an
enormous amount of wealth could be produced in
timber on land that was probably unsuitable for other
agricultural purposes.
Mr. GILL said it could have been used for a
limited amount of agriculture.
Mr. HAY considered that better results would
have been obtained from better land.
Mr. GILL did not see how there could have been
better results. 100,000 super, feet of timber to
the acre was a big affair. That land could not be
put down at more than £5 an acre, and
did not carry a great deal of timber. It cost
£lO to plant and clear and the value of the land
was £5, hence the cost would be £ls, so that there
would still be a big margin of profit per acre, and
they were only able to say in a general way what the
cost was as the earlier record of the cost of the
plantations was not obtainable. He referred to
the work of 40 years ago. They had come to the
conclusion that the cost would not exceed what he
had put it at, and allowing for compound interest,
there would be a big margin on the original outlay
that would justify anyone in planting on a com-
mercial basis. Knowing what they did now after 30
years’ experience, he would have no hesitation in
putting in pines in the assurance that he would have
a payable proposition, and he had had a great deal
to do with outdoor industries. There was no ques-
tion about it that the planting of pines was a thor-
oughly practicable and paying thing in prospect
provided that the right conditions were assured, but
to expect to take up inferior land rejected by other
people and make good stuff out of it was unreason-
able.
Mr. CORBIN said that he was not prepared for
this discussion and that therefore the Conference
would excuse any short comings, but nevertheless he
wished to support Mr. Gill’s remarks. He had utilised
to some extent the forests which had been put down
years before and had established the value of products
in those forests in a way that everyone very much
appreciated, and there was no question that Mr.
Gill had had a hard row to hoe. Of course the lack
of proper data was hampering the present position.
At the same time anyone could appraise what the
costs were, and in South Australia they were en-
gaged on that work now. If they referred to Mr.
Hutchins’ book on a description of forestry they
would see that Mr. McKay, of Victoria, had stated
that the net profit per acre on Pinus insignis, 8 x 8 in
the customary way, was £IBO per acre, 30 year rota-
tion. He himself had gone carefully into the costs
and if compound interest was allowed, supervision,
initial outlay and recurring expenditure, if £1 per
acre per annum were allowed it brought it down to
£l5O per acre. He did not know what the costs of
conversion were, but they were very much less than
that, and he thought that a conservative estimate
would be £3 per acre per annum profit. The price
had risen considerably lately owing to the war
for some classes of produce, and what had
happened was that the war had compelled
people who had been importing from Sweden and
Norway to use their timber. They came to them for
timber, and Mr. Gill’s row was an easier one to
hoe through that circumstance. Persons in South
Australia who were large utilisers have said that
it was better than the stuff they had been getting
and that the price was not higher than the pre-war
rates for the imported article. The position, there-
fore, was satisfactory. If they took the present
rates and applied them per acre they would find
that the result would exceed Mr. McKay’s estimate.
He did not know how much of this material there
was in South Australia, which it was going to
be a valuable asset. He did not think they could
go wrong if they planted as cheaply and as quickly
as they could. He considered the proposition a
sound one. He had a lot of data, but as the paper
was not his he had not the figures with him.
Mr. GILL asserted that, speaking broadly, they
had at least 6,000 acres of pines coming on in first
class order in the South-East. The trees were in
healthy condition and growing to the admiration of
everyone, and strangely enough in the Mount
Mclntyre forest, where they are such an unquali-
fied success, the trees were at one time subject to
disease, but the plantation recovered and has given
a handsome return since.
Hon. Mr. STYLES considered that Mr. Gill’s re-
mark, in which he had criticised the actions of for-
mer Governments, were perhaps justified, but they
would understand that whatever may have been the
shortcomings of the past these had more than been
made up for during the last few years. He was
pleased to recognise from his remarks and the ex-
perience Mr. Gill had had that there were Govern-
ments and Governments, and that there was to-day
in South Australia a greater recognition of forestry
work than in the years to which he referred. As
he himself said yesterday so he would repeat to-day
that it was the desire of his colleagues in cabinet
that he should come here to watch the interests of
the Government of his State and in seeing that what-
ever was done here was of such a character that


might help and assist them in the furtherance of
their forestry ideals. He wished to say, too, that
it had been his pleasure during the last month or
two to accompany the State Governor and the
Governor General on a visit to the Northern forests,
and that it was whilst in their open forests in the
North that a suggestion was made by those
distinguished gentlemen that resulted in a visit
being paid to the forests referred to by a
number of city timber merchants. He could not
say too much regarding the manner in which
the Governor General had pushed forward the
industry of forestry in South Australia and in Aus-
tralia. He could assure the delegates that, due to His
Excellency’s personal interest, people were beginning
to brush aside all prejudice, and Avere prepared to
follow the work of forestry in a fair and honest
fashion.
Mr. Gill has referred to the fact that orange
and dried fruit cases were not to be the sole work
that South Australia would carry on in connection
with the timber of the forests. A project was under
weigh which was likely to bring about an arrange-
ment with their timber merchants whereby they would
take the timbers from the forests and employ them
in all kinds of useful purposes. In conversation
with several of the timber merchants who have paid
a visit to the forest to which he had alluded on their
return to the city they assured me that they had re-
ceived quite a revelation in observing what they were
doing in the South Australian forests. He did not
know who were to blame for keeping the people so
ignorant in the past, but he assured them that he
looked forward in the near future to seeing the
forests become more productive than they had been
in the past. They must help one another, and they
niust take all advantage where they possibly could,
so that the full value will be credited to the depart-
ment which had had such uphill work in the past.
In the future case-making would be only one of the
smaller matters in connection with their work, and
although they did not propose to go further for the
moment, still it would be possible to see that the
State requirements are supplied to local people with
a view to tiding over certain difficulties. He thor-
oughly appreciated the information given in Mr.
Gill’s paper, and could assure members of the Con-
ference that if it was possible and the negotiations
to which he had referred were complete, that Mr.
Gill could supply a paper to the Conference that
could be an addendum to the report.
Mr. GILL said he would be pleased to do so if
he could get anything of a conclusive character.
Mr. LANE-POOLE considered Mr. Gill’s paper to
be of great value. Last year he had had the good
fortune to go over some of his plantations in his com-
pany, and saw on the spot the wonderful work he
had effected. Mr. Gill had had great difficulties
owing to the work at the beginning, before his
time, being of an experimental character. The
plantations were very small and very mixed,
and there was great difficulty in starting the
conversion work. There was difficulty in get-
ting milling costs in connection with the figures
at Bundaleer, because they were working under con-
ditions which a commercial man would not consider
satisfactory. The area was small, and it was im-
possible to keep the mills always running; facts which
must be borne in mind when the figures were presen-
ted to them. It was no fault of Mr. Gill’s that there
were no larger plantations behind the mill. It would
be of great advantage if the average cost of planting
and maintenance could be given. The suitability of
the soil was referred to. That was a very important
question in Western Australia. The Forestry De-
partment could get hold of no land on which Pinas
insignis would flourish, only sand plain on which he
hoped to be able to demonstrate to Mr. Gill if he
could remain on after the Conference. He had
sat at Mr. Gill’s feet in South Australia in planta-
tion work, and if he could avail himself of Mr. Gill’s
experience while he was here in plantation matters it
would be very satisfactory to him. The only land
available for the purpose was sand plain. At Hamel
they were able to get rid of the timber at remunera-
tive prices due to the fact that the imports of tim-
ber ceased, and the demand for cases for beer and
other commodities was great, so much so that they
were able to sell their timber, otherwise he could not
have disposed of the thinnings which members had
seen recently at Hamel. The sylvicultural aspect was
important, and he did not think it was well recog-
nised. He did not know how this particular tree grew
in its own but it seemed to him
that it was not really a forest tree. It pre-
ferred wide spacing, and was going to be
rather a difficult tree to grow for timber. But
for case work it was admirable, as Mr. Gill had de-
monstrated. He had one of Mr. Gill’s cases contain-
ing a full set of specimens of his timber sent
him from South Australia, and that of itself was a
sufficiently hard test. It was with difficulty that he
was able to knock the case to pieces to enable him
to get the specimens out of it. When it came to a
matter of structural timber he considered that the
sylvicultural aspect would have to be gone into care-
fully. Early close planting and repeated thinning
was going to be a difficult problem. The tree did not
make much of a crown, that was the whole difficulty.
In Western Asutralia, when he sent out a list of
trees for distribution, he had added a footnote to
the effect that this tree was not suitable for sand
plain country. They had demonstrated that in West-
ern Australia, and he did not want the public to
plant the trees in a wrong locality. He thought the
Insignis would remain a farmer’s tree. Everyone
always people ready to saw it up into cases. From
the forestry point of view there did not seem any
future for Insignis in Western Australia, due to the
fact that they could not get Bundaleer soil in West-
ern Australia.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD mentioned that the price of
cases is Is. sd. in Sydney. The price was before
the war, when they were importing shooks for cases
from the Baltic, at fid. to 7d. landed, and when esti-
mating of the cost of Finns insignis for cases, it must
be borne in mind that present prices were not going
to continue after the war.
Mr. HAY said that some cases came from New
Zealand.
Mr. LANE-POOLE thought it looked as though
they were going to put Jarrah cases on a New South
Wales market, and still make a good profit.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD would welcome it person-
ally.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said that the price at the
beginning of last year was but the millers
began sawing more timber to meet the demands of


the orchardist rather than for the purpose of mak-
ing money. They found they lost money at
and raised the price to and he believed that
the estimate of the present orchard year was
in the neighbourhood of one and a half million.
He could quote the figures for Hamel pine thin-
nings, but it was war time, otherwise they would
not be using that class of timber, particularly as
Hamel was 75 miles from Perth, and then again the
thinnings would be burnt in ordinary times.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD asked what the prices of
eases in South Australia were.
Hon. Mr. STLYES said the latest price was Is.
2d.
Mr. GILL informed the members that for a case
made of a little thinner timber he was getting Is.,
namely for the apple case. The highest price had
been from Is. 2d. to Is. 3d., but they were not get-
ting the latter price at the present time.
Mr. LANE-POOLE mentioned that the Govern-
ment Analyst, Mr. E. A. Mann, had asked him to
inquire the opinion of Mr. Gill upon Finns insignis
in connection with paper pulp.
Mr. GILL replied that no analysis had been made
nor any work done. The Finns insignis had shown
a variation in the resin contents. Some of it was
clean while some of it was more heavily charged
with it, but on the whole he thought Finns insignis
would make a good paper pulp. In South Aus-
tralia they were not in a position to try it.
Hon. Mr. STYLES said that some successful ex-
periments had been made with such common varie-
ties as stinkwort, which made a decent paper pulp,
as did straw and one or two other vegetable plants,
but the manner in which the samples have been pre-
pared was that the chief article used in the manu-
facture had been a lemonade bottle.
Mr. CORBIN said that Dr. Hargreaves, in a re-
port on the general question of paper pulp, had
stated emphatically that he thought Finns insignis
would make a good pulp. The question of resin
content Victoria had been brought up a few weeks
ago in Victoria, and was considered a drawback.
Mr. GILL considered it was a minimum quan-
tity. Dr. Hargreaves said that a small quan-
tity of it would not act as a drawback, and if the
timber was dry or slightly dry it did not interfere
with the grinding up, and then it rendered it easier
of extraction. Dr. Hargreaves was satisfied that
Finns insignis would make a good pulp.
Mr. JOLLY referred to the fact that he had
brought this question of wood plup forward some
time back, and suggested that Finns insignis should
be tried, drawing attention to the fact that in the
United States a considerable amount of work had
been carried out in connection with the production
of pulp from the more resinous softwoods. The ex-
periments dealt with a combined process involving
the wet distillation of the wood —which would
get rid of the resin—and the treatment of the residue
for wood pulp. The species tried were much more
resinous than Finns insignis, and the more resinous
portions of the tree, viz., the butt, were used. I do
not know what progress was made finally, but it
seems to me that insignis is well worthy of a trial.
If success were met with it would provide a good
market for thinnings, and have a big effect on the
cultivations of the species. He wished to ex-
press his high appreciation of Mr. Gill’s paper,
and there was no doubt that although the
actual figures were not available, any forester who
had been through the plantations must realise that
it was a payable proposition. The increment per
acre for the first 30 years was extraordinary. He
would draw attention to the question of producing
bigger timber for the general market, because after
all even if there were 100,000 acres of Firms insignis
in South Australia instead of what there actually
was, and they devoted' that to case making the case
market would rapidly be glutted. They had seen
Hamel and the conditions there, and that in that
locality Firms insignis was not going to be
a forest tree. There was a marked lack of crown
compared with the maritime pine. Conditions in
many parts of the Eastern States were, however,
much more favourable, and in suitable localities it
carried a splendid crown. He hoped that South
Australia would not cut all their plantations down
for cases. They wished to show what could be done
in the matter of producing big timber. Now that it
had been cleaned of branches after 30 years, it was
forming the class of timber they wanted to grow.
He trusted that South Australia would retain the
plantations for a greater age, as information on the
whole matter was badly wanted.
Mr. GILL hoped that some of the gentlemen pre-
sent would do him the favour of attending at the
University on Tuesday evening, when he would dis-
play several slides illustrative of the Finns insignis
in the Mount Gambier district, and which were very
informative in character. They were of considerable
height. When going through them with a mill they
have taken out 22,000 cases, but had left the bulk
of the trees standing. It was a fine stamp of timber,
and the probability was that it would be left for
a considerable time. Directly they had got out of
the timber that had been bought on the estate pur-
chased by the Government, the men on the bench
at once remarked, “That is timber.” The timber
from Moorak was planted widely, 16 feet apart, but
on the Mount it was no wider than eight feet, and
sometimes less than that. When they got into that
belt, the henchman at once noticed it. The same
took place at Mount Mclntyre. If it had been
planted closer it would have been better, but the
timber cut was quite as good if not superior to the
bulk of the stuff from the Baltic.
Mr. CORBIN was gratified to hear Mr. Jolly’s
remark about insignis. In regard to the material
itself they had always had the opinion that it had
more uses than for packing cases. But in addition
to their own private opinion there were the timber
merchants who knew what they were talking about,
and were absolutely satisfied that it was an excellent
timber. From object lessons about them it was
obvious that when properly grown it was easily
superior to a great deal of the imported softwood.
He could give instances to prove that. He was, how-
ever delighted to hear what Mr. Jolly had stated be-
cause he knew South Australia and the Finns insignis
and everything surrounding the question.
Mr. GILL when he started cutting those cases
was told that cases from Norway could be procured
for 6d. less, yet they definitely agreed to give him
Vzd. extra to enable him to carry out the experi-


ment, but since the war started they had come into
their own.
Hon. M. STYLES was pleased at this expression
of commercial patriotism.
Conference adjourned to Monday, 19th November,
1917, at 10 a.m.
MONDAY, 19TH NOVEMBER, 1917, 10 a.m.
On Conference resuming Mr. N. W. Jolly read the
following paper upon
EDUCATION IN FORESTRY AND FORESTRY
RESCEARCH.
By N. W. JOLLY,
Director of Forestry, Queensland.
Education in Forestry and Forestry Research to-
gether form what is, to my mind, the most important
aspect of Forestry in Australia to-day.
During the early period of the Forestry movement
great and lasting damage was done to forestry in-
terests by the ill-conceived schemes of men who, how-
ever enthusiastic and well meaning they may have
been, had little or no knowledge of the practice of
Forestry.
A similar danger confronts Australian Forestry
to-day, when there is much talk of development along
right lines, while at the same time there is no source
from which a continuous supply of well trained offi-
cers can be drawn. This is an extremely serious mat-
ter, for no amount of legislation, however well con-
ceived, will effect real improvement in the manage-
ment of the national forests if competent managers
are not available. The position is rendered still more
acute by the fact that the science of Australian For-
estry has still to be developed, the conditions being
then rendered much more difficult than is the case in
older civilisations.
In European countries, as a result of the study
and work of centuries, officers can be instructed
along definite and well established lines of manage-
ment, whereas in Australia we have the much more
difficult problem of training skilled observers, cap-
able of attacking, on sound lines, the various prob-
lems awaiting solution.
The public money can be wasted just as easily in
the future as it was in the past, and if training in
Forestry does not receive the whole hearted atten-
tion that it deserves it is quite possible that the
future waste will be greater.
The question of Forestry training is intimately
connected with that of Forestry research. I under-
stand that the Commonwealth Government contem-
plates establishing or assisting to establish a Forest
Products Laboratory, undoubtedly an excellent pro-
posal.
The field for research is wide, for in some parts of
Australia, particularly in Queensland, by far the
greatest proportion of the vegetable growth in the
forests is not marketable under existing conditions.
That is of course a position common to most mixed
forests in tropical and subtropical latitudes and is
greatly accentuated by the lack of a dense rural
population. Better utilisation is, however, desirable
and is in fact absolutely essential if the expenses of
forest management are to be at all commensurate
with the revenue. Wood pulp, wood distillation,
utilisation of woods for special purposes, such as
tool handles, bentwood furniture, etc.; seasoning
processes, the yield of minor products, such as tan-
ning barks, oils, drug’s, and perfumes, are subjects
closely connected with effective management, and
consequently awaiting concentrated attention.
Apart from the problems of utilisation there are
those more directly connected with the actual opera-
tions of Forestry, such as the development of sylvi-
cultural systems, the preparation of yield tables, and
the investigation and control of insect pests, par-
ticularly such formidable ones as the cedar twig
borer, the ironbark lerp, and white ants. The identi-
fication and strength of timbers and the effects of
Australian forests on rainfall and surface flow are
other important subjects which naturally occur to
one as requiring systematic investigation, while not
by any means least in importance is the preparation
of text books on Australian Forestry.
Many or perhaps even all of these subjects are re-
ceiving attention at the hands of workers scattered
throughout the Commonwealth, but it is obvious that
there should be a central organisation controlling all
Forestry investigations if possible, but if not all,
then advising or working in collaboration with other
institutions.
No doubt the proposed Forest Products Labora-
tory is intended to develop into an institution of this
nature, but it appears to me that advantage should
be taken of the sympathetic reception of the pro-
posal to press for the inception of a larger scheme
involving Forestry education as well as research. The
mutual advantages which would be secured by such
an arrangement do not need to be emphasised, while
in addition it should result in considerable economy
in establishment, provided of course that it is recog-
nised that the correct position for a Forestry school
is in close proximity to a forest.
Judging from the various discussions on Forestry
education which have taken place at the Interstate
Conferences of the past few years, one must con-
clude that all the delegates were agreed on one point,
namely, that it is necessary to provide a high stand-
ard of training for forest officers. There does not ap-
pear to have been any decision, however, as to whether
forest schools should be located in or near a forest
or in the city, while from the resolutions passed at
the last Adelaide Conference one is forced to the
conclusion that the establishment of several schools
found favour.
Those who support the establishment of forest
schools in conjunction with the universities of the
various capitals appear to me to attach undue weight
to the importance of providing a high standard of
instruction in the various sciences which are applied
to the study of forestry. The average trained forest
officer cannot be expected to be a trained botanist,
chemist, geologist, physicist, or entomologist, but
only to have learned sufficient of these subjects to
understand their application to forestry. After the
general foundation of his education has been laid
he requires to concentrate on forestry and such sub-
jects as forest botany and entomology, surveying,
and road construction, all of which can be taught to
better advantage in a school near the forest than
away from it, and with very little expenditure for
equipment.
It should not be forgotten that in a country like
Australia where most people think only of cutting
down the forest, it is particularly important that


students be instilled with a love for the forest and
imbibe the true forest spirit, without which training
is of little value.
If personal experience is to be counted worth re-
citing, I can emphasise that in my own case a true
understanding of Forestry came only in the forest
not in the lecture room.
Leaving out of account the establishment of ele-
mentary training schools or camps for forest fore-
men, nurserymen, etc., which each State would nat-
urally attend to, I regard the failure of the various
Conferences to arrive at a determination to found
one well equipped central institution as most unfor-
tunate.
The forest resources of Australia are so limited
that one central school could easily provide as large
a supply of well trained forest officers as can be ab-
sorbed steadily, and, unless each State is prepared to
incur far greater expenditure on establishment and
maintenance than its output of qualified officers will
warrant, the various State institutions must surely
be of an intermediate grade only. On the other hand,
a united effort by the Commonwealth and States
should result in a Forestry school of the highest
standard, one that will be a credit to Australia and a
vital force in Australian Forestry.
The Commonwealth Government by virtue of its
administration of Papua and the Territory has a
direct interest in Forestry, quite apart from its in-
terest in everything Australian, and if it is prepared
to assist in the establishment of a Forests Products
Laboratory it should not be difficult to obtain an
extension of this assistance to a wider scheme in the
advantage of which it would directly participate. If
this Conference can arrive at a unanimous expres-
sion of opinion on the matter it will have achieved
a result, the importance of which to Australian For-
estry cannot be over-estimated.
On the conclusion of the paper Mr. Lane-Poole
expressed his appreciation of the manner in which
Mr. Jolly had dealt with Forestry Research. At
the Conference held last year in Adelaide the ques-
tion of forestry education was discussed and a
scheme laid down for the training of lower grade
officers as well as certain recommendations for the
training of higher grade officers. At the time he
had only been in Australia a few months and was
not fully seized with the importance of the question
of an Australian Forestry School. After leaving
the Adelaide Conference he went through Victoria,
South Australia, and New South Wales forests and
saw that very large departments had been built
up to carry out the forest work and that everywhere
the head of the department was suffering for lack
of trained officers. The want of trained men was
felt in Western Australia, and the head of the
department is overwhelmed with detail work which
should be carried out by scientifically trained men.
The need for one Australian Forestry School had
become apparent to him after he had reached New
South Wales and had gone through that wonderful
country, which possessed so wide a range of climatic
conditions, he came to the conclusion that the best
site for such an institution would be in that particu-
lar State. He realised then that he was in. a position
to offer suggestions, and sent a paper on forest edu-
cation to all the Ministers and head of the forestry
departments in Australia, in which he pointed out
the necessity for establishing an Australian Forestry
School in a forest. That was a most important mat-
ter and he was glad that Mr. Jolly had stressed it in
his paper, because he believed that a forester who
was not trained in a forest or with forests at some
distance from the school was not the kind that was
wanted in Australia. The next point was in addition
to the forest school being in the forest it should be
situated in a part of Australia which furnished
the widest variety of forestry conditions, and that
certainly was New South Wales. He did not think
anybody would doubt that. New South Wales had
the open forests and even the brush forests which
were practically tropical, and the man trained in
an up-to-date manner in New South Wales should
be in a position to take up the work even of the
North-West of Western Australia. On his return
he was imbued with the importance of the research
question. In Western Australia there was a small
population and enormous forest resources. Not
forest in the sense of the ordinary forest of
Europe, not timber resources so much—al-
though they are great—but there were minor
forest products, and need for research work into
these was very pressing indeed. In the timber
waste alone, they were burning at the mills over and
above actual sawdust and wood required for boilers
and the furnaces of engines, over and above half a
million tons of sound timber a year —exclusive of
the rotten parts —burning it because their tim-
ber trade was an export trade. Western Australia
only sent out the best timber. There was no local
market. The population was too small to absorb
the scantlings, and the result was that everything
that will not make for the oversea market went into
the fire. Western Australia alone, of all the States,
has the sandalwood oil industry, although it is but a
small business at present, it is hoped that it will
become great in the future. Therefore he was quite
in accord with Mr. Jolly in pressing the matter of a
Commonwealth Forestry School and a Common-
wealth Research Laboratory. He was not, however,
in accord with Mr. Jolly when he said that those
two institutions were better under the one head, under
the same roof as it were. To touch on the matter
of the research laboratory first: That would con-
sist of a director, and a large stall’ of highly trained
technical men, dealing with varnishes and essential
oils, and microbiologists, men who took up the patho-
logical side of the industry, and botanists. The
work of the research laboratory would be to carry
out investigations into certain problems, and the
men doing that work would be men specially ob-
tained for the purpose. These specially trained
men were not likely to have a knowledge of forestry,
and he doubted if they had, whether they would be
able to impart that knowledge. They would not
make good professors of sylviculture and forest man-
agement, or be able to conduct a general forestry
course. Moreover, in the research business the men
engaged upon it want to be left to themselves. The
Director would lay out the work and would leave
them to carry it out without let or hindrance. Per-
sonally he did not think that the presence of a forest
school attached to the institution where research
work was going on would aid the research officers
very much. Again, if they looked at the forestry
schools of the world elsewhere they would find that


they were seldom attached to the research labora-
tories. The great forestry schools of America were
not attached to the research laboratory. There was no
reason at all why the forestry school should not be a
separate institution apart from the research labora-
tory, and once that was admitted there was no reason
why each should not be at either end of the Con-
tinent. They must have the forest school in New
South Wales owing to the peculiar climatic condi-
tions of that State. Where should they place the
research laboratory 1 ? He might be biassed, but he
considered it should be in Western Australia. The
reasons were that this State was the largest in ex-
tent, it was also the least populated of all the
States, and that might seem a poor argument, but it
was a good one, because everywhere in Australia
where the population has been large the natural re-
sources left by that population have been small,
while in Western Australia the population had not
been large enough to destroy the natural resources
God had given them, with the result that they pos-
sessed the largest natural resources in Australia. The
solutions of their problem were therefore somewhat
urgent. Such laboratory would have an enor-
mous field in Western Australia alone to tackle, even
putting aside the work from the Eastern States-
A few of the items with which a forest laboratory
would concern itself would, in the first place, include
the tan barks. In Western Australia they have the
largest number of these of all the States, starting
with the mangrove in the North-West, giving up to the
30 per cent., down to the South where there were
a number of barks running to between 20 and 30
per cent. There was the gimlet giving about 22 per
cent., which was an excellent substitute for myrabo-
lons, which are fruit exported from India, and they
command a very high price. Then there was the
mallet bark of which no other State has any,
running to 40 or 50 per cent, of tannin. Unfortunately
they had destroyed much of it in sending it away to
Germany in the past where the chemist turned it into
extracts and re-exported it eventually to Australia.
The forest laboratory might solve the question of the
extracts of tan barks. Then there was the red
gum tannin. A great deal of attention was being
given it because it ran as high as GO per cent, of
tannin, but up to now it had not been possible to
do much with it, as the tanners in Europe found
that it made the leather too red, whereas what
they wanted was a light coloured leather, the con-
sequence was they would have none of the Western
Australian product. Research work, however, might
discover a way to decolourise that article
and develop a large industry from the collection of
the red gum and the extraction of the tannin. Yet
another reason might appeal to members, namely
that Western Australia had been the Cinderella State
and had been left out of everything. In fact since
Federation had been accomplished, it had never
had a chance, and he felt sure that foresters would
agree she had been entirely left out of it from the
national point of view. But now that the link has
been forged which joins the East to the West by the
Trans-Continental Railway, would it not be a fitting
occasion in which to establish a forestry products
laboratory in Western Australia?
Mr. HAY: It would be a graceful compliment.
The GOVERNMENT ANALYST (Mr. E. A.
Mann), said that the question which arose in Mr.
Jolly’s paper with regard to a forest research labora-
tory was one of the most important matters that
Conference could consider, especially in view of the
action taken in so many directions to prevent
national waste. The matter had occupied the atten-
tion of the Executive Committee of the Advisory
Council of Science and Industry in Melbourne since
the inception of that body. They had taken the evi-
dence of Mr. McMillan, of British Columbia, and
of Mr. Lane-Poole on this question. Since then the
Committee have been engaged collecting evidence,
not only from local authorities but from other parts
of the world, bearing on the subject, so that it had
now a large mass of evidence before it with regard
to projects for the prevention of timber waste and
the utilisation of timber by-products. Up to the pre-
sent, the Executive Committee had taken no decisive
action in the matter, the reason for which was ob-
vious. The organisation of the Commonwealth In-
stitute of Science and Industry was not yet placed
upon a permanent basis. A temporary Committee
have been obliged to carry on without either powers
or funds. The consequence was that it had found its
hands tied down to the collection of evidence and in-
formation without the opportunity of carrying out
any practical steps based upon that information
However, the placing of the Commonwealth Institute
on a permanent basis was more imminent to-day than
it ever had been. Each month that went by rendered
the permanent establishment of that Institute more
probable. Members had probably observed in the
newspapers a further statement by the Prime Min-
ister concerning commerce and industry, which in-
cludes the establishment of this permanent institute.
They were getting closer to the consummation of their
wishes every day, and he felt that the discussion of
this question was, therefore, particularly opportune
because any possible advice members could give to
the Executive Committee would be especially welcome
at the present time and it was for that reason that
the Executive Committee had asked their permission
to take part, through himself, in the discussion upon
this subject, and have submitted a request asking
for the assistance of this* Conference in connection
with certain questions relating to the compilation of
information on various products. There were two
main objects referred to in Mr. Jolly’s paper with
reference to the research project. First, there was
the prevention of waste, and secondly, the develop-
ment of new products. Those were two main
branches of the work which would be carried out by
the research institution. Before they came to the
consideration of the details of the work of such an
establishment it was, he thought, of some importance
to express an opinion as to where the laboratory
should be established and how it should be organised.
Lest members on the Conference might not be aware
of the facts, he might say that the present tendency
of all the recommendations of the Executive Com-
mittee was towards the establishment of a Central
National Laboratory, which would comprise branches
dealing with the different divisions of main scientific
research. That idea was becoming more and more
confirmed in the minds of the executive and receiving
favourable consideration from the Government. It
was a question whether the forestry research labora-


tory should be established in connection with Can-
berra. The point had not been decided, but he was
throwing out the suggestion as being the most prob-
able. A forestry laboratory could be established in
connection with a main institution there, but there
was no necessity for that to be done. It was quite
probable that it would be a distinct advantage to
have a biological institute in close proximity to other
laboratories there to enable the interchange of views
between members of the staffs to be made, but it did
not appear to him that the same necessity applied
to the forest products laboratory. Whether it should
be (for the sake of argument), at Canberra,-or in
some other State; from what he could gather from the
opinions of foresters, there did not seem to be room in
Australia for more than one of such laboratories. It
would be a pity to have it divided up with branches
established here and there, which would not be to
the advantage of the organisation. To concentrate
it in one place would ensure the greatest success
and by centering all forest research in one locality
the best result would be achieved. As one who
is deeply concerned in the wellfare of this State and
anxious for its development, he would like to see
this laboratory if possible established in Western
Australia. In saying that, he was speaking purely
personally and as an officer of the State, not as a
member of the Executive Committee, where he would,
of course, be bound by any majority decision. But
he had personally urged it upon the Committee that
there were good claims possessed by this State for
the establishment of such a laboratory within its
borders, and if he would not be considered presump-
tuous, he would heartily back up all that Mr. Lane-
Pool had said in putting forward a claim for this
State to be considered in this connection. There
seemed to be no reason why if a forestry training
school was established in the East, the laboratory
should not be established here. The matter should
not be looked upon in the light of a favour and Mr.
Lane-Poole had given solid arguments why it should
be established here. There was one point in Mr.
Jolly’s paper on which he differed from him, and on
which he agreed with Mr. Poole. Mr. Jolly said that
the research laboratory and the forestry training
school should be associated together and should be
in the same place—at the forest. With regard to the
forestry training school, he had neither the right nor
the knowledge to express an opinion, but with regard
to the research laboratory, he thought it would be a
great mistake if it was placed in close proximity to
the forest. Not only on account of the distinctive
differences in the two classes of work, but mainly
because such a laboratory so situated would not be
nearly so effective. The grounds that exist for the
forestry school being in proximity to the forest do
not exist in the case of the laboratory. Such a labor-
atory should possess facilities for chemical and
other research work, and it could only be properly
equipped and carried on in centres of population or
in such a position as to have all the necessary scien-
tific facilities ready to hand. There were innumer-
able gas, water, electrical, and mechanical appliances
absolutely essential for carrying out the work
quickly and effectively, and these could only be ob-
tainable in a busy centre, where also there would be
the advantage of an easy interchange of ideas among
experts in various branches of science. If they situ-
ated a forestry school in the forest, the location would
tend to make it a failure. lit reply to an interjection
Mr. Mann stated that he was referring to such in-
stitutions as existed at Maddison, and not to certain
distillation works which although a certain amount
of research work might be carried out there, were
really nothing but a factory. However, all these
were matters upon which the opinion of foresters
would be welcomed by the Executive Committee —
and he would desire them to understand that the
statements he was making were quite apart from the
opinions of the executive committee, and were rather
for the purpose of raising discussions and getting
an expression of opinion from the Conference. Such
opinions as might be expressed would be of assist-
ance in arriving at a position which would bring
the greatest benefit to Australia as a whole, and
that was what the Executive Committee in Melbourne
was desirous of obtaining and not the consideration
of the individual interests of a State, but rather the
advantage to Australia as a whole. If he might
suggest it, it would be a distinct benefit if some
means of maintaining communications could be
adopted between the Executive Committee and the
Forestry Conference. If there were something for
instance in the shape of a standing secretariat,
through whom the Committee could apply for and
obtain information, much good would result. At
the last Adelaide Forestry Conference the matter of
a laboratory was discussed. At the time he was
engaged in Melbourne upon the work of the Execu-
tive Committee, who were most anxious to obtain
information upon the resolutions carried at the Con-
ference. It was only after great difficulty, and in-
deed only when the official report was published,
that the Committee could obtain full information
as to the opinions of the foresters. Then again
there had been before the Committee in Melbourne
a great deal of information regarding the planting
of trees for paper plup. The evidence had been
somewhat contradictory, but on questions of that
description, it would have been of immense
benefit if the Committee could have approached
an official representative and obtained the united
opinions of the forestry experts. At the pres-
ent time the views of the Executive Com-
mittee were trending towards the establishment of
a research institution, and it would be very bene-
ficial if the Executive could receive the co-operation
of official foresters in Australia. At the moment
the only means of intercourse was individual com-
munication with each of the States. It would be far
better if the opinions expressed to the Committee
represented the opinions of the whole of the foresters
in Conference. Members had before them a letter
from the Committee asking for the assistance of
Conference with regard to the compilation of in-
formation dealing with forest products. They have
asked whether a compilation of such information was
desirable and whether the Conference considered it
would serve a useful purpose, and if so what steps
the Conference would suggest towards the compila-
tion of such evidence and above all in what way the
Executive can assist them. There is, for instance,
the question of the utilisation of timber waste. He
had read with extreme interest the remarks on page
6of Mr. Hay’s paper on the distillation of wood. His
figures struck him (Mr. Mann) as remarkably good,
and he would like to obtain further information on
some of the points mentioned. It was stated that the
value of the by-products amounted to £2 2s. Bd,


per ton. He presumed that was per ton of wood
treated. Did the cost figures include also the capi-
tal or rather the interest on capital, and depreciation,
because those items were a serious charge on works of
that description, and without those figures it would be
impossible to make a definite comparison with those
available from certain private establishments. He
did not question the figures, but brought the matter
forward for the reason that certain figures had been
laid before the Executive Committee by a private
establishment which tended to show that in the pre-
sent state of the market for by-products, the distilla-
tion of wood was not in itself a paying proposition,
hence he was anxious to get to bedrock, as in the
instance he mentioned one very serious item was the
capital cost, and hence he would like Mr. Hay to
give figures which would throw light on that aspect
of the Government operations. Mr. Hay did not
refer at all to the value of acetone he understood that
the market had been seriously interfered with by a
factorv which had been established by the Common-
wealth for manufacturing this material, and if so
that was probably a reason for not itemising it.
With regard to wood tar, Mr. Hay gave the yield
although the individual values of the different pro-
ducts were not mentioned and were, he presumed,
included in the £2 2s. Bd. He would ask what uses
it had been found possible to apply the wood
tar to, and where there was a favourable market.
That had been one of the greatest difficulties in con-
nection with wood distillation, because it was not
marketable, and they had been obliged to use it in
their own furnaces. The same difficulty had been
encountered in American investigations. In fact
one of the principle chances of making it possible
was discovering a means of utilising wood tar which
was of a pure quality as compared with coal tar. An-
other point in Mr. Hay’s paper was that only cut wood
of a certain measurement was used. He understood
that was so in other works also, and it was difficult
to carry out distillation unless with blocks cut to a
certain size, and that did not give a means of utilisa-
tion of such waste as could not be saw-cut, such as
branches and crowns of trees which was a very im-
portant matter, and it was difficult to see how those
portions of waste timber could be utilised. Had they
made any experiment with regard to the utilisation
of timber other than that which could be cut to the
standard size required. The point raised by Mr.
Jolly was a matter for development and administra-
tion. There was the question of paper manufacture.
They had all been disappointed by the reports sub-
mitted by Mr. Surface on Tasmania. The Com-
mittee had been studying this question to ascer-
tain if it was practicable to plant trees in sufficient
quantity to make a paper industry an accomplished
proposition in Australia, and he had been also
greatly interested in Mr. Gill’s paper on the Remark-
able Pine, and would like to know what was the posi-
tion with regard to Firms insignis for paper making,
the resin he presumed would be the principle diffi-
culty. Then there were other materials for paper
making, which they had under consideration, many
of which were known to the members of the Confer-
ence, but one that perhaps was not. There was a
plant grown in Western Australia that was specially
reported upon by the Imperial Institute as one of
the best they had had under investigation. Strangely
enough, it seems to be but little known. It was the
Ecdeiocolea Monoptachya, (B. v. M.), the name itself
is peculiar, and it did not seem to have a colloquial
name. It is to be found on the Murchison, but he had
not seen it, and did not know how widely it was dis-
tributed. It only came under his notice lately, and no
proper inquiry, so far as he knew, had been systemat-
ically made into it. There was another important
question to be considered, namely, the preservation of
timber and mechanical tests. They were all familiar
with Mr. Julius’ work and of the American forests
laboratory. Americans were treating their soft woods
with preservatives in order to compete in the Indian
markot. They had not to go far to seek for commer-
cial justification as to the value of research work. Mr.
Southern, formerlv an officer of this State, who has
since been killed at the Front, was connected with
the powellising plant, and was soon able to suggest
alterations and changes which would cause a financial
reduction in costs of over £2OO a week on that par-
ticular plant, while at the same time treating an
extra 1,500 sleepers per week, hence the value of re-
search work, even from the commercial view point
may be very great indeed. Mr. Lane-Poole referred
to the oils, drugs, and tannins. The monumental
work of Mr. F. G. Smith of Sydney, would be known
to them all, both in connection with medical work
and ore treatment. Then there was Sandalwood in
connection with which he would refer to a striking
instance of the value of research work. The private
manufacturers had been making sandalwood oil which
would not comply with the British pharmacopaeia’s
standard. Samples were sent by the firm in question
to England, and were investigated by specialists
there who found that the oil contained certain in-
gredients which on removal lifted the oil well up to
pharmacopoeia standard. There were also such ques-
tions as drugs and alkaloids, which might be of medi-
cinal value, and useful for the service of man, but
which had hitherto been regarded as deleterious. Here
also was a field for research. The poison plants of
Western Australia, contained alkaloids and were
very probably possessed of medicinal value. I have
made attempts to have them thus scrutinised both in
England and in Melbourne, but up to the present
without satisfactory reports. Western Australia also
possessed the Zamia palm, to which was often attri-
buted losses in stock. It might be found capable of
yielding starch products of sufficient value at least to
pay for the eradication of the plant. The matter of
tannin was being investigated by two special commit-
tees, one in Queensland and one in this State. In many
cases new research work is not necessary with re-
gard to some products, and the trouble has been
that there have been so many workers labouring
along in a disconnected fashion. There has been work
done that is little known, or quite unknown, from lack
of publicity or because there is a mass of information
hidden away in official reports never collected or
brought to light. There was an immense mass of
information unpublished in Australia. In getting
hold of this and turning it to the best account, the
Executive Committee in Melbourne ask for your
assistance and co-operation. In connection with this
project for research work on forestry, there is room
for a definite scheme and for definite recommendation
from the Conference, and speaking on behalf of the
Executive Committee, I can say that they will be glad
to have the opinions you express, and to receive re-


commendations to which they will give the fullest
possible consideration.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD considered that the paper
contributed by Mr. Jolly and the expressions both
of Mr. Lane-Poole and of Mr. Mann, were of the
greatest possible interest and he believed that every
member of the Conference was in full accord with
their expressions of opinion. The subject was of
intense importance, as were the remarks made by
Mr. Mann, showing the different methods for the
different inquiries that were necessary and which
would probably result in the creation of an enormous
industry in New South Wales and in the utilisation
of their waste product, and probably the develop-
ment of a commercial scheme of value to New South
Wales, to Australia, and to the whole world. He
did not wish to raise a note of discor'd in the debate
because within the Conference no discord existed, nor
was there any in the States themselves. Mr. Mann
had given some highly interesting comments on the
different forms of directions in which they could
develop and should develop in the future. Speaking
for New South Wales, they were endeavouring
as far as possible and had been for many
years past endeavouring to develop upon the
lines he had taken up. The Committee ap-
pointed for the purpose had inspected their
technological museum, and had declared the work
done there to be good; that there should be no in-
terference with it and that it should continue in the
path already entered upon. He might say that the
manufacturer of eucalyptus oil of Broken Hill had
been the real commencement of the technological
museum in Sydney. It was being developed by Gov-
ernment officers who were giving a life service to
the by-products of forestry, although the State reaped
no direct benefit, because they did not recognise the
enormous amount of work done. He would like to
assure Mr. Mann that he was convinced that this
conference would be only too happy to fall in with the
suggestion he had made, but the weak point was
the political position. There were three States at the
conference represented by Ministers of the Crown,
and although Mr. Jolly would be only too delighted
to have his Minister present also, still neither Vic-
toria nor Queensland had Ministerial representa-
tion. However, among the other three States there
appeared to be a unanimous and absolute desire to
get to bedrock and to continue scientific research
work for which there was so great a necessity to-
day. Still, he felt that what Mr. Mann had asked
them to-day to do was for the moment so much
waste effort. He said it regretfully. He, Mr. Ash-
ford, had had experience of the Federal Govern-
ment. They had started a Committee out and had
furnished no funds. They were men of the highest
scientific and commercial attainments and they
had always been hampered for want of funds. The
Federal Government had not realised or had ne-
glected their responsibilities since Federation, in this
respect. They had made a pretence of developing
the scientific side of their waste products, and that
so far was the sum and substance of it, except that
the gentlemen they appointed have continued taking
a vigorous interest in their work which does them
infinite credit, the work that they had done was
excellent; that being so, New South Wales intended
to establish a proper training school for Australia,
but not in any parochial spirit. New South Wale
could not afford to wait for the Federal Govern-
ment. New South Wales intended to appoint a re-
search officer and every State must engage in re-
search work if it is to be up to date. While saying
that New South Wales would continue to do this
work, he trusted that the Federal Government would
realise the sense of their responsibilities and know-
ing that this work should be developed, lie hoped
that they would undertake it whereupon New r South
Wales would instantly meet them and be only too
pleased to make it a Commonwealth matter. The
New South Wales school they would be only too glad
to see it a Commonwealth school. It was situated
within the forest, within tropical forests and within
close range of the Alpine forest. He agreed with Mr.
Mann to the full, but he rose to say that it was
time for someone in Australia to express some con-
tempt for the attitude taken up by the Federal
Government to the present time.
Mr. JOLLY felt that some misconception had
perhaps arisen as to his proposal. What he pro-
posed was the establishment of *a forestry research
institution, and that seemed to have been taken to
mean a forest product laboratory. But that was not
his meaning at all. He recognised that there will
be a forest product laboratory in each of the
States, and it was not his intention to say that
Western Australia should not have one. Western
Australia should have one. Chemical research was a
most important branch of forestry work, but it was
not the only branch. When he proposed this in-
stitute of research he had in mind sylviculture re-
search quite as much as any other branch of forest
research. The organisation he would work for would
be one dealing with all branches of the work and
in that way he thought it would be found that its
co-ordination with the forestry school would be far
more important than had appeared to members of
the Conference at the present time. They had only
to look at the fine research institute established at
Dehra Dun, in India, with a school in co-operation
with it. It has been established there away from
the centres of population and industry, and the
work of that institution has been splendid, and it
was an example they should profit by.
Mr. LANE-POOLE made an inquiry as to the
training carried out at Dehra Dun.
Mr. JOLLY stated that it was not founded as a
school of very high standard, but had improved tre-
mendously.
Mr. LANE-POOLE stated that forestry officers
in that country had always been drawn from Europe.
Mr. JOLLY pointed out that the provincial staff
consisted of natives or native born. It seemed to
him particularly important that the research officers
should be in touch with the forestry officers. They
had had various examples of research work in Aus-
tralia of recent years, where the persons undertaking
it were not conversant with forestry itself. It would
be certainly of mutual advantage if these gen-
tlemen could be in touch with the foresters
and the foresters in touch with them, so that
the latter could learn the value of scientific
research. With these two factors combined he
did not fear that either branch would get into
a groove. Naturally all research work would not be
conducted at such an institution, and perhaps a
great deal of it would be conducted elsewhere. For
instance, it would be stupid to have the Western
Australian jarrah waste products sent over to the
Eastern States to have research work conducted
upon it. The same remark would apply to Western


Australian tannin. In India they had their insti-
tution and sent their officers throughout the country,
where they started research work at various places,
and afforded advice to the officers in charge of the
work. In certain instances the work was done at
Dehra Dun, but not always. As an example of the
success of the Dehra Dun Institution, he would
quote the case of the utilisation of the bamboo for
wood pulp. The Indian Government had appointed
a cellulose expert, who travelled the Empire, making
investigations, and also conducting numerous labor-
atory experiments at Dehra Dun; bulk samples were
then sent to England for testing on a large scale,
the final results being most satisfactory, and had it
not been for the war there would most probably
have been a trade in bamboo pulp to-day. The cen-
tral organisation should have an officer in charge of
each branch, and besides being responsible for the
work carried out at the Institution he would visit
the various States as required, investigating the re-
sponsibilities on the spot, and bringing back work
to be performed at the Institute or advising how it
should be conducted locally. He would emphasise
the point that the research institution was
not a laboratory merely. It was more than
that. Mr. Lane-Poole had a paper on work-
ing plans. Was not that an ideal subject
for a research institute. A central body was needed
to deal with such matters. As things were, foresters
only met once a year or once every two years in
conference, but if they were, throughout the interval,
kept in touch through a central organisation, some-
thing material could be attained. Mr, Mann re-
marked that a great deal of research work has
already been done and that there was no need for
it to be done over again. He did not agree with that
view as he had found in Queensland that a great
deal of the work had to be gone over again. He
had in mind an instance of the tannin contents of
wattle barks. It has always been held that wattles
decreased in tannin contents as one went North.
He also at first had assumed that proposition to
be correct, but he had since had investigations made
and found that the figures were different from those
figures supplied many years ago, and that he got
26 and 27 per cent, instead of 15 or 16
per cent. While coming over in the train a
Federal official had informed him that they badly
lacked information at head-quarters regarding Aus-
tralian hardwood. He said that Western Australia
boomed its jarrah and its karri, but that the officer
responsible for purchasing wood on behalf of the
Commonwealth Government had no means of ob-
taining reliable information showing the comparative
value of the various species.
Mr. LANE-POOLE pointed out that the tests
made by Mr. Julius covered Western and Eastern
timbers as well, and that Queensland iron bark was
put in its right position over jarrah in Mr. Julius’
graph.
Mr. JOLLY had heard it stated that no one else
had obtained the same result as those given by Mr.
Julius.
Mr. LANE-POOLE pointed out that that was in
Western Australian papers as well as Queensland.
Mr. JOLLY: He had not intended to introduce
any State disputes, but he was in conflict with Mr.
Lane-Poole when he said that Western Australia
stood out as an area that had the greatest forest
resources, and the greatest opportunity for the in-
vestigation of waste products. Western Australia,
it was true, represented the west side of the conti-
nent, but there were several States that represented
the Eastern. He was strongly of opinion that it
they were to balance the resources of the East with
those over the West, the former would preponderate
greatly. In Queensland they did not have so much
milling waste in that particular form, but he thought
they had a great deal more waste in standing tim-
ber which they could not sell, and had no prospect of
selling. Western Australia had pure forest, and
though they did not cut them out, but they made a
good attempt to do so. Queensland consisted largely
of mixed forests with the result that buyers took
perhaps 10 per cent, of the standing timber or per-
haps 20 per cent., but the remainder was as much
waste as milling waste, so, if these factors were
taken into account Queensland would rival Western
Australia in this direction. Then again there was a
great variety of products in the East, and the great
variety of species offered an immense field for in-
vestigation.
Mr. CORBIN considered that while South Aus-
tralia, according to general opinion, possessed the
least resources of forest produce in the Common-
wealth, nevertheless there were certain problems
there of special interest. Mr. Jolly had out-
lined a scheme for a central research insti-
tute, which appeared to be excellent. Mr.
Ashford pointed out the danger of delay in getting
if started, there was going to be waste of
time and energy in connection with the problems
that each State offered. There were reasons for avoid-
ing over centralisation, and for individual States
carrying out a great deal of their own work. What
little they contemplated doing in South Australia
they would nevertheless be only too delighted to
get advice from some central institute and from the
men qualified in the direction in which they were
working. For instance, if South Australia were
visited and the suitability of Finns insignis for
paper pulp was investigated and recommended, it
would furnish them with an impetus to do some-
thing in that direction. They had also the Xanthor-
hoea tatiana, on Kangaroo Island, which provided an
unsolved problem, and on a conservative estimate
they had £600,000 worth of Yakka Gum there at the
present time. In addition, they had a large quantity
of sylvicultural problems which had to be investi-
gated on the spot and were of purely local
character. Naturally, if those were left to the
central institute to investigate, the consequences
would be that it would not be done, because they
would have to wait until an adequate staff was a; -
pointed and after that wait still longer until that
staff had tackled what they considered to be more
important problems. They had to face facts while
aiming at an ideal. Whatever they did in the direc-
tion of centralising work, they would be up against
that sort of thing. A man who specialises success-
fully should be referred to, even if he did not hap-
pen to be connected with the central research insti-
tute.
Mr. GILL declared that no one had a greater ap-
preciation of the valuable contributions to the gather-


ing upon the means of preventing waste than he
had. Over 30 years ago the forestry department
of South Australia made some definite effort to
minimise the losses owing to the destruction of
timber. Those efforts were made on two defined
lines, one line was the manufacture of charcoal, but
at that time wages were ss. or 6s. a day, while now
they were at least double that. Not only were the
wages low, but the work was done by contract and
by men who were not interfered with by agitators,
and consequently the work was carried out at as
low a rate as would be possible at any time. If
was done by the forestry department. At the time
he was in charge of the biggest forest, containing
about 50,000 acres, and there were 60 men engaged
in charcoal burning. The venture proved a dead loss.
Subsequent to that, in the time of Mr. J. E.
Brown, another effort was made to minimise the de-
struction of timber. Contracts were entered into
with Broken Hill for supplying timber. The con-
tracts resulted in serious loss. As they found that
all their efforts to secure profitable markets had
been unsuccessful, they lay low to see how matters
developed. In South Australia latterly an idea had
been abroad that they were wasting a great deal
more than they were cutting, and that when we
cleared the growth in the forest instead of burning
up the stuff that had been cleared, that they should
have tried to sell it. The position is that only a
very small demand existed for such material. In
the forests where they clear a track, they obtained
only about sufficient timber to provide the necessary
fencing posts to enclose the plantation, so they had
utilised everything that could be utilised. We have
allowed men to go in and cut the smaller lengths,
down to four or five feet, or over if the timber is
too crooked for posts. After the Department’s
men had felled the stuff or sometimes before,
they were allowed to come in and take the
material away for mining purposes on a very
small royalty, not exceeding 2s. 6d. to 3s. per ton,
which is but little above the price of firewood. In
other instances, men had the opportunity to go into
the forest under a dead wood license to obtain fire-
wood. A few men had taken a log here and there
for splitting, but as a rule, the tendency has been
that the timber was of no value unless they en-
tered upon the undesirable course of paying car-
riage to cart it way. It would be seen that they
had been handicapped, and as the officer in charge
of the State Department, it was a matter he greatly
deprecated and would do everything he possibly
could towards it so far as lay in his power, but
the great difficulty lay in the high price of lab()ur,
and he knew of many ventures that could
be successfully carried out in the forests were it not
for that fact. They were confronted with another
difficulty as unfortunately the forests were nearly
all inaccessible to the ordinary market. Another
point that operated with them as indeed with all the
other States was the scarcity of population and its
migrative character. If as a result of the united
suggestions of the conference combined with the as-
sistance of Ministers, they could evolve some scheme
that would lead to the gTeater utilisation of forestry
products that come under the category of waste, a
red letter day would have arrived. The matter was,
however, he felt, in excellent hands. The problem
was being approached with energy and as the years
rolled on he was confident that in leaving the work
in the hands of such men as composed the Confer-
ence they were doing a wise thing.
Mr. HAY, referring to Mr. Jolly’s proposal,
agreed that the research bureau should not be assoc-
iated with the forest school, as in the forest sufficient
facilities for conduct of research work might not
be obtainable. At the same time a branch of research
work associated with forest management must be
conducted in connection with the forestry school,
that is forestry investigation, and probably that in
itself would be a preliminary to much of the re-
search to be carried on in a central bureau. With
regard to where that central bureau should be estab-
lished, he understood the feeling of Mr. Lane-Poole
in his preference for Western Australia, and he felt
sure that the proper attitude on that point was not
to care a rap where it was established so long as
it was established. It was part of the important
work before them and all that was wanting were
the facilities for doing it. Their original intention
in New South Wales was to have a central estab-
lishment associated with the forestry school. In
this branch of work the Government had elaborated
a large programme including economic, industrial,
and forestry research. Their intentions were to
tablish a bureau of research in connection with
the technological college, and the Commission had
asked them to alter their plans so as to make pro-
vision for research in forestry problems at that in-
stitute. Owing to the war that would probably not
be gone on with for some years. Their position in
connection with research was that they had to recog-
nise that they had a large proportion of waste tim-
ber to deal with. They were not in the same posi-
tion exactly as Western Australia, as New South
Wales, with a larger population, could utilise a good
deal of the waste in cutting it up for household
purposes, and there was a market to absorb it. West-
ern Australia was in an exceptional position to ad-
vocate research, as they had to destroy so much of
their timber. In New South Wales forests there was
not more than 35 per cent, of the timber
of high value for lumber purposes, and although
some proportion of the remainder could be used
for fencing timber and spokes, minor demands
could not absorb the waste in the forests, so they had
to try and find means of utilising it. The first pro-
blem they had to face was that their conditions of
transport were difficult and the cost was great.
They foresaw in connection with forest waste that
it would be out of the question to bring the material
to a plant. Therefore they decided to bring the
plant to the material. He regretted his inability to
give certain information that had been asked for, but
his reason was that the plant they were using was
not their own, although it was designed and worked
under the Commission to a large extent. The man
owning and working it was getting the value out
of it and not the department, but each ton unit of
waste wood was at the present moment being ab-
sorbed, and the returns in by products recorded.
Exact information, however, he was not at this stage
authorised to afford.
Mr. MANN asked if the information could be
confidentially conveyed to the Committee.
Mr. HAY promised that he would inquire. The
person who controlled the venture was only con-
cerning himself with by-products, such as acetic acid,


wood tar, and so on. He might inform them with-
out breach of confidence, that the wood tar was used
in the preparation of a patent specific for dipping
cattle for the prevention of tick, and also for the
prevention of fly blow in sheep. There were other ele-
ments added to the process which were secret. That
was what the wood tar was being principally used
for at the present time, whether it will become a
constant in the markets in Australia he could not
say. As to the terms on which the department utilised
this plant, they were paying certain fees for cleaning
out the vessels and retorts, and getting a certified
return for each ton unit of wood forested, and the
position was that unless the averages could be main-
tained all through their woods, there might not be any
possibility in the industry at all. They could not
afford to deal with one wood, but must deal with the
whole of them. With regard to the size of the woods
in the retort, the waste in the stems and branches
were used. It was all dry wood, cut to dimensions of
sft. by sin. by sin. The process was very simple, and
was earned out by regulating the heat and was sim-
ply managed. In fact a boy once having learnt it
could manage it, while the whole cost of the apparatus
was £2OO per ton-unit, capital cost. The plant could
be duplicated and extended at an outlay of an-
other £SO for every additional ton-unit. The par-
ticular process was not in existence anywhere else in
the world, and was entirely new. The man himself
was an engineer and a chemist. No one was allowed
to see the plant in operation with the exception of
himself (Mr. Hay). The value of research work de-
pended on the markets for the by-products. At the
present time in New South Wales they could
absorb in the local market all they could produce.
At the same time recognising that its value as an
industry depended upon the markets of the world,
he had made arrangements to send samples of the
by-products through a confidential man to different
parts of the world to see to what extent they could
be absorbed, and if present figures were maintained
it was going to be a very valuable industry. At the
moment they were having an analysis made of the
pyro-ligneous acid to see what percentage of picric,
tannic, and other acids they contained. The work
was interesting and was not costing much, and they
hoped for some useful results. He regretted he could
not give more definite information regarding the
plant to which he had referred.
Mr. MANN thanked Mr. Hay for his statement.
He had been deeply interested in the question of the
plant, and the Executive Committee in Melbourne
would be delighted to obtain any further facts that
could be communicated', because, as Mr. Hay had
asserted, if the figures could be maintained it looked
as though the' problem of the utilisation of waste
timber had been solved. If it was at all possible for
him to supply details to the Executive under the
seal of confidence, they would be only too pleased
to obtain them.
Mr. HAY thought that he could arrange for an
inspection of the plant by a representative of the
council, he thought he could go as far as that-.
Mr. MANN, in thanking Mr. Hay, said that it was
difficult to estimate what a thoroughly equipped
laboratory would cost. It might run to anything
from £IO,OOO to £20,000, and that was a serious
item for an individual State, while to establish a
number of laboratories would at the present juncture
be a great national waste. Therefore that was a
strong argument for concentration in one place.
While putting forward what claims Western Austra-
lia possessed in that connection, neither he nor Mr.
Poole were doing so to the detriment of Austra-
lia as a whole. The question was one which should be
gone into from the National point of view in every
possible way. Great waste would result from the
establishment of laboratories in every State as they
would lose not only by the accumulated experience
of a central institution, but also by the wide separ-
ation of a number of men working upon the same
problem when, if they were together, by their co-
operation they could achieve far more useful re-
sults.
Mr. HAY felt that they could not obtain sufficient
staff to maintain a number of institutes.
Mr. MANN agreed that that was so. Replying
to Mr. Jolly, what he meant was that possibly on
a number of matters upon which research work
was advoeted now, if a thorough search were made
through the existing records, a number of prob-
lems would be found to have been investigated.
The instances Mr. Jolly had given were due to
the fact that methods which had been used
30 years ago would not be accepted at the pre-
sent day, and a great deal of the old work should
be gone through again and rechecked. The matter
of Yacca gum was of great interest and importance,
but it must be remembered that there was work done
sometimes in one State which was not made known
in the other States. A compiled statement of the
analysis of Yacca gum had been made, and they
were tested to determine the yield of picric acid
(it was supposed this gum had been utilised in Ger-
many for this purpose, but whether that was cor-
rect or not he did not know). He thought he was
correct in saying that Xanthorrhoea tatiana yielded
32 per cent of picric acid. West Australian gum
grown in this State yielded up to 47 and 49 per cent,
of picric acid, so it would appear that this State
could at least hold their own. Unfortunately
in the compilation with regard to Yacca gums
which he had seen the only one he could not
find was the Western Australian gum, which
showed that the investigation was incomplete
when the compilation was made. The letter he
had submitted to the Conference on behalf of the
Executive Committee asked definite questions with
regard to the compilation of data and statistics, and
as no definite statement had been made he would be
glad if he could be placed in such a position that he
could forward to the Committee any definite con-
clusions on the points raised by them. The letter
was before the Conference, in which it was asked
whether was desirable, and secondly
the best steps to take to bring about a compilation,
and thirdly how the Executive Committee could
assist at all.
Mr. HAY asked if it was not a fact that picric
acid was easily obtained.
Mr. MANN mentioned that. Yacca gum was now
being used as a dye as well, he had been informed,
but did not know definitely.
Mr. HAY stated that the gum was used for the
shellac preparation of fine varnishes.


Mr. MANN said that before the war samples of
gum had been sent from Western Australia to both
England and Germany for investigation as to
whether they were suitable for varnishing. The
reports were, however, discouraging, and described
them as only fit for inferior kinds of varnish.
Personally, he thought that was strictly correct. It
seems to him that more probably it was used for
the production of picric acid.
Even if the yield was hardly payable or only just
payable on a gum which would yield 32 per cent., it
might be highly profitable on a gum that would
yield 47 per cent.
Mr. CORBIN considered that what had been said
did not explain the reason why in South Australia
they were not utilising considerable quantities of
Xanthorhoea.
Mr. LANE-POOLE: The question of wood dis-
tillation came up on page 6 of Mr. Hay’s paper and
he proposed to touch upon it later on.
Mr. JOLLY said that he would move the following
motion;—“That it be a recommendation from this
Forestry Conference that the Commonwealth estab-
lish an institution for education in forestry and
forestry research work.”
The motion was seconded by Mr. LANE-POOLE.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD suggested that the word
“immediately” be added.
Mr. STYLES suggested amendment having been
withdrawn for the time being.
Motion put and passed.
The CHAIRMAN (Hon. A. W. Styles) drew at-
tention to the letter from the Executive Committee
of the Advisory Council. He thought they were
perhaps prone to meet in conference and thereafter
to let things slide, but he sincerely hoped that before
the present Conference broke up some gentleman
would be appointed as a recognised authority as an
intermediary between the States on forestry matters
such as the States already possessed in connection
with meetings of the Premier’s conferences. New
South Wales was the recognised centre for all Pre-
mier’s conference matters in between meetings of
the conference. The States looked to that authority
to see that the resolutions carried at the Premier’s
conferences were given effect to in the interim be-
tween the conferences. He considered that some ap-
pointment should be made of a gentleman who
would look after the forestry work similarly. It
would appear that a certain resolution was passed
in Adelaide and that was the end of the matter. It
had not been given effect to, and if the appointment
was made the man who looked after the resolutions
for them would be very helpful to them.
Mr. GILL referring to the remark of the last
speaker about a resolution passed at the last con-
ference not being carried into effect —so far as he is
personally concerned, he has received no instructions
on the matter.
Hon. Mr. STYLES thought that South Australia
was the only State who had done something, and he
was sorry that Mr. Gill had given the show away.
He was not referring to that State and he though
they might be considered to be perfect.
Mr. HAY considered that the foresters themselves
were all too busy and the difficulty would be to find
the right man for the job.
Hon. Mr. STYLES remarked that they were all
busy men, but they should do something more than
talk, as the Governor General had remarked, it was
pleasant for them to meet together, but it was pleas-
anter still to see what had been actually performed.
Mr. HAY said there could not be any one more
appropriate for the position than Mr. Corbin.
Mr. CORBIN remarked that, like Mr. Hay, and
the other gentleman, he was also a very busy man.
Mr. JOLLY moved: —“That it is desirable that a
complete compilation of data be made as requested
by the Executive Committee of the Advisory Council
of Science and Industry.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD seconded the motion.
Motion put and passed,
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD moved: —“That in the
opinion of this conference Mr. H. H. Corbin be
appointed to carry out this duty and to compile the
data asked for by the Advisory Council.
Mr. GILL seconded.
Question put and passed.
Mr. LANE-POOLE moved: “That Conference is
of opinion that the heads of the several Forestry
Departments in the Commonwealth be appointed to
supply the data as set out in the first resolution to
Mr. Corbin.
Mr. JOLLY seconded. .
Question put and passed.
Mr. CORBIN stated that if it was the opinion
of the Conference that he should be of use in re-
ceiving data and communications from the various
States he would be glad to offer his sendees pro-
vided that he could get the necessary assistance
to see that matters were promptly attended to,
but he would like them to record exactly what
they wish him to do, so that when Conference next
met matters would be in order for them.
Mr. LANE-POOLE moved, and seconded by Mr.
GILL: “That Conference would be glad to receive
the assistance of the Executive Committee in com-
piling the date thus supplied and sending it to the
Government of each State, and Conference would
also be glad to receive the active assistance of the
Executive in giving effect to the first resolution.”
Question put and passed.
Mr. MANN pointed out that the Committee had
no desire to encroach upon the Conference field of
usefulness, but they did want to assist.
Mr. JOLLY was of opinion that they could assist
by enlisting the co-operation of the Commonwealth.
Hon. Mr. STYLES thought that they should im-
press upon the Advisory Committee the necessity of
taking steps in that direction.
The Conference adjourned until Tuesday, 20th
November, 1917, 10 a.m.


TUESDAY, 20TH NOVEMBER, 1917.
10 a.m.
Mr. STYLES invited Conference to discuss Mr.
Jolly’s paper “The Investigation of the forest area
necessary for the supply of Australia’s future tim-
ber requirements and the permanent development
by each State of the portion allotted to it.”
Mr. HAY stated that Mr. Jolly had introduced
one of the biggest problems in Australian Forestry
from two points of view. First of all because it
involved a very exact investigation of the forests
of each State, and it was a difficult problem par-
ticularly in relation to the question of forestry as
against settlement. On his own particular experi-
ence he could speak pretty emphatically on the
question as it had been a source of trouble
to New South Wales almost since the incep-
tion of forestry. He had not the exact figures
to quote, but from his own knowledge and ex-
perience he thought he could safely say that
their forest reserves had been depreciated at least
50 per cent. With regard to the first difficulty there
was only one way to solve that, and that was to
ascertain what lands were suitable for forestry pur-
poses, and they must be absolutely sure on that
point. Coming to the other question their experi-
ence was that the question had always been treated
in politics lightly, and if they tried to determine
the area on any basis such as the European per-
centage basis, they would go wrong, because the con-
ditions were so different in Australia. The charac-
teristics of the wood were different. It was only
after many years of tidal and anxiety that they
were eventually getting over the difficulty of this
question, and it was due principally to Mr. Ashford,
who foresaw that sooner or later this question would
have to be settled, and who showed a great deal of
strength of character as soon as he had the oppor-
tunity, by taking over the administration of the
forests and bringing it to a final determination.
They had endeavoured to carry out a classifica-
tion, but it had only been done on broad gen-
eral lines, and they estimated it would take at least
seven years to complete it in detail, but they were
able to say at the present that they had located in
the State of New South Wales the most valuable
lands for timber purposes which were to be set
apart definitely under the new Act for forestry. As
they went on and carried out surveys they found it
was necessary to make adjustments, but the whole
scheme was on right lines, and he did not think the
question could be solved in any other way in Austra-
lia except on the lines they had adopted. In a great
many States they had not the timber resources to
allocate on the basis of population. They only had
a limited portion of land suitable for forestry, and
they would have to make up their minds what area
of land they had available for that purpose, and set
it apart if it was State land, if it was not, the only
alternative was to appopriate it by purchase. In
New South Wales to date they had appropriated
10,000 acres of land. Mr. Hay was very pleased
that Mr. Jolly had introduced that question, because
it seemed to him (Mr. Hay) that some of the other
States required waking up on the point, particu-
larly Tasmania. He was quite satisfied from
his own experience that there was no way of
doing it on the area or population basis. It would
have to be done on the basis of land available.
Mr. LANE-POOLE also expressed his pleasure
with the tenor of Mr. Jolly’s paper on the subject,
as it was a most important matter. It was some-
thing that concerned the whole of the Common-
wealth; in fact, forestry, generally speaking, was a
matter that concerned the Commonwealth. The area
of forest reserves was not really a question for the
State to decide; it was a question for the Common-
wealth to decide because the Commonwealth alone
could know the proper area really necessary and the
only way the Commonwealth could arrive at what
was really necessary was by conference uniting in
estimating that area. Another reason why he was
glad to see the matter under discussion was that it
would enable them to refute the figures which were
made public year by year, the absurd figures that
were published.
Mr. HAY pointed out that the figures referred to
by Mr. Lane-Poole covered the wooded areas and not
the forest areas. He would venture to say that none
of the States knew exactly what forest area they had
got.
Mr. GILL stated that they knew in his State.
Mr. LANE-POOLE (continuing) stated that the
figures for the total forest area on page
382 of the Commonwealth Year Book were very
misleading regarding all the States, and par-
ticularly in regard to Western Australia. The figure
quoted was not an estimate of the total forest area,
but was simply the area over which certain trees
might be found to be growing. The figures were
utterly ridiculous, and if the discussion that arose
from Mr. Jolly’s paper in any way refuted the
figures it would do a great deal of good. There
was a figure quoted in the morning paper of the
previous day in the leader which was also very mis-
leading. Western Australia only had actually 12,000
acres of permanent forest reserves. The figures had
been copied year after year right from Mr. Brown’s
time.
Mr. HAY considered that in publishing statistics
of forest area it should only apply to lands that had
been set apart definitely for forestry. Outside of
the 6,000,000 acres that they had appropriated they
had at least 3,000,000 acres of lands that was wooded
area. He considered that it wanted defining more
clearly.
Mr. LANE-POOLE repeated that the figures were
very misleading, and lead the public to think that
they had very large areas of forest land when in
reality they had none at all.
Mr. HAY pointed out that in his opinion it was
up to conference to take some steps to correct this.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said that as far as Western
Australia was concerned he had already done that.
He had pointed out to the Government Statistician
that they had only 12,000 acres reserved.
Mr. JOLLY considered that the temporary re-
serves should be included under a special heading.


Mr. LANE-POOLE reminded Conference that
they had areas of forests that were reserved for
mining purposes in the goldfields, and these all
helped to swell the figure of 1,167,000 acres. He
took it that the discussion was dealing purely with
big timber country, the sawmilling country. He
considered that Mr. Jolly in his estimate of eucalypts
was under-estimating somewhat. He thought the
best example was the- blue gum in India. Mr.
Hutchins, when he first went to India as a proba-
tioner, found that the mean annual acre increment
was 600 cubic feet. Thirty-two years after that forest
was again valued and the main annual acre increment
was found to be the same. That blue gum has been
growing at the rate of 600 cubic feet per annum.
He could quote other instances in South Africa
where it was 400 cubic feet per annum and he
thought they could take as the minimum 100 cubic
feet per acre per annum for eucalypts. In karri
they could get more than 100 cubic feet per annum,
and jarrah the same.
Mr. JOLLY asked in how many centuries or de-
cades would they get that. They were dealing with
virgin forests that had been exploited. They were
not getting more than 15 or 20 cubic feet in Queens-
land at the present time. They might get their forest
in order in 100 years’ time.
Mr. LANE-POOLE replied that that was what
they were looking forward to. Until they could work
on the forests themselves they could not get any-
thing even approaching Mr. Jolly’s figures. They
got an average of milling logs in the so-called virgin
forests of about nine to 12 loads to the acre.
Mr. JOLLY stated that it was merely a question as
to how far they must look forward.
Mr. HAY reminded the Conference that the ques-
tion was very much complicated, owing to the fact
that all the wood actually in the forests was not com-
mercially in demand.
Mr. LANE-POOLE assured the Conference that
generally speaking, he was entirely in agreement with
Mr. Jolly, the main point was that they had not
the timber country. In Western Australia they
could only take country within the 20 or 30 inch
rainfall, which lay at the bottom of the plan which
he would produce. That was the only place in the
State with a 20 inch rainfall, a little tiny corner of
the South-West and a good percentage of that would
not grow valuable timber at the present time. In
short there only remained the jarrah belt and a karri
belt and a small belt of tuart. They were endeavour-
ing to do the classification of the forests of Western
Australia and were going very slowly, only doing
30,000 acres per month, and he considered that it
would take another couple of years to complete.
From the maps, as far as they had gone, he would be
very much surprised if they got more than
3,000,000 acres of first class jarrah country
and in the karri country less. People had
told him that it would work out at between a
half and three-quarter million acres. They had
jarrah tailing off into Wandoo, but it was poor for-
est country and they would never be able to work
it. It would be taken up by the agriculturalists.
The whole of Australia wants to wake up to the
fact that they could not regard Western Australia
as a nearly inexhaustable source of supply. There
was no virgin country for big sawmills to work in.
Mr. Hutchins put down the area for reservation in
Australia at 74,000,000 acres, but be agreed with
Mr. Jolly that it would be quite impossible to get
that area. They should have it, but the country is
not there and it was only fair that the agriculturalist
should have the best soil of the good rainfall country.
They had an opportunity in Western Australia on
the big sand-plains of establishing large planta-
tions of pines, but that was hardly the question they
were discussing. The question they were discussing
was so important that it was a Commonwealth ques-
tion and it was certainly time the Commonwealth
took some steps in the matter and brought it before
the notice of a State like Tasmania, which appeared
to be doing nothing for forest conservation.
Mr. GILL: And will probably require consider-
able persuasion to do anything.
Mr. LANE-POOLE continuing, said that in West-
ern Australia there was still a difference of
opinion in the minds of the public as to
whether the karri country should be reserved.
Some valuable areas had been ring-barked and
spoilt and this had been going on in Western Aus-
tralia as he supposed it had been going on in every
other State. New South Wales evidently were stop-
ping it, and he considered the Commonwealth should
take action and lay down definite instructions on the
subject. If they could get this done then their con-
ference would have done some good.
Mr. JOLLY in reply said that from what he
had heard during the debate, the position seemed to
be more serious even than he had thought. The posi-
tion seemed to be somewhat as follows: —Victoria
had about 4,000,000 acres of State forest, New South
Wales proposed to have 5,000,000, and might per-
haps obtain 6,000,000. Queensland had 1,000,000
acres of State forest and 3,000,000 acres of tem-
porary reserves. Much of the latter was of very
little value for forestry, having been reserved many
years ago, because the land was considered not
suitable for settlement. They could afford to alienate
some of that, and must endeavour to find more forest
land in other localities, but it appeared impossible to
obtain more than 4,000,000 acres of forest land for
Queensland. West Australia apparently cannot look
forward to more than 4,000,000 acres, while South
Australia’s area is too small to take into account in
the calculation. This makes a total of 18,000,000
acres exclusive of Tasmania, so that apparently it
was quite impossible to obtain 25,000,000 acres for
the whole of Australia. The position then appeared
to be the same as he had found it to be in Queens-
land, namely that it was not a question of how much
they could let go, but of how much they could get,
and he thought they should emphasise at this con-
ference that there was great need for the reserva-
tion of every acre of valuable forest land in Aus-
tralia. They all thought harshly of Tasmania, but
he considered that Tasmania deserved it, and in his
opinion Tasmania’s attitude towards forestry was a
crime against the Commonwealth, seeing that Tas-
mania was by position fitted to be the most valuable
source of timber supply in Australia. She carried
very find hardwood forests, and was well suited to the
growth of softwoods.
Mr. HAY pointed out that there was more wood
in Tasmania in proportion to her size than in any
other part of Australia.
Mr. GILL said that he considered that Tasmania
paid less attention to forestry than any other State,


and it would be a good thing if conference could
be held there.
Hon. Mr. STYLES suggested that it might be a
good thing if Conference could go to Tasmania and
live there for a day or two. One point had been
raised in the discussion by Mr. Lane-Poole that
should not be overlooked, and that was that however
dark the picture might be they should have a correct
statement in that Comonwealth book as to their true
position. He could not see for the life of him how
that could be put right unless the States themselves
put it right, and if they did not do it themselves
they deserved to live under the cloud which had been
pointed out to them by Mr. Lane-Poole that morn-
ing.
Mr. JOLLY stated that the Commonwealth Statis-
tician received their reports.
Hon. Mr. STYLES called the attention of Con-
ference to the fact that there was an invitation in
the book to point out any inaccuracies in the figures,
and he considered that the Statistician’s attention
should be called to the incorrect figures.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said that he had pointed out
the matter to the State Statistician and he consid-
ered that the head of the Forestry Department in
each State should do the same thing. He did not
think that Mr. Knibbs could be expected to read
their reports very carefully.
Mr. CORBIN said that the position was certainly
somewhat alarming and he had no idea that the fig-
ures given in the Commonwealth Year Book were
so far wrong as he now found them to. be, although
he had a suspicion that they were not all they should
be. He is very pleased to support the paper of Mr.
Jolly and the remarks Mr. Lane-Poole had made.
The thing should be put right. With regard to the
term “forest” in the Statistician’s report there ap-
peared to be some doubt about its meaning. If the
word simply meant forests capable of producing
large milling timber one could assume that the figures
were very much short of those given, and he thought
they should define in the statistics exactly what is
meant. In South Australia, as a matter of fact,
they could very quickly arrive at their natural re-
sources, and in estimating the resources of the Com-
monwealth and the various classes of forests they
should adopt a uniform method. If a standard
method were adopted it would be much better than
if they each adopted their own methods; because
comparison would then be possible.
Mr. LANE-POOLE reminded Conference that he
had some classification plans with him if any of the
members would care to see them.
Mr. GILL remarked that on several occasions he
had endeavoured to get from the survey office the
area of land, how much was big timber, and how
much was not, but unfortunately he had not been
able to get what he wanted. They had a limited
area of big timber and a great acreage of scrub
which was only useful for rough buildings and fenc-
ing posts. He was also of the opinion that they
should endeavour to correct the figures quoted by
Mr. Lane-Poole, as people reading them would con-
sider that forestry had all it wanted.
Hon. Mr. STYLES considered that it would be
very helpful if Conference framed a resolution for
submission to State Governments. The question was
one that should be closely considered or some of
their friends would be very harshly criticising the
Conference and saying that they could talk about
it but do nothing. They might ask that each State
should take some action.
Mr. LANE-POOLE considered that there should
be two separate resolutions. One should be sent to
each State and one to the Commonwealth. It was
a most critical matter.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said that Mr. King had sug-
gested that there should be a statement to the Com-
monwealth to make the matter clearer. They had
estimates now from the surveyors of the forests as
to the area.
Hon. Mr. STYLES said that they certainly wanted
two resolutions, the first that they should get their
figures correct and secondly that the intention of
the Comonwealth Government should be drawn to
the facts set out in the paper of Mr. Jolly and the
discussion that took place thereon. He asked
whether there should be a formal resolution that
each State should take steps to correct the figures
in the Commonwealth Year Book and for uniformity
to be observed in the headings in the Commonwealth
Year Book. It had been suggested that the matter
should be submitted to a sub-committee they had
appointed regarding nomenclature.
Mr. GILL: “Are they not two separate things
altogether ?”
Mr. LANE-POOLE: “It would take the Commit-
tee no time at all.”
Mr. GILL: “Then why not attend to it at once.”
Mr. LANE-POOLE reiterated that the figures
were very misleading. They were fairly accurate
as far as Western Australia was concerned. At the
present time Western Australia would appear to be
the biggest producer of timber, but he now under-
stood that New South Wales would beat Western
Australia.
Mr. HAY pointed out that they had a large con-
sumption in New South Wales.
Mr. LANE-POOLE: “Are you including mining
timber in your 5,000,000?”
Mr. HAY: “Yes.” Continuing, Mr. Hay said that
it should be moved as an outcome of the conference
that each State should take steps to ascertain the
extent of its forest area in order that the forest re-
sources of the Commonwealth might be accurately
determined.
Mr. GILL pointed out that they were doing that
already but they wanted to go a step further. They
had all got to that stage with the exception of Tas-
mania.
Mr. STYLES asked whether the matter should
be submitted to the sub-committee for the purpose
of bringing up a report. It would be a simple
matter for the sub-committee, and they would be
better able to suggest to Conference the best lines
to go on. A motion might be moved to the effect
“that steps be taken for the purpose of correcting


the figures in the year book, and the lines upon
which that work should be accomplished should be
a report from the sub-committee.”
This was moved by Mr. Lane-Poole, seconded by
Mr. Jolly. Carried.
Mr. LANE-POOLE moved, “That having in view
the entirely inadequate areas of country in the Com-
monwealth capable of producing valuable forest
that this Conference is of opinion that all prime
forest areas should be permanently reserved.”
Mr. JOLLY seconded, and the motion was put
and carried.
Mr. ASHFOKD moved, and Mr. Gill seconded,
“That having in view the seriousness of the position
this Conference resolves that a statement be pre-
pared by the State authorities with the request that
it be brought before the next Premier’s conference.”
Carried.
Mr. STYLES then invited the discussion of Con-
ference on Mr. Hay’s paper, “Australian forestry.
New South Wales’ experience in a State undertak-
ing, with conclusions and suggestions thereon.”
Mr. HAY, in introducing the matter for dis-
cussion, stated that his paper had endeavoured to set
down a plain record of all they had done or at-
tempted to do in New South Wales, and if there
was any information he could afford to members
of the Conference he would be only too happy to
do so. With regard to planting the conclusion
they had come to was that planting work was too
costly, and it involved the expenditure of a large sum
of money which he considered would be better spent
in improving their natural forests. He would like
expressions of opinion as to whether the cost of New
South Wales planting was excessive or unduly high,
or how it compared with costs in other portions of
the Commonwealth. With regard to regenerative
work they had confined it almost wholly to forests
of low economic value, forests which had been
deteriorated by bad cutting and so on. Although
probably they had set about the work with ideas
they would not father to-day, he could safely say
that they did not make any very serious mistakes,
and those that they did make they had profited by
and they felt they had a very fair grip of the re-
generation question. One of the things they had
to contend with was the great waste. It was
a trouble to find market for it, and if they could
find markets for it at the cost of conversion they
would be quite satisfied. They had in fact dealt with
much of it on that basis. They had discovered that
by trial they were meeting a demand they had no
idea existed, and they had made good profits on some
of it. He did not want to go very much into figures,
because he had not quoted in his paper anything
more than average cost of treatment. Although
in some instances it had been high, nearly £2 an acre,
the average had been in the vicinity of 10s. an acre.
Their efforts to plant had been so costly, they had
come to the conclusion that if they could, at the cost
of 10s. to £1 an acre, regenerate their forests, they
were doing good work. They had worked out their
own methods which were largely governed by the
Sylvicultural characteristics of their woods. He did
not think their methods would be applicable to
Western Australian conditions as he fancied that
Western Australian problems were more difficult
than theirs, and that the Western Australian forests
did not have the same capacity for regeneration. He
thought that it might be of interest to members if
he brought along illustrations to demonstrate the
class of country they were dealing with, what they
were doing with it, and the results they had ob-
tained. He had taken three different classes of
forest.
Mr. HAY then proceeded to explain photographs
of the forests before and after treatment. The pro-
cess they adopted in regeneration was to treat it in
sections. They marked these out with from two
to 10 chains between as tire breaks. He explained
that the timber was destroyed by sap ringing, as
they had found that ring barking killed a tree too
quickly for regeneration purposes. As the tree dies
it shed its seeds on the prepared soil. This class of
work cost them 10s. an acre.
Mr. GILL asked whether they did not find that
their dead timber was a source of danger from fire?
Mr. HAY, in reply, stated that they had to keep
the fires out and they had done so by early burning.
They had only experienced one serious fire in a
regenerated forest. With regard to some of their
leases they insisted that all stock should be with-
drawn during the hot weather except sheep. The
men they had trained for this particular class of
work were men that had been engaged in the mills
as spotters, and they were very experienced men,
knowing the trees that were of value and the young
trees that were worthy of preservation. He added
that the pictures which he trusted had been
of some interest to members of the Conference he
intended to present to Mr. Lane-Poole. Coming
to later methods he thought it might be of some
interest to the Conference to give them some evi-
dence of the manner in which they were working
out their problems. They had only started laying
down working plans during the last eight or nine
months, and he was submitting specimens to them,
but would not be at all disappointed if they were
criticised. It was laid down in their regulations, that
State forests should be surveyed. Surveying work
was rather costly, and they had first of all adopted
a system designed by Mr. Swain, one of their
officers, but they had now laid down a system
which was less costly. The dense forests they
stripped in sections, principally those parts they
were going to deal with, and members would
see from the plans how their survey work was done
and how the different classes of forest were shown,
after they had been surveyed. These plans were
produced by the surveyor first of all in black and
white. There was no colour on them when received
from the surveyor, and they were afterwards re-
produced by heliography. They still had a lot of
information to get about rates of growth, and the
possibility of most of their forests had been worked,
out on incomplete data. They had depreciated their
estimates by 50 per cent, in order to be on the safe
side. They were also trying to establish demonstra-
tion forests near big towns for educational purposes.
He had made some mention in his paper of the
question of forest education and training, and Mr.
Jolly also mentioned the same thing. It was a mat-
ter that had concerned them very much in Hew South


\\ ales during the last four or five years as they
had sent a number of trained men to the war and
could not get men to replace them. They had de-
cided to establish a school and train their own men.
They employed a great number of supernumerary
men, overseers, rangers, forest foremen, forest guards,
and these men did not want a very high degree of
training. Up to date they had been taking on that
class of men and giving them the necessary train-
ing while paying them wages. That was not an
economic method, and they had decided to provide
for that class of employee by a three months’ elemen-
tary course. They had not set out with the idea of
making their Forest school an Australian school, but
they were going at that school to train more highly
qualified officers. The only thing they wanted was
a really first class director for the school. Forest
investigation work was a big problem, and they must
have some method of tackling it and of recording
all the information they collected. Mention had
been made in Mr. Jolly’s paper of the question of
forest statistics, and this was a very important mat-
ter also. They realised for many years past that
they did not know the amount of timber they used
each year, and unless they could get some idea of
what they were using and what they were producing,
it was impossible to lay out their forest plans for
the future. The had provided for that by prescrib-
ing a form under which certain forest statistics
would be furnished. These were to be supplied to
saw millers and timber users, and each officer in a
district was held responsible for the issue of these
forms and the collection of them with the
necessary information. They would be able by this
means to get at least 95 per cent, of what the con-
sumption really was. He wanted to make some re-
ference to Mr. Jolly’s statement that they had noth-
ing like the area they thought they had. It was
a very serious matter but they were perfectly sat-
isfied that by treating their forests as they had done
one acre of forest could be made to yield at least
three times as much as under natural conditions.
That was a very important matter, and if they
could, by treatment, make 20,000,000 acres yield as
much as 60,000,000 acres the matter was not so ser-
ious as might at first sight appear, and he was cer-
tain that with proper treatment they could make
the natural forests yield at least 200 or 300 per cent,
more than under natural unassisted conditions.
Mr. STYLES in inviting discussion on Mr. Hay’s
paper said that they were very much indebted to
Mr. Hay for the pictures and working plans he had
shown them that morning.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said they were very much in-
debted to Mr. Hay for his valuable paper and his
remarks of that morning, regarding the work that
had been done in New South Wales, and for the
interesting photograph of the work. Western Aus-
tralia in particular was indebted to Mr. Hay for his
kindly gift of the pictures, and they would form a
very valuable addition to their forestry museum. He
was very sorry that the representative from Victoria
was not there that morning, as the whole question of
the sylvicultural treatment of the eucalyptus was a
very difficult one, and both New South Wales and Vic-
toria had been doing a lot of work in that direction,
but not in the same way. Their difficulties in West-
ern Australia could be put under three heads.
I irstly, the fire question, and he agreed with Mr.
Hutchins that if they could manage effectually to
protect their forests from fire they were achieving
a very great thing indeed. Secondly there was the
difficulty of getting rid of the superabundance of
timber which had no market at the present time.
They disliked ring-barking, that which if they had a
greater population it might be found valuable. One
did not like destroying even over-matured timber if
there was a possibility of finding a market for it.
Their third problem was the difficulty of obtaining
a sufficiently good regeneration, and these three diffi-
culties depended one on the other, and fire certainly
played a most important part in Western Australia.
In Western Australia there was a fire every three
or four years. The young jarrah trees did not get
their heads above the ground far enough before there
was a fire through which burnt off the leading shoot.
They had seen some ring-barking at Mundaring and
there was a splendid regeneration there, but fire had
gone through it and now it was no longer a forest.
He was very glad to see that in New South Wales
they had adopted a fire break system. The creeping
fires put through to burn up anything inflammable
with a view to preventing a large conflagration
usually destroyed just what forestry wanted to keep
on the ground, that was the dead and living cover,
and that was a most important thing to keep.
It was as well to mention, however, that the
forest fires in Australia were very - small things
when they considered the forest fires in
France in the Mors at Esterelles or Gascoyne,
as these were fires once started that it was
impossible to deal with. Those in Australia
were nothing like them. If they could only
organise a proper system of forest patrols, a proper
system of look-out stations, so that the forester could
jump on a fire at once, it would mean there would
be no fires in Australia at all. By a good system of
fire patrols such as they had in America, and in
America their fire belt system was a very big one.
The fire belts were made very broad and at a very
low cost. They trusted in America to having suffi-
cient men for a few months in the year to jump on
the fire straight away. If they adopted such a system
in Australia they would beat the fires, other
wise they would never get any sylviculture
done. With regard to getting rid of useless
material in the forest on page 6, Mr. Hay
gave them some very useful figures of the yield
per ton. In England recently they had put on the
market a portable still which worked on wheels and
could be taken into the forest, and if they, in Aus-
tralia, could deal with their superabundant timber
in this way they should do so. The whole question
had been gone into very closely in Western Aus-
tralia. He had submitted a report when he got back
from the East last year, and a great deal of informa-
tion had been collected which he thought might be
of value to the Conference. Mr. Hay’s figures of
the yield in New South Wales were about the aver-
age of all distillations. Timber throughout the
world yields about the same quantfty of the various
by-products. He had the figures by him and had
compared them with Mr. Hay’s figures, and they


came out about the same. He had the figures of
the yield of karri which had been tested in the old
country and had yielded lbs* of grey acetate
and the investigations were conducted in this con-
nection at the beginning of the war. There \vas a
very good description of a distillation plant situated
in the forest of Dean in the old country which was
published in last year’s report of woods and forests.
There is a very full report of the whole plant they
are using there. If they were going to produce the
distillates of wood they must sell them, but at pre-
sent they had no market for them. With regard to
charcoal, they must make a profit on their charcoal.
Cuming Smith’s works at Warburton just managed
to sell its charcoal and could not produce any more
because there was no market for it. He had gone
into the position in Western Australia, and the only
market for charcoal was in producer gas engines, and
there were only 129 of them in the State, and 75 of
them only used charcoal, and about three tons of
charcoal a month per engine. It would seem that
the market for their distillates of wood would have
to be found outside Australia, and if that was the
case it was probable that their costs of produc-
tion would be so high that they would be unable
to sell at a profit. He considered there should be
a very close investigation of the by-products with a
view to discovering any which would command a
market right throughout the world in just the same
way as they had a valuable by-product in sandal-
wood oil. The ordinary distillates have no markets
at all. In Western Australia they have even gone
into the question of potash, as to whether it was pos-
sible to get any potash from their timber, and the
best they could get was from 180 tons of karri which
realised 148 lbs. of sulphate of potash. The idea of
making use of the enormous wastage in their saw-
mills and the debris in their forests was not likely
to prove successful while their population was so
small. Going on to the question of the forest school
that Mr. Hay touched on, he was very glad to hear
that the forest school is started and only waited
the appointment of a highly trained man as Director.
They were all suffering from the disability of the
lack of trained men in that regard.
Mr. JOLLY stated that they were very pleased
to have Mr. Hay’s paper, which showed that at least
one State in Australia was going to do something.
There was no question about the excellence
of the results depicted in the photographs he had
shown them and the resume of the work which he
had given them which had been most instructive.
Mr. Hay had asked for the criticism of members of
the Conference as to the cost of planting and the
cost of natural regeneration, and whether the mem-
bers of Conference thought that the cost in New
South Wates were economical. They could ‘not
express any valuable opinion on that as they had
no information as to the species, the rate of growth,
and so on. The costs, however, did not appear to
him to be prohibitive, although they were cer-
tainly higher than he liked to see them. Per-
sonally he thought that the costs were not
excessive if they were dealing with a fast growing
species like Finns insignis. Queensland had experi-
mented for some time with exotic cunipers, and
up to the present they had not had any great
results. It seemed to him that in the sandy
lands of the coast there was quite a possibility
for the coastal cypress, which was a good grower.
They had test areas of Cyprus which were sown about
three and a half years ago, which were now up to
12 feet in height.
He was a little bit disappointed about this ele-
mentary course in forestry, and thought that Busi-
ness College was not the place for a forestry school,
and that the sooner the training was transferred to
the forest the better. Again, with regard to the use
of waste timber, some year or so ago he had received
a communication from England from an officer who
had started a wood distillation plant in the Forest of
Dean. Mr. Jolly had sent the proposal along to the
War Council, but it had received very short shrift,
and jvas not considered for a moment. Mr. Lane-
Poole’s figures impressed him, but Mr. Hay’s figures
impressed him also, and they certainly needed a final
authoritative opinion. They also wanted investiga-
tion with regard to the question of fire protection
in their eucalypts forests. He did not agree that
creeping fires were no good. It was a question of
development and expediency. It would be a much
different matter when they were properly organised
but personally he thought that a creeping fire
was a very useful help to them under exist-
ing conditions. In Queensland if they could
keep out a tremendous fire by having a less
dangerous creeping fire, they were going to do it.
They were going to limit their fire protection to
the areas of young forest and the creeping fires
to the areas in the pole stage as during the young
years of the tree’s life, it must have absolute pro-
tection from fire, but beyond that he did not think
it was absolutely essential to keep creeping fires out.
In those forests which produce a very dense under-
growth of grass, heavy grazing would keep the grass
down and be very useful as a fire protection agency
when the seedling growth is beyond danger.
Mr. GILL remarked that he was very pleased with
Mr. Hay’s paper, but had been at something of a
disadvantage seeing that when Mr. Hay was reading
his paper he, Mr. Gill, had been engaged with a
gentleman and did not hear the whole of the paper.
He would, however, like to say something with re-
gard to fire protection. They were dealing with a
different class of forest altogether, and the good gum
forests on the Murray River were not the same as
the stringy bark down in the South-East. They were
covered with a growth of ferns and a fire did not
creep there, but ran and leaped. Every stringy bark
tree was covered with bark like touch wood, and no
sooner did a fire touch it than it ran up it like light-
ning. They had fire breaks three chains wide round
them and he would be very pleased to show his fellow
delegates a few views that he had brought with him.
For an area of between 3,000 and 4,000 acres, they
had such a thing as a full 12 miles of fire break
right around it, and it had been found to be efficient.
They had also put up a fire tower constructed some-
what on the principles of a wind mill tower, which
gave an outlook a full 60 feet above the forest, and
that enabled! the foreman in charge to overlook the
forest. lij carrying out this system of fire breaks
six men and six horses would do as much as 25 men.
The cost possibly may be. a little high, but it does
not amount to 6s. an acre, which was a mere noth-
ing to what they hoped to get out of the land. He
always appreciated anything Mr. Hay had to say
to them on these matters, but with regard to working


plans, while they were of great importance, they re-
quired a proper man to carry them out and his de-
partment had been working for many years at very
high pressure and only within the last two or three
months two of his officers had had to get special leave
as they had not taken a holiday for years and were
absolutely run down. For many years in South Aus-
tralia the revenue of his department had fluctuated
with the revenue of the country. He hoped that
when the war terminated, they would be able to
improve matters and with the young men who were
under Mr. Corbin’s able tuition, that they would
be able to keep them on a better basis. The forests
in South Australia have grown by leaps and bounds
and with the advent of the Governor General, they
were looking forward to very much better things and
he would be glad to see everything put in as good
a condition as possible.
Mr. HAY stated that he would like to inform
conference that they get as much as 4d. an acre for
forest grazing, and the more the grass was kept down
the less risk there would be of a fire, but grazing
must be judiciously applied.
Mr. GILL remarked that their plantations had
been keeping a flock of sheep ranging from 3,000 to
5,000, and with his previous knowledge in sheep and
that of some of his colleagues, he had been able to
get a very good revenue from them. He had re-
ceived a telegram since he had been at the Confer-
ence, telling him that they had got as much as 23d.
per lb. for a large quantity of their wool. The re-
turns were very good indeed, and the efficiency
with which they keep down the grass was a great
safeguard against fire.
Mr. STYLES formally thanked Mr. Hay for his
paper. He reminded delegates that they were ex-
pected to take lunch that day with the President of
the Chamber of Commerce at the Palace Court, also
that the members of Conference were invited to wit-
ness the opening of the State Parliament that after-
noon.
Mr. LANE-POOLE pointed out that great diffi-
culty had been experienced in getting stave
timber and bairel timber for tallow at Wynd-
ham Meat Works. Many varieties of timber
have been tried and finally the Agricultural Depart-
ment tried karri, which has been found to be very
successful. He had one karri barrel in the building
which he would ask members of Conference to in-
spect. The demand for barrels was enormous, and
he knew that the firm of Guiness, in Dublin, were
thinking of putting their commodities into steel
drums. They were searching the world over for a
suitable timber for barrels, and if karri could be
made to supply the demand they would have a big
market awaiting them,
Mr. HAY informed the Conference that they were
building a very excellent cask out of their mountain
ash which was being used for the storage of wine.
Conference adjourned to 10 a.m., Wednesday, 21st
November, 1917.
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 1917.
10 a.m.
The Hon. A. W. STYLES, M.P., occupied the
Chair, and announced that he had received a com-
munication from the Private Secretary asking if
it would be convenient for His Excellency the Gov-
ernor General to be present on the following Friday
morning at 10 am. instead of at 2.30 p.m.
Resolved that the Conference would be pleased
to receive His Excellency at the hour and day men-
tioned.
Mr. CORBIN: On being asked to afford the Con-
ference information in regard to the forest of Ku-
itpo, said that he had a paper already printed which
was the first attempt at a working plan in connection
with that forest. It had been issued by the Gov-
ernment as Bulletin No. 4, Department of Forestry,
University of Adelaide, but he might say that con-
taining, as it did, a mass of statistical matter it did
not lend itself to clear and consecutive reading. If,
however, Conference desired he would read it, pass-
ing over some of the statistical matter which might
tend to confusion.
Mr. HAY suggested that the paper in question
should be embodied in an appendix to the proceed-
ings of Conference.
Mr. CORBIN pointed out that the paper was des-
criptive of work that had been done a year ago,
and since that time they had got much further ahead
both with data and with work, while the forest area
had been increased from 4,719 acres to something in
the neighbourhood of 8,000 acres. In addition to
that, they had been securing markets for their ma-
terial which put a different and better complexion
on the position altogether. There were, of course,
certain matters in connection with prices that he
did not propose to make public. The paper he
would read would be upon the working plan of the
forest of Kuitpo, South Australia.
Since this plan was made progress has been made
in several directions.
WORKING PLAN OF THE FOREST OF
KUITPO, SOUTH AUSTRALIA, 1916.
AREA OF WORKING CIRCLE—S,227 ACRES.
Introduction.
This forest is of great promise, judging from in-
dications available; but with this area as with all
others in Australia there is a great deal to be done
to reduce things to the state of a smoothly working
machine yielding the maximum of efficiency.
The working plan is essential for the sake of
continuity, and should be recast every 10 years in
the light of fresh data.
The data at present available are scanty, but a
beginning has to be made in all things.
History of the Forest.
The Forest of Kuitpo, in the hundred of Kuitpo,
was acquired by the Government for forest purposes
in the year 1898; it consists of about 4,719 acres, not
all in one block. The policy hitherto adopted has
been that of clearing the indigenous species, good
and otherwise, and planting.
Plantation work commenced in 1899, and has con-
tinued since; but the planting work can almost
wholly be regarded as experimental since species
have been planted each in various localities.
There has not been up to the present any syste-
matic planting of definite areas of any species on a
definite forest rotation, although 845 acres of Finns
insignis have been planted and about 151 acres of
other species.
In 1916 the whole of the forest was placed under
the control of the University Department of For-
estry, and a comprehensive study of the whole mat-
ter has been made.
The forest areas which have not been planted
have been “plane-tabled” with a view to locating


Year,
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
1
April.
May. j
June.
July.
Aug.
Sept.
Oct. 1
Nov. |
Dec.
Total.
1888 ...
•83
•09
1-21
•46
3-49
6-67
6-15
4-46
2-06
•85
1-50
•80
28-57
1889 ...
. ..
. . .
. . .
2-63
•70
•86
8-87
4-25
7-83
1-27
7-45
3-63
3-67
2-22
•11
43-49
1890 ...
•68
1-95
•40
1-61
1-59
8-88
8-23
6-58
3-19
6-16
3-19
•49
42-95
1891 ...
. ..
1 - 62
•12
•61
2-49
•59
1-76 1
609
2-97
2-57
4-50
2-06
3-42
28-79
1892 ...
...
1-47
•12
1-39
1-63
3-67
3-96
4-12
6-45
3-35
4-74
107
2-62
34-78
1893 ...
. . .
...
...
•58
•04
•39
4-86
6-91
5-58
3-95
4-64
6-28
3-26
2-52
1-27
40-28
1894 ...
1-43
•26
3-92
2-82
2-78
6-44
4-84
4-64
2-24
3-37
•14
1-79
34-49
1895 ...
...
Ml
•21
1-54 I
3-81
1-48
4-16
6-48
5-39
3-95
1-42
•52
•61
30-68
1896 ...
1-47
•55
•81
7-49
2-65
3-78
2-95
2-63
2-80
1-97
• 76
1-68
29-54
1897 ...
1 • 18
•63
2-12
1-06
5-47
3-98
4-22
6-87
4-10
1-68
•88
•01
32-20
1898 ...
. . .
•12
•61
•69
3-38
4-14
8-36
3-96
3-10
1-94
3-64
3-21
•83
33-98
1899 ...
...
. . .
2-14
1-36
1-65
3-21
4-23
6-28
1-65
2-89
2-92
2-08
3-87 I
•71
32-99
1900 ...
1-26
•05
4-00
5-29
7-42
5-96
1 2-70
8-37
2-81
1-68
•97 |
•81
41-32
1901 ...
...
1-27
•04
•88
2*57
1-90
9-53
3-35
2-35
4-84
4-90
1-03
1-09
33-75
1902 ...
. . .
•94
•90
4-43
•33
1-60
6-27
1 2-97
2-44
4-17
2-08
•86
2-48
29-47
1903 ...
. . .
. . .
115
1-28
1-87
3-61
218
5-67
5-92
4-35
600
2-16
3-50
1-35
39-04
1904 ...
. ..
! 4-65
| 2-40
•56
303
3-78
4-16
; 4-23
3-62
1-47
2-74
211
•03
32-78
1905 ...
...
i -98
•66
•35
6-18
3-54
5-53
6-60
3-40
4-60
5-77
•42
•11
38-14
1906 ...
...
| -08
13
4-33
1-90
2-43
7-24
! 6-20
5-94
6-06
2-82
3-72
1-74
42-59
1907 ...
1 -16
i -31
•95
2-89
4-19
3-95
4-16
5-01
2-12
2-70
2-18
•77
29-39
1908 ...
•16
I -86
2-49
i-76
6-24
6-19
3 04
2-62
5-99
3-34
•47
•71
33-87
1909 ...
...
...
1-00
j -64
1-82
7-15
5-90
5-49
5-75
7-54
300
4-54
3-39
101
47-23
1910 ...
...
•33
•05
7-59
•55
5-20
4-21
6-33
4-54
4-20
501
2-70
3-12
43-83
1911 ...
. . .
1 -27
: 3-97
1-20
•87
6-62
5-52
4-42
1-87
4-53
1-02
•47
1-86
32-62
1912 ...
•04
•32
1-71
1-52
•69
506
4-57
3-10
7-86
1-54
2-92
201
31-34
1913 ...
...
•25
2-01
3-93
1-30
2-14
•69
3-35
4-78
4-24
3-69
1-50
2-10
29-98
1914 ...
...
•33
I 1-93
•65
4-63
3-25
1-22
2-98
•81
1-40
•46
2-44
•96
2106
1915 ...
...
. . .
•76
•04
1-00
3-29
4-71
8-96
4-81
6-87
8-81
1-37
•59
•10
41-31
1916
Average of 28 years
to end of
•49
•46
•65
2-96
1-76
12-29
5-97
712
4-65
4-24
6-57
2-24
49-40
1915
...
...
...
: 103
•79
1-91
3-16
3-68
5-48
4-47
4-48
3-98
2-97
1-83
1-24
35 02
good areas of indigenous timber which are worth
retaining and improving; and also the planted areas
have been surveyed with a view to a stocktaking of
the timber which has up to the present developed
and to serve as data for the future systematic work.
During the past year several acres have been set
apart as experimental areas for the testing of other
species not found in this neighbourhood, and methods
and mixtures not so far tested; for while it is pos-
sible to read from the book of nature straight away
and adopt treatments on the large scale, in some
cases it will repay to experiment carefully and sys-
tematically.
This Working Plan is divided into two parts —
(1) Description of the present condition and the
work achieved; (2) the development and policy for
the future. .
PART I.
Description of the Property.
Location and Size.
The Forest of Kuitpo is situated in the Adelaide
Hills, exactly 30 miles from Adelaide by road to
the Forester’s house, 12 miles from the Willunga
Railway Station, 20 miles from Aldgate, 15 miles
from Mount Barker, and 22 miles from Blackwood.
The nearest township is Meadows, four miles away,
which resembles an English village. The forest has
an area of 4,719 acres.
There are three tracts separated by several miles —
acres.
The Knott’s Hill tract, or the North-
ern tract 1,528
The Central tract 818
The Southern tract 2,373
“The forest when taken over by the Government
in 1898 was not worth much, the unimproved value
not being more than 10s. per acre, and probably
considerably less. Mr. McTaggart used, at about
this time, to pay a rental of about £5 per annum,
and could then only run about 300 sheep for one
month in the year.”—Forester Durward.
Mr. W. R. Murray (Surveyor of the Woods and
Forests Department) states that from valuations
in the vicinity for similar land the unimproved value
is now, at date of writing (1916)
The Northern tract (1,528 acres) at 30s. per acre.
The Central tract (818 acres) at 40s. per acre.
The Southern tract (2,373 acres) at 255. per acre.
Average value of 4,719 acres = £1.46.
The outside boundaries of the forest are now
fixed by proper survey.
There are several rights of way through the forest,
and these will need to be considered. One apple
orchard has become established on the area, for the
leaseholder, having been given permission to have a
few apple trees for home consumption, has since
cautiously extended his plantation, and now repre-
sents his case as a right. While settlers around the
forest are welcome and desirable the settlement
should proceed on right lines.
Meteorology.
The meteorological records for the forest are in-
deed scanty, and only amount to rough records of
the rainfall for about four years. This matter re-
quires to be put right, as meteorological records are
a vital necessity in forest work.
Rainfall in the Forest of Kuitpo, Central Tract.
For the Central tract the following figures are
available: —
1912 (August 17th-December 31st) —14.62im or
40 days.
1913 August 17th-December 31st) —24.74 in. on 62
days.
1914 (August 17th-December 31st) —20.63 in. on
52 days.
1915 (August 17th-December 31st) —36.33 in. on
84 days.
The records for the nearest meteorological station
(at Meadows) are as set out on the following table.
These can be taken as a guide, but the rainfall read-
ings are not strictly applicable, e.g., for 1916 39in.
fell at the forest and 48in. at Meadows: —
Commonwealth Meteorology.
Element—Rainfall,
Station —Meadows.
From telegraphic figures only.
South Australia, sth January, 191 7.
E. BROMLEY, Divisional Officer.


Height
Growth.
Diameter
Growth.
Maximum
Height
of Trees.
Feet Per
Inches Per
Feet.
Annum.
j Annum
Average.
Average.
E. rostrata ... ...
2
•3-’5
80-90
E. obliqua ... ...
3 t
*5
80-100
E. Lencoxylon ... ... (
2
*3-5
80-100
E. fasciculosa ... ...
I* 5
•25-3
60
E. vimindis ... ...
. 1
5
•75--S
50-80
“The rainfall is heaviest from June to September,
but there is seldom a spell longer than three weeks
without a fall of rain, even in the summer.”—Fores-
ter Durward.
In July, 1913, a very severe frost killed wattles in
the open, and young Eucalyptus obliqua saplings
over 20ft. high were destroyed.
Topography.
A topographical survey of the various forest areas
is being made, in order to provide for a suitable
basis for the physiographical and soil surveys of
Dr. Teale, and preliminary lines of levels have al-
ready been run as the basis of a contour map.
Through the courtesy of the Survey and Railway
Departments data have been accumulated for this
purpose, and it is hoped in time to have a topo-
graphical picture of the whole of the basin of
Meadows Creek. Such a survey will assist in the
interpretation of geological and physiographical
phenomena, and will, with the soil surveys, form a
basis for a scientific study of forest conditions.
The Forester’s house is about 980 ft. above the sea
level. The highest points of the forest are from
I,oooft, to 1,200 ft. above sea level.
The direction of the main watercourses is South-
West, but these are dry in dry years in the summer
months. The North part of the North tract is un-
dulating, of a sandy soil overlying ironstone and
quartzite; the South-Eastern part is flat with a stiff
clay in parts, while along the creeks is a richer
alluvium. The quality of the soil in this North tract
is decidedly second class, and cleared areas are sandy
and liable to drift.
The central portion is practically all Tow lying and
the soil a poor stiff clay overlying nodular limestone
and gravels, with a rich alluvium in the lower parts.
This area is, and has been from time immemorial,
good Euc. rostrata (red gum) country on account
of the very wet condition for about five months in
the year.
The Southern tract is well timbered on the North-
Western side, being lifted above the wetter bottoms
It has largely a northern aspect. The centre is a
plateau about 1,200 ft. above sea level, and is at
present occupied by large quantities of roots of Euc.
cosmophylla, quite equal to good firewood mallee.
The soil is poor on the slopes with a quartzite sub-
soil, gravelly on the plateau, and rich and black in
the creek beds; slate rocks on sides of hill as seen
on sides of roads.
Geologically “the area is probably Pre-Cambrian,
there are some Tertiary gravels, and the creeks have
alluvium. There are wind-blown sands and Tertiary
sands which have not been cemented.” —F. Stillwell.
Dr. Teale is making a geological survey of the
forest, and his report will be issued later as a bul-
letin.
The forest soil is the poorer on account of the
periodic fires which have swept the area, but with
the establishment of canopy and the protection from
fires, and by the studious cultivation of humus, the
quality will improve immensely, and so will the
volume of the timber.
Social and Industrial Situation.
One of the fundamental principles for profitable
forestry is the establishment of a good local market.
At the present time there is little to dispose of in
the way of prime grown stuff, with the exception of
wattle bark, which sells on a royalty of £2 a ton,
and timber from the ruins of past fires, which is,
however, considerable and possibly worth consider-
able sums when sawn.
To put the areas in good order it will be neces-
sary to dispose of the timber at present in the forest,
and this will be done by treating definite areas yearly.
Every step will be taken to sell available produce
in order to defray the expense of treatment, to estab-
lish the necessary reputation for certain produce,
and generally to develop a sound steady business in
wattle bark and timber and the other minor forest
produce.
Agriculture 'and Land Grazing.
The value of some land which has been cleared
for cropping is from £lO to £l2 per acre when under
cultivation, but there is little really good agricul-
tural land owing to the wetness of the locality.
“The value of partially cleared land varies with
the degree of clearing, but the feed under the timber
is considered inferior.” —Forester Durward.
During the winter the country is too wet for graz-
ing, and cereal cultivation has been attempted, but
has been abandoned owing to the wetness of the flat
country.
Present Volumes.
In mapping the forest it has been considered hardly
worth while to estimate, except very roughly, the
quantity of timber until it is more definitely known
what our markets are likely to be; but as clearing
goes on the merchantable timber will be set aside for
seasoning.
Most of the standing timber is recovering from the
effects of sleeper cutting and inattention.
There is a bulk of such timber as required by
wheelwrights, for firewood, etc.
A detailed study of the present rate of growth has
not been made, as the condition of growth is so un-
like the ideal as not to be of much value; but as the
areas are treated and become fully stocked useful
data will be derived. One hundred trees of each
species are now measured, and will be remeasured
every five years to supply data; in the meantime
from a careful estimation the following data serves
as a guide:—
Annual Bate of Growth.
Classification of Land.
It is well known that most of the timber near
Adelaide is to be found in the hills. The plains have
long ago been “cut out,” and there are very large
areas of farming land to be supplied with fencing


Species.
*Area.
Species.
fArea.
Indigenous—
| Acres.
Introduced —
Acres.
Euc. rostrata
... j 202
Pinus insignia ...
929
obliqua
507
pinaster
41
fasciculosa
1
canariensis
10
leucoxylon
Y 325
muricata
20
viminalis
cosmophylia
1,500
gunni
ruhida ...
y 93
Other eucalypts
J 1
Year.
Specie^.
Acres Planted and
Position.
Total Area for
Year.
Total Aret
Pines.
t for Year.
Eucalypts.
1899
E. sideroxylon ...
18 0 120 A1
acres.
18-0
acres.
acres.
18-0
1900
P. insignis
1-5 224 B1
99
P. maritima
1-43 224 B1
4-33
4-33
99
P. halepensis
1-4 224 B1
...
1901
* P. insignis, P. halepensis ...
5-5 112 B2
99
t P. maritima and jarrah
7-5 220 C
>■ 16-1
13-1
1902
E. sideroxylon, E. teret'comis
7 0 220 C2
99
E. sideroxylon, E. creba
4-3 220
f 11-3
...
11-3
1903
E. tereticomis ...
100 112 D
99
P. canariensis ...
3 0 220
> 31-2
21-2
10-0
99
P. insignis
18-2 112 D2
1904
P. insignis
19-5 112 D2
99
P. maritima
3-8 112 D2
I 36-8
36-8
99
P. insignis
13-5 126 A2, 75a
1905
P. insignis
8-6 224 B3
99
P. nsignis
11-5 126 A3
> 20-0
20-0
. . .
1906
P. insignis
5 0 126 A4
99
P. maritima
4 0 126 A4
9-0
9-0
1907
P. insignis
17 0 120 A5
99
P. maritima
5 -8 120 A5
► 22-8
22-8
...
1908
P. insignis
27-75 120 A6
27-75
27-75
1909
P. insignis
11-75 120 A7
...
99
P. insignis
25-25 205 E
37-0
37-0
1910
P. insignis
103-8 252 E, 285
99
P. ma itima
7-6 252 F, 285
f 111-4
111-4
. . .
1911
P. muricata
10-0 205 E2
99
P. insignis
183-7 205 E2
I 204-7
193-7
1 1 . A
9
E. sideroxylon ...
11-0 112
11 • u
1912
Eucalypts
29-5 206 G
99
P. insignis
63-0 205 E.
> 92-5
63-0
29-5
1913
P. insignis
75 -3 206 G2
75-3
75-3
1914
P, insignis
26-3 206 G3
1
I
. . .
99
P. insignis
22-4 252 P
99
P. maritima
6-3 252 F
[ 141-0
141-0
. . .
99
P. insignis
86 -9 120 A8, 204
1915
P. insignis
67-2 207 H
99
P. muricata, P. benthamiana
10-0 207 H
I 77-2
77-2
...
1916
P. canariensis
7-7 206 G3
99
P. insignis
52-15 220
1 73-8
73-8
...
and other produce, the demand for which will in-
crease with time, and as closer settlement takes place
with the increase of population. In the hills them-
selves the timber is decreasing and deteriorating with
settlement, and each year tracts of timber are cleared.
In time it is inevitable that these forests will be as
islands in the sea, and as improved understanding
develops the returns will be increased.
The timber as it stands now both in the forest and
outside is capable of vast improvement, both in
volume per acre and quality,
It is impossible to give the percentage area under
timber in the vicinity; but it is the aim of th» holder
to reduce all land to the production of anything but
timber.
The Areas of the Forest under Forest Types.
Table I.
Utilisation.
The present amounts to posts, a few panels for
gateways for use in the forest, and wattle bark.
Licenses for firewood on a royalty basis of Gd. per
ton, or 10s. for a monthly license for a two-horse
vehicle and one man, or 15s. for a two-horse vehicle
and one man with another man cutting. Little sale
of produce has been effected, however.
Past Operations.
Only planting operations have taken place. Pines
have been planted with wide spacing in 10-acre square
blocks with a firebreak of 50 links between the blocks
and a 3-chain break on the outside, the indigenous
timber on the area being felled and burnt. Any
eucalypti planted have been placed at greater dis-
tances up to 12ft. by 12ft.
Planted Areas.
* Xot including firebreaks, f Including firebreaks.
* Filled up with insijnis, 1903.
t Planted later to fill up jarrah, 1905. Maritima, 2,000 planted.


Protection.
The only protective measures against fire have
been the firebreaks and the constant watchfulness
of the forester, who has often been without assist-
ance during very anxious times. There is an under-
standing between those in the vicinity that in the
case of bush fires mutual assistance is to be rendered.
The firebreaks are ploughed each season.
Administration.
The direction of the work in this forest has been
entirely in the hands of the Conservator of Forests
and all the work has been done under the oversight
of Forester Durward, to whose credit lies an immense
amount of very difficult work.
For a few months an assistant forester was at-
tached to the forest, but he enlisted. There are a
very few “old hands” temporarily employed, who
have carried out the operations with the help of men
put on for short periods during time of clearing and
planting.
PART 11.
Management of the Forest.
Object of Forest Management.
To produce timber of commercial value.
To produce such other minor forest produce as
tanning bark, firewood, etc.
To establish a system of experiments which will
be useful in the forestry of the State.
To serve as a training ground for the foresters of
the future.
To serve as an object lesson to the public, and at
the same time to be a pleasure resort for those who
wish to spend time in a forest.
Sylvicultural Systems.
Hardwood Types.
These types are not only desirable for the produce
they yield, but are necessary to serve to separate
the softwood areas, and thus assist in controlling
outbreaks of disease and fire.
Cuttings.
Clear felling for regeneration purposes and cut-
tings to remove undesirable trees.
Thinning of stands.
Final cuttings when the crop is mature.
Mixtures.
The eucalypts are rabid light demanders, and
therefore to protect the soil must be associated with
relative shade-bearing species wherever possible. In
this forest there should be no difficulty in this re-
spect. Moreover the associates will straighten up
the eucalypts and yield a greater return from the
soil.
Softwood Types.
Large seedlings or two-year-old transplants will
in future be used.
Pinus insignis rotation, 30 acres per year planted,
thinned, and clear felled at 35 years of age. Total
area, 1,055 acres.
P. maritima rotation, 20 acres planted per year,
40-year rotation. Total area, 800 acres.
Pinus canariensis rotation, 20 acres planted per
year, 4ft. apart, on a 40-year rotation. Total area
800 acres.
P. laricio rotatiqn, 20 acres planted per year on a
40-year rotation. Total area, 800 acres.
The insignis will be confined to the better localities
with the better soil and a moist subsoil.
The pinaster will be confined to the lower parts
where the wetter areas are, for the evidence on the
forest points to this locality suiting the Pinus mar-
itima.
The earary pine will be on the hill sides and tops
with somewhat rough surface of rock.
Other Species.
The A. melanoxylon will be introduced wherever
possible by seeding. Ftom evidence at present avail-
able in the forest it is at once obvious that this valu-
able tree is in its correct place when growing assoc-
iated with’ other species and protecting the soil.
A. pycnantha will be broadcast throughout our nat-
ural forest, and also in other places where soil pro-
tection is sought, nurses required, and an early rev-
enue likely. This shrub should pay handsomely for
a little attention. A. decurrens will be infused for
soil protection purposes and to assist in straighten-
ing up its associates, especially amongst the Enc.
fasciculosa (pink gum).
There seems to be no reason, once these species
become established, why, given proper protection
from fire, they should not regenerate in perpetuity
under special management.
The Pinus maritima seeding from such trees as 15
years old is coming up at distances of 15 chains from
the nearest plantation of that species. It seems
highly probable the canary pine will regenerate nat-
urally from seed and by clear felling of pines. It
seems quite likely that in certain seasons regenera-
tion will follow naturally with other species, and
thus if the problems in this connection are carefully
handled much advantage will result.
Total area of softwoods will be 2,825 acres, with
a yearly felling of 90 acres, besides the softwoods
which will develop in the mixed stands of hard-
woods.
Total area of hardwoods will be 1,044 acres, with a
yearly average felling of 26 acres approximately.
Potations and Expected Yields.
It can be seen from the above that as there are
not any forest areas under such treatment as indi-
cated above, it is therefore impossible to give a state-
ment of returns. All that can be said is that from
the rate of growth of individual trees in the bush
it is certain to be a high return under proper
management.
Total yield of chord wood and bark and other sub-
sidiary minor products is impossible to foretell.
“A very conservative estimate of timber in wood-
block form is 70,000 of red gum and 500,000 stringy
in the forest.” —Forester Durward.
The yields of pine timber under the present treat-
ment amount in some localities to nearly 10,000 cubic
feet per acre at 30 years of age; 6,000 cubic feet at
the same age is quite common even in areas of less
rainfall. It can be assumed than an annual incre-
ment per acre is between 100 cubic feet and 300 cubic
feet, and this from plantations made years ago when
conditions were less understood than they are to-day.


Central Tract.
Northern Tract.
Southern Tract.
Species.
Section.
Area.
Section.
Area.
Section.
Area.
acres.
acres.
acres.
E. ohliqua
112
50
209
19
/ 252
60
274
10
224
7
127
59
/ 274
t 10
ll 275
/
220
85
204
136
285
17
99 •••
...
...
...
...
/ 275
t 92
y 90
E. ohliqua
} 220
16
...
...
A. pycnantha
158
...
211
...
187
Total area of E. ohliqua — 5
56 acres.
E. rostrata
220
42
206
15
99 •••
217, 218, 109, 219,
103, 3460, 3434
170
...
...
...
...
212
...
15
...
Total area of E. rostrata — i
227 acres.
E. fasciculosa
...
274
2
99 ••• ••• •••
. . .
. . .
...
...
276
2
99 • • • • • • • • •
...
...
/ 275
t 92
} 16
Total area of E. fasciculosa
;— 20 acres.
E. rostrata and fasciculosa
1 220
1 9 1
1 ... 1
1
...
Total area of
E. rostrata and fasciculosa-
-9 acres.
E. rostrata, leucoxylon, fasciculosa
1
I I
209 |
93 I
1
...
Total area of E. rostrata, leucoxylon, fasciculosa — 93 acres.
E. leucoxylon, fasciculosa
• (1
i 127 1
206 |
20
170
1} •
...
Total area of E. leucoxylon, fasciculosa — 190 acres.
E. fasciculosa, ohliqua ... ... |
«
1 ... |
1 - 1
209 1
13
1 252
| 37
Total area of E.
, fasciculosa,
ohliqua — 50
arces.
Cutting Policy.
(a) Clear felling as soon as possible of all areas
to be set apart for natural regeneration and plant-
ing.
(b) There will not be any fellings of mature
stands for about seven years until there is a certainty
of continuity.
(c) Thinnings will be taken out at intervals, and
the cost of the work will be more than covered by
the sales of thinned produce. At Creswick the thin-
nings at 16 years of age are yielding a revenue of
£25 per acre.
The sylvicultural work should be entirely in the
hands of the forest staff, but the produce should be
disposed of by auction on site and removed within
a certain time in accordance with sylvicultural re-
quirements.
Planting.
Will be so arranged as not to encroach on the
good natural regeneration areas, the requirements of
each species will from now receive special attention
as regards soil and situation.
Planting and filling up of gaps and the produc-
tion of suitable sylvicultural mixtures will be spec-
ially developed in order to produce timber such as
stringybark free of gum veins. These are doubt-
less caused through the direct action of fire on the
stem, by exposure to winds, and finally by growing
on soil which has been burnt over periodically for
years, and is, therefore, devoid of the humus so neces-
sary for the development of first quality produce.
Ordinarily planting is best done in autumn in the
ease of the coniferae, and spring in the case of those
eucalypts which are frost tender.
Area of Forest.
Natural Regeneration.


Year.
Area Planted.* 1
Position.
Total for Year.
acres.
1
acres.
1900
...
...
1-6
224 B1
1-5
1901
...
...
. . •
1902
...
...
...
...
1903 f
... /
5-5
18-2
112 B2
112 D2
\ 23-7
1904
... |
19-5
13-5
112 D2
126 A2
V 33-0
1905
... {
8-6
11*5
224 B3
126 A3
}■ 20-0
1906
50
126 A4
5-0
1907
17-0
120 A5
17-0
1908
27-75
120 A6
27-75
1909
: I
11-75
25-25
120 A7
205 E
} 370
1910
103-8
252 E
103-8
1911
...
183 7
205 E2
183-7
1912
...
63-0
205. E
63-0
1913
75-3
26-3
206 G2
206 G3
75-3
h
1914
;;; I
22-45
86-9
252 F
126 A8 and 204
1 > 135-6
1915
67-2
207 H
67-2
1916
52-15
220
52-15
845-0
...
845-0
—
;
—
j j
.
Year.
Area Planted.
Position.
Total for Year.
acres.
acres.
1900
1-5
224 B1
1-5
1904
3-8
112 D2
3-8
1905
7-6
220 Cl
7-6
1906
4-0
126 A4
4-0
1907
5-8
120 A5
5-8
1910
7-6
262 F
7-6
1914
6-3
252 F
6-3
36-6
...
36-6
Pirn
i
is canariensis Plantations.
1913
30
220
3
1916
...
7*7
206 G3
7-7
10-7
...
10-7
Pinus muricata Plantah
ions.
1911
10
205 E2
10
1915
...
10
207 H
10
20
...
20
Eucalypt Plantations
Species.
1900
18-0
120 A
E. sideroxylon
1902
7 • 6§
220 Cl
E. marginata
7-0
220 C
E. sideroxylon
E. tereticornis
1903
...
... -j
4-3
220
E. crebra
L
100
112 D1
E. tereticornis
1911
110
112
E. sideroxylon
1912
290
206 G.
Eucalypts
1916
...
14*5
220
Eucalypts
93-8
...
...
FOREST OF KUITPO.
Pinus insignis Plantations.
Pinus maritima Plantations.
* Area of firebreak excluded. It can be considered to be about 10 per cent, in addition.
with P. halepensis, 1901, but filled up, 1903, with P. insignis.
f Originally planted
J Planted later, 1905, to fill up in between jarrah. §Omitted from total here as it is already taken in under
Pinus maritima.


Natural Regeneration.
Actually under
Timber.
Firebreak.
Total Area.
E. obliqua
E. rostrata
E. fascu ulo?a 1
E. Uucoxylon > Mixed
E. rostrata J
Planted
Finns insignis ...
Finns pinaster ...
Experimental plantations
Reserved Art
Area reserved or experiment and arboretum
Area reserved for grazing and other purposes...
Grand Total
acres.
606
207
330
acres.
50
20
32
acres.
556
227
362
1,045
102
U46
Areas, 1916.
845
37
114
84
4
11
929
41
125
996
99
1,095
?as to he Forester
I 66
90
d.
6
9
62
99
...
...
161
...
...
2,401 acres
Natural Regeneration.
Actually under
Timber.
Firebreak.
Total Area.
Species.
acres.
acres.
acres.
Pinus insignis ...
1,050
105
1,155
Pinus maritima ...
800
80
880
Pinus canariensis
800
80
880
P. lar do
800
80
880
Total -...
...
...
3,795
Area already
Additional Plan-
Total.
Planted, 1916.
tations Required.
acres.
acres.
acres.
P. insignis
929
226
1,155
P. maritima
41
839
880
P. canariensis ...
...
880
880
P. la/rici o
...
880
880
...
2,825
3,795
Natural Regeneration
Areas.
Area Required for Plan-
tations of Rotations.
Areas Reserved for
other Purposes.
Total
1,145 acres
3,795 acres
286 acres
5,226 acres
•
Present Area of
Forest.
Area Needed
Finally.
Area still to be
Acquired.
4,719 acres
5,226 acres
507 acres
Natural Regeneration Areas , 1916.
notations Contemplated.
Summary.—Areas of Forests and their Use.
The additional 507 acres are for the purpose of
planting to complete the proposed plantations of
softwoods.
The area to be acquired for this purpose should
be easy to clear, or already cleared, and on well-
drained hill sides, and the extension might with ad-
vantage be acquired early,
In all foregoing computations it is assumed that
10 per cent, firebreak will be allowed in addition to
the actual areas forested.
One of the problems to be worked out will be the
utilisation of this 10 per cent, area without reducing
its effectiveness as a firebreak.


Nursery.
Provision is being made for a nursery capable of
producing 250,000 trees annually, which, except in
the special case of large seedlings of the Finns in-
signis, must be at least two years old, or have been
once transplanted in nursery lines before being
planted in their permanent site. This is necessary
to check the growth at first and produce hardier
trees, and will mean cheaper planting owing to re-
duction in the cost of preparing the planting site.
Besides the trees above required for pure plantations
of conifers some quantity will be required for fill-
ing up gaps and planting in the natural regeneration
areas and in the rich alluvial creek beds, for some
time to come, such trees as the more exacting exotics
for the purpose of demonstration.
Protection.
Protection from fire is of the first importance. It
is proposed to erect two watch towers, one on the
extreme north border of the Northern tract in a
place from which it is possible to see in all directions,
another one on a selected high point in the Southern
tract. These will be manned during times of danger
by an outlook forest guard, and telephone communi-
cation will be established with the Forester. A wide
break will be established on the boundaries all round,
and only wattles will be grown on dangerous boun-
daries.
Besides this the policy of only employing those
who join as apprentices and dwell in the forest will
be strictly adhered to. Quarters and a garden will
be assigned for each dwelling. These men will be
skilled in fire fighting and will be always available
in ease of emergency. The spirit of co-operation
amongst the neighbours will be cultivated, and a
properly constituted organisation developed if pos-
sible.
By the introduction of less inflammable species
in belts between the others in the sylvicultural scheme
the danger of a large conflagration will be mini-
mised.
Administration.
The forest is under the control of the Bureau of
Forestry, University of Adelaide, loaned from the
Government with all provision. The Forester carries
out the work embraced in this plan by means of his
staff, but in cases of necessity any advice needed is
given.
Expected Financial Returns.
In the ease of the planted areas little can be said,
as the oldest plantation is only 16 years old. A graph
appended indicates the yield per acre to be expected
from well-planted areas, but in future careful sel-
ections of areas will be made at Kuitpo, and will be
planted, and most of our plantations will be heavy
volume carriers.
Utilisation.
The operations which are to be initiated at once
will involve the felling of all but timber which has
been planted. This will mean that wherever mer-
chantable timber is felled it will be set aside in a
depot where no possible harm can come to it, and it
will in the meantime be seasoning, but it must be
admitted that if it could be disposed at once at
a reasonable price that would be preferable. If the
forest were larger or more heavily timbered it would
possibly be a good step to establish milling opera-
tions, and once established hand it over to private
enterprise j but the question needs careful considera-
tion before a mill is started.*
If stringybark would be taken by the Government
departments as wood blocks, deckings, flooring, etc.,
at a payable price there would be no doubt that a
mill would be justifiable at once, especially if the
railway would take pines and stringybark and red-
gum.
It is entirely in the interest of the community that
such departments should review their attitude with
regard to these matters, and if possible assist the
State through our forests in this way.
According to Forester Durward the pink gum in the
form of small poles has a very long life when placed
in the ground. This should, with careful handling,
be the means of establishing an industry at the for-
est in rustic furniture, e.g., pergolas for the gardens
and cities of the State.
Wattles will be given all the attention that will
ensure the most revenue from this source, and it
should be considerable after the lapse of a few years.
The royalty per ton is £2 for bark, which only costs
the forest the value of the seed, 9d. per pound, and
a little labour in sowing amongst other trees.
Sale of firewood will play an important part in
putting the areas in order. The forest contains large
quantities of good firewood.
With regard to all these matters, including the
major produce of the forest in time to come, it should
be the principle to induce private enterprise to take
the raw material from the forest staff. At least the
conversion and utilisation of the produce should be
the work of a separate department so as not to em-
barrass the forest staff which will have enough to
do in its own line.
Transport and Roads.
The cost of transport from the forest to Willunga
Railway Station, including putting on truck, is 7s.
6d. per ton. Railage to Mile End is 3s. 3d. per ton,
or a total cost per ton from the forest to Mile End
of 10s. 9d. per ton. Our heaviest timber (green)
weighs about 751bs. per cubic foot ( i.e ., 30 cub. ft.
per ton), which will cost therefore 3s. per 100 super,
feet.
Our lightest dry timber weighs 361bs. per cubic
foot (62 cub. ft. per ton), which, therefore, will cost
Is. sd. per 100 super, feet for transport to Mile
End.
The firebreaks will serve as roads for the trans-
port of timber in the forest. Logging will have to
be done during the dry weather in autumn as far
as the main road, which will probably mean the
felling during the late autumn and removal to the
forest depots before the winter sets in.
Transport can be arranged so that the hauling
is practically all down hill. Material has been de-
livered in Adelaide at 15s. per ton for a three-ton
load.
The Financial Forecast of Forest Work.
Data used in working out a graph showing cost
of one acre of typical planted forest at the Forest
of Kuitpo on a basis of Bs. per day minimum wage
and pre-war rates for material. This cost can be
materially reduced in future.
•Since this was written milling has heen successfully commenced,
January, 1918.


P.maritima ...
Do.
Do.
Do.
o
Do.
Do.
Do.
Do.
«oue
o o o o
Do.
Do.
P. insignis ...
V
Species.
1909
1909
1900
1904
1906
1907
CO
o
00
CO CO
o o
05
CD CO CO CO
O O O' o
© © 4- 4*
1903
1903
1900
Year
Planted.
hhhMMm
t4 M h IO O M
OOMtMlO
© 4- tO H-•
to
o
>
05
W >
tO bO
O 05
> >
Ox »4
W>
120D3
126A2
126A3
224B3
tO H-
to t— 1
4*- tO
wwt)
to ►>
224B
Position of Plan-
tation.
Ol
oooca^
Oi CO
© -si >4 to Or
b9MW-J»b90
© ©
00 I— CO 00
05 CJl vl 4 k
© Sk 4-
© © ©
©
acres.
Area of Planta-
tion.
05
©©oo©©cpcpcpcp©co
O © O 00
©
00 00
©
©
X * X x
0 0 95®
' ' '05
4
X
©
X
H- h- 00
X
X X
00 oo
X
*
©
©
%
Original Spacing.
bO 00 00 © 00 © bO 09 00 00 00
00000000004-
Cv> InC CO
CO Cn h— 00
O Ox O O
*
tO 09 ©
-- 00 to
916
Present Average
Number of
Trees per acre.
09 to 4- 09
O On O o
:
09 4“ CO h- 05
i— 4- 00 05 CO
OOO^O
to 4- 00
ox © © ©
o o o o
to
4- © ©
© o ©
OICC
2,070
c. ft.
H
H
p
a>
Cubic
tents
Ac
1,160
600
05 09 09
-1 00 CO ©
O O O O
1 2.860
1,400
405
oo
Ox
c. ft.
Merch.
t
►j
’ 1§
09 bO 00
#*hOW
© Ox
:
I
4 Ol 4 M 05
O OU9 00 o
to ©
0409-1
oo >— <i to
Ox
I— > to
09 M M
© © ©
1130
o
True.
1
09
© 09 09 ©
O 4- to 09
© ©
09
220
108
©
o
H4*
C+
®
+H-5
Cr
i > a t>
! g
: ?
p
4-
Ox 05
.
4- 4-
4*- 4- Ox
© © © ©
©
©
©
5’
Average B.H.
Diameter.
O O 00 O
O O
h(CO
© O © 00
09 4 tO
©
tOtOtOCOtObOtOtOtObOCO
►— h-QO4-4^09©4^©©4-
Ox Ox
to 09 09 09
© tO 09 ©
09 4- ©
m094
4*
<1
ft.
Average Height.
oo oo
O 05
o o
I 1,900
2,140
JO 05 4k CO
tO 4- "oo -1 4-
O-lOCOi
o o o o o
© © Ox ©
4- *4- 00
O © © o
to
©
r
©
11,960
21,900
to
00
True.
to i—
O*
i
00
CO
3,000
[-5,560
[4,000
4,180
4,370
5,760
to
to
©
© 4-
© 4-
© ©
2.500
s*
*1
2
p
09
©
-4
cS
er
•M*
P
c+
o’
:
: :
:
| few years later
1 maritima a
halepensis
Filled up with
I among P.
I Inter planted
1 trees cut out.
| Exclusive of
Remarks.
Initial Outlay. per acre
Value of land 15 years ago taken as . . 10s.
Cost of planting and all operations con-
nected with it, e.g., felling, burning,
grubbing grass trees, ploughing,
fencing material, and erecting, rais-
ing pines in nursery, planting at
18ft. by Bft. apart, deterioration of
tools, bullock feed, etc. .. . . £lO
The clearing is the heaviest possible in
the State, and clearing, felling, cut-
ting up, burning timber, and grub-
bing grass trees alone costs £7.
Subsequent and Annually Recurring Expenditure
Cost of ploughing breaks for protection
of 217 acres, allowing half a chain
break around every 10 acres, plough-
ing done every year at .. .. Bd. to Is.
Supervision, including Forester’s pay,
etc. .. .. .. •. .. Is.
Cost of knocking off stool shoots 3s.
Pruning (done once), V2d. per tree .. £1 10s.
Thinning not done when planted Bft. by
Bft.
The whole of this recurring and subsequent ex-
penditure may be regarded as about equivalent to
3s. per acre per annum, which thus includes protec-
tion, taxation, supervision, and tending; 4 per cent,
being rate of interest allowed on the whole. The
unimproved value of land, taken all over, is 10s. ap-
proximately.
From evidence which has been carefully placed
together the avergae cost of a plantation of any
species is as represented on graph of cost.
The expense of stocking and maintaining an acre
of forest can be materially reduced below these fig-
ures.
The volumes per acre of produce have been ascer-
tained in the case of the Finns insignis, and, basing
the subsequent calculations on reliable data, estimat-
ing expenses and costs high and returns on volumes
low, it can be at least stated what the minimum re-
turns should be.
With careful and scientific management our re-
turns per acre should rise, and the cost of produc-
tion diminish considerably.
The cost of planting on areas which have once
been planted will be comparatively trivial. The
clearing will be done in extracting the previous
crop.
Summary of Survey of P. insignis and P. maritima, Forest of Kuitpo, 1916.
No. per acre.
Spacing 4' 2,722
„ 5' 1,742
„ 6' 1,210
„ 6' 6" 1,031
January 31st, 1917.
No. per acre.
Spacing 7' 889
„ T 6" 774
„ 8' 680
„ 8' 6" 603
No. per acre.
Spacing 9' 537
„ 9' 6" 482
„ 10' 435
APPENDIX TO WORKING PLAN OF FOREST OF KUITPO.
Experimental Work.
During the year 1916 a beginning was made with
systematic experimental work and investigations at
the forest. The main lines of work are:
1. Raising from seed numerous species which
were not previously found in the forest
or the neighbourhood.
2. Planting the commoner species of forest trees
at distances apart, e.g., 3ft. by 3ft., 4ft. by
4ft., sft. by sft., 6ft. by 6ft., and 7ft. by
7ft. respectively in order to have permanent
plots of these species under such conditions
of spacing.
♦ 51-7 per cent, stocked, 1916. t Inclusive of all diameters over and under 3" B.H. 0 T ri7C!OTTT
t Volume to 3" diam. Cost per acre. £lO 10s. av. § Exclusive of all trees under 3" B.H. L


Species.
No. of
Trees.
Seedlings.
Where Seed
Obtained.
Quercus pedunculata ...
370
Local
Quercus suber (Cork Oak)
Few
Victoria
Fraxinus lanceolata (Green Ash)
4,000
Canada
Cytisus laburnum
2,500
Local purchase
Acer negundo (Box; Elder)
430
Canada
Sterculia heterophylla (Kurra-
Many
Local purchase
jong)
Thuja orientalis (Thuja oriens)
China
600
A. Baileyana (Cootamundra
Wattle)
Lagunari'a Patersoni (Queens-
24
Local purchase
75
Local
land Flowering Oak)
Local
Albizzia lophanta
6
Rhus rodanthema
5
Local
Pinus pinea (Stone Pine) ...
1,700
Local purchase
P. pinaster (Maritime Pine)
20,000
Leira, Portugal
P. laricio (Corsican Pine) ...
33,000
New Zealand
P. contorta (Lodgepole Pine)
3,000
Canada
P. divaricata (Jack Pine)
1,200
Canada
Pseudotsuga taxifolia
48,000
Canada
P. muricata (Bishop Pine) ...
13,000
China
P. Jcoraiensis
16
P. benthamiana
40
P. densiflora
600
...
P. (unknown)
165
New Zealand
P. ponderosa (The Bull Pine,
Western Yellow Pine)
35,000
Euc. maculata (Spotted Gum)
L 100
New South Wales
Euc. diversicolour (Karri)
| t 80
Western Aus-
1 M
tralia
3. Sowing of seed in situ on ploaghed and un-
prepared but cleared land, to test how far
it- is possible to save labour and expense in
establishing forests of exotics.
4. Investigation in order to ascertain details of
best methods of establishing satisfactory re-
generation of indigenous species as blue
gum {Euc. leocoxylon) , red gum {Euc. ros-
trata), pink gum {Euc. fasciculosa) , and
stringybark {Euc. ohliqua).
5. Investigations to ascertain the best kind of
soils in respect to the development of each
important forest species. Dr. Teale is mak-
ing a geological and soil survey.
6. Investigations into cutting wattles in order
to produce coppice shoots.
7. Experiments to ascertain the effect of not
protecting young regeneration and young
exotic trees grown from seed in situ from
the rabbit and stock menace.
8. Investigations relating to the value of var-
ious timbers for purposes for which they
are not used at present.
9. Forest surveys, measurements of type trees
of each species, and laying out of sample
areas for testing growth per unit area have
been accomplished during the past year,
and as time goes on will be re-measured and
useful data accumulated.
For survey see page 17 of Working Plan of For-
est of Kuitpo.
Treating these sections seriatim.
1. The following seeds were sown in 1916 and
trees raised.
Some other species were sown, but the seed failed
to germinate, possibly owing to the fact that it had
been stored for years in the office of the Woods and
Forests Department.
2. The idea of this line of demonstration is to
obtain on a small scale as much information as
possible without losing time. The sylvicultural lesson
to be learned from such work is great.
3. A large number of species will be sown during
1917. This work is of a preliminary character to as-
certain at once what species can be raised in situ, so
that when seed is obtainable cheaply and in sufficient
quantities it will then be known what is the method
for securing the best results and avoiding expensive
nursery operations, e.g., the Finns canariensis is diffi-
cult to transplant, though I think the open root
method of planting this species has hardly had a
fair trial yet; but if it can be economically grown
from seed sown in situ the problem of foresting this
species is settled in this neighbourhood. Experiments
now two years old, of raising these trees from seed
in situ are giving excellent results. All possible steps
are being taken to collect seed from all sources.
There is yet a very important matter to be solved
by experiment, and that is the possibility of heavy
thinnings of areas occupied by mature pine trees
and testing whether the dormant pine seed in and
under the humus of the removed trees is capable of
coming up and restocking the area, if the opera-
tion is conducted at the right time of the year. From
evidence available it seems that in a good rainfall
area, such as Kuitpo ( see Working Plan of Kuitpo,
page 3), that in the case of Finns maritima there
should be little difficulty, but in the case of the Finns
insignis and Finns halepensis some doubt exists. At
Mr. Cave’s garden, at Mount Lofty, Finns insignis
and Finns maritima are seen to have regenerated
naturally in heavy grass for several years past.
No doubt after a heavy seed year clear felling in
autumn will open up the area for the germination of
the seed, and inasmuch as the seedlings will be thick
and the grass well checked, the possibilities are pro-
missing.
4. Such species as wattles, Euc. leucoxylon, ros-
tral a, and ohliqua are certainly best sown in situ if
the land is properly burnt over at the time. We
have enough evidence from past years at Kuitpo to
be sure of this.
5. The important result has been arrived at that
if the common broad-leafed wattle, Acacia pycnantha,
is stripped in the ordinary way and the remaining
stem felled close to the ground the wattle exhibits a
strong tendency to coppice, possibly owing to two
reasons — (a) the fact that the cambium has been less
damaged, and ( b ) the plant loses less moisture dur-
ing the hot months which follow stripping owing
'to the surface of the injured portion being con-
siderably reduced.
It has been found at Kuitpo by Forester Dur-
ward that about 80 per cent, of the wattles felled
coppice vigorously. If skill be used in felling the
percentage will undoubtedly increase.
The advantage apparent at present in this coppic-
ing is that, if properly tended and the coppice shoots
thinned judiciously, the root will produce a full
grown wattle in about 18 months or two years. The
tannin content has not been estimated yet, and it is
possible that the younger coppiced wattles are


















slightly lower in tannin content, but this probably
increases with the falling off in height growth. In-
vestigation of this matter is in hand.
6 Experiments have been initiated to test the
effects of omitting to fence against the rabbit pest.
7. The investigations concerning the durability of
the timber leads one to the conclusion that: —
Red gum of mature trees is extremely durable
in the ground, and has a life under ordin-
ary circumstances of easily 30 years, pos-
sibly longer.
Stringybark has a life of varying lengths in
certain places, but in the places where white
ants are numerous and other timber is
scarce the less mature timber may not be
able to withstand attacks long.
The pink gum, Euc. fasciculosa, is a very
dense timber, 741bs. per cubic foot when
green, seasons well, and is extremely dur-
able.
Small immature saplings of Sin. diameter over
sap have been known to remain serviceable
for 17 years at Kuitpo, and on this account
it will be specially valuable. The timber
is rather irregular in its growth in the poor
natural forests, but on coppicing and being
nursed with other timber, develops wonder-
fully straight poles relatively rapidly.
Specimens of Euc. fasiculosa (pink gum),
were sent to Messrs. Alcock & Co., of Mel-
bourne, who have kindly undertaken to
test this timber for special purposes where
great density is required.
Investigations into the cost of removing firewood
and other produce have led to the results given in the
Working Plan, p. 15. There are areas aggregating
several hundred acres where the roots under the
surface of the soil are found to exceed 30 tons per
acre.
The thinnings of the pine forests are finding a
ready sale at good prices on site, and attempts are
being made to sell by auction standing timber in the
forest; but before this is successfully accomplished
the business needs to be systematised. We can sup-
ply excellent flagpoles and masts from these thin-
nings.
8. During the past year an effort has been made
to see how far it is possible to persuade people
utilising timber to use the indigenous timber at pre-
sent standing in the forest.
The usual practice in clearing for planting is to
burn at considerable expense the timber occupying
the areas irrespective of its quality, a certain number
of posts being split beforehand. The experts in roll-
ing stock manufacturing of the Islington Workshops
were taken to the forest, and their impression was
that certain classes of timber could be utilised in their
workshops. The Engineer of Roads and Bridges has
also paid a visit to the forest, and is of opinion
that much of the timber can be used for wood pav-
ing.
Forester Durward was strongly of the opinion that
the Government should try to use stringybark for the
purpose of street paving, and with this idea the City
Engineer of Adelaide was approached, and he ex-
pressed the opinion that it could be used success-
fully. The unanimous opinion is that stringybark
for wood paving would be quite successful.
The quantity of rejects of wood blocks is some-
times considerable, mostly due to the fact that the
sawing has not been carefully done, possibly owing
to the defective saw machinery of the contractor;
others were rejected owing to “sap” and “veins,”
but relatively few.
The Engineer of Roads and Bridges is of opinion
that on a road where there is heavy traffic only the
best blocks should be used, but he considers that if
the policy is for a definite amount of wood blocking
to be done each year the blocks can be graded so that
those which will possibly not stand in a road where
there is heavy traffic might yet be just as useful in
a road where the demand of the traffic is lighter. Mr.
Stevens was favorably impressed with the experiment
of placing stringy bark in the Port Road. This seems
a satisfactory conclusion, and the timber can be
sawn annually and systemmatically from the forest
to supply this need, and at the same time assist the
forest sylviculturally with increased efficiency.
The development and utilisation of our South Aus-
tralian grown timbers will be relatively easy. Some
prejudice has, however, to be overcome, but this is
gradually disappearing.
An inter-departmental conference on the utilisa-
tion of timber from the Forest of Kuitpo lead to very
hopeful conclusion.
H. HUGH CORBIN.
During the course of his paper Mr. Corbin drew
attention to the value of stringy bark for paving
surfaces, on account of its cheapness when compared
with prices in the other States, He had been able
to purchase a milling plant with the result that a lot
of timber that would otherwise be lost as a com-
mercial commodity would be available, and turned
into wood block form. In this aspect the conditions
related in the paper read, has altered since it was
written. Some of the pine thinnings, too, are of
wonderful height, up 70 feet, while for railway
sheds they could have nothing better for rafters.
He had no intention when he came to the Confer-
ence to go into this particular paper, but neverthe-
less he would be very pleased to answer any ques-
tions.
Mr. HAY would prefer that discussion be de-
ferred until after Mr, Lane-Poole had read his paper,
when he would have some remarks to make and in the
meantime find an opportunity to consider some of
the details of the paper.
The CHAIRMAN pointed out that each one of
them was at equal disadvantage.
Mir. LANE-POOLE reminded Mr. Hay that his
paper had been read.
Mr. JOLLY expressed his appreciation of the
paper, and although, no doubt, some of his conclu-
sions may be wrong as he is only human, neverthe-
less it was so far probably the first attempt in Aus-
tralia at a working plan of such a detailed nature,
and for this reason alone the thanks of the Confer-
ence were due to him. Personally, he did not know
the local conditions sufficiently to offer comments,
but he would like to ask first about the wattle. Mr.
Corbin mentioned that this was sold on a royalty of
£2 a ton. He would like to have some information
about the yield and the time it took to obtain it.
Mr. CORBIN replied that the royalty of £2 a
ton was paid on the wattle bark in the forest. The
man who bought the wattle paid the royalty and
stripped it without any expense to the Department.
He took out the ton at his own expense and left
the sum of £2 per ton with the forester for the


bark which was quite green. He had not been able
to get at the yield per acre. The scheme had not
been worked up to that state of perfection as yet, as
the areas were not stocked with wattle, in fact, they
were exceptionally poor in that respect, but in the
future they would try to get as much out of the area
as they could. The wattle was stripped at any time
after five years, and when mixed with other trees
it was better to strip. It was straight and did not
have the branchy habit. There was a difference of
opinion on the point whether wattle was best grown
with other trees or in the open. When one saw the
wattle growing with other trees it appeared to be a
better proposition and he did not think that the
tanning contents were much less than when grown
in the open.
Mr. GILL mentioned in connection with wattles
that the £2 per ton was the highest they had
ever got, and they had not always been able
to get that price. In fact, it had gone down
as low as I Os. a ton, and another instance
never above £l, but the reason they secured
such a good royalty was that it was limited in ex-
tent and the man who paid it had been associated
with the department in the locality. He was afraid
that if there had been a large quantity of it and a
large number of persons came for it that probably
they would not get so much for it. Regarding the
character of the wattle, it was a question as to
whether it was a tree or not. It was actually a large
shrub up to 20 feet in height. There was no doubt
that it was a shade-demanding shrub, and he learnt
from one of the largest buyers that the bark obtained
in the shade of the high forest was superior to that
grown outside plantations. Looking at the matter
broadly, it had not been found that plantations in
the open had yielded as much as trees grown natur-
ally under the shadow of high forests. About five or
six years ago they had a remarkably good “take”
of wattle in connection with one of the plantations.
It was considered the record take for the district.
There was one disadvantage, it was associated with
pines. In discussing the matter by correspondence
with Mr. Hutchins, that gentleman pointed out that
the wattle in the capacity of nurse frequently out-
grew the tree it protected, therefore, he had to in-
struct Forester Durward to put on men to clear
away the wattles wherever they were endangering
the Pinus insignis. They had not always been ad-
vantage to them, as they had not always found the
necessary labour to develop the industry. He had
looked upon wattle as a good thing under certain
circumstances, until the war broke out there was a
decline in the industry owing to the importation of
bark from South Africa and the development of the
wattle industry there. It was obtainable cheaper in
that country than here. At the present time he under-
stood there were 100,000 acres of wattle under de-
velopment grown by cheap labour in South Africa,
therefore, he thought prices would go down, so while
efforts could be made to develop the wattle industry
here, he would not rely too much upon it. Then
again the cost of the labour has been very much
heavier than was necessary to strip the wattle. Pri-
vate owners of wattles have told him that wattles
would not pay at all. Men would not take on the
work under the old conditions that they used to.
Now they demanded at least half the profits made.
Mr. LANE-POOLB said that that was not the
experience in New Zealand.
Mr. GILL: Speaking as a Commissioner of the
National Park, they have found the prices enhanced
through the war. He hoped of course that wattle
would continue to bring a high price, but he could
not hide the possibility that they would not main-
tain a high price later on.
Mr. JOLLY considered that wattle would be a
minor forest product grown under the shade of
timber trees, so the State conditions would be more
favourable than the position of the private man, and
that aspect would strengthen the State position. Mr.
Corbin mentioned that there were large areas of
badly drained land carrying stunted eucalyptus in
the Kuitpo Forest, and that it was proposed to deal
with these. It would be interesting to know what
treatment was contemplated.
Mr. CORBIN; It was really mallee land of ordin-
ary appearance and interesting work had been done
upon it, but they had not included it in their pro-
gramme. As a preliminary step, however, they had
planted 100 trees of different varieties, and we are
observing what was happening to these. The country
was most interesting and quite exceptional. They
believed that the state of the country was due to bad
drainage. It was a plateau with a considerable
amount of iron in solution, and it was a problem
to know what to do with it. However they were
still investigating it, but could not make a definite
statement about it yet.
Mr. GILL knew that Mr. Corbin was right in his
assertion that the drainage was the trouble.
Mr. JOLLY considered that if the country could
be brought under forest it would be a good thing
as it was very favourably situated as regards mar-
kets. He would like to utter a note of warning about
too much detail being put into working plans before
they were advanced far enough in sylviculture.
Mr. Corbin had said that they proposed to thin in
seven years. He personally would not lay that down
as a fixed rule, but that it should be done when it
needed it. It sounded to him to be a very early date,
and personally he would not be satisfied to specify
that period. He would be glad if there was any
information available about the growth of Pinus
laricio.
Mr. CORBIN said he could not on the spot, but
from the evidence the soil conditions and the rainfall
were satisfactory. It was quite safe, he thought,
to transport it to other patches. With regard to
actual developments he could not say much, and the
same remark applied to Canary Island pine, of
which there was a 20-acre patch.
Mr. JOLLY said that he concluded that Mr. Cor-
bin was proposing the clear cutting of areas for the
regeneration of hardwood forests. Clear cutting
might be allright for small areas, but he would like
to know what area it was proposed to treat in a
block, to clear cut in one area.
Mr. CORBIN said that according to their pro-
gramme they were going to attempt to regenerate
about 40 acres a year, not necessarily all in one
block. He had not the least doubt about the regener-
ative capacity of the gums. The seed seemed to lie
dormant for many years, and if they could get a
fire over the area, they could show over and over


again at Kuitpo that it had been satisfactory. If
they scratched the surface they would get the red
gum coming up, and where stock were put on the
country and had caused an abrasion on the ground
it would be found springing up. In the case of
the stringy it was different. They had a dense
jungle of it, and there was a good deal of rubbish
there also. They proposed to let the material that
was suitable for mining props, etc., go, and the old
wrecks which were not much good for anything else
they proposed to ring and then burn the area over,
and they were satisfied that if they selected their
areas aright, they would get a regeneration. The least
they could do was to provide for all contingencies
by doing this kind of work, and where they got a
good patch they would keep it, and where they did
not they would seed or consider some other method.
They were going on and getting patches as they
could, and he felt sure they would meet with a good
deal of success.
Mr. JOLLY referred to the ability of the seeds
of various species to retain the power to germinate.
It was not hard to find in the literature of the sub-
ject that the seeds of red cedar will germinate after
lying upon the ground for years. In Queensland
they had tested red cedar, but could not keep the
seed for 12 months. By that time it was useless. Such
small points as these were of importance to foresters,
and it was a branch of work that required investiga-
tion. The percentage devoted to fire breaks in Mr.
Corbin’s paper was 10 per cent., which struck him
as being high.
Mr. CORBIN said that they had to accept that
figure at present, but they hoped that it would not
remain at that for all time. They expected to adopt
other methods, but there was a great deal of work
to be done.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD said that in New Zealand
when they made a fire-break they grassed it and put
sheep on.
Mr. CORBIN said if they were to grow grass on
fire-breaks it would be just as well not to have any
at all.
Hon. Mr. STYLES considered that the percentage
of fire-break could not be brought down lower with
safety.
Mr. CORBIN felt that (here was no good in worry-
ing about sylviculture if they were going to get
their forests burnt out. He thought that if they
could get a species such as blackwood or oak with
dense foliage, and which was not inflammable and
planted it out, it would act as a catch for sparks.
Mr. JOLLY mentioned that that was the prac-
tice in various parts of the world, namely, using trees
for fire-breaks. There was one important point which
had been raised, namely, the attitude of other Gov-
ernment departments towards the local timbers.
South Australia seemed to have had a good deal of
trouble from this quarter, as had Queensland also.
It seemed unfortunate that many Government de-
partments entertained a prejudice against using their
own timber. To give a concrete instance, in Queens-
land they had a species of eucalyptus, blaekbutt,
which was common to New South Wales and Queens-
land, and in New South Wales was highly valuable,
but in Queensland it took two years hard work to get
the works department to accept it. That was a
ridiculous position. He would like to know what
work had been done in turning stringy into wood-
blocks. In Adelaide they had talked pf laying the
road to Port Adelaide with it.
Mr. CORBIN said that the question of the utilisa-
tion of stringy for wood blocking seemed to him. to
be so important that he suggested to the Hon. J. H.
Vaughan, their last Commissioner of Forest land,
that they could not possibly wait for the result of
an experiment in that direction. If they had to
experiment and wait for 20 or 25 years before they
could get a result, it would be a valueless proceed-
ing. He had suggested to the Minister to call a con-
ference on the subject, and he did so. Samples were
produced. The delegates were taken to the forest
of Kuitpo and a considerable number of blocks were
cut out. The idea originated with Forester Durward
and not with him. He was the officer in charge of
forests, an excellent man, and it was his suggestion.
All that he (Mr. Corbin) did was to emphasise the
matter to the Minister. The Minister saw the value
of the thing, and they obtained an expression of
opinion which was universally in favour of the utili-
sation of stringy for woodblocks. Mr. Goodman,
Manager of the tramways, estimated that he would
require 20,000,000 blocks in Adelaide. In the year
1910 the price was £9 9s. a thousand, now it is near
£ll 11s., and Mr. Goodman considered that they
would have to pay £ls 15s. for blocks from the other
States soon. He thought it should be seasoned, and
there would be no question about the successful sale
and utilisation of that timber. Partly on the strength
of that encouragement, although not entirely, they
had put in a mill and were helping sylviculture
along, and turning a lot of the material into wood-
blocks.
Mr. JOLLY noticed that the cost of pruning (done
once) at per tree was £1 10s. That struck him
as being a high charge on the plantation. Appar-
ently 720 trees per acre had been pruned. Was it
not possible to reduce the number of trees pruned
dealing only with the dominant specimens.
Mr. GILL said that all the trees required pruning
to at least six feet, as then if a fire occurred it only
burnt slowly over the forest floor. It was a fire pro-
tection charge to a large extent.
Mr. JOLLY considered it to be somewhat exces-
sive, viewed from a fire protection standpoint.
Mr. GILL said the price of labour had to be con-
sidered. They could not always get boys to do the
work.
Mr. JOLLY asked whether closer planting would
obviate the pruning.
Mr. GILL pointed out that there would still be
dead limbs, although a great number of them would
possibly be eliminated.
Mr. JOLLY mentioned that his question pointed
to whether it could not be satisfactorily accomplished
by closer planting, resulting of course in better tim-
ber as well as being a lower charge on the planta-
tion. The figures seem very high and the matter
was a particularly important one.
Mr. CORBIN agreed that Mr. Jolly had brought
forward an important point. He was entirely in
agreement with him that if the planting were closer
there was a certainty of getting side branches more
quickly suppressed, and it would not be necessary
to prune with the same degree of trouble as at the
present time, and dead branches would probably be


knocked off to within three or four inches of the
main stem, aftid the area acquire the same immunity
from fire, had to be done with a saw. He was certain
that the result would be a better quality of timber.
Another thing was that the thinning would more than
likely result in an increased yield per acre. They
were endeavouring to adopt these revised methods,
and he could show them places where this had already
commenced.
Mr. JOLLY deprecated any idea that he had
drawn attention to these matters in any carping
spirit, and he was obliged to Mr. Corbin for his
information.
Hon. Mr. STYLES would say that there were two
points he would like to refer to which had been
raised by Mr. Jolly. The first was that difficulty
had been found in inducing the State Public Works
Departments to utilise their own timbers. He had
spoken of this matter more than once, but he felt
that to-day the forestry departments of the several
States had a splendid opportunity of pushing their
wares on to the Public Works Department. So satis-
fied were they in South Australia to give every en-
couragement to forestry and to other departments
that provided for the public buildings of the State,
that they had recently laid down a policy and in-
structed the Public Works Department that the roof-
ing of a certain building should not be done with
galvanised iron. They had slate quarries in the
State, and slate must be put on that roof, to show
the general public of South Australia not only that
we had slate in the State but that is was a better
material for roofing in our warm climate than gal-
vanised iron. At the present time he was pleased
to relate that they were negotiating for one of their
largest buildings to be roofed in this manner. He
would suggest to Mr. Corbin that if he had any
timber suitable or could suggest how the products
of the State could be utilised in the Public Works
Department and would bring the matter under his
notice, he would push it along, because pre-
ference must be given to local products. On
account of the war conditions it seems an
opportune time to press the position with great ad-
vantage. The other point was that he desired to
add his appreciation of Mr. Corbin’s work in having
attempted for the first time in Australia to provide
a working plan and to place it before a Forestry
Conference.
Mr. JOLLY pointed out that they all had plans,
but that Mr. Corbin’s was the first detailed plan.
Hon. Mr. STYLES said while they greatly appre-
ciated Mr. Hay’s paper and the plans submitted to
conference on the previous day it was the detailed
plan to which he was referring, and that Mr. Jolly
himself had said that he did not know but that there
was not too much detail. But something had been
attempted and something done by Mr. Corbin that
might lead to greater efforts in future and would be
helpful to all the States and to forestry in general.
Mr. LANE-POOLE stated that Mr. Corbin had
sent his paper over some months ago, and in con-
nection with it there was a point that he would like
to bring up. For instance, there was the question
of finding a shade-bearing tree to associate with
the eucalypts at Kuitpo. Very valuable work was
being done, and he trusted that Mr. Corbin would
push it on, and that a tree which would act as a
second storey to our forests would be provided. In
Western Australia they had practically nothing to
take the place of the second storey. Casuarina and
Banksia were the only ones slightly shade bearing.
The question of thinning in six years brought him to
pruning. He took it when Mr. Corbin said he intended
to thin in six years he contemplated much closer
planting of insignus, closer than anywhere in Aus-
tralia.
Mr. CORBIN replied that last year they had a
certain amount of trees in the nursery and suffi-
cient to plant out an allotted area of 30 acres, six
feet apart. There seemed to be a difference of
opinion about the distance to place insignis trees
apart, but he thought six feet or five feet would be
a satisfactory space, and he thought that that would
vary to some extent with the conditions existing in
the special areas. He had no hesitation in saying
that trees put in eight feet apart provided a cheap
and good volume of timber at the end of 30 years.
Where the case industry was important if a large
diameter was wanted, they might attain it possibly
more quickly in that way. The trouble was what
were they going to do in clear felling, they could
only take trees of a certain diameter, and they
had left on their hands a lot of stuff that was
worth nothing, and they did not like to destroy it.
If they took thinnings first and gave all the added
area and light to increasing the size of their trees
it was not clear to him that they would not get as
satisfactory a volume at the end of the same time.
In any case the latter method would give a cleaner
timber and closer ring. He was in favour of that.
He had anticipated making them four feet apart.
The insignis was a tricky tree, and perhaps they did
not thoroughly understand it. He had put trees all
four feet apart in experimental plots, with a view of
developing first class timber.. With the insignis
growing so quickly when planted in satisfactory soil
and suitable places he was not sure that it would not
require thinning in seven years. He appreciated the
criticism offered by Mr. Jolly, and he liked it. It
acted as a safeguard against possible mistakes. After
all it was the spirit of the Conference that they should
do a lot of good work in the exchange of ideas. He
rather welcomed a slating than that folk should
merely say, “Yes, it is very nice/’ and then let the
thing go on without expressing an opinion. He might
probably be wrong in specifying five to seven years.
In some areas they might have to thin at that age and
in some other instances later. When they got to know
the conditions and the trees he thought they would
find that they would thin probably at that time. It
would then be almost a rule of thumb to thin at a cer-
tain age. At Kuitpo the conditions were different to
other places, and the city was within 30 miles of
where they could get rid of their thinnings. He had
received from a large firm of utilisers in Adelaide
a letter saying that they were so satisfied with
the timber that they wished for a contract for
200,000 super feet of six inches down to
two inches. They offered a satisfactory price,
bigger he thought than had been offered for any
similar material in the Commonwealth. That, of
course, affected the whole situation. It was sug-
gested that if insignis was good for wood pulp
there would be no question about thinning, prob-
ably they would get a satisfactory result Avith closer
spacing and superior timber. Insignis was per-
fectly satisfactory for such purposes as general


building timber if they could accept the opinion ex-
pressed by those who sold building timber. Since
he had been in the State he had always advocated
that they should endeavour to provide timber for
local construction. The forests were in some cases
at a distance from Adelaide, but they were valuable
in any neighbourhood and there was no reason
why the forests should not act as a kind of timber
supply agency and provide local buildings with the
necessary material, and save the freight on timber
from places like Adelaide. One forest was 154 miles
away from the city, and there were a good many
houses built with timber which came over 154 miles.
If they could send for their timber to the forest it
would be satisfactory and would be cheaper and would
assist the forests.
Mr. LANE-POOLE thought he could throw a
slight ray of hope on the question of wattle bark.
In South Africa it was always black wattle grown
on moist land on the best agricultural land, and it
had proved more profitable to the farmer in Natal
to grow wattle rather than maize. The labour em-
ployed was Coolie labour, and the interesting point
was that Coolie labour had ceased, and no more
Indian labour would be sent to South Africa in the
future, or rather in about five years that source of
labour .would have ceased because their indentures
were for six years and there were only about five
years to run. Then South Africa would have to fall
back on black labour, which was not one-half as
efficient, so that it may prove profitable in this
State to grow golden wattle with its high tannin con-
tents close to extract work at, say, Mount Barker.
With regard to Canary Island pine, the difficulty
was to obtain seed.
Mr. CORBIN said that the ruling price in South
Australia has always been good for this, about
which Mr. Gill had also offered some suggestions in
connection with his working plans some time ago,
his reply was contained in the paper he had read.
Inspector Durward, who possessed local know-
ledge, informed him that £2 per ton royalty was the
pre-war rate, and he was satisfied that to-day he
could get £3, and certainly £2 10s., but, unfortu-
nately, the amount of wattle was limited and the
chances of obtaining a stripping this year were not
very great. He was personally obliged to Mr. Lane-
Poole for the information he had conveyed to
members of Conference in regard to Canary
Island Pine seed. He himself had written to Tener-
iffe for seed, but imagined that his letters had been
lost. At any rate he had come to the conclusion that
he could not get the seed. Canary Island seed sold
in Adelaide was about 15s. a lb. They had a cer-
tain number of trees in South Australia and could
get a small quantity of seed from them.
Mr. LANE-POOLE stated that a better tree than
cluster pine for reproduction could not be found. It
seeds very early and comes up in quantities. It was
not scorched by the sun as insignis was. At Hamel
there were good instances of it, and the trees were
13 years old. The matter of the State utilising its
local timbers had been touched upon. In Western
Australia they had the greatest difficulty in inducing
anybody to use local timbers. Fortunately the Archi-
tects’ Association, of which Mr. Eales was President,
had been helping very much, and in his presidential
address he pointed out the absurdity of using Oregon
when there was karri locally obtainable for super-
structure work. A little over 100 tons of Oregon
were sent to Wyndham Meat Works at a cost of
over 50s. per hundred super, feet, whereas karri
could have been obtained for 20s. to 255. per 100
super. He had protested against this Oregon timber
being used in the construction of the State Meat
Works, but unfortunately it had already been sent
forward. The matter of the value of pine thinnings
and pine timber the figures had come from Victoria,
but none of the figures were pre-war figures. He had
yesterday purposely refrained from quoting Hamel
figures, but they were sending from Hamel pine thin-
nings, and the man who bought them was taking
everything except branches it might be said, still in
ordinary times they would not be able to sell a single
stick as. there was 75 miles haulage by train to Perth,
and the consequence was that the value would drop
to nothing. The Victorian figures work out high,
and he fancied they would have to be cut down to
less than one-third after the war when Baltic timber
began to come in.
Mr. CORBIN said that that aspect of the case was
very important, and there was no doubt that pre-
war rates were different to present rates. The
firm to which he had made reference were importing
manufactured goods from Sweden, but the material
that they had been obtaining from South Australia
had been a revelation to them. They asserted that
it was more satisfactory than the imported material
they had been getting and cheaper than the pre-
war prices they had paid for that timber from
Sweden. He had gone into the question of the con-
tinuity of business with that firm. He had no reason
to believe that they had been flirting with them. He
believed they had developed a local industry which
had come to stay. He had taken the members of
the firm to the plantations, and had gone to con-
siderable trouble with them, but he felt satisfied now
that he was on a fairly sound basis.
Mr. LANE-POOLE referred to the question of
the cost of firewood in Adelaide. 10s. 9d. was the
cost of transport. The extraordinary charge made
by the Railway Department for cleaning out the
rolling stock was a very significant and remarkable
item. Was the price of 15s. to the consumer or was
it the cost price?
Mr. CORBIN remarked that they had had to grub
it by hand labour. It was a pure experiment, and
they had no machinery to do the grubbing, but that
cost them something, and they had also to provide
the transport to the railway station which involved
double handling, and when the material arrived
at the depot in Adelaide it had to be taken to the
consumers’ houses. The work was done at a loss,
but we had to make a start, and at the present time
they thought they could lower their cost.
Mr. LANE-POOLE asked what was the estimate
of the cost to put it on the market in Adelaide.
Mr. CORBIN replied that at the present time it
should at least cover expenses and enable them to
clear the area for operations.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said the clearing cost £7 an
acre. In Western Australia it is a terrifically high
price, and the Agricultural Commissioner put some
of the heavy clearing in the South-West at £6 10s.


Clearing at Kuitpo should not cost more than £3
or £4.
Mr. CORBIN was convinced that they could re-
duce the cost of clearing. He was simply taking the
figures as they stood.
Mr. LANE-POOLE asked if Mr. Corbin used a
traction engine for hauling the timber out.
Mr. CORBIN replied that they did not. The costs
had been greater than they otherwise would have
been on account of the presence of little grass trees,
which were considered to be fatal to any plantation
until they were grubbed out. They were growing
there as thickly as wheat.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said the costs for grubbing
out blackboy was £1 2s. 6d.
Mr. CORBIN said that those grass trees were
different to blackboys. They were little plants and
grew from 18 inches below the surface.
Mr. GILL: The trouble was that there was no
other country available.
Mr. JOLLY wished not to create a false impres-
sion as regards Queensland. It had not been his
intention to say that their department would not
use local timbers. They were unique in that respect
in Australia apparently. But they would not use
timbers which were extremely good simply because
they wanted the highest quality. They must have
ironbark and they would not take blackbutt.
Mr. GILL had known the Kuitpo Forest from the
start, as he had been directed to select it,
and knowing it he was appreciative of the
working plan compiled by Mr. Corbin. There were
one or two points upon which he did not see eye to
eye with that gentleman, but he wanted to point out
what the position was before he was able to start
upon the working plan. When they originally started
work at Kuitpo, to begin with, he had had to spend a
month or six weeks on a radius of 20 miles exploring
all the sections that were to be obtained. Those that
he wanted most he could not get. At that time the
department was being starved and he had had to
exercise the greatest economy. In the northern re-
serve he had planted on the original ground without
cultivation. He had put that in at the end of the
year. For one or two years after that they did not
have a team or a plough available for want of money.
It must be clearly understood that they had to push
along and overcome many obstacles —but in spite
of that they could claim that they had done some-
thing that had given a good lead for future opera-
tions. For years there was no possibility of dispos-
ing of any of the timber there, except for minor pur-
poses, mainly for their own use. Take the pink
gum, which was the finest in South Australia. There
was only one man who ever attempted to do anything
and then he wanted some special privilege over and
above the existing liberal terms. In their previous
endeavours to get markets for timbers, they had
made such losses that the Government decided that
nothing must be done in the direction of producing
forest products unless there was a certain contract
which would return the money expended and a fair
profit besides. As regards the making of work-
ing plans, those were most important, but un-
der the circumstances in which they were placed
in former times, it would be impossible to at-
tempt anything of the kind. Sometimes he had,
had an assistant, and sometimes he had had the ser-
vices of a surveyor and at other times not, and
things had been done in a primative way, and the
consequence was that he had been constantly travel-
ling and it was impossible to do anything in the way
of making working plans, as they had never known
how much money would be available for their opera-
tions. Sometimes they had to stop their operations
because the amount voted was less than they had
estimated for. He recognised that if perfect timber
was to be obtained, closer planting had to be adopted,
but often they did not have the plants at their
disposal, and no money to grow them; with the in-
dustry so starved they could not carry on on a
proper basis, but at the present time the prospects
were so bright that he felt that Mr. Corbin would be
able when he, Mr. Gill, ultimately gave up, to carry
on his operations in a far more successful position
than had ever been his lot.
Hon. Mr. STYLES referred to paper submitted by
Mr. Corbin. They all understood the disabilities
under which South Australian forestry had laboured
for many years, but they must live upon the history
of the past, as there was a hopeful outlook for the
future, and that all disabilities would be removed
at no short distance of time.
Mr. JOLLY considered the question of spacing of
trees in plantations to be of extreme interest. Every-
thing depended upon the conditions, the object
for which they grew timber, the markets and so on.
He would like to quote from an American publication
a summary of the result of experiments in Germany.
The experiments in question were continued for 50
years. They had been investigating the effect of the
various systems of planting and sowing. At the end
of 50 years it was found that planting up to
four feet was not as successful as planting over four
feet apart. That was a most interesting result and
refers to spruce. The value of the product from the
1.13 metre spacing was 2,890, and the value
of the product on the 1.70 metre spacing on
an area suffering from frost, was 2,854. The
difference was neither here nor there. 1.70
spacing corresponded to sft. 6in. Those results
of 50 years work were of extreme interest to for-
esters. Personally, he would be surprised to see
any district in Australia which would warrant any
closer planting than sft. Gin. Each locality wanted
its own special treatment, but they must not be lead
astray by such arguments as planting three feet or
four being essential for good forestry.
Mr. CORBIN: In those special areas about which
they had been talking, the whole of the work up to
1916 had been directed by Mr. Gill and done by
Forester Durward, and far from criticising it, he
paid a tribute to the great value of the work that
had been done. It was an object lesson to everyone
who went there to see the variety of the work done
and the success attained in directions. The spacing
problem was very important. Mr. Jolly had spoken
of the German conditions, and there seemed to be no
argument about it. He would like to say in dealing
with indigenous species, such as red gum or any
gum that might be mentioned, if they considered the
trees as they were at the present time for every adult
tree that existed, they have had probably in the be-


ginning thousands of seedlings, but the law
of the survival of the fittest, or the natural
thinning out had only left so many per acre.
He thought the trees were not all that they
might be, but unless they had trees fairly
dense on the ground to start with they could
not control them. If they planted Canary Island
Pine at eight to 12 feet apart, they would become
big after they had been planted a number of years,
and the area fully stocked, but supposing some de-
veloped two or three leaders and were unsatisfac-
tory, they could not afford to take them out. They
had to remain there and there always were a good
many trees that were undesirable, whereas if they had
been more numerous on the area they could afford
to go through and take out those that were least
desirable and eventually have perfect trees left. He
had seen a great deal of eucalyptus plantations in
South Australia, and he wished to say they had not
any sylvicultural control over those areas, because
they were few originally under stocked. If they
could obtain control in another way, if they
had wattle growing among the trees—it was a rapid
grower, and was doing a great amount of good, in
straightening up their trees and giving shade,
they could put their trees a wider distance apart
than otherwise. The Americans were seized with
the importance of large areas and they put
in their trees six and eight feet apart. Their
object in Australia should not be so much to cover
areas as to leave behind good possibilities. He was
glad to hear Mr. Jolly’s opinion that any planting
under sft. 6in. was too dense.
The Hon. Mr. STYLES (Chairman) suggested
that Conference should take the reports of the two
sub-committees appointed at an earlier stage of the
sittings.
The Hon. Mr. ASHFORD moved:
“That the two reports be adopted.”
INTERSTATE FORESTRY CONFERENCE.
Special Sub-Committee appointed to consider
Forestry Statistics as published in the Common-
wealth Year Book (Vol. 9, 1915).
Present: Messrs. C. E. Lane-Poole (Conservator
of Forests, W.A.), Convener; R. (Dalrymple-Haty’
(Chief Commissioner of Forests, N.S.W.), W. Gill
(Conservator of Forests, S.A.), and N. W. Jolly
(Director of Forestry, Queensland).
Mr. Lane-Poole pointed out that figures as given
on page 382 of the Year Book were absolutely mis-
leading. It was resolved, That this Committee re-
commends that the table on page 382 be amended by
the insertion of an additional column so that it will
show—
Permanent Forest Reserves,
Temporary Forest Reserves.
With reference to table on page 383 it was re-
solved “ That the caption in the second column be
altered from ‘Total Forest Area’ to ‘Total Wooded
Area.’ ”
Referring to table on page 384 “Forest Reserves
and Nurseries,” it was resolved to recommend that
this be altered as follows. —Under the heading “Par-
ticulars” differentiation be made between the number
of “Permanent Forest Reserves’’ and “Temporary
Forest Reserves.”
With regard to table on page 386 “Quantities of
local timbers sawn and hewn in each State of the
Commonwealth,” it was resolved, “That in the opin-
ion of the Committee the data collected in this table
does not represent the total production of each
State, and the Committee suggest that the amplifica-
tion of the returns be left to the authorities in each
State.”
The Committee further decided to recommend
that the heading “Plantation Trial Stations” should
be amended to “Plantations.”
C. E. LANE-POOLE,
Convener.
INTERSTATE FORESTRY CONFERENCE.
MEETING OF NOMENCLATURE COMMITTEE.
20 th November, 1917.
Present : Messrs. C. E. Lane-Poole (Conservator of
Forests, W.A.), Convener; R. Dalrymple-
Hay (Chief Commissioner of Forests, N.Si.W.);
W. Gill (Conservator of Forests, S.A.); and
W. Jolly (Director of Forestry, Queensland);
and Acting Secretary (A. H. Fairey).
The Committee after full discussion came to the
following decisions: —
(1) We consider that for the present it would not
be advisable to attempt to amplify the com-
mon names of timber trees except those which
might be of sufficient commercial value to
come into export or Interstate trade.
(2) We suggest that it be agreed upon by the
Heads of the Forestry Departments in each
State that in any omitted timber which may
subsequently come into timber commerce,
trade names shall be created which shall not
conflict with any already in use.
(3) The Committee suggest that the following list
of Australian Commercial Woods, with the
common names furnished, be submitted for
adoption by all the States, viz.:
Coast Ash (iF. Sieberiana) .
Mountain Ash ( E . regnans).
Alpine Ash (F. gigantea).
Blaekbutt ( E . pilularis).
Bloodwood {E. corymbosa).
Red Box ( E . polyanthemos).
Brush Box (Tristania conferta).
Grey Box (F. Hemiphloia).
Gimlet Wood {E. salubis).
York Gum ( E . LoxopMeba) .
Salmon Gum ( E . salmonophloia) .
Red Gum (F. rostratd). ty
Sugar Gum (F. corynocalyx).
Blue Gum (F. globulus).
Spotted Gum (F. maculata).
Forest Red Gum (F. tereticornis) .
Brush Gum (F. saligna) .
Grey Gum (F. propinqua).
Red Ironbark (F. sideroxylon) .
Broad-leafed Ironbark (F. siderophloia).
Narrow-leaved Ironbark (F. crebra).
Grey Ironbark (F. paniculata).
Jarrah (F. maginata).


Karri {E. diversicolor).
White Mahogany ( E. acmenioides).
Morrell {E. Oleosa, var. longicornis).
Peppermint {E. amygdalina).
Tallow Wood ( E. microcorys).
Tuart ( E. gomphocephala).
Turpentine ( Syncarpia laurifolia and hillii).
Wandoo {E. redunca).
Woollybutt ( E. longifolia).
Yate {E. cornuta).
C. E. LANE-POOLE,
Convener.
Mr. CORBIN seconded the motion, which was
carried.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD congratulated the Commit-
tee on the excellent work they had accomplished
Mr. LANE-POOLE asked how they could enforce
their recommendations.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD took it that New South
Wales would immediately adopt the names agreed
upon, and in any prints or discussions they would
confine themselves entirely to the names adopted as a
uniform system. He took it for granted that in
New South Wales Mr. Hay in all future literature
issued would adopt those names. They might have
the botanists against them and perhaps it was best
to say nothing—and go on doing. It was not a
matter of the present day, and then again the
botanist of to-day was not the botanist of to-
morrow. If the nomenclature was laid down the
public would accept it.
Air. LANE-POOLE pointed out that at the last
Conference it was decided that the name should be
standardised. Would it not be advisable to move
some resolution that these names should be adopted
as trade names, as in the opinion of the special com-
mittee it was considered that they should be trade
names.
Mr. HAY: There was the point to be remembered
that there were two States which were not repre-
sented at this Conference.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD pointed out that something
might arise which would cause the present Commit-
tee perhaps to change their opinion in some direc-
tion. He advised that before standardising them
they should give the matter time to settle down.
The Hon. Mr. STYLES asked Mr. Lane-Poole to
submit the report of the’ Committee which had con-
sidered forest statistics, which being submitted,
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD moved the adoption of the
report on the consideration of forestry statistics.
Mr. CORBIN seconded.
Motion put and passed.
Hon. Mr. STYLES desired to convey to Mr.
Lane-Poole on behalf of the Conference their appre-
ciation of the excellent work of this select committee.
Its excellence was proved inasmuch as it had not
been amended in any direction. As to Mr. Lane-
Poole’s own paper he considered that it should be
taken on the day when His Excellency the Governor
General attended.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said he would prefer that the
papers of one of the visitors should be taken on that
occasion.
Hon. Mr. STYLES enlphasised the fact that the
Conference was being held in Mr. Lane-Poole’s
State, and it would seem to him to be more appro-
priate therefore that Mr. Lane-Poole’s paper would
be the most appropriate to the occasion.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said that he would like Mr.
Jolly’s views on the standardising of forest statis-
tics
Hon- Mr. STYLES suggested that Mr. Lane-
Poole’s paper on the subject should be taken when
Mr. Jolly was present.
(Lunch adjournment.)
2.30 p.m.
On resuming at 2.30 p.m. the Chairman (Hon.
Mr. STYLES) requested Mr. Jolly to read his paper
upon “Sylvicultural Notes.”
Mr. JOLLY emphasised the fact that foresters
were greatly in want of literature, and so he had
thought it well to issue Bulletins in Queensland
which he considered would be useful for young stu-
dents and cadets in forestry. He knew of no Aus-
tralian publication dealing specifically with sylvicul-
ture. In the paper which he proposed to read his
notes were grouped under three headings, (1) Habi-
tat and development, (2) Reproduction and manage-
ment, (3) Enemies, Dangers, etc., and he had chosen
two species out of 10 dealt with in the Bulletin.
He then read the paper entitled “Sylvicultural Notes
on the Hoop Pine and Queensland Cedar.”
ARAUCARIA CUNNIN (HI AMU—HO OP PINE.
Habitat and Development.
A large conifer with a conical crown, which be-
comes flat topped with age and carries somewhat
scanty foliage, the latter being massed towards the
ends of the branches, which are arranged in regular
whorls corresponding to the annual shoots. The
stem is long, straight, and uniform, reaching under
favourable conditions a girth of fifteen feet or more
with a clean barrel up to or even exceeding 100 feet.
The trees are remarkably sound and free from faults,
except in localities where wounds from fire and other
causes have allowed the ingress of fungi and conse-
quent decay.
Hoop pine is distributed throughout the coastal
districts and on the islands from Townsville to the
southern border, but is of comparatively little im-
portance north of Gladstone, while south thereof it
is the principal softwood of the State. It never
occurs in large continuous belts, hoop pine scrubs
being always interspersed with lightly wooded grass
lands or eucalyptus forests. Except in scattered in-
stances, it does not naturally form pure forests, but
grows in mixture with broad leaved species over a
dense underwood, the average stand of dominant
hoop pine being from ten to twenty trees per acre,
although several hundred to the acre have been re-
corded, generally on stony soils and on dry ridges.
Though trees attain their best development on
moist, rich soils the species thrives on soils of all
descriptions, from drift sand to basalt, provided that
the average annual rainfall exceeds thirty inches and
the drainage is satisfactory. It is a tree of the
coastal ranges mainly, but is not found above an
altitude of 3,000 feet. Owing primarily to the elimi-
nation of the competition of less hardy species, the
densest stands are found on soils derived from sand,
granite and shales, this being particularly evident on
Fraser Island, in the Goodnight Scrub, and in parts
of the Gympie and Nanango districts.


Although hoop pine is able to exist for many
years under the shade of evergreen scrubs, eventually
struggling through their dense cover and forming
merchantable timber, healthy and vigorous develop-
ment requires the free access of light as soon as the
seedling growth is firmly established.
The rate of growth in height is slow for the first
year, but rapidly increases as the root system de-
velops, annual shoots of ten feet or even more having
been recorded. The girth increment of naturally
grown trees in virgin scrubs is slow, the measure-
ments recorded over a period of three years showing
an increase varying from nil to inches per year,
with an average of less than y 2 inch. This slow
growth is due largely to the dry seasons experienced
since measurements were instituted, and to the fact
that the adverse conditions under which, the trees
have developed, unaided against the competition of
other species, have resulted in the formation of hard,
tight bark which is not readily shed, and which by
its pressure exerts a strong retarding influence on
the growth of the cambium layer. The rapid de-
velopment of trees grown in the open gives rise to
the expectation that an average girth increment
approaching 1 inch per year will be obtained in well
managed forests.
Reproduction and Management.
Hoop pine coppices better than the average coni-
fer, but not as far as is yet known, with sufficient
vigour to exercise any influence on forest manage-
ment. It flowers generally in the spring, and fruits
from January to April, the cones taking one and a-
half years to mature. Seed may be collected in small
quantities every year, but general seed years oc-
curred in 1913, 1916 (mostly infertile), and 1917,
very large crops being home. The seed, which is
winged on two sides, is hard and woody, enclosing an
insignificant kernel, and averaging when well de-
veloped about 1,400 seeds per pound weight. The
distribution by wind is fair, seedlings having been
found in open country up to seven chains from the
mother trees, but in the dense scrub the radius of
distribution rarely exceeds one chain.
The percentage of fertile seed varies very much
with the seasons experienced, but a germination per-
centage of 50 would be considered a good average
result, the period of germination ranging generally
from one to three weeks. With poor seed the best
nursery treatment is to lay bagging upon the seed
and keep it continually moist, lifting it each day to
remove and sow such seeds as are germinating; much
waste space in the nursery beds is thus saved.
Seeds stored for twelve months were of little value
for nursery purposes, but further tests are now being
made to determine the maximum period during which
the power to germinate is retained. The seedlings
require considerable shelter in the nursery beds for
the first twelve months, their growth during that
period being slow, a height of not more than 6 inches
being attained. There being very few fibrous roots
attached to the long tap, the root system at that
stage is not suitable for transplanting unless wrench-
ing has been practised, this procedure inducing the
formation of a good fibrous root system and obviating
the necessity of waiting for two-year-old transplants.
It is possible that the raising of hoop pine in bamboo
tubes will be the simplest and most effective method
of raising seedlings for plantations, but this has yet
to be tested.
The successful natural regeneration of hoop pine
is dependent very largely on the wet seasons, the fre-
quent failure of which has to a great extent ac-
counted for the irregular distribution of the age
classes, good reproduction apparently having oc-
curred only on the comparatively rare occasions on
which a good seed year coincided with a very favour-
able season. The large size of the seed compared
with its weight is a considerable handicap against
satisfactory reproduction, as large numbers of seed,
instead of penetrating to the mineral soil, rest lightly
on the leaf litter, germination being thus lessened
considerably, while in addition a short spell of dry
weather is sufficient to kill many seedlings before the
tender young roots have reached the mineral soil and
become firmly established. For this reason mainly,
natural reproduction is generally most in evidence
on the edges of hoop pine scrubs, though the des-
truction of seedlings caused by scrub turkeys and
other scrub birds is also an important factor. On
the other hand, the protection against insolation and
fire which is afforded to the young seedlings by the
scrub growth is of considerable value in enabling
them to establish themselves firmly. Once established
the seedlings are comparatively hardy, and will re-
sist fairly severe droughts, although, as stated above,
good summer and autumn rains are essential to com-
plete success. The main points to which the forester
must give attention in assisting natural reproduction
are firstly the preparation of a suitable seed bed,
secondly the retention or provision of a shelter wood
sufficient to protect the seedlings from insolation,
thirdly the protection from fire, and fourthly the
removal of the shelter wood after the seedlings are
established, in order to obtain the fastest growth
possible. Whether the practical difficulties associated
with natural regeneration will render this method
more expensive than artificial regeneration or not
has yet to be learned, and the results of a prelimi-
nary study of this aspect will be dealt with in a later
bulletin.
As hoop pine cannot be described as a good soil
improving species, and the shade cast by it is not
sufficient to keep down the growth of weeds, the best
results will probably be obtained by raising it either
over an under wood of inferior species of little value
or in association with a shade bearer; the most suit-
able shade bearer naturally associated with hoop pine
is crow’s foot elm— Tarrietia Argyrodendron —which
will, however, only attain marketable size in the more
favoured localities.
Enemies, Dangers, etc.
\oung hoop pine is particularly sensitive to a fire,
and to a slight extent to such mild frosts as are
generally experienced in the localities suited to it.
Older trees which have developed in the shelter of
moist scrubs are easily killed by ground fires, but
those which have grown under more open and ex-
posed conditions, though liable to severe damage,
frequently recover, the principal effect noticeable in
later years being a decayed butt due to the action of
fungi which have obtained access through the scar.
Felled and badly damaged trees are readily at-
tacked by borers, amongst which Platypus sp., Or-
thorhmus cylindrirostris and Euthyrrhinus medita-
bundus have been recorded, while the seed is attacked


by the larva of a lepidopterous insect which has not
yet been identified. Much destruction of the seed is
also caused by cockatoos.
Observation has been made of considerable damage
to young pine caused by rodents gnawing the bark
from stems and surface roots. Such damage has
been observed only in the drier coastal regions
where, owing to the scarcity of surface water in
drought years, the animals are forced to obtain their
supply of moisture from plant tissue.
Tender seedlings are uprooted in large numbers by
birds, of which scrub turkeys are the most harmful,
while roots of older plants are frequently laid bare
through the scratching of birds and animals.
In the nursery the most serious pest is the larva of
a scarabaeid beetle, belonging to the genus Lepidiota,
which does damage to seedlings by eating the tap
roots. The most effective trap used on Fraser Island
is fresh bloodwood bark placed under the soil, the
larva collecting below the bark, where they are
gathered and destroyed.
CEDRELA AUSTRALIS—RED CEDAR.
Habitat and Development,
A large deciduous tree with an open wide-spreading
crown, reaching, under favourable conditions and
at a great age, a girth of over 30 feet with a clean
stem up to 100 feet in height ; in the least favourable
localities the stem is frequently short and crooked,
while heart-rot is not uncommon even in well-
developed trees. Though the main part of the stem
may be long and cylindrical the base frequently
carries large buttresses, which reduce the value of
the butt log. Cedar occurs in scattered belts in the
tropical and sub-tropical scrubs from north to south,
requiring for its best development volcanic soils,
and moist gullies, whether stony or not, and warm
localities with an annual rainfall of over forty inches.
It nowhere forms pure forests, for, being unable to
preserve a dense forest canopy, it is always associat-
ed with other species in high forests over a dense
underwood. Land with an average of one mature
cedar per acre would be described as verjr good
cedar country.
The rate of growth during the first few years is
rapid if unchecked by the twig borer, annual shoots
of six feet being not uncommon. The examination
of old stumps has disclosed an average girth incre-
ment of nearly one inch per year over a period of
200 years, and the maximum increase for standing
trees recorded over a period of four years is 6|
inches for a 50-inch tree.
Reproduction and Management.
Red cedar coppices freely and vigorously, and
may be raised from cuttings without difficulty. It
flowers generally during October and November,
and the fruit ripens through December to the end
of February. Seed crops, which are very heavy,
appear so far to be biennial, seed years having been
recorded at Atherton for 1913, 1915, and 1917.
The seed is very light, and being winged, is easily
distributed by the wind ; one pound weight contains
sbout 70,000 seeds.
The power to germinate is not retained over a
lengthy period, seed which had been carefully stored
for 12 months having failed entirely. The behaviour
in the nursery is excellent, as high as 90 per cent,
germination having been obtained over an average
period of 14 days. Seedlings transplant easily,
and are very hardy and of rapid growth, reaching a
height of four feet in 12 months and developing a
strong root system.
Up to the present transplanting during the winter
months has failed, but, given a good rainy season,
transplanting in February and March is successful,
the transplants rapidly establishing themselves and
proving hardy against severe droughts and light
frosts. If the cedar twig borer could be left out of
consideration, the raising of cedar in mixed plan-
tations in North Queensland would offer very few
difficulties except as regards planting on the very
stony basaltic soils, where, owing to the impossibility
of digging holes, sowing broadcast or in lines must be
resorted to. The spacing of the transplants need
not be less than 18 feet by 18 feet, for the natural
reproduction of miscellaneous species is generally
profuse enough to fill the blanks and establish a
complete canopy. Those species which seem best
adapted for association with cedar in the Atherton
district are Flindersia Chatawaiana, Blepharocarya
involucrigera, Castanospermum australe Aleurites
moluccana, and Tarrietia argyrodendron.
Natural reproduction in virgin country or in
areas operated upon for cedar in earlier days is not
much in evidence, except where the cedar trees
were numerous enough for their removal to cause
sufficient light to be admitted, for this species,
though able to exist under dense shade for a limited
time, makes poor growth unless the overhead cover
be removed, it being a strong light demander. By
the adoption of a modification of the group system
of regeneration satisfactory natural reproduction
can however be obtained. The felling and removal
of trees marked for sale should be preceded by the
brushing and felling of the miscellaneous growth
surrounding them, after which, in a good seed year,
a dense growth of cedar seedlings is assured. In
the following seed years the regeneration areas
should be extended gradually until the isolated
groups are linked together, it being essential that
no mature tree be removed until regeneration has
proceeded as far as the natural distribution of the
seed will allow, unless, of course, immature trees
are present in sufficient quantity to provide the seed.
Strict control of felling operations is necessary in
order to prevent unnecessary damage to the repro-
duction, while as a check to the twig borer, the
cleared areas should preferably not exceed one-half
an acre in size at first, and a growth of weeds, if not
too dense, should be looked upon favourably as a
means of protection.
Enemies , Dangers , etc.
Scrub wallabies, which frequently do much havoc
to some of the most valuable species, particularly
those of the Flindersia and Dysoxylon genera, have
not as yet done much damage to cedar, but in some
instances opossums were very destructive, climbing
up and breaking down young saplings, while cattle
have been observed eating the leaves of young
plants. A leaf-eating caterpillar and a large beetle
which eats the bark in an ascending spiral direction
have been observed but not yet identified. The


most serious enemy of the tree is the cedar twig
borer, which is the larva of the pyrallid moth.
Hysiphyla robusta (Moore). The moth lays its eggs
on the underside of the leaflets, and the larva after
emerging proceeds down the petiole to its junction
with the stem and bores into the pith, whence it
works downwards, hollowing out and killing the
shoot which frequently is a leader, though laterals
are also attacked similarly. A new leader is formed
only to be attacked in the same way, with the result
that the form of the young stem is destroyed and
the foundation of heart-rot laid. The life history
of this pest has not yet been fully worked out, but
there is no doubt that there is at least two broods
a year. Also the same moth has been hatched from
a larva found in a cedar fruit, and as two heavy
seed crops were almost completely ruined by an
insect which entered or emerged from the capsule
through a small pinhole, it seems probable that the
pest’s capacity for destruction is enormous and its
control extremely difficult. The first sign of attack
on the tender shoot is the appearance of a drop of
yellowish exudation on the outside of the part affect-
ed. The only remedial measures attempted as yet
have been the cutting and burning of all affected
shoots, but no definite success has resulted from
these measures. The grub is sometimes eaten by a
sharp-nosed scrub rat which climbs the sapling and
eats through to the pith in search of the grub, but
the check thus given to the pest has certainly not
been such as to compensate for the additional dam-
age done to the stems by the rats. It has not yet
been observed whether or not the insect attacks
other tree species, but cedar trees grown many miles
away from natural cedar country have been attacked
similarly, and it seems probable that other hosts are
responsible for its distribution. A first measure of
protection appears to be not to interfere with weed
growth which might otherwise be deemed inimical
to the success of a plantation, for young plants
which were first overgrown by weeds have certainly
suffered less than those which were fully exposed ;
but under all conditions the ravages of the pest
have been such that the formation of cedar plan-
tations on a large scale cannot be justified until
sufficient time has elapsed to determine to what ex-
tent the young saplings will outgrow the damage,
or until satisfactory remedial measures have been
found.
Minor damage, occasionally resulting in death, is
caused by a scale insect ■ — Euaspidiotus latanice
affinis —which attacks the stems and twigs of young
plants which have been weakened through being
subjected to excessive shade.
Mr. HAY, in the discussion which followed, re-
marked that the Cedar was the most extraordinary
species in New South Wales, and it was a species
that they knew comparatively little about except
that they had it, and there was not much of it. The
evidence of regeneration of some of the Cedar coun-
try in New South Wales was disappointing, al-
though in odd places they found it without any
apparent reason. The best method in their experi-
ence was to grow Cedar under dense conditions
where there was a lot of shelter, and even then the
borer sometimes destroyed it. It was one of the big-
gest problems that sylviculture offered.
Mr. JOLLY: The twig borer occurred all over the
world, and what Avas badly needed were the ser-
vices of an entomologist. He had written to India
where they had studied the borer’s life history. Trini-
dad had started plantations with a cedar closely
allied to theirs, and had had the same difficulty. The
borer was the great trouble with red cedar, otherwise
there would be no difficulty at all in dealing with it.
Mr. CORBIN had very little to say except to ex-
press his appreciation of the paper. He considered
it a valuable contribution from the point of view
that it set them all an example. There was a great
deal of writing on forest trees, but Mr. Jolly was
emphatic upon the absence of writings of sylvicul-
tural value. His paper formed a notable example
of what they should do, and of the application of
similar methods to all their forest trees of commer-
cial value. From the educational point of view the
paper was of the highest value. The student of
forestry on laying hold of such a paper has at once
the main fact of importance made available to him.
Evidently Mr. Jolly had put a great deal of research
work into his paper, and had been able to sum up
his conclusion in a concise manner. The information
afforded was invaluable. He would ask Mr. Jolly
if he could throw any light on the seed year. For
example, the year 1917 there had been a large crop
of seed whereas in 1916 the reverse was the case.
Mr. JOLLY replied that no tree that he had met
seeded heavily every year. No relationship between
seed years and seasons had yet been established.
Mr. HAY asked if Mr. Jolly had found the local-
ity where the borer did not affect the seed.
Mr. JOLLY: No.
Mr. CORBIN referred to Mr. Jolly’s remarks on
the reproduction of hoop pine where he said it is
possible that the raising of hoop pine in bamboo
tubes will be the simplest and most effective method
of raising seedlings for plantations, but this has yet
to be tested. He thought Mr. Jolly had said that
it had the habit of developing a tap root.
Mr. JOLLY said that was so.
Mr. CORBIN knew that in that case success of the
bamboo system of raising pine was doubtful.
Mr. JOLLY replied that the idea was to plant
early before the top root developed strongly.
Mr. GILL could do nothing but speak in the high-
est possible terms of the valuable contributions made
to the business of the Conference by Mr. Jolly. He
had set out valuable information in a most lucid
form.
Mr. JOLLY, in reply to Mr. Ashford, said that in
the North of Queensland the Cedar was on the East-
ern fall of the main range. In places it approached
the open forest country on the West, but even then
it was close to the coast. The coastal scrubs in the
North were seldom more than 30 or 40 miles in-
land.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD said he lived on the South-
ern fall of the Liverpool Range, 100 miles from the
coast; there were 100 acres of coastal brush country
with red cedar right through it.
Mr. JOLLY stated that they had that feature in
the Bunya Mountains of Queensland. Wherever they


got volcanic country and good rainfall they were
likely to get Cedar. The Bunya Mountains were
North-East of Toowoomba, and Toowoomba was on
the edge of the range 100 miles from the coast. It
was wholly a question of soil and climate.
Mr. LANE-POOLE considered that Mr. Jolly’s
paper was the most valuable contribution to the
Sylva of Australia that they had had. Foresters
got books about trees which contained nothing but
the habitat and names of the trees; often they gave
a description of them but nothing more. He would
like to transport the conference if possible to South
Africa, where, in Cape Colony, Baron von Mueller
had once prepared a list of trees for the Cape with-
out providing the details that Mr. Jolly had given in
his paper, with the result that they had planted the
trees in unsuitable situations and later on destroyed
the plantations and re-modelled them again with more
suitable species. What they wanted was the habitat
of the tree and how it developed, and similar matter
to that provided by Mr. Jolly. A botanist would
have taken five pages of letter press in giving
synonyms for Araucaria australis, and other matter
which did not concern the forester. The method laid
down in Mr. Jolly’s paper constituted a model for
all foresters to emulate and follow. He had been
racking his brains over the statement that hoop pine
coppices better than the average conifer.
Mr. JOLLY stated that he had been careless in
using the expression “average conifer.” Still the
lank, the three-needled conifers, and species of aga-
thes and oraniana coppice. There was one species,
Pinus echinata in the United States, and it was
stated that many of its forests were established from
coppice growth.
Mr. LANE-POOLE stated that generally speaking
the conifer did not coppice.
In answer to a question as to the origin of the
expression “hoop pine,”
Mr. JOLLY said that Mr. Maiden mentioned that
it was called “hoop” pine because the bark lasted
longer than the wood, but he (Mr. Jolly) thought
the reason was that it had two layers of bark, one
of which was longitudinal and one transversal, and
it looked like a barrel with the hoop around it.
Mr. Maiden’s “hoop,” as a matter of fact, would not
be a hoop at all, but a cylinder.
M;r. HAY stated that the principal value of Mr.
Jolly’s paper was that it would direct attention to
the need of sylvicultural research on some of the
outside species. They had not devoted much atten-
tion to tropical species; in fact that was a branch
of research that had been neglected. It was no use
to try and study a species by visiting its locality
at odd times now and again; an observation station
should be established and the study spread over
years.
The Hon. Mr. STYLES said that they could thank
Mr. Jolly for giving them food for thought.
The latter portion of Mr. Lane-Poole’s paper, viz.,
Standardising a system of collecting Forest Statistics
throughout the Commonwealth (see page 30) was
then discussed. Mr. Lane-Poole exhibited, etc.,- ——
and explained, etc., galvanised “tags” and the four
forms used in connection with the work of the
forester. Explained the forms and the system ad-
opted in Western Australia. He would like the
matter discussed by those present and amendments
suggested in them if the forms were not suited to the
other States.
Mr. JOLLY emphasised the great importance of
that class of work. They had heard a considerable
amount about forest working plans. They were all
trying to make forest working plans to the best of
their ability. The fact remained that nowhere in
Australia had they the information which would
enable them to compile satisfactory working plans
for forests which were actually producing timber to-
day. He did not refer so much to the type of forest
that Mr. Corbin had dealt with as that could not
be said to represent the karri or the jarrah or the
ordinary forests of the Eastern States. To make a
working plan of such a forest they had to know a
great deal about the rate of growth of the trees.
Otherwise it was impossible to fix on the annual
output. They had practically no information suffici-
ently reliable to afford them a true indication of the
rates of growth. Mr. Lane-Poole pointed out that the
estimate of the time which it took Karri to reach the
marketable stage varied from 40 years to 800 years.
That was strong evidence that they did not know
anything about it. He did not say that they were
equally ignorant in the other States, but they had
a very great deal to learn. New South Wales
had a Bulletin which gave approximately the
rates of growth of various species in that State. He
would join issue with New South Wales on those
figures. He thought they were over-estimated. For
instance, they gave estimates of the rate of growth
of hoop pine, which he was satisfied they could not
accept at all. If they based their working plans
upon that rate of growth the forests would be cut
out long before they should be. He presumed most
of the States had started this work. Queens-
land started measuring the rate of growth back
in the year 1904. Unfortunately, the work had
been discontinued by his predecessor. However,
they had been able to renew the work and
were now rapidly obtaining figures which would
be of great value to them. The system to be
adopted should not be the subject of much argu-
ment. It was simple. Mr. Lane-Poole had laid it
down in his paper very clearly. He thought prob-
ably when the work was systematised they would
all adopt practically that system with exceptions
that could be dealt with later. Although Western
Australia can expect to obtain very valuable figures
on sample five-acre blocks, which would represent a
good average of the growth it could not be ex-
pected that under some of the conditions that ob-
tain that they could do similarly in the Eastern
States. They had seen the karri forests, which were
practically pure. The forests in Queensland were
mixed forests, or very much understocked. For
instance they had some plots where blaekbutt was
being measured, but it was impossible in a virgin
forest to obtain five acres of pure blaekbutt and to
secure figures which could be used as a definite basis
for yield tables. The majority of the species were
of minor importance, such as bloodwood, sheoak,
apple, white gum;, etc., which would have to be elimin-


ated in the future crops. Consequently the figures
obtained for blackbutt would only show the rate of
growth of the individual trees and it would be a
matter of hypothesis as to how many trees could be
raised to the acre. The same remarks applied to
hoop pine, which grew in mixture with miscellaneous
species of little value, so that figures obtained from
areas carrying 10 to 20 trees per acre would not be a
fair criterion of the yield obtained when the area
was fully stocked with, say, 80 trees to the acre.
Western Australia was differently situated in this
respect as their forests were frequently pure or al-
most so, and they could thus obtain figures of
greater value for yield tables than the other States.
Mr. Lane Poole had suggested that measurements
be taken every five years, but that should be amended.
In Queensland they were measuring every year and
in some places every six months in order to obtain
information re the seasonal growth, the effects of
drought, etc. Not that the measurements of a couple
of years could compare in accuracy with those taken
over five years, but information of some kind was
wanted early. Apart from that he thought that Mr.
Lane Poole’s scheme might well be adopted.
Mr. GILL could not say more than to express his
appreciation of the trouble Mr. Lane-Poole had
taken, and his conviction that the scheme would
prove invaluable.
Mr. CORBIN said that it appeared to be a marvel
to him that Mr. Lane-Poole, with all his responsi-
bilities and his work in so many directions, had been
able to find time to draw out so complete a scheme.
He agreed with Mr. Jolly that annual or half-
yearly measurements should be taken, but it meant
that the work was increased many times. He took
it the idea was to get a comprehensive grasp of the
thing without special reference to any great detail.
There appeared to be a tremendous lot of work in-
volved. In South Australia it was very difficult to
do these things. With regard to Form No. 3, he
looked forward to seeing it, because practically
it appeared as though it were the same as they
were using in South Australia. As to the natural
forest in South Australia it would be useless to
worry about this sort of work in connection with
it, because it was in such a peculiar condition that
it would be very unlike the area after treatment, but
after treatment they should carry this scheme through
without let or hindrance. Their species in South
Australia were more or less pure and not compli-
cated like those in Queensland. He would be glad
to adopt Mr. Lane-Poole’s scheme in South Aus-
tralia.
Hon. Mr. STYLES promised that he would be
glad to support him.
Mr. LANE-POOLE was not clear whether it was
Mr. Jolly’s intention to reserve a few trees to the
acre in mixed forests, but if that were so it was im-
portant that they should be measured in their
natural state in the mixed forest.
Mr. JOLLY said that as the forests were so mixed
it impossible now to obtain yield tables applic-
able when the density of the stand had been increased
or a pure forest developed. His figures could only
give an index to the rate of growth, not pure yield
tables.
Mr. LANE-POOLE, referring to the question of
measuring every five years, particularly those trees
of deciduous bark, he might mention that he had
had considerable experience in forests where
droughts were a factor that did not exist in the
South-West portion of this State, therefore the im-
portance of measurement to find the effect of
droughts could be neglected here, but in regard to the
deciduous barked trees in South Africa it was amus-
ing to note the measurements that had resulted in
the forest. In one year there was a girth of four
inches and perhaps the next year only three inches.
The season of the fall of the bark was not necessarily
the same regularly. There was always an error creep-
ing in there. Five years was an excellent period to
take, particularly in South Africa., because there
might be two dry years and two wet years, and the
deciduous bark difficulty could thus be eliminated.
As he was measuring every tree in his blocks it was
a consideration as he had not a large staff.
Mr. JOLLY thought that the time taken up in
this work would not be very great. He also had a
very small staff, and the officers took measurements
in conjunction with their ordinary work.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said that where there were
cSOO or 900 trees to be measured it was a fair piece
of work to carry out properly. If Mr. Jolly could
show him the importance of the annual measurement
he would do it, but at present he did not think
that the information to be gained was worth the
expenditure. The matter of the actual difference in
the time of the year that eucalyptus grew at a
minimum rate, he thought did not necessitate the
measurement of large blocks. A few trees only
would overcome that difficulty. He knew of cases
where the measurements were carried out week by
week. Working plans, as Mr. Jolly had said, should
be based on sylviculture, but here there is nothing for
it but to base them on the statistics of growth—the
yield tables. In order to obtain accurate data he
considered five years interval between measurement
would give the best results.
Mr. JOLLY would like to give an example to il-
lustrate his point. In Queensland they started
measuring hoop pine in the year 1913, but if they
had waited for five years, it would have been 1918
before they had any information whatever about hoop
pine. As a matter of fact, in 1915 they had the data
for two years, which enabled them to lay down a
tentative plan for five years, based upon the
measurements that they then had. That ap-
plied to every species and if five years
was laid down as the minimum, they could
not draw up working plans for five years, whereas
by adopting the other system, they would have some-
thing to guide them. What was wanted he thought
was to get straight on to it, however inaccurate it
might be.
Mr, GILL would like to say that, in his opinion,
both the two previous speakers were right and both
were wrong in a sense. In eases where measure-
ments could be deferred, he thought that Mr. Lane-
Poole’s suggestion was valuable. In many instances
the growth was more difficult to measure when the
tree was small than when it was large.


Mr. LANE-POOLE said that, of course, they could
get figures, but they would be so inaccurate as to be
of little value. It would be better to arbitrarily fix,
say 100 years and work out the working plans as
efficiently as they could on one year’s growth, but one
year’s growth must necessarily be an inaccurate basis.
The important matter was to use as conservative
figures as possible, and they would be certain of being
on the safe side and would be in a position to say
that the miller could cut so much timber.
M]r. JOLLY remarked that seeing that the esti-
mates for karri varied between 40 and 800 years, it
was advisable to get something more reliable as
quickly as possible.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD: Speaking from the point
of view of his bush knowledge, said that it appeared
to him that any system could be gauged in six
months or five years. Mr. Lane-Poole had said that
the South-West was not subject to drought condi-
tions, nevertheless last year was an abnormally wet
year, and so the extra growth of timber that would
result would include the bark which would be a factor
of measurement. They might measure in May, 1915
and in May, 1920, and the bark might be swelled or
it may be decreased. To him, it seemed that it might
be a sound system in those countries where they have
reliable data for 100 years, but he felt that in Aus-
tralia where they were under new conditions, the
sooner they got roughly an idea of the growth, the
better it would be for the management of the forest.
Mr. LANE-POOLE pointed out that Mr. Ash-
ford’s argument supported his.
Mr. ASHFORD said that one year’s measure-
ment would prove that a certain tree was, say, two
feet in diameter, and six feet in circumference.
Next year it might be six feet one inch in circumfer-
ence. In the second year they would get some data
and their own common sense would tell them if it
was a fairly evenly distributed rainy season. If the
season was wet or was normal, the second measure-
ment would give some idea, taken in conjunction with
the first of the actual growth of the forest. In New
South Wales he had taken an interest in the measure-
ment of mountain ash. There was uniformity dur-
ing five years from the sapling stage to 2ft. Bin
diameter, and there had been one inch for years.
Those figures had been given to him. It would ap-
pear that there was data of what the actual growth
of that particular tree was. There might be an im-
mense development for instance in a fruit tree for
one year, while in the next year it would stand still.
Under Mr. Jolly’s system, they would get more data
and the additional work.
Mr. LANE-POOLE pointed out that Mr. Jolly
based his working plan finally on Uve years.
Mr. JOLLY thought the best thing was to get
something as fast as they could.
Hon. Mr. ASHFORD said that of course if MY
Lane-Poole had had all this work done for the past
20 years, the position would be different to-day.
Mr. JOLLY contended that if the growth of karri
was so uncertain, surely in their own interests, they
would require some information to guide them in
Western Australia. No one would argue that one
or two years measurements would give more than an
index. For instance, in Queensland, they had mea-
sured blackbutt for two years, and it showed an
increase of from iy 2 to 4 1 /a inches. They made
their plan of short duration, so that it could be re-
vised in the five years. In hoop pine, he laid down
half an inch per year as a basis. If he had accepted
the growth of hoop pine as being what he was told it
was, two inches a year, he would have been very
much out in his calculations.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said that, of course, the ob-
ject of the measurements was to establish a graph,
from the smallest to the biggest trees, and they
would practically have every circumference in the
forest. At the end of the five years, they could
draw a graph linking up these broken points, and
make a complete graph of the whole girth and height
growth of the species. In Western Australia he had
little hope of establishing working plans except for
tiny areas, or of getting sufficient staff to draw up
working plans under five years.
Mr. JOLLY said that there might be a saw-milling
area and a plant established to cut 20,000,000 feet
a year, and it could be easily seen that the forest
would be cut out in too short a time, and then you
would be in a position to say, if necessary, “No,
you can only cut 10,000,000 feet a year.” If you had
some information, even if it only extended over two
years, you would be in a position to take a stand on
it.
The Hon. Mr. STYLES thought that the sooner
they got some data the better it would be.
Mr. JOLLY: They were all after the same thing
in the end, but the point was that they should get
something quickly to go upon.
Mr. LANE-POOLE thought that the standardisa-
tion of measurement should be taken four feet three
inches from the ground.
Mr. JOLLY said that as long as their measure-
ments were the same every year it did not matter
whether it was 4 feet or 3ft. Bin. as long as they
were above the buttresses, and where it came to
measuring 4ft. Sin. from the ground this year it
might be 4ft. Bin. next year, as the soil might be
washed away from the bottom of the tree. 4ft. Sin.
would be quite acceptable to him. In big trees such
as cedar, for instance, they could not stick to 4ft.
trees, and the same remark applied to white beech.
Conference adjourned to Thursday, 22nd Novem-
ber, 1917, at 10 a.m.
Thursday, 22 nd November, 1917, 10 a.m.
On resuming, the Chair was taken by the Hon.
W. G. ASHFORD, M.P., and he mentioned that it was
understood that the continuation of Mr. Lane-Poole’s
paper would be taken on Friday morning, when His
Excellency the Governor-General would be present.
Mr. LANE-POOLE, referring to a paper by Mr.
Professor Tomlinson (which was subsequently read)
dealing with timber tests in 1917, pointed out that
Professor Tomlinson had carried out tests to find the
difference between hill-grown and other jarrah. All
specifications for sleepers specified hill-grown jarrah
which struck him as somewhat extraordinary in view


of the fact that the sand-plain jarrah round Pin-
jarrah was really a denser, stronger, and more dur-
able wood than mountain-grown jarrah. Neverthe-
less it was a fact that in all the specifications for
sleepers from all parts of the world they always
specified hill-grown jarrah. .He had concluded that
it must mean, and did mean, timber grown on the
hills and not in the valleys. Here and there through
the ranges were to be found pockets of better alluvial
soil, while on the ridges as at Jarrahdale it was iron-
stone laterite, boulder country. He assumed that the
early specifications on which all subsequent ones had
been based meant that the timber was to be cut from
the crest of the hill. In order to find out the differ-
ence Professor Tomlinson had carried out a series
of tests. Nevertheless Mr. Brockman, who was pre-
sent and had had a very wide experience, would
assure you that the sand-plain jarrah was by far the
most durable.
Mr. BROCKMAN: That is correct.
Mr. LANE-POOLE remarked that as everyone
with experience held the same view as Mr. Brock-
man it rendered the stipulation in the specification
he had referred to all the more confusing. He then
read a paper entitled “Report of Timber Tests,
1917: Investigations Nos. 1 and 2 by Alfred Tom-
linson, M.Se., Assoc. M. Inst., C.E., M.C.T., Acting
Professor of Mining and Engineering, W.A. LTni-
versity”:—
INTRODUCTION.
Need of further investigation on Western Australian
Timbers .
The intelligent use of wood for any structural pur-
pose requires a general knowledge of the mechanical
properties of different woods, in order that the one
selected may conform in its structural qualities to the
requirements imposed, and in order that a given
purpose may be served at a minimum expense.
It will be admitted by all who have to handle wood
in building, engineering, and manufacturing, that
our knowledge regarding the properties of our
various timbers is not very satisfactory, and al-
though, in all probability, knowledge gained from ex-
perience exists among those who have handled cer-
tain classes of woods for certain purposes, there does
not exist sufficient reliable published information for
general use. It is also a well known fact that from
this ignorance of the value of our varied timber
wealth, and its special adaptation to particular uses,
large quantities of valuable material have been
wasted.
It would be impossible to estimate the direct and
indirect losses which the State suffers from our ignor-
ance as to the true value of artificial seasoning, as
well as from the lack of authoritative general data
necessary for economical design. To the former
cause is due the lavish wastsefulness of using un-
seasoned timber of relatively short life, as well as
the damaging inference that our native timber is of
an inferior nature; while the latter cause is respon-
sible for the use of kinds unsuited for given pur-
poses, and the employment of either more or less
than necessary.
Again, in view of the ever growing scarcity of
timber, and the necessity of utilising the poorer
grades, together with the fact that competition with
other structural materials is increasing, it will readily
be seen that the need for full and reliable information
on the structural properties of timber is a matter of
the greatest importance.
Moreover, since we are beginning to plant forests,
and since forestry does not concern itself with the
production of wood simply, but seeks to produce
wood of given quality, we need this knowledge of the
mechanical and physical properties of our local tim-
ber in order to proceed intelligently in the selection
of plant material with reference to locality and site,
in order to be able to control in a measure the quality
of the product.
Engineers and architects are fully aware of the
deficiency in their knowledge of the structural pro-
perties of native timbers, and it was with a view to
obtaining additonal data to those already available
on the subject that the present series of tests were
undertaken.
The real reason why our ignorance exists has pre-
vailed so long, and is never likely to be completely
removed, is that wood is a direct product of vital
processes in that it differs from other materials used
in construction. Life means variety, change, varia-
bility. Timber thus naturally presents varia-
tions possessed by all living species, which
place it in a category somewhat different from
that of mineral or manufactured substances.
The rigid scientific tests applicable to such
materials as cement and steel cannot be successfully
imposed upon substances of vegetable origin. Thus
standardisation in timber is exceedingly difficult.
Even in the matter of classification of trees the
botanist finds obstacles: while apart from this ques-
tion the properties of wood from a given tree will
vary with its age and geographical position when
growing, with the season at which felling takes place,
with the part whence the wood is taken from the tree,
with the way in which the specimen is cut, whether
the wood is wet or dry, naturally or artificially sea-
soned, and whether it contains sapwood, shakes,
cracks, knots, checks, flaws, or other physical de-
fects.
This clearly indicates that mechanical tests on
wood are not likely to possess the same value
as those upon more homogeneous and definitely
constituted materials. It appears, then, that the
mechanical properties of a certain timber of a given
variety can be predicted upon the results obtained in
tests of timber of that variety only in a most general
way, or, say, only in a general way even if consider-
able detailed information concerning the many fac-
tors governing the mechanical properties of both test
timber and commercial timber is known. The values
usually assigned to timber are simply the average
of a number of tests, and obviously such values have
only a general application.
There are two classes of factors and conditions
which affect the strength of wood, viz.: (a.) Those
which are inherent in the wood itself, and (b.) those
which are extrinsic to the wood.
In any given piece of timber the extrinsic condi-
tions, such as the moisture content, may be of a
temporary character, but the inherent factors are
permanent qualities. It has been found that mois-
ture has more effect on the strength of wood than
any other normal extrinsic condition. In class (b.)
the relation between the strength and the moisture
of Western Australian timbers has been investigated
by Mr. G. A. Julius for the Western Australian


Government, and reported on by him in the year
1906.
It appears, however, that class (a.), the inherent
factors of Western Australian timbers, has never
been fully and scientifically considered or determined.
As these permanent qualities are of great importance
in the consideration and understanding of the struc-
tural properties, it was decided to conduct certain
investigations in order to establish the fundamental
relations, if any, between the strength quality and
the conditions under which the timber was grown.
MINOR TESTS ON JARRAH (EUCALYPTUS
MARGINATA) STICKS.
No. I.—On the relative strength merits of Jarrah
obtained from various localities and sites:
Plan of Investigation.
The representative samples of Jarrah grown both
on ironstone ridges and in valleys in various
parts of the State were obtained by the Conser-
vator of Forests and forwarded to the Department of
Mining and Engineering, University, Crawley. Speci-
mens of dimensions 4 inches x 4 inches x 40 inches
long, and generally green, were sent from Holyoake,
Muji, Jarrahdale, Wellington Mills, and North Dan-
dalup.
Since the timber must be used as grown, and can-
not be manufactured specially for experimental pur-
poses, it is obviously a difficult task to isolate and
determine the effect of any one variable. Indeed,
owing to the uncertainties and complex nature of the
variables, it is practically impossible to eliminate all
factors other than those under consideration, and so
the aim must necessarily be to minimise as far as
possible the effect of these extraneous variables on
the particular investigation.
In order to determine the influence of any par-
ticular factor, tests have proved that the re-
sults obtained from small rather than large timber
specimens are more satisfactory, for, as may be ex-
pected, experience has clearly shown that the latter
contain many more variable factors and uncertain-
ties. On this account the cross section was reduced
to the recognised standard size for minor test pieces,
namely, 2 inches x 2 inches. Again, it is obviously
necessary in this investigation for the specimens, as
far as possible, to be of straight normal grain and
free from flaws and other defects. These latter vari-
ables may, of course, subsequently be taken into con-
sideration after the relation sought for or law in
question has first been determined. Afterwards fur-
ther tests on large timbers are necessary to tell us
what significance the results derived from these small
test pieces have in the case of the usual commercial
sized structural material.
To ascertain the strength properties of timber the
most reliable single test appears to be the static cross
breaking or bending test, with the exception, per-
haps, of the impact cross breaking test. For the rea-
son that the cross breaking strength is necessarily
closely related to the tensile and compressive strength
of the material, since the stresses encountered in a
specimen loaded transversely are principally tensile
stresses in the lower portion of a beam and compres-
sive stresses in the upper portion. For the sake of
simplicity, also, it is desirable that the relative
“strength” properties of sample should be deter-
mined by means of static bending or cross breaking,
and to arrange for the specimens to fail by bending
and not shearing action.
For a proper comparison of strength to be
made it is necessary that all tests conducted should
be with timber dried to a common degree of dryness
or moisture content. As a suitable drying kiln was
not available it was decided, after breaking the
samples of timber, as beams, and determining their
moisture content, to reduce the obtained “strengths,’’
as reckoned on the maximum fibre stress at rupture
basis, to a standard moisture content of 15 per cent.
by interpolation from existing plotted data. The
graph showing the average relation between the ulti-
mate or maximum fibre stress at rupture and the
moisture content, and suitable for this investigation,
is given in curve for size A, Plate No. 3, of Western
Australian Timber Tests, 1906, by G. A. Julius.
; !| 1 :
Details of Procedure at the Department of Mining
and Engineering, University, Crawley.
The 4 inches x 4 inches x 40 inches pieces of jarrah
were sawn into sticks of approximately 2 inches x 2
inches cross section. Every stick was suitably num-
bered and indexed at each end for reference pur-
poses, and all particulars entered in a log sheet.
The breaking tests were performed upon a 50-ton
Schenk Universal Testing Machine (see Fig. 1),
with special attachments designed and constructed at
the University Department of Mining and Engineer-
ing, for carrying out the tests. Before commencing
the tests the machine was adjusted and accurately
calibrated by levers and standard weights made ex-
pressly for this purpose. After the completion of
the tests the machine was again calibrated. It will
suffice here to state that the variations which occurred
were negligible. During testing operations the
machine was always balanced, by floating the beam,
before applying the initial load.
Before placing the specimen in the tester the cross
sectional dimensions, particularly the portion near
the centre, were noted and checked, the stick was
carefully examined for flaws or defects and all par-
ticulars entered in the log sheet. In all eases the
span was 30 inches and the load applied at the
centre of the span. Special precautions (see Fig, 2)
were taken to prevent indentation, or local crushing
of the fibres of the specimen, during the test, by the
provision of suitable bearing plates at the place of
application of the load and at the two end supports.
The load was applied at a standard speed by auto-
matic gear, and finally the rupture load noted and
entered in the log sheet and cheeked.
The moisture content in the sticks was determined
by the so-called “disk” method. It is impossible to
determine the exact percentage of water in wood ex-
perimentally. For practical purposes, however,
wood is considered thoroughly dry when a thin cross
sectioned disk ceases to lose weight in a constant
temperature of 212° F. At higher temperatures
additional water will be given off, but chemical des-
truction sets in before all the water is driven off. In
the Government Timber Tests, 1906, before referred
to, the drying temperature was 240° F. In the pre-
sent investigations the standard drying temperature,
212° F., produced by water boiling at ordinary
atmospheric pressure was used.
Experiments showed that only an additional loss
in weight of about 2 per cent., on the dry weight,


took place on further heating the 212° F. dried wood
to 240° F., and thoroughly drying at that tempera-
ture. Immediately after fracture, two or more nar-
row whole cross sections of the broken specimen
were cut from the region of rupture by a smooth-
cutting circular saw as near as possible to, and on
each side of, the break. The disks, of thickness about
3/32 inch, after being properly indexed, loose
splinters removed, and rough edges trimmed, were
at once carefully weighed and all particulars entered
in the log sheet and checked.
The disks were subsequently dried in a boiling
water copper drying oven, constructed in the depart-
ment (see Fig. 3), until no more loss in weight
occurred, or until no greater difference of weight
than 0.5 per cent, of the dry weight remained to be
determined, when the final weight was recorded and
checked. Usually the disks remained at the tempera-
ture of 210-212° F. for 4 hours. The loss in weight
multiplied by 100 and divided by the dry weight
gives the percentage of moisture based on the dry
weight. Evidently if the original weight is twice the
final weight, 50 per cent, of the original weight
was water, but when computed on the basis of
the dry weight there would be 100 per cent, of water.
The advantage of computing the per cent, on the dry
weight is that it furnishes a constant basis of com-
parison, whereas if computed on the actual or wet
weight the basis on which the per cent, would be
computed would vary with every change in the
amount of moisture.
Methods of Calculations.
(1.) The relation between strength and moisture
content.
For simplification in computing it was considered
advisable to formularise the graphic relation between
the strength and the moisture content as obtained in
the Government Timber Tests, 1906. The “strength,”
namely, the maximum bending rupture fibre stress
will be denoted by and the % moisture con-
d max '
tent will be denoted by M.
From the nature of the two variables it would
appear that the relation should be of the form:
-S-mai = A -f- Be" kM , where e is the base of the
naperian logarithms and A, B, and k are constants.
However, since this formula would be too cumber-
some to use in practice an attempt was made to ob-
tain a simpler if less exact one.
It was found that the product of -^_ max and M
plotted as abscissae and M as ordinates gave points
which almost exactly coincided with a certain straight
line.
The details, together with the plotted data and the
straight line law are shown in Sheet No. 1.
Thus the relation, expressed as an equation, is as
follows:
| = 9,800 ( 1 + -) lbs.
“‘'"“max ' ’
1 = 4-375 ( 1 + tons-
between the limits M = 15 & 55, and -H- max has a
constant value for M = 55, or over.
(2.) Maximum Fibre Stress at Rupture.
The analysis on which the usual formulae for
beams are based assumes a homogeneous isotropic
material, i.e., its strength properties are the same in
all directions. These assumptions are justified when
dealing with a manufactured material such as steel
within its elastic limit. Organic timber is not so
uniform and homogeneous. The wood differs in
structure and properties in different portions of any
section, the distribution apparently being more or
less haphazard. Timber is not an isotropic material.
The many variations, which have been enumerated
before, produce a distribution and an amount of
stress which differ often considerably from the re-
sults of the ordinary analysis or beam theory.
It is evident then that the ordinary beam theory
when applied to timber must be considered to give
only approximate results.
The ordinary formula for resisting bending
moment for a beam of rectangular cross section is:—
c bd 2
B. M. = max X Zq'
Where g is the maximum unit stress or fibre
stress at the topi or bottom of the section, b is the
width of the beam and d its depth, all, of course, con-
taining the same units.
In this investigation the load (W) to break the
beam was applied at the centre of a span of 30
inches, or B. M = W X 30 -f- 4.
TT 6 X B.M. 45 W
Hence -^- max = —= , r 9
max b x d 2 bx d 2
The latter formula was used to obtain the breaking
“strength” (_^_ max ) of the specimens.
It must be remembered this involves the assumption
that the material is still behaving elastically up to
actual failure and, therefore, that the fibre stress is
still directly proportional to the distance of the fibre
from the neutral axis. As a matter of fact, the
elastic limit of the material has long since been
passed when the breaking load is reached, the neu-
tral axis has shifted and the extreme fibre stress is
no longer proportional to the bending moment. This
computed value of the fibre stress, under the breaking
load, exceeds the actual, and is evidently merely a
conventional one. Since also, as explained before,
the material is not isotropic, it is evident that the
ordinary beam formula when applied must be con-
sidered to be largely empirical, and the results ob-
tained by it by no means exact.
Results of Experiments.
In all 112 pieces of timber were broken, the failure
invariably being due to induced bending stresses.
The results of all the experiments are, for conveni-
ence, tabulated and summarised in Sheet No. 2. In
each of the first four districts enumerated 12 speci-
mens from the ridges and 12 from the valleys were
tested. The “strength” values are based on a mois-
ture content of 15 per cent.
Discussion of results.
It appears that with one exception there is a
marked difference in strength between the ironstone
ridge and the valley-grown timber. As this excep-
tion is now known to be more apparent than real, and
will clearly be accounted for in a later investigation
(No. 2), it is proposed at present to regard this
group as all being of valley-grown origin. The re-
sults show that the locality, or district, has little
effect on the strength, the ridge-grown means maxi-
mum being remarkably uniform in the series.
The variation in the strength in tons per square


inch. maximum fibre stress of ironstone ridge sticks
is from 10 to 7.5, with a mean average of 8 approxi-
mately, while with the valley-grown sticks the figures
are 7 to 4.5 (or 3.75) and 6 respectively.
Thus, in these tests, the mean value of the valley-
grown timber is only three-fourths the bending
strength of the mean value of the ironstone ridge-
grown timber, the latter timber always being stronger
and having a smaller variation range than the valley-
grown.
All the specimens of timber forwarded for testing,
although generally clear and sound, were really
chosen at haphazard. It is then reasonable to sup-
pose, as explained before, that the effect of the ex-
traneous factors ( i.e ., those not under consideration)
on the strength on the average may be regarded as
balancing one another. Again, it has been clearly
shown that the “strength” as obtained from the con-
ventional formula may only be regarded as an
approximate value of the real strength. Then if,
as found in the results of these tests, there is, on the
average, a clear line of demarcation between the iron-
stone ridge-grown and the valley-grown sticks, evi-
dently this observed general tendency and result may
be regarded as being substantially correct.
C onclusions.
This investigation on the effect of the locality and
the site where grown on the strength (bending) of
jarrah, other things being equal, indicates that: —
(1.) The locality, or district, is of little import-
ance.
(2.) The site is important: the ironstone ridge
timber is superior to that grown in the
valleys.
Minor Tests on Jarrah Sticks continued.
The result of No. 1 investigation, particularly the
second conclusion, is so definite and interesting that
it was considered desirable to proceed to establish, if
possible, the scientific relation between the strength
and some other inherent physical quality, in order
to furnish a true explanation why ironstone ridge*
jarrah is stronger than that grown in the valleys.
For our purpose we may consider wood as being
composed of a mass of small hollow fibres, or cells
of various sizes and forms, more or less closely
packed together. Painstaking research has shown
that the density of dry wood substance, irrespective
of species, is practically the same, being about 1.55
specific gravity, or about 971bs. weight per cubic
foot.
Since wood substance consists almost wholly
of cellulose, it follows that the great difference in
the specific gravity, or weight per cubic foot, of
different species of timber is due to structural rather
than chemical variations.
Evidently the weight per cubic foot or density of
timber, apart from the amount of water present in
the wood cells and cell walls, is largely dependent
upon the amount of air space in the various cells,
that is probably upon the differences in the average
thickness of the cell walls. As, in all probability,
the unital strength of ultimate wood fibre is a con-
stant it is seen that in a specimen of timber the
actual weight (dry, say) must be closely related to
the actual strength. In timbers of similar physical
structure, and at least within a given species, the re-
lative strength of different specimens evidently
should roughly be directly proportional to their
weights.
Taking into account the above considerations it is
evident that the relation between the “strength” and
“weight,” providing the disturbing variation in mois-
ture content factor is eliminated, will probably pro-
vide a satisfactory explanation of the fact that iron-
stone ridge grown jarrah is stronger than that grown
in the valley. Since also rough experiments gave a
similar indication it was decided to investigate the
matter more thoroughly, a brief report of which is
below.
No. 2. —On the Relation between Strength and
Weight.
Plan of Investigation.
Since the pieces of Jarrah broken in No. 1 investi-
gation were in every way suitable it was decided to
use them in the present investigation. For their
“strength” was already known, and to complete the
analysis it was merely necessary to obtain their dry
weight, say, in lbs. per cubic foot. Then by plot-
ting “strengths” and “dry weight” on suitable
squared paper the relation, if any, between these
two qualities could be determined.
Details of Procedure.
The ends of the broken Jarrah sticks (2 inches x
2 inches cross section approx.) were truly cut at
right angles to the sides and re-marked and indexed.
The samples to be used in the investigation were all
about 12 inches in length. The dimensions were ob-
tained by suitable vernier calipers, and the specimen
carefully weighed and all particulars entered in a
log sheet and checked. As soon as possible after
weighing the stick was cut, by a smooth cutting cir-
cular saw, into cross section pieces or “disks” of
thickness about 3/32 inch. These “disks” were imme-
diately scraped and all rough edges trimmed and
loose splinters removed, and then collected together
and weighed, and all particulars entered in the log
sheet and checked. After being thoroughly dried in
the boiling water oven (212° F.) the “disks” were
collected together again and weighed and particulars
duly noted in the log sheet, and checked.
For further particulars see “Moisture Content,”
No. 1 Investigation.
Methods of Calculation.
Let, W = Original weight before cutting speci-
men into “disks” (lbs.).
W x = Original weight of the “disks” (lbs.).
W, = Dry weight (212° F.) of the “disks”
(lbs.).
V = Original volume before cutting speci-
men into “disks” (cub. in.).
V x = Original volume of the “disks” (cub.
ins.).
D = Dry weight in lbs. per cubic foot (as-
suming no shrinkage).
Then, = or V x = X V
v V]_ w
1,728 WW 2
and, D = X W 2 = 1,728 X W] y
Since Y, W, W lt W 2, are known, D can be computed.
It is important to note that this calculation does
not take into account the shrinkage of the wood in
drying. This effect will be considered in some
future investigation.


W.A. UNIVERSITY TIMBER TESTS, 1917.
Fig. 1.
Schenk 50-Ton Universal Testing Machine.
Fig. 3.
Boiling Water Drying Oven.
Fig. 2.
Bending Apparatus and Special Attachment to Testing Machine.




W.A. UNIVERSITY TIMBER TESTS, 1917.




Results of Experiments.
In all 36 sticks were used in this determination.
The dry weight (212° F.), as denoted by D, varied
between the limits 37 and 521bs. per cubic foot res-
pectively.
The former had a “strength” ( i.e ., maximum
bending rupture fibre stress with standard moisture
content of 15 per cent.) of 8,4001b5. (3.75 tons) and
the latter a “strength” of 22,3001b5. (9.95 tons).
The results of all experiments are, for convenience,
tabulated and summarised in Sheet No. 4.
Here D, represents the density, or weight per
cubic foot, with a moisture content of 15 per cent.,
while S ma> < represents the maximum fibre stress at
rupture with moisture content of 15 per cent.
The values of D, and ' S max in each of the 9
columns represent the mean of 4 experiments (i.e.,
4 sticks).
(1.) The nine mean values of D x and S max
were plotted as abscissae and ordinates respectively
as shown on Sheet No. 3.
The equation to the straight line, Graph No. 1,
which lies more or less evenly between these plotted
values, assuming that D represents the dry weight
(212° F.) in lbs. per cubic foot, is:
S max = 7,850 X(D 25) lbs.
= 0-35 X (D 25) tons.
(2.) On theoretical grounds it might be argued
that the relation between S max and D should be of
the form: —
S =A4- Be kD where eis the
max I . ,
base of the napenan logarithms and
A, B and k are constants.
However, since this formula would be too cumber-
some to use in practice, an attempt, as in No. 1 in-
vestigation, w r as made to obtain a simpler if less
exact one.
Sheet No. 4 shows the result of plotting D, as
abscissas and D, x S max as ordinates. The equa-
tion to the straight line in this Graph No. 2 is:—
S max =23 820 —D x tons.
23 713 D tons.
= 23 (I—3l D) tons.
and this formula may be regarded as being in more
exact agreement with the actual mean experimental
results than the one obtained above in (1).
Discussion of Results.
The data obtained in this investigation show that
the contention previously arrived at, or result ex-
pected, from general considerations was justified.
For, eliminating the moisture content and other dis-
turbing factors, it has been clearly shown that the
relative bending strength of Jarrah sticks is approxi-
mately directly proportional to some value based on
their respective densities or weights.
It is believed that the variations from the straight
line laws in Graph Nos. 1 and 2, Sheets Nos. 3 and
4 respectively, are within the combined limits of
error due to extraneous and experimental factors
and the conventional analysis.
In Graph No. 1, Sheet No. 3, taking the 9 plotted
mean group results, the average and the maximum
variation from the straight line (or formula) values
are within 5 per cent, and 11 per cent, respectively.
Taking the 36 actual individual experimental results
the maximum variation from the straight line (or
formula) value is 19 per cent.
In Graph No. 2, Sheet No. 4, the variations are
less than those given above.
In using “measured dimensions” the error in cal-
culating the strength, in these tests, is probably in
the limit about 5 per cent., and on the average,
say, =b 2y 2 P er cent.
At present, of course, lack of data on the matter
prevents the determination of the probable average
tigures for errors due to extraneous factors and to the
fact that the material is not homogenous and iso-
tropic.
In this investigation it is seen, however, that the
errors due to extraneous factors, assuming the
straight line or formula to give the true relation
between D and S max , appear to be within reason-
able limits, in fact may instinctively be regarded as
being comparatively sm&ll, and not large enough to
materially effect the general tendency and straight
line law observed.
It should be noted that the formulse showing the
relation between S max and D must only be re-
garded as approximate for the reasons stated above,
together with the fact that the number of experi-
ments (36) is comparatively small.
C (inclusions.
(3.) This investigation on Jarrah sticks indicates
that, other things being equal, the strength increases
with the density the relation being as follows: —
(a) Roughly : S max = 0-35 (D 25)
(b) More accurately : S max =23 (1 —3l -5- D)
Where S max is the maximum bending fibre stress
at rupture, in tons per sq. inch, with a moisture con-
tent of 15 per cent., D is the dry weight (212° F.)
in lbs. per cubic foot, not allowing for shrinkage.
Minor Tests of Jarrah Sticks continued
Combined results of Investigations Nos. 1 and 2.
The prime cause of the result obtained in No. 1
investigation is now apparent, for evidently the iron-
stone ridge grown Jarrah must be heavier than that
grown in the valley.
With the exception of the specimens obtained
from one particular source, namely, N. Dandalup,
all the recorded facts agreed with the above conclu-
sion. It was found, however, that the specimens
from N. Dandalup locality obeyed the law, and
formulae, obtained in No. 2 investigation. Their dry
weight, per cubic foot, was comparatively light, so
that, as pointed out in No. 1 investigation, the group
could be regarded as being of valley origin.
Conclusions.
(4.) The reason why ironstone ridge grown Jar-
rah is superior in strength to that of valley grown is
due to the fact that it has a greater density.
(5.) Combining the formulae derived in Investi-
gations Nos. 1 and 2 for Jarrah beams, of cross sec-
tions up to 10 sq. inches area, we get—
(a) roughly,
_S_ max = 0-219 (D—2s) (1 +9— M)
(b) more accurately,
_^_ max = 14-38 (I—3l -r- D) (1 + 9 -f- M)
Where _S_ max is the maximum bending fibre stress
at rupture, in tons per sq. inch, with M per cent,
moisture content: M denotes the per cent, moisture
content having a minimum value of 15 per cent.: D
is the dry weight (212° F.) in lbs. per cubic foot,
not allowing for shrinkage.


Mr. HAY inquired whether Professor Tomlinson
would care to have a discussion upon his paper in
his absence.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said that he was sure that he
would.
Mr. HAY took it that the original contention that
hill-grown jarrah was the strongest had been proved
by the Professor’s deductions.
Mr. LANE-POOLE pointed out that the sand-
plain jarrah did not enter into it. What had been
shown was that jarrah grown on the ridges in the
jarrah belts was stronger than jarrah grown in the
valleys of that jarrah belt. He had not considered
sandplain-grown jarrah, which was the strongest of
all.
Mr. HAY asked if that fact had been proved by
Mr. Julius’ tests.
Mr. LANE-POOLE replied in the negative, but
stated that such was the general opinion and would
be proved.
Mr. HA\ : The paper disclosed Professor Tom-
linson’s excellent work and the completeness of his
investigations. He was not, however, competent to
discuss the Professor’s reasoning with regard to the
different processes adopted.
The CHAIRMAN asked if they were not taught
that in connection with practically all timbers. It
was not peculiar to jarrah.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said that was not so. In fact
it was exactly the opposite in a great number of
timbers.
The CHAIRMAN argued that locality made all
the difference.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said it was not the locality
but the actual site. The site in the locality made all
the difference.
The CHAIRMAN knew that in red gum and
stringybark, but they would be of one quality on
one side of a ridge and on the other side of the
ridge there would be a distinct difference. The
timber on the Eastern fall in New South Wales was
more durable than that on the Western fall. He
knew that from his own experience, as on his pro-
perty there were fencing posts which had been taken
from the Eastern fall that had been standing for
50 or GO years, and he thought that the same applied
to red gum and stringybark in that State. He
would have that that would be the usual thing in
connection with Finns insignis, and that the morning
sun and the evening sun would make a difference.
M(r. JOLLY pointed out that a faster rate of
growth did not necessarily mean a weaker timber. It
did in some species, but not in others. European
tests showed that a fast-grown oak was stronger than
a slowly grown oak. In the slowly grown oak the
porous layers of spring wood were closer together.
In fast-grown oak, spring layers were much farther
apart. On the other hand, with pines the converse
was the case.
Mr. HAY agreed that the same was the case with
the coastal ironbark.
Mr. LANE-POOLE drew attention to the fact that
the weakest grown oak in the world was the fast-
grown oak of the Cape.
Mr. JOLLY said that in Germany slow-grown
fetched a higher price than fast-grown oak because
it was more valuable for veneer work. In France,
however, the strongest oak used in barge construction
was obtained from fast-grown oak.
Mr. LANE-POOLE considered that valley-grown
jarrah was faster grown than the hill jarrah.
Mr. HAY said New South Wales had the same
experience in regard to spotted gum. It had to be
ridge-grown for certain purposes.
Mr. JOLLY pointed out that in Australia gener-
ally the species of eucalypts did not have the annual
porous ring that the European timbers had. Moun-
tain ash did have the annual ring.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said that karri had, to a cer-
tain extent.
The CHAIRMAN pointed out that on the Eastern
and Western fall in New South Wales there was
considerable difference in the timber—whether be-
cause of the early morning sun and not the evening
sun, or due to the wind on the Eastern side he did
not know.
Mr. LANE-POOLE suggested that the wind was
a large factor probably in carrying moisture.
Mr. JOLLY said that Professor Tomlinson had
shown that the reason for the decrease in strength
of the valley jarrah is that it is less dense, and that
for any one species the strength is generally propor-
tional to the density; that law had been shown to
apply to European species. It did not necessarily
follow that fast-grown wood was less dense and less
strong than slow grown, but in this special instance
it was. In Australia the fast grown was usually less
strong, but the converse held with European oak, in
which case the fast grown was stronger and denser.
He thought they were all more or less in the same
position with regard to the mathematics involved in
the paper and had perhaps got rusty on this class of
work and somewhat out of touch with it. There was
one point which struck him as being open to ques-
tion, namely, that Professor Tomlinson had used Mr.
Julius’ curves for his own figures. Mr. Julius had
drawn certain curves from his results which Pro-
fessor Tomlinson had used to interpolate other
figures.
Mr. LANE-POOLE considered that Mr. Julius’s
work on the jarrah tests had been very exhaustive
indeed. The curves showing' the relation of the de-
gree of moisture to strength were worked out from
a large number of specimens. He did not suppose
that any better test had ever been carried out than
those made by Mr. Julius on that particular, curve.;
Mr. JOLLY quite appreciated that fact. Those
curves represented an average, but in forestry they
were particularly careful not to apply an average
to an individual. That would represent average re-
sults, but could not necessarily be applied to each
individual specimen that might be tested.
Mr. LANE-POOLE said that Professor Tomlin-
son was not applying it to any individual specimen.
He made use of the curve to arrive at a general
formula, Mr. Julius said that they did it when they
obtained figures for a certain piece of timber, but
Professor Tomlinson reduced those to the average
curve. That would not necessarily represent the
figures he would obtain from the specimen in ques-
tion.
Mr. CORBIN pointed out that he had taken 36
specimens.
Mr. JOLLY objected that he had applied an aver-
age curve to each individual specimen. The proce-
dure may be quite correct, and Professor Tomlinson
would no doubt dispose of the question very quickly.


Mr. LANE-POOLE regretted that Professor
Tomlinson was not here to discuss the paper with
them.
Mr. JOLLY had noticed another point on page 5
of Professor Tomlinson’s paper where the great
variations in strength were shown, which was very
remarkable. It had often worried him (Mr. Jolly)
in his timber tests as to how they could face the
consumer with average results. He said, “In all 36
sticks were used in this determination. The dry
weight varied between the limits 37 and 52-lbs. per
cubic foot respectively. The former had a “strength”
of 8,400-lbs. (3.75 tons), and the latter a “strength”
of 22,300-lbs. (9.95 tons).” He made one specimen
of jarrah equal to the worst of the eucalypt. There
was a wide variation in one species.
Mr. HAY asked was not that common to all tim-
bers.
Mr. JOLLY said they should not give the
averages so much as the limits. He had taken that
attitude himself in a Bulletin recently. The limits
of strength were what he had taken, so the consumer
could see to what low strengths specimens might go.
He thought the minimum was a particularly import-
ant thing to them in all their work. Let them give
the average if they would but they could also give
the extremes.
Mr. GILL thought that the paper was a very
valuable one, and he was glad to have had the op-
portunity of coming in touch with it.
Mr. CORBIN also much appreciated the paper.
Mr. Jolly had pointed out the variation between
S,ooolbs. odd and 22,0001b5., as given by Professor
Tomlinson, as being very considerable, and he thought
the Professor had given a way to overcome the diffi-
culty. When bad timber was sold he pointed out
it would be probably light timber, and he had given
a mtethodl of finding out the merit of that timber.
The CHAIRMAN considered that so long as the
difference between dry and moist timber was re-
cognised there would be no harm done.
Mr. CORBIN pointed out that the Professor had
reduced it to mathematics so that the consumer
could arrive at the quality of the article he was
buying. He considered also that this was one of the
lines where the botanist might well intervene. For
instance, at the microscopist of page 4 the Professor
says, “Since nearly the whole structure of wood con-
sists of cellulose, it follows that the great difference
in the specific gravity or weight per cubic foot, of
different species of timber is due to structural rather
than chemical variations.” He points out that the
structural was important, therefore it should be in-
vestigated microscopically in order to arrive at the
quality of the timber. That was extraordinarily
useful and should safeguard the consumer against
buying an inferior timber under the impression that
it was of good quality.
Mr. JOLLY suggested that the West Aus-
tralia Department should go further with these tests,
and also test the strength of wood from various por-
tions of the same tree, the butt logs and top logs,
and see if the European conclusion applied there,
namely, that, eliminating the core of the tree, the
strength of the timber in a tree decreased upwards
and outwards.
Mr. LANE-POOLE announced that Professor
Tomlinson was anxious to carry out the tests for the
department, as far as his other work would permit.
In the end, however, he thought the data would be
compiled for which such desire was felt.
Mr. CORBIN forgot to mention that he imagined
Professor Tomlinson took a small sample, because
although the actual tests were in the nature of pure
science at the present time a small sample had to be
taken in order to get sound samples, that possibly
later on larger timber would be used in the experi-
ments. That was to say that scientific work has to be
carried out prior to other work which would be of
value later on, and preliminary to it. If they could
not assume the work done by others, such as the
graphs of Mr. Julius, they would have to start from
the beginning each time. It was evident that ordin-
arily they would have to assume data that had been
arrived at by previous investigation. There was no
doubt that Professor Tomlinson was sure of his
ground, if he had based his arguments on those
graphs. The paper was such as to indicate that.
Mr. GILL expressed the opinion from the man-
ner in which Professor Tomlinson put the matter
before them that it was what had been often advo-
cated by writers on timber. The process of examin-
ing a clean cut cross section was one of the best
methods. If it showed a large number of holes the
timber was not so dense. The greater the density the
greater the strength.
Mr. JOLLY considered it possible that a lens
examination of each species would give a rough idea.
Mr. GILL: On the same principle as the water-
bag—not so many holes.
On the motion of Mr. Jolly, seconded by Mr.
Hay, a vote of thanks was unanimously accorded to
Professor Tomlinson for the valuable paper he had
contributed.
Mr. LANE-POOLE asked the Conference who it
was proposed should carry on the work of the Con-
ference after its sittings had been concluded. For
want of some such arrangement the last conference
had proved abortive. A standing recess secretary
was badly needed.
The CHAIRMAN suggested in his absence that
Mr. O’Keefe should undertake the work of keeping
the States in touch with each other in the intervals
of Conferences. Any communication addressed to
Mr. O’Keefe would come before Mr. Hay and him-
self, and they would see that the Conference was
kept alive.
Mr. GILL asked a question as to the centre in
which the next Conference should be held.
The CHAIRMAN, referring to the secretaryship,
considered that the Conference should be kept alive,
and he suggested Mr. O’Keefe in lieu of anybody
else as being willing to take up the position, and he
would be in a position to obtain any clerical assist-
ance that he wanted.
Mr. JOLLY moved that Mr. R. A. O’Keefe be ap-
pointed standing secretary to carry out the confer-
ence proposals and suggestions when in recess.
Mr. LANE-POOLE seconded.
Motion put and passed.
Mr. LANE-POOLE had been reminded by Mr.
Gill’s question that it would be necessary to appoint
a place for the holding of the next Forestry Con-
ference. Mr. Kingsmill had pointed out that he
thought conferences should be held in Perth as often
as possible so that the people of Western Australia


should have the opportunity of being educated, as
they were sadly in need of education on forestry
matters. He would propose that the next conference
should take place in Perth.
Mr. HAY objected that it involved bringing mem-
bers a very long distance.
Mr. KINGSMILL was perfectly certain that
Western Australia more than any other of the States
needed education, and whereas such a conference as
this might take place in any of the larger cities with-
out attracting attention, in Perth it had been the talk
of everybody. He was sure that the Conference had
done more to stimulate interest in forestry than all
of them could do who had been trying to stimulate
it for years. He was quite serious in his proposal
if it could be brought about, especially as the new
railway would so greatly minimise the travelling, and
he was quite certain that Conference would do a vast
amount of good if they were to hold it in Perth next
year.
Mr. JOLLY quite appreciated Mr. Kingsmill’s re-
marks, but they must not forget that the one State
that needed education most was Tasmania, although
of course all the States needed it to a greater or less
degree; but the position in Tasmania was lament-
able, and if the Conference could meet in Hobart the
result would be of great interest to Australian for-
estry. But first of all, of course, they should ascer-
tain whether Tasmania would be willing to receive
them.
Mr. HAY mentioned another important point.
They had not come here with any idea that they were
more advanced in the East than in Western Aus-
tralia, but they had shown them certain measures,
and he thought that the others should come over to
New South Wales to see for themselves what had
been done there.
The CHAIRMAN said that New South Wales
would be delighted to have the Conference there, and
it seemed ungrateful to mention that a visit to West-
ern Australia entailed a long journey in view of the
fact that they had all been so well treated here that
they would all be glad to come back again to Perth.
They might say that they were behind in forestry in
Western Australia, but that was questionable, or in
any case the remark applied equally to every other
State.
Mr. KINGSMILL said that he had been speaking
from the point of view of the public.
The CHAIRMAN considered that New South
Wales wanted educating just as badly as any State
of the Commonwealth. Speaking personally he
would say let them have it anywhere except in his
State, because once he got away from his State he
could do as he liked. But he thought Mr. Jolly’s
suggestion a good one, and he understood that Tas-
mania was lacking and that the Conference should
therefore be held there.
Mr. JOLLY said he would move to that effect, but
first of all they might have to make some general in-
quiries perhaps.
Mr. HAY said that that could be left in the Sec-
retary’s hands.
The CHAIRMAN felt that the Conference should
divide its time among the States as much as possible,
and thus every State would benefit. They should
accept Mr. Jolly’s suggestion and if it was not agree-
able to Tasmania they could hold it in Queensland,
Victoria, or New South Wales. He suggested that
someone should second Mr. Jolly’s motion and carry
a further resolution that if Tasmania were unwilling
to have the Conference it should be held in Queens-
land.
Mr. GILL seconded Mr. Jolly’s motion. The idea
of returning to Western Australia for the Confer-
ence appealed to him, however, because he had such
a great regard for the State, but he saw danger
signals, because in Perth they had nearly killed them
with kindness. Personally he would like to go to
Queensland, but knowing Tasmania as he did, and
knowing that there were a few foresters there left
on their own and receiving no encouragement, and
that their splendid forests were being treated with
neglect, if they could induce Tasmania to give them
even a moderate reception, he felt it was their duty
to help them as much as they could.
Mr. HAY pointed out that there was a certain
time of the year that was inconvenient for them all.
This was Mr. Gill’s planting season, and the present
part of the year was inconvenient both for New
South Wales and for Victoria.
The CHAIRMAN suggested that Mr. Jolly should
move that Tasmania should be the meeting place for
the Conference if that State was willing; and if not,
that it should be held in Queensland in the month
of September next year. Other States had a claim
upon them, and it was interesting for them all to
get into the other States and see their forests.
Mr. JOLLY moved:
“That the Conference be held in Tasmania in
September next if convenient to that State; and
if not, in Queensland.”
Mr. GILL seconded the motion.
Question put and passed.
Mr. H. S. KING, in apologising for the unavoid-
able absence of the Vice President, Hon. R. T. Rob-
inson, said that the Minister would be pleased if
members would accept, each of them, a small box
containing samples of West Australian timber as a
memento of their visit.
Mr. JOLLY expressed the sincere thanks to West-
ern Australia for the manner in which they had been
treated. Their visit had been a delightful one, and,
speaking for himself, he had only seen one small
area of jarrah in Western Australia before. It was
a great privilege to have seen their glorious forests,
and he hoped Western Australia would do its duty
and preserve those forests. The visit had been of
great benefit to them all, and he hoped that each and
all the States might benefit. He had only been at one
Conference before, but the work done in Perth had
been far better than on the occasion he alluded to.
Conference adjourned to Friday, 23rd November,
1917, at 9.45 a.m.
FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 23, 1917.
The Governor General took the chair, and invited
discussion on Mr. Lane-Poole’s paper on “Working
Plans.”
Mr. HAY said that in opening the discussion on
Mr. Lane-Poole’s paper, he wished to put forward
that the principle of working plans was the most
advanced step that had been made in connection
with scientific forestry, and he used the word
“scientific” more in its exact than in its academic
sense. In Australia they had to a greater or


less extent adopted the principle of working
plans, only the trouble had been that these
plans were not too exact. In New South Wales the
forests of the Murray had been worked under work-
ing plans for the last 20 years. The reasons that the
plans Avere not so exact was on account of the heavy
initial cost of survey, although it would pay them
in the long run when once it was done, as it need
never be done again. For instance, the original sur-
vey for 200,000 acres in the Murray cost £BOO, or
about Id. per acre. Different conditions would mean
a different range of cost. They had done 150,000
acres in addition to the Murray and it cost them about
3d. per acre and that was a very heavy cost. The
average under the American survey system was 2 1 /2 ( i-
He thought it might be of interest to the Conference
to indicate in what way New South Wales had at-
tempted to tackle this problem of working plans.
They had trained surveyors for the Avork. They laid
doAvn a system of survey which was taken from the
American system, altered to meet their conditions.
They had eight young surveyors and they were put
under an experienced man and given a training-
in forest survey methods. Unless the forest survey
Avas done on system with an extreme measure of
exactness, they would find themselves in the position
of not getting their money’s worth for the survey.
They had prepared a manual in Ncav South Wales,
which laid down the work a forest surveyor
Avas to do, and the Avay in A\ 7 hich it Avas to be done.
The most important part of the survey was that it
should be carried out in a uniform way, and the
report should collect all the statistical data necessary
for the purpose of studying the position and laying
down a standard Avorking plan. He Avould read them
some of the information that had to be compiled in
the survey, and the data was more exact even than
the survey. The manual sets out that the report
should be furnished under the following heads:—
Name and number of State Forest or Area inspected;
area and situation, accessibility, local situation as
from nearest railway station, if held under any
tenure; improvements, their nature and value; rain-
fall, climate, water supply, etc.; configuration, geo-
logical formation, soil, etc.; timbered with —average
quantity to the acre of mature and immature timber
of the various kinds on the areas referred to. (This
should be dealt with in the greatest detail); the best
method of dealing with forest pests; the best method
of fire protection; whether area requires fencing, the
class of fence and probable cost, requirements of the
timber industry; recommendations as to/ the best
method of exploitation and improving the area and
its future possibilities (this should be dealt with in
the greatest detail.) The manual also set out the
method of strip survey to be adopted and topo-
graphical survey. A good many of their lands were
under tenure, and that complicated the working
plan. Water supply was also most essential. With
regard to the best methods of fire protection that
was the most important work of all. It was the
big problem in forestry in Australia, and Avas one
that required a very great deal of skill in providing
methods of safe-guarding their forests. Originally,
they had found that until they had followed this
system the information was not sufficiently uniform
to be of service to them. Having got the informa-
tion it had to be submitted to expert officers, and
they had unfortunately no Avell-trained Avorking
plan officers in Australia, but the best they had
devoted their time to this work. He wanted to em-
phasise the point that the plans in New South Wales
were only being laid down for a short period, as they
would want altering later on. He would show them
an example of a forest survey plan. The original
plan was compiled in black and white, and was then
heliographed. Every working plan was produced in
triplicate. They had found that it was better to make
a strip survey apply to the various sections. On
that information, based on sylvicultural data, the
working plans were produced. The working plan
he was exhibiting was for 10,000 acres, in two sec-
tions. In reply to His Excellency, he stated that
No. 1 was a division and the compartments were sub-
divisions within it. In their present range of sylvical
knowledge, which was very limited, they could not lay
down anything very definite, but they had adopted
the principle of reducing the possibility in every
case by 50 per cent., until they had more exact know-
ledge. A plan that would be of interest to them
was one of a demonstration forest of nearly I,ooo'
acres which he would explain to them. On their
working plans they showed the nearest way to
markets. Each of the working roads that were
shown on the plans was the nearest way to
the market, and it was kept clean for the
purpose of acting as a fire-break. The fire-
break system extended to the outer boundary. The
plans were worked out in a way which might be.of
interest to the Conference, it would show them they
were very guarded in estimating the possibility, and
he would like to read the whole of the working plan.
All the information in the plan was embodied in the
report which he would read to them. Every
forest was placed on to its own foundation as
regards finance. They looked at what the forest
had cost them and what it earned. Unfortunately,
most of them were on the debit side at present.
They were not fencing all their forests, but in the
particular one in question they anticipated getting
about £SO a year for grazing, which would pay the
interest on the cost of fencing. He thought
their 50 per cent, reduction of possibility was
a pretty fair basis to start on. They knew the
diameter expansion was somewhere between .02
and .04 of an inch in the ironbark forests. It was
costing them 3s. 6d. to convert their firewood, and
they were geting 6s. a ton for it on the ground. They
imposed restrictions on timber cutters. They were
trying to make their waste lands productive, and
they were being planted with wattle and other species.
They closed their land for two ygars from grazing as
they wanted to get tw 7 o years’ start in order that the
stock would not injure re-generation, as a general
rule their land was put up for grazing by tender. It
was rather an important thing that the grass should
be eaten down. He produced a photograph of the
forest he was referring to. The forest in question
had been overcut and there was no re-growth on
it, they would not consider the forest productive un-
til they had a re-growth.
Mr. CORBIN thought that everybody must have
read Mr. Lane-Poole’s paper with a great deal of
interest, and they were all seized with the import-
ance of the paper. It emphasised the menace to
which the forests had been subjected in times gone
by. Lack of finance was one of these menaces, as
very often a department was starved. The least pro-
ductive forest was then allowed to go and the most
productive got the small amount of support that
they could give it. They were all in a condition that
they could not under-value the importance of col-
lecting data. They must collect data, and the sooner


coma get it the better, they could then get
their working plans. The best method of preparing
the working plans was the cause of a difference of
opinion, but the collection of data should go on with
all possible speed. A question dealt with was the
specialisation of a department to deal with working
plans. An officer who specialised in working plans
was more fitted to carry on the work than one who
had not only this work to do but hundreds of other
duties to attend to at the same time. They would
thus get some standardisation in methods. He
could only express an appreciation of Mr. Lane-
Poole’s paper.
Mr. STYLES, during the course of his remarks,
said that he would like to make one or two obser-
vations. ‘ He had noticed on reading the paper
through, not as a forester but as a politician, and
he noticed that Mr. Lane-Poole had not left that
section alone. He was interested in reading that
valuable lesson, and the meddlesome politician
should not come in and destroy the work of the
forester. He wished to congratulate Mr. Lane-
Poole on his paper and to assure him that if it was
his (Mr. Styles) good fortune to introduce a For-
estry Bill into the Parliament of South Australia it
would be so hard and fast that it would be of some
value to South Australia and to Australia generally.
A Forestry Bill was necessary, he could see that, and
he considered they should see that the working plans
be not interefered with, and that this be laid down
by Act of Parliament, that the working plans be
not interfered with unless it be by resolution of
both houses of Parliament. Those then who were
interested in the political sphere knew that such a
resolution would have to have very good backing
before statute, such as the one he had in his mind,
would be interfered with. The Legislative Council
to which he belonged were very suspicious if sug-
gestions were made to them of taking away any por-
tion of the park lands in South Australia, and a
big fight was always brought up if such a matter
was brought forward. He was pleased to see that
the Hon. John Lewis, who was the leader in such
matters, always got the House to see with him that
the parks should not be interfered with but left to
the people. One thing he had learned during Con-
ference, and he came to be taught and to listen to
the experts who had gathered there, and that was
the absolute necessity for working plans for the
future, and he hoped that when Mr. Lane-Poole
next visited South Australia he would be able to say
that those things which he saw on the previous visit
were gradually being removed, and they were get-
ting more up to date with their forestry methods
in South Australia.
At this juncture the Governor General invited
discussion from the room, and
Mr. HARRISON stated that as a resident of
Western Australia who had gone through portions
of the forestry country 20 years ago, and recently
one noticed a great difference. They were faced
with more facts now in connection with the war, and
it was a certain fact that the timber wealth was of
importance to the country. Timber played a most
important part. Some timbers they were getting
very short of. The York Gum, for instance, was a
very good hard wood, and in many districts it was
almost extinct, and it would be very good if the
politicians of Western Australia would urge that
these timbers should be preserved, and if they
could get from Mr. Lane-Poole definite information
as to what class of timber should be preserved it
would be good for the Stale and the Commonwealth.
Professor DAKIN said it had struck him that it
would be a good plan when timber was used to any
extent in this country that definite data should be
obtained at the outset as to the place from which that
timber came, and the treatment it received before
being placed in the position in which it finally found
itself, because as the years went on the timber was
used as jetty piles or sleepers, it might be found to
have been attacked by forest pests; and an experi-
ment, if it were carried out, might be spoiled by lack
of definite data. He had been engaged in an investi-
gation on the so-called toredo in Fremantle piles.
He understood that some of the piles only lasted two
years, and it cost £IOO to put them down. It was
most extraordinary to find that two jetty piles which
had been put down at the same time, one would be
attacked by the toredo and the other would not.
That was an important point to consider. He had
immediately asked for data in connection with the
matter as to where the wood came from, whether it
had been grown in different districts, but there was
no data to hand. The information could not be ob-
tained and his investigations had been practically a
failure. The net results were of no value. He had
suggested that investigations should be carried out
on a larger scale, but unfortunately the expenditure
of hundreds of pounds was not to be considered even
if it was to save thousands of pounds in the long
run. That sort of thing must occur time after time,
and he thought it would be of advantage if those
people who were using timber on a large scale, if
they paid attention to the collection of data in regard
to that timber before it was used.
The GOVERNOR GENERAL thought it would be
interesting to have the views of sawmillers as to the
readiness or otherwise with which necessary regula-
tions for working under the selection system would
be followed. He thought Mr. Lane-Poole would
agree that they should be worked under selection,
and it would be very interesting if they had the views
of the sawmillers in question.
Mr. MUNRO stated that he was very pleased to
have the opportunity of saying a word or two on the
matter. He was not prepared to say anything at
that stage as to the point raised by His Excellency,
but he would like to stress the importance of a
proper working plan for these forests. He was con-
nected with one of the largest individual areas in this
State, and had been for 24 years. When he first
took control of that particular part of the country
he found an absolute lack of knowledge regarding
that area. It contained 250,000 acres, and to his
great astonishment and surprise, when he arrived at
that place which His Excellency had visited, and the
members of the Conference had visited, the boundary
survey was not even made. Then, again, he found
that railways had been laid, sometimes pulled up
and re-laid again, to go a little bit farther in some
direction, all through the absence of proper working
plans. He had the boundary survey made of this
area at an early date, and had a surveyor on for
some time making a feature survey of the country,
and the result of that survey was that although he
had some selfishness in the matter because he wanted
to know where he was when he was miles out in the
bush, and he had ridden round with men who were


supposed to know the country and had found that
really they did not know it at all. After the survey
had been made it proved of inestimable value to the
officers of his company and to himself. It showed
all the streams, the hills, and the character of the
forest area, whether good, bad, or indifferent, and
the best way to tap it and work it. If that was
necessary for an individual sawmilling proposition,
surely it must be more important to the Forestry
Department as a whole. He had been very interested
in the important information given to the Conference
by Mr. Hay, and he supported most heartily any
attempt that was made to get proper working plans
of the area. Many sawmillers’ interests were not in
the way of regeneration of forests. Sawmillers were
looked upon as butchers. They had to cut the timber
down and make a profit out of it. He was very
deeply sensible of the fact that the present rate of
cutting should not continue, but that the forest must
be looked after and surveyed. He thanked them for
the opportunity of saying a few words.
Mr. HAY said that unfortunately everything was
governed by the markets. The wood might be there
but they could not find a market for it, and the selec-
tion system was the only system millers could work
on. There was only a market for the better class of
wood. The miller must know what he had to deal
with, and he could not handle it properly unless there
was a working plan in existence.
Mr. GREGG said that he was very pleased to see
the interest taken in forestry conditions in Western
Australia. He had only had experience with the
pastoralists. He had seen devastating fires going
through the jarrah forests and doing a terrible
amount of damage. They let the forests for grazing,
and in order to get the best results from the forest
from a grazing point of view he had to burn it every
three years because the forest would not burn in
Western Australia more often. The reason why it
would not burn oftener was that a green forest
would not burn. There was not much damage done
if the fire was put through every three years; the
damage was if it only went through about every six
or seven years. It seemed to him they had not the
money to put into clearing fire-breaks, but he made
the suggestion that they should burn the forest land
when it would burn, and the damage done then would
be very slight indeed. It was surprising how few
very small trees were destroyed by a creeping fire
going through in the early part of the year. He
offered the suggestion as a sheep man if it was worth
anything to the Forestry Department. With regard
to Wandoo timber he was always grieved when he
saw the thousands of acres of Wandoo that had been
burnt down to make it fit for the plough. He had
burned down thousands of acres of Wandoo himself,
but it was a most valuable timber and it seemed to him
to be an ideal timber for sleepers, and he did not
know why it was never used. It was practically im-
pervious to white ants. He had seen a log that had
been down for 40 years and the sap only was gone;
it still had all its strength left. To-day on the East-
ern side of the Darling range they had thousands of
acres of Wandoo which could be used to great ad-
vantage at the present time.
Mr. SAXBY said that he did not feel competent
to speak before such a distinguished audience, but
if he had them in the bush he might be able to speak
to them in his bush language. He Lad not read Mr.
Lane-Pooled paper and did not know what the dis-
cussion was about, but he knew Mr. Lane-Poole’s
views and that he was on the right track in many
instances, but in some ways he was on the wrong
track. He was right particularly in connection with
the data he was collecting. He would be able to
see by this means what the forest contained, parti-
cularly in regard to jarrah. Then with regard to the
scheme of firebreaks he was of opinion that Mr.
Lane-Poole was right, but with regard to the regu-
lations he brought in some time ago in which he
was asking the millers to pack up the end of their
trees, he was absolutely wrong.* He thought if the
ends of the trees were packed up as Mr. Lane-
Poole suggested they would create such a fierce fire
as would destroy everything. He thought the forests
should be burnt often as one of the speakers had
said. They liked fires to help to break up the logs.
It was essential from the millers’ point of view that
the fires should go through often in order to enable
their teams to get through the bush. There had
been some discussion regarding afforestation. He
had taken some of the members of Conference
through bush that was cut out, and they had men-
tioned that the impression was general in the East-
ern States that our growth of forests was very slow,
and they were absolutely impressed with the way
the young growth was coming on. In the maiden
bush there was practically not a single young tree
coming up. After the timber had been cut down
they should lock that area up, and the young forest
would then grow up itself without any doubt.
There would be no necessity then to plant. He
did not know what Mr. Lane-Poole’s paper con-
tained, and he thought that the further he went on
in his rambling statement the more he would confuse
the assembly.
Mr. J. C. PORT said that he had not had an
opportunity of reading Mr. Lane-Poole’s paper, but
as a sawmiller he would like to say that he con-
sidered that anything Mr. Lane-Poole had in view
was very necessary. It was very necessary that
their forests should be under scientific men, and he
was in no doubt that their efforts were for the
benefit of the State for generations to come. His
view on the timber industry had been simply that he
would get the timber on the best terms he could and
go into the question of transport, and of cutting it
up, and they had to sell their timber in order to
make a living. They did not look to the future
generation or anything else, but when they had to
start to work the mills without much capital they
did not consider those who were to come after
them. About 12 years ago he was out of the coun-
try, but he was one of those who compiled the re-
gulations for the sawmillers, and since then he had
had the pleasure of working under them. They had
been without a forestry man for the last 12 years
at the head of the Forestry Department, and he was
pleased to see they had a Minister now who was
taking an interest in Forestry affairs, and with Mr.
Lane-Poole at the head of affairs the timber in-
dustry would be safe-guarded. There was another
thing, however, and that was that the moment the
extra charges came along as they must do with all
the protections that were being taken, directly the
price of jarrah got too high to compete with other
timbers there would be no demand for it at all.


Mr. HAMERSLEY pointed out that the object
of the millers was to cut out the best of the timber,
and there was no doubt they would suffer if they
worked under the plan of “sufficient unto the day
is the evil thereof.” They were likely to suffer
unless some of Mr. Lane-Poole’s suggestions were
taken notice of by Parliament. He agreed with Mr.
Styles who had definitely announced that it was his
endeavour to put through a Bill in South Australia,
a Bill that could not have a coach and four driven
through it in the same way as the sawmillers drive
their teams through, the forest. They had magnifi-
cent forests in Western Australia and they wanted
the gentlemen in conference to teach them how to
get the best out of their forests. He was interested
in land and in stock and found it necessary to run
fires through the country to get better results for
feeding sheep. He had denuded some six or seven
thousand acres of valuable timber and possibly he
was not getting so much out of it as a wheat-
growing proposition as he might have done on a
timber proposition. It was sufficient for him to
know that he could make something out of it by
wheat straight away, wdiereas by timber he might be
in his grave and his children might be in their
graves before anything was made out of it. He
had left some trees in and they had proved them-
selves a perfect curse to him in connection with the
reaper and drilling machines. He was pleased to see
there was one thing that Mr. Lane-Poole advocated,
and he thought it should be taken notice of by Par-
liament, and that was to pass an Act of Parliament
which would enable the coming generations to bene-
fit by what was done to-day. There was one matter
wherein the Lands Department required them to
carry on certain improvements from year to year.
They had to improve the land, and in a great many
cases the only thing they could do was to ringbark
the timber, and there must be thousands and thou-
sands of acres of beautiful timber country that had
been recklessly ringbarked, and to his certain know-
ledge that had not been an improvement from a
grazing point of view, because once you destroyed
the timber there was not the annual fall of leaves,
and you could not run a fire through it annually,
which was so necessary from the grazier’s point of
view. He was of the opinion that conference would
be of great advantage, particularly as a sympathetic
minister was at the head of affairs, and they would
get something on their statute book which would
safeguard the forests of the future and might even
influence the Lands Department not to ruthlessly
destroy as grazing area some of their fine forests.
Mr. KINGSMILL thanked the Attorney
General and Mr. Lane-Poole for the oppor-
tunity of being present that day. It had
struck him more than ever this morning after his
hurried perusal of Mr. Lane-Poole’s paper that at
the very root of successful forestry lay the forest
working plan which had been alluded to as the for-
ester’s Bible. One of the most pleasing developments
in forestry affairs in this State w T as that these people
whom the forester had been wont to look upon as
his bitterest enemies were now looked upon as his
best friends. It was very pleasing to see the saw-
millers taking part in these discussions, and he
thought it was one of the most interesting things
they could see and which pointed to success, They
must get the public of Western Australia to under-
stand that the money spent on their forests would
be spent in the most re-productive work on which
it could be spent. Another point alluded to was that
to get success there must be a continuity of pur-
pose. Once a good working plan was laid down that
plan should be absolutely inviolable, and it was very
pleasing to him to find that so many members were
present and that they were all of the same opinion.
It would encourage the Minister and the Conservator
of Forests to bring forward an Act in connection
with which it would have to be worked. He was of
the opinion that this Conference had done a lot fa
stimulate interest in forestry in this State. Regu-
lations were brought in for making their forests an
asset for all time. It was pleasing to see so many
gentlemen present who had a knowledge of forestry,
not only the Conservators of Forests but men like
the Hon. Mr. Ashford and the Hon. Mr. Styles. He
thanked the Minister and Mr. Lane-Poole for the
privilege of attending Conference.
The ATTORNEY GENERAL said that although
he had introduced the Governor General there as the
Governor General, he felt that when he was in the
chair they looked upon him as their chairman and
forgot to a certain degree his high position. They
looked upon his as their best friend. He (the
speaker) would be less than human if he did not feel
a little bit gratified by the interest taken in forestry
in Western Australia. If they had introduced for-
estry regulations at the time when Mr. Hamersley
was in the pioneering stage, Mr. Hamersley would
have been one of their bitterest opponents. The
country had to be opened up by men of the type
of Mr. Hamersley, and the hardy pioneers from
whom he had sprung. The time was coming, how-
ever, when they could delay no longer in taking
care of the assets they had in order that the State
might receive the greatest value for them. That
could only be done by a proper system of demarka-
tion of the forests and proper working plans as
described to them by Mr. Lane-Poole and Mr. Hay.
There was nothing like the photographs that had
been shown to them, at any rate to those who were
interested like himself, and he would like to ask Mr.
Saxby whether there was any place here that showed
such growth after it had been burnt as the place
Air. Hay had shown them photographs of, and there
fire was kept out absolutely. He was ready to intro-
duce a Bill for Forestry some months ago, but he
felt that the time was not ripe, as he wanted the
people of the country to be behind him, and particu-
larly the sawmillers. When Mr. Lane-Poole came
here he was suffering from the disability of youth-
ful looks, and was apt to be considered a boy. He,
the speaker, had suffered from the same disability
himself. The man, however, who had such a know-
ledge of forestry must have the germs of knowledge
in him, and those germs of knowledge could not be
set going from anybody else. Problems would arise
m a new State like Western Australia, and practical
men had to buy the brains of men skilled in the
subject. They wanted to buy the brains of those
skilled in forestry, and around that table were the
brains of Australia in forestry. They were educated
by the advent of these gentlemen to Western Aus-
tralia. The public was being educated by the publi-
cation of the debates, and it had been assisted by


the publication in the Press of much forestry infor-
mation during the last 18 months. He had been
trying to tell them that the most tangible asset which
this State of Western Australia possessed were their
forests. Time was short, but he could go on talking
for a long time, although he talked with a great deal
of diffidence before the Governor General and the
gentlemen who have made this subject their own.
He had to learn a little bit about it because he could
not have the Conservator of Forests with him in
Parliament, and he had to impress his colleagues
with the importance of the subject and with his own
views. He had invited pretty well every member of
Parliament to be present, but only about six had
turned up. But he hoped that those that had turned
up were in accordance with all their views on fores-
try. If that was so their Forestry Bill would go
through. When the Bill came before Parliament he
hoped that they would not only have the support
of the millers but of the people of Western Aus-
tralia, in order that the people of Western Australia
would be able to know that their assets at last were
being put in order.
Mr. GILL pointed out that the reference made by
Mr. Hay to the principles that had been found most
suitable in dealing with the forests in New South
Wales, the selection system, was one that had equally
applied to the natural forests in South Australia.
Some 30 years ago he was in charge of a forest of
50,000 acres, and the same difficulty arose there as
had always arisen in sparsely populated countries,
that there was no demand for all classes of the tim-
ber. There was only a demand for sleeper timber
and a few posts. Referring to the question of firing
the forest he felt compelled to cross swords with the
gentleman who considered that the oftener the forest
was fired the better it was for the forest, as he
thought that a man who did that was the worst of
all the enemies of the forest. If anyone examined a
forest which was frequently burnt in this way, it
would be seen that every fire burnt off the leader of
the young trees, and a tree with several fresh leaders
twisted each time like a bayonet would never make
a proper timber tree, but would have to be cut down
in the course of thinning operations. Firing the
forest was right enough if properly regulated, but
after once firing to start the young growth, it must
be rigidly excluded. Forest legislation should be
rigorously enforced, or great loss of both property
and life could not fail to result, and he instanced
a big fire which had occurred near Port Victor, in
South Australia, which had spread for 20 miles, and
in its course had burnt two little children whom their
mother had left just for a short time in a hut. He
regarded any man who either recklessly or malici-
ously started a fire as being next door to a murderer,
as he could never tell where his fire might go, or
how many lives it might destroy, to say nothing
of the property it might ruin.
Mr. LANE-POOLE (in reply), stated that it was
very gratifying to him to find that his paper had
been received with so much interest. Mr. Hay had
shown them that in New South Wales they were
on the high road to successful forestry. They had
got out working plans. There was no chance of the
timber being overeut and Mr. Hay had reduced his
figures by 50 per cent, to be on the safe side. In
Western Australia the working plans must be of the
simplest character. He was not able to go into
details as New South Wales was. They would have
to see what their forests would grow per year and
then look after the forests that had been cut out.
Working plans were based in the Old Country on
sylviculture. Here, so little was known of the sylvi-
culture of jarrah that their working plans
must be based on the rate of growth and the
re-generation. Mr. Hay had shown them what
New South Wales had done. But what had
not been shown was how these plans were to be
protected. Would these plans be broken up by a
new Government coming in. They could reserve
large areas of forests, protect them and lay down
splendid working plans, but unless those plans were
protected by a distinct section in the Act, as in the
French Act, it would be no good. While Mr. Hay
was in charge of the Forestry Department of New
South Wales, the forest working plans would never
be broken, but forests will not grow in one lifetime.
France, owing to the war, had to break her working
plans, but it required a special enactment to break
those plans. He was quite in agreement with Mr. Hay
that there should be a working plans officer. They
were very badly needed. Mr. Styles was under a mis-
apprehension if he had gathered from the paper that
he (the Speaker) was criticising South Australia, as
he had sat at the feet of Mr. Gill when
he was over there and gathered all the informa-
tion he could. He had referred to the very early
work which was of an experimental character. All
the latter work in South Australia was a model to the
other States. He was very glad to hear Mr. Harri-
son on wandoo. It was one of the most valuable tim-
bers in the State and he was very sorry to say they
had no reserves for wandoo whatever. It was a very
difficult tree to manage, as it grew in a very open
forest. The trees are not close together and the land
was good for grazing and it was therefore, very
difficult to reserve enough for the needs of the coun-
try. The chief need of the country as far as this
timber was concerned, was, of course, for the Mid-
land Junction workshops. The members of confer-
ence had been impressed with the use of wandoo
for the scantlings of trucks. In connection with the
“G” trucks, Mr. Hume had told him that the costs
had been reduced from £2 to 65., a year
by the substitution of tuart and wandoo for steel
underframes. Professor Dakin had raised a
very interesting point regarding the collection of
data and in his reference to the piles used in con-
nection with the jetties at Fremantle. He had seen
two pieces of jarrah that came out of the same
bridge. One was put in when the bridge was first
erected 70 years ago, and the other was there for
two and a-half years. The 70-year-old pile had not
been touched by the so-called toredo, and the other
was absolutely riddled and useless. Here in West-
ern Australia more than anywhere else we were con-
fronted with the difficulty of converting selection for-
ests into clear felling forests. The trade was an ex-
port one, and the open markets of the world required
absolutely the best timber in the world. Their speci-
fication for timber, however, was ridiculous.
They were sending out timber for sleepers that was
absolutely beautiful timber, and anything that was
not up to the standard went into the fire. He could
not say how long it would be before they could
change from the selection system. The miller


picked out the eyes of the forest, but it was
the only thing he could do. He was at any rate
very gratified to see that the sawmillers were in sym-
pathy with him. Mr. Munro had shown him a very
poor re-growth at Jarrahdale. This had been worked
since 1874, and the re-growth was very poor owing
to the repeated fires. Mr. Grigg brought up the
question of wandoo. He thought that Western
Australia had suffered more from conversion of
timber to sleepers than anything else, and as to turn-
ing wandoo into sleepers it was prostituting good
wood. He suggested that it was possible for the
wandoo to be reserved for the Railway Department.
All the wandoo that the Railway Department was
using now was brought from private lands, and no-
thing came from Crown lands. The areas of Crown
lands of wandoo were exceedingly small. He was
very glad to hear Mr. Sexton urge the necessity of
the classification. Camps had been arranged and the
surveyors were co-operating with the foresters. The
surveyors were doing surveying, and the foresters
forestry work. The stand of marketable timber
was being ascertained, and the amount of over-
matured timber was also being ascertained. They
must try to find out how much valuable timber they
had and how many poles they had to the
acre for their future forests. They had recorded
on the usual 80-scale sheet the full information as
to the forests. He had hoped to get more camps on
this year to put an end to the perpetual feud be-
tween lands and forestry. The only thing to do was
to lay down definitely which was forest land and
which was agricultural land. Mr. Sexton also
brought up the point that forestry begins
with the axe. He did not put it in that
way but that is what he meant and what foresters
were taught in the schools. It did not start in the
seed-bed but with the axe. The millers had done a
lot of good. They had to get rid of the big stuff
before they could do any forestry work. Reference
had also been made to the charges that might have
to be imposed on the millers. Revenue had been re-
ceived from the main jarrah and karri belts but not
a penny had been put back and there must be a
million and a-half acres of land that had been cut
by the millers, and now the Forestry Department
had to take it in hand without a penny to pay for it.
He was very sorry to see that ringbarking was looked
upon as an improvement by the Lands Department.
The agricultural land in the forest regions of the
South-West was not more than 1 per cent,
of the area, and yet the method of surveying
in the past was to allocate anything up to
1,000 acres of the country. Ten acres would be
good land and the rest forest country, and then the
wretched man under the C.P. conditions had to set to
work on this valuable timber and ringbark it and
thereby rob the country of it. With regard to fires,
he was very glad to see that several gentlemen said
that fires did harm to the forests. That was a very
great advance because he was told when he came
here first that jarrah forests could not exist without
fires. He could not understand that until he saw
that people were trying to make a living by growing
sheep on the jarrah scrub. Repeated forest fires
burnt up all the small bushes and the leaf mould.
He would like them to look at the catchment area
at Mundaring. The late Government had ring-
barked that area to make it a fine catchment area,
and Mr. Brookman had told him that it was one of
the finest regeneration propositions he had ever seen.
Fires came through it, however, and now they had
nothing there at all. There were acres and acres
without anything on it at all. Nothing remains ex-
cept the dead sticks of ringbarked timber. You
can follow for years the fires that have gone through
a forest. The leading shoot is burnt off and then
you get a bit further on and the next fire takes it
off. The result of fires is to convert a good re-growth
into crooked poles. He was very glad to see Mr. Gill
supporting him so thoroughly in this matter. He
wanted to say that the fire question was a big ques-
tion in other countries. Take the area in the South
of France where there were pine forests and where
there were numerous droughts. They managed to
keep the fires out from there. They did not institute
the creeping fire system in South Africa, but fire-
breaks and a proper system of fire control. In re-
gard to Mr. Kingsmill he wished to say that Mr.
Kingsmill was always a strong friend of the Forestry
Department. It was certainly a great asset to have
such a strong friend working for the Forestry De-
partment.
The GOVERNOR GENERAL said that he owed an
apology to the Conference for having played truant
so long. As a forester he regretted very much being
absent from their discussions. He had made a tour
of the North-West of this State, and thought that
the jam wood was one of the most magnificent tim-
bers he had seen, but it was being used for firing and
the generation of gas. As to the hardness of York
gum he had tried to chop a log that had been dead
for years, and he could answer as to its hardness.
Sandalwood also was a very valuable wood. He con-
sidered that this had been a most excellent Confer-
ence. The papers had all been good, and they had
had a mixed discussion that day, and had all directed
their attention in the way of making most of their
natural resources. There were some products in
which they had almost a monopoly. The question of
the reservation of their timbers should be made as
fast as the laws of the Medes and Persians. There
should be a hard and fast rule laid down as between
agricultural land and forest land. He thought he
had one of the first forest lands at home of about
4,000 acres, but that had all gone since the war. It
had been referred to that day as to the fewness of
the members of Parliament present, but that may
have been because of what had been said about them.
He remembered the grave-digger scene in Hamlet
where one of them turned up a skull and looking at
it remarked, “This might have been the pate of a
politician.” .There was no short cut to the mil-
lenium in forestry. They enjoyed the open market of
the world for their timber as well as for their wool,
and this was a most important consideration. There
was no doubt that most of their valuable timber had
been cut for sleepers. They had grown Scotch firs
in Scotland for the sleepers as it grew in so short
a time. When Mr. Munro spoke about the saw-
millers having to make a profit that was only com-
mon sense. If some things were lost by regulations,
and undoubtedly they are, an immense amount could
be gained by communication between each other, and
he was pleased to see the lines of demarkation
marked out on the forest plans they had seen of
New South Wales that morning. By developing by-
products, too, another advantage would be gained.
