

[ Confidential, and for Private Circulation only.]
Loyal Orange Institution
OF AUSTRALASIA
1 REPORT OF PROCEEDINGS |
(f First 4cncial p
* OF THE
GRAND LODGES OF AUSTRALASIA,
PROTESTANT HALL , CASTLE RE AGII ST.,
On the 28lh, 29tb, 30th and 31st March
Bko. HENRY HICKS, E.W.G.M.,
Bro. A. J. S. GILCHRIST, OS., )
New South Wales. (
Bro. J. W. BAM BE R, G.S.. (
South Australia, I
Bros. GLASSOP & MILLER, Printers, 78 Clarence-st., Sydney.


/ V* A .


V If
L Confidential, and for Private Circulation onlyC\
OP AUSTRALASIA.
REPORT- OF PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
GRAND LODGES OF AUSTRALASIA,
HELD IN THE
Loyal Orange Institution
PROTESTANT HALL , GASTLEREAGII ST.,
SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES,
On the 28th, 29th, 30th and 31st March, 1882.
Bbo. HENRY HICKS, R.W.G.M.,
New South Wales, President.
Bro. A. J. 8. GILCHRIST, G.S., )
New South Wales, f Joint
Bro. J. W. BAMBER, G.S., / Secretaries.
South Australia,)
Bros. GLASSOP & MILLER, Printers, 78 Clarence-st.




[ Confidential, and for Private Circulation only.\
OF AUSTBALASIA.
REPORT- OF PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
GRAND LODGES OF AUSTRALASIA,
HELD IN THE
SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES,
On the 28th, 29th, 30th and 31st March, 1882
BRO. HENRY HICKS, R.W.G.M.,
New South Wales, President.
Loyal Orange Institution
jjwt Cmifaw*
PROTESTANT HALL , GASTLEREAGH ST.,
Bro. A. J. S. GILCHRIST, G.S., ) s
New South Wales, Joint
Bro. J. W. BAMBER, G.S., | Secretaries.
South Australia, J
Bros. GLASSOP & MILLER, Printers, 78 Clarence-st.


*
#


LOYAL ORANGE INSTITUTION
Report of the'proceedings of Conference (consist-
ing of Delegates from the Grand Lodges of Australasia)
held in the Protestant Hall, Sydney, on the 28th,
29th, 30th and 31st March, 1882, convened for the
purpose of deliberating upon the most effective means
to be adopted in order to secure uniformity in system,
and the consolidation of our political power in these
Colonies.
The Conference met at 2 pm. on Tuesday, 28th
March, when the following Delegates attended and
presented their credentials, viz. :
New South Wales —Bro. Henry Hicks, R.W.G.M.,
Bro. A. J. S. Gilchrist, G.S., Bro. N. J.
Mackenzie, Grand Treasurer.
Victoria —Bro. Rev. Dr. Gilchrist, R.W G.M., Bro.
Rev. J. T. Kearns, G.C., Bro. John Waugh,
G S
Queensland —Bro. D. P. Milne, R.W.G.M , Bro.
Rev. James Carson, G.S., Bro. A. McKenzie,
G. Treasurer and G.L.
South Australia—Bro. Rev. J. W. Bamber, G.S.,
Bro. H. Marks.
New Zealand—Bro. J. Seabrooke, P.G. Sec., Bro.
J. Seabrooke, junr., Bro. S. Murphy, D.G.S.,
(N.S.W.) The last named Brother was nomin-
ated by Bro. J. Seabrooke, senr., P.G. 9., and
accepted by the Conference.
The Conference proceeded to appoint the necessary
officers, when it was proposed by Bro,__Rev. Dr.


Gilchrist, seconded by Bro. D. P. Milne, and unan -
mously resolved :
“ That Bro. Henry Hicks be President of this Con-
ference.”
Proposed by Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns, seconded by
Bro. Rev. James Carson, and resolved :
“ That Bros. A. J. S. Gilchrist and J. W. Bamber
be Joint Secretaries.”
Proposed by Bro. Rev. James Carson, seconded by
Bro. D. P. Milne, and resolved: —
“ That no new business shall be entertained after
2 p.m. to-morrow, Wednesday the 29th inst.”
Order of Business.
After some discussion as to which item on the
Business Paper should take precedence, it was pro-
posed by Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns, seconded by Bro.
J. Seabrooke, senr., and resolved :
“ That the following be the Order of Business, viz. :
1 st. The consideration of the question as to the
desirability, or otherwise, of Federating the
Grand Lodges of Australasia.
2nd. Uniformity in the R.A.P. Degree Lecture
and Ritual.
3rd. Uniformity in Ritual, &c., in the Orange
Degree.”
Period of Sittings, &c.
In determining the hours of sitting there was some
little difficulty, owing to the fact that the Delegates
from a distance wished to be as short a time as possi-
ble absent from their respective duties, and they
moreover desired to visit the Sydney Lodges and com-
pare notes. Besides, on the part of New South
Wales and New Zealand, there was an impediment in
the way of a full attendance of the Delegates if the


sittings were to be held in the day time exclusively.
It was finally proposed by Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns,
seconded by Bro. Rev. Dr. Gilchrist, and resolved :
“ That the Conference sit daily from 10 to 12 am.,
and from 2 to 6 p.m., until the completion of
its business, with closed doors.”
Grand Lodge of Middle Island, New Zealand
At this stage of the preliminary proceedings, the
Conference was informed by Bro. Rev. J. W. Bamber
that there was another Grand Lodge in New Zealand,
viz., that of the Middle Island, which was unrepre-
sented.
Bro. S. Murphy, D.G.S. (N S.W.), stated that he
had not communicated with the Grand Lodge referred
to, not being aware of its existence.
It was then proposed by Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns,
seconded by Bro. John Waugh, and resolved :
“ That the proceedings of this Conference be
forwarded to the Grand Lodge of the Middle
Island, New Zealand, with a letter of apology
for omitting to invite them to send Delegates
to this Conference, stating as a reason that
their existence as a Grand Lodge was not
known until after the Conference met”
This concluded the preliminary business, but the
Brethren being desirous of gaining time, it was
unanimously agreed: —
“ That the Conference hold its first sitting at
once.”
FIRST SESSION.
Tuesday, 28th March, 1882, 3 p.m.
All the Delegates were present excepting Bros.
Marks and Murphy, from whom apologies were
received. The proceedings were open:d by prayer, the
Rev. Bro. J. T. Kearns officiating.


Proposed by Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns, seconded by
Bro. Rev. Jas. Carson, and resolved: —
“ That this Conference affirms the principle of the
desirability of Federating the Grand Lodges
of Australasia for mutual support.”
The question then arose as to what form the
Federation should take, when it was proposed by
Bro. Rev. Jas. Carson, seconded by Bro. John Waugh,
and resolved; —
“ That a Sub-Committee, consisting of the follow'
ing, viz., Bros. Rev. J. T. Kearns, Eev. Jas.
Carson, J. Seabrooke, sen., Rev. J. W. Bamber,
' and A. J. S. Gilchrist, be appointed to bring
up a report recommending the form which the
Federation should take.”
Proposed by Bro. Rev. Dr. Gilchrist, seconded by
Bro. Rev. Jas. Carson, and resolved :
“That this Conference do now adjourn until 10
a.m. to-morrow.”
SECOND SESSION.
Wednesday, 29TH March, 10 a.m.
All the Delegates were present, with the exception
of Bro. S. Murphy, one of the representatives of New
Zealand.
The meeting was opened by prayer, Bro. Rev. J. T.
Kearns officiating.
The minutes of the previous Session were read and
confirmed.
The Sub-Committee appointed at the previous
meeting submitted its report, recommending —
“ That a Grand Council be formed from the Grand
Lodges of Australasia, consisting of Delegates
from their membership, and that two-thirds of


the Grand Lodges agiecing thereto be con-
sidered a sufficient majority to authorize its
formation.”
The report was received and adopted..
In order to make this recommendation one of the
recommendations of the Conference, it was proposed
by Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns, seconded by Bro. D. P.
Milne, and resolved :
“That a Grand Council be formed from the Grand
Lodges of Australasia, to consist of Delegates
from each Grand Lodge, a majority of twp-
thirds of said Grand Lodges agreeing thereto
shall be deemed a sufficient authority to cause
its formation.”
Proposed by Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns, seconded by
Bro. J. Seabrooke, sen., and resolved :
“That the title of this Council shall be ‘The Grand
Council of the Loyal Orange Institution of
Australasia,’ and that it consist of three Dele-
gates from each Grand Lodge, to be elected at
the annual meeting immediately preceding the
meeting of the Grand Council.”
Proposed by Bro. Rev. Dr. Gilchrist, seconded by
Bro. H. Marks, and resolved :
“ That at the first meeting of each session of the
Grand Council, a President, Vice-President,
Secretary, and Treasurer be elected, and such
officers shall hold office until the succeeding
regular session of the Council. In the event of
the death or removal of the President during
his term of office, the Vice-President shall be
empowered to act for him.”
Proposed by Bro. Rev. James Carson, seconded
by Bro. J. Seabrooke, senr., and resolved:—


“ That the Grand Council shall meet for the first
time in 1883, that the second meeting shall be
in 1885, and that thereafter the meetings shall
be held triennially.”
It being necessary that a meeting should be held to
hear the result of decisions of the various Grand
Lodges, respecting the recommendations of Confer-
ence, it was proposed by Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns,
seconded by Bro. H. Marks, and resolved
“ That a Conference of the Grand Lodges of Aus-
tralasia be held in the Protestant Hall, Mel-
bourne, on the second Wednesday in March,
1883, and that the Executive Committee of
the Grand Lodge of Victoria have power to
alter the date if found necessary.”
Powers of Grand Council.
Proposed by Bro. Rev. Dr. Gilchrist, seconded by
Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns, and resolved :
“That the functions of the Grand Council shall be
in the main advisory, rather than legislative
or administrative, and that it shall therefore
serve the purposes of a court of arbitration in
questions of difficulty that may be referred to
it by any of the Grand Lodges.”
Proposed by Bro. Rev. Dr. Gilchrist, seconded by
Bro. H. Marks, and resolved :
“ That the Grand Council shall be competent to
deal with appeals from the decisions of the
Grand Lodges in cases where the appellant
has expressed a wish to have the sentence in
his case submitted to the Council, provided
that the Grand Lodge has consented by a
majority to allow him the privilege, and that
both parties have agreed to abide by the decis-
ions of the Council.”


THIRD SESSION.
Wednesday, 29TH March, 2 p.m.
All the Delegates were present, and the meeting
was opened by prayer, Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns officiat-
ing, Minutes of previous Session were read and con-
firmed.
Grand Council Fund.
After considerable discussion on this subject, it was
proposed by Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns, seconded by
Bro. Rev. James Carson, and resolved :
“ That a fund be formed to be called the Grand
Council Fund, the means to be adopted for
raising such fund to be considered by the
various Grand Lodges during the coming year,
and the next Conference shall at the com-
mencement of its business, collate the answers
from the various Grand Lodges and decide on
a course which will meet the views of the
majority.”
Charge jor Appeal to Grand Council.
This matter having been freely discussed, it was
proposed by Bro. Rev. Dr. Gilchrist, seconded by
Bro. John Waugh, and resolved
“ That in all cases of appeal to the Grand Council,
the appellant shall be required to deposit,
along with his appeal, the sura of One Guinea
as a guarantee of good faith, and as a contri-
bution to the Grand Council Fund.”
Political Aspect.
Proposed by Brc. Rev. James Carson, seconded by
Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns, and resolved
“ That the Grand Council make it a principal object
to devise modes of operation in all political
matters as far as practicable.”


Uniformity of Signs, Passwords, dec.
Proposed by Bro. Rev, James Carson, seconded by
Bro. H. Marks, and resolved :
“ That this Conference recommends the Grand
Council to issue.a common cipher for Austra-
lasia.”
Proposed by Bro Rev. James Carson, seconded by
Bro. D. P. Milne,-and resolved:—
“ That this Conference recommends that the Grand
Council be empowered to issue common signs,
grips, and passwords, for all the Colonies, but
should circumstances arise between the meet-
ings of the Council rendering it advisable to
change them, the President shall have power
to do so.”
Proposed by Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns, seconded by
Bro. D. P. Milne, and resolved :
“ That the Grand Council issue the Orange Pass-
word annually in cipher, which is to be for-
warded to the Grand Masters and Grand
Secretaries of the various Colonies, and that
the Passwords in future shall be given in pri-
vate to each financial member by the Master
only.”
Proposed by Bro. A. McKenzie, seconded by Bro.
Rev. James Carson, and resolved :
“ That this Conference recommends the Grand
Council to draw up a uniform Orange Ritual,
to be used exclusively within the Australasian
Colonies.”
Arch-Purple Degree.
On the introduction of this part of the business
considerable interest was manifested by all the
Brethren present, causing a lively discussion, and
resulting in the following :


Proposed by Bro. Rev. J. W. Bamber, seconded by
Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns, and resolved :
“ That the Lecturers present give the Lecture as
delivered in their respective Colonies.”
Bros. A. McKenzie (Queensland), J. Seabrooke,
senr. (New Zealand', John Waugh (Victoria), H.
Marks (South Australia) and Henry Hicks (New
South Wales) thereupon complied with the resolution,
giving lectures, signs, explanations and passwords.
Proposed by Bro. N. J. Mackenzie, seconded by
Bro. H. Marks, and resolved:—
“ That the Grand Council be recommended to
adopt and issue a uniform Annual Arch-Purple
Password.”
Proposed by Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns, seconded by
Bro. John Waugh, and resolved: —
“ That in the opinion of this Conference the Ritual
of the Arch-Purple Degree may be modified
without in any way interfering with the aim of
the Institution, or the effect of the obligation.”
Proposed by Bro. Rev. James Carson, seconded by
Bro. Rev. J. W. Bamber, and resolved :
“That this Conference do now adjourn until to-
morrow, Thursday, 30th March, at 10 a.m.”
FOURTH SESSION.
Thursday, 30TH March, 10 a.m.
All the Delegates were present, and the meeting
was opened by prayer, Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns
officiating. The minutes of the previous Session
were read and confirmed.
Arch-Purple Degree.
This subject having been resumed, it was proposed
by Bro. Rev. James Carson, seconded by Bro. Rev.
J. T. Kearns, and resolved :


“ That having ascertained that there are serious
discrepancies in the Lecture and Ritual of the
Arch-Purple Degree, as given in the various
Colonies, this Conference recommends that
the Grand Council be empowered to prepare a
uniform Lecture and Ritual to be exclusively
used in the Australasian Colonies.”
Proposed by Bro. Rev. James Carson, seconded by
Bro. John Waugh, and resolved :
“ That this Conference recommends that henceforth
only two Degrees be recognized by the Insti-
tution in Australasia, viz., the Orange and
Purple.”
Proposed by Bro. D. P. Milne, seconded by Bro.
A. McKenzie, and resolved :
“That this Conference do now adjourn.”
FIFTH SESSION .
Thursday, 30TH March, 2 p.m.
All the members were present, and the meeting was
opened by prayer, Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns officiating.
The minutes of the previous meeting were read and
confirmed.
The consideration of the Arch-Purple Degree was
resumed, and it was proposed by Bro. Rev. J. T.
Kearns, seconded by Bro. J. Seabrooke, senr., and
resolved :
“That the present discrepancies in the Arch-Purple
Degree, Ritual and Lecture having evidently
arisen, in the main, through depending upon
memory alone, this Conference recommends
that the revision of said Ritual and Lecture be
prepared by means of a cipher and key to be
issued by the Grand Council to the Grand
Masters and Grand Secretaries of each Grand
Lodge in Australasia ”


Proposed by Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns, seconded by
Bro. Rev. Dr. Gilchrist, and resolved :
“ That the said cipher and key shall be kept in the
custody of each Grand Master in Australasia,
but no copies must be taken therefrom in any
of the Colonies, and, as a safeguard, those in
charge, and all who may be allowed to learn
it, shall make a solemn oath or affirmation
never to carry a copy with them, nor transcribe
it, or allow it to be transcribed, either in whole
or in part— the one copy in each Grand Lodge
from which Lecturers are to learn excepted,
which copy shall be kept by the Grand Lodge
in every Colony. Each Grand Lodge how-
ever, may, within proper limits, allow a copy of
the cipher and key to Lecturers, appointed in
pairs by the Arch-Purple Committee of each
Grand Lodge.”
Proposed by Bro. Rev. Dr. Gilchrist, seconded by
Bro. D. P. Milne, and resolved :
“ That the proceedings of this Conference be
printed, and that each Grand Lodge bear an
equal share of cost of same.”
Proposed by Bro. Rev. Dr. Gilchrist, seconded by
Bro. N. J. Mackenzie, and resolved :
“ That a Sub-Committee consisting of the President,
Bro. Henry Hicks, the Joint Secretaries, Bros.
A. J. S. Gilchrist and Rev. J. W. Bamber, and
Bro. Stephen Murphy be appointed to prepare
the Report for the Printer.”
Proposed by Bro. Rev. James Carson, seconded by
Bro. H. Marks, and resolved :
“ That the various Grand Lodges be requested to
consider the best mode of carrying into effect
the resolutions passed by this Conference, and
to furnish a report of their deliberations, by


the Delegates, to the next General Conference,
to be held in Melbourne on the second Wed-
nesday in March, 1883.”
Proposed by Bro. Rev. James Carson, seconded by
Bro. A. McKenzie, and resolved :
“ That this Conference do now adjourn until to-
morrow, at 10 a.m.”
SIXTH SESSION.
Friday, 31ST March, 10 a.m.
All the members present, and the meeting was
opened by prayer, Bro. Rev. J. T. Kearns officiating.
Arch-Purple Ritual and Lecture.
The Conference having agreed to recommend cer-
tain alterations in the above, it was resolved :
“That the modifications in the Arch-Purple Ritual
and Lecture, which this Conference has agreed
to recommend, be communicated by the Dele-
gates to their respective Grand Lodges.”
The business having been completed it was unani-
mously resolved :
“ That the whole of the minutes be now read.”
They were read accordingly, and were confirmed
on the motion of Bro. Rev. James Carson, seconded
by Bro. D. P, Milne.
In closing the Conference the President compli-
mented the Brethren upon the success which had
attended their labours, and the good feeling which
had been manifested throughout the whole of the
proceedings.
HENRY HICKS, R.W.G.M., N.S.W., President.
A. J. S. GILCHRIST, G.S., N.S.W.V Joint
J. W. BAMBER, G.S., S. Australia J Secretaries.
STEPHEN MURPHY, D.G.S., N.S W.
Revision Committee.




&&kio
f 1(74-0
h) U&yj


1508
00809858


