

pO®'
Jl
NEW S
PROPOSED ELI
city o;
JC wx
MM
oercH wales.
SCTRIC RAILWAYS
?OR THE
F SYDNEY.
J. J. C. BRAD FIELD, ML, MJnst.CJY




NEW SOUTH WALES.
REPORT
ON THE
PROPOSED ELECTRIC RAILWAYS
FOR THE
CITY OF SYDNEY
J. J. C. BRADFIELD, M.E., M.lnst.C.E.
Sydney;
William Applegate Guluck, Government Printer.
43537—"




INDEX TO PLANS, PHOTOGRAPHS, £fc.
PLATE.
Photographs of Power Plant, Generators and Table of Steam Consumption per Kilo-
watt Hour i
Plan of Interborough Rapid Transit Subway Car
„ Latest All Steel Car, New York Municipal Railways 3
Photograph of Latest All Steel Car, New York Municipal Railways (Exterior) ... 4
Latest All Steel Car, New York Municipal Railways (Interior) ... 5
Bogie for All Steel Car, New York Municipal Railways ... ... 6
Plan of N.S.W.G.R. Suburban Car 7
„ Victorian Government Railways Tait Car ... ... ... ... ... 8
Electric Motor Car Van ... ... ... 9
„ Typical Dead End Terminal Stations ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
~ Tracks and Platforms, Manhattan Terminal Brooklyn Bridge 11
Tracks and Platforms, Pennsylvania R.R. Co.’s New York Terminal ... 12
Tracks and Platforms, New York Central and Hudson River Railroad Grand
Central Terminal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
Plan of Tracks and Platforms, Hudson and Manhattan Railroad Co.. Church-street
Terminal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
Plan of Extension of Charing Cross, Euslon, and Hampstead Railway, to Thames
Embankment ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... 15
Photograph of Sewer Excavator ... ... ... ... ... ... 16
Orange Peel Dipper to dig to 30 feet depth ... ... ... ... 17
Excavation at 59th Street and 4th Avenue, New York ... ... 18
Excavation at 12th Street and 4th Avenue, New York ... ... 19
„ Timbering supporting Roadway, New York ... ... ... ... 20-21
„ Construction of Four-track Subway in a Narrow Street, New York ... 22
,a Excavator at work under 4th Avenue, New York 23
Typical Rock Tunnel, New York ... ... ... 24
Rock Tunnelling Machine Co.’s Rock Borer ... ... ... ... 25
„ showing method of Protecting Plate Glass Windows from Concussion
due to Blasting 26
Plan of Bridge and Construction Department, Pennsylvania Steel Co., Steelton,
Pennsylvania ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 27
Photograph of 170-ton Girder built by Pennsylvania Steel Co., Pa. ... ... ... 28
„ 170-ton Girder in place on Boston and Albany Railroad, Worcester,
Mass. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 29
Photograph of Finishing Department, Pennsylvania Steel Co. 30
„ Automatically Spaced Punch, Pennsylvania Steel Co. 31
Portion of Perforated Paper Record from Punching Machine 32
Photograph of Punching Machine 33
60-inch Duplex Rotary Planer 34
Assembling Shop 35
„ Machine Shop 3 s
„ Riveting Shop 37
„ Radial Miller 3$
„ Centre for Highway Draw Bridge, Potomac River, Washington, D.C. 39
Photograph of Track Girder 44 feet long for 210 feet Span, Scherzer Rolling Lift
Bridge in 60-inch Rotary Planer 4°
Plan of Pittsburgh Plant of American Bridge Co., Pa. ... ... ••• 41


PLATE.
Photograph of Special Planing Machine, American Bridge Co. ... ... ... 42
Assembling of Hell Gate Bridge in American Bridge Co.'s Works 43,44,45
Rotary Planing Machine, American Bridge Co. ... ... ... 46
Plan and Section of Shop for Fabrication of Quebec Bridge, St. Lawrence Bridge
Co., Montreal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 47
Photograph of Edge Planer, St. Lawrence Bridge Co. ... ... ... ... ... 48
Portable Drills Reaming Holes, Quebec Bridge ... ... ... 49
Half Width Main Piece of Shoe, Quebec Bridge on Surface Planer ... 50
Assembly of Main Shoe in Shop, Quebec Bridge ... ... ... 51
Drilling Field Splice of Bottom Chord, Quebec Bridge ... ... 52
Compression Section, Diagonal Mi 2 Mi 3, Quebec Bridge ... ... 53
Vertical Tension Member, Quebec Bridge 54
End Section of Bottom Chord, Quebec Bridge ... ... ... 55
„ Section of Vertical Tension Members, Quebec Bridge ... ... 56
~ Side View of Traveller and One Tower of Staging for Inner Arm,
Quebec Bridge ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 57
Photograph of Top of Traveller, Quebec Bridge ... ... ... ... ... 58
Traveller, Quebec Bridge ... ... ... ... ... ... 59
Plan of City Railway Scheme, recommended by Royal Commission, 1890 ... ... 60
1896 ... ... 6i
, Extension of Railway Terminus to Devonshire-street Cemetery, recom-
mended by Public Works Committee, 1900 ... ... ... ... ... 62
Plan of City Railway, Chief Railway Commissioner’s Scheme, 1909 ... ... 63
„ ~ „ Royal Commission’s Scheme, showing alterations proposed
by Mr. Bradfield, 1909 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 64
Plan of City Railway, Mr. Hay’s Scheme, 19:2 ... ... ... ... ... 65
Chief Railway Commissioner’s Scheme, 1912... ... ... 66
and Underground Tramways, 1913 ... ... ... ... 67
Deposited Plan of City Railway and Tramway Connections ... ... ... ... 68
Plan of City Railway as Modified December, 19x4 ... ... ... ... ... 69
View of Proposed Alterations at Belmore Park and Central Station... ... ... 70
Circular Quay ... ... ... ... ... 71
Plan of City Railway as Recommended, 1915 ... ... ... ... ... ... 72
Distance—Time Curves for City Railway Recommended, 1915 ... ... ... 73
Plan showing Metropolitan Railways and Suburban Electrification Recommended,
1915 74
Section of Single Track Tunnel on Curve, showing wiring ... ... ... ... 75
Double „ ~ „ ~ „ ... ... ... ... 76
Single Track Cut and Cover on Curve, showing wiring ... ... ... 77
Elevation of wiring in Double Track Tunnel ... ... ... ... ... ... 78
Plan and Elevation of wiring in Single Track Tunnel ... ... ... ... ... 79
Plan of wiring Double Track Tunnel and Double Track Cut and Cover on Curve ... 80
Plan of Railway Structure Gauges, New South Wales and Australian Railways ... 81
~ Metropolitan Railways Recommended, 1915 ... ... ... ... ... 82
Bird’s Eye View of City of Sydney ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 83
Plan of Sydney Tramways showing Passengers carried for Year ending 30th June,
1914 84
Plan of Train Capacities of Metropolitan Railways Recommended ... 85
„ Showing Types of Electric Trains ... ... ... ... ... ... 86


Department of Public Works,
Sydney, N.S.W.
The work recommended in this Report, viz., the electrifica-
tion of the inner zone suburban railways to Parramatta,
Hornsby, Sutherland, and Bankstown; the construction of
the City Electric Railway, and Electric Railways to the Eastern,
Western, and Northern Suburbs; the construction of two
long span cantilever bridges across the harbour of 1,600
feet and 1,350 feet centre spans respectively; the electrification
of the outer zone suburban railways to Penrith, Campbelltown,
Waterfall, the Hawkesbury River, and various other small
branches in the suburban area; and the construction of under-
ground tramways, amounting to approximately 20 million
pounds sterling (£20,000,000), exclusive of land resumption,
has been approved, and will be carried out in the order indicated
above.
An Act cited as the “ City and Suburban Electric Railways
Act, 1915,” received Vice-Regal assent on 13th October, 1915.
This Act authorises the construction of the City Railway,
the Eastern Suburbs Railway to Bondi Junction, the Western
Suburbs Railway to Weston Road, the provision of additional
power to the extent of 45,000 kilowatts in the White Bay Power
Station, also feeder cables, substations, overhead wiring, signal-
ling, &c., at an estimated cost, exclusive of land resumption
of six million four hundred thousand pounds (£6,400,000).
The Act also necessitates the electrification of the inner zone
suburban railways and the provision of power and rolling stock—
an additional expenditure of some three million six hundred
thousand pounds sterling (£3,600,000) or ten million pounds
sterling in all.
It is anticipated that plans will be sufficiently far advanced
to enable a commencement to be made at the end of April, 1916,
and that four years will be occupied in the construction of the
work comprised in the City and Suburban Electric Railways


Act, 1915. Under my direction, to designs and specifications
prepared by Mr. Bradfield, and under that officer’s supervision
this work is to be carried out in accordance with an agreement
dated 24th April, 1915, between the Agent-General for New
South Wales on behalf of the Government of New South Wales,
and John Norton Griffiths, of London, England, carrying on
business as Norton Griffiths & Company, which enables the
Company to receive a payment of 5 per cent, on the value of
the work performed. The Electrification of the Suburban
Railways and the provision of power and rolling stock, &c.,
will be undertaken by the Chief Railway Commissioner.
M.lnst.C.E.,
Director General of Public Works,
Sydney, 16th December, 1913.


I. Transportation Developments in Large Cities ...
2
2. Electric Railway Development ...
5
3. Passenger Movement
15
4. Modern Cars for Rapid Transit Railways
19
5. Stations ...
25
6. Junctions
29
7. Excavation and Excavating Machinery
30
8. Blasting in New York City
33
<3537—A
Report on the Proposed Electric Rail-
ways for the City of Sydney.
On 31st January, 1914, the Director-General, at the request of the Minister,
instructed me to proceed abroad before the work of the City Railway and the
Sydney Harbour Bridge was entered upon, to make myself familiar with the
most recent developments in connection with the design, construction, and
working of Underground Railways, and the design, manufacture, and erection
of Long Span Bridges.
On 20th February (M.P. 14/1208), the Minister instructed that I was to
secure any information available on the subject of the proposal to utilise the
City Railway system when laid down for tramway purposes for five years.
On 6th March the Minister directed that whilst in New York I should
ascertain the method adopted there of blasting underground.
On 4th July (M.P. Ka. 14/345), the Minister desired that I should be
instructed by cable to ascertain particularly the conditions adopted in various
countries to prevent excessive claims for damage to property by blasting
during the progress of the works.
In accordance with the Hon the Minister’s instructions, I sailed from Sydney
by the s.s. " Tahiti,” on 21st March, returning on 19th September, 19x4.
On account of the war much of the material gathered was delayed in transit,
and did not arrive in Sydney until the end of November, thus delaying the
preparation of this Report whilst information collected or purchased in
Germany has not been forwarded.
It would be impossible to describe in detail the numerous works visited;
this Report can only give the result of observations made in as far as they
relate to the construction of the City and Suburban Electric Railways, including
the Sydney Harbour Bridge and the Electrification of the Existing Suburban
Railways.
The Report includes the following subjects :


g. Precautions against Excessive Claims for Damage caused by
Blasting ... 34
10. Contract Prices, Underground Railway Construction, New
York 35
ix. Special Steels for Bridge Construction 36
12. Bridge Fabricating Establishments 40
13. The Sydney Harbour Bridge Problem 5 2
14. The Evolution of the City Railway ... 55
15. The Electrification Problem in New South Wales ... ... 66
16. The Metropolitan Railways and Tramways Recommended ... 75
17. The Population, Commerce, and Passenger Traffic of Sydney 80
18. The Train and Passenger Capacity of the Metropolitan
Railways Recommended 88
19. Comparison of Time of Journey and Fares by Existing
Tramways and by Proposed Electric Railways 91
20. Suburban Electric Trains „93
21. Order of Procedure 97
22. Estimates of Cost 98
23. The Financial Aspect JOO
24. Proposal to Utilise the City Railway for Tramway Purposes
for Five Years ... ... 103
25. Conclusion 105
TRANSPORTATION DEVELOPMENTS IN LARGE
CITIES.
As cities grow in population and importance some quarter gradually becomes
too valuable for residential purposes and develops into the commercial, amuse-
ment, and monetary centre. The residential population decreases, and consists
mostly of civic officials, travellers at hotels and the hotel staff, caretakers
at the various mercantile buildings, &c. There is a concentrated daily influx
of population for one and a half to two hours each morning and a similar
efflux each evening, whilst during the remainder of the day and well past
midnight, there is a less concentrated, but steady traffic. The concentrated
traffic necessitates facilities for rapidly conveying people in the mornings
from their homes in the suburbs to their places of business in the commercial
area, and for their return at night.
There is a constant increase in traffic to and from the business centre, due
tc its encroachment on the adjacent residential quarters, and to the ever-
increasing height and importance of its buildings. Surrounding the business
centre there is a densely populated urban residential area with shopping
facilities, and beyond this again is the suburban residential area, less densely


populated than the urban area, although districts possessing scenic or hygienic
advantages, or on account of some industry or other cause, may become very
thickly populated.
Based on observations in London, New York, Paris, Berlin. Chicago,
Philadelphia, Boston, and Hamburg, the transportation of the population
to and from the business centre has generally been dealt with as follows ;
(1) By Steam Railways.
The commercial necessity of establishing railway termini near the business
section of a city was obvious, and, as far as human foresight could determine,
and the funds available at the time would permit of, this has usually been
done. To save the cost of land resumption in Chicago and New York, elevated
steam railways were constructed in the streets, whilst in London and elsewhere
the railways were constructed underground or partly underground. These
elevated railways generally obstruct the street traffic, also light and air to
surrounding buildings; they are noisy, usually unsightly, and, in common
with the underground railways, were objectionable on account of the cinders,
smoke, soot, and noise from the steam locomotives.
(2) By Street Cars.
As the suburban area extended the commerical area required an ever
increasing daily influx and efflux of population, and street cars worked by
cables and by electricity were introduced. In London, New York, Chicago,
Boston, Philadelphia, &c., street cars are in places taken underground; this
is done to relieve the congestion in the streets and to leave them free for
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
In conjunction with steam railways, street cars were able to cope with
the traffic for some years, but as the cars increased in number the streets
became overcrowded and could not satisfactorily accommodate the vehicular,
pedestrian, and street car traffic, which led to the third development.
(3) By Electric Railways.
The expansion of the city outwards increased the time and length of journey
from the suburban to the business centre; the growth of the business centre
necessitated a constantly increasing daily influx and efflux of population in
the morning and evening rush hours; the street cars congested the streets;
the objectionable atmospheric conditions caused by steam locomotives rendered
their abandonment necessary, and more rapid and more adequate transit
facilities were demanded than could be given by steam railway and electric
street car services.
Electricity as a motive power for railways was being steadily developed,
and when the necessity arose electric railways proved to be the solution of
the Rapid Transit problem. Electric locomotives in the first instance, and
subsequently electric trains with multiple unit control, were devised, and have
been a great success. Steam railways, surface, elevated, and underground,
and large steam terminals have been converted and worked electrically, whilst
electric railways, elevated, underground, or partly elevated and partly under-
ground, have been constructed in various cities, and many interurban electric
railways have been carried out, especially during the past decade. Electric
lailways are far less noisy than steam railways; there is an entire absence of


smoke, cinders, and foul gases; the ventilation problem of underground
railways is simplified, and many of the objectionable features of elevated rail-
ways in cities are removed.
Rapid transit electric railways may be divided into three classes
(a) Surface Railways. Constructed on private right of way on em-
bankment, viaduct, or in cutting, as required by the ruling grade,
and to avoid level crossings at streets.
(b) Elevated Railways. —
1. Constructed wholly over public streets.
2. Constructed on private right of way.
(c) Underground Railways —
x. Constructed as shallow subways under public streets and private
property;
2. Constructed as deep level subways or tunnels under public
streets and private property.
The different types of rapid transit railways enumerated above have equal
carrying capacity when operating under similar conditions, but there is a
great difference in cost of construction, and in the comfort and convenience
of the passengers.
From the standpoint of the passenger, surface railways and elevated
railways are much to be preferred to underground railways on account of the
view from the carriage windows, the superior air, light, and ventilation. In
many of the cities visited the same railway system is often partly underground
and partly elevated, as at Berlin, Hamburg, Boston, and Philadelphia. If
constructed on private right of way, the elevated portions of these railways
are no obstruction to the streets or detriment to the surrounding property,
and as seen in Berlin and proposed for Philadelphia, the railways where elevated
can be designed to be handsome and practically noiseless structures. In the
business centre of a city to save valuable resumptions, to facilitate traffic,
and for aesthetic considerations, the railways should be just below the surface
where possible.
(4) By Motor Buses.
In London, New York, Berlin, and many other cities, motor buses are
successfully competing with tram cars. The buses ply to outlying districts
not served by trams, and when competing directly with the trams are far
better patronised, as they are more mobile, stop where required, pick up and
set down passengers on the footpaths, are faster, and equally as cheap. An
additional attraction is the fine view to be obtained from the top of the bus.
The motor bus is the most recent development; it is, however, only super-
seding the tram car in the streets, and cannot compete against steam or electric
railways.
Conclusion.
For carrying passengers quickly, cheaply, and in large numbers, electric
railways, either wholly underground or partly underground and partly elevated
are undoubtedly far in advance of any other means of rapid transit. The
elevated portions of such railways located on private right of way and properly
constructed are not detrimental to property, do not interfere with the street
traffic, and need not, if properly designed, be an eyesore.
4


ELECTRIC RAILWAY DEVELOPMENT.
Historical.
A steam locomotive, after allowing for all losses, converts about 4 per cent,
of the total energy of the coal or other fuel into mechanical energy at the
driving wheels. Electric working does not give much increase in actual
efficiency, for under absolutely the best conditions not more than 6 per cent,
of the energy of the fuel consumed in the furnaces of a modern power station
is converted into mechanical energy at the wheels of the electric locomotives,
or motor coaches—usually the percentage is much smaller and ranges from
4 to 6 per cent.
For new lines in new countries over long distances or over short distances
where there are long intervals between trains, steam traction is easily the more
economical, but for heavy suburban traffic over short distances with short
intervals between trains, electric traction has paramount advantages, and
especially so if there be considerable sections of the railway underground.
Electricity has been adopted as a motive power for railways for the past
thirty years. An electric locomotive was exhibited at Berlin in 1879, and in
1882 the first electric locomotive was put in commission when trains were
hauled electrically on the Royal Zaukerode Colliery in Saxony.
The City and South London deep level tube railway was constructed and
worked electrically in 1890; in 1895 the Nantasket branch of the New York,
New Haven, and Hartford was converted from steam to electricity, whilst
electric locomotives were used to push trains with their inactive steam loco-
motives through the Baltimore tunnel of the Baltimore and Ohio Railway,
electricity in this instance being an aid, not a substitute for steam.
The Dusseldorf-Krefeld Electric Railway, built in 1898, is of interest as
it was the first electric railway to connect two industrial towns connected by
a steam railway.
In France, in 1901, electric locomotives were substituted for steam loco-
motives at Austerlitz, and the Orleans Railway from Austerlitz to the Quai
d’Orsay Station, Paris, was worked electrically.
In 1907 the Grand Central Station, New York, was converted and worked
electrically; the electric railways at present extend to Harmon —a distance
of 33 miles, and to North White Plains —a distance of 24 miles —from Grand
Central Station.
In 1910 the electrification of the Pennsylvania Station, New York, was
completed.
At the present time in all parts of the world there have been constructed
several thousand miles.of new electric railways; some thousands of steam
railway, including large terminal stations have been converted and worked
electrically, whilst many important proposals are under construction or in
contemplation.
The cities of London, New York, Paris, Berlin, Hamburg, Philadelphia,
Chicago, Boston, &c., and their suburbs have for some years past been served
by magnificent systems of electrically operated railways, whilst sections of
main line railway, radiating sometimes 30 miles and over from their city
termini, have been converted and worked electrically as at New York.
In Australia, the suburban railways of Melbourne are now being converted,
and will in the near future be worked electrically by multiple unit trains.
Electric railways were not constructed in the first instance for reasons of
economy, but were necessary because steam locomotives could not give the


service demanded, and where railways had to be placed underground efficient
ventilation with steam locomotives was impossible. It was soon proved,
however, that a fast and frequent service could be given to thickly populated
suburban areas at a less cost by electric traction than by steam traction, and
the experience gained in working suburban traffic electrically, demonstrated
that, when the interurban passenger and goods traffic on a section of railway
leading to an important terminal station was heavy, these classes of traffic
could be handled more quickly and economically by electric than by steam
traction.
Trains.
Electric trains are of two types :
(a) Coaches hauled by an electric locomotive, which is changed at the
terminal station of the electrified zone for a steam locomotive and
vice versd on the return journey.
(i I ) Multiple unit trains, consisting wholly of motor cars, or of motor
cars and trailers, the motor cars replacing the locomotives.
Electric railways were worked at first by electric locomotives; heavy axle
loads were required to secure the necessary adhesion, and a locomotive had to
haul its own weight as well as that of the trailing coaches. It was soon seen,
however, that the locomotive could be dispensed with, and by equipping some
of the carriages with electric motors, the weight of the carriages themselves
could be used for adhesion, thereby reducing the weight of the train and the
cost of haulage, which in the United States is given at 5 cents per pound per
annum.
A carriage equipped with motors is called a motor car; an unequipped car
is called a trailer. A single motor car, or a combination of motor car and
trailers is called a unit, and a multiple unit train consists of several units.
The motor equipment of each unit must provide sufficient power to act as
the locomotive of the unit, as a multiple unit train may be split up when the
traffic is light and used as two or more trains. The whole weight of the train,
if required, or any portions necessary to meet the conditions involved, may be
used for adhesion, and consequently quick acceleration. A multiple unit
train travels equally well backwards or forwards; it can be controlled at
either end, can be quickly accelerated, and is, therefore, very suitable for
fast suburban service.
In the early days of electric railways short trains at fairly frequent intervals
were run, but as the traffic grew, the number, and in some cities the length of
the trains had to be increased. In London, Paris, and Berlin the maximum
trains consists of from six to eight cars. In New York the stations on the
Rapid Transit Subway were originally constructed for eight-car trains on the
express tracks, and five-car trains on the local tracks, but the platforms had
soon to be extended to provide for ten-car trains on the express and six-car
trains on the local tracks. In the subways now under construction in New
York it is intended to run eight-car trains, each car 67 feet long, accommodating
270 passengers, or 2,160 passengers per train. In the subways proposed for
Philadelphia it is intended to run ten-car trains, each car 52 feet long, accom-
modating about 160 passengers, or 1,600 passengers per train. Although
six-car trains are generally run in the Boston subways, provision has been
made at the stations for eight-car trains.
For high speeds and grades of 2J per cent, a train length of about 520 feet
appears the maximum advisable for Sydnej 7 .


Distribution of Traffic.
The distribution of traffic on a rapid transit city railway is most irregular.
For a period of three hours in the morning and three hours in the afternoon
the traffic is much more dense than during the remainder of the day, whilst
for one hour in the morning, usually from 8 a.m. to 9 a.m., and for one hour in
the afternoon, usually from 5 p.m. to 6 p.m., the peak loads or periods of
densest traffic occur.
Records of traffic taken on the Cumberland-street Line, Philadelphia,
indicate that the traffic from 6 a.m. to 9 a.m. is 23'8 per cent, of the total daily
traffic in both directions, and the morning hour peak load is 9 per cent., whilst
the traffic from 4 p.m. to 7 p.m. is grb per cent., and the evening hour peak
load is 15 per cent, of the total daily traffic in both directions.
These figures are fairly typical of the daily traffic in all large cities, the
morning peak load varying from 10 per cent, to 12 per cent., and the evening
peak load from 14 per cent, to 16 per cent, of the total daily traffic in both
directions. It is apparent that the number of passengers who must be carried
during the evening hour peak load determines the greatest number of trains of
maximum length which must be provided in any one hour.
Headway of Trains.
The headway is the interval of time between successive trains passing any
particular point. The headway on any given system is determined by the
speed of the trains and the period of the station stop. Usually the station
dealing with the heaviest traffic determines the headway.
In Paris, Hamburg, and Berlin the headway between the trains on the
underground railways is 2 minutes, and this headway also obtains during the
rush hours on the underground railways in Boston, Philadelphia, and New
York, whilst in London a headway of less than ii minutes is maintained.
These headways are obtained with maximum speeds of 35 miles per hour and
upwards, with complete installations of block signals and automatic stops.
At a speed of 15 miles per hour, sixty-four trains per hour were taken over
Brooklyn Bridge on a single track, but this number has recently been reduced
to fifty-two per hour. A distance of 700 feet is maintained between the trains;
the signals are spaced 100 feet apart, and each signal for a following train is
controlled by the track, seven signals in advance. This number of trains per
hour is only possible by relying on the driver, and on account of the compara-
tively slow speed.
On the Key Route Electric Railways, San Francisco, a headway of 45
seconds is maintained at a speed of 30 miles per hour. The line is block
signalled with automatic stops.
In Chicago on the Union loop a headway of about 20 seconds is maintained,
but to do this safely the speed can only be about 6 miles per hour.
On the London Underground Railway some forty-four trains per hour are
run on a single track between the Mansion House and South Kensington Stations,
i.e., a headway of 82 seconds, and in times of abnormal traffic as many as
fifty-five trains per hour have been run over this track in one direction. The
fastest train on the system is the 9'ix a.m. from Ealing to the Mansion House,
distance 11 miles, time of journey 27 minutes, equivalent to a schedule speed
of over 24 miles per hour.
The authorities in London have had long experience in handling dense
traffic, and by regulating the traffic have educated the public. The travelling


hr.
min.
sec.
8
37
3°
8
39
12
8
4 1
5
8
42
5s 1
8
44
5° I
8
46
37 !
8
48
30 I
8
5°
19 i
8
52
3 I
8
53
54
8
55
46 '
8
57
35
8
59
12 i
9
O
5 1 i
9
2
3i
9
4
17
9
5
54
9
7
29
9
9
2
9
IO
24
9
12
3
9
13
39
manners of the London public are unsurpassed anywhere; regulated move-
ment, devoid of all appearance of hustle, is characteristic, the people make
haste apparently slowly, but very effectively, and the result is seen on the
Underground Railway in the short duration of the station stop. The passengers
are ready to alight immediately the train arrives; those waiting on the plat-
forms do not attempt to enter the train until it has discharged. The movement
is free and deliberate, yet rapid and without any conflict. In times of normal
traffic the station stop ranges from 10 to 15 seconds, but in the evening rush
hour the length of station stop is somewhat longer. As observed at Charing
Cross Station, the station stop was as follows : —Minimum 15 seconds, maximum
35 seconds, whilst the average of twenty-five consecutive trains was 22 seconds.
These twenty-five trains passed in 36 minutes —equivalent to forty-two trains
per hour on a single track.
On the Interborough Rapid Transit Railway, New York, the average
station stop at Grand Central Station, recorded by the officials on sth January,
1914, was as follows
North-bound during evening rush 57 seconds.
South-bound during morning rush ... ... 61 seconds.
This is the busiest station on the system, and limits the number of trains
per hour.
The .following table gives the headway of the trains on the South-bound
express tracks of the Interborough Rapid Transit Railway, New York, at
Grand Central Station, as recorded by me on the 6th May, 1914:
GRAND CENTRAL STATION, SOUTH-BOUND EXPRESS, INTERBOROUGH
RAPID TRANSIT CO., NEW YORK.
Train arrives.
Train departs.
Station Headway. Station
stop. empty.
hr. min. sec.
min. sec.
8 3 6 48
8 38 35
1 42
8 4° 14
i 53
8 4 2 4
I 53
8 43 59
1 52
8 45 4 6
I 47
8 47 37
i 53
8 49 31
I 49
8 5i i 8
I 44
8 53 4
I 51
8 54 55
I 52
8 5 6 4 s
I 49
8 5 s 32
i 37
9 o 15
I 39
9 i 4«
I 40
I 46
9 3 29
9 5
i 37
9 0 54
i 35
9 8 31
I 33
9 9 5§
I 22
9 11 36
I 39
9 13 9
I 36
Average
1 43-3
8


The greatest headway observed was i min. 53 secs., with a station stop of
54 seconds, and, measured by time, the front end of the following train
would be 59 seconds away from the rear end of the train starting from the
station. This interval of about 1 minute is the minimum interval possible
to maintain a high speed and a safe breaking distance. Thirty-four trains
on the express tracks and thirty-six trains on the local tracks pass Grand
Central Station in one hour in the same direction.
The greatest number of people carried on the underground railways of
New York in any one day was 1,289,000. There are four tracks—two express
and two local —carrying traffic both up and down. During the past nine years
2,198,000,000 people have been carried without a single fatality.
Advantages of Electric Traction.
The advantages of electric traction are briefly as follow :
Generation of Power. —A steam locomotive, on account of the unfavourable
conditions under which it operates, is a very wasteful form of prime mover,
whilst a modern power station is the most efficient method yet devised for
generating power by the combustion of coal.
The best of steam locomotives, under favourable conditions, burn about
3Jib. of coal per brake horse power hour, and give a thermal efficiency of 5-1
per cent., with coal rated at 14,200 British thermal units per pound. Allowing
for safety-valve losses, stand-by, and other losses, the net thermal efficiency
of a steam locomotive will not exceed about 4 per cent.
A power station is usually situated so that coal and water can be obtained
with the minimum of handling. Modern boilers and automatically-stoked
grates fed by coal-handling machinery are installed to obtain at the minimum
of cost the maximum thermal efficiency, which, in a modern power station,
is about 12 per cent. Of this, 45 per cent, is lost in transmission from the
power station to the train, so that the thermal efficiency of a modem power
station, measured at the train, approximates 6 per cent.
A cheaper grade of coal can be burnt in a power station than in a locomotive.
The cost of generating current at the North River Power Station, 59th
Street, New York, is -2 of a penny per unit; the average coal consumption,
including both the old and modern machinery, is under 2 lb. per kilowatt
hour for coal giving 14,200 British thermal units per pound. The cost of
the current at the third rail ready for delivering to the train, including 12
per cent, on the capital invested (interest 6 per cent., amortisation 5 per cent.,
and taxes 1 per cent.) i§' *4 of a penny per unit, or twice the price per unit at
the generating station.
Electric Locomotives more Efficient than Steam Locomotives.
Electric locomotives can be constructed to weigh much less and to occupy
much less space than steam locomotives of equivalent power. The average
result shows that electric locomotives as built generate about 25 per cent,
more power in proportion to weight than steam locomotives do, and in
consequence there is less idle weight to be handled and a corresponding saving
in the cost of haulage.
For a high speed service it is generally not found practicable to construct
steam locomotives with more than 45 percent, of their total weight available for
adhesion. For example, the latest high-speed passenger express locomotive
constructed in New South Wales, the “ NN " class, weighs 124 tons 7 cwt.
and has an adhesive weight of 58-. tons 9 cwt.


On the other hand, high-speed electric locomotives in many instances
have their whole weight available for adhesion. While this lack of adhesive
weight is of no consequence in long, non-stop runs—since at even moderate
speed the performance of any locomotives, steam or electric,, is limited by
the power of its boiler and engines, or of its motors rather than by adhesion—
yet it is clear that electric locomotives of equal power to high speed steam
locomotives, can speed up more quickly with advantages corresponding to
the number of stops in the run.
, An electric locomotive can develop for short periods a much greater horse-
power than its continuous rating; this flexibility is not available to the same
extent with a steam locomotive.
Owing to the more rapid acceleration of electric locomotives and their
capability of sustaining a heavy overload for short periods, the dislocation of
traffic on account of late trains is reduced to a minimum, and a greater number
of trains per track and heavier trains can be rim, thus increasing the capacity
of the railway, including the terminal station. The problem at several
passenger and goods terminal stations at the present time is whether additional
tracks and station accommodation should be constructed, and the steam
service maintained, or the capacity of the existing tracks and terminus be
increased by electrification.
At Grand Central Station, New York, forty-six multiple unit trains, or
trains hauled by electric locomotives, run in the same direction on two tracks
in 39 minutes. The electric locomotives originally hauled twelve Pullman
cars; at present sixteen cars are hauled, and arrangements are being made
whereby the number of cars can be increased to eighteen. With a steam
locomotive service a similar number of trains in the stated time and the length
of the trains would be impossible.
Owing to minor round house repairs and annual or periodic overhauls of
electric locomotives, occupying considerably less time than those of steam
locomotives, and it not being necessary to clean fires and boiler tubes, remove
ashes from the smoke boxes, take in coal or water, or wait the raising of steam,
the yearly average mileage traversed under like conditions by an electric
locomotive is probably 30 per cent, greater than that by a steam locomotive.
In addition, the electric locomotive costs less for wages, stores, repairs, renewals,
and running-shed expenses.
Ventilation problems are very much simplified with electric traction, and
the atmosphere of a city is improved, as there is no smoke, soot, cinders, noxious
gases, and escaping steam from the locomotive. Grand Central Station, New
York, and the Park Avenue Tunnel in approach were electrified on account
of the ventilation problem and smoke nuisance.
With electric locomotives there is an entire absence of objectionable noise,
but with steam locomotives the blast and the din of steam escaping from the
safety valves is most objectionable.
Multiple Unit Trains more Efficient than Steam Trains for Dense
Suburban Traffic.
All, or as many of the coaches of a multiple unit train as may be required
for adhesion, can be equipped with motors, hence the number of driving wheels
will be greater with a multiple unit train than with a steam train, and a much
greater proportion of its weight available for adhesion. The longest suburban
railway train in use in Sydney consists of an “S” class locomotive, weighing
72 tons, and ten cars 50 feet long, weighing 1,000 lb. per foot loaded, or a ww*


weight of 661,280 lb,, of which not more than 95,000 lb. on three axles would
be available for adhesion.
A multiple unit train for the same service would probably consist of four
motor cars, each 67 feet long, weighing 1,876 lb. per foot loaded and four
suburban cars as trailers, each 51 feet long, weighing 1,000 lb. per foot loaded.
Total weight of train 706,7681 b., of which, with two motors per car, 251,384
lb. would be available for adhesion.
Since all the axles of a multiple unit train can be motor driven, any
required power can conveniently be developed within the limits of economy.
Corresponding power can be attained from steam locomotives only at greater
cost generally.
By electrifying steam terminals, and using multiple unit trains, the capacity
of the station can be increased by about 60 per cent. A steam train arriving
at a terminal station necessitates four platform and eight signal operations.
First the train arrives and discharges its passengers, secondly an engine follows
in and connects with the rear of the train, thirdly the train is hauled away
from the platform, and lastly the locomotive which drew the train in steams
away. With a multiple unit train the driver walks from one end of the train
to the other, and the train is ready to draw out, necessitating only two
platform and four signal operations.
A multiple unit train can accelerate at the rate of 1 to i| miles per hour
per second without undue cost of electrical equipment or discomfort to the
passengers. Much higher initial acceleration could be given, but the cost
of motor equipment would be excessive, whilst passengers would find the
quicker starting of the trains decidedly uncomfortable. The economical
acceleration for steam locomotives is about -3 to -45 miles per hour per second,
although a much higher rate could be provided if the cost and weight of the
locomotive were of no moment. A multiple unit train can, therefore,
accelerate three times as fast as a steam-driven train, and keep within the
limits of economy.
The schedule speed depends on the length of run between stations, the
ruling grade and curves, and the length of station stop. The distance between
suburban stations is usually short, and for a high schedule speed a train must
accelerate rapidly, travel at its maximum speed as long as possible, and
decelerate quickly; the maximum speed can never be attained when ascending
grades or traversing curves; a few seconds increase in the length of station
stop might much reduce the schedule speed.
Observations made on 6th May, 1914, at Grand Central Station,
Interborough Rapid Transit Railway, indicated that when the station stop
was 51 seconds the headway between the trains was 1 minute 52 seconds;
but when the station stop fell to 31 seconds the headway between trains was
1 minute 31 seconds, clearly showing the influence of length of station stop
on schedule speed. The headway between trains is 2 minutes during the rush
hours; the schedule speed on the express tracks is 18 miles per hour, and on the
local tracks 13 miles per hour.
A multiple unit train, on account of its greater acceleration and speed,
runs a greater mileage daily than can a steam train, and the trainmen cover
more ground per day, hence the cost of wages per train mile is less for electric
traction, less rolling stock is required, and, as was explained when the
advantages and disadvantes of electric and steam locomotives were discussed,
other contingent expenses are also less. As the total operating expenses per
train mile are less the profit is increased; this enables more trains-to be run;
and increased facilities beget traffic.


The more facilities the public have for travelling the more they travel.
As the population of a city increases the number of rides per head also increases.
This is evident from the following table, which gives the revenue rides per
head for six cities in the United States during the years stated ;
New York,
Year. including
Bronx.
1890
1895
1900 276
1905 312
1910 376
1912 388
Greater
New York,
excluding
Richmond.
Brooklyn,
including
Queens.
Chicago. Philadelphia. Boston.
Electric Power.
Electric energy is usually generated as high tension three-phase alternating
current. Water power is used in favourable locations, but steam power is
generally used for generating electricity.
The alternating current is stepped up to a high voltage by means of trans-
formers for transmission over long distances, and stepped down to current of
a lower voltage before reaching the motors of the train.
To illustrate the increase in efficiency of modern steam-generating plants
the following particulars of the Power Plant of the Interborough Rapid Transit
Railway, New York, will be of interest.
There are three power plants, as follow :
Ultimate Capacity.
Daily Coal Consumption.
At 59th Street, North River
At 75th Street, East River
At 96th Street, East River
140.000 h.-p.
100.000 h.-p.
100.000 h.-p.
1,000 tons.
700 „
700 „
340,000 h.-p.
2,400 tons.
The following steam plants are installed, and the consumption of steam
shows that each succeeding plant is more economical than the preceding one.
(See Photograph, Plate No. 1.)
1. Vertical Cross Compound Corliss Engine, installed 1898. Steam
consumption, 19 lb. per kilowatt hour.
2. Combined Vertical and Horizontal Compound Corliss Engine,
installed 1900. Steam consumption, 17’ 1 lb. per kilowatt hour.
3. Multiple Expansion Parallel Flow Steam Turbine, Parson’s Type,
installed 1904. Steam consumption, 15 lb. per kilowatt hour.
4. Vertical Three Stage Low Pressure Steam Turbine, Curtis Type,
installed 1910, and operated in conjucntion with No. 2. Steam
consumption, 13'1 lb. per kilowatt hour of combined plant.
5. Cross Compound Horizontal Reaction Steam Turbine, installed 1914.
• High pressure element, single flow, low pressure element, double
flow. Steam consumption, ii - 25 lb. per kilowatt hour.


The efficiency and size of electric generators have also grown rapidly. A
few years ago a generator of 7,500 k.w. capacity was considered a large unit;
at the present day generators having a capacity of 15,000, 20,000, 25,000, and
30,000 kilowatts are being manufactured.
Four systems of electrical operation are in vogue, viz., single phase, split
phase, three phase, and direct current. Of these, single phase and direct
current are the more common; the former has been developed by the Westing-
house Company, and the latter by the General Electric Company.
(a) Single Phase. —High tension alternating current, three phase, or
single phase is generated, and by means of transformers, which
may be necessary in the substations, and are generally necessary
on the trains, is reduced to a pressure suitable for the single phase
commutating motors.
(b) Split Phase. —High tension alternating current, three phase, or
single phase is generated, and by means of transformers, which
may be necessary in the substations, and are necessary on the train
if the voltage of the single phase distribution is high, is reduced to
a suitable pressure for the two-phase motors. These motors
are, however, not well suited for the varying speeds required by
suburban traffic.
(c) Three Phase.- —High tension alternating three phase current is
transmitted to substations, and thence is distributed to the train
as three phase alternating current at a pressure suitable for the
three-phase motors. Transformers may or may not be required
in the substations and in the trains.
With the single phase, split phase, and direct current systems, one
overhead conductor only is necessary, but with the three-phase
systems, two overhead wires are required for each track. Three-
phase motors are not well suited for the varying speeds required
by suburban traffic; they are suitable where a nearly constant
speed is required on main lines under easy traffic conditions.
(d) Direct Current. —High tension alternating three-phase current is
transmitted to substations and converted there to direct current
at a voltage suitable for the direct current commutating motors on
the trains.
Comparison of Direct Current with Single Phase Alternating Current.
Either the single phase or direct current systems can be applied success-
fully and efficiently for working main line and suburban traffic.
Many more direct current railways are in operation in England, America,
and Europe than single phase railways, though in Europe the proportion of
single phase railways is larger than elsewhere. This is due to the class of
traffic and to some extent, perhaps, on account of the decision of the Author-
ities of the Prussian State Railways in favour of single phase traction, made
before high voltage direct current was evolved. Statistics issued for the year
1913 show that in Austria, Bosnia, and. Herzegovina there were seventy-three
direct current and six single phase systems in operation.
In the United States single phase railways have been converted to high
tension direct current railways, but in no instance has a high voltage direct
current railway been converted to single phase.
With direct current the cost of furnishing power to the train is more costly
than with the single phase system, as rotary transformers and more expensive


substations are necessary; with the single phase system, stationary trans-
formers may be necessary in unattended substations.
With the direct current system transformers are not necessary on the train;
rolling stock with single phase equipment, therefore, is more costly, and of a
greater weight requiring more power for haulage. The ratio of weight of direct
current and single phase equipped rolling stock is approximately as i is tora.
With single phase system there would be interference with the neighbouring
telephone and telegraph wires, due to induction; moreover, the Car shed
staff required for the inspection of single phase equipments is about double
that required for the inspection of direct current equipments.
When the traffic is very heavy, as on a suburban railway, the working
expenses of the single phase system more than counterbalance the additional
prime cost, if any, of the substations and transformers required for direct
current, but where the traffic is less frequent, but of a heavier character, as on
main lines of railway, the single phase system may prove the more advantageous.
The following is a list of all the Railways in England, partly or wholly
electrified, or in process of electrification :
Length
of single Maximum
track, Gradient,
miles.
System. Voltage.
Current.
London-Brighton and South
Coast Railway.
London and South Western
Overhead
Alternating.
3rd rail
Direct.
Railway.
London and North Western
Railway.
Central London Railway
City and South London Rail-
way.
Great Northern and City
Railway.
Great Western and Metro-
Insulated 3rd
and 4th rail.
politan Joint Railway.
Lancashire and Yorkshire
Railway.
Liverpool Overhead Railway
Mersey Railway
Metropolitan District Rail-
way.
Bakerloo Tube (London
Electric Railway).
Hampstead Tube (London
Electric Railway).
Piccadilly Tube (London
Electric Railway).
Midland Railway
Metropolitan Railway
1 in 70 Overhead
lin 44 Insulated 3rd
and 4th rail.
1 in 30 3rd rail
In progress Overhead
1 in 30 3rd rail
Alternating.
Direct.
North Eastern Railway
Waterloo and City Railway..
This clearly shows that the
been recognised, as there are o
ic advantages of the direct current system have
only two alternating current systems in use, and
traffic, where the single-phase system should
these deal with main-line
be advantageous.


For heavy duty, suburban or intcrurban traffic, the established features
are high voltage alternating current transmission and low voltage direct current
car and locomotive equipments. To combine these features most efficiently
the Westinghouse Company are at the present time experimenting on the
New York, New Haven, and Hartford railway, with a car equipped with a
mercury rectifier. It was originally intended to place the mercury rectifier
in substations along the route. This would have necessitated power house
attendants, and an unnecessary complication on account of the high voltage
alternating current transmission to the rectifier and the lower voltage direct
current transmission from the rectifier to the trolley. By placing the rectifier
on the car the engineer can attend to it, whilst only one transmission line is
needed. Power at n,ooo volts alternating current is taken from the trolley,
and after passing through the mercury rectifier is supplied to the direct current
motors at a maximum of 600 volts. The car is equipped with four 200-horse-
power direct current motors, and has been in operation since the middle of
February last (1914). It was not open to inspection, nor were any details
available in May last. If successful, this- mercury rccitfier may have an
important bearing on future railway development.
Among the important developments which have effected economy and
safety in electric railway operation, and improved the service rendered, may be
mentioned the modern steam turbine, the rotary converter, multiple unit
train control, the high tension direct current system, the modem railway
motor, and electric signalling with automatic stops.
PASSENGER MOVEMENT.
The power, signalling, equipment, and rolling-stock of an electric railway
may be quite adequate, yet the railway may not be working to its maximum
capacity on account of inadequate access for passengers from streets to plat-
forms, and vice versa, and inadequate provision for loading and unloading the
trains. The passenger movement determines the length of station stop;
this largely determines the headway of the trains, which, in turn, determines
the capacity and financial possibilities of the railway.
The density of the pedestrian traffic in Sydney is by no means as great
generally as prevails in New York and other large cities, but in certain places,
as at Milson’s Point, Circular Quay, and various railway stations, the traffic
is very dense for short, periods during the morning and evening rush hours.
From observations made in 1912-13 it appeared that thirty-three people per
foot of width per minute could pass along a passage, level or on an easy
grade, that about twenty people per foot of width per minute could walk up
steps, whilst downstairs the number was slightly less.
To verify these figures inquiries were made in the large cities of the world,
especially in New York, where the traffic is more dense than in any other city.
The results of these inquiries are as follow:
Passages and Stairways.
In San Francisco the ferry steamers load at the ends; the passengers walk
directly from the ferry building to the boat. Width of passage, 13 feet 8 inches;
number of passengers unloaded, 1,500 in 3 minutes; number per foot of width
per minute, 37.


h.
m.
s.
h.
m.
s.
4
5°
0
4
5i
0
4
54
0
4
55
0
4
36
0
4
57
0
4
58
0
4
59
0
5
00
0
5
1
0
5
1
0
5
2
0
5
2
0
5
3
0
5
3
0
5
4
0
5
4
0
5
5
0
5
6
0
5
7
0
At Brooklyn Bridge, New York, the traffic is as dense as at any place in
the world. Observations show that a New York crowd moves at the rate
of about 300 feet per minute during the rush hours, walking with a step averaging
30 inches; each person averages 10 sq. ft., and the passage discharges about
thirty people per foot of width per minute.
A crowd moving freely up stairways takes about the same number of steps
per minute, say 120, but advances only about 12 inches horizontally instead
of 30 inches. Upstairs movement is more dense than downstairs movement,
but correspondingly slower. Twenty-four persons per foot of width per minute
upstairs, and eighteen persons per foot of width per minute downstairs arc
the maximum.
At Grand Central Terminal Station, New York, access is by ramps—-there
are no stairways. The experience at this station is that, for the comfort and
safety of the passengers, a ramp should not be steeper than 11 per cent. — i.e.,
lin 9: preferably the grade should be 8 per cent, (r in X2J), or less. Through
the courtesy of Mr. Balliet, the Assistant General Manager, a record of the
passenger movement was taken in May, 1914, as follows
The ramp from an arrival platform is 13 feet wide, grade 8 per cent. The
ramp at present discharges 280 people per minute, equivalent to twenty-two
persons per foot of width, who walk from 182 feet to 231 feet per minute,
each occupying from 9Jto 10 \ square feet of space. This ramp was not working
to its maximum capacity.
The ramp to a departure platform is 6 feet 4 inches wide, grade ix per cent.
The ramp, when the count was taken, was acting as a discharging ramp, and
was accommodating 160 people per minute, equivalent to twenty-six people
per foot of width walking at 150 feet to 170 feet per minute. This ramp was not
working to its maximum capacity.
At Grand Central Subway Station, 42nd Street, New York, Interborough
Rapid Transit Railway—the most congested underground station in the world—
counts were made on 10th June, 1914, by the Public Service Commission, and
forwarded through the courtesy of Mr. D. J. Turner, Deputy Engineer. The
width of stairs is 9 feet.
This staircase takes both up and down passengers. When the number of
persons exceeded twenty per foot of width per minute the staircase was congested.
The results of these counts were as follow ;
GRAND CENTRAL SUBWAY
STATION,
Number per
foot of width per
minute.
Passengers 1 Passengers
Up. i Down.
From— To—
16


o
O
o
0
O
0
o
0
CO
o
o
O
O
O
0
O
0
0 O O O O O
fON >ON
O
C\
M
M M M
0.00
M M
ON
N
N
N
00
M N M
O M N u-> NO oo o
ro< y^rofOfnfOf > OfO< r N' , t’
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
. 5
5
O
O
0
o
o
0
o
0
o
0
0
0
o
0
O
O
0 O 0 O O O
ro OWN
o
00
o
N
M
fO u->vD
M M M
0.00
o
N
M
N
CO V) ts O O M (V> *T> *0 NO O. ON
N M N M rOfOfOrOf^fOfOfOfO
GRAND
CENTRAL
SUBWAY STATlON— continued.
N umber per
foot of width per
minute.
Passengers
Down.
From — To—
h. m. s. h. m. s.
128 !
127
122
On the Boston
Underground
Railway 1,072
per foot of width
passengers
descended the steps in one hour, equivalent to eighteen persons per foot of
width per minute. Ascending, sixteen persons per foot of width per minute
were counted, but the steps were not crowded. No counts were made on level
passages.
On the Philadelphia Underground Railway, in half a minute, sixty persons
descended a stairway 7 feet wide, equivalent to seventeen persons per foot of
width per minute. This was about the maximum number the steps could
accommodate. No records of people ascending the stairways were taken.
The ultimate capacity of the Church-street Terminal Station, Hudson and
Manhattan Railway, New York, is 60,000 passengers per hour each way, or
120,000 per hour in all. At the present time the traffic is very great, and the
rapidity with which the passengers disappear is surprising. The incoming
and outgoing traffic is kept separate, and‘the entrances and exits have been
designed to handle the maximum possible hourly traffic without congestion
or delay. The width of the stairways has been based on twenty persons per
foot of width per minute, up or down, whilst the width of the passages and
ramps is based on forty persons per foot of width per minute, but the traffic
has not yet reached this density.
Elevators.
In New York elevators run at a speed of 450 to 550 feet per minute. A
passenger occupies 2 square feet of space, a car 6 feet x 5 feet, accommodating
fifteen persons. The stopping time at landings, including opening and closing
doors, and the discharge and loading of passengers averages f of a second per
person— i.e., if ten persons are discharged and ten taken on, the stop is 15 seconds.
43537—B


If the elevator is wide and comparatively narrow, with the door placed on
the longer side, the average time falls to \ a second per person; whilst if the
passengers enter at one side and leave at another the average time occupied
is from J to J of a second per person.
Escalators.
Escalators, or moving stairs, are a development of the Otis Elevator Co.,
New York, and are now extensively used in America, England, and Europe.
For railways, the width of steps of all escalators is the same, viz., 4 feet.
The capacity is three persons per step per second, equivalent to 10,800 persons
per hour. When people get accustomed to the escalator, the discharge is
somewhat greater, as they walk up or down'the steps.
The lift varies from 15 feet to 60 feet in one run, the speed being about
90 feet per minute.
The latest escalators installed anywhere are on the London Underground
Railway at Paddington, Charing Cross, and Oxford Circus Stations. At
Paddington and Charing Cross there are two escalators, one up and one down,
with an emergency staircase between.
At Oxford Circus there are also two escalators up and down, side by side.
The rise is 60 feet, and this is the longest escalator yet installed.
The escalators work very satisfactorily, and in the busy hours of the day
are crowded with passengers.
Platforms.
On the underground railways in London, Paris, Berlin, Hamburg, New
York, Boston and Philadelphia, at wayside stations the platforms are either
island or side platforms and accommodate both the incoming and outgoing
traffic; but at the Grand Central terminal station, New York, and the Church-
street Terminal of the Hudson and Manhattan Railway, where the traffic is
particularly heavy, the trains load and unload at different platforms, and
the incoming and outgoing passengers are kept separate from the streets to
the trains, and vice versd. Under these conditions — i.e., continuity of direction
—the handling of traffic is very much facilitated, and the people disappear
rapidly.
On the underground railways in London generally, separate entrances
and exits are provided to and from the platforms, but in New York the same
means of access are used both by the incoming and outgoing traffic.
Conclusion.
Lifts as a means of handling dense railway passenger traffic to and from
stations are out of date, and have been superseded by escalators 4 feet wide,
each capable of handling 10,800 passengers per hour. Passages and ramps can
accommodate thirty-five to forty persons per foot of width per minute, up stair-
ways twenty persons, and down stairways eighteen persons per foot of width
per minute.
At stations the entrances can be less in width than the exits as passengers
come to a station intermittently, whilst they are unloaded at regular times
in great numbers.
For unrestricted passenger movement there should be adequate access
from the streets to the platforms. At all stations the incoming and outgoing
traffic should be kept separate from the street to the platform, and vice versd',


but at terminals, or stations operating partly as terminals, the trains should
also load and unload at separate platforms, thus keeping the incoming and
outgoing traffic separate from the street to the train. For rapid loading and
unloading the cars should have three sliding doors on each side.
MODERN CARS FOR ELECTRIC RAILWAYS.
The seating and carrying capacity of the cars, and the rapidity with which
they can be loaded and unloaded are very important factors in the success
of any rapid transit railway. The exigencies of the traffic and the character
of the people have naturally influenced the type of car used. In its environ-
ment Sydney resembles New York and Boston, and the experience gained by
these two cities in developing a suitable car is of particular interest.
The leading considerations in selecting the type of car are :
It should be so proportioned in the matter of length and width, arrange-
ment of accommodation, &c., that a maximum number of passengers can be
carried.
The entrances and exits should be so arranged that the car can be loaded
and unloaded in the minimum of time.
The weight should be carefully reduced to an absolute minimum without
sacrificing strength. Axle loads should also be as low as practicable, and con-
centrated weight at one end only of cars avoided.
The structural make-up should be such that, in the event of collision, a
minimum amount of injury to passengers and damage to property will result.
Dimensions of Cars and Seating Accommodation.
An electric railway can never be a paying proposition if all passengers are
provided with seats during the morning and evening rush hours and other
periods of abnormal traffic, as the number of tracks and trains required would
render the cost of such a service absolutely prohibitive. During the periods
of normal traffic it is possible to seat all or almost all of the passengers. On
the underground railways in America and Europe only from 26 to 33 per cent,
of the passengers at present obtain seats during the rush hours.
In London the seating capacity per car ranges from thirty-six to fifty-two.
There are fewer standing passengers in London during the rush hours than in
any place visited.
In Berlin cars hold 100 passengers, but only seat thirty-three.
In Paris the most recent type of third-class car holds ninety passengers
and seats twenty-five.
On the Interborough Rapid Transit Railway, New York, the cars are
constructed of steel, about 50 feet long over anti-climbers, with three sliding
doors on each side, one at each end, and one in the centre. (See Plate No. 2.)
When all doors are shut an electric circuit is established, and a light notifies
the motor man. Nominally the cars seat forty-eight persons. Four seats are
required for the doors, and have to be lifted, so that actually the cars seat
forty-four, but often 169 passengers are crowded in. The present cars have
reached the limit of capacity, unless constructed with more side doors and
on seating accommodation.


On the Boston Underground Railways there are two types of car—a 50-ft.
steel car, similar to that in use on the Interborough Rapid Transit, New York,
and on the newest section over the Charles River to Cambridge a more recent
car, 69 ft. 6 in. long, 9 ft. 6 in. wide, accommodating 266 passengers in rush
hours, of whom seventy-two are seated. The car has three sliding side-doors
on each side.
Until quite recently it appeared that' cars of the dimensions used on
the Interborough Rapid Transit, New York, about 51 feet long, were the
most efficient type, but the experience gained with the latest Boston car
indicated that the longest and widest cars possible would give the best results
in handling the vast and ever-increasing traffic in New York, and for the
underground railways now in course of construction in New York there will
be used the latest development in steel cars {see Plate No. 3), having a length
of 67 feet with a width of 9 ft. n in., and accommodating 270 passengers, of
whom seventy-eight can be seated during the rush hours and ninety during
periods of normal traffic.
With the 51-ft. steel car at present in use in New York, forty trains of ten
cars, each car holding 169 passengers, or 67,000 passengers in all, can pass any
given point in one hour. With the latest type of car now operating on the
New York Municipal Railways (Plate No. 3), forty trains of eight cars, each
car holding 270 passengers, or a total of 86,400 passengers, can pass any given
point in one hour, so that the new car will make the carrying capacity of a
single track 27*8 per cent, greater than with the older type of car.
With regard to cost, 600 cars of this latest type cost in New York 9,000,000
dollars, and are equal in carrying capacity to 1,000 cars of the older type (Plate
No. 2), costing 11,000,000 dollars, i.e., for equal carrying capacity the latest
type of car is 18 per cent, cheaper than the older one.
In the United States particularly, also in Europe, the question of the maxi-
mum seating and carrying capacity of cars has been carefully studied, and the
problem is being solved more in the direction of endeavouring to crowd a
maximum number of passengers into the cars, than in exploiting the floor
space of the cars to the best advantage for seating accommodation.
Cars with all transverse seats and centre aisle are generally more comfort-
able than cars with longitudinal seats, and especially so on account of the rapid
acceleration and deceleration. The all transverse seating arrangement,
however, places a heavy restriction on the carrying capacity of a car, and cannot
generally be used if 30 per cent, only of the total number of passengers the
car could accommodate have to be provided with seats.
When cars have three side-doors and longitudinal and transverse seats,
the longitudinal seats can be conveniently placed near the doors and the trans-
verse seats midway between the doors and near the ends of the cars. The
latest American car (Plate No. 3), combines longitudinal and transverse
seating accommodation with a large space in the vicinity of the doors to ac-
commodate standing passengers.
The car in service on the Sydney suburban railways (Plate No. 7) has
the seats placed transversely, and is about 51 feet long by 9 ft. 3 in. wide over-
all. It seats sixty passengers, but by loading the centre aisle and end plat-
forms, about 100 passengers can be accommodated. This car is unsuitable
for a quick suburban service.
The Tait car (Plate No. 8), to be used as a trailer on the Melbourne
Suburban Railways, when electrified, has all seats placed transversely, and is


59 ft. 3i in. long by 9 ft. 9 in. wide overall. It seats ninety-two passengers
comfortably, and can accommodate an additional ninety passengers, or 182 in
all. The motor car to be used is shown by Plate No. 9 ; it seats eighty-two
passengers and accommodates eighty additional passengers, or 162 in all.
Entrances and Exits.
Modern cars have two or more, generally three, sliding doors on each
side —doors opening either inwards or outwards are inadmissible. In
Paris the three doors on either side can be controlled from one point in
the car. In London the doors are operated by attendants on the plat-
forms, whilst in New York, Boston, and Philadelphia the end doors are
operated mechanically and the centre door by compressed air. By regula-
tion the centre doors should be used only as entrances and the end doors
as exits; in practice, however, all doors are used promiscuously as entrances
and exits, except in Philadelphia, where the regulation appears to be strictly
enforced.
To minimise the distance which a passenger has to walk when entering or
leaving a car, three doors on each side—one door at the centre and a door
about one quarter the length of the car from each end —have proved to be the
most effective, and loading and unloading can be carried out with great rapidity.
Unless separate platforms are provided for loading and unloading, the entrances
and exits of the cars should be kept separate during periods of congested traffic
to minimise crushing, the entrances to be at the centre of the car and the exits
towards the ends of the car. The doorways should represent about 25 per
cent, of the car length.
During periods of medium or light traffic some of the doors can be conven-
iently cut out of service and seats adjacent to them lowered. This will be
done in the latest cai now being constructed for the New York Underground
Railways. During rush hours the car has per side two 32-in. centre entrance
doors, and two 32-in. exits at each end. During medium traffic the car has one
32-in. centre entrance and a 32-in. exit at each end. During periods of light traffic
there is only the one 32-in. centre door for entrance and exit. The side doors
divide the car into sections of such capacity that each doorway will do its fair share
of work. The average walk of a passenger during the rush hours will be 83-6
inches, compared with 90-5 inches on the Interborough Rapid Transit car,
with side and end doors; 91-6 inches on the Cambridge subway car with three
side t doors; 87 inches on the Hudson and Manhattan car with side and centre
doors, and 146 inches on the Brooklyn Rapid Transit car with end doors. These
figures indicate clearly the superiority of cars with side doors over cars with
end doors or with end doors and centre doors. Had end instead of side doors
been used on a car of this length the time of passenger interchange would have
been prohibitive.
The type of car in use on the Sydney Suburban service, with end doors
loading from end platforms, is quite unsuitable for a rapid transit service.
The movement into and out of the car along the long centre aisle is too congested
and slow, the end doors do not afford sufficient facilities for entrances and
exits, and the platforms take up space which could be better used for accom-
modating passengers.
The Tait car, with sliding doors —nine on either side—is a good car for
rapid loading and unloading. At all periods of traffic, heavy or light, the
passengers have the minimum possible distance to walk, loading or unloading.


Reduction of Weight.
For underground railway service the cars should be constructed of steel.
This does not necessitate a heavy car, as many all-steel cars weigh less per
passenger accommodated than similar cars with wooden superstructures.
The service demanded determines the power required, and consequently the
size and weight of the motors.
The use of pressed steel shapes in lieu of commercial sections also saves
weight. Pressed steel shapes would involve a prohibitive expense in making
a few cars, yet when a type is standardised and the cost of dies, &c., is distri-
buted over a number of such units, the extra cost becomes inappreciable.
Another means of reducing weight now being generally adopted is to utilise
the whole depth of the sides of the car as a truss to carry the weight over the
span between the trucks. Unnecessary weight such as flooring under seats
is also eliminated. .
To limit axle loads the most effective method would be to make all cars
motor cars, and all axles driving axles, for if a car has to provide the necessary
motor equipment for itself and a trailing load the axle loads of the motor car
will be greater than would be required if the power were distributed over
the whole train.
The latest New York car has only one motor per truck, and the truck
is eccentrically pivoted to approximately equalise the weight on driving
and idle wheels. This arrangement is much superior to the common arrange-
ment of two motors per truck on one truck of the car, as it gives much
lighter concentrated loads. The all motor-car train reduces the cost of
construction of the structural steel in bridges and similar works, and the wear
and tear on the permanent way is also less. The advantages of minimum
weight from the view points of haulage, wear and tear, &c., are obvious and
will not be further discussed.
The above features have been incorporated in the latest car now operating
on the New York Municipal Railways, and, as indicated by the following table,
the result shows a remarkable weight economy proportional to carrying capacity.
The table also shows that it is proposed to use all motor cars on the New York
Municipal Railways now under construction, also that no trailer cars are
in use on the Cambridge Subway—the newest portion of the underground
railways in Boston —or on the Hudson and Manhattan Railway on either the
tunnel service or the service to New Pennsylvania and Newark, nor are they
used on the Long Island Railway Subway to Pennsylvania Station. When
all cars are motor cars shunting is reduced to a minimum, and the difficulty of
breaking up trains to suit the traffic is eliminated.
Plate No, 4 shows a side view of the new car, and Plate No. 5 the interior
view; whilst Plate No. 6 shows one of the bogies. This car has 60 per cent,
greater carrying capacity than any car previously used for similar service.
The extra capacity was provided without increasing the axle loads or
sacrificing strength or any other essential features.
Special measures were taken with all the interior arrangements to provide
a thoroughly sanitary construction throughout, the shape of the seats was
given careful consideration, while exhaustive tests were made with various
schemes of illumination in order to obtain the system providing the maximum
amount of comfort for passengers.


2S
COMPARATIVE
DATA—
ELEVATED AND SUBWAY CARS,
NEW YORK.
No. of Cars in '
Passenger Capacity.
Weight of Train
in lb. per foot.
Railway and Class of Service.
Overall
Seated.
Maxi-
With'
Length.
mum
Mo-
Trai*
Minimum
Medium
Maximum
(seated
Empty.
crush
tor
Jer
Total
(rush
(medium
(light
and
load.
Car.
Car.
hour).
traffic).
traffic).
standing)
it.
ini
fi
I
52
44
45
48
169
1,496
1.950
,,,
I
1
52
°i
44
46
• 48
169
987
1.442
Interborough Rapid
Transit Subway—
Latest Steel Cars (Plate
No. 3).
-
2
2
3
4
1
2
2
2
3
5
6
104
156
260
312
2i
3i
4*
88
132
220
264
92
138
230
276
96
144
240
288
■ 338
507
845
1,014
1,496
1.324
1,292
1.324
1,950
1.781
1,747
1.781
5
3
8
416
6
352
368
384
1.352
1,305
1,759
I?
3
IO
520
7i
440
460
480
1,690
1,343
1,798
r 1
...
I
67
3
78
...
90
270*
2
...
2
134
6
156
...
180
540
New York Municipal
3
...
3
201
9
234
270
810
Railway Corporation—
4
...
4
269
O
312
360
1,080
1,268
1,826
Subway. Latest Type
5
...
5
336
3
390
450
1.350
of Car (Plate No. 4).
6
...
6
4°3
6
468
54°
1,620
7
...
7
470
9
546
...
630
1,890
L 8
...
8
53 8
O
624
...
720
2,160 J
ri
...
X
49
3
50
154
1.455
1,893
Brooklyn Rapid Tran-
sit—Elevated series—
Motor Car and Stan-
dard Trailer.
•
2
2
3
3
I
I
1
2
X
2
3
4
5
4 8
98
146
195
243
0
6
6
9
9
48
100
148
198
246
148
308
456
610
758
719
1,455
1,213
1,274
1,164
1,150
1,893
1,645
1,7x0
1,600
14
2
6
293
O
296
912
1,213
1,645
I
69
6i
72
2661
2
2
139
I
144
532
3
...
3
208
7i
216
798
Boston—Cambridge
4
...
4
278
2
288
1,064
1,235
1.771
Subway.
5
6
7
I 8
•1
2
3
...
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
347
4W
486
556
48
96
145
8 i
3
9i
4
4
8
0
360
432
5° 4
576
44
88
132
i,33o
1,596
1,862
2,I28_
1581
316
474.
Hudson and Manhattan-
4
...
4
193
4
176
632
1,533,
1,991
Original Type. Tunnel
'
5
5
241
8
220
790
Service.
6
7
.8
'1
2
...
6
7
8
1
2
290
33 8
386
48
96
0
4
8
4
8
264
308
352
44
88
948
1,106
1,264,
158'!
316
Hudson and Manhattan-
3
...
3
145
O
132
176
220
264
30 8
352
474
632
790
948
1,106
!,264,
New Pennsylvania—
Newark Service.
4
5
6
7
.8
...
4
5
6
7
8
193
241
290
33 8
386
4
8
0
4
8
1,510
1,968


COMPARATIVE DATA—ELEVATED AND
SUBWAY CARS,
NEW YORK-
' — coniinned.
Weight oi Train
in lb. per foot.
Passenger Capacity,
). o? Cars in
Train.
Railway and C’ass of Service.
Long Island Railroad
Subway—Suburban
Flatbush Avenue
Division.
Long Island Railroad
Subway—Suburban
Pennsylvania Station.
Minimum Medium
(rush (medium
hour). traffic).
Maximum (seated
(light and
traffic). -tandingV
iB6'
372
558
744
93°
i,ii6
1,302
i,4 8 8.
' I
2
- 2
3
.3
2 i
7i
oi
6
Safety.
Even with automatic stops and the most perfect system of signalling
and train control that ingenuity can devise there is some slight risk of
collision, due to derailments and other causes. It has been conclusively proved
that a train of steel cars is much less damaged by collision than a train
of wooden or composite cars; there is less risk to passengers, and no risk
of fire, which with wooden cars on an underground railway might result in a
catastrophe.
Quite a moderate collision will wreck a wooden car, as the strong underframe
of one car mounts and rides on the underframe of the adjacent car, wrecking
the wooden superstructure, which is only a shell and can offer no real resistance.
Wooden passenger cars usually telescope in a collision, many passengers axe
killed or maimed by the flying wreckage, which afterwards almost invariably
catches fire.
Apart from the greater safety to the passengers the all-steel car is replacing
the wooden car in the United States and Europe on account of its financial
merits, viz., reduction in weight, other things being equal, with consequent
economy in haulage, lower maintenance costs, and greater life.
In steel car construction a special device now being largely used in the
United States is the anti-climber, which consists essentially of a steel buffer
beam with several large horizontal corrugations. In a collision the ends of
the beams come into contact, interlock the cars, and so prevent one car riding
on the other. The result of collision has generally been a characteristic
buckling at the ends of a number of cars, showing that the shock is absorbed
over the whole length of the train without sufficient injury to any one coach
to cause any great loss of life.
24


If a collision were sufficiently severe total destruction of cars would result;
no foresight could obviate this, but in by far the greater number of collisions
steel cars with anti-climbers would eliminate most of the danger to passengers,
and there would be little damage to rolling stock.
Conclusion.
The type of railway carriage adopted is of the utmost importance both
for the comfort of the passengers and the financial aspect of the City Railway.
In the principal cities of the world during the morning and evening rush hours,
generally not more than one-third—often loss, but seldom more—of the
passengers are accommodated with seats, as the expense would be prohibitive.
The Tait car is a good type of car, but the number of doors, whilst admitting
of rapid loading and unloading, would be detrimental to quick starting, as
each door would have to be closed before the electric circuit—which would
notify the motor man by a light signal that the train was ready to start—
could be established. The numerous doors also reduce the carrying capacity
of the cars, and for service on the Underground City Railway this type of car
cannot be recommended.
For efficiency, safety, and economy, an all-steel car with anti-climbers,
similar in dimensions, seating capacity and door space to the car outlined
on Plate No. 3, is the most recent and best type of car. All cars should be
motor cars, each car fitted with two motors, one over each truck, unless the
cost of equipment is found to be too great.
In New South Wales at the present time the cost of carriage and the high
tariff will necessitate a train consisting of alternate motor car and trailer.
The electrical equipment of a motor car, including pantograph, cabling, set
of contractors, set of rheostats, switchboard, air compressor and governor
reverser, circuit breaker, dynamotor and two motors per car, would cost
£1,250 or £2,500 for two cars. The cost of electrical equipment for one motor car
and one trailer for the Victorian Railways is approximately £1,980, or a saving
of £5OO per unit of two cars. It must be borne in mind, however, that when
an electric railway service is established all repairs will be executed at
workshops similar to those for the steam service at Eveleigh, consequently
the winding and rewinding of motors and the making of electrical equipment
will gradually be undertaken, and the advantages of then having all cars
equipped with motors may outweigh the additional cost, if any, of the motors
and other electrical equipment.
STATIONS.
An imperfect arrangement of the station tracks at terminal stations will
greatly decrease the train capacity of any railway. The track layout will
be given of a few of the principal modern stations visited, and it will be seen
that the tendency in recent years is to construct terminal stations, especially
if underground, with loops when possible.
Wayside Stations.
On electric railways wayside stations for each pair of tracks consist either
of one island or two side platforms, separate platforms for unloading and
loading are not provided. The passengers entering or leaving the trains


intermix on the platforms. Separate entrances and exits, however, are
usually provided to keep the incoming and outgoing traffic separate from the
platform to the streets. At wayside stations on the Metropolitan District
Railway, London, some forty-four trains per hour are accommodated on each
single track, but a fair average train capacity for wayside stations can be
taken at forty trains per hour.
Terminal Stations.
These stations consist of either dead end or loop terminals.
Dead End Terminals are usually arranged as shown by Figures i, 2 and 3,
Plate No. 10. Figure 1 shows a station with two side platforms. The crossing
of trains takes place in front of the platform, and with trains about 500 feet
long, as proposed for Sydney, using each platform road alternately on account
of this crossing of traffic, only about thirty-two trains per hour could be dealt
with at the terminal station. This would be the maximum capacity of the
station in any case, for unless the passenger and parcels traffic is very light
the loading and unloading which takes place at the same platform could not
be carried out in much less than 2 minutes.
As a wayside station can accommodate about forty trains per hour, this
arrangement of terminal station would reduce the capacity of the railway
by eight trains per hour, i.e., by 20 per cent.
In Figure 2 there are two platforms, shunting takes place at the back of
the platform. Apparently the capacity of this station should be equal to the
capacity of a wayside station, but actually it is less. With trains 500 feet long
to equal the capacity of a wayside station, the shunting would have to be
done at an average speed of 12 miles per hour, each train would have to stop
with absolute precision at the determined position, and the stop at the
departure platform could not exceed 50 seconds. A spare driver would be
required and the driver of each incoming train would have to wait at the point
B to take over the control of the next succeeding train, as it would take well
over 1 minute for the driver to change ends, board and restart the train. This
time could not be allowed.
The minimum distance required for shunting from AtoC is 700 feet; this
could be traversed in 40 seconds at an average speed of 12 miles per hour;
the distance from B to D is likewise 700 feet. With a station stop of 30
seconds at the arriving platform; shunting time Ato C, 40 seconds; length of
stop at Bto pick up driver, 20 seconds; shunting time Bto D, 40 seconds; and
station stop of 50 seconds at the departure platform, it would be impossible
to maintain a service of forty trains per hour except for very short periods,
and the capacity of the station would not be any greater than that shown
by Figure 1.
Figure 3 shows a terminal station with three platforms. With one
additional train in service, nearly twice the lay over time can be obtained
that is possible with the arrangement shown by Figure 1. This is very
important, especially at a terminal station dealing with parcels, &c. The
arrangement minimises the interference of the incoming and outgoing trains,
but when a train leaving platform 3 conflicts with a train entering either
platform 1 or 2, the time of conflict is longer than with the arrangement shown
by Figure i,*and consequently only about the same number of trains could
be dealt with.


The train capacity of ordinary dead end stations is, therefore, about 20
per cent, less than the train capacity of a double track railway accommodating
forty trains per hour.
The Manhattan Terminal Station, Brooklyn Bridge, New York (Plate
No. 11) is an example of a special design of dead-end terminal. Upwards of
35,000 people per hour are handled at this station during the rush hours.
Incoming trains arrive alternately on either side of platform A, unload and
proceed to platform B, where they either load or proceed to platform C to
load. Trains depart from either platforms Bor C; there is one grade crossing
as shown. By relying on the vigilance of the employees, without automatic
stops, and at a speed not exceeding 15 miles per hour, one train per minute—
actually sixty-four per hour—has been handled on each track, but there is
always the risk of collisions.
The layout of the Pennsylvania Terminal Station, New York, is shown by
Plate No. 12. It is a terminal station for traffic arriving from opposite direc-
tions, and is also a through station. It covers an area of 7J acres, and is
worked electrically. There are eleven platforms serving twenty-two tracks, at
present the total number of trains in and out is 500 daily. The platforms
average 21 feet in width, and are reached by stairs from the concourse floor
of the station building, which is an exceptionally fine modern structure.
Loop Terminals. —A loop terminal station can deal with a greater number
of trains per hour than can be dealt with by a dead-end terminal, the train
capacity of the railway is not reduced, no interlocking plant is required, the
motor man does not change ends of train, and there is a greater degree of
safety.
Grand Central Station, New York, the Church-street Terminal of the
Hudson and Manhattan Railway, New York, and the Charing Cross Terminal
Loop, London, are typical examples of recent terminal loop stations worked
electrically.
New York Central and Hudson River Railway, Grand Central Terminal
Station. —The Grand Central Terminal Station, completed in 1913, is the largest
and most up-to-date railway terminal in America, and is the centre of the
most extensive combination of passenger transportation systems in the
world.
The completion of this new station has established in the very heart of
the city intercommunication of travel between all the lines of local transit in
greater New York, Long Island, and Jersey City.
Direct underground connections are made between this terminal and four
other underground railway systems in the vicinity, whilst electric trams pass
along the streets fronted by the station.
The railway tracks are arranged on two levels, the upper level for through,
or express trains (Plate No. 13), and the lower level for suburban or local
traffic. The area occupied by the two levels is 79 acres.
The express or long distance trains consist at present of sixteen Pullman
cars hauled by electric locomotives. These trains arrive at intervals of 3
minutes at the unloading platform, take 2 minutes to unload on . account of


the luggage, &c., traverse the loop 332 feet radius behind the station if neces
sary, and load at a departure platform, or proceed to a siding.
The suburban trains consist of ten multiple unit cars arriving at intervals of 2
minutes; they unload in 40 seconds, traverse a loop 136 feet radius to a loading
platform, and are then ready to resume the outward journey.
Four tracks —twd up and two down—lead to Grand Central Station, and in
the busiest period forty-six trains are hauled on two tracks in the same direc-
tion in 39 minutes.
.The control of the trains has been the subject of very careful study. The
signalling arrangements are all worked electrically—the interlocking machines
are the largest in the world. The suburban level machine has 400 levers,
and the express level machine 362 levers; one man is assigned to the working
of each forty levers.
The incoming and outgoing pedestrian traffic are kept separate, and every-
thing has been done to facilitate the speedy and uninterrupted transit of
passengers from one part of the station to another, and to eliminate all
possibility of friction or confusion.
The new terminal building as seen from the street is a magnificient granite
structure of a modified Doric style. An idea of the size of the main building
may be had when it is understood that the waiting rooms, baggage rooms,
concourses, and other rooms available to the public have a total area of 6 acres,
and will accommodate 30,000 people at one time without crowding.
Hudson and Manhattan Railway, Church Street Terminal Station. —The
New York Terminal of the Hudson and Manhattan Railroad is situated at the
southern end of Manhattan Island, and on the extreme south of the City
proper. It is, however, adjacent to the business centre, and though not
of the proportions of the Grand Central or Pennsylvania Terminals, is a fine
example of engineering construction. The area of the site is approximately
2 acres, with a frontage to Church-street of 520 feet. The train service
provided by this Railway Company is a local rapid transit passenger
service between New York City and New Jersey, via tunnels under the
Hudson River. The railway connects at New Jersey with the main trunk
lines of the country.
The platforms are 350 feet long and accommodate seven car trains,
having a passenger capacity of 107 per car. The headway between trains
is ij minutes or forty trains per hour per track. The passenger capacity
is thus 30,000 per hour per track, or 60,000 per hour for two tracks in one
direction.
There are only five railway tracks in the station—four for regular use and
one for emergency—but the arrangement of the tracks and platforms being on
the loop principle (as shown by Plate No. 14), eliminates the necessity of
shunting, allows a station stop of at least 2 minutes, and entirely does away
with an interlocking plant, which would be otherwise essential to the safe
working of quick traffic.
Two main tracks enter and leave the station, each connecting with two
station tracks, and with the emergency track. There are platforms on each
side of each track, i.e., separate platforms for loading and unloading—six
in all—two for loading, three for unloading, and one for handling baggage.


Arriving trains open the car doors to the unloading platforms for passen-
gers to pass out, and when the car is empty the doors on the opposite side are
opened to allow passengers from the loading platforms to enter. All conflict
of movement is thus avoided.
By having two arriving platforms for each main track entering the station
a i| minute’s service can easily be maintained and the capacity of the loop
terminal station is quite equal to the train capacity of the railway.
Charing Cross Loop. —An extension has recently been opened for traffic at
Charing Cross, which greatly improves the train facilities on the Charing Cross
and Hampstead Tube, and the interchange of passengers between the District
Railway, the Baker-street and Waterloo Tube, and the Charing Cross and
Hampstead Tube. A single line loop 3| chains radius and a new platform 350
feet long have been constructed at a cost of £200,000, as shown by Plate No. 15.
Incoming trains traverse the loop before discharging passengers at the
station platform.
Passengers can interchange with the District Railway or with the Baker-
street and Waterloo Railway; the combined station is known as the Charing
Cross Embankment Station, and the volume of traffic is unequalled anywhere
in the world. During the rush hours 178 trains per hour in both directions
will traverse the combined station; of these eighty-six hourly will run on the
District Railway, forty-eight on the Baker-street and Waterloo Railway, and
forty-four trains hourly on the loop recently constructed. A normal day’s
service will be 2,139 trains, viz., 1,028 on the District; 540 on the Baker-street,
and 571 on the New Loop. Special attention has been paid to ventilation, and a
continuous supply of fresh air at the rate of 60,000 cubic feet per minute is
maintained, whilst the motion of the trains assists the circulation of fresh air
throughout the station.
Other loop terminal stations are, the Centre-street Loop, New York
Municipal Railways, the loop terminal station of the Rapid Transit Railway,
Philadelphia, the Dudley-strcet • Terminal Station, and the Sullivan Square
Terminal Station of the Rapid Transit Railway, Boston.
Conclusion.
A dead end station unless of special design, which is not always possible on
account of the expense, reduces the train capacity of a railway by about 20
per cent. Modern terminal stations are being constructed where possible
with loops, and such stations have the same train capacity as the railway.
Usually no interlocking is required, and the stations are safer and more efficient.
JUNCTIONS.
One of the chief causes of delay in a suburban railway service is the time
lost at level or grade crossings. Electric traction has minimised the time
taken by a train to traverse a cross over, but if a train is only a few seconds
late it delays the traffic in the opposite direction at the crossing and may
seriously affect the train capacity of both tracks. The delays caused by one
level crossing only may reduce the efficiency of a railway system by 10 per
cent., and there is always the risk of collision, especially with a fast electric
service on an underground railway.


In New York the local tracks of the Interborougli Rapid Transit Railway
loop around at the City Hall and South Ferry and cross the main tracks at a
different level likewise at City Hall, Philadelphia, the train crosses the under-
ground railway at a different level. Grade crossings are avoided.
To increase the train capacity of the Earl’s Court Station on the District
Railway, London, by some fifty trains per day, and for greater safety, a fly-
over junction, constructed at great expense, while the service was in full opera-
tion* was opened for traffic in January, 1914, replacing a level crossing.
Conclusion.
To minimise delays, to maintain the maximum efficiency of a railway in
the rush hour, and to secure absolute immunity from collision, all grade crossings
should be avoided if possible on rapid transit electric railways in cities, unless
the cost of so doing is prohibitive.
EXCAVATION AND EXCAVATING MACHINERY.
Excavating machinery is used whenever possible—particularly in the
United States and Canada—for the construction of railways and similar
works.
At the time of my visit to Montreal a large system of sewerage was under
construction, and the trenches were being excavated to a depth of 30 feet in
places by machinery. The photograph (Plate No. 16) shows a sewer excavator
of the steam shovel type, whilst the photograph (Plate No. 17) shows an orange
peel sewer excavator at work in Montreal.
When in New York, underground railways were in course of construction
by open excavation in the streets where they were wide enough; by cut and
cover in the narrower streets, and in business centres; and by tunnelling where
required.
The open excavation is carried out where possible by steam shovels and
drag line excavators. Photographs (Plates No. 18 and No. 19) show excavators
at work and the extensive timbering required in the streets. Blasting is
freely permitted subject to regulations, which will be detailed subsequently.
In commencing cut and cover excavation the road surface for a predeter-
mined length is excavated, the material being carted away and replaced during
the night by Oregon timber planking 3 inches thick, supported on girders of
timber or steel resting on the ground. Very little inconvenience is thus caused
to the business people or to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. After the timber
surface has been prepared shafts are sunk in the footpaths and other con-
venient places, and the underlying material excavated to a depth of about
7 feet, the girders being supported by timber props and piers as the work
proceeds. Successive depths of about 7 feet are excavated and supported by
timbers until the full depth of excavation is reached. Manual labour is almost
general, the confined space rendering the use of machinery impossible. The
material usually is soft, and can be shovelled into the steel skips; sometimes
it has to be first broken with a pick. The skips hold from 84 to 112 cubic
feet; they are hoisted to the surface, placed on waggons, and emptied at a
convenient dump.


Photographs (Plates No. 20 and No. 21) show the usual type of timbering
supporting the roadway above, whilst the photograph (Plate No. 22) shows the
construction of a four-track subway in a narrow street in New York, where one
pair of tracks had to be taken under another pair to save land resumption.
Photograph (Plate No. 23) shows a tunnel excavator at work in a confined
discharging space, into a steel skip.
For rock drilling, jack hammers and a heavier hand hammer (the Bull
Moose) have been found more effective than tripod drills, and were almost
invariably used, as they could be more readily handled. The Bull Moose drill
weighs about 95 lb., and requires about 100 cubic feet of air per minute at 100 lb.
pressure. In soft rock a four-point bit is used, and in hard rock a six-point
bit. As much as 130 feet has been drilled by one Bull Moose hammer in one
day, but general average is 60 to 80 feet, as against 40 to 60 feet with a tripod
drill. Jack hammers are used in subway work in trimming and on bench
work. The jack hammer weighs about 40 lb., and requires 45 to 50 cubic feet
of air per minute at 100 lb. pressure.
In cut and cover excavations the gas mains are removed as soon as possible
after work has commenced, as several disastrous explosions due to leakage
have occurred. For the local gas service, 6-inch steel pipes are placed along
the alignment of the footpaths and serve as kerbs; the mains conveying gas
to distant places are carried on trestles above the side walks. Water pipes,
sewer pipes, and other conduits are supported in position until the necessary
diversions have been completed.
In disposing of the rock after blasting, machinery is seldom used. The
larger pieces are picked up and placed in skips by a block and tackle, the
smaller pieces and soft material being shovelled in.
In tunnel excavation the rock is drilled, blasted, and disposed of as des-
cribed above; the dimensions generally preclude the use of machinery. The
photograph (Plate No. 24) shows a typical rock tunnel under Lexington-avenue
and 94th street. New York, and illustrates the crane hoisting the large pieces
of rocks into skips and the general method of working.
The wages paid in New York are as follow:—Rock drillers, 46 cents, or
is. nd. per hour; carpenters, 3 dollars, or 12s. 6d. per day; and labourers,
1.75 dollars, or 7s. 3d. per day, and upwards.
Rock Boring 'Machines.
Several machines have been patented in the United States to bore out
tunnels, but so far none has proved successful. A machine patented by the
Rock Tunnelling Machine Co., of New York, intended to bore a hole 8 feet in
diameter, was seen in operation at New York. The general construction of
the machine (illustrated by the photograph, Plate No. 25), is as follows : —Sixteen
3-in. hammer drills are mounted on a massive cast steel revolving head with
four arms or shafts. Each drill cylinder passes through an arm and is firmly
held in a swivel holder, thus permitting changing the hammers to the proper
angle with the face of the rock.
Compressed air is supplied to the drills at 80 to 100 lb. pressure through
the main horizontal shaft on which the head is mounted. This shaft is rotated
by a worm wheel 3 ft. 4 in. in diameter, operated by a 25 h.p. air engine geared
200 to 1.
The shaft and engine are carried in a main horizontal frame with front and
rear vertical transverse diaphragms, mounted on wheels. In the upper part


of each diaphragm are screw jacks, which are operated to engage the roof of
the tunnel and hold the machine firmly in position, the machine to be advanced
by a pair of horizontal, longitudinal screw jacks, 4 inches in diameter, and of
36 inches feed. These connect the front and rear diaphragms and move them
backwards and forwards relative to each other, being operated from the central
shaft by means of spur gears. When the machine is in operation the screw
jacks are intended to move the front portion of the machine forward half-an-
inch for each complete revolution of the head.
The excavated material is removed by a belt conveyor suspended from the
forward diaphragm, and carried by a pair of rear wheels. This is operated by
a 2 h.-p. electric motor, and the material is delivered into dump cars on a track
following the machine.
The drills are so designed that they are automatically governed by the
character of the rock. The cutting tools have a slight longitudinal movement
in the drill cylinders, and are provided with ports which control the exhaust.
They do not reciprocate, but are held in one position or another and receive
the impact from the hammer, which weighs 25 lb., and strikes from 1,000 to
1,200 blows per minute. When the pressure against the cutting steel is
sufficient to overcome the constant pressure in the rock drill, it moves slightly
backwards and opens the exhaust port, putting the hammer in operation
against the head of the cutting steel. This action continues as long as the
machine is in operation, and the cutting steel is forced against the rock with a
pressure of about 100 lb. If the resistance against the point of the cutting
steel becomes less than 100 lb. through soft rock, open fissures, or other reasons,
the interior pressure forces it forward, closing the exhaust port and stopping
the action of the hammer piston. If the machine is still continued in operation,
the cutting steel acts as a gouge, milling off the tunnel face until the resistance
is great enough to force it slightly back in its seat, when the hammer action is
resumed, thus maintaining uniform regular action and automatically stopping
the hammers when they are not needed.
The tool holders are so designed that the entire set of sixteen drills can be
changed in 15 minutes. The cutters are so arranged as to remove all of the
rock in the face of the heading and provide clearance for the machine.
The machine was set up against a face of very hard rocks with quartz bands
at the company’s works, New York, and was set in motion for about half an
hour to enable me to see it at work. The machine cut into the rock very
slowly, not at the rate of half-an-inch per revolution, the rock was largely
gouged out by the revolution of the head owing to the sticking of the drills,
rather than chipped out by percussion; the rock was reduced to dust and
fine chippings. The wear on the drills was very great. A continuous test
under working conditions is necessary to enable cost data to be obtained.
The machine is more or less in the experimental stage; it is yet very far from
being a commercial success, though it may prove successful for small headings
in fairly soft rock.
Conclusion*.
Rotary machines for boring out tunnels are only in the developmental
stage, and are yet very far from being a commercial success.
On the underground railways in New York the rock is excavated by
blasting; for drilling the holes, hand hammers have proved more efficient
than tripod drills. Rock channellers have also proved useful.


Steam shovels and steam crane navvys, where the space permits, can be
employed with advantage, but in cut and cover work the bulk of the excava-
tion must be done by manual labour.
BLASTING IN NEW YORK CITY.
As directed by the Minister, inquiries were made to ascertain if blasting was
allowed in New York City, and if so, under what conditions.
Blasting is permitted in New York, either above or below ground, and is
governed by regulations framed by the Municipal Explosives Committee, and
administered by the Fire Commissioner, who issues permits to manufacture,
transport, and store explosives, and for blasting.
Any person handling explosives is required to obtain a certificate of fitness
and pass an examination upon the law and the regulations governing the trans-
portation, storage, and use of the substance, compound or article relating to
or connected with the service to be performed by him, upon the risks incident
to his employment, and upon his knowledge of the precautions necessary to be
taken in connection therewith. An annual fee of 5 dollars is charged for a
certificate of fitness.
Magazines must be constructed to specifications, the framing and outside
boarding to be spruce timber, the outside of which must be covered completely
with asbestos not less than 1 lb. to each 10 square feet and steel plates not less
than J inch thick. Inside boarding to be tongued and grooved pine, the
space between the boarding on sides, floor, and roof, to be closely packed with
mineral wool.
The principal regulations which apply to blasting operations are as follow : -
1. The Fire Commissioner may require a magazine to be surrounded
by a sand-bag barricade substantially constructed.
2. It shall be unlawful for anyone to use in a blasting operation a quantity
of explosives greater than necessary to properly start the rock,
but the Inspector of Blasting shall have authority to prescribe
the maximum quantity of explosives to be used. The Inspector
of Blasting shall also have authority to prescribe the amount and
manner of application of the protective covering to be placed
over blasts situated on the perpendicular or diagonal side of a rock,
and over blasts for ditch work, block holes, manholes, poleholes,
electric wire subways, sewer and gas connections, gas and water
mains.
3. The blasting of rock contiguous to any structure shall be so con-
ducted as not to cause damage to such structure, and to this end
weak walls or other supports shall be shored up, and rotten or
decomposed rock shall be removed only by the use of gads, picks,
or crowbars. When blasting in the vicinity of a weak structure
is unavoidable, only light face blasts with short lines of resistance
and small charges shall be used.
4. Except when blasting in a tunnel or subway, the roof of which is at
least 10 feet below the surface of the ground, it shall be unlawful
43537-C


for any person to explode a blasting charge by means of time,
slow burning or safety fuse, or by any means other than some form
of electrical apparatus.
5. Immediately after loading and tamping the hole, and before firing
the blast electrically, the rock to be blasted must be covered on
all exposed sides with a strong woven matting of rope or wire,
at least i£ inches in diameter. The matting to then be covered
with at least twelve timbers, each 10 feet long and 10 inches in
smallest diameter, held securely together by chains or by iron or
steel cables at least f inch in diameter. After the rock has been
thus covered, the blast shall be fired without unnecessary delay.
6. The provisions of the preceding clause shall not apply to blasting
operations in a tunnel or subway when the blast is situated more than
100 feet from the mouth of opening to the tunnel and at least 10
feet from the outer surface of the rock.
7. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct blasting operations
within the City of New York between the hours of 7 o’clock p.m. and
7 o’clock a.m., or at any time on Sunday, except under authority
of a special permit.
Blasting is also permitted in the City of Chicago, under regulations similar
to the above.
PRECAUTIONS TAKEN TO GUARD AGAINST
EXCESSIVE CLAIMS FOR DAMAGE
CAUSED BY BLASTING.
In New York, prior to the commencement of blasting operations, the houses
adjacent to the scene of operations are examined, and if necessary the exteriors
and interiors arc photographed. Small charges are used where damage is at
all likely. To prevent the breakage of large plate glass windows owing to the
vibration of the air caused by a blast, cross frames are placed on opposite
sides of the windows, and held in position by steel wires secured by eyelets
to the window frames at the top and bottom. The cross frames are about
1 ft. 6 in. long, constructed of ij in. x | in. Oregon with a back piece 2 in. x 2 in.
x 5 in. long. The photograph (Plate No. 26) shows the construction and method
of using these frames, which have been found very effective. On one section
200 windows were broken in one day before the use of the frames, but the break-
ages have been practically nil since their adoption.
When blasting takes place near a shaft more vibration and damage is
done than when the blast takes place away from a shaft, but by building a
bulkhead across the shaft the trouble is considerably reduced.
In London the material is largely clay and chalk, and no great difficulty
was experienced in its removal. By statute all claims for damage to property
must be made within two years, otherwise they arc disallowed.
34


„ roadways—asphalt ...
„ wood block
New granite kerb
New bluestone kerb ...
• • .
New cement sidewalk
Cast-iron outlet boxes
„ pull boxes ...
Vitrified pipe sewer, 12 in. ...
„ 18 in. ...
24 in
Cast-iron sewer pipe, straight
„ special castings
Brick or concrete sewer, 3 ft. 6 in. x 2 ft. 4 in.
„ „ 4 ft. 6 in. x 3 ft. ...
Brick masonry in sewers
Concrete in sewers
Cast-iron gas or water pipe, 6 in. diameter...
„ 12 in. „
.. „ 16 in. ,,
...
35
CONTRACT PRICES FOR UNDERGROUND RAILWAY
CONSTRUCTION IN NEW YORK.
The average prices ruling in New York during the year 1914, were as
follow:
Earth excavation above or below mean high water
Rock excavation ... ... ...
Tunnel excavation, above or below mean high water
Concrete
Rubble stone masonry
Dry rubble masonry ..
Brick masonry
Hollow terra-cotta brick or tile masonry
Portland cement (for grouting)
Timber foundations ...
Broken stone or gravel
Waterproofing, i-ply ...
2-ply ...
s-piy -
Brick in asphalt mastic
Vitrified drain pipe, 4 in.
~ 6 in.
~ 12 in.
Cast-iron drain pipe, 3 in.
„ '4 in.
„ 6 in.
„ 8 in.
Tunnel ducts ...
Riveted steel
Steelwork in beams and shapes
Steelwork in rods and bars
Cast-iron tunnel lining
Steel in bolts and washers
Miscellaneous iron castings ....
Miscellaneous wrought iron or cast-iron for sewers
Vault lights
Restoration of sidewalks
5-00 per cub. yd.
7-00
/ is*oo
\ 20*00.
15-00
3-50 per barrel
ioo-oo per 1,000 sup. ft
2-50 per cub. yd.
•60 per sq. yd.
/ 30-00
135-oo
•35 per lin. ft.
1-25
1-75
•15 per duct foot
80-co per ton ...
72-00
80 -oo
4500
6000' „
75-oo „
75-oo ~
1- per sq. ft.
2- per sq. yd.
3-
4-00 „
2-00 per lin. ft.
1-
2- per sq. yd.
i-oo each
5-oo „
3-00 per lin. ft.
5-oo
50-00 per ton
75-oo ~
4- per lin. ft.
5-
15-00 per cub. yd.
10-00 „
i-oo per lin. ft.
■l-50
l S. d.
1 o 10
19 2
2 I 8
2 I 8
19 2
I O IO
326
4 3 4
326
o 14 7
20 i 6 8
o io 5
0 2 6
O 3 I
0 5 2
6 5°
7 sio
o I 6
o i 8
o 3 1
O 4 2
0 5 2
°73
084
O o 7i
i 6 13 4
15 ° °
i 6 13 4
9 7 6
12 IO O
15 12 6
15 12 6
063
o ii 6
O 12 6
o i 6 8
084
o 6 3
0 9 5
O 4 2
I O IO
O 12 6
1 o 10
1 5 o
10 8 4
15 12 6
o 16 8
I O TO
3 2 G
218
042
o 6 3
084
o 10 5
It will be seen that the prices for steel and ironwork are
with the prices‘ruling in Sydney.
compared


SPECIAL STEELS FOR BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION.
High-class carbon steel containing the following elements, viz.:—
Acid Steel.
Basic Steel.
Per cent.
Per cent.
Phosphorus, not more than
Sulphur ~
Manganese ~
Silicon „
(Carbon as low as possible to meet physical requirements.)
Can be readily manufactured with physical properties as below :
Ultimate strength
62.000 to 70,000 lb. per sq. inch.
37.000 lb. per sq. inch.
Minimum elastic limit
Minimum elongation in 8 inches
Minimum reduction of area
24 per cent.
44 per cent.
Carbon steel of the quality above is very suitable for bridge construction,
and is now being used in the manufacture of an arch bridge of 1,000 feet span
across the East River at Hell Gate, New York. This is the longest and most
important arch bridge yet attempted.
In long span cantilever bridges, the weight of the structural steel in the
cantilevers and centre girders is greater than the combined weight due to the
deck and live load. It is essential to keep the weight of the structure itself
as low as possible and for this purpose special steels of greater ultimate strength
and higher elastic limit than the best carbon steels have been found necessary.
During the past decade nickel steel has been introduced with satisfactory
results in the design of long span bridges, viz., the Manhattan Suspension
Bridge and the Blackwells Island Cantilever Bridge—both across the East
River, New York —the Municipal Bridge at St. Louis, and the Cantilever Bridge
now in course of construction across the St. Lawrence River, at Quebec. At
present a more recent steel (chrome-nickel steel) is being used in the construc-
tion of two important bridges, viz., a Suspension Bridge across the Rhine,
at Cologne, of 604 feet centre span, and a bridge across the Mississippi, at
Memphis, of 604, 621, and 790 feet spans, centres of piers.
Nickel steel is made synthetically by adding from 3 to 3J per cent, of metallic
nickel to molten carbon steel as it is being poured into the ladle prior to casting;
the nickel diffuses uniformly and intimately mixes with the molten metal,
increasing its ultimate strength, elastic limit, ductility, and toughness, also
its resistance to abrasion, shock, and corrosion.
The chemical composition of nickel steel is as follows ;
Acid steel. | Basic Steel.
Per cent.
•06
•04
•70
Per cent.
Phosphorus, not more than
Sulphur „
Manganese „
Silicon „
Carbon „
Nickel, not less than
36


The physical properties of nickel steel plates and shapes of the above com-
position are as follow :
Ultimate strength ...
Yield point, minimum
Minimum elongation in 8 inches
Minimum reduction of area
From 65,000 to 100,000 lb. per sq. inch.
50,000 lb. per sq. inch.
18 per cent.
40 per cent.
Nickel steel has not been developed to the limit of its possibilities, but an
elastic limit of 60,000 lb. per square inch is almost invariably obtained, although
50,000 only is specified. With little trouble an elastic limit of 60,000 lb. per
square inch and upwards can always be obtained.
Nickel steel is always pitted on the surface, due to the rolling in of the scale;
it must be double rolled to get a good surface. It is more difficult to roll
than carbon steel and often shows seams at the bends of angles and shapes,
due to segregation in the ingots. Nickel steel is more difficult to work and
costs about 20 per cent, more to fabricate than carbon steel.
Compared with carbon steel having a limit of elasticity of 37,000 lb. per
square inch, nickel steel as specified with a yield point of 50,000 lb. per square
inch is 36 per cent, stronger. The yield point is seldom less than, and with
care can always be, 60,000 lb. per square inch, or 60 per cent, greater than that
of carbon steel.
Columns identical in all dimensions have been constructed of nickel
steel and of carbon steel and tested to destruction. The nickel steel columns
show a similar increase of strength over the carbon steel columns. Nickel
steel rivets having been found too hard to close satisfactorily, carbon steel
rivets are used for riveting nickel steel plates and shapes.
With the same degree of safety the working stresses in nickel steel can be
60 per cent, greater than the working stresses in carbon steel, and the dead
weight of a structure correspondingly reduced.
In America, nickel steel was quoted at 12J dollars, or £2 12s. per ton more
than carbon steel for each per cent of nickel, whilst in Germany the corres-
ponding price given was £2 per ton. Pure nickel costs 35 cents per pound at
the Homestead Works, Pittsburg, but it is stated that ferro nickel containing
90 per cent, iron and 10 per cent, nickel can be used in the manufacture of
nickel steel instead of pure nickel, and the excess price over carbon steel quoted
above reduced by at least 50 per cent.
Chrome nickel steel is made synthetically by adding ferro chrome and nickel
to carbon steel during manufacture. Chrome nickel steel is also made direct
from ores. The Pennsylvania and Maryland Steel Company has secured
large iron ore deposits at Mayari, Cuba, unlike any other iron ore in common use.
A serpentine rock decomposed by the actibn of salt, water, and heat, leaves
on the plateau a bed of soft iron ore some 30 feet deep, containing silicon,
aluminium, phosphorus, sulphur, manganese, nickel,, cobalt, and chromium;
the nickel content varies slightly, otherwise the ore is quite uniform in
analysis.
This Mayari ore is converted to pig iron, a typical analysis of which is as
follows :—Carbon, 4-67 per cent; manganese, -90 per cent.; phosphorus, *047
per cent.; sulphur, -on per cent.; nickel and cobalt, 1-30 per cent.; chromium
2 - 66 per cent.; vanadium, -05 per cent.; titanium, -18 per cent.; copper,
'°3s per cent.; silicon, -8o per cent. By mixing with other irons of known
analysis, steel containing nickel and chromium in the percentages required
is produced and known as Mayari steel.
37


Chromium in steel increases its clastic limit and hardness, also its resis-
tance to shock and alternating stresses. It is the most active element in
making steel respond to heat treatment. The presence of chromium and
nickel in steel produces a metal possessing a high clastic limit, combined with
ductility, and of greater hardness, resilience, and better wearing qualities, than
carbon steel. Chrome nickel steel is especially valuable for parts which have
to be hardened and tempered.
. The strength of chrome nickel steel depends on the relative percentages of
nickel and chromium. The following tests made for the Pennsylvania Steel
Company, from material made direct from Mayari ore clearly show this.
CHEMICAL COMPOSITION.
Element.
Plate Material.
Eycfc.Tr Material.
Per cent.
•191
Per cent.
Carbon
Sulphur
Phosphorus
Manganese
Nickel ...
Chromium
PHYSICAL
PROPERTIES,
Plate Material.
Eycbar Material.
Ultimate strength, lb. per sq. in. ... ... 61,000 106,500
Yield point, minimum ~ ... ... 36,800 50.000
Minimum elongation in Bin 27 - i per cent. i 2 -8 per cent,
Minimum reduction in area ... ... ... 51-9 per cent. 30-6 per cent.
The eyebar material is similar in quality to steel containing 3J per cent,
of nickel with no chromium.
Chrome nickel steel for bridge material made synthetically at Krupp’s
Works, Essen, containing 2 per cent, nickel and -5 per cent, chromium has the
following physical properties :
Ultimate strength 78,220 lb. per sq. in.
Yield point ... ... ... ... 49,780 „
Elongation in 8 inches ... ... 15 per cent.
Full size chrome nickel steel columns required for the Memphis Bridge
were tested to destruction last year in the United States Government Testing
Machine of 5,000 tons capacity at Pittsburgh. These tests indicated that
Mayari steel was equivalent in strength to ordinary 3-J per cent, nickel steel.
" With the same degree of safety for bridge work the working stresses of
chrome nickel steel containing not less than per cent, of nickel can be the
same as those for nickel steel containing 3J per cent, of nickel, and 60 per
cent, greater than the working stresses of the best carbon steel.
Owing to the lower percentage of nickel in chrome nickel steel it can be
produced synthetically at a less cost than nickel steel. When it is made
direct from the ore—the only suitable deposit yet discovered has been secured
by the Pennsylvania Steel Company—chrome nickel steel can be produced
at a price very little in excess of ordinary carbon steel.


Method of Tendering
The manufacture of alloy steels, i.e., nickel steel and chrome nickel steel
is undertaken by few manufacturers, and to secure the advantages attendant
on their use the following procedure, was adopted in calling tenders for the
manufacture and erection of the superstructure of the Bridge over the
Mississippi River at Memphis.
Outline drawings showing the leading dimensions and general character
of the bridge were prepared, not working drawings, as this would have
involved the preparation of two complete sets, only one of which would be
required when the kind of steel was decided upon.
The stresses were computed and the weights estimated for two designs,
viz.:—
I. A carbon steel design in which the eyebars only were of alloy steel.
2. An alloy steel design in which all main members of the structure
were of alloy steel, but the deck and subsidiary members of
carbon steel.
A specification governing the strength of materials, working stresses,
workmanship, manufacture and erection was prepared, and with the outline
drawings above, was submitted for Bulk Sum Tenders. The specification
included the estimated weights of the two designs as follow:
Carbon Steel. Alloy Steel. Total,
Carbon steel design
Alloy steel design .
15,185
7.485
Alloy steel, including nickel steel and chrome nickel steel was specified
as follows : —Alloy steel shall not contain more than the following percentages
of minerals :
All other Steel,
Manganese
Phosphorus Acid Steel
Phosphorus Basic Steel
Sulphur
Silicon ...
Carbon
In addition to the above, alloy steel shall contain not less than 1-20 per
cent, of nickel and may contain such percentages of chromium, vanadium, or
other metals as may be necessary to meet the physical requirements herein-
after specified. Material containing more than 3 per cent, of nickel may
contain up to -45 per cent, of carbon.
Whatever the composition of the alloy steel that is selected by the
manufacturer it is essential that the material shall be uniform or approximately
of the same composition throughout. Bidders, will, therefore, be required
to submit the lower and upper limits of percentages of metals in the alloy
steel, they propose to use. The upper limit in each case shall not be greater
than 125 per cent, of the lower one.
39


The various grades of alloy steel shall be known as rivet steel, medium
steel, eyebar steel, and pin steel. Medium grade steel shall be used when
alloy steel is specified for plates and shapes.
Rivet Steel. Medium Steel.
Ultimate strength, lb. per sq. in.
85,000-100,000
70,000-90,000
95,000-110,000
Elastic limit, lb. per sq. in., not less than
1,600,000
Mimmum elongation in 8 inches
See below
15 per cent.
Ult. strength
40 per cent. .
Reduction of area
Specimens of medium alloy steel
meet the following
requirements
for elongation and reduction of area :■
Material z inch thick or under.
1,600,000
Elongation in 8 inches
Ult. strength
30 per cent.
Reduction of area
For medium alloy steel thicker than 1 inch, the required percentage of
reduction of area will be reduced by two for each increase in thickness of
J inch or fraction thereof above 1 inch, but in no case shall the reduction of
area be less than 24 per cent.
The alloy steel design required some 2,315 tons less material than the carbon
steel design. The Pennsylvania Steel Company, with chrome nickel steel made
from Mayari ore, were the successful competitors.
One of the conditions of the contract is that the accepted tenderer must
prepare the working drawings under the direction of the engineer.
BRIDGE FABRICATING ESTABLISHMENTS.
Fourteen noted bridge fabricating establishments—three in the United
States, one in Canada, six in Great Britain, one in France, and three in
Germany—were visited.
In Great Britain the longest span bridge seen in course of construction
was at the Cleveland Bridge Co.’s Works, Darlington, where nine out
of the fifteen 350-feet spans, for the bridge across the Ganges River at
Sara, were being manufactured. The work done at all of the establishments
visited was excellent, but the layout and equipment of the shops were not
quite as modern as the more recent works in America and Germany.
The Fives Lille Works were well laid out and equipped.


The Maschinenbaugcsellschaft of Augsburg and Niirnbcrg—the M.A.N.
Company —two branches of which were visited, one at Duisburg and one at
Gustavsburg, are well laid out and equipped, and the work in process of
fabrication for the new bridge over the Rhine at Cologne was excellent in
every respect. In connection with this work when the thickness of the plates
exceeded 6 inches, on account of the difficulty in driving rivets, turned nickel
steel bolts tapered i in 200, machined to a (hiving fit in tapered holes in the
plates were used and were very satisfactory. The method is a novelty
in bridge construction; the extra cost of work so bolted was about £7 per
ton.
Owing to the incidence of war between Great Britain and Germany many
interesting photographs and other information, which were to be forwarded,
have not come to hand.
A brief description will be given of three establishments in which the most
important long span bridges have been or are being fabricated.
THE PENNSYLVANIA STEEL CO’S WORKS AT STEELTON.
Bridge and Construction Department.
This Department of the Pennsylvania Steel Company was built in 1903
to fabricate railroad and heavy municipal bridge work, and is equipped with
the most modern machinery. The Williamsburg Suspension Bridge of 1,600
feet centre span, and the Blackwells Island (Queensborough) Bridge with a
principal span of 1,182 feet were successfully fabricated by these works.
The shops (Plate No. 27) are placed parallel with the Pennsylvania
Railroad, and are traversed by tracks conveniently arranged. Inside the
buildings all material is handled by electric travelling cranes and trucks or
narrow gauge cars. In addition there is an elaborate system of travelling
jib or wall cranes which constitutes one of the most economic features of the
entire equipment.
The raw materials, such as plates, shapes, &c., are brought in on cars to the
material storage yard where they are handled by several gantry cranes having
a span of 85 feet and a travel of 2,720 feet. The ground covered by these
gantry cranes is so divided that the various classes of raw material have distinct
locations, which classes are in turn subdivided, so that the material for each
contract or order is piled individually. In addition there are a number of
targets placed at intervals along the entire length of this gantry area, and as
the material is unloaded from cars its position as relating to a target is noted,
and it is thus possible to determine immediately the exact position of the
various classes of material for each contract. From here the material is taken
into the upper end of the shop which constitutes the first area. This latter
covers a space of 340 feet in length by 170 ft. 8 in. in width, is twice as wide
as the remainder of the shop building, and is divided longitudinally, forming
two departments, one of which is used exclusively for shapes such as angles,
“I ” beams, &c., while the other is used exclusively for plates. In these
departments the material is straightened, marked off to size, and planed,
&c., to prepare it for punching. The parts then pass to the punching
assembling, drilling and reaming, riveting, finishing, and painting areas, and
arc finally loaded on cars at the finishing or lower end of the shop. This
arrangement means that all the material enters the shop at one end and passes
from one department to the next in advance, and so on through the building
to the shipping or storage yard.


The extraordinary length of this shop is realized from the fact that the
distance under one roof from the receiving yard to the painting area is 1,850
ft. 4 in., while the width centre to centre of columns, not considering the lean-
to’s which arc on each side and are 20 feet wide, is 85 feet, except the receiving
area, which, as mentioned before, is twice this width. Great care has been
taken to sec that the aesthetic as well as the strict utilitarian appears in the
design of the building, particular attention having been paid to the grouping
of the several structures and to the harmonious assembling of their most
prominent features. Each building is of skeleton steel construction, the
walls of the first story being brick and the remainder concrete. No loads
are carried by the walls, the entire roof and interior being supported by the
steel frame.
All the cranes and most of the tools are electrically driven by individual
motors. Each machine, therefore, is self contained and independent.
The main shop is supplied with lateral feeder auxiliary buildings, taking
care of the hydraulic work, forging work, machine work, light structural work,
rivet making, &c., and these lateral buildings are so arranged that they will
feed the main shop at the proper stage in the course of fabrication.
In the auxiliary building devoted to hydraulic and forming work is a
350-ton press used for bending and making buckled plates cold. It is also
used for crimping angle and tee stiffeners, which are fitted in dies and all are
thus uniform, bending and straightening plates together with other work of
this nature. All hot bending of material is carried out in this building. Coke
oven gas is used for heating.
In the auxiliary building devoted to forging work are several hammers,
gag presses, &c., to take care of all work of this description required in bridge
construction. The rivet making plant is equipped with automatic rivet and
bolt makers. The templet shop —a building 60 ft. by 240 ft. and two stories
in height—is a separate fireproof structure connected to the receiving area
by a covered passage way through which the templets are carried to the laying-
off area. This shop contains a storage for templet lumber and is equipped
with a full line of wood working machines.
Some of the most worthy features of this establishment are the elaborate
installation of heavy duty overhead and wall travelling cranes which make
possible the handling of the heaviest known bridge members. Girders for the
Boston and Albany Railroad, as shown by Plates No. 28 and No. 29,
are 122 ft. 6 in. long and weigh 170 tons. These were completely fabricated in
the works and loaded on especially reinforced railroad cars. The travelling
cranes are of two classes, viz. those which span the shop and are of 25 and 50
tons capacity, and those which travel along the wall similar to a jib crane.
The latter are arranged upon two systems of tracks secured to the building
columns and placed one above the other, each track supporting several cranes
of lifting capacities of 3,5, and 10 tons. Each crane operates independently
of any of the other®, and in the case of the upper ones the load can be racked
out far enough to clear the end of the one beneath. The photograph of the
" Finishing Department ” (Plate No. 30), gives a good idea of the arrangement
of these cranes. It is impossible to dwell with too much emphasis upon the
advantages derived from this system of crane sendee. Its extreme flexibility
is apparent; no matter where the work to be handled may be located it is
possible to bring one of the three crane systems into use, and to do this without
unnecessary delay.


The double gang of reamers, eighteen to a gang, are especially designed
with electric independent motor drive and air feed, and are exclusively used
by this establishment, having been designed and patented under the direction
of the Superintendent. These drills are used for drilling and reaming
assembled work.
The special cast iron skids on deep concrete foundations are located at
convenient intervals in the finishing end of the shop where chord members
can be laid down accurately and field splices laid out and holes drilled from
the solid while the pieces are in their final position. This assures absolute
butt joints and concentric holes for such connections.
Two large assembling yards are located at the finishing end of the
establishment, all parts of which are accessible by the use of 50-ton gantry
cranes, and in these areas trusses are completely assembled. In this way the
lengths of members and completed spans can be checked.
Among the many special tools which have been provided may be mentioned
Sellers’ “Automatic Spacing Punch.” This machine is provided with roller
table, which enables it to punch plates up to 10 feet wide by 100 feet long.
Punching capacity eight -f-inch holes through I-inch plate at one stroke,
twenty to thirty revolutions per minute, maximum travel 8 inches per
revolution. The material is not marked off. The spacing of holes is controlled
by a perforated paper roll, the holes in which are made in a special machine
and checked for size, location, &c. The spacing of the holes becomes absolutely
accurate in this way. The punch is operated electrically, the impulse to throw
the gag in the punch is given by compressed air being admitted through the
holes in the paper. This punch is shown by the photograph (Plate No. 31).
A photograph of portion of the perforated paper record, which was used on
this machine for punching the web plate of the 170-ton girder for the Boston
and Albany Railroad, Worcester —the largest web plate girder yet constructed
—is shown on Plate No. 32, whilst the photographs (Plates No. 28 and No. 29)
show the girder assembled on trucks at the works, and erected in position.
The punch for punching large web plates will punch a il-inch hole through
i-inch plate. Punching is controlled by an electric push button arrangement,
which is shown by the photograph (Plate No. 33). Plates up to 10 feet wide
can be punched on this machine.
The large gate shears will cut plates up to 10 feet wide by 1 inch thick in
one stroke.
The double-headed rotary planer as shown by photograph (Plate No. 34)
has one end moveable, can plane both ends of a column up to 80 feet long in
the one setting, thus ensuring both ends being perfectly parallel.
The pneumatic riveter air pressure is io"o lb. per sq. in.; pressure on rivet
head 90 tons.
Other photographs appended are :
Photograph (Plate No. 35) showing Assembling Shop.
No. 36 „ Machine Shop.
No. 37 „ Riveting Shop.
No. 38 ~ Radial Miller.
No. 39 ~ Centre for Highway Draw Bridge.
No. 40 ~ 60-in. Rotary Planer working on a Track.
Girder for 210 feet Scherzer Lift Span.


THE AMERICAN BRIDGE CO.’S WORKS. NEAR ECONOMY.
PITTSBURG.
These works are now fabricating the arch bridge to span the East River
at Hell Gate, New York. This bridge will be the longest arch bridge yet
constructed —1,000 feet span, and 18,000 tons dead weight.
As shown by Plate No. 41, these works are situated oh the Pittsburg,
Fort Wayne and Chicago Railway at Economy Station, near Pittsburg,
and front the Ohio River. The site of the works comprises about 150 acres,
whilst an upper plateau above the railway of some 125 acres is also owned
by the Company and used as a residential district for the officers and workmen.
The plant is one of the most extensive of its kind in existence, and has a
producing capacity of 15,000 to 20,000 tons per month of miscellaneous struc-
tural material.
Yard Tracks and Travelling Cranes.
The works have a system of parallel standard gauge tracks, which communi-
cate with all the shops and connect with the Pennsylvania Lines. A line of
3-feet gauge, operated electrically, also surrounds the works for the con-
venient transit of men, and material in small bulk. Near the centre is situated
the stockyard of the establishment, where all the mill material is received
and distributed for its passage through the shops. This stockyard is covered
by a system of travelling cranes extending from the railway towards the river
and at right angles to the direction in which the material moves. At the
delivering ends of the bridge shops similar cranes of greater capacity are located
for handling and loading the finished product, and at other points, as described
on the plan, are located similar parallel systems of travelling cranes for the
convenience of the contiguous shops. These cranes all have a uniform span
of 60 feet, and are interchangeable on their respective runways. Toward the
railway end they connect with a gantry which runs parallel with the railway,
by means of which cranes can be transferred from one point to another as
convenience requires, or a special heavy crane can be placed on any runway
to facilitate the handling of exceedingly heavy pieces.
Main Bridge Shop.
The main bridge shop is 270 feet wide by 776 feet in length, equipped with
tools and handling appliances of modern design. The whole area of the shop
is covered by a system of electric hoists operating transversely.
At the discharging end of the shop facilities are provided for handling and
machining structural members of over 100 tons in weight, or over 120 feet in
length.
Many of the tools in this shop are of special design, such as multiple punches
for simultaneously punching standard beam connections, and punches with
automatic tables or adjustable spacing racks. One machine has punched
50,000 holes in twenty-two hours (day shift ten hours, night shift twelve
hours). Multiple radial drills, carried on longitudinal moving gantries, serve
for the usual drilling and reaming.
Riveters of special design are carried on gantries or travelling wall brackets.
A special planing machine was designed for facing the ends of large chord
sections up to 13 ft. x 10 ft. The photograph (Plate No. 42) illustrates this
machine in operation on the chord sections of the Hell Gate Arch Bridge,
which has the largest chord section yet fabricated.


The photographs (Plates No. 43, No. 44, and No. 45) show the members of
this bridge being assembled. Two adjacent chord pieces, each weighing 165
tons when brought together, fitted perfectly.
Photograph (Plate No. 46) shows a rotary planer at work on one of the
members. The largest gusset plate in the Hell Gate Bridge is 17 ft. 6 in. long
x 10 ft. 6 in. wide xif in. thick. Rivets are i|- inch diameter, carbon steel,
8£ in. between heads when snapped; before snapping, bar is 12 inches long
with one head on.
Auxiliary Bridge Shop.
Paralleling the Main Bridge Shop, and between it and the river, is situated
the auxiliary bridge shop. This shop is fitted up for the fabrication of special
structural work, such as highway bridges, roofs and material generally of a
lighter or more complicated type than that handled in the main bridge shop.
Templet Shop.
Between these two structural shops is located a templet shop, 60 feet wide
and 500 feet long. This building is provided with facilities for handling and
finishing templet lumber and distributing it in the most convenient manner
throughout the shop.
Power-House.
In the up-river direction across the stockyard the power house is established
in a central location. At this point are located all the engines required for
the various purposes—direct connected electric generators, air compressors',
hydraulic pressure pumps, and the pumps for the general water supply for
the whole plant.
Eyebar Shop.
Above the power-house is situated the hydraulic forge for eyebars. It
contains two separate systems of hydraulic forging machinery, one set for
finishing bars up to and including 8-in. widths. The other set will handle
bars up to 16 in. in width x2J in., with heads 37J inches in diameter. This
latter system is the most powerful of its class in existence.
The main upsetting machine weighs 250 tons, almost entirely of steel, and
is capable of exerting an upsetting pressure on the eyebar of 1,500 tons, and a
simultaneous vertical holding-down pressure on the bar of 3,000 tons. For
making the heads the horizontal ram has a pressure of 600 tons, vertical ram
250 tons.
Method of Upsetting Eyebars.
At first heat, head of eyebar is formed roughly. At second heat, head is
finished; but if eyebars are large or of nickel steel a third heat is necessary to
finish. After leaving the upsetting machine it is taken to machine to shear
off excess metal, and to punch hole for eye. The eyebar is then taken to the
rolls to roll down the required thickness, and then to annealing furnace, where
it is heated to a temperature of 1,550 deg. to 1,600 deg. Fah. From the anneal-
ing furnace the eyebar goes to a muffle, where it cools, protected from
draughts.
After cooling, the eyebar goes to the straightening rolls, and then to the
boring mill. Eyebars can be made 65 feet centres of pins. This length is
governed by the annealing furnace.


Eyebars were being made for the Quebec Bridge. The heads were formed,
but the eyebars were shipped to Canada undrilled to save duty; the drilling
is done at Montreal.
The hydraulic shears are capable of cutting cold bars of 16 in. x 3 in. with
a shearing pressure of 1,000 tons, and the vertical punch capable of punching
16-in. diameter holes through 3-in. material, hot, and exerting a pressure
of 1,000 tons.
Suitable rolling and straightening machines are installed. Roller straighten-
ing is used, as far as possible, to reduce the liability of injury to the bars. The
annealing furnaces are designed for continuous production and are controlled so
as to treat the material at the desired temperature.
Bending and Forge Shop,
The bending and forge shop is situated next to the stockyard, and on
the line of the main bridge shop. This building contains the various forging
tools of the establishment, and also an equipment of tools for bending and
curving.
Immediately above the forge shop is located a building of similar design
and dimensions to that just described, which contains all the machinery for
producing the rivets, bolts and nuts of the establishment. It has a capacity
of about 1,000 tons of rivets and bolts per month. This building contains
the stock of manufactured bolts and rivets, which can be readily transferred
to any part of the plant by means of the narrow gauge service track. Still
further up the river (as shown by Plate No. 41) are located the machine shop,
pattern shop, iron foundry, and testing laboratory.
Iron and Steel Foundry.
The areas at the ends of these buildings, and also the shops contiguous to
it, are covered by electric travelling cranes.
The pattern shop, which is situated between the machine shop and foundry,
is equipped with the most modern and convenient appliances for this branch
of the business.
The iron foundry is a building of the same dimensions and general style as
the machine-shop. It contains the same arrangement of longitudinal travelling
cranes, and, in addition, it is equipped with a system of travelling radial cranes
for the convenience of individual operations. Natural gas is used throughout
the foundry for core baking and mould drying.
The steel foundry is a building of the same, dimensions as the iron foundry,
and is equipped with modern travelling cranes and convenient appliances.
Testing Laboratory.
The testing Laboratory, in addition to the minor machines for tensile tests
of steel specimens contains an equipment for testing cement, concrete, and
other building materials, and also a powerful machine for testing to destruction
the largest eyebars. This latter is the largest privately owned testing machine;
capacity 4,000,000 lb., say 2,000 tons.
At the time of my visit an eyebar was tested for the Quebec Bridge. Bar,
16 in. x 2 in. x 35 ft. centres of pins; stretched 6 feet in length and 20 per
cent, in a length of 18 feet; at fracture, stretched 34 per cent, in 12 inches.


Miscellaneous Structures.
As accessories to the plant, but somewhat remote from the area for manu-
facture, there are located buildings for general storage supplies and to keep
stores of lumber and patterns, erectors’ tools and material at a reasonably
safe distance from the manufacturing plants.
On the opposite side of the railroad from the works, about 20 feet above
the railroad level, is an extensive plateau on which the main office of the estab-
lishment is located and is connected with the works. This office is such as
to afford the most convenient facilities and ample provisions for the officials
of the manufacturing plant. The dimensions of the office can be indicated
from the fact that the drawing office alone is of sufficient area to accommodate
about 500 draftsmen.
THE ST. LAWRENCE BRIDGE CO.’S WORKS AT MONTREAL.
These works were established at a cost of some £200,000 to fabricate the
bridge across the St. I.awrence River at Quebec, a brief description of which
will be given to illustrate the magnitude of the work.
The bridge is 3,239 feet long between the faces of the abutments, and has
one 140-ft. approach span at the south end, and two spans aggregating 269
feet at the north end; the centre span is 1,800 feet centres of piers. The anchor
arms are 515 feet long, the cantilever arms 580 feet long, and the suspended
span 640 feet, measured from centre to centre of pins. The bridge is 88 feet
wide from centre to centre, and has a clear height above extreme high-water
of 150 feet. The bridge provides for two lines of railway and two footways.
There is no provision made for highway traffic. The bridge is designed for
5,000 lb. per lineal foot covering both entire lines, together with two E 60 engines,
the engines and train loads being placed to give the maximum condition of
loading. The wind load was assumed at 30 lb. per square foot of exposed
surface of the two trusses and one and a half times the elevation of the floor,
and 300 lb. per lineal foot as a moving load on the exposed surface of the train.
A wind load of 30 lb. per square foot parallel with the bridge was also assumed,
acting on one-half the area assumed for normal wind pressure.
The superstructure is constructed partly of carbon and partly of nickel
steel; the truss members of the suspended span and the greater portion of the
cantilever arms are of nickel steel, whilst almost all the anchor arms are of
carbon steel, except in a few members where it is necessary to use nickel steel
to keep the length of the rivets down to practical limits.
The type of truss is of a somewhat unusual design, being of the so-called
“K ” system. This type offers a number of advantages for a bridge of this
size, especially during erection. Its chief advantage in this respect is that
during the erection of the cantilever span it is possible to complete each panel
by itself, and move the traveller out to the end of the completed portion. This
would not be possible with the Warren or Single intersection type, without a
large number ol temporary supports for the members. In this type all redun-
dant members for supporting the main members are dispensed with, as every
member of the bridge carries live load with the exception of one small horizontal
member at the main post.
Carbon steel eyebars are used for the top chords of the cantilever and
anchor arms. Owing to the large number of bars required, it was found
necessary to arrange them in double rows for the entire length of the chord.


The heavy section at the main post requires thirty-two bars 16 in. x 2.3 /16 in.
with a total area of 1,120 square inches. On account of the length between the
main panel points it was found necessary to use two lengths of eyebars between
these points. In order to facilitate the work of erection, and also to keep the
eyebars properly aligned after erection, these bars are carried on a lattice sup-
porting truss between panel points, the trusses remaining permanently in the
structure. All the other tension members in the bridge are built up members. As
the eyebars which would be used for such members were so entirely out of pro-
portion to the very large compression members in their vicinity, the use of the
built up tension members was justified from an aesthetic point of view. In
the case of the very long diagonal members, where at least three lengths of
eyebars would be required, the built up tension members were eminently more
desirable, as they are able by means of their flange angles, to support their
own weight with a minimum of deflection. This would not be the case with
eyebars unless supported with auxiliary ties or other redundant members.
The chord members are very large, the largest being 7 ft. 2 in. deep and
10 ft. 4 in. wide. This member has a cross section of 1,902 square inches, and
the weight between the main panel points is approximately 400 tons.
In order to facilitate shipment and erection, however, this member is
spliced at the centre and each of these sections divided longitudinally. This
brings the weight of the piece to be handled down to approximately 100 tons.
The webs of these members are as a rule composed of four plates. The maxi-
mum thickness of plate used on the webs is 1 inch, and maximum thickness
of web 3| inches. The question of using thicker plate was considered, but
it was felt that, as a rule, better material could be obtained in the thinner
gauges, and as stitch riveting would have to be used in any case, little or no
benefit could be derived from the use of the larger plates. It was also possible
to get wider and longer plates in these sizes, and thus to reduce the number of
shop splices.
The splices of all the compression members are designed with xoo per cent,
of rivets. This was felt to be preferable in these very large members, taking
into consideration the possible uncertainty of getting a true planed surface
for the abutting ends. All the wind stresses are transferred to the piers through
the bottom lateral bracing, there being no lateral bracing at the top chord.
The wind stresses in the web members are carried down the compression
members to the bottom chord. There is a separate system of lateral bracing
for the floor which at each main panel point is transferred down through the
sway bracing to the bottom lateral system. The lateral reaction from the
wind at the end of the anchor arm is provided for by means of a steel wind
anchorage embedded in the pier, which allows a longitudinal and vertical
movement of the truss, but no lateral motion. Traction forces are carried to
the bottom laterals through specially designed traction trusses at panel points,
at which points there are expansion joints in the floor system. The expansion
of the cantilever arms and suspended span from temperature is taken up at
the two ends of the suspended span. This is effected by means of a specially
designed expansion brake. This brake is adjusted to stand a force of 250,000
lb. in either direction.
The size of the rivets varies from inch to | inch; they are carbon steel
throughout; | inch is allowed up to 3I inch grip, 1 inch from 3J inch to 5J inch
grip, ij inch for 5| inch grip and over. The greatest grip of rivets occurs at
the shoe where 9.5 /16 inch is required. When the grip of the rivet, however,
exceeds four diameters, the allowable unit stress of the rivet is reduced by 1 per


cent, for each 1/16 inch of additional grip. This does not apply to com-
pression members having butt joints. All rivets over 5 inches long have a
taper of 1 jyz inch in 12 inches. The size under the head is 1 /3a inch smaller
than the diameter of the hole.
No material less than J inch in thickness is allowed in main members.
Material f inch in thickness is allowed, however, in details such as lattice bars
and the plates of the lateral and sway bracing, provided the requirements of
the specification as to unsupported length, &c., are fulfilled.
Ihe shoe under the main posts has a bearing surface on the masonry of
22 ft. x 26 ft. 4 in. and is 19 feet high overall. It is constructed to be shipped
and erected in seven pieces, and weighs approximately 400 tons. The lower
section is composed of four steel castings 4 feet high, each of which weighs
approximately 40 tons. The next section is constructed of plates and shapes
and is erected in two pieces. This section takes the thrust from the cantilever
and anchor arm chords. The upper section is erected in one piece, and carries
the two diagonal compression members and the main post. In order to keep
down the thickness of the bearing plates in the chord adjoining the shoe, a
sleeve is used to distribute the bearing of the pin. This is used for the two
chords and the main post. These sleeves have an outside diameter of 45
inches, the pins being themselves 30 inches in diameter. In order to facilitate
erection, all pins through members with four webs are in two lengths, there
being a separate pin for each two-web section. The 30-in. pins at the shoe
and post weigh a little over 6 tons each.
Contrary to usual practice, the floor beams are not riveted to the vertical
posts of the bridge, but are connected by an 11-in. pin passing through the
post and web of the floor beam. This method of connection was adopted
partly to facilitate erection, but principally to do away with the bending in
the post that would be caused under full live and dead load if a rigid connection
were used. At each main panel point double floor beams are used, the webs
of which extend past each side of the compression vertical. At the inter-
mediate panel points, however, single web floor beams are used, and are con-
nected by means of hangers to the intei section of the diagonals. The floor
beams usually are 10 feet back to back of angles, and weigh complete from
50 to 60 tons. The main stringers are through plate-girders, framed with
sub-floor beams and eyebeam stringers. The top flange is stiffened laterally
with a heavy channel, gusset plates connect the sub-floor beams to the webs.
By this arrangement it was thought to give an added sense of security to those
using the bridge, as well as an actual factor of safety in case of derailment.
The main post over the piers is probably the largest single member of this
type ever built in a bridge. It is 310 feet long, centre to centre of pins, and
has an unsupported length of 155 feet. It is composed of four separate columns
latticed together, its outside dimensions being approximately 9 ft. xlO ft. Its
greatest cross section is 1,903 square inches, and each post weighs 1,500 tons.
For erection purposes it is required to be shipped in twenty-six sections.
The detail of the top of this post is the heaviest on the bridge, it being required
to distribute the stress of five very heavy members. In order to keep the
rivet grip within the specification it was necessary to use nickel steel. This
connection is to be shipped in two pieces, each of which weighs 65 tons.
As an entirely new plant was built and new machines constructed for this
work, the contractors were compelled to face the problem of initiating the
construction of a bridge whose members have no equal in bridge construction
at the present day, with an untried equipment and a brand new organisation.
The output of the works is about 2,000 tons per month.
43537—D


In order to adequately cope with the difficulties involved in the manu-
facture of this steel work, it was necessary to equip these shops with machinery
and handling facilities of, in many cases, unprecedented size, capacity, and
accuracy. The main shop is 660 feet long and 220 feet wide for 440 feet of its
length, and 190 feet wide for the remainder. It has two main longitudinal
aisles, one of them devoted to the heavy and the other to the extra heavy work,
which is classified and arranged so that different portions pass through con-
tinuously without interrupting other portions, so that any portion of the shop
can be operated to full or partial capacity without interfering with any other
portion. Plate No. 47 shows plan and sections of the shops.
Raw material is delivered at one end of the shop to a storage yard com-
manded by a long span travelling crane. It passes continuously through the
shops on two full-length longitudinal surface tracks supplemented by 70-ton
and 35-ton longitudinal overhead travelling cranes.
The sequence of the successive operations and intermediate storage pro-
vides for the progress of the work without interruption, congestion, or back
motion from one end of the shop to the other, where the finished members are
delivered to a large shipping yard, part of which is covered. This yard is
commanded by a long span overhead crane and served by six railroad tracks
and shop tracks intersecting the crane runway. Many of the roof trusses are
supported by longitudinal trusses that eliminate most of the interior columns
and provide large unobstructed areas of floor space. Most of the machine
tools are arranged in rows near-and parallel to the longitudinal rows of columns,
many of them being provided with roller tables. The wide spaces between them
and the surface tracks are largely filled with transverse skids for storing and
handling the members, and the machine tools, besides being served by the
principal tracks and cranes, have special travelling wall cranes or jib cranes
and numerous assembling hoists and trolleys moving on transverse tracks
supported by the roof trusses. All the principal tools are operated by inde-
pendent electric motors having an aggregate of about 1,000 h.-p.
Steel plates and shapes, imported largely from the United States, are delivered
by the railroad to the receiving yard, where they are handled and stored by a
90-feet crane travelling on a 500-feet runway, transverse to the axis of the shop,
which crosses five standard gauge and service tracks parallel to the shop axis.
Steel enters the shop on service tracks, is transferred to skids, handled by
pneumatic hoists, straightened, sheared, and laid out. All of the heavy
sheared plates have their edges planed in two machines, which have a capacity
for plates 46 feet in length. Photograph (Plate No. 48) shows this machine.
The planed edge of the plate is placed on the bed of the machine, where it is
securely clamped by direct pneumatic plungers alternating with plungers which
operate powerful toggle joints of intermediate double clamps. Except at
the planed edge, the plates are supported on the platforms of trucks moving
transversely.
The cutting tools are operated by a full length screw-drive and are double,
so as to cut on both advance and return strokes. Nearly all of the rivet holes
are either drilled from the solid or reamed for I in., 1 in., and in. rivets.
Preliminary holes to enable the plates to be assembled for drilling holes through
several thicknesses, and other drilling arc done by a battery of sixteen stationary
radial drills. They have a radius of 7 feet, and are served by overhead assem-
bling hoists moving transverse to the shop axis and handling web plates and
other materials on special wooden skids. Besides the stationary drills, there
are twenty-four movable drills mounted on trucks that are moved from place


to place, together with their portable tracks, by the overhead cranes, and arc
thus available for work on the stationary large members wherever the latte.i
may be located. These machines revolve on a vertical axis, have vertical
and radial adjustment, and are driven by variable speed motors. The machines
are moved on their tracks by a ratchet mechanism, and are clamped to the
rails when in use. Photograph (Plate No. 49) shows battery of these drills drill-
ing flanges pf bottom chords and reaming holes in stiffeners of floor beams.
After the compound webs, the built-up channels and beams and other
elements of the large compression members have been riveted together, they
are assembled to form the complete members or sections of them, and many
more rivet holes are drilled from the solid or reamed in them, and the rivets are
driven. Here the work is divided in two classes —pieces weighing 70 tons or
more and pieces weighing less than 70 tons. The rivets are driven largely by
pneumatic yoke machines, with capacities up to 100 tons, which are suspended
with differential hoists from overhead trolleys and from travelling jib cranes.
These machines have a reach wide enough to catch the centre rivets of all the
chords and girders and a gap sufficient to clear the widest flanges. Rivets which
are inaccessible to them are driven by pneumatic hammers. The lower chord
pieces are among the heaviest members handled in the shop, and they are lifted
and turned by pairs of very heavy vanadium cast steel hooks connected by
double slings made of multiple parts of steel wire rope, which are used entirely
in place of chain slings.
The 7J ft. x 10 ft. ends of the lower chord members, 42 feet long, are finished
in a duplex vertical and horizontal planing machine with one stationary head
and one head movable on a 25 ft. x 100 ft. bed, thus enabling it to be set in
different positions and permitting the simultaneous finishing of both ends of
all of a set of duplicate members to exactly the same length. They have
patent tool holders for cutting in four directions on both direct and return
strokes.
Large pin holes and oval holes for manholes are roughed out of the single
plates by a vertical boring mill. This machine has a vertical shaft which
carries a revolving cutter head with a transverse motion, which enables the
tool to describe an ellipse.
The large pin holes up to 45 inches diameter are finished in a horizontal
boring mill with a transverse motion of 23J feet and a vertical motion of 15J
feet, which enables it to finish the pin holes in the great pedestal without moving
the latter.
The riveted shoes for the main vertical posts on the river piers are seated
on their heavy sectional cast steel pedestals, which have their upper and lower
surfaces very accurately machined in a planer with a 10 ft. x 30 ft. bed, which is
installed in a temporary wooden shed in the fitting yard. The shed has a
sectional roof, any portion of which can be removed by the yard cranes to
permit the pedestals to be handled in and out of the machine.
Photograph (Plate No. 50) shows the large surface planing machine with por-
tion of main shoe being machined. Besides the special machines, there is an
equipment of standard bridge shop machine tools, including shears, drills,
punches, planers, milling machines, and other tools. A double rotary milling
machine has a capacity for finishing moderate size end bearings, and an 84-in.
plate shearing machine is installed for cutting the largest and heaviest plates.
Special milling machines are installed for fitting the ends of vertical w-^


stiffener angles, and horizontal boring machines are provided for the pin bearings
in the webs of the floor beams. The bottom chords, floor beams, and other
heavy members are riveted by pneumatic yoke riveters suspended from 6-ton
jib cranes, travelling in both aisles on runways 130 feet long, and having inclined
reaction wheels transmitting the bottom thrusts to T shape tracks in planes
about 45 degrees from the vertical. There arc two 48-in. and two 24-in. 100-ton
“ Murphy ” riveters and ten 50 to 100 ton “ Hanna ” riveters with 24 to 75 in.
throats.
Photograph (Plate No. 51) shows Assembly of Main Shoe on Cast Steel
Base.
~ „ No. 52 „ Machine Drilling Field Splice in Bottom
Chord.
No. 53 „ View of section of Compression Diagonal
Weighing 140 tons.
No. 54 „ View of Vertical Tension Member 74 ft.
long.
No. 55 „ End Section of Bottom Chord.
No. 56 „ Half Section of Vertical Tension Member
108 feet long.
Photographs (Plates No. 57 No. 58, and No. 59) show Traveller and
Assembling Cranes.
The finished floor beams, weighing as much as 135,000 lb. each have both
single and double webs 10 feet deep and 90 feet long. They are shipped from
the Bridge Shop, loaded on three flat cars, securely braced in a vertical plane
and supported only at end bearings, which are pivoted to the car platforms and
arranged to switch around curves.
THE SYDNEY HARBOUR BRIDGE.
In America and England the opinion was freely expressed that the Parlia-
mentary Standing Committee had made the proper selection in recommending
a one-span bridge across the Harbour, in preference to subways, also in recom-
mending the cantilever bridge with horizontal lower chord in preference to the
somewhat cheaper design, with the curved lower chord. The bridge recom-
mended was considered a handsome one.
Owing to the developments in electric operation and speed control devices,
it is now possible for trains to safely approach each other with a short interval
only between trains; this interval will be decreased in the future, and instead of
limiting the train length to 500 feet with comparatively long distances between
trains, a continuous length of train should be provided from end to end of the
main bridge. There is a tendency to use steel cars of increased capacity, and in
lieu of a continuous train weighing 1 ton per foot, the weight should be increased
to 3,000 lb. per foot.
With bifurcated tracks at platforms, a double track will have a train capacity
of eighty trains per hour to, and eighty trains per hour from, North Sydney. Such
a capacity should reasonably meet future demands. The tram service, which
was to occupy the other pair of tracks across the bridge until these tracks were


required for railway purposes, will without doubt occupy them permanently.
Public opinion would not allow the tram service to be removed, nor would it
be necessary, owing to the increased train capacity which can be obtained by
bifurcating at platforms.
These altered conditions of loading will not affect the estimated cost.
For the design and fabrication of the bridge two courses can be followed.
Either working drawings and specifications, complete in every detail can be
prepared, or plans and specifications prepared in outline only, fixing the
essential features of the bridge, and leaving the detailing to the firms tendering.
Whichever course is followed, alternative tenders should be called for local
manufacture and for importation.
Not more than nine—probably not more than six—firms in the world
would be prepared to tender for the fabrication of this structure,.
The disadvantages of calling tenders upon complete working drawings are
as follow:
i. It would be impossible to design the bridge to suit the shop piactice
of all firms likely to tender. For example, the main tension
members could be constructed of built up members or of eye-
bars. Built up members would be from 20 to 30 per cent,
heavier than the same members if constructed with eyebars
this excess weight will increase the weight of the various other
members throughout the structure. If eyebars are adopted ir
the working drawings the competition would be restricted, as lew
of the above firms have the requisite plant for making the laige-
size eyebars required, and naturally the purchaser would have
to pay their price, which may be and probably is, fixed by
arrangement between the firms possessing the necessary plant.
If the working drawings provide for built up tension members
as well as eyebars, two sets of calculations and almost two complete
sets of working drawings would be required.
2. To decide the kind of steel used, two complete sets of working draw-
ings, each with the variation above, would have to be prepared,
viz., a design wholly of carbon steel, and an alternative design
partly of alloy and partly of carbon steel; otherwise the competition
would be restricted, and the price increased.
3. To ensure competition, alternative designs with variations would
have to be prepared; if these designs were completed within three
years a very large staff of designers, draughtsmen, and tracers
would be required, for whom there would be no further work on the
completion of the plans. Apart from the difficulty of collecting
a suitable staff in Sydney the cost of the several designs would
be very great. Complete working drawings and specifications
would cost at least £70,000 for one design only, and while each of
the alternative designs would cost less than this, there would be
an additional expenditure of quite £50,000 for plans, &c., to ensure
competition.
It might be mentioned that the official design for the Quebec Bridge took
two and a half years to prepare, and did not comprise complete working
drawings; it is stated to have cost £lOO,OOO.


By submitting plans and specifications for tenders, fixing the essential
features only, the maximum amount of competition and experience would be
obtained at a minimum of cost; one set of working drawings would be neces-
sary. This latitude will enable tenderers to design the details to suit their
shop equipment and facilities, and to chose the kind of steel which they could
most readily obtain.
Lump sum tenders would be obtained for bridges of equal capacity and
strength; the tendered weight would be given, the schedule rates for additions
or deductions, and the class of steel to be used. A tender could then be accepted
and it would be obligatory on the successful tenderer to prepare the working
drawings to the approval of the Department in accordance with his tender,
and the cost of alternative plans would be saved.
By calling alternative tenders for importation and for local manufacture
the scope of the tenders would be widened and the price reduced. From
inquiries made in America, England, and the Continent, there would now bo
no insuperable difficulties in transporting the large members if manufactured
oversea on account of the steady growth in the size and equipment of steamers.
Such a boat as the “ Nestor ” could load through the hatches, and accommodate
in her hold the longest and heaviest members required, whilst firms owning or
chartering steamers would reconstruct the hatches and decks so that these
large members could be shipped.
Because it would be agreeable to the people of New South Wales, and because
of the tariff, some firms would be willing to send to Sydney the machinery
which they have constructed for the special purpose of fabricating large bridges,
and erect temporary shops here.
All plates and sections would have to be imported, as there would be no
future demand for material of such dimensions. It would not pay the steel
works at Lithgow or Newcastle to erect plants to roll the material required
for the Sydney Harbour Bridge.
Unmanufactured angle, tee-bars, and plates are admitted duty free from
the United Kingdom, from elsewhere the duty is 5 per cent. The duty on
fabricated bridgework is 30 per cent, if manufactured in the United Kingdom,
and 35 per cent, if manufactured elsewhere.
The higher duty and cost of carriage on the manufactured bridgework
would probably amount to at least £6 10s. per ton more than the duty and
cost of carriage on the unmanufactured material. This difference in duty
and carriage would probably enable manufacturers to establish temporary
shops, pay the higher wages in New South Wales, and fabricate the bridge at
a less cost than by importation. Steel castings and large eyebars would
have to be imported, as the cost of the requisite plant would be prohibitive.
Conclusion.
To secure the cheapest and most efficient bridge the following course is
recommended :—" Alternative tenders to be called for local manufacture and
for importation on plans and specifications, fixing the essential features only,
and leaving the details of construction and the choice of steel to tenderers.
The successful tenderer to complete the working plans to the satisfaction of
the Public Works Department.”
54


55
THE EVOLUTION OF THE CITY RAILWAY.
The first proposal for a City Railway took place about the year 1857, after
Mr. John Whitton had been appointed Engineer-in-Chief. A survey was
made for an extension of the railway into the City via Castlereagh-street,
with branches to both sides of Circular Quay.
About the year 1862 plans and sections were prepared for a railway through
Hyde Park to the Circular Quay.
Between 1866 and 1878 several lines of survey were made, but definite
action was brought about by the decision to establish the Garden Palace
Exhibition. For the accommodation of visitors a tramway was constructed
from Redfem via Elizabeth-street as far as Hunter-street. This tramway
was at first worked by horse traction. Subsequently steam motors were
used.
On 21st October, 1884, a sum of £450,000 was passed on the Loan Estimates
for an extension of the railway from Redfem, through Hyde Park, to a principal
station between Park-street and St. James-road, with a branch thence along
Macquarie-street to Fort Macquarie. Working plans were being prepared
when a change of Ministry caused the abandonment of the project.
In response to public agitation for the extension of the railway into the
City and connection to North Sydney, the Government determined to refer
the question to a Royal Commission, which was appointed in March, 1890.
Royal Commission, 1890.
No less than seventeen private and nineteen official schemes were submitted,
advocating either extension along the western side of the city— i.e., the business
side, or along the eastern side through Hyde Park to save the costly resumptions
necessary with the western route. No proposal was made for a loop railway
around the city proper.
The Chief Railway Commissioner, Mr. E. M. G, Eddy, submitted a proposal
for a railway on the eastern side of the city, with a terminal station in Hyde
Park. It provided for future extension to North Sydney by tunnel from
Fort Macquarie to Milson’s Point, and for an extension to the Eastern Suburbs.
As, however, public opinion was against taking a large portion of Hyde Park
for railway purposes, the Chief Commissioner submitted the following alterna-
tive proposals,, viz., “ The construction of a large terminal station for long
distance traffic on the site of the Benevolent Asylum and Police Barracks,
and the continuation therefrom of four fines into the city as far as King-street,
from which point two lines were to be taken to a terminus at the Circular
Quay, and the remaining two fines were to be continued around to the Eastern
Suburbs.” Estimated cost, £835,000, exclusive of land resumption.
On 6th March, 1891, the Royal Commission recommended Mr. Eddy’s
alternative proposal for the City Railway, as shown by Plate No. 60.
Royal Commission, 1896.
No action was taken on the report of the Royal Commission of 1890-91
until in April, 1896, the Railway Commissioners brought the question under
the notice of the Premier as one calling for immediate settlement in the
interests of the safety and comfort of the travelling public, and a Royal
Commission was appointed to investigate and report. ,


Mr. Eddy submitted a proposal for six lines of railway to be extended from
Redfem Station, across Devonshire-street, through the Cemetery, Benevolent
Asylum Grounds and Police Barracks, to the south-west comer of Hyde Park,
where there was to be a large terminal station. Estimated cost, £600,000.
This proposal, known as “ The Park-street Scheme,” was abandoned in favour
of the St. James’-road scheme, also proposed by the Railway Commissioners,
one of the principal reasons being that the Park-street scheme did not go far
enough into the city.
The St. James’-road scheme provided for six lines of railway to be extended
from Redfem Station, across Devonshire-street, through the Cemetery, the
Benevolent Asylum Grounds, the Police Barracks, Belmore and Hyde Park
to St. James’-road, where there was to be a large terminal station. The esti-
mated cost of the St. James’-road scheme was £650,000.
The Royal Commission recommended the St. James’-road scheme, as
shown by the heavy line by Plate No. 61. The light lines show possible
extensions to Circular Quay, to the Eastern Suburbs, and to North Sydney by
bridge and subway, also a circular railway around the city.
Public Works Committee Inquiry, 189 7.
The question of extending the railway into the city was referred to the
Public Works Committee, the members of which had formed the Royal
Commission appointed in 1896.
The Public Works Committee also recommended the St. James’-road
scheme as shown by Plate No. 61, and in their report pointed out that an
extension to North Sydney could be made by tunnel under the harbour from
Fort Macquarie to Milson’s Point, joining the existing railway near Lavender
Bay, or by a bridge across the harbour from Dawes’ Point to McMahon’s Point,
joining the existing railway near Bay-road Station.
Report of Mr. F. Rennick, Engineer-in-Chief, Victorian Railways.
As the citizens of Sydney strongly objected to the alienation of any
portion of Hyde Park for railway purposes, in 1898 Mr. F. Rennick, Enginecr-
in-Chief, Victorian Railways, at the request of the Premier, reported on
the various proposals. He considered the St. James’-road scheme to be
the best, but recommended an alternative scheme, proposed by the Railway
Commissioners, which would not appropriate any portion of Hyde Park.
This scheme was briefly as follows :—“ Make Redfem the terminus for long-
distance trains, and extend the railway to the Government House Grounds,
near Circular Quay, for the city and suburban traffic, providing stations at
Liverpool-street, at the site of the Girls’ High School, and in the Government
House Grounds near Albert-street.”
Public Works Committee Inquiry, 1899-1900,
As the City Railway recommended by Mr. Rennick deviated from the
route recommended by the Public Works Committee in 1897, and as increased
accomodation at Redfem Station was imperative, the Public Works Committee
in 1899 were asked to report on the expediency of either erecting a new terminal
station on the north side of Devonshire-street, known as the Devonshire-
street scheme, or of extending the railway into the city to St. James’-road,
as recommended by the Public Works Committee in 1897.
On 7th June, 1900, the Public Works Committee passed a resolution
recommending the erection of a Central Railway Station, and Administrative
Offices on the north side of Devonshire-street, as shown by Plate No. 62.


Sydney Harbour Bridge Advisory Board, 1901-3,
In 1901 an Advisory Board —the Chairman of which was Mr. J. Davis,
M.lnst.C.E., now Director-General of Public Works—was appointed to call
for competitive designs and tenders for the Sydney Harbour Bridge. The
Board followed the route recommended by the Royal Commission in 1896 for
bridge communication from Dawes’ Point to McMahon’s Point. The Advisory
Board in 1903 recommended a design and tender, but as their report was pre-
sented at a time of financial depression no action was taken to accept the
design and tender recommended.
Construction of Central Station, 1900-1906.
The Bill authorising the construction of Central Station was assented to
on nth December, 1900. The work was commenced on the 29th February,
1901. The existing Central Station was completed, taken over by the Railway
Commissioners, and opened for traffic in August, 1906. The building was
not constructed to the original design owing to.lack of funds. The completion
of the Central Railway Station did not afford any relief to the railway traffic,
as most passengers wished to proceed into the city, whilst the electric tram
services in George-street, Pitt-street, Castlereagh-street, EHzabeth-street, and
various cross streets, overcrowded the city thoroughfares. As a consequence
two Royal Commissions were appointed in 1908, to report on “ Communication
between Sydney and North Sydney,” and on the “ Improvement of the City of
Sydney and its Suburbs.”
Royal Commission on “Communication between Sydney and North Sydney,"
1908-9.
This Commission was appointed to inquire into the expediency of providing
increased and improved facilities of communication between Sydney and the
suburbs on the northern side of Sydney Harbour, and, inter alia, reported on
29th March, 1909: —
“ The best practical and most economical method of establisliing direct
communication, which will avoid obstruction to harbour navigation, is by
subways, with a depth of 40 feet of water above the subways at low water.
The following railway, tramway, and vehicular subways were recom-
mended :
“ Railway subway from Lavender Bay, via Kirribilli Point (Beulah-
street) and Fort Macquarie to Moore-street.
“ Tramway subway from Arthur-street, North Sydney, via Milson’s
Point and Dawes’ Point, to loop at Barton-street, Circular Quay.
“ Vehicular subway from Arthur-street, North Sydney, vid Milson’s
Point and Dawes Point, to connect with Hickson-road near
Pottinger-street.”
Royal Commission on “ Improvement of the City of Sydney and its Suburbs,"
1908-9.
On 14th May, 1908, a Royal Commission was appointed to inquire into the
“ Improvement of the City of Sydney and its Suburbs,”
Eight proposals for a City Railway were submitted to this Royal Commission,
The scheme recommended was submitted by the Chief Railway Commissioner,
Mr. T. R. Johnson. It provided for a three-track loop railway around the


city, and in conjunction therewith railways to the eastern, western, and northern
suburbs, with subway connection to the northern and western suburbs,
providing for a depth of 40 feet of water at low water.
The City Railway was to branch off the existing railway system near the
Redfern tunnel, to pass underneath the Central Station, and thence proceed down
the western side of the City by way of York-street to Circular Quay, returning by
way of Macquarie-street and Hyde Park to the Central Station. The railway
to be constructed in shallow subways in order to avoid the use of lifts. Six
underground stations were located as follow:—At Central Station, under
and at right angles to the existing station, at the back of the Town Hall; at
Wynyard Square; in Circular Quay, under the Wharves; at St. James’-road;
and at Liverpool-street; the last two stations to be under Hyde Park, as shown
by Plate No. 63.
Public Works Committee Inquiry on the Sydney Harbour Bridge, 1911.
In 1911 the question of connecting Sydney with North Sydney was referred
to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works. The evidence
disclosed that on account of the rapid growth in the length and draught of
modern steamships, a depth of water of 40 feet over the subways would prove
inadequate, and that a bridge with a pier or piers in the fairway would be an
obstruction to navigation. The largest steamship afloat but not yet in com-
mission is the “ Fiirst Bismarck,” length 912 feet, beam 100 feet, loaded
draught about 36 feet, gross tonnage 55,000.
A nickel steel cantilever bridge, 1,600 feet centre span, providing for four
lines of railway, a main roadway 35 feet wide, a motor roadway 18 feet wide,
and a footway 15 feet wide spanning the Harbour from Dawes’ Point to Milson’s
Point without any piers in the fairway was cheaper than, and in every way
preferable to subways, and was recommended by the Public Works Committee.
This bridge was proposed by the writer, as was also a loop on the City Railway
between Town Hall and Liverpool-street Stations, as shown by Plate No. 64.
This loop made it possible for passengers to proceed from North Sydney around
the eastern side of the City and to the Eastern Suburbs and vice versd without
changing trains.
Mr. David Hay's Scheme.
In 1912 the Government appointed an expert in London, Mr. David Hay,
M. Inst. C.E., of the firm of Mott and Hay, to visit Sydney and report on the
whole question of passenger transit in the City of Sydney and Suburbs.
Mr. Hay recommended a double-track loop railway, commencing at Central
Station at the existing rail level, above ground as far as Goulburn-street,
from which point around the City the railway would be entirely underground.
The railway to run diagonally across the blocks bounded by Castlereagh-street,
Bathurst-street, George-street, and Goulburn-street, along George-street past
the Cathedral and the Town Hall into York-street, following this street to
Wynyard-square Park. At this point it would be divided, one branch running
over the Harbour Bridge to North Sydney, and the other going to Circular
Quay. The line would then be continued under the Government House
Grounds and the Botanical Gardens, returning by way of Pitt-street, &c., to
the Central Station. Stations to be constructed at the Central Station at
platform level, at Goulburn-street, Queen Victoria Markets, Wynyard-square,
Circular Quay, in Pitt-street near Martin-place, and at the intersection of
Pitt and Bathurst streets, as shown by Plate No. 65.


Mr. Hay also recommended railways to the Eastern and Western Suburbs.
These railways did not connect with the City Railway, or with each other, all
passengers from the Eastern or Western Suburbs wishing to proceed around
the City, or to any Suburban Station would have to change trains at the
station under the Queen Victoria Markets.
The Eastern and Western Suburbs Railways, where underground, were
smaller in section than the City Railway, and as there could be no exchange of
rolling stock, a large quantity would be required for holiday traffic, which
would be idle for a great portion of the year, and there would also be a large
increase in cost on account of men’s idle time Further, the proposal would
necessitate the removal of part of the existing Central Station building, would
interfere with the shunting arrangements and reduce the capacity of Central
Station yard for the storage of trains. These were grave objections, and on
the advice of the Railway and Public Works Departments, Mr. Hay’s Scheme
was not adopted.
Chief Railway Commissioner’s Proposal, 1912.
On qth December, 1912, the Chief Commissioner, Mr. T. R. Johnson, for-
warded to the Minister a modification of his proposal approved by the Royal
Commission in 1909, introducing the latest recommendations, viz, Bridge
connection to North Sydney, the connecting loop between Town Hall and
Liverpool-street Stations, and a more direct connection to the Sports Grounds,
&c., as shown by Plate No. 66. The underground stations were all located
as previously submitted, and all crossings were grade crossings; fly over junctions
could not be obtained.
The City Railway Recommended, 1913.
The location shown by Plate No. 67, was proposed by the writer, Central
Station was placed parallel to the existing station, whilst the station at the
back of the Town Hall in Mr. Johnson’s proposal was placed in a more central
position under George-street in front of the Town Hall. By the new location
better grades were obtained, there would be no interference with the main
sewer, a saving of miles of single track construction, estimated at £200,000,
would be effected, and better traffic facilities would be provided than in the
Chief Commissioner’s modified scheme of 1912. On 31st January, 1913, the
Chief Commissioner concurred in this proposal. All stations were under-
ground stations.
The City Railway with Tramway Connections. —The electrification of the
Suburban Railways, including power and rolling stock, will cost over £4,000,000
sterling. On account of the great expenditure necessitated by the construc-
tion of the City Railway, the need for which is imperative, the Minister was
desirous of postponing the outlay on the electrification for a period of five
years, and directed that provision was to be made for the tramways from the
Eastern Suburbs to connect with the City Railway by an underground tram-
line from Moore Park to Liverpool-street Station, and for the tramways from
the Western Suburbs by underground connections from Victoria Park,
University, to Central Station, as shown by Plate No. 68.
A Bill providing for the carrying out of the work on these lines was passed
by the Legislative Assembly at the close of the Session of 1913, but was rejected
by the Legislative Council.


The City Railway as modified, December, 1914,
The City Railway to follow the location of 1913, but the lines from Redfern
Station to Goulburn-street and at Circular Quay to be above ground. Central
Station and Circular Quay Station to be open air stations, whilst the other
four stations —at the Town Hall, Wynyard-square, St. James’-road and
Liverpool-street respectively—will be underground, as shown by Plate No. 69.
The reasons for raising the level of the railway at Central Station and the
Quay are as follow :
When Central Station was constructed in 1901-6, an area of land on the
eastern side was set apart by the Public Works Department to enable the
railway to be extended into the City at some future date. This location of
the offtake of the City Railway at platform level was in accordance with the
scheme submitted by Mr. Eddy, and as recommended by the various Royal
Commissions, and Public Works Committee prior to the Royal Commission of
1908. Mr. John Sulman, Architect, made a proposal to that Royal Com-
mission for the City Railway to branch off from the existing railway system
at Redfern, and run underground around the City—the new station at the
present terminus to be underground. This proposal was adopted by the then
Chief Commissioner, Mr. T. R. Johnson, and embodied in his scheme.
With regard to the station at Circular Quay, Mr. Fraser, Engineer-in-Chief
for Existing Lines, stated in evidence before the Royal Commission on City
Improvement in 1909, that one of the reasons for placing this station under-
ground was to allow for the levelling down of the Rocks Area at some future
time, if it were thought desirable, but if the level of the Rocks Area was not
tc be interfered with he would prefer an overhead station at Circular Quay.
The Royal Commission favoured a high-level station at the Quay, but
apparently recommended the low-level station on account of the possibility
of levelling off the Rocks Area.
A Housing Act was passed in 1912. The Rocks Area has been placed under
the control of a Housing Board, consisting of Messrs. J. D. Fitzgerald
(Chairman), J. W. Holliman, and T. H. Nesbitt. Some of the land has been
let by the Board on building leases of fifty years duration, and action in the
matter of levelling off the area is not contemplated. If it were decided at
some future date to carry out this work, a high level station at Circular Quay
need not interfere with the project in any way.
The advantages of the high-level location are as follow:
Cost of Construction. —The cost of construction will be at least £1,000,000
less than the low-level proposal.
Land Resumption and underpinning Buildings. —With the high-level location
there will be more interference with property above ground, but less inter-
ference below ground than with the low-level scheme. In the latter scheme
many buildings between Central Station and Goulburn Street would have to
be underpinned and in some cases the basements would be required.
Some of the land required for the high-level proposal can be resold at a
profit, and all things considered there will be little difference, if any, between
the cost of resumption of the two proposals.
Efficiency. —The capacity of the City Railway, apart from the length of station
stops, depends ultimately on the grades. With both the high and low level


proposals there would be short lengths at the ruling grade of i in 40; with
the low level proposal, however, there would be long steep grades from
Redfern Station and Liverpool-street to and from underground Central
Station, and from Wynyard Square and St. James’-road Station to and from
underground Circular Quay Station.
These long steep grades necessitate: —
(a) A long braking distance between trains on down grades,
(6) Greater power consumption on up grades.
When the traffic is so dense as to call for block sections of the shortest
length consistent with safety, braking distance becomes the limiting factor,
and this distance determines the length of block. On account of extra braking
distance required on the long steep grades of the low-level location, the trains
on the high-level location can be bunched closer together, thus enabling more
trains per hour to pass over the tracks.
On account of the easier grades of the high-level proposal there would be
a saving in power and in current for working.
Assuming the City Railway is working to a capacity of 1,000 trains daily
from Redfern around the City and back, the estimated saving in power
measured in kilowatt-hours at the train motors is 18,444 P er day, which at
o-yd. per kilowatt-hour (Mr. Brain’s estimate) represents a daily saving of
£54 or an annual saving (assuming 339 days) of £18,306. At 4 per cent,
interest this represents a capital value of £457,650.
Interference with Traffic. —During construction there would be less inter-
ference with the tramway, vehicular, and pedestrian traffic between Red-
fern Station and Goulburn-street, and at Circular Quay, with the high-level
than with the low-level scheme.
There will be some 750,000 cubic yards less excavation with the high-level
proposal, the great saving in haulage of the excavated material through the
streets will not only reduce the first cost, but there must be considerably less
interference with all classes of street traffic, and less difficulty in providing
suitable tips for the spoil.
At Central Station it would be an expensive and difficult matter to construct
a large underground station and keep the existing railway service in full
operation above. The site of the low level station at Circular Quay is in
reclamation; the tide ebbs and flows under the Quay, the station would be an
expensive and difficult one to construct, and when constructed it would be
always more or less damp. During construction there would of necessity be
serious interruption to all classes of traffic, as an excavation 520 feet long,
115 feet wide, and 25 feet deep, would have to be made in Circular Quay in
which to place the underground station.
Interference with Sewers, Water Mains, &c. —The low-level scheme will interfere
to a much greater extent with sewers, water mains, &c., than the high-level
scheme. In the vicinity of Hay and Campbell streets large stormwater sewers
convey stormwater to Darling Harbour, whilst the main Bondi sewer and its
numerous auxiliary sewers are met with. At Circular Quay the Tank stream
would have to be diverted if the low-level scheme were carried out. In many
cases the sewers would have to be supported during the construction of the
line. The high-level proposal does not interfere with the sewers, water pipes,


and other underground conduits at the two low-lying portions of the City, where
interference should be avoided if possible.
Ventilation and Drainage. —With the high-level scheme there would be no
problems of ventilation and drainage from Redfern Station to Goulburn-
street and at Circular Quay. With the low-level scheme, artificial ventilation
would have to be provided for. As the railway would be below ground water
level, and below the stormwater sewers for a considerable distance at Hay-
street, Campbell-street, and Circular Quay, the seepage and rain which would
find its way into the subway would have to be pumped out.
Beautification of the City. —At Central Station, Belmore Park could be
beautified somewhat in accordance with the recommendation of the Royal
Commission on City Improvement. A high-level station at Circular Quay could
be made quite a feature in the adornment of the City, as the ferry buildings
and wharves could be combined with the proposed railway station building,
somewhat as outlined by the late Mr. Norman Selfc to the Royal Commission
in 1909.
It is perhaps necessary in this connection to disabuse the aesthetic mind
of the public that believes this sytsem would mean the uglification of any
portion of the City, as the only above-ground track apart from Belmore Park
would be the short portion beyond its Northern boundary and the approaches
to the overhead station at Circular Quay, all of which are capable of such
artistic treatment as would have a directly opposite effect. In illustration
of this, reference is directed to the accompanying sketches (Plates No. 70 and
No. 71), showing a proposed mode of treating these features.
Fly-over Junctions. —With the high-level location the only grade crossings
would be between Central Station and Wells-street; with the low-level location,
in addition to these there would be three level crossings at Liverpool street.
These would be a source of danger and would decrease the capacity of the
railway for traffic, for should a train be late on one of the lines the trains
on the other tracks would be delayed.
The high-level location is by far the better for rapid handling of trains
and for safety —it is an almost perfect scheme. Collisions by trains moving
in opposite directions would be impossible, and with electric signalling and
automatic train stops, it would be also impossible for a train to collide with
a train ahead.
From the engineering aspect every factor is greatly in favour of a high-
level location.
City Railway recommended, 1915.
The City Railway recommended for adoption is a two-track loop railway
bifurcated at platforms. The location and levels follow the high-level three-
track loop railway agreed to by the Chief Railway Commissioner in December,
19x4. ( See Plate, No. 72.)
Train Capacity. —The capacity of a rapid transit railway is measured by the
number of trains that can traverse a single track during the evening rush hour.
The number of trains depends primarily on the length of station stop, as the
engineer should provide adequate power and instal modern signalling and
equipment. If the effect of the length of the station stop can be eliminated


the capacity of a single track is at once increased. This can be done by
bifurcating the tracks at the station and providing for alternate trains to stop
at opposite sides of an island platform. The effect of the station stop is
thus eliminated, and the capacity of the line is governed only by the
minimum possible headway between trains on a single track.
Wynyard Square Station—where it is estimated the station stop will be
40 seconds —will deal with by far the greater volume of traffic on the City
Railway, and, as has been found on the District Railway, London, and on the
Interborough Rapid Transit Railway, New York, the duration of train stop
at the busiest station only will influence the train capacity of the City Railway,
although the station stop at the other stations may not be longer than 15
to 25 seconds.
In preparing the distance-time curves to determine the capacity, the length
of station stops has been taken at 40 seconds.
Based on the experience of the working of the underground railways in
London, New York and other cities, the average acceleration has been taken
at ij miles per hour per second, maximum speed 35 miles per hour, and the
average deceleration at if miles per hour per second. The effect of grades
on acceleration, deceleration, and maximum speed has been taken into
account.
Operating under the above conditions the capacity of a single track not
bifurcated at platforms and a station stop of 40 seconds is, with automatic
speed control, forty trains per hour, or with visual signalling, thirty-four trains
per hour. With tracks bifurcated at platforms, some eighty trains per hour
with automatic speed control, or sixty-eight with visual signalling, can be
operated on a single track.
The distance-time curves for a schedule of eighty trains per hour traversing
a single track bifurcated at platforms are shown by plans (Plates No. 73a, No.
73b, and No. 73c), and by taking alternate curves a schedule of forty trains per
hour is shown for a track not bifurcated at platforms.
The curves are drawn for the complete city railway from the turnout at
Redfern back to the same point.
The shortest necessary running distance between trains fixes the capacity
of the line, and it is found that this distance is the same if eighty trains per
hour with tracks bifurcated at platforms or forty trains per hour without tracks
bifurcated at platforms, traverse a single line. This minimum distance is about
800 feet, and must be maintained for an appreciable interval of time after one
train has completed accelerating and just before the other train commences
braking. The schedule requires that both trains shall maintain almost full speed
during this time interval, which would be impossible without automatic speed
control, brought about by combinations of contact ramps. Cab signals and
automatic speed-controlled train stops would also have to be provided.
Paradoxical though it may seem, with bifurcated tracks at platforms and
running conditions as previously set out, a second train cannot approach the
first train as closely as the third train can approach the first, because the first
train has passed to a different track when the second is attaining its minimum
distance. The minimum distance between a first and second train is 1,175
feet whilst the minimum distance between a first and third train is 800 feet.
Examination shows that the conditions that limit the capacity of single
tracks are still operative with the bifurcated tracks and that the bifurcation
has not introduced any new element that would tend to reduce the capacity.


It is therefore evident that the two-track loop bifurcated at stations
would provide 33J per cent, greater train capacity than the three-track loop,
not bifurcated at stations. Owing to the impossibility of providing complete
fly-overs with a three-track loop, this difference in efficiency would in reality
amount to 50 per cent.
The two-track loop railway recommended has a maximum capacity of 160
trains per hour into, and 160 trains per hour out of, the city, with automatic
speed control, or 136 trains per hour in each direction with visual signalling.
If the time of station stop at Wynyard Square Station can be reduced
below 40 seconds, the capacity would be increased, but it is inevitable that
Wynyard Square Station must deal with a continuously increasing volume
of traffic, and the length of station stop will tend to increase rather than to
decrease.
Effect of City Railway on Central Station.
There yet remains to be considered, " To what extent will the construction
of the City Railway recommended and the electrification of the suburban rail-
ways affect Centra] Station as to —
“ Its train capacity.
“ The storage of trains.
" Future development.”
Train Capacity. —There are nineteen platforms from which the whole of
the suburban and country passenger traffic is conducted. According to the
Time-table dated Bth November, 1914, this traffic necessitates 375 trains
daily, Mondays to Fridays, departing from Central Station, and 377 arriving.
Of the departing trains, sixty-three are trains of empty cars, thirty-six are
country trains proceeding beyond Waterfall, Campbelltown, Penrith, and the
Hawkesbury River, whilst the balance, 276, serve the Sydney suburban area
within a radius of about 34 miles from Sydney.
The maximum hourly number of trains departing from Central Station is
fifty-six between the hours 5 and 6 p.m., conveying 24,600 persons, whilst forty
trains arrive during the same period, i.e., the present maximum hourly train
capacity inwards and outwards of Central Station is ninety-six trains.
With the City Railway in operation and the Suburban Railways electrified,
the whole of the 276 suburban trains above could and would be accommodated
at the proposed City Railway Station on the eastern side of Central Station,
leaving fifteen platforms free to accommodate the country traffic —at present
thirty-six trains daily.
These fifteen platforms could handle forty trains hourly in wards or outwards
or eighty in all, whilst each of the four tracks of the City Railway could
accommodate eighty suburban trains hourly, i.e.. Central Station could
accommodate 400 trains hourly in all.
Storage of Trains. —The produce and goods accommodation on the eastern
side of Central Station yard are to be removed to Alexandria siding; the
City Railway will require some of the land vacated, and the balance can be
used for the storage of trains. When remodelled, about 520 carriages can be
stabled, as against 466 carriages, the present maximum number accommodated
at Central Station yard.
64


Central Station
i
Town Hall
2
Wynyard Square...
4i
Circular Quay
St. James’
i
i|
Liverpool-street
I
Total
xo
Future Development. —The City Railway and the Suburban Electrification will
increase the capacity of the existing Central Station, but at some future date
it will again become inadequate to deal with the traffic, and the question arises :
Where can the new terminal station be ?
The location proposed in 1896 by the then Chief Commissioner, Mr. E. M. G.
Eddy, in Hyde Park, is an ideal location, and sooner or later, in my opinion,
a terminal station will be constructed there. Electric traction has now made
it feasible to operate a station entirely underground; there would be no inter-
ference with Hyde Park, except for entrances and exits, and there could be
no objections on account of smoke, grit, and noise, as would have obtained
with a steam service.
With this in view the City Railway has been so located that at some future
date an underground terminal station can be constructed under Hyde Park at
St. James’, above the station proposed for City Railway. The upper station
to accommodate long distance traffic and the lower station the suburban
traffic, as at Grand Central Station, New York. The traffic north of Hornsby
could proceed viA the Sydney Harbour Bridge, and relieve the congestion
on the railway to Strathfield.
As Sydney expands it may be found necessary to have a term’nal station
on the northern side of the Harbour for the railway traffic to and from the
north and north-west portions of the State, and with the City Railway and the
railways to the northern, eastern and western suburbs in operation, a terminal
station in North Sydney would be convenient for all suburbs.
The City Railway recommended would increase the train capacity of Central
Station four-fold; it would slightly increase its capacity for the storage of trains,
and is adapted for future extension, or for forming an integral part of any
greater scheme that may be developed owing to expansion of the City.
Future Addition to the City Railway.
Plate No. 72 shows two tracks, coloured green, to the westward of the
four tracks of the City Railway outlined above, enabling a further forty trains
per hour to be run in each direction between Central Station and Wynyard
Square, connecting directly with the northern suburbs and Balmain fines at
the latter station. These tracks could be extended around the City at a later
date, forming an additional two-track loop.
Besides enabling the North Shore Bridge tracks to operate at their full
capacity without making a terminal station at Wynyard Square, these two
tracks would deal with large amounts of traffic between Wynyard Square and
suburbs reached vid Central Station.
Assuming the volume of traffic carried into the City from all suburbs when
the Metropolitan railways existing and proposed are in full operation, is repre-
sented by 10, it will be distributed at the stations on the City Railway approxi-
mately as follows :
43537—E


The two stations on the western side of the city will have to deal with about
60 per cent, of the total City Railway traffic, hence this portion of the railway
will be the first to reach its maximum capacity. The provision of the two
additional tracks will provide for some 80 trains per hour away from the
City, 40 to North Sydney and Balmain, and 40 through Central Station.
The capacity of the eight existing tracks leading to and from Central Station
woidd not reach 40 trains per hour per track. These eight tracks must
accommodate all long distance steam traffic besides the City Railway traffic,
until in the near future, two additional tracks are provided for use of steam
traffic only.
The capacity of the City Railway recommended will be somewhat in excess
of the eight tracks to be used for the electric suburban service, but future deve-
lopments in working with automatic speed control will without doubt increase
the capacities of these tracks to approximate with the capacity of the City
Railway.
In conclusion, exclusive of land resumption, the two track City Railway
recommended can provide for 160 trains per hour in either direction at a cost
of £3,000,000, whereas the three track City Railway recommended by the
Royal Commission on City Improvement, 1909, provided for 107 trains per
hour in either direction at a cost of £4,300,000. The proposal recommended,
therefore, has a total increased train capacity of 50 per cent., whilst the cost
per train per hour is £18,750 against £41,120 —a reduction of 54 per cent.
THE ELECTRIFICATION PROBLEM IN NEW SOUTH
WALES.
The railway traffic to and from the City of Sydney may be classified under
the following heads
The Inner Zone Suburban Passenger Traffic.
This traffic may be taken as terminating at Parramatta, 14 miles from
Central Station; at Hornsby, 21 miles; at Bankstown, 11 miles; and at
Sutherland, 15 miles from Central Station. It also includes the traffic on the
Milson’s Point to Hornsby Railway —some 13 miles long.
The Outer Zone Suburban Passenger Traffic.
This traffic extends beyond the limits stated above, to Penrith, 34 miles
distant from Sydney; Campbelltown, 34 miles; the Hawkcsbury River, 36
miles; Carlingford, on the Clyde to Carlingford Branch, 17 miles; Regent’s
Park on the Lidcombe to Regent Park Branch, 12 miles, and to Waterfall, 24
miles. It may also be taken to include the railway, Blacktown to Richmond.
When the railway shall have been electrified to Waterfall the traffic to
National Park should be served with electric trains, and the present steam
tram service from Sutherland to Cronulla should be replaced by an electric
railway service obviating any change at Sutherland.
The.lnner Zone Long Distance Passenger Traffic.
This traffic extends as far as Nowra, 92 miles; Goulburn, 136 miles; Camden,
42 miles; Bathurst, 145 miles, and West Maitland 119 miles, from Sydney.


The Outer Zone Long Distance Passenger Traffic.
This traffic extends to Albury and Tocumwal on the Victorian border to
the various inland termini, as Hay, Wyalong, Condobolin, Cobar, Bourke,
Morce, Invercll, &c., to Wallangarra on the Queensland border, and eventually
to Murwillumbah when the North Coast Railway is completed.
The Goods Traffic.
This traffic is to be taken by goods railways now under construction to the
waters of Port Jackson. When these railways shall have been completed the
goods traffic will be almost entirely dissociated from the inner zone suburban
passenger traffic.
Number of Passenger Trains.
Based on the time-table inaugurated on Bth November, 1914, on week
days there depart daily from Central Station 312 trains to cope with the
passenger traffic of all zones. Of these 20 terminate in the outer long distance
zone, 16 in the inner long distance zone, 26 in the outer suburban zone, and
240 within the inner suburban zone. The maximum hourly number of trains
is 56 departing during the hour 5 to 6 p.m., 47 of which terminate within the
inner suburban zone, 4 within the outer suburban zone, and 5 proceed beyond
the suburban zone.
On week days 314 passenger trains arrive at Central Station; 17 commence
in the outer long distance zone, 19 in the inner long distance zone, 25 in the
outer suburban zone, and 253 in the inner suburban zone. The maximum
hourly number is 41 trains arriving during the hour 7 to 8 a.m., 33 of which
commence within the inner suburban zone, and 8 within the outer suburban
zone. /
On Saturdays 313 trains depart from Central Station; the maximum
hourly number of trains is 40, between 12 noon and 1 p.m.; 33 of these ter-
minate within the inner suburban zone, and 3 within the outer suburban zone.
The number of passenger trains arriving at Central Station on Saturdays is
323, with a maximum service during the hour 7 to 8 a.m. of 40, 33 of which
commence within the inner suburban zone, and 7 within the outer suburban
zone.
In addition to the passenger trains, some 63 empty trains arrive at and 63
depart from Central Station daily.
These figures show that the maximum number of trains dealt with at
Central Station is during the hour 5 to 6 p.m. on week days, and that the
traffic is already considerable in the inner suburban zone.
In addition to the above trains serving the inner suburban zone, 49 up
and 50 down per day serve the suburbs between Milson’s Point and Hornsby
on week days, and 50 down and 52 up on Saturdays. In addition, some 8
empty trains arrive at and depart from Milson’s Point Station. On week days
the greatest number of trains per hour arriving at Milson’s Point is 7, between
8 a.m. and 9 a.m., and the greatest number of trains departing from Milson’s
Point is 6, during the hours 5 p.m. to 6 p.m. On Saturdays the greatest
number of trains which arrive at Milson’s Point is 7, during the hour 8 a.m. to
9 a.m., and the greatest number of trains departing from Milson’s Point is 6,
between 12 noon and 1 p.m.
Suburban Electrification—lnner Zone.
As it will be impossible to run steam trains on the Underground City Rail-
way, the inner zone suburban railways as shown in blue by Plate No, 74,
must be electrified and worked in conjunction with the City Railway with


multiple unit electric trains, but for some time the outer zone suburban railways
and the long distance passenger traffic will be worked to and from Central
Station by steam trains as at present.
The inner zone suburban railways proposed for immediate electrification.
are as follow :
No. ol Foote Track
I ricks. Mile'. Miles.
ml. ch.
I 8
ml. ch.
8 64
Sydney to Illawarra Junction
Illawarra Junction to Strathfield
Illawarra junction to Sydenham
Strathfield to Parramatta ...
24 8
14 22
Strathfield to Hornsby
Sydenham to Bankstown
Sydenham to Sutherland
Milson’s Point to Hornsby
13 6o
27 4°
16 52
24 6
12 3
13 2 4
26 4 8
63 57
150 12
26 10
Cross-overs, &c.
63 57
176 22
23 58
New cross-overs, sidings and tracks in car barns.
Total inner zone.
63 57
200 o
Suburban Electrification. Outer Zone.
When the outer zone suburban traffic becomes dense enough to warrant it,
the radius of electrification will gradually be extended until it embraces the
whole of the outer zone suburban area, and the suburban traffic within the
electrified suburban area will be worked by multiple unit trains, and the long
distance traffic by electric locomotives, replaced at the various termini of the
electrified zone by steam locomotives. The extent of the outer zone suburban
traffic is shown in yellow by Plate No. 74, and the railways and tramways to
be electrified are as follow ;
No. ol Route
Tracks. Miles.
Sutherland to Waterfall
Lidcombe to Regent’s Park ...
Granville to Campbelltown ...
Parramatta to Penrith
Clyde to Sandown Siding
Sandown Siding to Carlingford
Hornsby to Hawkcsbury River
Loftus to National Park
Sutherland to Cronulla
Blacktown to Richmond
ml. ch.
8 75
1 75
20 55
19 66
14 52
ml. ch.
17 70
1 75
4 1 3o
39 52
29 24
7 32
16 11
160 51
22 7
95 19
Cross-overs, &c.
182 58
17 22
95 19
New cross-overs, sidings and tracks in car bams.,
Total outer zone
200 o
68


Long Distance Electrification,
The time is relatively not far distant when the inner zone long distance
traffic will be handled electrically, and electric trains will run as far as West
Maitland, Nowra, Goulburn, and Bathurst. The time is yet too remote,
however, to consider the question of electrifying the outer zone long distance
traffic; steam traction has paramount advantages under existing conditions.
System and Voltage.
Two systems of electrification are suitable, viz., Direct Current and Single
Phase. Two classes of passenger traffic have to be considered, viz., in the
immediate future the suburban passenger traffic radiating about 34 miles from
Sydney, and at some future date the long distance passenger traffic extending
150 miles from Sydney, and with possible extension up to 500 miles from
Sydney.
It is essential that the system of electrification adopted must be capable
of extension over the whole of the railways; any change in system, should it
have to be made in the future on account of a wrong choice now, might be as
detrimental for quick and economical working as the various gauges in Australia
are at the present time, and it is desirable that any electric locomotive or motor
coach should be able to traverse any part of the Railways of New South
Wales and of the neighbouring States when the gauges shall have been unified
and the railways electrified.
The most important advance in electric railway working during recent
years has been the adoption of high voltages for direct current operation.
The advantage of high voltage is that the higher the voltage the fewer
sub-stations are required, also the less copper in the distributing system. For
equal power transmitted and equal power loss in transmission, the weight of
copper is inversely proportional to the square of the voltage, i.e., when the
voltage is doubled only one quarter of the weight of transmission line would
be required, and the cost of conductors reduced about 75 per cent., but the
cost of the other apparatus and appliances is somewhat increased.
When 1,200 volt direct-current systems were first operated the trolley
potential was obtained by using two 600-volt generators wired together in
series, the 600-volt railway motors were likewise wired permanently in series,
the generators and motors were insulated for 1,200 volts, and were furnished
with commutating poles; the next development was to wind and insulate
these machines for 1,200 volts, so that one could be used, instead of two in
series. The most recent development has been to wire two of these 1,200
volt generators or motors in series, and insulate them for 2,400 volts. The
Butte Anaconda Railway has been in operation at 2,400 volts since July, 1913,
and has proved a success.
The tendency in direct current railway development is towards voltages
higher than 2,400 at which potential there are several railways operating
in America, whilst in England there is a short length of experimental railway
from Bury to Holcombe Brook in successful operation with a line voltage of
from 3,500 to 4,000 volts.
Voltages of 3,000 are practicable at the present time, and experiments
indicate that voltages of 5,000 and 6,000 with direct current operation are
practically assured. Such high voltages would be of great advantage for the
electrification of the inner and outer zone long distance railways.
It is quite practicable at the present time to wind motors or generators for
1,500 volts, wire two in series and insulate them for 3,000 volts, and operate
them on a 3,000 volt direct current system.


By adopting the direct current system for the suburban service at 1,500
volts, the inner zone long distance railway could be electrified at 3,000 volts,
the inner zone long distance rolling stock could operate over the suburban
railways at full speed at the lower voltage.
Power for the suburban railways could be generated at the White Bay
Power House at 11,000 volts, 25 cycles, alternating current, and transmitted
at that voltage in underground conduits to suitably located sub-stations about
10 miles apart. Here the current would be converted to direct current and
fed to the trains at 1,500 volts, which is the greatest line voltage advisable for
the City and Suburban Railways.
When the electrification of the inner zone long distance railways becomes
necessary, power could be transmitted from White Bay Power House at 11,000
volts to suitably located sub-stations on the suburban system. In these
sub-stations it could be stepped up through transformers to 88,000 or 110,000
volt alternating current and transmitted by overhead wires along the private
right of way of the railway, for distances up to 150 miles. En route it would
be taken to sub-stations, transformed to a lower voltage, and fed to the trains
as direct current at 3,000 volts —double the voltage recommended for the
suburban railways.
Comparing 1,500 volt, and 3,000 volt direct current installations, with
the higher voltage there would be fewer sub-stations, but the train equipment
would be much more expensive, the cost of the latter would outweigh the
saving in the former, and a 1,500 volt installation would, therefore, be the
cheaper, and best adapted for the suburban electrification.
If, when the time arrives to electrify the inner zone long distance railways,
a voltage of 6,000 is found practicable and desirable, stock wired for use on the
6,000 volt circuits could operate at half speed on the 1,500 volt circuits, or long
distance trains could be hauled at full speed over the lines of each zone by
changing locomotives at the boundary.
For the inner and outer zone suburban railways there is no doubt whatever
that the direct current system will cost less for construction than the single
phase system, and the running expenses and cost of maintenance will also
be less.
For the inner zone long distance traffic, when electrification becomes
necessary, the passenger and goods traffic will be heavy; and as far as can be
foreseen, a high voltage direct-current system should be as favourable in
first cost and working expenses as the single-phase system, the relative
advantages of the systems depending mainly on the volume of traffic to be
dealt with.
For the outer zone long distance traffic, based on present day knowledge,
the single-phase system would be cheaper and better. This may not altogether
hold good in the near future, as recent developments indicate that 5,000 and
6,000 volt direct-current systems may be successfully 7 operated at no distant
date.
The electrification of the outer zone long distance traffic is at present a
remote contingency, the advantages of the direct current system for the
suburban railways which must be electrified in conjunction with the construction
of the City Railway, and the probable equal facilities of direct current and
single phase working for the inner zone long distance traffic, portions of which
may be electrified at no far distant date, far outweigh any advantages the
single phase system might have now for the outer zone long distance traffic.


Bearing in mind the future problem of electrifying the long distance
railways as well as the immediate problem of electrifying the suburban
railways, the direct current system at 1,500 volts is recommended for the
City Railway and the electrification of the suburban railways.
Overhead Wire or Third Rail.
There now remains to be decided whether direct current at 1,500 volts
should be fed to the trains by overhead wire or by third rail or by both methods.
Any person coming in contact with a wire or rail conveying current at
1,500 volts pressure would be electrocuted. In the sparsely populated
suburban districts it is impossible to keep the public, especially children, from
trespassing on the railway property. Under these circumstances the third
rail would constitute a direct menace to life, whereas with overhead construction
contact with the live wires would not be possible.
The City Railway with open air stations at Central Station and at Circular
Quay will be underground for a length of 35,300 lineal feet of single track. If
third rail construction were adopted, the underground portion could apparently
be constructed throughout with a flat top at a height of 15 feet above
rail level, whereas with overhead construction a height of 17 ft. 3 in. would be
required with a car height of 12 ft. 9 in., and it would appear that third rail
construction would require 2 ft. 3 in. less depth of excavation, thus effecting
a considerable saving in cost. This, however, is not so. Of the 35,300 lineal
feet of single track which will be underground, 30,000 lineal feet can be single
track tunnel section costing £36 per lineal feet whilst 5,300 lineal feet only can
or must be single track flat top construction, costing £4O per lineal feet with
17 ft. 3 in. headway and £3B per lineal feet with 15 feet headway.
The cost per foot of single track in single or double line tunnel is less
than the cost with flat top construction with a headway of either 17 ft. 3 in,
or 15 feet.
The headway in the single and double line tunnel sections is sufficient
to accommodate a car similar to the latest New York car and also to provide
room for the overhead wiring and pantograph (see Plates No. 75 and
No. 76.)
If third rail construction were adopted it would not be possible to reduce
the height of the single and double line tunnel, as the present heights shown
are necessitated by the side clearances required for the existing rolling stock.
It will thus be seen that the saving which could be effected would only be over
the length of 5,300 feet of flat top construction, which could be reduced in
height from 17 ft. 3 in. to 15 feet, and similarly at the four underground
stations the excavation could be reduced by a depth of 2 ft. 3 in.
The additional cost of providing headway for overhead construction would
amount to about £36,000. In addition, the overhead wring would probably
cost about £2OO per mile more than third rail construction, bringing the total
additional cost up to about £40,000. This amount would not warrant the
adoption of third rail construction on the City Railway, for, as already pointed
out, it would always be a source of danger alike to employees and to the public.
The Suburban Railways now require consideration. Overhead construction
would cost about £4OO per mile more than third rail construction if there were
no other considerations, but the adoption of third rail construction would
mean that in many places the spaces between the existing tracks would have
to be widened to provide room for the third rails. In addition to the cost,


the widening would disorganise the traffic whilst tracks were being reconstructed,
and at crossings with third rail the work would be very complicated. With
overhead construction no widening of the tracks would be necessary, and there
would be little or no interference with existing traffic. Some of the bridges
on the Suburban Railways have a headway of 15 feet only, and with overhead
construction cither the rails will have to be lowered or the bridges raised to
maintain the structure gauge. With a car 13 feet high the trolley wire would
be 15 feet above the rails, which height must be maintained in accordance
with the Australian Railways Standard Structure Gauge. To carry the
wire clear of the underside of overbridges and maintain the structure gauge
of 15 feet, the rails in some instances may have to be lowered about 12 inches
under the bridges, or the bridges rebuilt.
All things considered, overhead construction, estimated at £2,000 per mile
of single track, including poles, auxiliary wires, bonding and feeders, will not
cost more than third rail construction, and there will be the additional
advantage of absolute safety.
There now remains the question of adopting both overhead and third rail
construction. Third rail construction could be used in the subway where
the public could not trespass, and overhead construction on the portions in
the open and on the Suburban Railways.
All rolling stock would have to be equipped with a pantograph for contact
with the overhead wire and with a shoe for the third rail. At present there
are 210 first-class and 490 second-class American cars in operation on the
Suburban Railways, or 700 in all. When the City Railway and the railways
to the northern, eastern, and western suburbs are constructed, there will be
at least 1,000 cars in operation, and to equip the necessary motor-coaches
both for overhead wire and third rail would well nigh absorb the £40,000
which could be saved in construction, and as the rolling stock had to be renewed,
the expenditure for double equipment would continue. Apart from the
disadvantages of two methods, the additional cost of £40,000 for construction
is warranted. Safety should be the first consideration, and overhead
construction is recommended.
Details of Overhead Construction.
A double trolley wire of hard drawn copper will be necessary to enable
sufficient power to be supplied to the motors of the motor coaches or
locomotives. The double trolley will be supported from a messenger cable
as shown by Plates No. 75, No. 76, and No. 77, which show the heights and
clearances required for single and double line tunnel and for single track cut
and cover.
Plate No. 78 shows a longitudinal elevation of the overhead equip-
ment in a double track tunnel.
Plate No. 79 shows plan and elevation of overhead equipment on curve in
single line tunnel, and Plate No. 80 shows plan of overhead equipment for
double line tunnel and double line cut and cover.
Maximum Load and Minimum Structure Gauges.
Practically all of the permanent structures, under-bridges, over-bridges,
station platforms, signals, &c., on the New South Wales Railways have been
constructed to the limits of the minimum structure gauge shown by Fig. 1,
Plate No. 81. In 1912 the Railway Commissioners of the various States agreed
to a new minimum structure gauge in accordance with Fig. 2, Plate No. 81.


It will be noted that the new gauge is i foot wider than the old standard.
Before rolling stock can be built to the new loading gauge limits, all structures
within the new Australian Standard Structure Gauge will have to be rebuilt.
This does not by any means mean that all bridges, &c. will require rebuilding,
as many bridges provide the necessary width but insufficient head room. In
many cases the requisite clearance can be obtained by lowering the level of
the permanent way and not interfering with bridge piers or superstructure.
It is impossible to estimate accurately the cost of altering existing structures
to conform with the new structure gauge, but about £BOO,OOO should suffice.
Power required for the City and Suburban Railways.
The City Railway. —Allowing for a 45 second service on each of the four
tracks the power required to operate such a service is 49,300 kilowatts.
Western Suburbs Railway. —Allowing for a ij-minutc service on each of the
two tracks, the power required from Wynyard Square via Balmain and along
the existing railway to Redfern is 38,000 kilowatts.
The Eastern Suburbs Railway. —Allowing for a i|-minute service on each of
the two tracks from St. James’-road via Bondi, and along the existing railway
to Redfern, the power required is 50,000 kilowatts.
The Northern Suburbs Railway. —Allowing for a ij-minute service on each
of the two tracks from Wynyard Square to Bay-road Station, the power
required is 14,500 kilowatts.
The Existing Suburban Railway. —Based on the service given in the Time-
table of Bth November, 1914, the power required is as follows :
Sydney to Parramatta ... ... 12,600 kilowatts.
Sydney to Sutherland ... ... 9,000
Sydney to Bankstown ... ... 6,000 ,
Sydney to Hornsby 3,300
Milson’s Point to Hornsby ... ... 5,300
Total ... ... ... 36,200 kilowatts.
Summary.
kilowatts.
The City Railway, |-minutc service (80 trains per track per
hour) ... 49,300
The Western Suburbs Railway, ij-minutc service (40 trains
per track per hour) 38,000
The Eastern Suburbs Railway, i|-minutc service (40 trains
per track per hour ... 50,000
The Northern Suburbs Railway, il-minutc service (40 trains
per track per hour) 14,500
The existing Suburban Railways present Schedule 36,200
Total 188,000
The above total represents the power that would be required for the services
indicated, but in the beginning it will not be necessary to give these services,
and the Northern Suburbs Railway via the proposed Sydney Harbour Bridge


kilowatts.
The City Railway, a ij-minute service on each loop (80
trains per hour) 25,000
will not be in operation. Again the tramway will not require as much power
as at present because about 37 per cent, of the through passengers into the City
will be carried by the electric trains.
At the outset, the power required will be somewhat as follows:
Western Suburbs Railway, 6-minute service, Weston-road ... 6,500
Eastern Suburbs Railway, 3-minute service, Bondi Junction 9,000
Total 40,500
Power to the extent of 45,000 k.w. would suffice for the above railways until
the services are increased beyond the above figures.
The existing suburban service (Time-table, November, 1914), would require
36,200 k.w.; allowing for a natural increase and for the train traffic which
will be diverted to the suburban railways when electrified 45,000 k.w. should
suffice, that is, 90,000 k.w. in all.
Power-Size of Units.
In the United States, units of 15,000, 20,000, 25,000, and 30,000 kilowatts
capacity are being manufactured and installed. In New South Wales it is
inadvisable to install units of too large a size—there is the difficulty of trans-
portation from England or America, and should an accident occur the temporary
loss of one unit would be relatively too great a proportion of the power installed
in the power station. Where the user is nearer the manufacturer the units
can be larger, and the utmost efficiency obtained. The economical choice
of generators for the City and Suburban electrification lies between generators
of 15,000 and 20,000 kilowatt capacity. The power required at White Bay
for the first few years after the City Railway is in operation and the inner
zone suburban railways are electrified will approximate 60,000 kilowatts.
It would probably be cheaper to install three 20,000 kilowatt units than four
15,000 kilowatt units, although the difference would not be great.
The normal output of a 20,000 k.w. unit would be from 17,000 to 18,000 k.w.,
while the normal output of the 15,000 k.w. unit would be from 12,000 to 13,000
k.w., for each machine, and for average steam conditions the larger units
would be a little more economical in steam.
The boiler pressure of the existing installation at White Bay is 180 lb.; the
efficiency of the turbines would be increased by using a pressure of 200 lb. per
square inch or even higher, but the cost of the boilers would be slightly
more for the higher pressure.
All things considered, the size of the units should not exceed 15,000 kilowatts.
Recommendation.
The electrification of the inner zone suburban railways should be undertaken
simultaneously with the construction of the City Railway.
Power for the City and Suburban Railways should be generated at the
White Bay Power House by units not exceeding 15,000 kilowatts capacity,
generating electricity at 11,000 volts, 25 cycles, three phase; steam pressure


of boilers, 200 lb. per square inch or upwards. The new units should be tied in
with the existing plant. From White Bay the current should be transmitted
to suitably situated sub-stations, there converted to 1,500 volt direct current,
and supplied to the trains from overhead wires.
With the inauguration of an electric railway service, the working conditions
will be quite different to those which now obtain with the steam service, and
in order to prepare the officials for the task of operating the City Underground
Railway, the electrification of the railway Sydney to Sutherland, should be
put in hand during the present year. The electrification could be completed
about the end of the year 1917, and the railway could be worked as an electric
railway to Central Station for some twelve months before the City Railway
could be completed to Circular Quay.
THE METROPOLITAN RAILWAYS AND TRAMWAYS
RECOMMENDED.
To adequately deal with the traffic of the City of Sydney and Suburbs it
will be necessary in the immediate future to electrify the inner zone, and at
a later date the outer zone suburban railways; and as shown by Plates No.
72 and No. 82, to construct a two-track loop railway (with bifurcated tracks
at stations) around the city, a double-track loop railway to the Eastern Suburbs
connecting with the proposed City Railway near St. James’ Station and with
the Illawarra Railway near Erskineville Station; a double-track loop railway
to the Western Suburbs connecting with the proposed City Railway at Wynyard-
square, and with the Main Suburban Railway between Stanmorc and Peter-
sham Stations; a double line railway to North Sydney connecting with the
proposed City Railway at Wynyard-square Station and with the Milson’s
Point Railway near Bay-road Station; and a loop between Waitara and
Normanhurst Stations to connect the Milson’s Point Railway with the Main
Northern Railway. Extensions to Mosman, Manly, Narrabeen, Pittwater,
Ryde, Watson’s Bay, and La Pcrouse, which will be required at a later date,
are shown dotted on Plate No. 82. The Underground Tramways recom-
mended are shown on Plate No. 72.
The Metropolitan Railways and Underground Tramways have been laid
out as loop lines where possible, and the comfort and convenience of the public
have been considered to the utmost. In the city proper the railways and
tramways will be wholly underground, whilst the railways to the Northern,
Eastern, and Western Suburbs are either elevated or surface lines on private
right of way, and will not obstruct the streets or be any detriment to the
adjoining property. The stations have been so located that the outlying
tramways will act as feeders, and it should be possible for a passenger to obtain
a daily or season ticket to cover the railway and tramway journey.
The underground tramways are recommended, not so much as a means
of satisfactorily relieving the dense passenger traffic, but rather as a means
of facilitating the vehicular and pedestrian traffic by removing the tramcars
from the streets. The cost of underground tramways can be justified for this
latter purpose, but not for the former, as the volume of traffic which could be
taken by two car units is small compared with what could be taken by electric
railway trains.


The City Railway.
As shown by Plate No. 72, four lines of railway take off from the existing
railway system to the north of Redfern Station, adjacent to the Wells-street
overbridge, and run parallel to the existing railway as far as Cleveland-street,
where the tracks curve to the east and traverse the extreme eastern side
of the existing railway yard to avoid interference with the sidings and
shunting tracks now in use. On the eastern side of the main building there
will be an open-air station at the same level as the existing platforms. The
booking-office, waiting-rooms, &c., will be constructed under the platforms.
The main access will be from Eddy-avenue, and there will be subway connection
for passengers to the main station. A baggage subway will connect with the
existing baggage subway under the main budding.
Continuing northwards, the four tracks will cross Eddy-avenue on a viaduct
and traverse the eastern side of Belmore Park. The four lines to be carried on
bridges across Hay-street and Campbell-street, and graded down to pass in
tunnel under Goulburn-street. Here the lines diverge to form a two-track
loop underground railway around the city. Two lines curve westward and
pass under Castlereagh-street, Pitt-strect, Liverpool-street, and private property
to George-street, where they curve to the north and pass along to the Town
Hall Station, under George-street immediately in front of St. Andrew’s
Cathedral and the Town Hall. The two tracks continue under George-street,
under Queen Victoria Markets below the cellars, along York street to Wynyard-
square Station in Wynyard Park. Wynyard-square Station will be a two-level
station; the City Railway will be accommodated at the lower platforms, and
the railways from North Sydney and Balmain at the upper platforms. There
will be a concourse floor between, and common to the upper and lower levels.
The railways from North Sydney and Balmain will connect with the City
Railway between Wynyard-square and Town Hall Stations. All crossings
will be “fly-over.” Wynyard-square Station can be so arranged that half the
trains arriving from North Sydney and from Balmain can be terminated there
so as to maintain a service of eighty trains per hour between these suburbs
and the city during the morning and evening rush hours. Separate arrival
and departure platforms will be provided for the tracks terminating at Wynyard-
square. The surface of the park will not be used for railway purposes.
From Wynyard-square the two lines continue in a north-easterly direction,
under streets and Government property to Harrington-street, where they
emerge from the ground and are carried on overhead construction across
George-street North and Circular Quay Open-air Station. This station will
be constructed above and combined with the ferry wharves. Facilities will be
provided for the easy transfer of passengers from the railway to the ferries and
vice versA.
The overhead construction will continue on the eastern side of Circular
Quay Station, across Circular Quay, to the western side of Macquarie-street,
where the lines enter the ground and pass under Macquarie-street in cut and
cover construction, and curving southwards pass in tunnel under Government
House Grounds, the Botanical Gardens, and Macquarie-street to St. James’
Underground Station in Hyde Park.
The level of St. James’ station has been fixed so that it will be possible f •
construct above the proposed City Railway station an underground terminal
station in Hyde Park for long-distance traffic if it be thought desirable to do
so in the future, should Central Station become inadequate to accommodate


the long-distance traffic. On leaving St. James’ Station the two lines of railway
continue in a southerly direction under Hyde Park to Livcrpool-strcet Station,
situated at the southern end of Hyde Park. After passing through Liverpool-
strcet Station, the lines curve to the south-west, pass under private property,
and emerge at Goulburn-street, thus completing the city loop.
The two tracks of the City Railway on the western side are connected
between the Town Hall and Liverpool-street stations by a two-track loop.
At some future date it may be found necessary to take the holiday traffic
to the Show Grounds, Cricket Grounds, the Randwick Racecourse, &c., from
all parts of the city and suburbs by a double track railway, connecting by
double junctions with the City Railway between Central Station and Rcdfern,
as shown by Plate No. 82, but for many years to come this traffic can be
adequately dealt with by the existing tramways.
The ruling grade on the City Railway is 1 in 40 against the traffic and 1 in 30
with the traffic. The minimum curve is 8 chains radius, and there are no
level crossings whatever. '
The stations provide for island platforms 520 feet long. Bifurcation
eliminates the effect of the station-stop on track capacity, whilst congestion
is avoided by keeping the incoming and outgoing traffic separate from the
platform to the street, and vice versd. At the terminal stations separate
arrival and departure platforms will be provided for each track.
The platforms will be straight where possible, otherwise they will be con-
structed with curves of large radius. A maximum speed of 35 miles per hour
will obtain on straight level track and down grades, and the schedule speed
including station stops will be half the maximum speed, or 18 miles per hour.
The City Railway, including the double track loop, and the connections
to North Sydney and Balmain between Town Hall and Wynyard-square
Stations comprises a total length of some 16 miles 52 chains of single track,
of which 7 miles 66 chains is above ground and 8 miles 66 chains underground.
Eastern Suburbs Railway.
As shown by Plate No. 82, the Eastern Suburbs double-track outer
circle railway connects with the City Railway between Circular Quay and
St. James’ Stations by means of two junctions, and proceeds in an easterly
direction in tunnel under the Domain to Sir John Young Crescent, where it
emerges from the ground and passes on viaduct over Riley-street, Crown-
street, Palmer-street, Bourke-street, Forbes-street, Dowling-street, and private
property to Brougham-street, where it re-enters the ground and continues
in tunnel through King’s Cross Station, under Victoria-street and Darlinghurst-
road, near the top of William-street.
The lines then curve southward and pass in tunnel under private property
and streets to Womerah-avenue, where they again emerge from the ground
and pass on viaduct over private property and streets to Glenmore road (open
air) station. The line then curves eastwards and passes in cut and cover
through private property and streets to Paddington (open air) station, and
thence in an easterly direction in cut and cover to Edgecliffe (open air) station
at Wallis-street. The line then passes under Nelson-street and, emerging from
the ground, is carried on viaduct over private property and streets to Bondi
station at Bondi Junction. Thence the line runs in tunnel in a south-easterly
direction to Waverley station at Macpherson-street, and continues in a south-
easterly direction in cut and cover to Little Coogee (open air) station near


St. Mark’s Road; curving to the south-west, the line then runs in cut and
cover to Rae-strect, where it again emerges from the ground and passes on
viaduct over private property and streets to Coogec (open air) station, situated
near the Randwick Asylum, and continuing south-west the line runs on embank-
ment and in open cutting to Daceyville, where a short viaduct takes it over
Bunnerong-road to Daceyville (open air) station.
From this station the line continues in the open air in a westerly direction
to Rosebery (open air) station, thence in a north-westerly direction on embank-
ment to Waterloo station, over Botany-road, and thence on embankment
through Alexandria to junction with the existing railway system (Illawarra
Branch) at a point about 10 chains south of Erskineville station.
The inner circle railway for the holiday traffic to the Show Ground, Cricket
Ground and Racecourse, junctions with the Eastern Suburbs outer circle
railway near the Randwick Asylum.
Between Daceyville and Rosebery stations two sidings each 4,000 feet
long for storing trains have been provided.
The total length of the outer circle railway, inclusive of the sidings for
storage of trains is 10 miles 56 chains of double track, and of the inner circle
railway for holiday traffic is 7 nvles 32 chains, or 18 miles 8 chains of double
track in all, as shown by plan.
The ruling grade is 1 in 40, and the sharpest curve is 8 chains radius.
Island platforms, 520 feet long with necessary accommodation, will be
provided at the stations, and these latter have been so located that the suburban
tramways will act as feeders to the railway.
Western Suburbs Railway.
' A double-track loop railway, shown by Plate No. 82, junctions with the
City Railway on the south side of Wynyard-square station, and proceeds
through Wynyard-square station, thence in a north-westerly direction in cut
and cover as far as Agar-street. Here the tracks curve to the east and con-
tinue under the Fort-street School grounds and the eastern side of the
Observatory Park, emerging at the northern boundary of the Observatory
Park. The railway is then carried on viaduct across Watson-road, Argylc-
strcct and Argyle-place where it is joined by the roadway and footway
approaches of the proposed bridge across Darling Harbour,
Continuing on viaduct in a westerly direction, the line passes over Govern-
ment property, Rent-street, Hickson-road, and Bettington-street, and from
thence across Darling Harbour to Balmain by means of a high-level cantilever
bridge 1,350 feet centre span, providing for two lines of railway, a 35-ft. road-
way, an iB-ft. motor roadway, and a 15-ft. footway, the bridge to have a
minimum headway of 170 feet above high-water. On the Balmain approach
the railway, roadways, and footway continue on viaduct until the two latter
reach the natural surface at Darling-street near Adolphus-lane.
The two lines of railway then continue on viaduct over Adolphus-strcct
and private property to Balmain (open air) station, thence over Stcphen-
street, Ann-street and Fawcett-lane where the lines enter the ground and
pass under streets, private property, and Gladstone Park to Darling-road
(open air) station near Llewellyn-street.
The railway then curves southwards and passes in open cut through private
property and Elliott-strcet (which must be closed), and continues in a southerly


direction under private property and streets to Weston-road (open air) station.
On leaving Weston-road station the line crosses Belmore-street and passes
over streets and private property to Rozellc (open air) station at O’Neill-street.
The railway then crosses streets and private property in open cutting, and is
then carried over the Glebe Island railway on a bridge. Thence the line runs
in a southerly direction through private property to Leichhardt (open air)
station at HiU-street, and on leaving this station it re-enters the ground and
passes under private property and streets to Annandale (open air) station
near the junction of Norton-street and Parramatta-road. The line then
continues under streets and private property to Terminus-street, where it
emerges from the ground on railway property, and with fly-over junctions
joins the existing railway system between Stanmore and Petersham stations.
The total length of the Western Suburbs Railway is 5 miles 27 chains of double
track; the ruling grade is lin 30, and the sharpest curve is 8 chains radius.
All the stations are “ open air ” with island platforms each 520 feet long.
Northern Suburbs Railway.
Two lines of railway, as shown by Plate No. 82, junction with the City
Railway south of Wynyard-square station, and pass underground in a
northerly direction to Princcs-strcet, where they emerge and continue in open
cutting to Agar-street, thence on embankment to Argyle-place. Here the
viaduct construction of the Sydney Harbour Bridge approach commences and
carries the railway over Argyle-place to Princes-street where the railway joins
with the roadway and footway approaches on the main bridge.
After traversing the main bridge the railway is carried over streets and
private property to Kirribilli (open air) station, situated between Fitzroy and
Willoughby streets; from thence the line runs on viaduct to Walker-street,
which is crossed on the level, and closed to vehicular but not to pedestrian
traffic. After passing Walker-street, North Sydney (open air) station is
reached, and the lines on leaving this station pass in tunnel to Bank-street,
where they emerge and connect with the Milson’s Point to Hornsby Railway,
a little to the south of Bay-road station. The ruling grade is lin 39, and the
sharpest curve 8 chains radius.
The stations arc island platforms, 520 feet long; total length of this line
measured from the northern end of Wynyard-square station is 2 miles 48
chains.
Provision is made on the main bridge and spans in approach for four sets
of rails, two of which will be used for railway purposes, each track having a
capacity of eighty trains per hour, while the other pair of tracks will be used
for tramway purposes.
Underground Tramways.
To facilitate the tramway traffic and to relieve the congestion in the
thoroughfares, Underground Tramways, as shown by Plate No. 72, would
be required, about the time the City Railway and the Eastern and Western
Suburbs Railways become operative.
The trams from Bondi Junction would be taken underground on the south
side of Oxford-street in front of the Victoria Barracks, and the trams from
Randwick, Coogee, and the Show Ground would enter the ground in Moore


Inside City
Boundary.
Outside City
Boundary,
Total.
3.327
114,972
118,299
110,700
641,800
752,500
33-27
5-58
6-36
Park. These trams would pass under Oxford-street and Elizabeth-strcet to
Circular Quay, and would have stopping places at Darlinghurst, Liverpool-
street. King-street, Bent-street, and Circular Quay.
The Western Suburbs trams from Annandale, Leichhardt, and Glebe Point
would be taken underground in Parramatta-road near the University Park,
whilst the trams from Newtown and Marrickville would enter the ground in
City-road on the Eastern side of the University Park. The Western Suburbs
trams would pass under George-street West and Pitt-strect to Circular Quay,
and would have stopping places at Railway-square, Goulburn-street, Park-
street, King-street, Hunter-street, and Circular Quay.
A connecting loop near Bathurst-street would give direct access from the
Western to the Eastern Suburbs and vice versd. To cope with the traffic in
the evening rush hour, provision is made at Circular Quay for sidings for the
storage of twenty cars for each system.
THE POPULATION, COMMERCE, AND PASSENGER
TRAFFIC OF SYDNEY.
Canberra is to be the constitutional capital of the Commonwealth; Sydney,
however, on account of its location on the Eastern seaboard of Australia, the
rich and fertile territory of New South Wales of which it is the capital,
and chiefly on account of its magnificent harbour, will in all probability always
be the commercial capital of Australia.
The area and population of Sydney on 31st December, 1914, were as follow:
City of Sydney.
Area, acres
Total population ..
Population per acre
Increased facilities for the railways and shipping are being constructed by
the Railway Commissioners, and by the Harbour Trust Commissioners.
Goods Railways are under construction or proposed to enable the goods
traffic of the State to be taken direct to Glebe Island, Darling Island, and
Darling Harbour. The main suburban railways will then be used exclusively
for passenger traffic.
The Power Station at Ultimo is inadequate for the tramway service, and an
additional power station to augment the supply is now under construction at
White Bay.
During the last twelve years the Harbour Trust Commissioners have ex-
pended upwards of £2,000,000 upon harbour improvements, and have proposals
under consideration aggregating £6,000,000 sterling. There are at the present
time 55,000 feet of wharfage in actual use for shipping and another 12,000 feet
under construction.
Woolloomooloo Bay has 5,520 feet of wharfage ; the jetty running down
the centre of the Bay is 1,140 feet long by 208 feet wide.
Circular Quay has available for mail steamers, 3,654 feet of wharfage.


Between Dawes’ Point and Miller’s Point there will be, with the completion
of the construction now in hand, ten wharves, each 600 feet long, capable of
accommodating eighteen ocean liners, having a gross tonnage of 200,000.
In Darling Harbour, ninety-one berths are available and in constant use.
The Pyrmont jetties are fitted with steam cranes and electric coal elevators,
and some of the wharves are equipped with electric conveyors; these arc capable
of loading 12,000 tons of wheat per day..
In Jones Bay provision is being made for five extra berths for the use of
the largest oversea vessels.
At Glebe Island an extensive scheme of wharfage is now in progress. The
proposed wharfage will extend into the waters of Johnston’s Bay, and comprises
a coal loading wharf 1,020 feet long, and a grain loading jetty 2,000 feet long,
with six large storage sheds for wheat.
The Harbour Trust Commissioners, in addition, have under consideration
ah extensive scheme of wharfage around Blackwattle, White, Rozelle, and
Johnston’s Bays, and eventually around the foreshores of Balmain. A large
timber trade is carried on in this vicinity, and when the railways and wharfage
under construction shall have been completed this portion of the Harbour will
deal almost entirely with the oversea and interstate goods traffic.
The Birds Eye View (Plate No. 83), shows the improvements as they will
appear when completed.
All steamers at present carrying oversea passengers and mails to Australia,
excepting those of the British India Steam Navigation Co., trade to Sydney,
and most of these steamers make it their terminal port.
Based on the inward oversea shipping, Sydney now ranks as the fourteenth
port of the world, and if the Interstate shipping were considered, it would rank
higher. It is the eighth port of the Empire, and the first port of the Common-
wealth.
For the year ended 30th June, 1914, the oversea and interstate tonnage
which entered Port Jackson totalled 7,552,750 tons, or including the coastwise
traffic, 8,737,310 tons. The value of the imports was £s3fi l 3.°3°- The
incoming sea-borne passenger traffic numbered 146,799 persons, and the out-
going traffic 122,879 persons.
The future importance of Sydney as a maritime centre cannot be over-
estimated; it must at least maintain its present position, and is destined to
become one of the most important seaports of the world.
The passenger traffic of the Sydney Metropolitan area is at present carried
on by steam railways terminating at Central Station on the city side and at
Milson’s Point on the northern side of the Harbour. Steam ferries convey
passengers to and from Watson’s Bay, Manly, the suburbs on the northern
side of the harbour, the Lane Cove River, the Parramatta River, and Balmain.
The traffic of the suburbs not served by steam railways or ferries is carried by
electric tramways. In addition, the tramways are required to convey the
railway and ferry traffic to and from and through the business section of the
city, which is limited in extent and is roughly embraced in the area extending
from Central Station on the south, to the waters of Port Jackson on the north,
and from Darling Harbour and Darling Harbour Railway on the west, to
Government House Grounds, the Gardens, and Hyde Park on the east.
Any future expansion of accommodation within the civic area must bo by
increasing the height of the buildings. .
43537— F


IQIO
173.897.034
I9II
! 197,871,083
583,692
1912
227,668,638
671,589
1913
248,720,735
733.689
1914
260,696,726
769,017
For the five years ended 30th June, 1914, the number of passengers carried
on the Sydney Suburban Railways, inclusive of the traffic to Richmond, has
been as follows :
1 Rate per cent. Increase at
Average Dahy. fj. sinc .
Year ending 30th June.
Per Annum.
45,458,419
51,077,540
59,026,917
66,752.857
73,180,876
134,096
150,671
174,121
196,911
215.873
These figures show that during the past four years this traffic has increased
at the rate of 12 64 per cent, per annum, and if this rate of expansion be main-
tained the traffic will double itself in 5-8 years.
For the five years ended 30th June, 1914, the number of passengers carried
on the City and Suburban Tramways on the southern side of the harbour, has
been as follows :
a -i.. Rate per cent. Increase at
Average Daily. £i. since I9 io.
Yeat ending 30th June.
Per Annum.
These figures show that during the past four years this traffic has increased
at the rate of 10-65 per cent, per annum, and if this rate of expansion be main-
tained the traffic will double itself in 6-8 years. This traffic has now reached
saturation point, and it is almost impossible to accommodate more cars on
some routes during the evening rush hour.
For the five years ended 30th June, 1914, the number of passengers carried
on the Northern Suburbs Tramways, has been as follows :
Averaee Daliv Rate per cent - Increase at
Average uauy. C-I . since 1910.
Year ending 30th June.
Per Annum.
14,280,999
i 7. i0 3,49 2
20,705,850
23,492,868
25,012,976
42,127
50.453
61,079
69,300
73.785
This traffic has increased at the rate of 15-04 per cent, per annum, and if
this rate of expansion be maintained the traffic will double itself in 4-9 years,


For the five years ended 30th June, 1914, the number of passengers carried
by the Ferry Steamers has been as follows :
Average Daily P“ I “““ e at
Year ending 30th June.
Per Annum.
70,796
83,333
95,870
97.345
24.000.
28.250.000
32.500.000
33.000.
35,614,640
105,058
This traffic has increased at the rate of 10-37 P er cent. P er annum, and if this
rate of expansion be maintained the traffic will double itself in seven years.
The combined Railway,-Tramway, and Ferry traffic in the Metropolitan
area for the past five years has been as follows :
eper cent.lncrease at
C.I. Moce 1910.
Year ending 30th June.
Per Annum.
Average Daily.
257.636,452
294,302,115
339,901,405
371,966,460
594,505,218
759,990
868,148
1,002,659
1,097,246
1.163,732
These figures show that during the past four years the passenger traffic
within the Metropolitan area has increased at the rate of 11-24 per cent, per
annum, and if this rate of expansion be maintained the traffic will double itself
in 6 5 years.
The following particulars of the passenger traffic to and from Central Station
were furnished by the Chief Railway Commissioner on 14th October, 1914.
The average number of passengers arriving in Sydney daily, Mondays to
Fridays, is 85,000; on Saturdays 93,000; on Sundays 40,000. A similar
number depart from Sydney.
Between 7 a.m. and 8 a.m. 40 trains arrive, conveying approximately
20,000 passengers, while during the same interval 33 trains depart, conveying
2,450 passengers.
Between 8 a.m. and 9 a.m., 40 trains arrive, conveying approximately
17,700 passengers, while during the same interval, 31 trains depart, conveying
1,970 passengers.
Between 9 a.m. and 10 a.m., 3,420 passengers arrive, and 2,380 passengers
depart.
Between 4 p.m. and 5 p.m., 2,500 passengers arrive, and 6,300 passengers
depart.
Between 5 p.m. and 6 p.m., 40 trains arrive, conveying 5,100 passengers, and
during the same interval 55 trains depart, conveying 24,650 passengers.
Between 6 p.m. and 7 p.m., 36 trains arrive, conveying 3,100 passengers, and
during the same interval 36 trains depart, conveying 13,780 passengers.
The maximum number of trains arriving per hour during the busiest time
is-4o r viz., between 8 a.m. to 9 a.m., and 5 p.m. to 6 p.m.


The maximum number of trains departing per hour is 55, viz., between
5 p.m. and 6 p.m.
Plate No. 84 shows the Sydney and Suburban Tramway system, and
the number of through passengers carried to the city from the various suburbs
for the twelve months ended 30th June, 1914. The following statement
shows the number of passengers for the year ended 30th June, 1914, who
would probably have been diverted to the railways.
Diverted to—
Number of
Through
Existing Suburban
Railway.
Proposed Eastern
Suburbs Railway.
Proposed Western
Suburbs Railway.
Passenger?.
Proper- Number
tion. Diverted.
Propor- Number
tion. Diverted.
Propor* Number
tion. Diverted.
Abbotsford—Circular
Quay.
173.456
943.M2
1,696,009
915,184
173.45&
169,080
943.142
848,005
915.184
Abbotsford —Railway
Haberfield—Circular
Quay.
Haberfield—Railway
Leichhardt—Circular
Quay.
Leichhardt—Railway
Cook’s River—Circular
2.213,573
343- I 3°
553.393
343.13°
Quay.
Cook’s River—Railway ...
U ndercliff e—Circular
1,106,971
201,483
1,106,971
201,483
Quay.
Undercliffe—Railway ,
Addison-road—Circular
520,495
637.474
520.495
637,474
Quay.
Addison-road—Railway..,
Dulwich Hill —Circular
1,362,377
1,310,291
1,310,291
Quay.
Dulwich Hill—-Railway ...
St. Peters —Circular Quay
St. Peters—Railway
Newtown —Circular Quay
Newtown —-Railway
Erskineville—Circular
2,5 i 5.6
1,822,717
5,016,990
4,378.921
9,786,765
1,000,621
1,215,145
2,508,495
2,189,460
4.893,383
333,5(0
Quay.
Erskineville—Railway ...
Alexandria )
Hemlerson-rd.| C Qu U ay _
Redfem 0 }t° Foveaux-st
Balmain—Circular Quay
Balmain—Railway
Ryde—Circular Quay ...
Ryde—Railway and
Gladesville—Circular
2,255.55*5
| 2,651,590
i
i
i
75 I . 5 53
662,898
4,722,141 i 1, i 80,535
. 992,031
992,031
3,197,826
80,701
253,861
3,197.826
80,701
253,861
Quay.
Gladesville—Railway ..
Drummoyne—Circular
Quay.
Drummoyne—Railway ..
Bellevue Hill —Circular
407.597
640,193
4°7..V)7
r no,iy3
1 ,470,960
45°.7°°
1.470.960
Quay.
8 4


Diverted to—
Number of
Through
Passengers.
Existing Suburban
Railway.
Proposed Eastern
Suburbs Railway.
Proposed Western
Suburbs Railway.
Tramway.
Propor- Number
tion. Diverted
Proper- Number
tion. Diverted,
Proper- Number
tion. Diverted.
Bellevue Hill—Forbes-st.
403,882
2,651,801
Woollahra—Circular
Quay.
1,988,850
Woollahra —Forbes-st.
1.977.553
1.998.57 1
Waverley and Bondi—
Circular Quay.
Waverley and Bondi—
Darlinghurst.
Waverley and Bondi—
Railway.
Bondi Junction —Circular
Quay.
Bondi Junction —Darling-
hurst.
1.998.57 1
2,278,161
759,387
503.353
503.353
7,217,960
5.4!3.470
7,046,239
Bondi Junction —Railway
Coogee and Little Coogee-
Circular Quay.
Coogee and Little Coogee-
Darlinghurst.
Coogee—Railway
Coogee—Newtown-road...
High-street, Randwick—
Circular Quay.
High-street, Randwick—
Darlinghurst.
High-street, Randwick—
Railway.
La Perouse and Little
2A39.559
2,701,374
2,139,559
2,701,374
1,124,869
1,365,965
45,128
349,893
292,084
Bay—Circular Quay.
La Perouse and Little
454.637
Bay—Darlinghurst.
La Perouse and Little
112,227
Bay—Railway.
Maroubra—Circular Quay
Maroubra—Darlinghurst
Maroubra—Railway
Bay-street, Daceyville—
Circular Quay.
Bay-street, Daceyville—
FoVeaux-street.
509,750
955,977
54,487
907.139
509,750
318,659
54,487
680,354
2,036,566
1,527,424
Botany—Circular Quay...
Botany—Foveaux-street
King-street, Randwick—
Circular Quay.
King-street, Randwick—
Darlinghurst.
King-street, Randwick—
Railway.
Randwick Racecourse—
178,221
336,200
1,779,400
2,158,319
1,186,267
539,580
668,481
501,361
602,237
Circular Quay.
Watson’s Bay—Erskine
street.
348,604
Watson’s Bay—Victoria-
street.
394,393
Dover-road—Erskine-st.
921,536
85


Tramway,
Dover-road—Victoria-st.
William-street, Double
Bay—Erskine-street.
William-street, Double
Bay—-Victoria-street.
Crown-street—Circular
Quay.
Crown-street—Crown-
street Junction.
Zetland—Circular Quay...
Zetland—Foveaux-street
Darlinghurst—Railway ...
Randwick—Railway
Newtown-rd.—Randwick
Darling-street Wharf—
Leichhardt.
Darling-street Wharf—
Rozelle Junction.
Mullens-street—Circular
Quay.
Mullens-street —Railway
South Annandale —
Circular Quay.
South Annandale—
Railway.
Glebe Point—Circular
Quay.
Glebe Point—Railway ..
Pyrmont—Circular Quay
Pyrmont—Railway
Forest Lodge—Circular
Quay.
Forest Lodge—Railway
Number of
Through
Passengers.
2,673,531
2,879,889
6,680,249
4, 0 63,749
761,540
150,161,926
Diverted to—
Existing Suburban Proposed Eastern Proposed Western
Railway. Suburbs Railway. Suburbs Railway.
Proper- Number Proper- Number Proper Number
tion. Diverted. tion. Diverted. tkm. Diverted.
tramway traffic for the year ended 30th June, 1914,
On the basis of the
and 339 days per annum, the
railways, would relieve the t
per annum, or say 63,300 per
City Railway, by means of the existing suburban
tramway system of about 21,460,000 passengers
r day; the Eastern Suburbs Railway would relieve
the tramways of about 25,000,000 passengers per annum, or say 73,700 daily '> and
the Western Suburbs Railway of about 9,130,000 passengers per annum, or say
26,900 daily, i.e., about 163,900 daily in all, representing about 37 per cent, of
the through tramway passengers.
The present passenger traffic to and from Central Station amounts to 170,000
per day, or, with the 63,300 tramway passengers above, it would reach 233,300
per day, or during the hour 5 to 6 p.m., about 33,800 passengers outward
bound.
The suburban traffic as a whole has increased at the rate of 11-24 per cent,
per annum since 1910. •
86


Owing to its limited area further expansion in tire City proper can only take
place by increasing the height of the buildings. This is being done, but at the
same time the suburbs adjacent to the City proper are being developed and
are gradually expanding and assuming characteristics of the City. These
suburbs will be served by suburban railways, so that following what has
happened in other cities, the rate of growth of traffic in the City proper will
gradually decrease.
In preparing the following table the rate of increase has been taken at
10 per cent, for the years 1914-1918; 9 per cent, for 1918-1922; 8 per cent,
for 1922-1926; 7 per cent, for 1926-1930; 6 per cent, for 1930-1934; 5J per
cent, for 1934-1938; 5 per cent, for 1938-1942; 4 \ per cent, for 1942-1946;
and 4 per cent, for 1946-1950.
Maximum hourly in one direction
between 5 and 6 p.m
Year ending 30th June, Average daily in both direction?.
233.300
341.716
482,160
655.974
859,848
1,085,539
1.344.793
1,634,605
1,949,296
2,280,400
33.828
49,528
69,912
95.”5
124,676
157.401
194.992
237.014
282,644
330,653
With the Eastern Suburbs Railway in operation the number of passengers,
increasing at 7 per cent, per annum, is estimated as follows:
Maximum hourly In one direction
between 5 and 6 p.m.
Year ending 30th June. Average dally in both directions.
10,686
14,008
18,360
24,069
31.548
126,630
165,987
2X7.575
With the Western Suburbs Railway in operation the number of passengers,
increasing at 7 per cent, per annum, is estimated as follows
Maximum hourly in one direction
between 5 and 6 p.m.
Year ending 30th June, Average daily in both directions.
26,900
35,260
46,219
60,584
79,413
87


THE TRAIN AND PASSENGER CAPACITY OF THE
RAILWAYS RECOMMENDED.
When these railways are in operation Sydney and its Suburbs will be
served by a comprehensive system of electric trains; the maximum service
possible is shown by Plate No. 85. The actual service will depend upon the
traffic demands, which cannot now be foreseen.
The plan shows the incidence of the trains from the various suburbs along
the Metropolitan Railways.
Train Capacity.
: From the Eastern Suburbs Railway, as shown, it would be possible to
operate a service of 40 trains per hour on each track via Darlinghurst, and
30 trains per hour via Erskineville, or 70 trains in all per hour into the City.
A ij-minutc service could be maintained via Darlinghurst to Bondi Junction;
here the trains could divide if necessary, giving a 3-minute service to the City
via Daceyvillc and Erskineville, and a 3-minute service to Vauclusc and
Watson’s Bay. From the City to Daceyvillc via Erskineville, a 2-minute
service could be maintained; here the trains could divide, maintaining a
6-minute service to Long Bay and La Perouse, and a 3-minute service to the
City via Bondi Junction. By the connecting loop between Liverpool-street
and Town Hall Stations passengers could be taken from the Eastern Suburbs
direct to Balmain or North Sydney, and by the double junction between
Liverpool-street and St. James’ Stations passengers could be taken to Circular
Quay, Wynyard-square, Town Hall or Central Station, along the western side
of the City.
From the Western Suburbs Railway it would be possible to operate a
service of 15 trains per hour from Weston-road via Stanmore, and 30 trains
per hour from Weston-road via Balmain and Miller’s Point, or 45 trains in all
per hour into the City. Half the trains via Miller’s Point would have to ter-
minate at Wynyard-square Station. A 2-minute service could be maintained
via Miller’s Point to Weston-road; here the trains could divide, providing a
4-minute service to Drummoyne and Ryde, and the 4-minute service to the
City via Stanmore.
From the Northern Suburbs Railway it would be possible to maintain a
service of 25 trains per hour from Central Station via Strathfield, Hornsby,
North Sydney, and back to the City across the proposed Sydney Harbour
Bridge. A 72-scconds service could be maintained between Wynyard-square
and North Sydney stations; here the trains could divide, 25 trains per hour
could go to Hornsby, 10 per hour to Neutral Bay, Mosman, and Athol Gardens,
and 15 per hour to Manly, Narrabeen, and Pittwater.
During the rush hour half the number of trains arriving at Wynyard-square
from North Sydney via the Sydney Harbour Bridge would terminate at
Wynyard-square.
From the Main Suburban Line a ii-minute service could be maintained
between Lidcombc, which is to be the junction station for the Main Southern
Line and the City, and a J-minute service could be maintained between Stanmore
and the City. Beyond Lidcombe a 4-minute service could be maintained on
the Main Southern Line, and 25 trains per hour could serve the remainder of
the suburban line and the Western Line and branches.
From the Illawarra Suburban Line a service of 25 trains per hour could be
maintained from Waterfall around the City, and a service of 25 trains per
hour could be maintained from Bankstown around the City. A service of
50 trains per hour could be maintained between Sydenham and the City.


In addition to the suburban services outlined above a i|-minute long-
distance steam service could be maintained on an additional pair of tracks to be
constructed by the Railway Commissioners between the Central Station and
Lidcombe. By the existing tracks and crossing loops these long distance steam
trains could be run without any serious interference with the electric service.
Between Redfcrn Station and Central Station the two inward bound tracks will
be connected by cross-overs and likewise the two outward bound tracks, so that the
number of trains to and from any suburb can be varied to suit requirements,
but the aggregate ultimate capacity of the railways will be as given above.
The capacity of a railway is not determined only by the number of trains
per hour that can be run along its tracks, but by the product of this number
and the passenger capacity of the trains.
It will be gathered from the Chapter on “ Modern Cars for Rapid Transit
Railways ” that cars with a far greater passenger capacity than those at present
in use for Sydney Suburban service are general in other cities.
Under climatic conditions prevailing in Sydney there would be no difficulty
in designing cars to seat 100 passengers, and provide space for 50 standing
passengers. A train of eight such cars would have a capacity of 1,200 passengers.
During the rush hour the passenger capacity of the City Railway to or
from the City would be as follows :
Trains per Passengers per
Hour, Hour,
Railway,
North Sydney
Balmain, Drummoyne, &c., vid Bridge
Eastern Suburbs vid Darlinghurst
Eastern Suburbs vid Erskineville
Illawarra
Bankstown
Main West and South
Main North vid Strathfield
Western Suburbs vid Stanmorc
60.000
36.000
48.000
36.000
30.000
30.000
48.000
30.000
18.000
336,000
The most important station will be at Wynyard-square. There will be
two lines of railway from North Sydney and Balmain, bifurcated in the station,
and also connecting with two terminal platforms, and the two track City
Railway loop with bifurcated tracks.
The ultimate hourly outbound train capacity of Wynyard-square Station
would be as follows :
Direction.
Capacity per Hour.
80 trains.
North Sydney and Balmain
Circular Quay
Town Hall ...
200 trains.
Of these 200 trains, the 40 that start from Wynyard-square and go to
North Sydney would have to load fully at Wynyard-square, whilst the re-
maining trains would probably load half their passengers, and the maximum
passenger capacity would reach 144,000 inwards or outwards in the same
89


hour. This traffic would be kept separate from the trains to the streets, thus
avoiding confusion and delay. The tramway from North Sydney could add
an additional 40,000 passengers per hour inwards or outwards.
Based upon the daily distribution of railway traffic which obtains in all
large cities, the evening rush hour traffic is about 15 per cent, of the total daily
traffic (in Sydney at the present time it is 141 per cent.), and 336,000 passengers
during the rush hour would therefore represent a daily number of passenger
journeys in both directions of 2,240,000, or a yearly number of 759,000,000,
reckoning 339 days to the year.
The passenger journeys by railways, tramways, and ferries for the City of
Sydney aggregate 394,505,218 for the year ending 30th June, 1914, or 544
rides per head of population per annum. This is high compared with other
cities, and is due to the fact that many of the passengers at present change
from the train at Central Station, and from the ferries at Circular Quay and
Darling Harbour to the trams, and are thus duplicated in the returns.
The number of rides per head of population, however, increases as the
population increases. In the Manhattan and Bronx Districts, New York
City, the number of rides per annum per head of population in 1912 was 388,
the average for Greater New York excluding Richmond being 338. For the
years 1920,1930 and 1940 the number of rides forecasted by the Public Service
Commission, New York, is respectively 417, 542 and 703, with estimated
populations of 6,578,000, 9,078,000 and 12,528,000 respectively.
The character of the people and the climate and attractions of Sydney,
lend themselves to travelling more so than in most cities, and the number of
train rides per head of population per annum will be assumed to average 500.
On this assumption the population served by the system would aggregate
1.518.000 persons to whom must be added the people who would travel by
ferry and by tram. By the time the system is working to a capacity of
336.000 passengers hourly the population of the Metropolis will probably
have reached 2,500,000 persons. This population would obtain about the
year 1950 at 3| per cent, increase per annum.
Assuming that all passengers are seated during the rush hours, and that a
train accommodates 800 people only, the capacity of the system is 224,000 people
during the rush hour. This represents 1,493,000 people daily, or 506,127,000
passengers yearly. At 500 rides per head of population per annum, the system
would serve a population of 1,012,000, to whom must be added the people who
travel by ferry and train, or say a total population of 1,700,000, which population
at 3J per cent, increase per annum should be reached about the year 1937.
If all passengers are provided with seats during the rush hours, about the
year 1935 the system might require to be increased by constructing two
additional tracks on the western side of the City or by completing an additional
loop, or a two-track loop round the City.
On the rapid transit railways of the principal cities of the world, during
the rush hour there are two standing passengers to each seated passenger. If
however, in Sydney there are two seated to each standing passenger, the two
track loop railway should suffice until about the year 1950, because surface
and underground tramways and Central Station —then an electrified terminal —
will assist in handling the traffic.
The centre of the City is moving towards Central Station, and it is probable
that by the time the proposed City Railway reaches its ultimate capacity an
entirely new scheme will serve the needs of the travelling population better
than an extension of the double track loop.
90


COMPARISON OF TIME OF JOURNEY AND FARES
BY EXISTING TRAMWAYS AND BY THE
PROPOSED ELECTRIC RAILWAYS.
Apart from the discomfort of tram travel on hot and dusty or rainy days,
the residents of the suburbs now served by trams will find it advantageous
both in fares and time of journey, as shown by the following tables, to travel
by the electric railways. It would be possible to issue season tickets to cover
the journey by electric railways and the outlying tramways which act as feeders
to railway stations, thus further reducing the fares to the outlying tram-served
suburbs. For example, a season ticket could be issued between Bronte and
the City, available on the Eastern Suburbs Railway to Waverley Station, and
on the tramway from Waverley Station to Bronte only.
In making a comparison with the present tramway system and the proposed
electric railways, a schedule speed of 18 miles per hour for trains and the actual
times of journey given for trams in the official time-table have been adopted.
In computing the train fares one-thirteenth of a quarterly second-class
season ticket has been taken, and for the trams the actual fare now paid for
one journey each way per day for seven consecutive days.
It will be seen on reference to the tables that in every case the time of
journey and the fare to be paid would be considerably less by electric railway
than by tram, and in addition railway season ticket holders could make more
than one journey per day if they so desired.
The following table shows the distance, time of journey, and the weekly
fare to the City from the various stations on the proposed Western Suburbs
Railway by rail and by tram.
TO WYNYARD-SQUARE STATION.
Time
of
Journey
How Travelled.
Distance.
m. ch.
4 75
Annandale Station
Electric train vid Stanmore ...
Electric train vid Miller’s Point
Existing tram
4 68
4 20
5 4»
4 15
5 o
3 35
6 28
5 55
2 71
6 72
4 50
4 40
3 8
2 IQ
Leichhardt Station
Electric train vid Stanmore
Electric train vid Miller's Point
Existing tram
Rorelle Station
Electric train vid Miller’s Point
Electric train vid Stanmore
Existing tram
Wcston-road Station
Electric train vid Miller’s Point ...
Electric train vid Stanmore
Existing tram vid Forest Lodge ...
Existing tram vid Pyrmont
Existing tram, ferry and by walking
Electric train vid Miller’s Point ...
Electric train vid Stanmore
Darling-street Station
Existing tram vid Forest Lodge ...
Existing tram vid Pyrmont
Existing tram, ferry and walking
Electric train vid Miller’s Point ...
Electric train vid Stanmore
Existing tram vid Forest Lodge ...
Existing tram fid Pyrmont
Existing tram, ferry and by walking
Balmain Station
91


The following table shows the distance, time of journey, and weekly faro
to the City from the various stations on the proposed Eastern Suburbs Railway
by rail and by tram: —
Distance.
Journey. Fare -
How Travelled.
King’s Cross Station
Glcnmorc-road Station
Paddington Station
EdgeclifTe Station
Bondi Junction
Waverley Station
Little Cooget Station
Coogee Station ...
Daceyville Station
Rosebery Station
Waterloo Station
Electric train via Domain ...
Existing Watson’s Bay tram
Electric train via Domain ...
Existing Bellevue Hill tram
Electric train via Domain ...
Existing Bellevue Hill tram
Existing Bondi tram
Electric train via Domain ...
Existing Bellevue Hill tram
Existing Bondi tram
Electric train via Domain ...
Existing Bellevue Hill tram
Existing Bondi tram
Electric train vid Domain ...
Existing Waverley-Bronte tram
Electric train vid Domain ...
Existing tram vid Darley-road
Electric train vid Domain ...
Existing tram vid Coogee ...
Electric train vid Domain ...
Electric train vid Central ...
Existing tram vid Kensington
Existing tram vid Waterloo
Electric train vid Domain ...
Electric train vid Central ...
Existing tram vid Waterloo
Electric train vid Central ...
Existing tram vid Waterloo
When the
Suburban
Railways have been electrified
other thickly
populated suburbs now reached by tram will
following table
also be benefited,
as shown by the
TO CIRCULAR QUAY STATION.
Distance. Weekly
Journey. Fare,
How Travelled,
Newtown Station
St. Peter’s Station
Marrickville Station
Erskineville Station
MacDonaldtown Station
Tempe Station
Electric railway
Existing tram
Electric railway
Existing tram
Electric railway
Existing tram
Electric railway
Existing tram
Electric railway
Existing tram
Electric railway
Existing tram
From the above table it will be seen that passengers from Newtown Bridge
by electric train could reach the Quay in less than half the time that it now
takes by tram and at less cost per week.
92


SUBURBAN ELECTRIC RAILWAY TRAINS.
The everyday passenger has probably no conception of how important
a part the make-up of the train plays in minimising the length of station stop,
thus increasing the efficiency of any service and its financial results. There
are factors inseparably bound up with the question of the make-up of the train
for an underground service which seem to have hardly any bearing on the
subject, but are really important, viz., divisions of traffic, temperature, and
humidity.
The conclusions arrived at are based on the actual experience of other parts
of the world, and whilst these conclusions may be regarded with favour by
one side of public opinion, other sections of the community will view them
with considerable disfavour. However, it is thought that all impartial critics
will be forced to agree that if the maximum traffic efficiency is to be obtained,
and the air in the subway kept as pure and cool as possible, accommodation of
one class only should be provided, and that no special provision be made for
smokers on any trains which traverse the proposed underground railway.
With the advent of a costly underground railway and a rapid transit
service, members of the travelling public must be prepared for a radical change
in the make-up of the trains and a reduction in the various classes of
accommodation provided for their convenience. It is not proposed to interfere
in any way with the accommodation provided on trains commencing and
terminating their journey at Central Station.
New South Wales at present caters for its suburban passengers under
four distinct heads, viz., first and second class, each with smoking and non-
smoking accommodation, and at least six distinct types of cars are in use.
Under existing conditions, therefore, railway authorities here have a much
more difficult problem to contend with than the authorities controlling similar
services in other parts of the world.
On the tube railway in London third class accommodation only, non-
smoking and smoking, is provided. On the underground railways in Hamburg,
Paris and Berlin, second and third class accommodation is available. In
the last named city smoking accommodation is provided to a limited extent.
It was at first prohibited, but the passengers desiring to smoke patronised
the street cars above owned by a different company, and so forced the hands
of the underground- authorities. In New York and Philadelphia only one
class of accommodation is available, and smoking is prohibited.
In Hamburg, Paris and Berlin, where two types of carriages are provided,
the headway of trains is 2 minutes.
Grand Central Station at 42nd Street, New York, controls the efficiency
of the Interborough Rapid Transit Railway; on account of the length of stop
at this station, thirty trains per hour at the most can be got through on each
of the express tracks during the rush hour, but when the traffic is less dense
up to thirty-four trains per hour have been handled. One type only of carriage,
without smoking accommodation, is used.
The City of Sydney is restricted in area, and in that respect resembles New
York and Boston, although it is much smaller than either of these cities. As


the suburbs of Sydney increase in population, traffic will become very dense,
and rapidity of passenger movement in and out of the trains will be essential
to enable the traffic to be adequately dealt with. During the rush hour,
with four types of carriage, there would be great confusion and clashing of
■the traffic on crowded platforms on account of the passengers sorting them-
selves out, before they could board their respective carriages. This conflict of
movement would greatly increase the length of station stop and thus
materially decrease the efficiency of the system.
It may be contended that in London provision is made for third-class
accommodation, smoking and non-smoking, and that a train capacity of
forty-four trains per hour is maintained, but it must be remembered that in
London, steam surface railways with terminal stations at Charing Cross, Cannon-
street, St. Pancras, Euston, Paddington, &c., convey tens of thousands of
passengers hourly to the City who can reach their destination by walking,
by motor buses, by trams, or by several systems of underground tubes, which
are supplementary only to many other means of passenger distribution.
In most large cities there are several terminal stations, distributing the
traffic at various points in the City. In Sydney the case is altogether different,
for the railways are all owned by the State, and there is and can only be one
principal station. The City Railway is not a supplementary service it is
the one and only means of conveying the railway passengers into the City.
The volume of traffic which may be anticipated at Wynyard Square station
at some future date is 144,000 passengers per hour inbound or outbound.
Long before this capacity is reached the platforms will be congested, and every-
thing possible must be done to reduce the time of station stop, as the efficiency
of the whole system will be determined by the capacity of Wynyard Square
station. Separate platforms will be provided for loading and unloading trains
terminating at this station, and there will be separate entrances and exits to
and from every station. With automatic speed control, it will be possible
to pass eighty trains per hour on each track, and deal with the traffic antici-
pated if one type of carriage only be used. If two types of carriage be used as
first and second class, or one class with sm >king and non-smoking accommoda-
tion, the passengers must separate into two divisions. It may be urged that
this could readily be done and that passengers for one class could assemble
towards one end of the platform likewise the other class at the opposite end.
It must be remembered, however, that the make-up of trains to various suburbs
would be different, and trains to the same suburb would require a constantly
varying amount of each class of accommodation. As trains for various
suburbs traversing the City Railway must call at certain platforms, on
account of the varying train accommodation, passengers on the Central
half of the platform would not know exactly where to stand on the
platform, and there would be conflict of movement as each successive
train arrived. Again the stream of passengers arriving on the platform by
the central steps would meet this uncertain crowd, and there would be great
congestion. Bed rock efficiency can only be reached by adopting one class
of carriage on account of the confusion with two classes of passengers. A loss
of efficiency of at least 10 per cent, would result at Wynyard Square station
during the rush hour, and this loss on an expenditure of some £18,000,000
sterling may be found too heavy a price to pay for two classes of accommo-
dation.
Efficiency is the chief consideration, but there are other reasons why smoking
accommodation should not be provided on the City Railway.


95
Practically the whole of the electric energy fed to the trains will be dissi-
pated in the underground railway in the form of heat, by the working of the
motors, by the friction of the brakes on the wheels, and of the wheels on the
rails. With 1,000 trains per day operating in the subway, the conversion of
electric energy would produce the same heat as by burning 10 tons of coal per
day, but without the attendant smoke and fumes. It might be added that the
four track subway in New York at present accommodates approximately
2,088 trains per day.
In London and elsewhere it has been found that the temperature of under-
ground railways varies with the season, but increases regularly year by year.
The air temperatures at stations on the Bakerloo Railway, London, since 1907,
are given in the following table and show a regular increase. The summer of
1911 was the hottest yet recorded in England. It should be noted that the
readings were taken at 8 p.m.
BAKERLOO RAILWAY, LONDON.
Station Temperatures—Degrees Fahrenheit.
Year.
1907.
I908.
1909.
1910.
1911.
Z9Z2.
Station.
Min,
Max.
Min.
Max.
Min.
Max.
Min.
Max.
Min.
Max.
Min.
Max.
Min.
Max.
Baker-street
Regent’s Park
Oxford Circus
Piccadilly ...
Trafalgar Square ..
Embankment
Waterloo ...
Westminster Bridge
Elephant and Castle
road...
5«i
604
62
59
57
56
574
54
5i
66
66
66J
66J
66 J
66
65i
65
64
(>3i
63 i
65I
63
624
62
61J
61 i
574
69 1
70
71
70
7°
70
6gi
67!
67I
65
66
67
64
&3i
624
621
63
574
70 4
71
7 l i
70 J
704
694
6g4
684
684
651
68
684
65
64
64
63
634
59
7 \
7H
724
71
704
694
69
684
68
67
68
69
66
644
64
64
634
584
734
74
74 i
74
734
73
724
7i4
72
67
68
69
66
64 4
64
64
64
58
1
7 1
724
724
72
714
704
71
69
694
68
684
69
67
664
65
65
63
61
73
724
73
724
72
71
704
694
694
Average
57-3
65-8
62-1
69-4
63'4
70*0
64-5
70*2
64-9
73-2
64-9
7 i-i
65-9
71-5
Mean ...
615
657
667
67
■2
69-0
680
687
Humidity is a very important factor in ventilation, as the disagreeable
odours in enclosed spaces are always more or less noticeable in a humid atmos-
phere. The odours in subways are largely caused by the operating conditions,
the oil and grease used in lubrication, the motors, hot boxes, hot brake shoes,
and fuses, all contributing to render the tunnel atmosphere far less agreeable
than the open air.
The following table gives a comparison of the temperature and humidity
of Sydney with principal cities of the world having underground railways :—
Temperature.
Humidity.
City.
Latitude
Mean
j Summer.
Mean
Winter.
Highest
on
Record.
Lowest
on
Record.
Average
Hottest
Month.
Average
Coldest
Month.
Average
Hottest
Month.
Average
Yearly.
London ...
New York
Paris
Berlin
Sydney ...
deg. min
51 3°
4° 43
48 50
52 3°
33 52
deg.
61-2
72-1
63-
64-
7°'9
deg.
39'3
31-
37-1
32-
53-8
deg.
940
100-o
101*1
98-6
108*5
deg.
9'4
6*o
14*1
13*0
35-9
deg.
62-8
74-5
65-8
660
71-6
deg.
387
3°'3
36-1
30-0
52-3
per cent.
79-r
67-0
75-o
70*0
per cent.
80 -6
71-0
78-8
73-o


360 motor cars, complete @ £4,000
£1,440,000
480 trailer cars electrically equipped with couplings al-
tered to suit new cars and new high duty brake gear
@ £250 each
120,000
Total
£1,560,000
Sydney is nearer the equator and has a higher mean annual temperature
than any of the other cities, and its winter temperature is also much higher.
Sydney is more humid than New York, and conditions similar to those which
prevail on the underground railways in New York can be expected to prevail
in Sydney. During the summer months the subways of New York become
hot and uncomfortable; many passengers prefer to travel by the slower elevated
railway in order to travel in the open air.
On the Philadelphia underground railways smoking, which had been allowed,
was prohibited in 1913, in the interests of public health.
For rapid working it has been shown that the types of carriage should be
reduced to a minimum, so that passengers will enter the car door nearest to
them. On account of the heat, humidity, and operating odours unavoidable
in Sydney during the summer months, it is in the interests of public health
and hygiene that smoking should be debarred on the City Railway, and, as a
consequence, on all the suburban railways.
With the advent of an electric train service, first and second class carriages
should disappear, likewise smoking and non-smoking carriages. One type of
carriage only should be adopted, similar to the latest New York pattern, and
these should be kept clean.
At the present time the suburban railway passenger traffic, inwards and
outwards, is 170,000 daily; there are 109 steam locomotives, 210 first-class, and
490 second-class carriages, i.e., 700 carriages in all in the service, the value of
which is over £1,000,000 sterling. With the existing suburban lines electrified,
and the city railway and the eastern and western suburbs railways in operation,
the estimated number of railway passengers for the year ending 30th June,
1914, was 333,950,- or about double the present amount of 170,000 daily.
To provide for this estimated railway passenger traffic and a margin for
the yearly increase until the proposed railways are constructed, some 360 all-
steel motor cars of the type of the New York Municipal Car, capable of accom-
modating 250 passengers each, would be required at the outset. The existing
carriages would be used as trailers to these motor cars and as trailers to steam
locomotives, as a steam service would have to be maintained to and from
Central Station until the inner and outer zone suburban traffic was electrified.
During the rush hours the suburban train would probably consist at first
of seven cars —three new motor cars, and four of the existing cars as trailers.
In periods of normal traffic a more frequent service than is given under existing
steam conditions is necessary for successful operation, and trains consisting of
two motor cars and two trailers would suffice. When the existing rolling
stock has reached the limit of its usefulness it should be replaced—preferably by
all motor cars —unless the cost of the electrical equipment is prohibitive; if so,
trailers similar in type to the motor cars should be used.
With 360 all-steel motor cars in service, 480 of the existing suburban cars
would have to be equipped for electrical operation, forming 120 seven-car
trains; the balance of the existing stock, viz., 220 cars to be operated to and
from Central Station by steam locomotives, forming say 25 eight-car trains.
The cost of the rolling stock would be approximately as follows:


This expenditure would be distributed over a period of years.
. Electric locomotives could be used to haul the existing carriages, but as
additional carriages, which must be motor cars, become necessary, the cost of
providing say fifty electric locomotives would be nearly three times as great
as the cost of equipping the 480 cars as trailer cars; moreover, an electric loco-
motive service would not be as efficient as a multiple unit service.
Plate No. 86 shows the probable suburban electric train consisting of
three new motor cars and four of the existing cars as trailers, also the type
of train which should be aimed at, viz., seven cars (all motor cars) capable of
accommodating 1,900 passengers.
ORDER OF PROCEDURE.
To adequately deal with the railway traffic problem of Sydney will
necessitate—
1. The electrification of the existing railways.
2. Utilising the existing suburban rolling stock to its fullest extent.
3. Altering existing structures to conform with the Australian Minimum
Structure Gauge. (See Fig. 2, Plate No. 81.)
4. Provision of a suitable type of rolling stock.
5. Constructing the City Railway and electric railways to serve the
Eastern, Western, and Northern Suburbs.
To economically deal with the problem is a difficult matter. By electrifying
the existing railways the train capacity of Central Station could be increased
by 60 per cent., and by providing suitable rolling-stock the passenger capacity
of trains could be increased 100 per cent., making a total increase in passenger
capacity of Central Station of 220 per cent., enabling 78,000 passengers to be
dealt with during the rush hour instead of 24,500 as at present.
It is impossible to increase the carrying capacity of the existing tramway
service, which is now proving inadequate to effectively handle the traffic, and
the extension of the railway into the city is imperative.
The electrification of the railway, Sydney to Sutherland, should be put in
hand during the present year. The power required to operate the existing
service is some 9,000 kilowatts. This power is available at White Bay. The
cost of overhead wiring, bonding, signalling, alterations to track, &c„ may be
set down at £250,000, whilst rolling-stock wall cost £250,000, or £500,000 in all.
This electrification could be completed in 1917, or some twelve months
before the first section of the City Railway could be opened for traffic. The
experience gained in operating this railway electrically would be invaluable
when the time came to operate the City Railway. The City Railway should
be undertaken forthwith, and as soon as possible thereafter the Eastern Suburbs
Railway to Bondi Junction or Daceyville, and the Western Suburbs Railway to
Balmain.
Simultaneously with the construction of the City Railway, the inner zone
suburban railways should be electrified in the following order :
Sydney to Bankstown.
Sydney to Strathfield, four tracks.
Strathfield to Parramatta.
43537—0-


The Northern Suburbs Railway, including the Sydney Harbour Bridge,
should be undertaken as soon as possible after the Eastern Suburbs Railway
has been commenced.
After the Northern Suburbs Railway has been commenced the railways
Strathfield to Hornsby and Hornsby to Bay-road should be electrified, so
as to be ready for traffic about the time the Sydney Harbour Bridge is com-
pleted. It may, of course, be found preferable to electrify these railways
earlier, but the exact date of electrification will depend on how the existing
steam suburban rolling-stock can be utilised to the best advantage.
The next step should be the construction of the underground tramways
from Circular Quay to the Eastern and Western Suburbs, and the final step
the bridge across Darling Harbour to Balmain.
Before all the works outlined above have been completed it will probably
be found necessary to electrify some of the outer zone suburban railways, and
to construct an electric railway to Mosman and Manly. The extension to Manly
should follow closely upon the opening of the bridge to North Sydney.
ESTIMATES OF COST.
The following estimates are approximate preliminary estimates, based on
the information available, and do not include land resumption.
Construction, New Railways.
The following estimates include the cost of overhead equipment, bonding
and signalling;—
Total.
£ £
The City Railway.—Two-track loop rail- 3,000,000
way with tracks bifurcated at stations.
Eastern Suburbs Railway Outer Circle
Double Track-
From the City Railway to Bondi '1,150,000
Junction.
Bondi Junction to Daceyville ... 700,000
Daceyville to Erskineville ... ... 300,000
2.150.000
Western Suburbs Railway, Double
Track—
Stanmore to Weston-road 650,000
Weston-road to Balmain 275,000
Balmain to Wynyard-square, in- 2.125.000
eluding High-level Bridge
across Darling Harbour for
vehicular and pedestrian traffic
3,050,000
Northern Suburbs Railway—
Wynyard-square to Bay-road, in- 2,750,000
eluding High Level Bridge to
North Sydney for vehicular
and pedestrian traffic.


Underground Tramways— £
University Park to Circular Quay... 900,000
Moore Park and Victoria Barracks 850,000
to Circular Quay.
Connection under Bathurst-street... 50,000
1,800,000
Tramway—
Connecting Haberfield Tramway 10,000
with Summer Hill Station.
Total ...£12,760,000
Electrification of Existing Inner Zone Suburban Railways.
Overhead wiring, bonding and signalling, 200 miles 600,000
Repairing sheds and car barns ... ... ... 100,000
Widening tracks to new structural gauge and alter- 800,000
ing overbridges.
£1,500,000
Power.
The power required to operate a suitable service on the existing suburban
railways enumerated above, the City Railway, the Eastern Suburbs Railway,
and the Western Suburbs Railway, will approximate at the outset 90,000
kilowatts.
The cost of installing this power, including substations, transmission lines.
generating machinery, &c., will total £2,250,000.
Rolling Stock.
It is estimated that 360 new "motor cars and 480 converted trailer cars
would be required to operate a suitable service for the suburban railways
enumerated above, the City Railway, and the railways to the Northern, Eastern
and Western Suburbs. The cost of the rolling-stock would be about £1,560.000.
Summary.
Construction new railways and tramways 12,760.000
Electrification of existing inner zone suburban rail- 1,500,000
ways.
Power for new and existing railways 2,250,000
Rolling-stock, new and existing railways 1,560,000
£18,070,000
or, say, £18,000,000.
The above estimate does not include land resumption or the cost of electri-
fying the outer zone suburban railways, which could not be economically
electrified for some years, or the cost of constructing the suburban railways
shown as future extensions by Plate No. 82.


THE FINANCIAL ASPECT,
The estimated cost of the City Railway and Suburban Electric Railways
proposed for immediate construction, including power and accessories is as
follows:
The City Railway 3,000,000
Offices in George-street in conjunction with Wynyard
Square Station ... 300,000
The Eastern Suburbs Railway to Bondi Junction ... 1,150,000
The Western Suburbs Railway, Stanmore to Weston-
road... ... ... ... ... ... ... 650,000
Power and accessories ' 1,300,000
£6,400,000
The proportionate cost of rolling stock for these railways may be set down
at £600,000, making a total outlay of £7,000,000.
Interest.
Taking the rate at 4J per cent., the interest on the above expenditure
would be £315,000 per annum.
Ratio of Working Expenses to Earnings.
The experience of other countries has been that when a steam service has
been converted to an electric service the working expenses are considerably
reduced. It is this reduction in working expenses which enables interest
to be paid on the original cost of a railway plus the additional interest on
capital required for electrification; and moreover the interest returned as
dividends has generally been greater after electrification.
The Butte Anaconda Railway was changed from a steam to an electric
service in October, 1913, and the reduction in the operating expenses was
40 per cent., while the Manhattan Elevated Railway in New York when
electrically operated showed a reduction of 20-4 per cent. The average general
experience indicates a reduction of at least 17 per cent.
The report of the Chief Railway Commissioner for the year ended 30th
June, 1914, states that the working expenses for all classes of passenger and
goods traffic were 69-87 per cent, of the total earnings. For the suburban
passenger traffic only the ratio of working expenses to earnings would be
less than the above figure and should not exceed 65 per cent. When electrically
operated the ratio of working expenses to earnings on the suburban system
ought, in the light of the experience of all other countries, to be reduced by
at least 15 per cent., or, for the proposed electric railways, the ratio of working
expenses to gross earnings should not exceed 55 per cent.
On the Hudson and Manhattan Railway, New York, for four months ending
28th February, 1915, the ratio of working expenses, including City taxes, to
gross earnings was 42 per cent., whilst for the Interborough Rapid Transit
Railway, New York, for eighteen months ending 31st March, 1915, the ratio
was 45-5 per cent.
Probable Revenue.
The Chief Commissioner’s Report for the year 1914 gives the average
receipts per suburban passenger per mile as -57 pence first class, and -37 pence
second class, including workmen's fares, with an average of *4 pence per
passenger per mile for all classes.


With the inauguration of a rapid transit service one class of accommodation
only will be provided, and if it be determined that no loss of revenue be
permitted on the existing suburban railways during the first year, then the
average rate of per passenger per mile would have to be adopted. There
is a reservation, however, that the working of one class of accommodation
only may result in a reduction of working expenses approximately sufficient
to meet the deficit otherwise created.
With regard to the new city section, at the outset all passengers traversing
it would pay the equivalent of id. in each direction on daily or season tickets;
in other words the present tram fare of id. in each direction would be added to
each ticket. The passenger would gain in time and would not have to change
from the train to the tram. On the Eastern Suburbs Railway beyond King’s
Cross Station, a uniform fare of 2d. in each direction—the same as the existing
tram fare—would probably be necessary, whilst on the Western Suburbs
Railway a fare of 3d., the same as the present tram fare, would be required.
Later, a reduced rate on. the season ticket mileage basis in vogue could be
incorporated with the ordinary season ticket.
The railways should be in operation about the end of the year 1919, and the
passengers carried and revenue derived during 1920 —the first year of complete
operation—also in the year 1926 are estimated to be as follow :
ESTIMATED REVENUE—YEAR 1920.
Daily Passengers. Fare. Revenue
Railway.
£
id. 1,690
2d. 614
3d. 5°5
£2,809
rnings £952,00
("428,000. Fro:
City ... ... ... ... ... ... ...i 405,800
Eastern Suburbs to Bondi ... ... ... ... 73,700
Western Suburbs to Weston-road ... ... ... 40,400
Assuming 339 days per annum, this represents as gross earnings £952,000,
or allowing 55 per cent, as working expenses, a nett revenue of £428,000. From
this must be deducted the interest on capital, viz., £315,000, leaving a surplus
of £113,000. To this amount must be added the rental value of the office
accommodation provided for the Chief Commissioner, which, after deducting
rates and taxes, is estimated at £12,000. The total estimated surplus on the
first year of operation is therefore £125,000.
ESTIMATED REVENUE—YEAR 1926.
The estimated revenue for the year 1926 is as follow's :
Daily Fare „ Daily
Passengers. Revenue.
Railway.
City
Eastern Suburbs to Bondi
656.000
110.000
60,600
Western Suburbs to Weston-road
equivalent to £1,494,000 per annum.


Stationary interest charges on Capital as invested,
1914, and as given in Chief Commissioner’s
£
Report for that year
263,451
Allowing 55 per cent, for working expenses, this represents a nett revenue
of £672,000 per annum, which after paying £315,000 interest, leaves a surplus
of £357,000, to which must be added £12,000 rental value of offices of the
Chief Commissioner, making £369,000 in all.
About this time a further expenditure of about £1,500,000 will have to be
made for additional rolling stock and power. At per cent, per annum the
interest on this amount would be £67,500, leaving an estimated nett surplus
for 1926 of £301,500.
The Effect on the Tramway Revenue.
If the proposed electric railways had been in operation in 1914 it is estimated
that 37 per cent, of the tramway passengers would have been diverted to the
railways. For the year ended 30th June, 1914, the earnings of the tramways
as a whole were £1,934,164, the working expenses £1,669,033, and the balance
after paying working expenses £265,131. The total capital invested in the
tramways on 30th June, 1914, was £7,628,653, on which the interest charged
was £263,451.
If 37 per cent, of the tramway passengers are diverted the earnings and
working expenses would be each reduced by that percentage. The working
expenses of the railways and tramways were largely added to in 1914 and
previous years, owing to a substantial increase in wages, and as wages should
not increase again for some years the ratio of working expenses to earnings
should tend to decrease on account of the natural expansion of the traffic.
Based, however, on the ratio given in the Chief Commissioner’s Report for
1914, the balance in 1920 after paying working expenses would be £397,700
less 37 per cent., or £250,500.
The tramway traffic is estimated to increase at the rate of 7 per cent, per
annum, and if the capital invested increases in proportion it would amount to
£11,500,000 in the year 1920, or some £4,000,000 more than the present capital.
The rate of interest to be paid on the extra capital will be higher than that
paid at present and is taken at 4I per cent, per annum. The estimated revenue
for the tramways for 1920 is as follows : —■
Interest charges on additional £4,000,000 capital at
4J per cent. 180,600
443.451
Estimated balance after paying working expenses
and allowing for 37 per cent, decrease in traffic 250,500
Deficit £192,951
Summary.
Estimated deficit from tramways, 1920 192,951
Estimated surplus from Electric Railways, 1920 ... 125,000
Nett deficit £67,951
This estimated deficit would represent the interest on some £1,500,000
at 4J per cent, per annum.


After the City Railway has been commenced the authorities controlling
the tramways would, it is considered, decrease the expenditure on tramway
rolling stock and tramways generally, so that the system would not be over
capitalised in 1920 when it must lose 37 per cent, of its passengers, and certainly
a large portion, if not all, of the capital represented by the above deficit need
not be spent, although by withholding the expenditure the public during the
rush hour would not be provided with a maximum of facility, but relief would
be given immediately the first section of the City Railway was opened, viz.,
during the year 1918.
The tramway power-house at White Bay has a surplus of power for present
day traffic, and as the estimates for the City and Suburban Electric Railways
include a sum of £1,300,000 for power and accessories, this power could be
installed to be available for tramway purposes until the year 1920, after which
this power would be used by the electric railways. By doing this, and by
curtailing the expenditure on rolling stock it should be possible to reduce the
normal expenditure on tramways during the next five years by £1,500,000
and by properly graduated capital outlay in view of transfer of service,
the estimated deficit in the year 1920 could probably be obviated.
From the year 1920 onwards, the tramway position should steadily improve,
as the traffic must again grow in the City proper, though not at the present
rate of increase, but the traffic on the outlying tramways, which will be feeders
to the electric railways, will increase at a more rapid rate than at present.
THE PROPOSAL TO UTILISE THE CITY RAILWAY
FOR TRAMWAY PURPOSES FOR FIVE YEARS.
Boston was the first City to construct subways for tramway purposes.
These were undertaken to enable the street cars to proceed underground to
the centre of the City more quickly than they otherwise could on account of
the narrow, crooked and congested streets. A somewhat similar reason has
influenced other cities, where tram cars are running underground. Compared
with an underground railway system, the volume of traffic which can be
carried by an underground tramway system is very small. The consensus of
opinion in all cities visited was that underground tramways were upon
occasions necessary to expedite the tramway traffic, and to facilitate vehicular
and pedestrian traffic in the streets, but in comparison with electric railways,
are not justified from any point of view.
The City Railway‘now recommended will have a high-level station at
Central Station. It will be impossible to connect an underground tramway
from the Western Suburbs with the City Railway before reaching Town Hall
Station, hence the only portion of the City Railway on the western side which
could be used for tramway purposes would be from Town Hall to Circular
Quay. On the eastern side of the city the underground tramway could connect
with the City Railway at Liverpool-street, and could utilize the City Railway
from thence to Circular Quay.
In order to utilize the City Railway for tramway purposes, the complete
loop would have to be built in the first instance, together with the necessary
tramway connections, at an outlay of about £3,945,000. The result of this
expenditure would be to facilitate the tramway traffic to Eastern and Western


Suburbs, and to improve the street traffic conditions by withdrawing a number
of cars from the streets. No relief would be provided at Central Station, the
train capacity of which would not be in any way increased.
Now, by an expenditure of £1,800,000 on the construction of the City
Railway from Central Station to Circular Quay, together with £270,000 for
electrifying the Sydney-Sutherland and Sydney-Bankstown lines, and £1,300,000
for necessary rolling stock and power, or a total of £3,370,000, a system could
be provided which would at once give a greatly increased train capacity at
Central Station and relieve the city streets of a large number of tram cars.
These would amount to the number of cars required to carry all ferry passengers
who now travel between the Quay and Central Station via Pitt-street or
Castlereagh-street, and also practically all the Illawarra suburban passengers,
who at present use the trams to travel between Central Station and various
points in the City. Central Station would benefit to the extent of not having
to deal with the Illawarra suburban traffic as terminal traffic, thus freeing a
number of platforms for other purposes.
Thus it win be seen that an initial expenditure of £575,000 more is necessary
to provide for the use of the City Railway for tramway purposes, without
furnishing any relief at Central Station. Of this extra amount, £45,000 would
be absolutely lost capital, for upon converting the line to its intended purpose
by running electric trains, the tramway connections would be of no further
service.
The tram car in use on the surface is not at all suitable for operation on a
rapid transit underground system. The car bodies, though excellently adapted
for the slower surface service could not be expected to stand the wear and
tear of underground work at speeds of 30 miles per hour and upwards.
The trolley pole is arranged for normal operation at a height of 17 ft. 6 in.,
and could not be operated satisfactorily over long lengths of subway when the
maximum height could only be 15 feet.
The open or partly-open cars in use should not be operated underground
on account of the danger to passengers through the possibility of falling from
the cars. With the present type of car the conductor collects fares from the
footboard; this would be impossible in tunnels.
To operate the number of tram cars required on the railway it would be
necessary to couple the cars together in units of two; certain only of the
existing cars are wired on the multiple unit system, which would preclude
the use of the majority of them.
It is, therefore, quite plain that for an underground tramway service a
large number of cars to an entirely new design would have to be built, and
the cost of these would be comparable with the cost of providing electric railway
rolling stock. It would, however, be advantageous in every way to expend
any money available on high capacity railway stock in preference to new
tramway stock.
It might be thought that six cars could be coupled together at the entrances
to the subways and proceed underground to Circular Quay as a train at a high
speed, but the time taken to assemble and couple the cars together would
occupy at least a minute. As a headway of 30 seconds at least would be
required between successive trains of cars, the same capacity and a more
efficient service could be obtained by running two car units at a 30 seconds
headway.
. The pressure between the tramway trolley wheel and overhead wire is
18 lb., the City Railway wiring will necessarily be such that a pressure of 30 lb.


per wire, or 60 lb. total pressure will exist between the pantograph and the
two trolley wires. This construction would be so rigid that the use of the
ordinary trolley wheel current collectors would be impossible and bow collectors
would have to be substituted. The voltage of the tramway trolley wire is
600, whereas 1,500 volts is proposed for the underground railway.
Platforms, permanent-way, and overhead wiring would have to be arranged
in the first instance to suit tramcars and then rebuilt to suit railway stock.
The natural solution of the traffic problem of Sydney is in the first instance
to construct the City Railway, the Eastern Suburbs Railway as far as Bondi
Junction, and Western Suburbs Railway to Weston-road, to electrify the
existing suburban railways, Sydney to Sutherland, Sydney to Bankstown,
Sydney to Parramatta, and to provide the necessary power and rolling stock.
Relief would be afforded to Central Station and Circular Quay, and to the
tramway traffic from the Eastern and Western Suburbs. Some 80,000,000
passengers per annum who now travel to and from the City by tramcars would
travel by electric railways. The street traffic, based on present day traffic,
would be reduced by some 4,000 tramcar journeys per day, and the residents
of the outlying suburbs would be served by a quick and up-to-date means of
transit.
When the Eastern Suburbs and Western Suburbs Railways are completed,
the street traffic, based on present day figures would be relieved to the extent
of 113,000,000 passengers per annum, or say 5,650 tramcars journeys daily.
In conclusion, no practical or economical advantages would result from
attempting to run trams on the City Railway, while from the point of view of
first cost, efficiency, safety, permanency of construction, relief to Central
Station, and general suitability, it is evidently a scheme not comparable with
the natural solution of the traffic problem of Sydney, which is to construct
the City Railway and use it for railway purposes.
CONCLUSION.
As stated in the opening paragraplis of this report, no attempt has been
made to describe the various systems of underground railways and tramways
visited in the various cities. Such information would have been more or less
a compilation, and though interesting, it would have had no real bearing on
the problem to be solved in Sydney.
Throughout the United States, Canada, Great Britain, France, and
Germany, the authorities responsible for the planning, construction, or opera-
tion of transportation undertakings, engineers responsible for the design and
erection of long span bridges, and officials controlling establishments which
fabricate material and equipment therefor, one and all, received me most
cordially, and furnished ‘me with any information desired, for which kindness
and attention I wish to thank all concerned.
The development of the scheme for Metropolitan Railways, has, since the
year 1890, passed through many vicissitudes. If the proposal submitted in
this report be carried into effect I venture to think that the judgment of the
citizens of Sydney and the Engineering profession generally will be distinctly
favourable.
ll c -^
Chief Engineer,
24th February, 1915. Metropolitan Railway Construction.
43537—B


Plate 1.
r^*l6s *
_)^Q5
<*=W
HC->
?050
S *
2 £’
0 i
Big
qsx
zoh
<z </)
5.
PS2
XX
xX H
p B '.
sg||
E 3 S
g°<X
Rxhjj
V«*CO£)
1 OZO
"°~X
■ X
* tO H
h) C\
- : o£
TTr-rrlftr- ■
QQ
ZW
ss»
g<£
»S M .
ozw
<->*-tO
tn 5
co . O
OSK
u^K
X*S
pT 2
gzx
gxx
7gx
I Zh
«Xt/}
< w
U J
H "J
CO <
. H
£
©2
nJ 1 - 1
Ph , 4
hJ C\
wcu M
J°*W
< 0«
03 «/-)D
< V°
2 I x
zSns
o>w
fO*" l^
1| 8
"l«
«< X
si ite
2® £
ks 05
'25
*w & : r : :
•cx. «"»
IT o o m r 1
2*; S' bi? m ~
Irl !;!::
5 c : ; : t :
« s> * * ! : :
5* h N n VI
£6d 6 6 d
£ £ £ Z; Z,
&a.i
' QiO.'Z
■•• ' _ o
1 ' ■’ ** 4; S 5
.‘ <ss
• ■ <-a
-■ ■ • 1 WQ.U
CO 05
■ 2%° ■
- H X
I .s
■ • ■ g£ s -§
WqCU*
: <6^
■ U3
S«S^
NO |fl*
«S>h
': x^og
f-< H cti
gz
■ ; -
; £S||
i
1 S K ga
; § Is
, UW«sj
• > I Z«<
■ ■; ■"ESS
X JD« ®
XSxg a
Db,zc «
mKBqH
x s z<
X uo6
~ - - -’
■ i > I xEg
•owtgx
L • g Hz: dz b
!L S-ag"?
a fcHpS«
5 V ‘fxSOzw
6 ,SBssgg
£ «ii§g§
B•■ • H g S o «
I .'• ■• doSgwg
H 2dQj2o
* ! g^g*
u-s • *' * , >s*H,.g
■* l ' [<• fri to
i“SwS2S


'
zzd
— Interborough Rapid Transit ’ 11 11,1UI#W
— Subway Car —
: Ca/wety
Seafa/_ 44.
S/a/?e/w/_ /2S.
«
*
5?
%
-s
-of
i
—
yo/a/ rasse/?gerj_ /o&.
£no i
'Op'AT/ON
sa sa a a
E
*-
%U
ffk.
m
1^1
M
W
HU
□ □
□n
m
m
Hi
tit
m
Hi
VK
ypi
1 w ws
*p*i4
i T r<r
%
*44
Hi
m
. v ( JA ,
" i
i
V
•«
*
>
i
B
i
l b
r
\
rh -
" r
/
vL/
77
- I S/0S HrVAT/OAf ,
* - *jrL /} ~
ever a// 4S ■/
l\ \
i
L‘
-
■ ■- - ■
’ 1
1
/r -
n 2
r T r -
I
'
1 rt-
IJ (T>
1
I fcO
1
41821
PHOTO' LITHOQRAPHCD ■>
PiAN
r W.A. OULLICK. OOTT. PRINTER, N.&W.
'


ru er
• New
York Muni
cipal Railways
This car accommodates
of whon7 78 are Seated
£70
m rus^
Pa ssengers
hours
9
-/tf
awf «a»i« t
r
J
and
90 during
p«
riods of light - Traff
IC.
m
2»
V
J
i
i
. (
II
□
>4
1 (
i
)
i- 4
— vrH
3
TT
L
s
. St*** *• C*j*
t
R
1
JLJ
— Cfross
I! U
Sa'ct/m at
-A
CtUT/tl trout. —
Sect/ art o* £. .
_[
tw«r
—£md £L£VATJL
pk?
TV.
u_
'
*-r-
*1*
.t
i~_n
rh —
—
J-J
—i
«
i--
•
m--4)v
1
•
3-
JJJ
iU-
il
■1
A
1
H
>!
, -
i
J
1
>-
1
I
l.
1
'J
“S
f
■■j
V> 1
j
r
II
1
■— 1
f
-jr:±*fr
1
4^rr-
*
tow*
Y~i-
— z->-d-/*4— 7t~*
r> s-a *■
r/V
r-—'
■P_LAJ_
V
□
’=* —
X)
1 if}
id
IM
1 i
]\
WM
(a
m
m
VJ
\jm
y
m
gay
ME
3=
is
Wi\
fiiwS|
i
\k
m
i
J
m
*44
u
|
J||
p||
m
1
5T
1
1
-r
— 1
cT
ft
r
1
(L
L_L
r'
*
03
_L
_L
\
7
-t’
r
T
1
i
1
41821
1
PHOTO-
.ITHOQRAPHEO B>
f W.A.
QULUCK
, oovr. PRINTER
N.&W.






Plate 6.


1
—
— N . 3 . W. R. "' p
Suburban Gar
Cantilever Underframe
Close Coupled
Tare I9.r. I/.c.O.q.
C<7/)GC//y
Seated 60.
Stond/na 40.
»
>
'4
m
1
i D
3d
0
1
jnnri
|j~i1
u,
i-
ii
7b/a/ Passengers. /60.
a
£a/o St
a ft
SVAT/OH.
/
~ w
•<
i
■ a a a a
ff *
H\n
m
1M
m\
%
n
i_
Hi
I
i:
a
Silillil
'* ’
°o 'h
1 •'
*■
i
L [Ml 1
iit[p |! ■
j[iilllll"’' "'"I'lUlIjJ
iiiiiiiillll
IIH
I UJL/f rzd tA
' ’ •'*
Eiw / v i(ii
■I
—--^
\
N H
J
' 1 * 1
IX
Vi
. 9
(
-J
- —-
7 c
H J '/Of 1
c
%
J.
HI
-E
— r
A A
\T
A
-
Tr
-i-
f r~»y~^
!
=J-
* d
T
JL
f Y~'
lJj
A
A
hi
-£
*&*
41821
/ JL
1
ti P^h
Luj _
T
— , —
t -si
_ \
Or-5-,
f
Hn
js: k:
J ■
' <o
, H-k
h i P
rT
n>
1
. . A
4i
n -
# 1 j?<
f-£ '
Pla/v
w, a. au
...... m
KHOTO'UTHOORAPHCD BY
LUCK. GOVT. PRINTER N.S.W.


•
5”
s
Plate 8
1
(
]
D
D
□
□
D
D
1
t^l
1 ---
Victorian Railways
[ st £
tc I 1
' < 1 1
i
Hi
t~z
f s f V
\
'H
\
i
<*
±
ft
M
z
K
X
t-’
>
o
e
t
0
1 3
4
1
>
m
s
<
B
0
I
3
6
t-
X
El
\
*
Q
•
° 1 J
‘t M k
£ & & §
1
| *
El
5?
I 4
i
|l?5j
i
1
T^j
1
I
•*>
1
5
*i
Q
—z%*;*"~\
i
*•
*
Z3>Cm
s
s
1
..'■"■1 L ?U l . -
Rfef
t
Y
*
■1
5
L
*
* i
.
r
"> L.
///
US
.
II
1
Hi*l
, {i 1
»> 1
1 1
1
1
1
I
IS 8 !
@
*
1
A
1 In
f
i ,
< sr
o '» . 7
Iff
r— -ff-F/- >
% i
i^l
i
[ | S _
-
pggjj
/ T
i
41821
II#
ks^'l
_____
i
— V
—
L
Jr-
4


’M'sx •aaiNiMd HonioD r* a
A
//y
fl Q3HdV«
'►'V
oohxii-c
>XOHd
■ ■ *- ■ — " —
iZQi*
a»— n *m m — i ■
j
—
►
I
—
—
11
E
r
H
J
n
1
1(J
j
p|
j
1
J
L
a
1
r
zn
1
- 6S>
i-vaaff
.
r .
//
w ' A/O/J. y'AJ JUi\f
, f
— \ O - & — — —
t~
n
(
l
i
\
_J
—
I .«
I
I
V
)
)
V*
\*—i — m r~~
—/ 1 —
—=F5>-
— rs
£
'h
1 1
\v>
c
h\
i
n
%
B
□
□
□
h
OO
□ 0
SI
J- -*r-Ff—
B
H
H
FI
a
i
0
Urn
la
I %\ 1
t %
11
ii
=j
-====
j
i
i i
1 i
,-r^S
i ■ ■
EEEiP
*#■“1 II 1 ■ -1.^—iit— ir— 11 oUHl— 1 L_ji—iILJLJJ «— ll—lUU ilj— inu-ii—«
1
to *1 if
kJL
/vo/j.y*jr7'j
• £0/ sw&aJWtf/ a J°l
09 ifatpt/BjS’
•yC
i \
* \
I * \
1 JT
1
1,
i
*
• ,
■Z8 /WW
■//loaohj
, I
Ms-
■ 1
jA
<
j
NVA «VQ MOJ.OVA1
V ■'
r
a -==-■
>
QxvMvmvy NViaoioi/
H ‘
Plate 9


"Typical Dead-end Terminal Stations
wro*" szo ‘■°~ a 1 , " -
Pj_A rrO#A7 S2o' iCQ/VO |
t
Fm: / —
U 7oon >|
e__. -PtWHUM LCHGTH 700 j f>t.ArroK/T 320 t-ono 1 n —>•
1 Pla Troftrt 320 /.ova j
n&:£.
pLArro/ifr SZo' /.ave
Fig: B.
PHOTO-LITHOOBAPMED »Y *,*. QULL10K. OOVT. PRINTER, «»«
Plate 10,


Manhattan
Arrangeme
’
:n
Terminal — Brooklyn bridge
Plan Shewing .
t of Tracks and Platforms
?
Vf
1KI
--Til
hv illlllll UNLOADING PLAT NORM |
iMliJ LOADING pLAn
m LOADING PL Arrow
/ n/SD/Na Plat
1/?A/ UN LOAD/ NO PLATFORM A OlllMJD
77”
rORAf
fill L OAD/NG PL A TFOPM C UliOj
X iimimhip RJiimmi 1 ■■* / a /-> y a / y* D r a o Af 1
i
A H
/ UW m uuwtw " —' ■: — I
41821,
C3
K Lev£L Cross/no
Scale //nch — 80 f&r 1 — 1
PHOTO-LITHOQBAPHID by w.a. oullick. COVT. PRINTS R, N.S.W.
Plate 11


Pennsylvania Railroad Company’s
'
-
NEW YORK TERMINAL
Tunnel .
PLArrc
;:Tvg:-rrT:-s; - /V? // ■
PLATfO&Af W*T
/V* g |
- Pl-ATA-p*/* A/iS ~
—_ "~ ri " . a r r o * Nf /V- 4 \*fjr
" /* 1. A T f O * ET A?J
- ' L ' p/.Arsb*/* //: £
- .. -1
- - /Y*/
Tunnel
Tunnel
Plan at Tra™ i fvfi
41821
PHOTO>LITHOQRA»HKO BY W.A. QULLICK. QOVT. PRINTER. N.1W.
Plate 12




0£/7G0S/V<7
//VCOAS//V&
7Z//V/V/TZ
7‘C/A/A/EL
Hudson a. Manhattan Railroad u-
\
I
Church si Terminal
t
,
i
-
I
Plan at Track Level
/
*
1 — i
Work/ no Platporp
i
i
*
. JESSJ-wr — nur /v^ISllUlik.
Jy
Arr/val Platporm n'o’ woe
\
m HftMl/ jSIHEfr <W /a* Mfltfr AV
ASA /
\
»
Departure. Platporm 22- o’ w/oe
yr j '
jffllllllM— : n*,T HIUPB- nt/T MllHifc— OVT ODT-WMP evHittillllf our fffflJllllf
Jfi/ ll
\\
Arr/val Pla tporm 22- o woe A
_
/
V
/l
1 »d
\
\
/,v-Bk um« tt4MSB mijv
Jy
k
>
\\
departure Platporm 220’ w/de
ft- ' 1
p
Arr/val Platporm //•'«' w/oe
Cr
o
r
Ox
42Q. o >■
PHOTO-LITHOGRAPHED »Y W.A. OULL'CK. OOVT. PRINTER. N.R.W.


Plate 15
s
d
m
H
Z
c
&
>
o
9
d
o
3
3
e
* *
>
>•
■
o
M
X
ft.
<
•r
o
o
X
3
6
H
O
X
ft.
c
5


16
Plate


Plate 17.
ORANGE PEEL DIPPER TO DIG TRENCH 30 FEET DEEP, ANY WIDTH.
IN OPERATION AT MONTREAL.




19
Plate


Plate 20.


Plate 21.
14
04
3® I o
&
w
ywE z
w '
rot d
s] g
>
<
BMPi z
Hi O
H
O
Z
Kaal x
SfflwiM w
rwg y
tCQ >
tfSH <
■[■H
O
«
&S, =>
xaSi 1/1
>■*« o ■
>•-•43 55
. .’ w
5
* H


Plate 22.
CONSTRUCTION OF FOUR-TRACK SUBWAY IN NARROW STREET, NEW YORK.


Plate 23


t, rJf. 1 in
1 1
mkm w •
TWtfll z
ilHg Z
H '
w
cAjp! u
iarJK o'
fflUlr a:
j
*|£H <
I u
s-l&H & -
filllwj >
WmECm {-*


25
Plate


Plate 26.
Jiia o
SSI 2
H
■*W*m
it JH <
wal nJ
£>;*■ cc
%s&m§ ~
*SSI| o
$S»f *
hSII t*
£9 Z
mi ' °
1J in
»122 / </>
11
a 1 ~
Si * °
I: b
I* w
FJ * S
I .5, Q
I i 2
f ■ i x
i j in
:•• <
X -j
« j o
j >
VMJ- « K
H
W\ A <
|n J
SB\
BSSm o
WMMMM 55
AWyMM h*
Mv\wM o
ill w
Hn9n h
SB o
■1 OS
WH
Jt


Plate 2 Z




Plate 29.






• • •
• •
• . t
• ••••••
• •••••
• •
• •••••
• •••••
• •
•• • • • • •
• •
••• • • • •
• •••••
• • • • • •
• •••••
• • • • •
» •
• •••••
• •••••
• •••••
•• • •
• •
• • • • • •
• • • • • •
••• • • •
• • • • • •
32
Plate


*1 J
o
h
o
Jiijffli u
?SQ|
zJWm o
fs#« H
ygiyfl (-
BPrjw cc
=
x
, d
»rptl ~
fvm* -
Ml? s
Wrm*. u
JUi w
V ■ ' J
, Jr 5 w
'! 1 °
! ■ i i
fejil s
rl I
41l i
m
®l 5
llpl "■
iwifcjra °
i:fj| 5
Si i


Plate 34-


Plate 35.


Plate 36.


Plate 37.
t n
u
Z
<
X
U
J
-1
<
O
D£
u-
c/5
X
u
H
W
>
2
o
Q
£
c.
uc
£
u-
C
Q
O
35
s
s
o
g
>
o
s
w
cu
o
a
C/3
o
2
H
w
>
2


11^
Plate 38.


Plate 39.
H
■ z
JdM w
Fs&M
4H z
ill OS
fli y
t|9 >
L*trj o
gfl o
r.K vi
fJB D
os
&S o
Pm
Hi H
HI _3
mI 5
KHI a
o
[3 Q
Sfj s
Unfl
m <
mm £
OS
w
>
5
u
<
ss
o
H
O
c.
OS
w
>
o
w
o
2
•<
os
Q
>-
<
S
O
H
W
w
U-.
<*■'
cc
w
OS
c
u*
ti
os
H
2:
w
o


pi
Plate 40.


H
Z
<
J
0-
0 >r
fc O
d a
CD
5 u j
11 i
a: >
u 00 i
1 u-l §
H °l o
Z o
L < W
0 g *
££ <
Z Ui 2
< 5
1 <
u
I x
< >-
u
z
u
a
41
Plate


Plate 42.
SPECIAL PLANING MACHINE 13 Ft. x 10 Ft. FOR FACING ENDS OF LARGE
CHORD MEMBERS.




■>
k : f c«
* «
J cs
■ P
2a >*
H 3 2
il <
VvJ
IB O
■fl
■ w
HI o
■ o
■ 5
■ c
■
9B <
b u
H 2
B w
■
H <
H
in
CC
W
cc
ss
w
s
o
2
5
j?
w
c/)
c/:
<
w
u
Q
5
n
w
H
<
O
tt-
X


Plate 45.


Plate 46.
w
7.
<
C
7
7.
<
>
OS
<
H
O
OS


Plate
11l
0
0
0*
V
DO
0
111
IQ
U
of <
fc kJ
0 p
z z
□ o
h 2
<
[3 06
E °
5 uj
£ S
0 *
° m
2 ui
I □
(0 Z
LjJ
L q;
° £
z <
g - 1
h H*.
0 CO
U
w
0
Z
<
2
<
j
(L


Plate 48.
H
W
a
X
H
O
z
a
a
H
D
u
If)
w
H
<
-1
Cu
Q
W
05
<
W
X
tf
o
g
S
<
cu
«
o
pH
*
Ph
z
<
►J
cu
PJ
o
Q
w
a
o
Q
5
B
U
a
CC
W
D
a


Plate 49.


Plate 50.
os
\ w
' z
■ I 3
t C-
VBM cj
jam <
mm Mh
os
|m| d
co
hB *
u
|gM|
B9flH vo
BB|^H
HH z
PB o
h| w
mSM o
SB k
co
Hi
BB o
IS «
gH W
ni &
g|
HI <
fcjPl s
al s
PM H
jp Q
pSI
ipri <
v* k


Plate 51.


Plate 52.
QUEBEC BRIDGE. DRILLING FIELD SPLICE OF BOTTOM CHORD.


Plate 53.


Plate 54.


j!
i #, '■<£*■- ,- ■ I*. Bii.ffl
-■ - ■ nw?^
lra *
. ■ SCI i-5
’^z^zsPmSe&p&Kst^ B~3nAvibc •
Bj <
HI Q
n o
■■ X
BB u
55
PH o
rTh h
1 H
«
■B b
o
BB y,
QB o
u
■h? w
co
P 5 Q
r-*j “
w
o
Q
5
k
u
w
cq
w
3
O'
55
Plate


; ■
V ' -
\i V-. . ; j
QUEBEC BRIDGE. SECTION OF VERTICAL TENSION MEMBERS 108 FEET LONG
Plate 56.


SIDE VIEW OF TRAVELLER AND ONE TOWER OF STAGING FOR INNER ARM.


ON TOP OF TRAVELLER, SHOWING ONE END OF THE ASSEMBLING CRANES.
Plate 58


QUEBEC BRIDGE TRAVELLER.






OULLIOK. «OVT. PHIIOCR RAW


The City Railway
COMMISSIONER’S SCHEME
by the Royal Commission
on
Improvement - 1909.
CHIEF RAILWAY
recommended












Plate 66




Plate 67




Plate 68




Plate 69


Plate 69


Plate 70.


Plate 71.


Plate 72


U V 0 Chief Enoineeb.
2Lt •**“ tS’ METROPOLITAN RAILWAY CONSTRUCTION.
■ B
%J/l U SYDNEY
_J|l H >-
1 I § ?VE
iI U * • /
: rcr L q: s /
/ < <
c / -J Z
y-uiiiiji
—<§r^Tr
i Macquarie's chair
PEACOCKSPI
GOVERNMENT
HOUSE
FARM COVE
GROUNDS
\\
\\ o


400^
CO
Q
z
o
250 O
tU
200 w
P
100 ,
‘ cl
•II
' ' *<•
' 7’7' h CENTRAL.
50 • ••• • ' h
e•ooo®• S 2 o -O o a
S . a o g : 2 ,_.i, .a , a g o
' r; : u» ” a -■ u» . ;■j r ■ ■ Sil ; ■ : e 3 '' . m ‘'‘r * ‘ ‘ 13 ' ’ i ‘S' ‘ i ta a
—4-+- ; • - r! I ]-• ;-f-~ t , -- -t -I ,-t —-i —i - ~:,n ;- ; . ~,9 , , , , i , . . us
t:.-ir : ; I station stop
• '■-vv-:' • : ■ j An RPnnNna
£ 40 SECONDS.
DISTANC
Scale—s
5 ; ! ' t >
■' ‘ ’■ o .... .'o' S a a . o .... o
o 2 -- S .. - . § : S ■ o •• • o -H- ■ o
j.,.; j.I to , . . r^,’»- r 1-jj-I-- *9-*—!--i-•• 1-I--—®9 ■ -i-r ,I 05
DISTANCES IN FEET.


DISTANCE-TIME CURVES.
! i Seale—soo Feet = 1 inch (Hor.) ■, ;. 4 ,y|; ' . 'i.-T tZrrj- XI4I
.1 ZZZ. 50 secs. —A inch (Ver.) \ —• 4-~f4 —L-T-j-i
4 80 TRAINS PER HOUR. ' - - - h;f
;; iL 4 u : : i:l' l zrj:r;:i d:\ ::i:
1 - :
o4n4Z-4444-- w l -4-t-144-4-rZ-r*4-T-T-i--i--i--l-4-2-i 2 -■ i-- !-i-J-U-ji I I H t-i-^-4-r-t-t
CES IN FEET.


}- MMI i! I ! I 11 I I v) h 11 ! I 1111 I|lli|M!| 11 i | | i IIi|! | N i ! ; : | j 1111 |I | 11 || Ijj i- | | ~platei~Z3^
1 r -t-rp-fHr 900 ; r —' Frp-FT+-r iyrf- HPfH ~~~~ | j 1 !~ti~~ri~
• - T-f-t- [4'44-- > ~ j-4- h- i- - r ppFipj-p.4---|- -j j i-j-i —:_7T7F-4d^-^44f44~4i-—HfFFh-■j-^F7|l|7t|7t|7ptllj7Zp|7i7uuiiF£n~lF~pFF44~*~tlF4^—... -1.[.. -*-u-{- 44444j7FFpp4pi--lU4[lll J-4-f-P —i —l-—l—j Ll_Lxl _
if r^rrq^4:iJ = :ii:l|id_4riTl^' 1 [ : F_4 L i_rtlt: f *1 rH | i 1 FfP:: J L 'A\ A ±-
—j-Hu}-4-K-»- -h-- j -f{-,-!--i-*--h~r- j- . ? .- I . TT ._i —pip—k-i —4-J—r, -v —• j -4 -* ij - - J -* - pH-j L "- - 1 1 ~r l P-+-~rrrn^F~4r F 44- ~1~, n ~t
rrr ftr. ii j }dTTTrrnTr~ "i ' FF'l ' 1 r ' r ■ u \ -rfl'l'T!" i"'""i rttr F. .• rT- fi \•" i~ ■ . > f. , i rp<"\"]": .jfr i rjT’TT i m “ujTTtTI .■.u-L.-.-tri- J_i_piLuL'Ul i,F ;.,.flFu4Xn IFF _jXLl_i Jl 4
hi V' nc rr- . FiFpp pr, , - 5 , I i i , • - ; , : p* p. | f i t.u ip P^i j -• 4-^4--^^ttf-44^-+4-U^444T:-u-tFPpip.
r ppij-, - p -; ;I . 1,: .i . ... j ; P- —>' j j ■ 1 j* 1 p-t - L - x j-jp-p—|-rf?-j-'-- - [-4 .-4 pFpT^pypf-
. - >.-l_)Il. I JL :. ■ ;... .-j- , ».iJ, i ■-, . , , :.... 4— ; i_J it i ' < 1- - .-S ..*.< . .; |774—.. 1 . -1— L--- ( v--. -i .. ~ w-!- ■ -f -i-!-+- f i-!—)--j--‘- ■;.; -■ —1 - H’4' 'I L -r-|- t— 1 -*-+-) _4tilE „ fei,
r' i. ;.j■ ’ - ; irj ■ 1 ; .~j. . ;■ j |' j I ’rj' • " —'*• i>. ;" ,;‘ r L ■•, - - ;_[t rirnrii't' 1 "• -i :: r I
■■'Ektir 'F';-■FI' :: T;': • ■■-TiT- r ; 1 T 1 “ t : ''ill't‘ ’ F- 1 _--F -t-t'i 'ttri‘--pf-p:tit’
- - r - “ "t- - i--t- r -r-j- -- '--I ■-, --T -1— — —J—— J - - !- - [ jrr ,-hj— -r~;-r-( -r—:—r — ■' t:-"! 4 ' :-j -- [ -i-j' f-r- f' ! ' 4 ’ , }” L 'j ft itti i'f'H’l H~ncSiil*
4!]4-'--4 ::: i Ih'■ f444^^44tfft--[1 1 ; 1 I-- 1 - -r-t r^ t^j-'tFj 4 -: ! n 1
fyl. ix",f_!t j’ l - *\ ’ i j 4 7 y tl-fi ■ -^44-ipiji -~'Ty L - - \ i j-4. _-_| _ __" 1 ” < ; T |lr- f 4-* --j f 1 r1 1 ' "4- 44-j-4-44 4-ixi 414-44^-44=^ • 4t
” 9 4f ,r: r7 T | | Tjf: T '[ r \Zl ~ TFTIrTT" 4 1 ' 44 j T: ] ’4! ‘ 'r 4 4 :±l |'4M
■ 'i: .>■ ■ y ■•4 5. . 750 •.. • y 1 —t-t ■■i - ■ - ; _i __,_{_ ,_j■ j :_ 1 >_ _ ( .. tw _ ‘ FFLl,. i*°t*aw n 2 mo
-f j ‘. j , ! 1 4f 1 j : : ‘ 1 1 t~ j , : - !
lwiT p :| p ■■• ’-j - : 1 1'j : I * | ! --- j i* ■ I ' j t|| | y
CT*trh'T"rT':“"4'T"rl'rt:;+ • t rlr^rF E"tlit:f " } '7 “■ •■’fT'iij-."- •, 1 ■
'■ ■_ „,,j 1 .I_ t . J 1 ■ { i_l ■1 j ’ 4_i 1 ■j;;jJ ; i j j 4 i : 1 j .. 1 _, --*. —j I j.i_i. i.p. ; |-i—p-.. J-.. : -i I—>—+ -■—J.l - | ■. — t .-.i j.. —•.—i -t-- —t > —> -
650 4-i-i-t- —l-1- -■■ -• T - j-i 4 -4- • {- r-—-t M- -fH-r-^-r- - > - 1 ! F J~ - F { ‘ -v! ' ' ' — ' + 14
4:~ f . -'' tji: ■ , -4 ifPc “ f . L- i ,_ r
- ID—-1_1_! l—t-i—; —i—_4_iJ I- L-I~; ——-L-i-i- -—i—_i_-XT-f-j—4-r-r-D—+4--; _ i •--!-4-^-1- h r-t~F —H~! 4jr ■ •t444t 4-H — ; -t— — 1— r -|--- r — 1--
:d4aFFti4k44-bFtT DT: 41-p^qj±aj±r
- 1 . J . .. . 1 i-.-I'-iI—I- Ll.irt u liJ _ p.4-I-U-U -If 1 r 4- I-D-L' --5( . ]L\ • .—, U-U/ 4 r . - ■ — u ——^4- ——
- —ui-tWH-t-i-i \ —4 — " ——l —!—i-1- 1— ‘ i —i- -[—i j -j - - -j—>-1— —i-i J- |~L .-*—•!—j—»—»—i—j"i «M>4-»DD" ■> ■■■>“ <-\-/-, |_i— —l_i_. Si ->—t -—j—r-r--i ijj t -r— ! —:J r~ — |- ‘ i . 1 • i~! r~~! *“ '~T4’ + ~t I
4t: ? {j|Ffl4t'"T TT |7dL[ -,...j JAMES'."" ' ._- : it” dll’ FxrtE
5S<? r I p p 4‘^^ 7 4- ; -- r - -' -I: |--j—-j- 4---p,
. ;-f-4-.:V : ii L p -| :: Fj77 1 i ! | '|' i ' ;
;; OuAY7-' ^ ;i- - v-d ' : - ;:-v4'7 : '■ : '
. -4 I - -‘-rr- T i. 4.: r -., -44-' ; ;:^d r; 4 ; ; p j : ; ; -4 : ;: 1, r,; : :._.:;::i ■_ 14 i 1 —— DISTANCE
t J:l; 41;:. II ;:4 144 l ■: 4 4;lil 7!:■■4' • 44 ■ :'' 4444: :. 4 •:lit 474 ' j::;!! '44 444 lIIi - 4;41 lllF] - 44:4 :1 Fill: ,’ I 80_T]
1 4 4-| ----i--;-!--- 1 . 7;j ; :■ *-j i■. |- ; ,• : ;• F F ■■• r ; 4-rr-j- 1 j 4 ;■ - 1 * , '-■ : - |-j j ■•: -r -'-i.---p- 1 \ :-i -■; 1: ■ !• ii i rj'i i 1 4- •, ; ■ i • I i *
i'riTT’H 4 ;~r'rr4~F', ; F r ;- vJ- ;l r-; r ; 17- 1 1 [‘j PIF" ?' r VI i’!' : 11 T ’4 ■ 1 ‘ 4'- : 4 ■ ‘ ' r i’”' ri; l;i' r]l i44JT T 4. F 4 11J XF : F FIF ■’4 i 4144 ■.4 ’1 :.. 4 ,<i • 1 11 l T t
VRii ! T!4 'TltTiI F 1 r " 4^ - ■ j -1 :■. ■ t r I' I '”', v ;4' jF 4 *i r f r “4■ F ■ 1 1 i ; I 14" ■‘4 1 :'“ 4 : * : ! *v : ' 4'* 1 ;■■■!' 44 ■i.,l • 1 ! ■. F 4 U4lJj--i ;i • '-. -I.:; ,4 . - -J F - - +-+■ -
- r I lyill ]l'■ —r "T jyi ‘ l j' 1 |I Jl|_y7 |7j ''JFF T F up-j4FI_F| , F—7* Pp\ j \ - _ p_' _ -_f J'- _i T i : ‘4'!'4__|,_;4-J„. |_i.,j,_ r .j..|..F 4 _ j....; p_ ■ 1!1 ' _: ■ ■:_. ._■. i_ _ _x_; .>. _.J_.'...-_. l _; u-:
_i r! ' r % ■; i’ i;: ; rp J t
a~nFF‘tTT'i "oF~r-r-’--f" 4> -'rS" o~fTTT rTl~'iß j 1 1 1'nll“a“il '• , i F~Fcs” r , t "'o'' •■,■,-■{•-,•“— — ; ; —. "o' ~TTV“ : ""o 4T r r:"tr"rr"o*7>-” T "j~ r I T, T • Fig il-.. g 1 g . g S ll
vi:i;:U4lOT|^U:lP-r|l:lli:r|4Xlamj;:mjTO.|xitiFi4x|: |„.,., :.i.n.:'| .\ : :• | ;-q::|:iT:::: i |‘4-:-i- !--!:■ | -Jh w |,-;-h-i i;+;|-h
DISTANCES IN FEET


1 iimiFf —toff
J 1 :
> i
c^>
- ■ 4; r
•h
1 \ 1
-L-
- | '
;
A-
”
....
iti i i i i i
i
i 1 : ; I ; ; :
. , : -\
\
j I
1 ! If'
• ; ; . 1
)
’
L 1.
t
m Tx
x
J-4- ‘ -
- -. \
-j
>_
-
4m-
1 — f- 4 -
« ! A
-t 1
T-r|- V-- 1
J
--
r—
—
-
-
..4-' -i.
j ; .
...
•— <—
x
*” T~
T
— 1
f
—
H fXf
I7.X IXXT| f
--
-
li
' 4 T
* t * i r •
>•71
4 r X *■
j'T'"T i"!
5
—
4
4
TtT
\ ■ ■ ■ I r r
i-
!"■
:
1-
1
; ; F
:T
f.fr
... 1 -
f
t
~
r
*T”
-.U
-.4—
1 _
i
——
j • i_
L r _:
44: TtX 77 '
!
- i ■'■■■
tr i\ i
\Lil\ J
w!'
■■
V
I
"iv
■ 1
_
-
-
i-
♦
■
-
I
—
17000
I
i-_ . i .
: t
mi
O: -
4
-
■■
J
5 1
tx
- 1—
,4
~
i -A ‘ ;■
‘
“
*-
'
~
',
“
I-
_
I
'
|-
—
‘.. i.
s
,
• ' . > !
•\ij\
r
••i
-1 i
-j
-
I
-
1 i
- -
x ..X-
X
_
X
, .
; i
-; -
j
: !
T
; V •f
.
T'j
■■
4
TV
T\
r - i j -
pf\ ■ * ; -
;
’
1 .
-
T-
1
-
r
-
-
—
-
——
;
■■■
■
4
' t. :
\ { \ j
1
> (
L.
: | |
?
‘
;
!
1 V* r
i
TV
■1 ‘
Vi \ 1 ] ;
1
I 1
i
. ' ‘
’
t , r
, i
1
\rfr
■ _ 1
.Ur4v f 4“f "■* 4"
!
. :
!
|T
I
’ 1 ; ’
: r
<
! : , ■
'rosmon
' or turnout
■
1
T' j
1
' : ;
' . i
r •
’ \l
-
1 1
IK- ...V.
■ - \ | ; ,
4.
; '
: r
1
17500
| .
I
...»
co-V
\ ‘ l\ ! 1
\X ;\ !
_.L i
■ : 1
1 ‘ I
; <
r -
. ... ■~v' - ;
... . ■’
T , ‘
— 1
r -H
y-f - ■'X;
1
)
T 4
f
i
Tn
T t '*
r i
m
-1
‘D
tt
i
Ifiiii
i '
i
T
:
-i ■!■ :
H F ;T
* f* v* -
e -T \
4'“
-44-1
4'T
Tf- J
-
'
\ S A
\ T - -1
:-nte4:xiT ?
1 f •'
J l
.» Yl '
■! I-
k i -
E
-
-
t‘ -
4
...I.
T"
-
-
’
. ... ; .
...
~
’
-
—
__
i 1
fT
-ix
-
_
— —
't~ !
■ i
4
_ r -p.- - r p-
,
r
.
> i ;
~X)
■ i V
XT#.
5 . } ,
ri
X
1
L_
t±\
18000
i
! !
. , i
Sfi
m :
rn
v rt ' r '\
V a r \
' to'/JvSf'
pi
4 \
1
u
...
j T
i
, X
-
•*' • t
’ • - - I •
•1
\
..
4- *
. r /
'■4
■j.
T’
..
■
1
-
"
3
!
: ; l|;
--
J
T
4
“
4
...
1
—
—
4--4
I <
I ’ , ’ ■ i 1 j :
' y
1
"
*■ , r
17-
f ?
■-m
r 5
1 i t
_
-
-4
444
i i
-44-
ITT
L 1 . ' ; i t i.
rU' ;TT=: r r
* •
■ i
- »
' < i
•; r+ .
fi-
■;i
-
-
- j-
X
-!■
-- 1 i
kV
iti
j.
-
f
7XH
4
-K
7.f
-X..
1
—
■ th
i r
__L^
-t-H-vH-i-T-f-
i
\ i
1
. j
i . ; 1
i r :
! i
■ 1 1 X
A . : \ •
\ > !
, '
O)
v
. 1 .
.I...;..!
: {
■ '
' 1 :
!
; 1
T ' i . \ v\_ L _
r '
A
r
■■
]T
11
M i ■ I ! : : : ■
■ 1 • j
;
i ’
-
if i ! X
A
1
0
v
■-
X
x
_
1—
h
T_-j_
] i
, i v
3
h1
.4
-H-
1 !
.xr
!~j~X" !’ i’TT ■;
..
r 1
'
! i
i
■
f \ ' T ' V.
! !"■
' ‘
-
-
X
k-
.
18500!
x : 1 1
.
■; j
■
T
■
\
• t\
a
-
.
-
rT
L
•
j , *
1 1
t
If! '
’
L I ‘
“X
L,
i
r
1
\ 1 \ ;
V*-vV4
TV
.
V
-i.
-4-
1 ■. ,,
’ - ■
1
.
' ■ •
&
h-
L
-
t
: ‘' ’i
’■ ; i ' t , ,
;
■]
’ ' i
i ■; 1
-f
■ T -
V if Position of\ a a.
Tu.
•nout
ll"fp
n
-
■ ' r
-X
--
h-
r-
hr
■ •
• i ; ; • , ■ ‘
\
• t
! ■
: :
■
’■ "*f”
=j
1
t~t - f
, i , if ■ , ,
"* f ' i
\
,'
r i '
. ■ , ’ ;
. .
l_ ! —
\ \ i
\ j
2
i
. 1.1
j .
1
■ , ; ! . 1. .: -,. 1
; ,
! - 1 t
■.j
■ iff - -
1-
-
...
. r;:::: X.
,\ TV I : ;
s
- -
T
rX-
\
.
-7-i •
_
- h
-
4.
19000
I f
n
I
1 ' ' ’<
• -
"
-
-
\ ; \ : '
■ ‘ H-
1"\
1
......
..
--
_
—
-
’
.IT
--
-
-
rr~
—
- .
• ■*
,
'
*
■
,
. !
■
, ,
•sj
—
-
*
1 -
... 1 -
\ '~X \
t»l
■
■ 1
...
*
—
03
\ \ t\
T' \\
“
—
■\
.
—
I
”
Tr
“ ;
f
;
H
>
2
1
: V s A Position of
L j
■ turnout
\
■
—
-
—
, 1
,
'
-
I 7 A
V -
i\
|A
1
- - .
.
19500
i
: . : — !. ;
00
o
i j
CO
o
SL
T ■ 1 .
■
f, Vf A ■
A
Xi
J
•if
_ p
\
T X
-
"
_
-
-
~
—
-
--
-
!
i,
1 i ;
! ;
'
< f :• rX"
(. , ;
! r Xf
fX
.7
Sl
XiX-
x\
r
- ■
j
: .7. ...i .... j
H
ta
>
cn
o
cn
cn
s
j
m
, 1 .
1 : 1
! I
T 4 r ■
!
i 1
, - 1
■’
1 1
j ■’
: '
|'
1 ‘
■ ;
! ' , r
m 1. _ .
jo y
TJ V ; i
-• i
i
h r
1 '"rx:i
\
-
dim
S - * i- ~4
**V.
t** :
> j. 4 T
»■ r 1 “T"
i ’
A
r:;
ri-
A
I..
'
-
7-
“.17
4..
...
_
•
h—
—
’
o
-4
# % 1 \ •-
l
A
-1 r~ *,• .A'
_ . V.
;
4 *
XT. ;; :
%
cn
ha
w
W
ii
rf
11
H
; '
-
“
_
■■
■
“
■ :
1 1
t - *
0 1V;.'
r | V
„f f
V
f- '
-T-rfvtf
|
; ;
7
-
■
-
"
.
20000
M
Mt
<*
•
; ‘
co
j
\ :
\r
0
: r
1 '•~T
' ■
B*
«
tr
m
!
;
T: ’'
H
!
Q
Q
~
.
\
\, :
7
A
A
- -1
-, r j
n
o
5*
r»
w
p
’ . ■'
'
v
■
..4-.
;
r
—
"I
L I
• ; | 4
w
«
lil
o
c
' ’ T ;
;
' 1
!
'
i
....
\
,
-4
'
T
-
. ..
—
20500
:
' ■ ’ * , i
20
, ; f ■ *
r ; '
1”
■ ! '
i
r
\'<-Vl ■
*■
T
-
-
—
i , *
1
;
■ i ! > ' '
; r
I
;
!
1
Vf-Xx: “
- 1-
. ; : ' ’ i
<
- r T .
.
-
I ‘ '
7 • T ; : i
[
f-
Position of \ i-f Turnout
r
—
;
m
■. i
1
i
'
■ ■ r: ;
- p 1 1 • ■ j
i
-
\
Vi. i\
7 '
V
4
-
i
' i
■* r ■ i ;
■ ,
03
■ <
* i
■ )
__
.
”
T-!r44
' f ■; i -
;
%
V
4:
j;
-
—
21000;
- : \ i ;• - J
j
i
: • ’ : , i
1 :
»
■ : ;i
' L i'T
;■
T
-
■
; 1
■ T_
T r ;_LL
’
• ; ! ; ; i : ; ,
i
-
A
X
I
~
—
r; 4
• 1 > '
i ■ ' i, ■ ■■
!
! . : !
: : *
;
-
-
: ; : i 1 1 : i
.
-
Or
. V
•f'
\
:
—
■ 4 4 j'
- - -
... 1
J i ! ’ l
j •
r
5
»
I'-.-. - i. - > -
; ' ' . r, J. y
! 1
' ! !
i i ' r T
i. 1 .
1
1-
.
-
-
]
. ’ 1 •
M4J-
’
; 1 ; , 1 | •
■
|
k -
'
V"
7
7
-S . ti-
' ■
1 i i
ITTT
K r\- r
-
-
••
- ■
--
1 i
j7 i
X --f ' X ' !
i : 4
V
) T44T 1
i f
- ;.j if.-
. , i
r j.
-
-
1 1
I.:;;
. 1 i
• \
*7
-
-
J ' 1 I
i r 4]
7-
-
i
-
L *
x
. _
V
4-
—
21500
4;TXT ■ ;
■ :
f
r-
3?
- |
• A
•-»
-
’
►
d
. : , i
I ‘
- r
, i i ;
1
.
-
i
: '
ra
1-
-
_
i
4-i
■ -■
■ ! r ■ -' 1
- - ; - ,
, . .. .
, •
- t- - j ;
..
- 1
I ‘
i
r
- - *•
-
—
—
i ' i
• ! ■ i
5
. ■
4
■ f
r . .-p
! *
' 1
!
-
1
:T; :
,
“
i‘
1
..
...
r
..
r*
TT
v:
'
! .i
t
.
\
*
1’P
1 :
2
-
IT
flr
1 I t
L.i .
. *
; T i ! ; ; ,. .
1 : r , ' : ’
; t ; j.j.,.
i ■ -
tH--
j-
-•
r.
--
- -f-
I ’*, T
; x : 1 i j 1
•; 1
i
7;
"
.
~
..
‘
~
"
3 .
O.
-ttr
a
.TT’
+v--h
f
1:
\
E-
7
□
-ill
V
\
\
-
•-
-
rM -
CO —
22000 1
“ *
- ■ 1;
- ■.
*-
i' T .
; i
" r 1 'j
r
.
■f“
7
E
__
-
-
~ir
xiirj;
- j-f-TT
T r ; r f : ' ■
, i
?
,
-
-
-
r
T—
-
-
-
\
ri 1
■'1 J "i T
T !T,r
-
*
z
4
k
T
4 if
i i ;
; i
. --j
, : :
Ll }.l j j : ; . 1
; i T ! ' i j-
r
i 1 VI
1
11
1 1
4 X. i
1 r f 1 ; i 1 1 1
T-
• i
1
1 1 r
L.l .
5 ! ; ' ; i ! ’ ■ !
\ '
f
- ,
: :
-LA -iX
'iJlr
1
"~r> '
U i
tv:; T it r ;■ ■
1
|T[
: : J
; i i
i > . ‘ ■ • • ■ ■ i
[ '
1
1 ' ‘ ; ;
T4T h mx
7‘1'
T M
!
1 i
X 1 s j 1 i U
, >
if
rn
. -I
i i .
i
_ r . T . ; J. r 4_T , ! .
!
i 1
rrf 1 1
h ttT
1
1 1
_i
1 i ! i ! : L L
4-
7 IT
TT_
■ ‘
i 5 i
' ~ r-r rn
tr
r^rrr
i : 1 1 i 1
] <
1 1
1 : 1 I 1 r i 1 i 1 T I T
1
! 1 1
.5 1


jp ;; n 1 t l^ jP-i-ate^p^-----
j—|— -| —i — - - \—|’ ”| i i-i-j—j—j_zj_ -t-j-'j—i—j-f -j—j zi——i-....i_i—|4_h„ xf —;-iz J— 1.
:zzjz zrp|:x4ppzxz|zjxzpzpzzzuppzjZ|ZpuzpzpzzLzLpzp^
rtr Ziitrjuprpp 4 = to : i!±ffizt{zzXfX&}±x:x± ijxfT-nXz Tt! 111 ffi x+f : ir
:;pi zypjxjyp prune xhtjz ipjzrx zpxp zujxjz xptr zjXjzz zuzlzz :m : xzzx zzzrjz ipx rum ztzzp zzzzz z±.
:JB -
:r x '.ll’. xiuupf r zirtipuuiprptpz zjzppprpizp xtz r unzip zpxj: zpipx prrx zjzzjzzztzzzz zjzzp pipxx: zzzpp zupdz ipppz uppjzp zjuhix zzjzizr zzp zt zzzzz zhi
j~x ujx- ! p4^: ~ j|~~
■ ~|r ~ ~i~|' lx 1 ! - jipjz '|'"|'T'p ~r'ryf ~ f jpup UjzjujZz ”' §| ~ |~7 ~j~' ipjzjup zzfzzz zppuz yjxr ''jlTrj'Ttpf' zyppiz ! i~~ ~ |"|~ ~ uzzzzzzu
;Zzr: P±jzt,jzn± z: jit zjzjzpj: jrr :rjjr~ xFEnt: : ig£ z±izz zzzzzzzh
rjzuz luizrzir |z x ztpi|zp| Izjujx. ~pjxz- j-px= "j Xpjx -|Z z|.
:pfg .^^fextizzirMlijjiziz j.z^uP zbzjzjz zzizzpzpjzz jzttlzzudx^zzxxixx zdxiziziziziz. zjzizlx zpizlzh zizzzz zzf
_ Jp|_ jlj| | P{ j ||{ ) | iKj j [ .|. | ||*; i ; | 'j H j | j|j|}[_■ I ' ‘ | | | ' ___ ..Xp,..-—, l.Ji-L L- -j-f ||i,j||j| i j | J | j j j |
u ::• ; ]^^:distange4time : icußVEs;^pi|'R
X■ [- 40 SECONDS. - - : ■ ' ■ - _: : I'—;^^^^^iX-f-r|-przur---u
aixx znxz xzgz rzr:.: r :xiTZ: :z. :::: } : seaie-soq Feet == yn^pgo^iqxrpzzpxptpuppxzd+zzz^
I* 85o ~i j i~j | ttH-FH-'iH^fr-xrffritr j-Et .txtx±ixtu;xtPzpxxxp± ipnznzzpf:zizutzxi
lfi%-tßM^ : Pf , rri-| "I H i-FT H-r : : 80 TRAINS PER HOORH-rp-r : PTl : f : r-+ :t: 4
ft fflT XX J XHcENTRWII.fa4::X T :-Ut+: ±U± TBr ±ttt ±S Xt Xt tliXXd+tx Xf I “X: X- 5=: 14
riiXxx Xt XEmizd+ex xE :iX rX XT X= X 5 X 4 rx ±X+X Xf X$ :XX
H.inXTtt'Xf- U I il' 1I i 1 | | ijj s| itt I §Tftt4" pTn rXfp
11^11 : §: ®ll I 1: 1 11i|;i | 1 J I? I fll ! «iH' Hifi 11 ! iHI I N ! I I
DISTANCES IN FEET.
' I


Plate 74
MapinJsfaea.ttialQf'irjf-aadi shaet


r \ rAWt 'n§’® IV 'rlSrf^ ,P 18 CILBJLAIffI | ' c ,f f R £A K ETg I■N-V ,7 ■■-,' '
''; X BuiTttxfrahP \) l > f 11 I
- I j ”/' r vj. ;,:
+ f" ' 6 j ;. : .. ■ ;•;': ■ .’ •- '• -' .':/;•■• : A


t x ftu Is 7ST- ! I ! « (TSTfRAItI 2,4 1' U-T 1 J^jfU
RRI^tEI^LY
G. T\ftUmjffr_ lOOac. | \| X ~ vl 23 V ! J. Williamsow i^ST^fTi
1 r. Wy __ I 1 * wc«*«i ßEl -LE\ VUt ESTATE CUNCARTHEL MS J‘ K VOOcw L ».
V i n L t/«< 46 JOOoe, . 30Om>. x o/ X ±dyHr
\ XP BATHURST FARM -A- u r tr tm/’Jf J I \ /35 \ j-/* T/f —TT
'Foxier y&.tvunM l r —|— l 1 I—\X 1 —\X i^bcrnepa
/ ■'•' romer , Vvi: A .. \ j 4* r t tzsc£ —-—i —-tt
J- “ .x . . (* 33^p-^^kyyD T^^^^
ATttTIJ A(TIAMIRA X, ■ V‘~sp D.WaUwortK 15 cottaoe vale VN Si lAflcUUn TCarne. | Xpj '°‘™ M '-
, z )) M s™s& £ toooac \ CV “S p 4t> 7Wa y\ Sooa "\ Vx' t -' , l ield
// k 1 Is* 2o\ C.Reid* 6OOac-\° \ a— - j | i/jJ !«, -Chas.J^
.rx T, K *“ “ us3I! F CO TTAr.E r, M VF> 7ottac. 340<Jl M/ 8 T~-r a -%s^Wl
-v r ,,v_ S~ iVIRRfaMjgPPJPPB I X^"~ nCT H..r. ■■ V eS \ / f=-
" tUVABaU} izesat.' EUU Bail ’XI 6i \ js r./ l W n ,\ 69 jA JO ki
>y/ MOULSEY * wnLVERJQy ,s > I ” &Z / 63, \ \ uj
I v.R BA6w —-—- 7 - ILLowe, m / jj t«r n v V\—* cler-mont \ X/l
—A \>7V W S°Ocu>. l\ I eastwooo/ A \ s‘foaO 5 ‘ f0aO / !/ 6Z ,,
y[ X f y IiBB-imjrxx 7 raey -7X J j nu * s M&
■* / It 11, r i._/i IrK park jS T77i i W / c» i 3 \lCk?\ Oct Ou 6T\ )1»-
I ; | | t p- r. Campbell- L4W ; § **> rfWAW.mie. / a #V E 8 \X^ C^>= LD /i*
([ 3}f SHAMCOMORE M* ; 7 •< BIRLIHO J— 0\ \ /a, rd: tot, J\ J " K,.-
I 1 . *>*«« ■' Woo. _■ , cVit-YM 1 ) 56NqmoJ/ /l S /‘v-’VIwA -XSA i X^'VTECO
A ? -|t 7iSO««. , i —| »0. [j IS / 38 Yd™ / y»jM' X<SX/V iX
! rTi A\J V rsVXy 58C H 4 5 M —noworraA x \ M m& / yC '* Tfe?V^UlA
Xfrvl ' „ \J.ytont*or*h' COO >K W\ aßaby vX Z ° isX^XX^^eblin>7
nr/feo , __ ____ 7 /m»„ ' V/ V7 / IV L 7 X >S‘C\^ r Townsonj «?
!io i 'foojf . "• / — 1/ \ w X3aX townsorv JJr K
/ reRMoNT )/ 61 x /Wi\
' ywi^**®^! so ”" s A 1.-. JJ p-W&Stjjy pvn /f- ~r G. Bbaxcell\f' Y “^s^^
; X
fcV ~ xXz4\ & V^ 28 MWiicxpalDis
L (V j'S'ANDUEWS UBoac
■"%TvS. IZ+Oao }rt\y V / }fa | 3JOat.\of .^)
60 \ ~
\l23o<te. {
DENBIGH
1 K Jl 7*" *.
& JY* o\-
> X oi»
WE ROM BA
*O, 1 NETEMYSES
X \ leOOac. /
-7X.. - ZSATSIz^A
X 1 V / yTxflfinto A(Wi
V' /7 CUBBADY
£// SOOac.
\/\'4i\ /JO6/10S' "X XXiTxX/ V I CAMPJELUULS T
!/\\\ s/ / vXll3s_ 3 fa’M dOOac. j
T
l€ H i<ai£ I JJ 163\ pj.,
f a /120 -if£_| JL ’y \
/X/ Trn ms r~\ —X» ' >
/ AaljX
G.JfolU j"
MOLES.MAIM
J. FurceiL 6001
kenmejie__A
'S'j
i^>
SESIa j WtUiam/ H 01&
*7 ; /
ZZliAfto 1 EStfDALE
Prod AtAj
*) Ts TT” lr^
’ ■ a iv 2
PARK 1C
t t
A PS B © D S
Gainer Parte
•AMI EM 1 BELMONT
B6 85
89 *F
~ 92 ! 83
\v J John. OocUy
—. G3ouc.
J) 'T V'X-'' 1 o
An r. % I \ > N ! i?0|;
I}\ A V^i s zooojc* ■/» Alt —1 7 > —T\ ■' ,-3( i
m tsS JxL_ ■ (res\ ■,,-'
~ Dp^tair^t/ v 9 'F\l
wTii (b-.- «4-.m^EHsEfflXs?..>4=4
n f L fit I I 27/ 54 JAJ JzN' Dec- 1861 | ff)
fvi g xjtl
l v ' I lIN fc ,4 J.ACHLANVALE 1 w -^~»e t J *A
I Vl Rtlroin %>& A; \V )*.\
jXyl Brou/jhion L 5 l /~JL TTyf. '^ < sP • |l 91
_v?_2_ y ,A 1 toAfilUr XcCX \
w fiShflT “TouNotßY wiCT3n
loarv wiCT3n pop - area jTo ?a *1 c.. y._ _ •**., r* x \
'WILTON >4X > \
l!jw" , i SOQclc jfVv 4» c « v. '‘"X - I t
_ " a / y si 5> rn.
aatifluUiWl JpP'L-MEULiT'JffI . MEL- US. tel' Afi J |WW
\ I x■'
/7/ >- \ (■ ■
aSBCx KESEIRVESi® 51 Catchmamit SmipSy top Sydinisv^wd^S^&irj
I * V * ]} J AktoiSox J
a Ato'-jT . / r L ?H\
csTTss iW,u>n I 4 ■ wAiLMiOQLA!
|s7\ (u J ****
Pwiclaimeil Jnij 1880
Tit, q Partly exempted from the operation of ordinary
■ 't 9 Timber Licenses by Gazette of 23vSeptember‘80 M Ti
3, /W> /
/ H«“ / /
riblf 66 -T
Jfigl'PM
66 KS»
23 25 5+ S 3 £2
4 .X? 43^®
.43 . 46 i 42
22 ,/L-
.♦^Special
> !3 385 fa
54
46X] 66
34 \l H]j
96 / 103
/x
X( \ / \VJ
M9\
0 E? Mun l
1 Districi
I Qampbelffa
v»
Classification \
j*r r/ f
dm s>r l*» t,rSw {P(Y%**i / a*
SpAWed/Pub RecX (TJVI ,-
p2r /notified .. A .. . J~gO s *| -X 4
/ Notified April 1908 1
6*.* October X- r»/*tf» J r-E -v '
3660 / 55
"kjl {/ S’ f
\ 52 /bi^iAti
?* 35 SS if\ 6 V-^—C] ProetetmM ff ( j 4./C
' V s 4137 i°/=
j_“_% ? » a\?
®sp^i.iy j, - ® bs: /41373,
jgg°y %r tz'Tts T %KSff \!ii-\\Si May 19&& —7
,g 7 -lii3g:Ua"~4 <lp%H/ 3 I f r 3 J ' J \
\ I 78 17A \ a i? 23/35m]\ y N - r(T<? \
\ I lx*
\ j A* for
sJ Jl
J ft*
fT
/\
/
t
/..
c Xfv 27* Fe
e 7t
isjtwi KC pa \
VA 5 g
ww. Moore
breiank MO
1 '
330 m y.s'.. ’.JO
--—re —«U 52 7Tv"" • -. v **" X /^^T^ffisag!
/ \ N V - f N / -
7X"* 1 * X x V ‘ / /.
Estate fficX. N i *X 'v / ■ws / /
, , maiuac.'ri Y"OA XiT nc i4w|"*F~7 \ y&g3 X X ■ v -- ' " KTM
i oi ■•■> ir^> 01 r 3O L°' L BB I —Nu/criSS mi «? _\-'ii2 so; //,*• •>»»*» '-, , v , / / •
iL^l^^^^bankstQ^N^^Hjgw®«■, \\ \/.„ / /;- ...X. .:
RE Sank rd —~
h 3O " 29 lifelike ■ W 1 - -»-■
nA iv-'i-vlv. sit IT 5
tim I^ B AxW rl /Hi® \(r. .Jrthnsfnn. Xx,-Pa &v / mMiSTATL. __xPaRK .(^j6BdtemX2^£ f*S 'X vw» r * ** r '• -■ .'.'v ' 77/
/^N O M/'W ,soft J- '\ »•»’.’.l • ' v v y • *** / m ?a y \■ '. . , •
h r,yyy . xy / / ■ ■ - -»-■
«-■? & yy N /
q\Pen ** 3 * X ‘ >‘‘v/ / fukscm/AS's -.- ~ :v,/, x-\
j2sXtonHutetyllie ¥r v X S V '
issi^jHaift*... \;>oO'&c. /X* ■• V" -.-^C e "°^l3 \ . / '
X yBAYY r ■ ' : V , . ®
(LHiU ..fi is XlB “ #n / ‘ / \ I **•'• t •' •'. " enr y ifSjTjnP Riinlrs ■- " ■■■ : >' i y '.T " X>
rciny* 1 1 ~i ' MP27 / \ « 5 \ •, wps / . • /„••■ .
Ti ~ WJ /*SC\ liP ffli / / X .*■ m»io ’. 1 / ■•.•:?■ ;xx -.v»
vhrT. f^RAKrivL-/J ,7 X *v /I ‘ e jmv e§_ H -. T 1 ~»k\ '•-,' . / / 5 \ / . *...■ ■ . t ■••■ ?
wJI / ■ ■/ ,' ,
T^r t - r -~t;X «®esoa e .|fr 55- OT&XJu UW^tSB:
J iCSJuIOn rV\V T] 7§| V/. Johnston /
i». \ («.. 1/49 AxSt I wfi- /\“ \ JU/ts ° .•ffX / 7RI>Zr ! ,
. \jfno3. VX/36 >» rmmXjyy 9o/ 1 \MiHiXJSiBiius —[afT 3 5«5W
hos. / /^ Gf 1 T | /90/J \LWTHiuiisms —WTx fa
’siutltr\ri A 500 ac. 32 iZCi. --T3tf
\ y J ei/TK ,7/X a “~ r 3S “ 85
.\raKIT 53 $#VV 1 T )n ' S®
nniMIT T 2 |l r\ ‘ , T.Craham.! se
IC fVXX ZSQIac. Samuel »
~ ~ / TOWW
JT.TE /yODac. \ (3 €4oac./ T °^JM 60 ?10
91 *fce^^vl^ s7
. JaOO IC 4 (XTT I T • \7n (u J&A.VZ M\£j&C 4O | / unao. ‘ II iiT llilT A / ’ V.;
iisfic t± j,f i-Liveg
4T I 61 / jX7 P^U J&Pi/y.. .,. xLi—HSk / 4JgJu«, -f^Restßvt/ fa V* Sotander , ' ' "' ,
/ XTT v 8 Ssr-piXM3- XuX ' 2l ’fek;l{ ■ -.
' yiiTy i-JX / XT -AX KrxH 1 93 7X Afi 2 \ \ uW- k -Tpo^ 3 .. ' *•
■ ,i- c 7-'“|^yit.X^sA l /C''tX" /I Tfeiaa 1 7i / sU\J«w iW73,Ao| m X7 0 6 ' \ yc 3 “ Pi i^p , ‘ " l/w/i l3 fAXj^E=2^
z i 777777 ff BATE , - -■ . t‘.‘ "xi
—\ - . AXXL) ix£t- xlX” jlx 44 1 45 5i r ;
Tv 7 7 ji\w' MSul x> ‘
jJXXXT J. | Jk/ / e> Z/2 m IS. ,- a-, 'r,/V':
su "y'' x
\Vr~7vA M * rvt f#r (° M * iflc ‘ tion ss[ ■ ' '*• • ■4§€7X<^
.--Notified # < M ■ Vw &vU<iw — 'ihsrJr' ,, -.' ; J >. ■•.
eAxV A nfmi -a*i /' y / ;'i - -; ,. s -
«t ■f^fW^rV^ •< •* '•■ ; .■-•■■-■■•.■' '■ 'w|#|
Jr AZ i : * , -‘ / X l |ftr/ /./ fjJor. ''-SK •&■- ' \ * * ■ . ' ' - JtPsl'lM *' /
/ v f . > *> 7
, , jjl 9 Be«h . (\X 7^
l i\ JCSL : 'ff <kT4S U jf ' .
.*\ ip*ra/ 0 aJials J jjßto-'' 1» .-a.' # 9 ■ 'flßaL_ 4b-si3NU«ii<«»idP '
AA. , X X® f. \i. XW ' ■ - x;X^”St
. ,4 XXI n, VTS H*s,*i fx f,'M A. * /^^““lSeS^j k *:92 -_l„ -«i • , 4'VAX ,t .-»7^^
Inn. P 7 R. IS&a —5r— lr.a April 18/3 \ ® fik ' ' * >
*" nj A- . 1 , r~O Afol (308 Y WH ■■/. ,-? •%! -.#/;,' ; / > ‘ ' 7-ff
HM\ / [ kJ A ! P«'tJy ettmpoai fro M.L?o\ ft X 7-,. ■' . _y ' '- ' ‘* , -: tTT. ■' .v\»£
SX'XA WlXjfeOi Ded XtolfJ-ld 3- x 1 .‘ ' ;X:
r _J ' / R. 9615 , licwet 4* Ifrr■ !> Btt pT > K,. \* Jl^ , i] \ /-<lb X’w * p^r “ r " ' ; »CufTaCUfT«n£ ■■ ■ y. -i r .
/MBit •“ V4BCl2s«s —^oaocu - t
•Wfir Kl(^I ■',
si m rm» r
ml ✓ I A| A • fro MI 7fl\ l\ \vi..’ k/gF \TV£>- .X/,,, _y
-An-V ';WlXjfeOi - AugusU^S®^ x -
2 i ' / R. 9615 , i'«™» 4“ ifa-. »» yr >-x V .MaiWpaea ' 'A; X, ,*.-' y4f ✓w* irr » ae ‘ 11
■XTr -\CWv^fj^p^^■ \ 4
X/ 71 7 X H c April-*4BB^r cum,a, ' TO " s ■ - X-Xfer
J "'f 30 —-C ** t/Al 11 V> V/IJU 'iCl i •• '* • ( *‘
M\Ar~v‘ for ;<L\ mi .mg" L 'X. IWfyj* 71^
if Sale T \\ X 1C
-An x ,•'.-' jr4«t AX^ iS Xy"^ Ca,TM ™ T, ”i , T v*'
" ■ a a ■ ■• A-TX
A^it-48S^™ ln,,To "' ! - X-XX! •'
s3zrntx ■ , w •- - ; --
\ I— —. m . I MUZ. ‘ V MLi9NI\ r /Cv» 5 iY .. ®Z/\ AAk s
AXi 'i.i. t“V." i,i, ‘ #3/ « , ■ -,•■•■■•
JLi> rl mw'we^ ■ ■ V : .-'
;/ Mm £ Lease / c snerallv r_ ~ : %\ V-mV .K . • • \ -AiA.--
I /~* » MPrt( Lfrtf fled fvt^J_ 4 VV*3I cir" \ ' trxx -."10
—f I r Vk 4,430 iff - - \l ,
) I r\ \ MLS m.lii VTTVs^fcK,. Partapy -OT-I ijr ' \i f- ;:: - ,^'
( # I\ \ S.V - : ‘u 5 .;^
'* K U‘**
•-VC .
Sf • ill -=eV T» TX-’Zlf' IOgucc-e* n _ Q r, ▼
r * —l —T — " 4p- ] Notified Ai ■ F.R-110 ! */Jr
f iz 7 Supply / . ■ .
rXT/ notified ism I
r XV A* ■ i
.-.A.,
■ffIHSL / isT
io -QQ*7'/ .''•■■
“V 1 ] 80 -^n^a- ' ■
THE '
... ;• ;■ ■ . .-v-
-: • • r-. -V
;,.yV' V
- •• ■ ■ ,-- ; -
'V s ' •V
, ij.v^v
VVVVV^
:" ; -V;';.;;
yW-f II - rl&W — -j ■ ■ - ' , ' ; • , , v^v
; . ■' MllWp 1/MIM-I
R . ,*o37 \ Slfllg ~rr\ 126 \*&~T ( 2l V(Cpa]cli{T 1
2iy&idiff I
.W" 13’“ sv sT
k \ Mey 1888 ,
i rimy IMS ,nj " t f , ssv. x t. l "? fiUlacl / JM • ,
Xg^a~dC-4f«yXViAWjri wjf ■ - ■ - ■ .•■•'~r rr --
■■ ANEW SOUTH WALES ' ' '
tarltorough
i MPIC Xv S '- ' ■ , j
1 piu ixTX i * AM* \f "/f. • » 4- i ;- •. jll
"' ' 1 ' ' * •■'•- 1 ■ -"-f
Jm rt' v i . - / *
~ ' ■ . # , . .’■ *• ■■■.,. ' -*-/■■ v.
V?!31 I folk , ' ' •' -*-/ - '
. Scale ' ' •
T - . , 777 T T I - -- f ------- ***-
B4o.\Xr™§y r . «**• ■.' -[-., : jL— - * J— -,—?■““
X, | 1 SJysfT : /~ySLou% pl '
7psriarAM/isi*ss v * /I ' -: '* , .- ■■-
4 /MBMiiier , .
.-. ■ ' . r - 1 NOTES ; .
r J^ 2 !-!. x. Jra . • ‘ trigonometrical compilation ~
/ m /2*23T :.; ■ .
aPp CTSg&agj y C l l7 1 • ’ * » SiyonometricaL Stations (wUhsAUUud* in/ Feet/) *ka*n thxu AltteiC - .',
I County Boundary * M mm/tAu* ■ —■— • and/ Ihanviayt.. iw«~ v X y~- — y ■ - f f -.,
; *23 1• 24 Jhrtshßoundary —.—. J .
j J y ~ Land Dutrirb Boundary. i, .... —— • •—, wAiklTXr ' -'-.f ? ,"s7
( BUCLI i ■■ Population/ Boundary Aamss at Gcmemmmt/ Jbrtna MANXdY "v;7v-‘^
t f . CUy and Tatrn/ Boundaries.,.* Mvnes ofPrtrato h*ens... . „.. PENRITH vV.'/tfy
\ f . . / Suburban/ Boundary*. ... — Jtiunss aflooaluus SJhsvTonfns..,. . DURAL A f .
. f * / : Beeenfa. Noms» tfßstatat. kirkham », * v^~.T s
I JUsorvo farm/Lease/ * . -n> A£um« aTßaiUray StcUions.liat^rme&Sidinpe. ........ AubUTD , ■ f-'
) ■ / .',‘v ,•«.; i - ... ~r x Reoerte- farm/ Solo and/Loose/. - M Jienn*e marksd that » ar& also Rtseevee farm OceupaUonr ’i'i..
t:' .' ; ■;(:;.. f i-v.v,'i ■■ ;-; ; . Special/Area/. - ambr Jfirfas High* er Atstnsss Liams*. 1
x > i 1 ..'x,v '' --x’ .-’•. JAinidpaLßoandruy> - ———- .. IhnwgdOraseiJtotkmdJMLßoundariea jfamtjw v.^V*^
“ s <-RnlH P* Jhrteh/Boundary
Land Distrirt/ Boundary. i % • • ,
* Arpulattons Boundary
r , ' s , City and Jbhfn/Boundaries —••—
[ .e, • » Suburban/Boundary*
f ’ ■ ,': Reeenra. .,; ——.——• • ~.—
I Resort* farm/ Least/ -*-
\ •■ ■’ ,;V'" ' *■' • Reeenf* farm/ Sola and/Laos**. ..;— —•—
K' • - r ; .a .j. ;;-vx« x.::~ ■• '1,■ ■■' ,-•; . Special/Area/
1 « 1 '> V *7 UinuipaLßoundary i' -5,.. m '.... m
(-jtX - ■•/Y.-- 1 I-.rX A li>X X, r ii '/‘ —I.X« ■ ... 1. J_ -'I , ~- ,- ' - 1 1 i-|^rli^'lCr!’.^lT S <> le 1- *r - .-“.'. - > -.. r! '■'■ -Hi.[ '. .■ j.
S' — 1 J Tj 7 ~ ■„ 'i. 5j >
■'■■;-■■.■■■ ; MAP
■ :. ir^ClMfllP
'.”Sta nwgll / , • , , ii
‘ F»r Cad Ww* hryew
M P 25
J 2 iLT-a W°*" V J / XiiT \ kWfejr.*? \ TiAl o '— fcr 3 / X.? \
r. 3 0i0 9 ,\ —\XKSTO If h / yj JML\ vX_./ hrjs?P -f >/T^X?il\ (| 1
(f J<Ka | jfty /
sTK ' : . -7-1 •“»■“■** Surve 7 ,-■" <1 w< X ' jt* y> tin
fvX i
X I x
ri'X? %ar *a&- ’^Jgs^C.lUleMarleyßeMh
’ rw lOWM TW»”"gpy -a -BAii T' Wfe- . ■«T X ” -"■
r:MKT»E«4^‘™ M^ar-f _ T X- ■*&.:%■ X J? . .
gPOy. j
.. 1
PHOTO*LITHOGRAPHED BY W.A. AUULICK, GOVT. PRINTER. M.B.W.




Plate 75
/hecrzr** //fswAr&t
&AWS/0M Solt
Tunnel
Single Track on Curve
PHOTO-UTHOORAPHEO BY W.A. QUUUiOK, GOVT. PRINTER, M.&W.




Plate 77
Cut and Cover
Single Track on Curve
PHOTO-UTHOORAPHED RY W.A. QULUCK, GOVT, PRINTER. KiW.


Plate 78


/bscriAJH —
'' ’ '' XiS /huuatom \ | p
*M aTjhUL£yWi* £S \ T • 1 1 ~ ' B " 1 ".. 1 ' U ~ ■ ■ i
J m ~i _ _ „ L-. <wa
— -r-=0==P~E=^ = r*^~^ ::r 1 jo -o ■ — % /s-t- —^iPT”
T/tA/GUr
* a'~0 T~ ’ ' , - '
.. r7.,r 90-0. ■ A
' —— : 'SSS'SSS 'S/SSSSSSSSSS/sS USSJJA
7^777^ 7 Single Track Tunnel on Curve
Pian at Troner iV/rr Afe/e/tr
J-J*3bx
I. r "xi i LJz^hk
ZL-iliUL ..■■■■_:
Trailer W/rc
T vr*
a .
1
~Tt*-AK
41821
CTT7
* to
a ' jt *
\. 1
/S PrnscrroN
•* *~o N
Enlarged Long
ioofrwe /n Ps/trcr/oN or
PHO TO'LITHOQR APHED BY W.A. <
1" 7 ° *■
itudinal Section
Prrotr on abovb Pi an
iULLICK, OOVT. PRINTER, fi&W.
Plate 79


Plate 80.
photo-lithographed by w.a. gullick, govt, printer, N.B.W.
-41821-


17
MINIMUM i>l KUCTURE AND MAXIMUM LOAD GAUGES"
■ •
New South Wales Railways Australian Railways
PRIOR TO 1308 1912
J7B 5432I0I234. S6 .7 8,, ,, 87664321 OI2 S4S6 7
8 17
16
15
14
13
\Z
II
10
a
8
7
6
B
4
3
2 ’
1
0
16 16
16
IS
14
13
ie
11
1A IR
—
-5'
6"---
-- *1
i >tnr
-7
14 14
--
■ —
-4
--0
3L-4
ii
Id Id
/
_.,4
—
10'
6--1
—
' ✓
1
\ \
12 ie
9 /
i
\
T
Jj|
n
H || .
1
i —
|
!o
SSL-
\
i
■ 1
10 10
■+
+—
15'
O'-
—
.1
-
i
14
4
3 9 *
t
1
«
1
1 —
1
9
a'
7
6
5
4
3
e.
1
4
...
1
—V
r
8 e
1
\
3 !
1
.
0)
\\
— 7 7 i_
i—
.
5' 3
i
1 —
1
I*-
-9’
i—-
-j
c
>
6 6
7] —;
— H
1
1
1
S 5 _
1
1
'a
1
( 1
*
!l
|
1
3 3
.
)V—
..
z z
r
41'
O'—
..
»
cv
‘
“t"
1 I
: 4'fl
Ja
■i
L
-4
.4
1
6 0
1
L>
87G 54.SX2I0I2X34.S678 87654 3X2 10 12X34 5 '6 7 8
»■ 1
Note mdth must be Mowed on curres of Wchtns radius fa' sty 4dej) or under f/opart
ofrolbj stock to iecbserfotheni/s or Minimum Structure ihsn 8 Yieh /’Mrm/eni or (if uhyepbtforrtiDri
/MINIMUM STRUCTURE SHEWN THUS
41821 MAXIMUM LOAD SHEWN THUS
FHO TO'UTHOQRAPHCD BY W.A. OUULICK. GOVT. PRINTER, N.&W.
Plate 81




Plate 82


Plate 82


|5
N
t
MOSM
(Middle H?
I /^T
**LM£A f
PHjTO‘jf.-iOCR».PHF3 Is Y WA. fi'JIUCK, COV' IT. h S W.


$
N
3
li
il>
w*
\\w
\\
vr*.
✓ ■ JIN
\ h|‘
I .
] - PARK'
V- 7 >iy
#O4 £>
\
I
,v*
W' / PARK / |. ..»L . o\ .R
ci/ ( it s f
\yf i Jr \^k
&>_ *// /§ ‘/' SUw A Si y# -|) §♦.
x if / V # J
ory // /T ss^ Riverview *w
j)l IS ]) $// j
\ 1\ # rfe \|StS2S^'S^v
J W *»», A —,/ tj ■;. ■
X.-e \\< ' V'' . JU~ Xbl -- ~ / A
\\_ '^X =s ===tte;}Z-*| I= S ~ff,-}. aTexammmME TfTT ’-T-SR , -
XTo /of r\c,// - 5 . ffft s J
V
V\*
suiiscsp Creek
I
> r/croe/A
x '
■ V
f \ c \i iiis* \jr^
ypr\ ■-> x **&*h Uhrs or /» )) \ V \Jf *// —SJN V A^y
/00C-.. t ' . / H l Ml
pc ■; ■ Ai ijf\\qsm lAX^^^r~yM^ti^§r^^
■ i /1 fr ""•*
.( JL$ | / <*&
'' J| |\ 'Y /I J ) \i Y f'—v* 1 I >'XX’“'- x .' X_T\ . .
/j l| \r &y A n X&WfQjJ pr Tlix' ertat
i \ f/Mj j • w xx .• \sf r!x ! m
> ‘I i V liC ( f'J / i X" «»
' — W 4 i \* f±t \ . m/$ F I y<F/s aF f
S X?/ I lli /t A 3 7 x-TOv DR^MOYN
)) o # I S kjy\ € , JJ VOXX f\ \ « .<
f (( % _Ji \ <3 \) \ , jC. /
wi \ V^^=^'\\.y—^y\^r\{
■ W-\' v • # r>i^
.\\ \ \ % J&c/J'* n I „ Roddtf >v *‘'
\ ■ )l \ \\ i ) ’, ( eX ® / ft
»\ \ /TXN. AY \\ ■ ■ XX t X. -', 3•■ X/ W /
MX \\ xw®fp«r7’ xx /
i- v\ wr r i ~ \ w*
•^SiSw
_ 11 >assall m
&2 • S W" '■'•
\V.■ W £ I ur
- Ovnlfas
V.y
CAM£LUASrA% ROS EH ILL i:
//:
pmx racecourse;!
11 $i
v> ffl
IB
v> \u
/ ■-«
7 xll
V wrii/4M jjT
! i^Cr s^! B&
eOAQ (I jot/v
M^ 5
Ajr~
1 i )r'm
* I SJjf //1
i l\ % // p M
SL \\ M*VCH£S7£/rL a ■ &S
V\ ir- __ JSfev V// tftV % // r
i ‘“A# / /
•«j i i iisSMsy f
J : S iWj/?
W tJ-J-jT |Wl'
\is> -i v \
! i I I J n ßnnr\/
- (( il I I -
L eoA/i
1 •».
I(Q
I
/'■
/
v L / \ V x >r'' - v ) //y/
\ i Jt- /S —\‘ i f
\\ . x - r p % {,/
't'idr i:< ‘ i ,-ir- —r i^~~ l : ' \ - I eaneAMATTA // J/ H // \ In '
Bar -I I ■ v^iTa * J %ia=i- ,J~-I /V . ~ ■— r '' : -~" '■■ 1 ' t y/ifTAjo „ // // \\l I i
Q jn . ,a« // IB —--
V 'lf _r i i i i ;H S al''~~
. r r 2!:S sf £fl )
In GUI,
f*- E M
' II Is J.-
\s%lr I Hi
ff I
.ll VAi/6fifH
I.A
MA
\ - i"Tr-~ , iP
£2ds__JL ll' §\
BQ(/*oA#\ jr
I
r^^INECROPOUS
***AU
r-x 1/
s
I
Hj
I
AL3£#T AO AO
QtIMORC.
LJ
f
ST JOH*S AOAO
£i/£AL£V( AOAO
*
*
I
5
*
I
K
I
I • ■
MITCHBL.L. sr_ ,A yy
■° A * i i" a#^l
sr o i yJy i








Plate 84.




Plate 86
— The Electric Train — —
<y - - - ■
AM & mt M-M-1UBU ■ '«r M— I«=MK / N
loffiiil
oj^l
Iluui-L
£|«l*|i|ft|?M«|d)Uli|6lil
||MI^|ttNla|l|‘il&l?l
[
jffiB
1
cmo
f
Bpj
%\AM\AU\AA*\A*\U\i\Am\.
31
lpF|i
H
|B^Dg
|o
rHt
9
a
H
■U- .- _J-U
J
Ul - u
i.-1. JL
:
-&- : z£l
r Hffe- s ffi m:
"~ •&' # f TIT & ! —““
i -to- ;
' I &
rTT"
IZ
i
y~i
a 1
-0
" r
J/ -<?'
- /»"
67-0
j
* OS €/' •' " - ■ ■■' ■■ * * 1 1 Of m €/ •j - i/
7 -p 67
*r
4OS'-0” 0rt
ND FOU
„//
I
J
Immediate Three Motor Cars a
m Existing Suburban Cars as Trailers *
i
— : J
i£„: y-- ... - =
0
rPflSW
HHHF
§^|!P
Pp
i □
grp^e
II
soffit
Jj
efctiH
M
b|b
gc
jonHnas
jnttfll
jjngHHc j
«p
m^m
oEEBj
p|Bi
if
mi
E^i
aipiri
s;
■Wj,
BBBEKfcfehrpspFEnpE^
i
1 v\
n u -yR x °
<■ 1 1 . i . i.
~ i TZi2
i -
m
—
J L- r
T -&- I _r£
ft- -*p--$- ;
A\ -Y1 i •
-u-v
H i
-ot- -vrr -ty- ; -to- -tx
r~ ~\U' -t±>
- Tt
r“
-07"
fy
-o
~U7- U7 ....
ALL
— w~ 'VT-
t T”" 1 - i i i i i 'i ; 1 r
s**r' S* * 1 ' yi /r 1
67'-0‘
' -1 " J
, /cr'~
o 4 '
JL 67'7?" — ►
* OS v pp os mm U r
T~
e /
4S& '~~0 ' Over aA
Seven 7
FHOGRAPHED BY W.A. G
t/ —t
* v/ u
,- r
iiM
Future *-
PHOTO-LI
f — 1 — —
Motor Cars
JLLICK, GOVT, PRINTER, N.8.W.
