

REPORT
OF THE
ROYAL COMMISSION
ON THE
SUGAR INDUSTRY
1912


1912.
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
REPORT
OF THE
ROYAL COMMISSION
ON THE
SUGAR INDUSTRY;
TOGETHER WITH
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE AND APPENDICES
Presented hy Command; ordered to he printed, 4dh December, 1912.
[Cost of Paper. —Preparation, not given; 1,250 copies ; approximate cost of printing and publishing, £97.]
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia U- Albert J. Mullett,
Acting Government Printer for the State of Victoria.
NO. 59.— F. 13881,




CONTENTS.
Royal Commission—Letters Patent (3) .. .. .. , # _ iv y PA y *
Report—
Introduction
vn
Assumptions .. .. .. # # # # •
Summary of Report .. .. ~ .. _ _ j
Part I.—Brief Summary of Existing Conditions .. .. ~ , _
„ ll—Bounty, Excise, and Import Duty .. .. .. _ xx j v
„ lll—Growers, Millers, Refiners .. .. .. .. _ _ xxxviii
»» IV. —Wage Earners .. .. .. .. jy-
>, V. —Allied Industries .. .. .. ~ # <
„ Vl—Beet Sugar .. .. ~ .. .. .. _ ]xxi
Dissentient Memorandum .. .. .. .. # Ixxvii
Minutes of Evidence ..
A
Appendices to the Evidence
Index to Witnesses
Index to Evidence
A 2


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
GEORGE THE FIFTH, by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Ireland, and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, King, Defender
of the Faith, Emperor of India :
TO Our trusty and well-beloved His Honor Sir John Hannah Gordon, K.C.M.G.,
The Honorable Albert Hinchcliffe, M.L.C., Robert Murray
McCheyne Anderson, Esquire, Martin Rowland Shannon, Esquire,
Thomas William Crawford, Esquire.
Greeting :
KNOW YE that We do, by these Our Letters Patent, appoint you to be Commissioners to inquire into and
report upon the Sugar Industry in Australia, and more particularly in relation to
( a ) Growers of sugar cane and beet ;
(b) Manufacturers of raw and refined sugar ;
(c) Workers employed in the Sugar Industry ;
(d) Purchasers and Consumers of sugar ; and
(e) Costs, profits, wages, and prices :
AND WE appoint you the said Sir John Hannah Gordon to be the Chairman of the said Commis-
sioners :
AND WE direct that at any meeting of the said Commissioners three Commissioners shall be sufficient
to constitute a quorum and may proceed with the inquiry under these Our Letters Patent, notwithstanding the
absence of the other Commissioners :
, AND W E further direct that in the event of the absence of the Chairman from any meeting of the said
Commissioners, the Commissioners present may appoint one of their number to act as Chairman during such
absence :
AND WE further direct that in the event of the votes given on any question at any meeting of the said
Commissioners being equal, the Chairman, if present, and if the Chairman is not present then the Commissioner
appointed to act as Chairman in his absence, shall have a second or casting vote :
AND WE REQUIRE you with as little delay as possible to report to Our Governor-General in and
over Our said Commonwealth the result of your inquiries into the matters intrusted to you by these Our Letters
Patent.
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF WE have caused these Our Letters to be made Patent and the Seal of
Our said Commonwealth to be thereunto affixed.
WITNESS Our trusty and well-beloved Thomas, Baron Denman, a Member of
His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross of the
Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael and St. George, Knight Commander
(seal op the common- of the Boy at Victorian Order, Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief
wealth of Australia.) of the Commonwealth of Australia, this twenty-fourth day of October, in the
year of Our Lord One thousand nine hundred and eleven, and in the second
year of Our Reign.
(Signed) DENMAN,
Governor-General.
By His Excellency’’s Command,
(Signed) JOSIAH THOMAS.
Entered on Record by me in Register of Patents No. 4, page 426, this twenty-fourth day of October, One
thousand nine hundred and eleven.
(Signed) ATLEE HUNT.


GEORGE THE FIFTH, by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Ireland, and of the British Dominions heyond the Seas King, Defender of
the Faith, Emperor of India :
TO Our trusty and well-beloved His Honour Sir John Hannah Gordon, K.C.M.G.,
the Honourable Albert Hinchclipfe, M.L.C., Robert Murray McCheyne
Anderson, Esquire, Martin Rowland Shannon, Esquire, Thomas
William Crawford, Esquire.
Greeting ;
E r S hy } eti^ s Patent issued in Our name by Our Governor-General in and over Our Commonwealth
LrTun U 2 Cer the / eal °fsaid Commonwealth, and dated the twenty-fourth day of October, in the year of
rp'nnrf °a san(r nine hundred and eleven, Jfe did appoint you to be Commissioners to inquire into and
report upon the Sugar Industry in Australia:
A' ND the date the said Com mission an Act entitled “An Act to amend the Royal
2 has been passed into law, and it is desirable to issue a new Commission under and by
P 7 c ° ntaxned “P°y<d Commissions Act 1902 ”as amended by that Act for the purposes
mentioned in the firstly recited Commission and in this Commission :
, rUi . 1 HEREFORE M E do, by these Our Letters Patent, issued in Our name by Our Governor-General
of Our Commonwealth of Australia, acting with the advice of Our Federal Executive Council, and in pursuance
f he Constitution of Our Commonwealth of Australia, the “ Royal Commissions Act 1902-1912,” and of all
, powers him thereto enabling, appoint you to be Commissioners and require and authorise you to inquire
into and report upon the Sugar Industry in Australia and more particularly in relation to
(a) Growers of sugar cane and beet ;
(b) Manufacturers of raw and refined sugar ;
(c) Workers employed in the Sugar Industry ;
(d) Purchasers and Consumers of sugar ;
(e) Costs, profits, wages, and prices ;
if) The Trade and Commerce in Sugar with other Countries ;
(g) The operation of the existing lams of the Commonwealth affecting the Sugar Industry ; and
(h) Any Commonwealth legislation relating to the Sugar Industry which the Commission thinks
expedient :
AND VV E appoint you the said Sir John Hannah Gordon to be the Chairman of the said Commissioners :
AND M E direct that at any meeting of the said Commissioners three Commissioners shall be sufficient
to constitute a quorum and may proceed with the inquiry under these Our Letters Patent, notwithstanding the
absence of the other Commissioners :
AND W¥j further direct that in the event of the absence of the Chairman from any meeting of the said
absence SlonerS ’ *** Commusioners P resent ma V appoint one of their number to act as Chairman during such
AND WE further direct that in the event of the votes given on any question at any meeting of the said
Commissioners being equal, the Chairman, if present, and if the Chairman is not present then the Commissioner
appointed to act as Chairman in his absence, shall have a second or casting vote :
7 further direct that the inquiry to be made by you in pursuance of this Commission shall be
deemed to be in continuance of the inquiry intrusted to you by the firstly recited Commission, and that any evidence
taken by you in pursuance of that Commission shall for the purposes of this Commission be considered by you in
the same manner and to the same extent as if that evidence had been taken in pursuance of this Commission :
AND you with as little delay as possible to report to Our Governor-General in and
over Our said Commonwealth the result of your inquiries into the matters intrusted to you by these Our Letters
r\ IN TESTIMONY M HEREOF WE have caused these Our Letters to be made Patent and the Seal of
Our said Commonweatlh to be thereunto affixed.
WITNESS Our trusty and well-beloved Thomas, Baron Denman, a Member of
His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross of the Most
(seal of the Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, Knight Commander
commonwealth of the Royal Victorian Order, Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief of
OF Australia.) the Commonwealth of Australia, this fourth day of September, in the year of
our Lord One thousand nine hundred and twelve, and in the third year of Our
reign,
{Signed) DENMAN.
D TT . _ 77 , Governor-General,
tfy His Excellency s Command,
{Signed) ANDREW FISHER.
Entered on record by me in Register of Patents No. 5, page 65, this fourth day of September, One
thousand nine hundred and twelve, f
[Signed) M. L. SHEPHERD.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.


GEORGE THE FIFTH, by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas King, ' Defender
of the Faith, Emperor of India :
To Our trusty and well-beloved William Jethro Brown, Esquire, LL.D., Litt. D.:
Greeting :
WHEREAS by Letters Patent, issued in Our name by Our Governor-General in and over Our Commonwealth
of Australia acting with the advice of Our Federal Executive Council, and dated the fourth day of September,
in the year of Our Lord One thousand nine hundred and twelve, We did appoint the Honorable Sir John
Hannah Gordon, the Honourable Albert Hinchcliffe, M.L.C., Robert Murray MoCheyne
Anderson, Esquire, Martin Rowland Shannon, Esquire, and Thomas William Crawford, Esquire, to be
Commissioners, and did require and authorize them to inquire into and report upon the Sugar Industry in
Australia, and more particularly in relation to :
(a) Growers of sugar cane and beet ;
(b) Manufacturers of raw and refined sugar ;
(c) Workers employed in the Sugar Industry;
{d) Purchasers and Consumers of sugar ;
{e) Costs, profits, wages, and prices ;
(/) The Trade and Commerce in sugar with other Countries;
(g) The operation of the existing laws of the Commonwealth affecting the Sugar Industry; and
(h) Any Commonwealth Legislation relating to the Sugar Industry which the Commission thinks
expedient:
AND WE did appoint the said Sir John Hannah Gordon to be Chairman of the said Commissioners :
AND WHEREAS the said Sir John Hannah Gordon is unable, by reason of ill-health, to continue
to act as one of the said Commissioners;
NOW THEREFORE WE do, by these Our Letters Patent, issued in Our name by Our Governor-General
of Our Commonwealth of Australia, acting with the advice of Our Federal Executive Council, and in pursuance
of the Constitution of Our Commonwealth of Australia, the “ Poyal Commissions Act 1902-1912,” and of all
other powers him thereunto enabling, appoint you, as from the ninth day of September instant to he one of the
Commissioners for the purposes of the said first-mentioned Letters Patent and to be the Chairman of the
Commissioners appointed by the said first-mentioned Letters Patent in the place of Sir John Hannah Gordon
as fully and effectually to all intents and purposes as if your name had been inserted therein in the place of that
of Sir John Hannah Gordon wherever in the said first-mentioned Letters Patent the name of Sir John Hannah
Gordon appears :
AND WE DIRECT that nothing in these Letters Patent shall affect anything done by the said Sir John
Hannah Gordon before the said ninth day of September instant:
WITNESS Our trusty and well-beloved Thomas, Baron Denman, a Member of
His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross of the
(seal of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, Knight
commonwealth Commander of the Royal Victorian Order, Governor-General and Commander-
of Australia.) in-Chief of the Commonwealth of Australia, this seventh day of September, in
the year of Our Lord One thousand nine hundred and twelve, and in the third
year of our Reign. "
{Signed) DEN MAN,
Governor-General.
By His Excellency's Command,
{Signed) ANDREW FISHER.
Entered on record by me in Register of Patents No. 5, page 66, this eleventh day of September, One
thousand nine hundred and twelve.
{Signed) M. L, SHEPHERD,
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.


REPORT.
Jo His Excellency the Right Honorable Thomas, Baron Denman,
a Member of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council , Knight
Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael and
St. George , Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order ,
Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief of the Commonwealth
of Australia.
May it Please Your Excellency—
1. We, Your Commissioners, appointed by Letters Patent dated respectively
the twenty-fourth day of October, 1911, the fourth day of September, 1912, and the
seventh day of September, 1912, to inquire into and report upon the Sugar Industry
in Australia, and more particularly in relation to—■
(®) Growers of sugar-cane and beet ;
(b) Manufacturers of raw and refined sugar ;
(c) Workers employed in the Sugar Industry ;
( d ) Purchasers and consumers of sugar ;
{e) Costs, profits, wages, and prices ;
(/) The Trade and Commerce in sugar with other countries ;
(g) The operation of the existing laws of the Commmonwealth affecting
the Sugar Industry ; and
( h ) Any Commonwealth Legislation relating to the Sugar Industry
which the Commission thinks expedient ;
have the honour to report as follows :
2. At the outset we wish to place on record our deep regret that Sir John
Gordon, who had conducted the proceedings of the Commission through the greater
part of its work in the collection of evidence, should have been impelled through
ill-health to resign the position which he had occupied with so much distinction, and
with so great an advantage to the Commonwealth. While he is in no way respon-
sible for the Report which we now submit, we are all conscious of the debt we owe to
him for his efficient and exhaustive investigations ; and we are also conscious that our
work has been lightened more than we can say by the many luminous suggestions of
which we had the advantage while he was associated with the work of the
Commission.
3. Your Commissioners entered upon their inquiry on the 25th October, 1911.
They have held 139 sittings, and have taken evidence from 447 persons interested
in many various ways in the Sugar Industry.
4. In the course of their investigations Your Commissioners visited all the
sugar-producing centres of Australia, and by public advertisement and the circulation
of specimen questions relating to the industry invited evidence from all interested.
5. Vour Commissioners also visited the capital cities of Kew South Wales,
Victoria, Queensland, South Australia, and Tasmania, and publicly invited evidence
in those centres.
6. Where it appeared that the evidence of particular individuals was essential
to the inquiry, steps were taken to insure their attendance.


7. Whenever practicable opportunities were taken of inspecting sugar mills
and refineries, and observing the actual conditions under which the employes in
the industry worked, and the provision made for their sustenance and accommodation.
8. Advantage was taken of the visit of Mr. J. C. Penny to Hawaii to
obtain from him a report on the conditions of the Sugar Industry generally in
Hawaii. His report is given in an Appendix to the Evidence ; and we venture
to believe that it will he found to he of great interest and value.
9. We regret that a lengthy delay in furnishing this Report has been
occasioned by litigation, prolonged over many months, and arising out of
our endeavour to secure evidence from representatives of the Colonial Sugar
Refining Company Limited. After the litigation just referred to had reached
its first stage, when the decision of the Magistrate was given in favour
of the Commission, the Company applied to the High Court and obtained
an interim injunction prohibiting Your Commissioners from requiring the
Company to answer any questions or to produce any documents which were
relevant only to certain specified subjects. As a result of the granting of the
injunction Your Commissioners were placed in a position very prejudicial, in
their opinion, to the effective discharge of the duties imposed upon them by Your
Letters Patent. If a question were put to the Company and an answer were refused
on the plea, or the pretext, that it came within the prohibition of the injunction,
Your Conimissioners were unable to require an answer without incurring the risk of
proceedings for Contempt of Court, and the delays incidental thereto. Of the legal
aspect of the Court’s action we are, of course, in no position to express an
opinion. We desire, however, to state our conviction that the issuing of such
injunctions under similar circumstances must seriously impair the utility of
Commissions of Inquiry as a means of investigating the costs of production and
manufacture in the case of wealthy corporations. In the present instance, the
situation was complicated by the facts that the Commission had already been long
delayed by the litigation previously referred to, and that the conditions of the
Australian Sugar Industry were such as to render it imperative that the Commission
should present its Report at the earliest possible moment.
Under all the circumstances of the case, the Commission deemed it advisable
to obtain such information as the Company were prepared to give. In justice to the
Company we must add that in their statement, returns and answers to questions,
they gave us a great deal of useful information, but their reticence on some subjects,
more especially as to the details of their balance-sheets, has prevented us from making
our Report as complete in some important respects as we desired to make it.
10. We have also to report that one of Your Commissioners, Mr. Thomas
William Crawford, whose aid has been of great assistance to us in the conduct of our
investigations and in the many formal and informal discussions arising out of those
investigations, has preferred to express his opinions and conclusions independently
and in a dissentient Memorandum which is annexed to this Report.
11. We desire also to say that, in the conduct of our investigations, and in the
framing of the present report, we have assumed :
(1) A loyal adherence to the policy of a White Australia.
(2) The national importance, from the point of view of defence, of
effecting the settlement and cultivation of the tropical and semi-
tropical areas of the Australian continent.
12. Responsible persons will scarcely impugn the validity of these assumptions,
whatever differences of opinion may exist as to the consequences which they
involve, or as to the means for giving practical effect to them. Their acceptance
implies no more than a due consciousness of the progress of Australia towards
nationhood—the recognition of the ideal of a Commonwealth which shall be
socially coherent, and politically self supporting: While this ideal has been held in
times past by an isolated few, the progress of recent events, both within Australia and


beyond its borders, has given to the ideal a new validity and significance, and a
virtually universal acceptance. Unfortunately, it is not easy to recognise adequately
to what extent our national problems, social, economic, and political, call in some way
or other for re-statement in the light of the assumptions to which we have referred.
Many of the ideas which are still current, and not a little of the legislation which
survives, have become antiquated through lack of adjustment to the new
responsiliilities of Australian national life.
13. The problem of the relation of public control to the Sugar Industry
affords a striking illustration of the truth of the statements just expressed. While
the wide divergencies of opinion which exist to-day with respect to that problem are
often the result of a mere ignorance of essential data, they are still more frequently
the result of a failure to outgrow ideas, opinions or policies which belong to the
limited outlook of pre-Federal times. The problem of the Sugar Industry to-day is
not, save in subordinate respects, a problem of industry, of wealth, or of production ;
it is primarily and essentially a problem of settlement and defence. iNo nation can
afford to regard lightly the development of its industries, the progress of its wealth,
or the economic efficiency of its productive machinery. But, important as these
things undoubtedly are, they rank, as regards the Sugar Industry, on an inferior
plane. The Commonwealth to-day is brought face to face with one of the gravest
problems which has ever taxed the ingenuity of statesmanship —that of the settlement
of tropical and semi-tropical areas by a white population living under standard
conditions of life. And intimately associated with this problem is the question of
national defence. If the ideal of a White Australia is to became an enduring
actuality, some means must be discovered of establishing industries within the
tropical regions. So long as these regions are unoccupied, they are an invitation t<»
invasion, as well as a source of strategic weakness. Granted so much, it follows that
the supreme justification for the protection of the Sugar Industry is the part that the
industry has contributed, and will, as we hope, continue to contribute, to the problems
of the settlement and defence of the northern portion of the Australian continent.
The recognition of the nature of this supreme justification is the first condition ol a
sound public policy in relation to the Sugar Industry. Relatively to it, all other
issues are of minor importance.
14. In presenting this report we have followed the order indicated by the
following syllabus:—
Pag:?
Part I.—Brief Summary of Existing Conditions.
1. Physical and climatic conditions ... ... ••• ••• xiii
(1) The soil and climate of the Queensland littoral ... xiii
[a) Relation of sugar areas to Australian demand ... xiii
\h) Other tropical products ... ... ... ... xiii
(2) The Sugar Industry and a White Australia ... ... xiv
(a) Suitability of sugar culture for white labour ... xiv
( b) Suitability of Queensland littoral for white settlement xv
2. Economic Structure ... ... ... ••• xvl
(1) Capital ... ... ••• ... ... •••
(a) Growers ... ... ... ••• ••• XVI
(0 Millers ... ... ... ... ••• xvii
(c) Refiners ... ... ... ••• ••• x ™i
(2) Labour * ... ... ... ... ... ••• xviii
3. Public aid and control ... ... ... ••• XIX
(1) The Commonwealth ... ... ... ••• x * x
(2) State of Queensland ... ... ... ... ••• XIX
4. The costs of the Sugar Industry ... ... ... ... xx


# Page.
5. The importance of the Sugar Industry ... ... ... xx
(1) Industrial ... ... ... ... ... ... xx
(2) Social ... ... ... ... ... ... xxi
(3) Political ... ... ... ... ... ... X xi
6. Question of export trade ... ... ... ... ... xxii
7. Some causes of discontent ... ... ... ... ... xxii
(1) The Net Protection ... ... ... ... ... xxii
(2) Virtual abeyance of competition as a factor in the determina-
tion of prices ... ... ... ... ... xxii
(3) Labour conditions ... ... ... ... ... xxii
(4) The system of Commonwealth control ... ... ... xxii
(5) Consumers ... ... ... .. ... ... X xiii
8. Conflict of interests ... ... ... ... ... xxiii
Part ll.—Bounty, Excise and Import Duty.
1. Net protection to Sugar Industry ... ... ... ... xxiv
2. Purposes served by System of Bounty and Excise ... ... xxiv
3. Diminution in value of such system ... ... ... ... xxiv
4. Other considerations suggesting abolition of system ... ... xxv
5. Statement of Cairns cane-growers ... ... ... ... xxvi
6. Alternatives to present system. ... ... ... ... xxvii
7. Conclusion ... ... ... ... ... ... xxviii
8. Effect of abolition of Bounty and Excise upon net protection ... xxviii
9. Objections to increased import duty—- ... ... ... xxviii
Burden to consumers ... ... ... ... ... xxviii
10. Cost of “ White Australia ” policy ... ... ... xxix
11. Indirect consequences of unnecessarily high duties ... ... xxix
12. Interests of allied industries ... ... ... ... xxx
13. Difficulty of reduction of duties ... ... ... ... xxx
14. Present high price of sugar ... ... ... ... xxx
Evidence suggesting present net protection adequate ... ... xxx
15. Evidence favouring increased net protection ... ... ... xxxi
16. Conclusion as to import duty, assuming it to be fixed at a definite
figure ... ... ... ... ... ... xxxii
17. Fluctuations in foreign market prices ... ... ... xxxiii
18. Consequences of fluctuations of foreign prices from points of view
of the consumer and the protected industry ... ... xxxiii
19. Conclusion ... ... ... ... ... ... xxxiii
20. Objections to fluctuating duty considered ... ... ... xxxiv
21. Method of fixing fluctuating duty ... ... ... ... xxxiv
22. Duty on raw and refined Sugar ... ... .... ... xxxv
23. Import duty on Molasses .., ... ... ... ... xxxvi
24. Duty on Sugar Machinery ... ... ... ... xxxvi
25. Duty on Beet Sugar ... ... ... ... ... xxxvi
26. The Brussels Convention ... ... ... ... ... xxxvi
27. Recommendations ... ... ... ... ... xxxvi
Part lll.—Growers, Millers, Refiners.
1. The problem of ensuring equitable distribution of profits ...xxxviii
2. Distribution mainly dependent on prices. Factors in price
determination ... ... ... mi ...xxxviii
3. These factors not reasonably effective in Australian Sugar Industry xxxviii
4. Refined Sugar ... ... ... ... .. ...xxxviii
5 Raw Sugar ... ... ... ... ... ... xxxix
6. Cane ... ... ... ... ... ... xxxix
Agreements between Mills as to prices and supplies ... xxxix
8. Position of non-shareholding growers ... ... ... xl
9. Growers not in a position to refuse supplies ... ... xli
10, Evidence of Mr. Knox ... ... ... ... x lj


Page.
11. Conclusion as to operation of competition in Sugar Industry as a
factor in price determination ... ... ••• ••• x^i
12. Actual distribution of profits among various branches of the industry xlii
13. Colonial Sugar Refining Co. Ltd. — ... ... ... ••• x ji|
14. Difficulties of examining into profits of ... ... ... x (u
15. Balance-sheets of, and supplementary evidence relating to ... xliii
16. Summary of position ... ... ... ... ••• x Jjii
17. Refiners and millers generally ... ... ••• X ’ lV
18. Conclusion as to refining and milling profits ... ... ••• x lv
19. Profits of growers ... ... ••• ••• •** x ”
20. Importance of the growers ... ... ••• ••• •••
21. Suggested remedies— ... ... ••• ••• x * v l
22. Revival of competition ... ... ... ••• ••• x^v l
23. Nationalization of the refining industry ... ... •••
24. Public competition and refining ... ... ... •••
25. Limitation of refining and milling profits ... ... ...
26. Public control of prices ... ... ••• •••
27. Disadvantages of existing sliding scales of prices ... .-. xlviii
28. Objections to public control of prices ... ... ••• x^ x
29. Proposal said to be revolutionary ... ... ... ••• x^ x
30. Proposal said to be impossible ... ... ... ••• x " x
31. No need for special legislation in Sugar Industry ... ... h
32. Mills may refuse to buy ; and Central Mills are under an obliga-
tion to Queensland Government ... ... ••• ]}
33. Production of a surplus ... ... ... ••• ••• J}|
34. Means of giving effect to policy
35. Machinery should be Federal ... ... ••• •••
36. Constitutional aspect of question
37. The determination of price of raw sugar ... ... ••• liij
38. The determination of price of cane ... ... ... •••
39. Scheme suggested relative to ... ... ... ... j} y
40. Advantages of scheme ... ... ••• ••• ••• “ v
41. Recommendations ... ... ... ... ••• ••• * v
Part IV.—Wage Earners
1. Importance of the worker ... ... ... ••• •••
2. Suitability of white labour ... ... ... ••• ••• J VI .
3. Medical testimony ... ... ••• ••• l .
4. Evidence of other witnesses ... ... ••• ••• JQ 1
5. Remuneration of labour ... ... ... ••• ••• j v l
6. National aspirations ... ... •• • •• • •• • J V 1
7. Living wage an accepted policy ... ... ... ••• .
8. Workers should share benefits of protection ... ... ... Ri
9. Conditions of Northern Australia ... ... ... ... ‘ Vl .i
10. National importance of settlement ...
11. Necessity for permanent settlers ... ... ... ••• y]]
12. Encouragement of other tropical products ... ... ••• An
13. Necessity for legislation for the protection of labour ... ... lyu
14. Relations of Colonial Sugar Refining Company to labour ... jvm
16. Disadvantages of Sugar workers ... ... ... *** ! v lll
17. Labour in the Sugar Industry generally ... ... ...
18. Wages below a reasonable standard... ... ••• ••• || x
19. The living wage... ... ... ••• ••• ••• Jl x
20. Cane-fields : Position of the cane-cutter ... ... ... Jl x
22. Wages of field hands ... ... ••• ••• *! x
24. Deductions for time lost through wet weather ... ... | x
25. Raw Sugar Mills: Wages paid in ... ... ... ••• | x
26. Settlement of recent strike —wages withheld ... ... ... lx
27. Mr. Knox’s evidence in regard to wages withheld ... ... * x
28. Mill manager’s evidence on same subject ... ... ••• l x
XI


29. Overtime ... ... ##> # >
30. Wages and conditions in the Refineries ... ] x i
31. Improvement of conditions essential ... ... ... jx-
-32. Riving wage essential ... ... ... ”* | x j
33. Abolition of Bounty system ... ’** ” ] x j
34. Alternative suggestions ... ... ... ** |xj-
-35. State assistance to improve labour conditions . i Y u
36. Recreation ... ... ... ** ’** jxj-
-37. Drawbacks of rural life ; some remedies suwested i Y u;
38. Savings Banks ... ... ** *’* j x j y
39. Maintenance of efficiency of the worker .. i Yl v
40. Profit sharing ... ...
41. Recommendations ... ... ... j j
Part V.—Allied Industries.
1. Enumeration ... ... . j
2. Primd fide case for duty-free sugar i YV
3. Per Contra — ... '
• • • • • • • • • • • • ... Jx v
(1) Danger of surplus of Australian produced sugar ... ] xv
(-) A Hied industries generally already have duty-free sugar for
export purposes ... ... ... " ... ‘ .. j xv
(3) They are protected by Tariff on local market ... ... \ X y
4. Jam industry calls for special consideration ... ... ... \ xy \
6. Jam fruit-growers specially concerned ... ... ..’ ] xy [
6. Their grievances, real or alleged, largely due to other causes !.. Ixvi
7. Resulting difficulties in the way of recommending duty-free suo*ar Ixvii
8. Difficulties of discrimination ... ... " ° Ixvii
9. The necessity for duty-free sugar not proved at present price of jams Ixvii
10. In any case that price could be raised. ... ... Ixviii
11. Danger of collateral competition. ... ... ... ’ ] x j x
12. Possibility of diminution of volume of fruit-growing industry con-
sidered ... .. ... \ " j x i x
13. General summary of position ... ... ... p x j x
14. Recommendations ... ... ... ... ] xx
Part Vl.—Beet Sugar.
1. Possibility of extension of beet sugar industry, and question of
whether such extension would be prejudicial to national interests Ixxi
2. Idea of export trade illusory ... ... ... ... | xx j
3. Assumption that cane will always enjoy an economic superiority
over beet ... ... " ... ... ... ‘ jxx-
4. State Governments and the beet sugar industry ... ... Ixxii
5. The possibility of a growing rivalry must be recognised ... ... Ixxiii
6. Relative claims of beet and cane sugar ... ... ... Ixxiii
7. Conclusion ... ... ... ... . . Ixxiv
8. A suggested remedy ... ... ... **’ ] xx iv
9. Recommendations ... ... ... ... Ixxiv


PART I.—BRIEF SUMMARY OF PRESENT CONDITIONS.
In the following summary we confine our remarks to the cane sugar industry.
The beet sugar industry will receive separate consideration in Part VI. The main
purposes ol the present summary are to correct some of the illusions which exist
with respect to the cane sugar industry, to bring into clear relief the more elemental
facts of the existing situation, and generally to present those facts in such a way as
will enable persons who may have little or no acquaintance with the industry, to
realize the nature of the problems with which we have to deal in other parts of
the Report.
1. Physical and Climatic Conditions.
(Tj The Soil and Climate of the Queensland Littoral.
The suitability of the soil and climate of the Queensland littoral for the
purpose of sugar cultivation is sufficiently demonstrated by the progress of the
Sugar Industry in the past. The occasional presence in certain regions of floods
and cyclones, the existence of pests, and the difficulty of clearing the land in the
first instance, have undoubtedly retarded that progress ; but their influence has
probably been less deterrent than the inadequacy of the price paid for cane, the
difficulty of securing efficient labour, and changes in legislation together with an
uncertainty as to the course of future legislative policy. Two matters appear to call
for special mention :
(p) While the area, under, or admitting of immediate cultivation, is
sufficiently extensive to supply the Australian market, there are
large areas still unreclaimed which are equally suitable for cane
cultivation. These areas will prove more than equal to meeting
the expanding Australian market for long periods to come, even
assuming the rate in the increase of the population to be greatly
accelerated.
( h ) Large areas in tropical and semi-tropical Australia are suitable for
rice, coffee, cotton, rubber, &c. The conclusion is sometimes
expressed that such products are more entitled to protection than
sugar. We do not think the conclusion warranted by the
evidence which has been submitted to us. In any case, the Sugar
Industry is established, and it has proved its suitability. At the
same time, the Sugar Industry alone will not suffice for a complete
solution of the problem of tropical settlement. Much of the land,
though it may be suited for such tropical products as we have
referred to, is not suited for sugar cultivation ; and sugar is grown
under conditions which preclude an export trade ( v . infra 6, Question
of Export Trade p. xxii). In this connexion we desire to draw
attention to the following extracts from evidence :
Howard Oliver Newport, Instructor to the Department of Agriculture, Cairns.
4735. How long liave you been in the Department'?—l think it will be thirteen years next month.
4736. It has been your duty to study the suitability of Northern Queensland for the production of
tropical products, has it not ?—That is so.
4737. This Commission is engaged on the question of sujrar production, but it is also very much
interested in the accompanying question of whether or not other products ihau sugar may not be grown
profitably in Northern Queensland. Therefore, the Commission would like you lo state your opinion
under, we shall say, the three principal heads of rubber, rice, and coffee, as being the three heads
which suggest themselves to me under which possible tropical products may come in this


country. We shall be glad to hoar your opinion not only on rubber, rice, and coffee, but any
other tropical product which you think might become a profitable industry in the northern parts
of Queensland. I will now ask you to state your views as concisely as possible, while, at the
same time, doing justice to your subject ?—I should think it exceedingly regretful if any inference
should be drawn from any evidence that has been previously given to the effect that it is impossible to
establish, in Northern Queensland, other tropical industries than sugar. In my opinion, there are many
such possible industries, and there are a numbor of them that I could quote, but on your suggestion I
shall confine myself to a few of them. In establishing these industries there are considerable difficulties,
which may be classed as follows :—First of all, an unconscious and natural bias on the part of the
settlers we introduce. We bring them from a white country, and, coming from a white country, they are
naturally more accustomed to dealing with industries belonging to a temperate climate'. In coming to
tropical parts they meet with industries of which they have not even heard, much less being acquainted
with the methods of dealing with those products which naturally belong to the climate and soil of North
Queensland. In entering into many, but not all of these tropical industries there is a period during
which it is necessary to wait before any actual return from the capital invested is received. But this is
more than made up subsequently, because, although these products take time to come into bearing, they
last a very long time, generally as long as the life time of a man. Again, an unsettled state of affairs
plays an important part also where one is dealing with a permanent crop, and these industries have to
start with purely white labour, which makes it more difficult to start them than if they had started at a
time when, perhaps, the heaviest work might have been undertaken by other labour, as
was done in the Sugar Industry. Then, again, the effect of custom comes in, that is
the unavoidable and natural tendency to look round and see what has been done previously
in connexion with such industries. Allusions to previous efforts have, unfortunately, been
made to the failures rather than to the successes. That is not a fair basis on which to judge
the possibilities of an industry, the industry has often been blamed when it is not necessarily the industry
that was at fault. Ihe individual is naturally loathe to blame himself. Nevertheless, these industries
in some instances, notably coffee, have been started up here without any previous experience whatever,
but errors made in connexion with a permanent product are not easily remediable. If an error be made
in the planting of corn or cane sugar it is limited to the one season or, at most, a year or two, when it can
be re-planted, whereas in the case of the failure of a product which takes five years to come into bearing it
discourages the grower to start again. Many of these plantations being started without knowledge were
foredoomed to failure, and a good deal of money was expended in attempting to open them. As a
number of growers have said to me, “If we had only started a number of these products with the know-
ledge we have now, we could have obtained a very different result.” I think that statement would apply
to many of the tropical products that have been started. The harvesting of these crops differs very much
from that of cereal and other crops of a temperate climate. Tropical crops vary very ranch, and the work
of cultivation and harvesting has to be undertaken systematically and carefully, and we are, perhaps, in
the position of not knowing how to begin. In regard to that matter, I might quote cane itself ;at first it
was difficult for a white man to cultivate and harvest cane, but now he can do so, and do it well ; never-
theless, a man must be experienced to earn good wages at cane-cutting. Such experience with other
tropical industries has not been obtained. In quoting the non-success of these industries, such a fact
that coffee at that time was worth to od. a lb., while it is now to Bd., was very often omitted.
So, possibly, if the industry were re-started now, it would be quite a different matter. I would submit
that those products which are adapted to the soil and climate are far more likely of extended success than
are temperate climate industries adapted, or endeavoured to be adapted, to unfavorable climates and soils.
These products will be confined practically to consumption within the Commonwealth. That they will
not meet with difficulties I do not suggest j it is to be anticipated that they will meet with difficulties
similar to those with which sugar met, but probably not greater than can be overcome by the people if
they set their minds to it. Of course, it is impossible to compete in open markets of the world under the
conditions of labour existing in the Commonwealth without legislative assistance. Therefore, to a
considerable extent, success must depend on a bonus. Bonuses are now available upon some of these
products, and so far as they go they are good, but they are not sufficient to induce the further cultivation of
them. In order that the bonus should do so, it should be upon the same basis as that of sugar, namely,
roughly, one-third of the value of the raw products. These tropical products may continue for the liie-
time of a man ; it must be borne in mind that this permanency means a permanent asset to the country,
whether the individual passes away or not. Hence the planting of cocoanut or rubber trees, whether
brought to maturity or abandoned, remain an asset to the country, and they can be re cultivated very often
without re-planting. Most of these industries do not require a great amount of capital to be invested ;
ceitainly not a great deal in large factories and machinery, which may in a short time become out of date,
and require to be put on the scrap heap. The amount of machinery required in many instances is
comparatively small. Again, the product is very often not perishable, which is an important point in
pioneering work, when one is, perhaps, some distance away from transport facilities. Another point is
their high bulk value, which enables transport charges, which might otherwise appear heavy, to be much
more readily borne. Of course, there is no industry incapable of failure, and there must be a certain risk
involved, but, nevertheless, many of these industries can be shown to be sound business propositions.
(2) The Sugar Industry and a White Australia.
hile soil and climate of the Queensland littoral is undoubtedly suitable
tor sugar cultivation, the questions remain whether the climate is suitable for white
settlement, and whether the Sugar Industry is suitable for the employment of white
labour. J
(u) Suitability of Sugar Culture for White Labour.
. . ave received a great deal of evidence on this subject, and we are of
opinion that no reason exists in the nature of things why white labour should not
be employed on the sugar plantations or in the sugar mills. We do not mean by
XIV


this that we are satisfied with all the existing conditions of labour in the Sugar
Industry. But these conditions have improved, and are capable of still further
improvement in ways to which we shall refer in Part IV. —Wage Earners. We limit
ourselves here to the statement that, though the work in the Sugar Industry is often
arduous, it is suitable, or capable of being rendered suitable, for the employment of
white labour.
(b) Suitability of the Queensland Littoral for White Settlement.
We entertain no doubt of the possibility of effective settlement, by a white
population, of the Queensland coastal areas. Though a contrary conclusion has
been frequently expressed in the past, we believe that the conclusion is based upon
conditions which are no longer existent, or upon a failure to realize the physical
adaptability of the white races to varying climatic conditions. No one [can "doubt
that the white population has proved itself slow to appreciate the need forappropriate
changes in clothing, diet, home conditions, and general mode of life. Yet, despite
this tardiness, the present population is a normally healthy one, with a fully
developed physique, and a low death rate. Frequent references have been made in
the past to tropical diseases. It appears to have been overlooked that there are also
diseases which are virtually peculiar to non-tropical regions. Moreover, the tropical
diseases themselves are largely preventable or capable of mitigation by improved
methods of medical treatment, and by the progress of tropical medicine, hygiene, and
sanitation. Indeed, the mere fact of settlement tends to limit the area of danger.
In one respect Queensland is particularly fortunate, since its littoral is flanked by high
mountainous regions which in times to come are likely to be used in an increasing
degree by the inhabitants of the low lands for purposes of recuperation or change.
But, even under existing conditions, that the health record is satisfactory may be
inferred from the following interesting evidence of Mrs. Elizabeth Teys, teacher of the
State School at Mossman, Queensland, the most northerly of the sugar centres :
Questions 1023-1029 “ Occasionally a child might have fever, but I do not know of any
one in the school who has had it The general standard of health and the physical standard
here is as good or better than it was in the West. It is not better than on the Downs, but the
attendance is better Only two children who have been in attendance at the school have died
since I have been here (thirteen and a half years). One child was here for two years, and the other only
for six months, and had consumption. Neither of them was born in the district.”
Some witnesses, while not challenging the facts we have stated, have expressed
the opinion that the effect of residence for several generations in the tropics might,
or must, prove prejudicial. We have seen no evidence to justify this opinion ; and it
appears to indicate an adherence to certain views, as to the inheritance of acquired
characters, which have been generally discarded by leading modern authorities. On
the general question we wish to draw special attention to the evidence of an expert —
Philip Sylvester Clarke, M. 8., Ch.M., Sydney, F.R.C.S., Edinburgh, Medical Practitioner, and
Government Medical Officer at Port Douglas.
1827. You tender a written statement, dated 4th November, 1911 ?—Yes.
Mossman, 4th November, 1911.
To the Members of the Royal Commission, Mossman.
I beg to place before you the following considerations with regard to the possibility of the
permanent settlement of the white man in the cane-growing districts of North Queensland. This question
is closely connected with that of the adaptability of the white race to settle, thrive, and work in the
tropics. Unfortunately, we have no satisfactory precedent to guide us in solving this problem. The
recent important advances made in the subject of tropical medicine and hygiene by improving our methods
of preventing and treating the tropical diseases incidental to the North Queensland coastal districts, render
the outlook for white settlement far more favorable than it would have been twenty years ago
In considering this question, the colour of the white man would appear to have little influence in
guiding us to a conclusion, for, to quote Dr. T. F. Macdonald, “If colour is produced by adaptation to
sunlight and other climatic conditions, why are the Esquimaux brown in their Arctic environment,
the Finlanders dusky, the Indians red, the Maoris black, the Galla natives on the Line white, the Line
Islanders most pale of Melanesian races, tne Fuegans black ? ” In the northern cane-growing districts the
chief influences that exist tending the individual and race deterioration may be considered under the
following heads :
1. The influence of heat and atmospheric humidity.—ln my experience sunstroke is rare in the
cane-fields ; I have yet to meet with a case of thermic fever. Undoubtedly the nervous and muscular
vigour of the field worker is diminished to a certain extent by the warmth of the climate, but not to a
degree incompatible with the satisfactory performance of his work.
2. The influence of disease. — The ordinary epidemic diseases such as influenza and diphtheria appear
periodically in the cane-growing districts, but are attended with a much lower mortality than exists with
similar diseases in the southern districts of Australia.


The most prevalent cases of sickness in this (Mossman) district are the so-called Mossman fever
malaria, dengue, ankylostomiasis, rheumatic affections, filariasis and diarrhoea. Most, if not all, of these
troubles are eminently preventable. Filariasis, malarial and dengue fevers are certainly communicated to
man by mosquitoes. Properly carried out mosquito destruction, mosquito proof habitations, and the use of
mosquito nets would eradicate these diseases. The incidence of Mossman fever would probably be
diminished by the same precautions, as all the indications point to the fact that this fever is transmitted
to man by inoculation by some insect, probably some variety of mosquito. Ankylostomiasis is in almost
every case contracted by the habit, common amongst tbe children in North Queensland, of walking about
with uncovered feet, thereby enabling the embryo hookworms to enter the body through the skin. The
preventive measure is obvious. Re the rheumatic affections. These could largely be prevented by
ordinary hygienic precautions. Many of the present field workers are extremely careless in their habits.
They retire at night dressed in their working clothes, still wet with perspiration, often to awaken in the
morning with an attack of lumbago or other rheumatic affections.
The diarrhoeal troubles could be prevented by boiling or efficient filtration of the drinking water,
especially during certain months of the year, when diarrhoea is prevalent.
3. The influence of the climate on the health of women and children.—Concerning the women,
one commonly hears the remark, “It is impossible for a woman to live a healthy life on the North
Queensland coast.”
Undoubtedly, in this district many of the women do not enjoy good health. This unfortunate
state of things 1 attribute chiefly to their mode of living, and not directly to the tropical climate. Most
of them do not take sufficient outdoor exercise, do not dress or diet themselves to suit the climate, and
there are few social amusements to distract their attention from home worries.
The absence of qualified obstetrical attendance has in the past been a fruitful source of chronic
debility amongst the women residing in the smaller coastal towns.
Re the health of the children.—-I consider that, with proper care, the probability of a child born in
this district living to attain the adult age is much greater than in the southern portion of the Common-
wealth. This view I take from the fact that ordinary epidemic diseases that affect children, viz.,
diphtheria, measles, and scarlet fever, are attended with a smaller mortality here than they are in cooler
latitudes. The cheerful manner in which parents allow their children to walk barefooted to school
accounts for the prevalence of ankylostomiasis, with ils attendant anaemia, amongst the children.
In rearing their children, most of tire mothers here slavishly follow the precepts applicable to the
rearing of children in colder climates The result is that unhygienic practices, such as the over clothing
of children, are common, and materially diminish the vitality of the rising generation.
4. The influence of alcoholic intemperance.—This in the past has been, probably, the most potent
cause of sickness amongst the field workers in this district. With their natural resisting powers
deteriorated by successive bouts of alcoholism, it is not uncommon to see these men lying all night in an
intoxicated condition by the roadside, to fall an easy prey to the malarial and other parasites.
2. Economic Structure.
(1) Capital.
One witness, Mr. J. R. Raddle (Question 25644), says it has been computed
roughly that the amount of capital invested in the industry in Queensland is
£7,()u0,000 —the capital value of the machinery, premises, and land being put
down at £2,500,000, and of the land and farms, &c., at £4,500,000. In addition
to this, there is the growing, milling, and refining in New South Wales, and the
refining industry in Melbourne and Adelaide. On the whole, it would seem fair to
assume that the Sugar Industry in Australia involves a capital of not less than from
£10,000,000 to £12,000,000. This capital is divided between growers, millers, and
refiners.
(a) Growers.
The Growers and the Land. —The great body of the growers is composed of
occupiers and owners of small plantations varying in size from about 50 to 200 acres.
Tbe official estimate for 1911 of the number of white growers and the acres
cultivated, gives an average cultivation of 28 acres per grower. A small proportion
of the growers are lessees. Bingera and Fairymead plantations, both in the
Bundaberg district, are the only instances now existing where cane is grown in large
quantities by the mill-owners themselves.
Ihe Grower Non-employer —According to the evidence of Dr. A. J. Gibson,
then General Superintendent, Bureau of Sugar Experiment Stations, Mackay, and
now General Manager of Government Sugar Mills, Queensland (Question 9682) —
“ It would be difficult to state the exact figures in relation to growers who, with their families, do
their own labour entirely. In No. 4 Sugar Bounty district, in particular, where the areas under cane are
smaller, and dairying and other industries are carried on as well, a very large proportion of the work is
done by growers and their families. In other districts, much of the cultivation work is done by the
grower and his family on small areas ; but in the majority of the cases, additional labour is required to
render assistance during the harvesting period.”


The Bounty. —The growers receive a Bounty on delivery of the cane at the
mills. The Bounty is £3 per ton of recoverable sugar contents of the cane ; and it
is given subject to certain regulations of which the general object is the exclusive
employment of white labour, and the maintenance of standard conditions (v. infra
3, Public Aid and Control, p. xix).
Price for Cane. —The price paid for the cane is subject to seasonal fluctuations,
and varies also accordingly to locality or to particular mill, and according to the
proprietary relations between grower and miller, v. (/>) Millers. These variations
run for undamaged cane from about Bs. 6d. a ton to 19s. 6d. a ton. Generally
speaking, the price paid by the mills runs from 13s. to 16s. per ton.
Sugar Cane and Sugar. —The quality of cane varies with different species,
with locality, and with the seasons. Generally speaking, the cane is richest in sugar
contents in the more northerly areas. Approximately, it takes from Bto 10 tons of
undamaged cane to make a ton of raw sugar.
(h) Millers.
Mill Owners. —A large number of the mills are owned by growers to whom
the State of Queensland has advanced funds on the deeds of their freeholds for the
erection of mills on a co-operative or quasi co-operative principle. These are
generally described as Central Mills. Other mills described as Proprietary are
owned by private individuals or companies. The Colonial Sugar Refining Company
mills about one-third of the Australian output of raw sugar.
John Robert Paddle, General Manager, Government Central Sugar Mills, Queensland.
25569. What is the total number of co-operative mills in Queensland ; name each ?—Thirteen
co-operative mills borrowed money from the Government. These are :—-Mossman, Mulgrave, Proserpine,
Racecourse, Marian, Plane Creek, Pleystovve, North Eton and Double Peak, Gin Gin, Isis, Mount Bauple,
Moreton and Nerang River. Cattle Creek and Meadowlands are also worked on co-operative principles,
but did not borrow money from the Government.
25570, How many of them (giving the name of the mill in each case) are (a) clear of debt to the
Government, (6) up to date in their instalments of principal and interest money, (c) in arrear with their
payments to the Government, and (d) taken over and now worked by the Government?
As to (a) four, namely, Racecourse (Treasury paid in full and securities released) ; Marian
(Treasury paid in full and securities released); Pleystowe (liability taken over by the Queensland National
Bank Limited), and Moreton (Treasury paid in full and securities released).
As to ( b ) five, namely, Mossman (£2,363 6s. sd. suspended and made payable, 30th June, 1924) ;
Mulgrave, North Eton and Double Peak ; Plane Creek (£5,435 ss. 2d. balance arrears of interest to 30th
June, 1900, being paid off by annual instalments of £650, not considered as being in arrears) ; and Isis
(£1,191 6s. lid. annual instalment paid in December).
As to (c) nil.
As to (d) four, namely, Proserpine (arrears of interest to 30th June, 1911, £1,661 Bs. 3d., balance
of loan to 30th June, 1911, £55,305 os. 7d., total liability to Treasury, 30th June, 1911, £ 6,966 Bs. 10d.);
Gin Gin (arrears o; interest to 30ch June, 1911, nil ; balance of loan to SOth June, 19.1, £43,944 1 *g, 3d.,
total liability to Treasury, 30th June, 1911, £43,944 10s. 3d.) ; Mount Bauple (arrears of interest to 30th
June, 1911, £9,119 Os Bd., balance of loan to SOth June, 1911, £39,435 18s. 3d. Total liability to
Treasury, 30th June, 1911, £48,554 18s. lid). Nerang River (arrears of interest to 30th June, 1911,
£9,002 Bs. 1 Id., balance of loan to 30th June, 1911, £19,464 19s. Bd., total liability to Treasury, 30th
June, 1911, £28,467 Bs. 7d.). All that have been in arrears have been taken over, and they are
Proserpine, Gin Gin, Mount Bauple, and Nerang River.
Millers and Growers. —As a rule, the shareholders in the Central Mills are
growers, though a large percentage of growers are not shareholders, and this
difference of relationship to the mills has been a fruitful source of discontent. The
mills were looked upon as co-operative enterprises on the part of the growers.
Unfortunately, from a strictly co-operative point of view, no limit was set to the
holding of each shareholder ; and no guarantee exists against discriminations of one
sort or another unfavorable to the non-shareholders, for example, as regards the
price paid for cane. In certain of the mills, notably North Eton in the Mackay
District, there has been a tendency towards diminution in the number of co-operators,
and even to the formation of a close body of individuals who are in a position to
exploit non-shareholders if they choose to do so. Some of the mills have recognised
these evils, and have guarded against them to some extent, at least, by provisions in
their articles of association that the shares cannot be separated from the freehold
security pledged to the Government in respect to which the shares have been
issued.
F.1388Z. B


Mill-white Sugar. —While most of the mills limit their work to the manufac-
ture of raw sugar from the cane, some of the mills—notably Bingera, Fairymead, and
Nerang—carry the manufacture a stage further and turn out a “ mill-white sugar,”
which, though not so popular as refined sugar, is said to he as serviceable for
most practical purposes.
(c) Refiners.
The conversion of raw sugar into refined is undertaken by two companies —
the Colonial Sugar Refining Company Limited and the Millaquin Sugar Company
Limited. Of these companies, the former is far the larger, and it occupies, by virtue
of its refining and milling interests, and its oversea trade, a predominating position
in the Australian Sugar Industry.
O %j
(2.) Labouk.
(a) Classes. —A great variety of labour is employed in the Sugar Industry.
The growers employ men as general field workers or as cane cutters —in the former
case usually by day labour, in the second case usually by contract. The mills and
refineries employ a larger proportion of skilled labour ; but both in the mills and in
the refineries there is a good deal of labour which may be classed as unskilled.
(b) Effect of Bounty Regulations in Securing Preference for White Labour. —
The effect of limiting the Bounty to the growers who employ white labour exclusively,
together with the deportation of kanakas and the general policy of the Common-
wealth as regards coloured immigration, have been so far successful that to-day less
than 6 per cent, of the sugar is produced by coloured labour.
(c) Effect of Bounty on Wages. —The Bounty regulations have exercised
a favorable influence with respect to the standard of wages of field workers. Up
to the time of the adoption of the General Order issued by the Minister for Trade and
Customs in August last, while it cannot be said that the actual effect of the Act was
to raise wages, it has unquestionably been the means of helping to prevent wages
from falling below the bare subsistence level. In some instances, growers were
paying a rate in excess of the minimum.
( d ) The Efficiency of Labour. —Generally speaking, the standard of efficiency
of the unskilled labour supply in the mills, and in the fields, is not of a high order.
This is due to several causes, including the intermittent nature of the employment,
the unattractive conditions under which men have to live, and the fact that good men
can earn better wages in other occupations. Latterly, as was admitted in evidence,
there has been an improvement in the class of labour offering, and the opinion
was expressed that if better conditions could be offered, a more desirable class
of men would be attracted to the industry. A very large proportion of the labour
required is drawn from the larger centres of population, the local supply rarely if ever
being equal to the demand.
(e) Accommodation. —At the mills accommodation is provided for the mill
employees. When visiting the mills members of the Commission inspected the men’s
quarters. In some cases the accommodation is very inferior. The rooms are small
and badly ventilated, and the sanitary arrangements are not such as to promote good
health. In the majority of cases, however, considerable improvements have recently
been, or were being effected, due partly to the operations of the State Shearers’ and
Sugar Workers’ Accommodation Acts, and partly to a desire of some mill-owners to
see that their employees are better cared for. In nearly every instance the sleeping
apartments were found to be badly kept ; in some they were positively unkempt and
dirty. This unsatisfactory state of affairs is attributable in a great measure to the
carelessness of employees themselves, and to the want of some system of organization
and control in the care of the men’s quarters. At nearly all the mills reading rooms
are provided. At some there are spacious concert halls, and provision for outdoor
recreation. An extension of these attractions would doubtless help to reduce the
intemperate habits about which there is so much complaint
(/) Wages and Hours of Work. —The minimum wage paid for field workers,
other than cane cutters, ranges from 225. 6d. in the off season, to from 255. to 30s. in
the crushing season, per week and found ; and the regular working hours range from
54 to 57 hours, including time going to and returning from the fields. The wages of
mill employees (unskilled labourers) range from 275. 6d. (with a bonus of 2s. fid. for
those who remain to the end of the crushing season) to 30s. per week and keep.
Since August, 1911, 30s. per week and found is the recognised standard wage
XVIII


fb.^ns i, .?rt' n l! 1 i empl T eS ' J h f 0 1 11 - v Queensland mills which pay 275. 6d., and add
South w I XT 1 ?! are cl Ol t lft Colonial Sugar Refining Company. In the New
r Rivers sugar districts mill workers a”re paid a/a less rate than
miuhnum mtenaid I*- S ” gar Fo >' instance,lhe
Broad vvnfAr o Ft t " Colonial Sugar Refining Company at their Condong
“ r s°“ nulls to adult employees (some of whom are married mef
Of f per ce r on their r?if ' 48 > U . rS ’ "I th a . bonus of 2s ’ 6d - An additional bonus
not governed by an industriaUwlrd. 18 *° Pa ' d **" ‘° th ° Se wW WageS are
10i f«n°h mi,lsare worked b ? *»ro shifts of an average of
pal'd for overt i,4 at the 60 b ° U / S P er ma " P er week. All time over 48 hours is
Company’s refineries the ? • ° f tlme , a , nd a quarter. At the Colonial Sugar
men en"a "edon ,i t t W T-P ald to adults is 7s - eight hours day"to
With a totch of^.tf AtXml , t 0 tlloS fi e ill Side R tlle , buildi T’
rate is 7s. per day, or 425. per week of 48 limits M ' llaqU ‘ n refin6ry ’ Bundaber & the
. ,■ C f, ne - 18 CUt ’ exce P t >n very rare instances, on the buttv e-ano- svstem the men
day? eich mau Wn ha g s a w ger i
system rLTkm h. ° f , th ° Be °as cutters on this
dßra f “™ s °“l~XV td
TevCe lfZ w, i-l 0U t rS ?" exce P tl0 ” all y good crops. The average earnings of 1
t f. S an g woilving ten hours per day on an average crop may he fixed at snv
3. Public Aid and Control.
There has been both Commonwealth and State legislation with a view to
Sed ‘n S he mdU3try and directing the conditions Wilder whichit shall t
(1) The Commonwealth.—
(a) Imposes a Customs duty of £6 per ton on all cane sugar (raw or
lefined) imported into and consumed in Australia ;
(b) Imposes an Excise duty of £4 per ton on all sugar produced and
consumed within Australia ; p
(c) Confers a Bounty at the rate of £3 on the quantity of cane estimated
to produce a ton of raw sugar.
The Bounty is subject to certain regulations, which are designed to secure the
meZTwaX J 7he lfres if?”’ “ d *,? pa >’ ment for sucb labour of standard
Ti t- £ * 10 uet ies ult is generally expressed by saying that the Mio-nr
reason P p° te . ctl(^ n of per ton. The statement is inaccurate for the
the Bountv’is^^calculatedn„'th W Payab ' 6 ° Uly ? Ugar as h S oes iuto consumption,
: u * y 18 calculated on the raw sugar producing contents of the cane According
to our own estimate, the net protection may be put down at £5 ss. per ton. g
• . P] TH f ® TATE 0F Queensland, —Queensland, as beinc the State most vitnllv
“u wavs' P RT O "? ° f ' ‘‘"I Sugal ' haS in the P& a -i “ d the
hJ f y iaS advanced moneys for the erection of the Central Mills ■ it
ad foiled f?mect thc- Tat m d Mills which in the shareholders’ hands
•‘ ‘I fai !. to “Cft tlie » obligations ;it has spent large sums in procuring scientific
r???Tns°„ r ew e v?i g et r &r ™\ in combating cane diseases and pests, and
n piocuung new varieties of cane ; and it has passed certain legislation with a view
to improving the living conditions of employees w ith a view
XIX


As to the obligations of the Central Mills to the Government, evidence was
given as follows :
William Joseph James Short, Inspector of Accounts, Audit Department, Brisbane.
25814 What is the total amount advanced by the Government to co-operative sugar mills, and the
amount now due ?-The total amount advanced to Central sugar mills, including interest and capital, is
£595 830 12s 3d. on the Ist July, 1911. The balance of loan on the Ist July, 1911, was £337,339
fy s ’ Bd That does not include arrears of interest. The arrears of interest at that date were principally
on the Central Mills, foreclosed by the Government, and was £26,5 1 9 2s. Bd., bringing the total liability
to the Treasurer on the Ist July, 1911, £363,919 2s. 4d.
25815 Is that from your latest report 1-Yes. (Witness produced report of Auditor-General to
Parliament for the year 1910-11.) The figures 1 have been giving are taken from it.
4. Costs of the Sugar Industry to the Australian Consumer.
A white community which prefers to grow its own sugar in its own territory
with white labour, rather than purchase from abroad sugar grown by cheap coloured
labour, must face the responsibility of making good the increased cost ot production
under the higher standard of living and reward. Either the consumer or the taxpayer
must pav. In Australia, under the Customs Duty, the cost is paid by the consumei.
The incidence of the Excise and Bounty does not directly affect him except in so
far as it enables him, as taxpayer, to recover through the Treasury the difference
between Excise collected and Bounty paid. At present, Australia s demand exceeds
250,000 tons per annum. Assuming that amount to he produced locally, and
assuming, as experience warrants, that within a protected area, the price o tic
protected commodity will generally run to foreign market price plus freight plus
duty, the present Customs duty of £6 a ton pledges the Australian consumer to the
extent of £1,500,000 per annum. In actual fact, certain deductions have to
he made :
(1) The present difference between Bounty paid and Excise collected of,
approximately, 15s. a ton of sugar, means that the consumer recovers through the
Treasury an amount which has varied for different years, hut which tor the year
1911-12 was £198,167.
(2) The Australian output is not, as a matter of fact, equal to the Australian
demand. According to the most recent estimates it fell 50,000 tons short. 1 o this
extent the consumer, as taxpayer, recovers the whole of the increased price.
(3) When, as recently, foreign market prices are abnormally high, the sellers
of refined sugar may not take full advantage of the protective duty._ Pre-existing
contracts, the fear of decreasing the demand, or the fear of legislative action, and
other considerations may and do operate to the advantage ot the Australian consumer
at times when the foreign market price is abnormally high,
(4) On all coloured-grown sugar the Commonwealth Treasury receives the
full Excise, while paying nothing in the way of Bounty. As we have already saw ,
approximately 6 per cent, of the Australian output ot sugar is grown yco ourec
labour.
When due allowance is made for the foregoing qualifications, it will be
apparent that the Australian community is pledged to, in a sense, an annual subsidy
to the Sugar Industry of over £1,000,000 per annum, and that this amount wi
increase in proportion as the local production approaches the local demand and in
proportion as the policy of excluding black labour proves prohibitive.
5. Importance of the Sugar Industry.
The importance of the Sugar Industry in Australia may he considered fiom
Several points of view.
(1) Industrial. — {a) Every industry established in the Commonwealth is a
national asset. We have already referred to the estimate of from ten to twelve
millions pounds as representative of the capital employed in the Sugar Industry in the
Commonwealth. The following official figures illustrate the relative importance of
the growdngand milling industries in New South Wales and Queensland.


The tonnage of sugar produced in the several States of Australia, yearly :
Year.
New South Wales.
Queensland.
Tons.
Tons.
1870
• • • • •
678
2,8) 1
1880
• • • • •
7,300
15,5 51
1*90
• • • • • •
26,533
69,911
1900
19,938
92,5 ) 1
1910
...
18,828
207,2 31
The following official table applies to the numbers
of persons
engaged in the
O O
year ended 31st December,
IP 11, in the four districts into which the Sugar Industry
is divided for the purpose of administering the Bounty Regulations.
The figures are
avowedly approximate.
Earning Bounty.
Not Earning Bounty.
Grand
No. 1
W lute Labour •
... 5,935 .
.. 107 ... 727
834 ...
6,769
No. 2
5 524 .
.. 90 ... 465
... 555
6,079
No. 3
... 8,533 .
.. 31 ... 93
124 ...
8,657
No. 4
1,770
... 4 ... 20
24 ...
1,794
Total Queensland*
... 21,762
.. 232 ... 1,305
... 1,537 ...
23,299
„ New South Wales ... 3,525
.. 12 ... 113
125 ...
3,650
r, 'Oui „ Victoria...
500
•• • — —
... —
500
Total...
... 25,787
... 244 ... 1,418
... 1,662 ...
27,449
* Exclusive of 3,745 white persons employed in factories ; exclusive of 360 colored persons employed in factories,
total, 4,105.
{h) An industry of such importance as the foregoing figures indicate
necessarily implies far-reaching stimulus to accessory industries. Some of these are
local, such as trade, dairying, gardening, &c. Others extend throughout the
Commonwealth. Every State of the Commonwealth finds consumers for some of its
goods in sugar-producing areas. In this connection, we may cite, as a concrete
example, the evidence of Mr. William Gibson, of Bingera, as to one plantation and
mill : —
22356. I claim that the industry requires the utmost consideration from our legislators, in view of
its great value to the Commonwealth. I am willing to give any information required, and i t lere is
anything the members of the Commission would like to see at Bingera, we shall be glad to s low t em.
The following statement shows what a plantation and sugar-mill means to the public in tiale •—
to railway per annum, £7,000 ; shipping company freights, £6,500 ; harbor dues and whar age, , >
firewood cutters, £2,000; merchants’ accounts, £13,000; foundry, £4,000; saw-naills, £1,500 ; cattle
purchased for beef, £5,000 ; horses bought, £1,500 ; corn, £3,500 ; other produce, £1,000 ; lime, idOU ;
flour, £1,500 ; coal, £l,000 ; wages, £45,000 ; cane-cutters’ contracts, £21,000 ; railway lines, perma-
nent, 22 miles 2-feet gauge, 81? miles 3ft. 6in. gauge, portable, 10 miles 2-feet gauge ; ocomotives, ,
increased value of land to farmers by railway and river bridges, past six years, £10,000.
(2) Social.— The industrial aspects of the Sugar Industry are less important
than the social. The Sugar Industry is a contribution of the first importance to the
policy of a White Australia. The change from coloured to white labour conditions is
transforming the character of the population of the Queensland coastal area. While
much remains to be done in the direction of encouraging white settlemen t, a gieat c lange
for the better has already been effected as regards the numerical ratio of the white
population and their morale. Further, as a result ol the increase of the w ie
population in the Queensland littoral, a new stimulus has been offered to the opening
up and settlement of large inland areas. The importance ot the fact can hai y e
over-estimated, in view of the circumstance that these inland areas, owing o leir
elevation above sea level, enjoy a climate of admitted excellence, and allow ot a very
varied cultivation.
(3) Political.— While the social aspect of the Sugar Industry is more important
than the industrial, the political aspect is perhaps more important than either.
Unsettled areas in the tropical parts of Australia are not only a source ot strategi
weakness. They constitute a positive temptation to Asiatic invasion ; and may give
to the white Australia policy a complexion which must inevitably weaken the claim
of Australia to external support. As we have already remarked, the ultimate, and
in our opinion the effective justification of the protection ol t ie ► ll o al n us ly
beyond questions of industry or wealth production. It must be sought m the very
existence of Australia as a nation.


6. The Question of Export Trade.
No substantial export trade of Australian produced sugar can be anticipated,
at any rate, for a long time to come. Such an export trade, in competition with
coloured grown sugar in Java and elsewhere, could only be maintained by the
payment of an export bonus so large as to prove an intolerable burden, either on
(1) The taxpayer (if the bonus w T ere paid by the Commonwealth
Treasury) ; or
(2) Upon the Australian consumers of sugar (if the bonus were paid bv
the Sugar Industry itself, as under the German Cartel system).
With regard to the latter alternative, the following passage from a recent
work deserves quotation :— c ' The usual margin between prices of raw and refined
sugar in Germany was 3s. 6d. per cwt., but when the Cartel was in operation
it rose to 10s. 6d., and when the Cartel w 7 as abolished by the Convention, it
fell again to the normal figure. On 15th January, a calculation of the profit
arising from the Cartel, based on the prices of the day, gave the figure of 7 * 90 marks
per 50 kilogrammes ; that is, nearly Bs. per cwt. of sugar consumed. This, calculated
on a consumption of 703,507 tons, showed a profit of £5,558,495 for the industry,
with which they could make contributions to those who lost money on exports. The
German Cartel profit was sufficient to furnish a bonus of about ss. sd. per cwt. on
the refined exported, or 4s. lOd. per cwt. on the raw sugar exported.”—(Martineau
Sugar, at page 125). r v ’
7. Some Causes of Discontent.
(1) The Net Protection. —The growers generally complain that under
normal conditions of foreign market prices they do not receive an adequate return
on their capital outlay. The explanation which is commonlv offered is that the net
protection is inadequate.
(2) The Virtual Abeyance of Competition as a Factor in the Determi-
nation of Prices.— The price of raw sugar is not arrived at as a result of compe-
lt is fixed by the Colonial Sugar Refining Company. Although the
Colonial Sugar Refining Company is not the only refinery, it refines the great
bulk of the Australian raw sugar, and its single rival (the Millaquin Refinery)
is a negligible quantity as a competitor. Further, while the Colonial Sugar
Refining Company determines the price of raw sugar, the millers in turn deter-
mine the price to be paid to the growers for their cane. In general the determi-
nation is arbitrary, in the sense of being unaffected by serious competition. Sugar
cane is not a commodity which can be easily carried from mill to mill it
gravitates to the mill which is nearest at hand, and with which it is connected
by tiam lines for carriage of the cane. Where several mills could compete,
they have, at any rate in some cases, preferred to combine for the purposes of
fixing pi ices or of apportioning areas of supply. While many of the mills are
owned by growers, the growers who are shareholders are in a position to profit
unduly at the expense of the growers who are not, either by differentiating between
the pnces for the cane, or by fixing for all supplies of cane a price sufficiently low to
enable the miller to make up on his milling account what he loses as a grower. In
the net result it may be said that the grower, who incurs the greatest risks, and
represents for national purposes the most important element in the Sugar Industrv is
the person who makes least profit out of the industrv. ' 171
(3) Labour Conditions.— ln the opinion of a large proportion of the employees
m the Sugar Industry generally, and more especially of workers in the fields, wao-es
are inadequate, the hours of labour are often excessive, and many other conditions
are unsatisfactory.
(I) The of Commonwealth Control. —While growers declare that
the returns on their capital and enterprise are inadequate, and while emplovees in the
Sugar industry generally declare that their wages are unsatisfactory, a number of
minor causes of discontent relate to the system of Commonwealth control. We have
already referred to _ the prevailing opinion that the net protection ought to be
increased. Many witnesses have protested also against the incidence of Bounty and
Excise, some advocating that these should be abolished ; others that they should be
equalized. While the Bounty Regulations have failed to assure a satisfactory wage
to the employee they have been attacked by growers as being in many respects unneces-
sarily complicated and irksome. ' ° J r
XXII


(5) Consumers.—Consumers are proverbially long suffering The fact that the
price o sugai in Austialia is very materially enhanced owing to the existence of the
present protective scheme fails to awaken any emphatic protest on the part of the
Australian consumer m general. When, however, the purchaser of sugar makes the
pure mse oi the purpose of the manufacture of jam, confectionery, beer, mineral
waters, &c., the high price of sugar assumes a more serious aspect. The manufacture
ot the commodities just referred to is a matter of great importance to the Commen-
ce a i. t involves the question of an adequate return, not merely to manufacturers,
)ut also to primary producers. The fruit growers, for example, allege that the high
puce o sugar limits unduly the market for jam, and depreciates the value of the fruit
emp oye m the manufacture of jams below the level at which cultivation is
proh table.
8. Conflict of Interests.
Our brief reference to some of the causes of existing discontent makes no pre-
tence to completeness. We here attempt to indicate only some of the more prominent
causes. We have said enough, however, to show that existing discontent does not
speak with one voice. As a matter of fact there is very great difference of opinion,
not merely with regard to the nature of the reforms which are needed, but also with
legarcl to those facts of which an exact knowledge is a necessary preliminary to sound
ameliorative legislation. The consumers, and especially many of the manufacturers
m adieu industries, consider that they ought to have cheaper sugar. On the other
lane, those engaged in the Sugar Industry ask for an increase of the import duty,
which would, of course, involve dearer sugar. Within the Sugar Industry
itself, the divergence of opinion on many subjects is emphatic. Large
numbers of the growers are averse to the Bounty Regulations, while the
employes were favorable to their retention as a means of assuring a
ceitain standard of wages. Large sections of the growers maintain that they
are exploited by the millers, either as to price paid for cane, or as to the methods
y wlc 1 ™ ie P rice 18 assessed, while millers contend that they pay as high a price for
cane as the price obtained for raw sugar permits. Complaints were frequently made
by non-shareholding growers who supply the Central Mills as to forms of
discrimination, especially as to prices paid for cane, and in some cases as to
combinations among Central Mills to deprive the non-shareholder suppliers of the
benefits of natural competition. In reply it was claimed that the shareholders were
entitled to some privileges in return for having pledged their freeholds as securities
or the advances made by the State (besides undertaking other responsibilities from
which non-shareholders were free, and which at least some of the latter at the
inception of the mills had distinctly refused to undertake), and further, that where
piovision was made for non-shareholder growers to acquire shares on reasonable
terms there was little, if any, inclination to avail themselves of the opportunity. The
lefineis (more especially the Colonial Sugar Refining Company) are sometimes
represented as a model combination of economic efficiency with the highest standards
of business integrity. At other times they are represented as a monopoly which
uses its powers of exploitation to the fullest extent compatible with the avoidance of
starving primary producers out of existence.
We have endeavoured to discover the real facts of the many problems which
weie piesented to us, and to suggest the remedies which seem to us best adapted to
secure justice to all parties in the industry, and the fulfilment of those national
puiposes to which reference has been made, while safeguarding, as far as may be
practicable, the interests of the Australian public in their dual capacity of taxpayers
and consumers.


PART II.—BOUNTY, EXCISE, AND IMPORT DUTY.
1. We have already explained in Part I. of this Report that the Bounty,
Excise, and Import Duty result in a net protection to the Sugar Industry which may
be assessed approximately at £5 ss. per ton of sugar.
2. We have also stated that the Bounty Regulations have served useful purposes
in the past in promoting the white labour policy, and in improving the standard of
wage. The system of Bountv and Excise has also served, to a slight extent, the
purpose of promoting a due apportionment of profits among the various branches of
the Sugar Industry. Out of the net protection of £5 ss. per ton of sugar, the grower
receives a Bounty of approximately £3. Further, the excess of Excise over
Bounty has meant a substantial contribution to the Federal Treasury. The net gain
to the Treasury for the year 1910-11 was estimated at £157,055.
3. The progress of events, however, has materially diminished the value of
the Bounty and Ixcise system.
(1) For practical purposes, the transformation in the fields from coloured
to white labour is now virtually an accomplished fact. Ninety-four
per cent, of the labour is white labour.
(2) Since the introduction of the Bounty Regulations, considerable
progress has been made throughout Australia in the direction of
securing a living wage and improved labour conditions generally.
That much remains to be done will be generally conceded. But
the development and extension of the system of Wages Boards,
and the establishment of both Commonwealth and States’ Courts
of Industrial Arbitration, express in legislative form the will of
the Australian people to insist upon a fair standard of wage and of
labour conditions, not merely in protected, but in all industries.
In other words, the policy of “ New Protection,” so far as it affects
the wage-earner, is coming to be regarded as a merely transitional
phase in the progress of public regulation of industrial conditions.
So far as concerns an Excise (imposed on manufacturers who pay
less than a standard wage) the policy was determined to be
unconstitutional by the High Court. So far as concerns the
Bounty (limited to producers who pay a standard wage) the
application of the policy of the “ New Protection,” while it has
undoubtedly achieved useful purposes in the past, is open to so
many objections and is so limited in its ambit that the necessity for
more direct, more effective, and more extensive legislative action
has been recognised by both the Commonwealth and by the States.
(3) The futility of the Bounty and Excise system, as a means of
promoting a just apportionment of the profits of the industry, has
become increasingly manifest. The virtual abeyance of competition
in the Sugar Industry, which has already been the subject of
reference in Part 1., places the control of prices in the hands of
large industrial concerns. Under these circumstances, it is not
possible, by giving at one stage in the process of production and
manufacture, and by taking at another stage, to determine to any
adequate extent the profits of different parties engaged in the
industry.
(4) The growing recognition of the national importance of the Australian
Sugar Industry discounts the fact that the Bounty system, taken
in conjunction with the Excise Duty, has been a source of revenue
to the Commonwealth Treasury. The fact appears as an argument
against, rather than in favour of, the retention of the Bounty and
Excise system. We see no adequate justification for a tax on the
Sugar Industry; and the real alternative which presents itself to
us is either the abolition of Bounty and Excise or their equalisation,


4. It would not necessarily follow from the foregoing that the Bounty and
Excise system should be abolished. But that conclusion is suggested by other con-
siderations to which we shall now refer.
(1) The costs of administration amount directly to about £7,000 per
annum. A substantial addition must be made, because the
Bounty is paid (as it should be paid) when, or shortly after,
the cane is delivered at the mills, while the Excise is only levied
(as it should be levied) when the sugar goes into consumption.
In other words, the Treasury has to pay the interest on the money
in the meantime. When it is remembered that the Bounty paid
in 1910-11 amounted to £630,610 it will be appreciated that a
considerable expenditure is involved on this head. When it is
also remembered that both the Commonwealth and the States are
pledged to the policy of a living wage, the expense involved in
an independent administration of the Bounty Regulations appears
inconsistent with a due economy of the national resources.
(2) By the great body of the growers the Bounty Regulations ar6 regarded
as irksome in their practical working. This is perhaps not of
grave importance in view of the possibility that the Regulations
might be simplified. Still some weight does attach to the fact.
While the growers naturally favour the Bounty, as a body they
dislike the Regulations incidental thereto. We propose to quote,
later on (section 5), some extracts from the evidences which
illustrate the attitude of growers in relation to this subject.
(3) It is a much more serious objection that the Bounty Regulations are
partial in their operation. They apply only to growers, leaving
the employee of the millers and refiners unprotected. It is an
obvious anomaly that the one class of profit earners who get least
return for the capital which they invest in the Sugar Industry is
the one class which is subject to the control of the Bounty
Regulations.
(4) As we have seen, one object of the Bounty system has been the
regulation of the wages and general conditions of labour of the
white employee in the Sugar Industry. The Bounty is only given
where the wages and conditions comply with certain tests which
the Federal Parliament broadly defines. By the decision of the
High Court in the Harvester Case , the regulation of wages and
conditions of labour within a State is a matter of State, not Federal,
cognizance. If, as the Court declared in that case, the substance
rather than the form of an Act is to be regarded, it would appear
that section 4 of the Sugar Bounty Act of 1810 was ultra vires.
We were informed that this conclusion had been affirmed by
eminent counsel who have been consulted on the point; but that
the question had not been brought before the High Court by the
growers for judicial determination, lest the whole of the Act
with respect to Bounties should be declared unconstitutional and
the payment of the Bounty be thereby imperilled. Assuming the
conclusion above stated to be correct, the present system of
Bounty and Excise may be represented, not wholly without justice,
as a complicated device by which the Federal Parliament taxes
an industry, incurs costs in administration and the liability of
interest on loans, in order to do something which under the
existing Constitution it has apparently no right to do.
(5) As a result of the Bounty Regulations, a certain amount of
discretionary power is left in the hands of the Government of the
day. This appears to us to be a grave objection ; it invites
the intrusion of political influence, and it introduces an element of
instability into the industry.


(6) One curious result of the payment of Bounty on the weight of cane,
with no prescribed limit on individual suppliers as to sugar contents,
w r as brought under Your Commissioners’ notice. The following
extracts will explain :
S. Manson, Manager, Isis Central Mill.
20156. But even without that, are there not times when they would lose the cane altogether ;
whereas they at least get the Bounty and something over?—Yes. Sometimes a crop is taken off so
that the grower may get the Bounty, and not for what he will get from the mill for the cane.
H. L. Podlsen, Farmer, Childers.
20666. Your position is that, at present, cane under a certain standard is worth nothing, but the
mill takes it, and you get the Bounty on it?—Yes,
20667. And for that reason some of the growers are in favour of the continuance of the Bounty?—
Yes.
W. A. Gibson, Managing Director, Marburg Mill.
26151. It is grown originally for cattle fodder, and what they do not Avant they put through the
mill and claim the Bounty on it ? Yes.
26155. And the general taxpayer has to foot the bill ? —lt is all registered under the Bounty Act.
26156. It might be described as rather a humorous situation from the point of view of the general
taxpayer ? —That is true.
26157. It is not as bad as some instances we have heard of, where frosted cane worth 6d. per
ton got a£3 Bounty ?—We paid Bs. 6d. per ton for frosted cane not worth more than 3s. or 4s. Of
course, Bs. 6d. per ton is our minimum price.
26158. You make up for that cane by averaging the price for the better quality of cane ?—Yes.
J. Johnston, General Manager Millaquin Sugar Co. Ltd.
22710. Evidence has been given to-day to the effect that cane has been crushed at the mills Avhich
it would have paid no mill to crush, but it has simply been crushed in order to enable the grower to obtain
the Bounty. That is to say, it is a kind of fraud on the Excise, is it rot?—l do not know whether it is
true or not.
22711 You have not done it ?— I will not say that, but that was in 1908, when I was fairly ucav
at the game.
22712. It is said to have been done on the authority of a Cabinet Minister —I do not know whether
tl at is so or not?—l think the Minister sent up word that the Bounty would be paid owing to the very
bad season on all cane, however badly frosted it was. When cane is badly frosted the P.O.C.S. is very
low, and not only gives us no sugar, but it actually takes sugar from the other cane going through the
mill. One customer came to me that year and said, “ Mr. Johnston, your manager will not take ray cane.”
I said, “ I suppose he has his reason for it.” He said, “ For God’s sake, get my cane off. You know the
Minister has agreed to pay Bounty on everything.” I said, “ But it is no good. It will only spoil the
other cane.” Then he said, £1 Well, I will send it in for nothing. 1 have to cut it, even if you do not take
it and cart it away.” I said to him, “ Well, Ido not want the cane for nothing, and I want to help you all
I can,” and I gaA T e him 2s. 6d. a ton for it. It is not many times that I have clone good actions, but it has
followed me ever since how I bought cane for 2s. 6d. a ton; and yet my manager refused to take the
cane from them. Mr. Hartnell, my manager, is here, and he can corroborate Avhat I say.
It will be noticed that the above evidences are mainly from the Bundaberg
district. The impression left upon our minds is that, as a general rule, the cane
on which Bounty was claimed was up to the standard upon which the rate of Bounty
had been fixed.
5. Many of the above stated objections against the Bounty and Excise system,
together with certain other matters, are referred to in a statement which we think
should be included in this report.
A. F, J. Draper, Chairman of Directors, Mulgrave Mill.
2688. Vou told me yesterday that you would like to present to the Commission certain views that
Avere formulated and agreed to at a meeting of groAvers ?—Yes. These opinions were formulated at a
meeting of the sugar-gnmers of the district. Between 70 and 80 of them met together and discussed the
necessity of laying before the Commission our joint opinion on all matters that we considered we could
agree upon ; that is, the non-contentious matters. From that meeting a representative committee Avas
appointed, and that representative committee, together with all the Avitnesses who handed in their names
as men who avill come before the Commission, were then asked to meet and draw these questions up. They
met, some 20 in number, and the questions were all agreed upon unanimously. (The document was then
read, as folloAvs) :
The undersigned cane-growers of the Hambledon, Mulgrave, Aloomba, and Babinda districts have
agreed on the matter set out beloAv:—
I.— Coloured Labour.
FI ey are of opinion that the Sugar Bounty and Excise Acts have fulfilled the purpose of
transferring the industry from black to white labour conditions, and there should not now beany reversion
to coloured labour,
II. — Rebate and Excise.
They fuither think that to maintain the industry and to prevent the possibility of such reversion
the Excise should be continued on all sugar produced from cane grown by coloured labour. Further, a
large number of cane farmers are of opinion that the Excise and Bounty should be absolutely abolished ;
while they are unanimously of the opinion that if this be not (lone the amount of the rebate and Excise
must be made equal.
XXVI


111. Matters Impeding the Development of the Industry.
tion at <les!re *° P? in ‘ oot «-* the •>«** of the Excise ami Bounty legisla-
Lne wo P nrmh CO t o O, ' S Go ' ,ernm ®"‘ 'evloa upon us an unfair tax of 2s. 6d. for every ton of
Commonwealth i’sTlmiWl'i™ ' j"? a »” tlle lm P ortant fact th »t no other agricultural industry in the
from time to Hmp i / penalized. M e protest against the number of harassing regulations that are
irCme ; J P UP ° U " S hy the * e(,eral Government. The following Regulations are specially
(1) It a man desires to start and maintain a sugar farm he must register as a producer, giving
lull details and description of the property.
(2) If he desires to register for rebate, a complicated plan of the farm has to be prepared and
submitted and approved of by the Customs authorities, and his farm may be subdivided
into several registered areas.
f 0 He is bound (o notify the authorities when he is about to cut his cane ; and further notify
, , wi IGm WlieU “ eshlfts hls cane-cutters from one registered area to another.
) hen applying for rebate he has to specify the registered area from which (he cane has
been cut, and (he date of its registration, and make a declaration as to what wages he
nas paid, the number of chippe. s, ploughmen, fencers, grubbers, cooks, cane-cutters,
carters, and boys employed, giving (heir rate of wages and price if done by contract.
1y a . vei T u T st Re g u,ation whenever there is any dispute between employer and
employe in the matter of wages, however (rivial or unfounded, the whole of the
employer s Bounty earned or to be earned is wiihhell until the point in dispute has
been settled which may not be for some months. The delay entailed works most
barsldy in the case of the small farmer, and might be avoided by holding a sum
sufficiently large to cover the particular dispute in case the finding should be against
the employer. Where a charge has been made of a contravention of the Act or
Regulations in the matter of the employment of coloured latour, then—
(i) the statement of the complainant should be (a) specific, and (6) on oath ;
(ii) an immediate inquiry should follow.
Disputes and accusations under this head are frequent, very often ill-founded or
malicious, and always press hardly on (he farmers of weaker financial position.
(6 ' Wa wish to enter a strong protest against the Regulation enforcing payment of wages
on wet days, when the men do not work. Under the previous conditions, an employ^
he worked m WCt WCather f,ee of cl,ar S e » l)llf paid only for the days on which
In the interests of the employe the Regulation in question is unwise, as it means
tha the farmers employ little or no labour during the wet portions of the vear, which
in this district is the “off season.” This means that the labourer, instead of beino-
comfortably housed and fed during the wet weather, has to be turned adrift.
We are not aware of any other industry in which this system obtains.
(< ) It is prescribed by Regulation that no labourer shall earn less than 225. 6d per week and
keep in the “off season/’ and 2os. per week and keep in the harvesting season
Instances have occurred where work has been let on contract, and, owing to such
causes as intemperance, incapacity, or attention to his private affairs the contractor
has not earned the amount prescribed by the Minister, although the contract price was
sufficient to earn such a wage by working fair and reasonable hours. The rebate is
thus jeopardized— a course which we regard as absolutely unfair.
I hese Regulations are carried into effect without any notice whatsoever, interfering
i i Vlt \* I 6 ex ' stin = contracts and with the financial arrangements previously
made by the farmers. r J
6 In view of the several objections to the Bounty Regulations just stated,
the question naturally arises whether the purposes which these Regulations have
served might not be achieved by means less open to objection.
(1) The primary purpose for which the Regulations were originally
designed the substitution of white for coloured labour—has
been, as we have already pointed out, substantially achieved.
Ninety-fom per cent, of the labour in the fields is now white
labour. It has been suggested by some witnesses that the
abolition of the Regulations might result in a reversion to
coloured labour ; hut this could be prevented in several
ways, e.g.—
(n) The substitution for Bounty and Excise of an Excise tax
on the produce of growers employing coloured labour.
( b ) Th e provision, either by Commonwealth or by State
legislation, that coloured labour should be paid the same
« rates as white labour.
( c ) The direct prohibition, by legislation on the part of the
sugar producing States, of the employment of coloured
labour in the cane-fields.


Of these alternatives, the last-mentioned seems to us to he preferable, at
any rate, so far as Queensland is concerned \ and we understand
that the Queensland Government is quite prepared to act in the
direction indicated. So far as concerns New South Wales, where
the settlement problem is not so important, it would he relatively
immaterial wdiether State legislation directly prohibited coloured
labour in the fields, or insisted upon the same living wage for
w hite and coloured labour. It may be noted, moreover, that
New South Wales only produces about one-tenth of the Australian
output of cane sugar, and that in that State the industry likely
to decline, partly through the rivalry of other forms of cultivation
not available on the Queensland littoral, and partly because ot
the climatic advantages enjoyed by the Queensland areas for
cane culture. These facts, viewed in relation to the relative
unimportance of the settlement problem in New South Wales,
suggest the desirability of discriminating between the policy of a
White Australia (which is primarily a matter of Immigration)
and a policy of excluding from employment coloured aliens
already within the Commonwealth. There is a certain amount
of coloured labour within the Commonwealth for which employ-
ment must be found. If that labour does not pome into
competition with wTfite labour in one sphere it wall in another,
either as wage earner or as producer. It is, indeed, probable
that competition in the latter sphere is more to be avoided than
in the former. The whole problem of coloured labour appears
to have originated mainly in a policy ot coloured immigration, and
in the fact that coloured labour was cheap. The policy ot
coloured immigration has been discontinued ; and it the rates of
wage for coloured and white labour for similar w T ork be the same,
the & danger from that source would also cease to exist in any
substantial form. The danger could only arise on the assumption
that the coloured labour is more efficient than wdiite.
(2) The secondary purpose of the Bounty Regulations —the maintenance
of standard w r ages and conditions ot labour can be, and in our
opinion ought to be, secured by legislation (either Commonwealth
or State) embracing the whole of the industry and not applying,
as the Bounty Regulations apply, to one selected portion ot the
industry. Wb deal with this subject in lait I\ ~ Wage
Earners.
(3) The utility of the Bounty Regulations as a means of promoting an
equitable distribution of profits among the various branches
of the Sugar Industry is so obviously inadequate that the
retention of the Regulations on this ground would be wholly
unjustifiable. The true solution of the problem here indicated is
a matter of great importance, and will receive due consideration
in Part 111., Growers , Millers , and Refiners.
7. On the whole, we arrive definitely at the conclusion that the system of
Bounty and Excise should be abolished as soon as may be practicable, and that, with
a view to this abolition, such action should be taken as we indicate in the Recom-
mendations at the conclusion of this part of our Report.
8. The Customs Duty on cane sugar is £6 per ton, raw or refined. As we have
shown in Part I. (p. xix.), this means a net protection to the industry of a sum which
mav be approximately assessed at £5 ss. per ton. r l he proposed abolition ot bounty
and Excise, presuming the Customs Duty to remain stationary, would mean an increase
in the Protection of approximately I ss. per ton. Whether this increase would be
justifiable is a question to which Your Commissioners have given careful
consideration.
9 While we assume that the Import Duty should be sufficiently high to
enable every branch of the industry to conduct its business at a reasonable
profit, while paying employees generally a living wage, we are strongly of opinion t rat
any increase in the Import Duty should not be made without consideration ot the
various objections to a high Tariff. Among these objections the foremost is, ot
course, the'burden which a high Tariff lays upon the consumer, Whenever any one


class engaged in an industry is not receiving what it considers an adequate return, it
naturally demands a higher protective duty, without troubling to inquire whether
an undue absorption of the profits by other branches of the industry, or any other
cause, is not immediately responsible for the alleged grievance. And the demand is
not unlikely to be conceded for purely political purposes under a system of party
government, since the various branches of an industry are relatively organized
while the general community of consumers is not. In the long run the consumer,
of course, pays. The normal tendency is for the price of a commodity within
a protected area to be fixed at the price of the commodity in foreign markets,
together with freight and duty added. Sugar is one of the necessaries of life; and
there are special reasons for keeping its price as low as possible at a time when the
cost of living is increasing with great rapidity. Increased wages to the wage earner,
for example, will mean relatively little if competition with the outside world is so
completely excluded by high import duties that capital can pass on the whole of
its resulting obligation to the consumer in the form of enhanced prices.
10. The practical coincidence of consumers of sugar with Australian citizens
requires that the question should be viewed from a national standpoint. According
to a return tabled in the Senate, December 18, 1911, the year’s estimated consumption
of sugar in Australia was 253,494 tons. Assuming, as will probably be the case, that
this amount will be soon produced locally, and assuming the import duty of £6 a ton
to effect a corresponding increase in the price of sugar on the local market, the
Australian consumer is pledged to, in a sense, a subsidy of approximately £1,500,000
per annum. There is a further fact to be borne in mind. Even when sufficient area
is under cultivation to meet the local demand, that area will be only a fraction
of the total area for which employment must be found if the general problem of
settlement is to be solved. The situation would be very materially affected if there
were any prospect of building up a substantial export trade. But as we have
already pointed out (p. xxii.), we do not consider such a trade to be within
the sphere of practical politics, taking into consideration the nature of outside com-
petition which would have to be met in the world’s markets.
11. Apart from the objections just urged, some indirect consequences of
unnecessarily high duties, though generally admitted, are frequently disregarded in
practice. We limit ourselves to consequences which have an immediate bearing upon
the Sugar Industry:—
(1) Over production. —An unnecessarily high duty, imposed in respect of
a commodity with regard to which an external market cannot be
anticipated, is a direct encouragement to the production of an
unprofitable surplus.
(2) Slack production. —As Dr. Maxwell remarked in his report to Sir
William Lyne in 1905, “ The measure of protection afforded to the
Horne industry should be that amount which is indispensable to
maintain the Home producer, using the most modern means of
producing, against the foreign producer. If the measure of pro-
tection is raised to enable the Home producer to continue to
compete by the use of obsolete methods, a tribute is offered to
ignorance and stagnation.” If the sums which are spent by the
consumer in enhanced protective duty were spent by the Treasury
in education, in agriculture, and in industrial efficiency, the ultimate
results would be much more advantageous.
(3) The Tariff and the Trusts. —America’s experience suggests that the
Tariff may have an undesirable influence in promoting Trusts. Mr.
Havemeyer, President of the American Sugar Trust, went so far
as to declare that “ The mother of all Trusts is the Tariff.” While
the existence of Trusts in free-trade countries discounts this sweep-
ing generalisation, it must yet be apparent that an unnecessarily
high import duty, unless with stringent safeguarding, by tending
to eliminate external competition, renders the formation of Trusts
more easy, and their despotic control more effective and enduring.
According to Professor Clark, an eminent American authority on
Trusts, u The honest manufacturer, whom for our good we must
protect, is crushed under a high duty as he would not be under a
low one.” (The Problem of Monopoly, 59).


12. Apart from the objections to the unnecessarily high Tariffjust considered—
the buraen on the consumer, and such dangers as over-production, and slack produc-
tion—the fact must not be overlooked that sugar is an essential constituent in the
raw material of many important Australian industries—especially jam manufacture
We discuss this subject at length in part Y„ Allied Industries. J
13 To raise a duty which is shown to be inadequate may not be an easy
matter lo lower a duty which has once been imposed, and under which vested
lights have been acquired, is an extremely difficult matter. “ Work for Tariff reform ”
as one eminent writer remarks significantly, “is a thankless task.”
14. To the foregoing argument it may be added that the high price of susrar
leceutly prevailing abroad makes it possible to charge a high price for sugar°in
Australia. If at present, £5 ss. per ton is not an adequate protection, tiricfri.lt
amount might not be adequate when foreign market prices drop, as they are likely to do
sooner or later, to at least £6 below recent prices. It is true that, for one reason or
wfp «' ad ™ nta S e °f ’ogj l foreign prices has not been taken by the Colonial
Auf rab! fimn? Company m fixm B. ‘I 16 P rice of refine d sugar in Australia. But the
Australian pricf ZVfl 7 7 “ 1911 and 191 *- These fluctuations in the
A istrahan puce, due to fluctuations in foreign market prices, suggest the question
tf U^f ' laStead °f bein S d-ved as at pLentshfSld not fluctuate
tlKlsrmffrif Tl foreign market prices, rising as those prices fall, falling as
P ‘ suggestion is one to which we shall return later on Fo?the
. I . loWeve . r ’ shall a f ume the established system of a fixed import
y ontmues m force ; and we address ourselves to the question whether the
present net protection of approximately £5 ss. per ton of refined suo-ar mav be
regarded as adequate. The majority of witnesses in the sugar districts whom we
examined were in favour of a very substantial increase. Those witnesses, however
S ter - Sted^ tieS ’ and i ll 18 dlfficLllt t 0 assess the precise value of their evidence’
net protection inadequate 6 UOted as su &S es * dve of an opinion that the present
.... _ Jo , HN Dkysdale, Sugar Planter and Millowner, Lower Burdekin.
raised /In fbif c"? w" k “ lat the P rese "‘ dut y °f &S a ton is sufficient, or do you think it should be
rabed °‘ W<> CaU gB ‘ ° n YBr ? We " with as if 11 «• ™ry difficult to say it oi'ghl to be
A Qrf«9 G 'l BS0 ''’ h '. D " ? ene ?! S,1 P er m‘™ d ent Bureau of Sugar Experiment Stations, Mackav.
of Sugar ExpedZta'stationrpage nn 3 '‘11““ 191 °“ 19U Ee P°?’’ Burea “
been arrived^' 638 ‘° B '' g " B °" e brancl ‘ ° f the i,ld, ' s, T th “ t » maximum state of efficiency has
strict action A h m"2!h^ n f r e \° ‘ he sneoesBhl cultivator is tl.e mau who is pavinu
commercial vaiue, rotation ,fT ° f P ' MtB
my o P i^‘ b^t:::s^^ r r e d j?zz,ir s :z "z ea fr y ° f fac, °™ s “ d - ia
oases to 10.12 per cent, below the best work, while the general average would beTbo“ TtoTper cent
i,t h co ::z
a well trained and'welloSSed tdrrfT*’' Bad!ng faCtors be the employment on
practicable commercial lines to all branches of’the industry. 6 aPi> mot,CT n scientific melhods along
J . R- Paddle, General Manager, Central Mills.
t\aZ y ° U a Httle more of Mr ‘ Drjsdale’s evidence
wage *■ thu
the strike, is if S „Z? 3 Ii 3 Skss. h nltmt“-- he “ the lOWeSt grad ' s before


Would you not say that a profit of 20 per cent, per annum would enable a miller in the first place to pay
a living wage ?—Yes. r J
25564. Certainly to pay a man Bs. a day ?—Yes.
25565. Taking live years, it would have enabled Mr. Drysdale to have paid a better price for cane
and yet would have enabled him to have obtained a very handsome profit on his industrial undertaking ?
25566. That being so, and not going any further than Mr. Drysdale’s mill, under the same conditions,
tlie import duty would be high enough to give the labourer a living wage, the raw sugar manufacturer
a tair profit, and the grower of cane a fair price for his cane ?—Yes.
, 25567. That brings us to the conclusion that where a mill cannot do that, either the mill is not
sufficiently supplied with cane, or the management is not efficient ? Yes, want of efficiency.
25568. Will you admit that the taxpayer ought not to pay a higher duty than is sufficient to
should n't efficien % managed, and that he ought not to be taxed for inefficiency ?-—He certainly
20580. When all these improvements have been achieved, do you think under present Tariff
conditions the mills will be successful ?—Possibly ; there is a tendency to improve matters generally.
i 2^ 8 J- , If the -7 hacl been P ro P erl 7 situated and under efficient management would the present Tariff
have enabled them to be successful, and if they are efficiently managed they would still become paying
propositions ?—Yes. r : o
25582. In the face of those two conclusions, what reason is there for raising the Tariff on su°ar ?
bo rar I do not say that there should be any increase.
VI 25^ 83 - As a reasonable man, you do not think the taxpayer should have the Tariff raised to
enable an inefficient concern to make a profit ?—No.
E. W. Knox, General Manager of Colonial Sugar Refining Company.
26822. Do you think, in putting the present [net] import duly at £5, that is high enough to allow a
fan- return for the capital in the different branches of the industry, and fair wages to the employes ?
1 es, if you leave the industry alone. 3
15. Among the mass of evidence submitted to us in favour of an increase in
the present net protection, we select the following as specially worthy of
consideration :
H. L. Po dlsen, Farmer, Childers.
20469. While there thus is a constant decrease in the returns from the land owing to gradual
exhaustion, there is at the same time an increase in the working expenses from causes as hereinafter
shown. There has been a steady increase in the cost of labour, both wages and contract, in horse flesh
horse feed, cost of repairs, implements, and various other items. With age the land gets more overrun
with weeds.
C. E, Young, Sugar Plantation Proprietor, Fairymead.
22191. What is the freight from Java ?—I suppose it would cost 7s. 6d. or 10s. a ton to send
down to Sydney. It is, perhaps, a higher test sugar than we make, 96 test, that is £l2 Is.
22192. Is that higher than the average price of sugar for the last eight years ?—I think so.
22193. Then it does not seem to bear out your statement that Java can land sugar here cheaper
than you make it. Ihe average price of sugar for the last eight years has been something like £ll 10s ?
—That is a little lower, and is for a lower test, the one is 96 net titre, and the other 94, °
22194. We have had it in evidence all through that the Colonial Sugar Refining Company’s refined
sugar is the finest in the world? 1 hat may be, but Ido not suppose it has as high an amount of sugar as
ours, but it is whiter. We have had ours analyzed, and it contained 99-84 per cent, of sugar and that
left a small margin for impurities.
22194 a. Would you get as much for your sugar ?—No, because of the colour. One drop of indigo
in a tank as big as this room will colour the whole of it. The difference between £l2 for Java sugar
and whatever our Queensland price is, is partly due to quality ; it does not give a higher test by the
polariscope, but the salts are less harmful in Java than what they are here. When Poolman was running,
his refinery, he almost invariably bought Java sugar, he did not care whether he paid a little more because
he got his sugar so easily refined. We cannot help that in our country, as our country is not such a
typical sugar country as is Java, and we have to make the best of it. We consider Australia is a very
good country, but it is not the best for everything. 3
22196. Ihe duty is £6 a ton, and £4 a ton is paid by the sugar manufacturer, which is deducted
from the grower, is it not ? If Java sugar is bought, the buyer has to pay the Government £6 a ton if
he buys it for his refinery. If he buys Queensland sugar for his refinery, he has to pay £4, so the
advantage in favour of Queensland is £2 a ton. ‘
22197. In addition to that £6, there is the cost of freight, insurance, exchange, &c., which brings
the price up to £l2 10s. a ton for Java sugar, is not that so ?—I think they do the whole thing for £6
c.i.f.e. They load very big cargoes, and they send 7,000 tons in one bottom.
22198. The harbor dues on foreign cargoes are four times higher than on local cargoes—there is
5s difference ?—But it would be a long way from our freight. We pay 17s. 6d. a ton to get our sugar to
Melbourne, and Java sugar can get there for 7s. 6d.
22199. But that comes out of the £l2 10s., so it does not enter into the question ?—No.
22200. With regard to this average price of £ll 10s. for Australian raw sugar at the port of ship-
ment, would not the refinery have to pay freight on this raw sugar, and also supply bags, the cost of
which would have to be added to the £ll 10s. which the mills have received, making another £1 a ton ?
I was not comparing them at all ; I have made out no figures. lam merely stating that Java sugar can
get into Sidney, I believe, at £6 c.i.f.e. in time of glut.


Per ton.
94 net titre in
Bond.
Australian raw sugar
... £12
10
0
Imported raw sugar
... 10
8
4
Additional cost of Australian sugar
... £2
1
8
22202. Then you say that during the Inst ten years Java sugar has not been able to compete with
the Australian article in price ?—Java is expanding very rapidly, and the price is coining down, and we
will have to deal with them directly the price of sugar gets low. So long as Java can get a good market
for its sugar in England we are all right ; but the time will come when the world will be over-supplied
with sugar, and then all the people calculating on the continuance of the present prices of sugar will be
left badly in the lurch.
William Gibson (Gibson and Howes Ltd.), Bingera.
22364. Since 1904 the rate of -wages has increased, I estimate, 30 per cent., and the hours
of labour have decreased 27 per cent, in the mill. That makes 57 per cent, in favour of the working man.
Cane has increased in price, and the farmer forgets that we have to pay £l more in Excise than in 1907,
which means that in 1907 we had to pay 2s. more for our cane in Excise, so our cane has increased in
cost 20 per cent. Fiiewood has gone up 20 per cent.; coal, 30 per cent. ; sawmill timber, 25 per cent. ;
beef, 20 per cent. ; horses, 50 per cent. ; and we have the Worker s’ Compensation Act, land tax, income
tax, which all mounts up.
Hon. A, Gibson, M L.C. (Gibson and Howes Ltd.), Bingera.
23055. Do you think the present import duty of £6 a ton should be raised, or is it sufficiently
reasonable to protect the industry from the consumer’s point of view?—l have gone into that question
very seriously and carefully. I feel almost ashamed to say that I think the duty ought to he more than £6
a ton. But speaking my own honest opinion on the matter, if we had that £6, without any encumbrance,
it would be all right; but there are so many obstacles put in the way that it makes it very difficult and
very irksome work.
23056. You are referring now to the Bounty Regulations ? —Yes, and to the inspections that have
to take [dace. I think there should be a duty of another £l, making it £7 per ton, and if the other £1
which does not now come to the grower, were given to him, I think it would be a very fair and reasonable
thing.
E. W, Knox (in his statement of his Company’s position).
26844. (33.) As to (a) the position of the company must first be considered in relation to the Tariff.
In this respect there is a widespread belief that the sugar refining business is heavily protected by the
incidence of the sugar duties. This is wholly erroneous, for the refiner works in bond, and pa} r s the full
import or excise duty on the sugar when it leaves the refinery. If the refined sugar is produced from
imported raw sugar it is subject to a duty of £6 a ton ; if from Australian raw sugar £4 a ton. It is
doubtless the difference between these duties which has given rise to the belief that the refiner enjoys a
protection of £2 a ton, and such would be the case if the refiner paid the same price for the Australian as
for the imported raw sugar. But our records, which can be verified in the same way as those given in the
two preceding statements, show that the manufacturers of raw sugar in Australia, who sold their output
to the company during the years 1906-10 inclusive, received £2 Is. Bd. per ton more than the company
paid for their imported supplies during the same period, the figures being :
(34.) Thus it is established beyond question the fact that both theoretically and actually the
company’s refining business is conducted purely on a free-trade basis And it must continue to be
conducted on this basis so long as our agreements for the purchase of Australian raw sugar are drawn, as
at present, in a manner which automatically insures to the producers of such sugar the very fullest market
equivalent in price.
(35.) Indeed, it is certain that were we to deal year in and year out with imported sugar exclusively,
we could buy to better advantage than now, because under present conditions our supplies of Australian
sugars are only supplemented when an ascertained shortage renders this necessary by the purchase of
small quantities of foreign sugars towards the end of the season, which is an unfavourable time for
operating. For instance, in 1909-10, the failure of the Queensland crop was anticipated, and we imported
77,408 tons of Java sugar at a cost of £ 1 Is. per ton (import duty paid) below the price paid for Australian
sugar in that year (excise d ty paid).
16. In considering the value of the evidences cited as suggestive of the
conclusion that the present net protection is adequate, two important tacts must he
borne in mind. In the first place, the evidences were elicited at a time when sugar
was high iu price. In the second place, the evidence, generally speaking, assumes a
rate of wage materially below that which, in our opinion, should be paid (see Part IV.,
fVage Earners). Taking into consideration the more important factors of the
problem—on the one hand the fact that the margin of profits in refining and milling
is unnecessarily high (see Part III.), the undoubted scope for improved efficiency in
milling and growing, and the claims of the consumers and of allied industries to cheap
sugar—on the other hand, the increasing costs of production generally, the urgent
need for a substantial improvement in the rates of wages, and the necessity for
meeting the competition of Java sugar —we are compelled to conclude that the
removal of the tax on the Sugar Industry involved in the abolition of Bounty and
Excise should not be accompanied by any diminution of the present Customs Duty of
£6 a ton. Indeed, bearing in mind the substantial rise in wages, which we deem
necessary, and bearing in mind also the large proportion which is borne by wages
to costs of production generally, we are compelled to conclude that, if the Customs


rHity be fixed at a definite figure, it should be not less than £6 10s. Australia is
pledged to the maintenance of the living wage ; and we feel entitled to assume that
the Australian consumers of sugar, who are virtually coincident with Australian
citizenship, will be prepared to pay for the furtherance of an object which is admitted
on all hands to be of the utmost national importance.
I/- It is a familiar fact that the world’s prices for sugar, as for most other
commodities, fluctuate considerably. As prices in the world’s market rise, they tend
to bring about over-production. Over-production ends in prices which may be
ruinously low to producers. Tins is so common a phenomenon as to lead one
eminent economist to observe that there is no such thing as a normal price. The
implied distinction between an imaginary normal price and an actual average of
prices is of great importance for the purposes of estimating the incidence of pro-
tection ; and it deserves, in our opinion, far more importance than it appears to have
received.
18. Within a protected area, especially where local production does not equal
local demand, the primary factor in the determination of the price of the protected
commodity is the necessity for meeting external competition. If the local market is
subject to 1 rust control, as in the case of the Australian Sugar Industry, price
fluctuations are likely to be less marked in the home than in the world market. The
1 rust will be able to keep up local prices when foreign prices are unusually low, at
any rate for some time. On the other hand, when foreign prices are unusually high,
the I rust will probably not take full advantage of the rise for fear of inviting
legislative interference. So far, the Trust may be regarded as a beneficent
institution; but its influence, as Australian experience shows, is more likely to be
exerted in the direction of maintaining high prices to the consumer than in the
direction of maintaining fair prices to the primary producer. The position may be
stated as follows:—■
(1) Alien foreign market prices are abnormally high, the consumers
within the protected area are burdened with prices quite
unnecessarily high for the purposes of protecting the local
industry. In July, 1911, the Colonial Sugar Refilling Company
was quoting its 1a sugar at £2l 12s. 6d, On 3rd November, 1911
(four months later), it was quoting the same sugar at £24 2s. 6d.
The explanation of this rise must not be looked for in any
corresponding increase in Australian costs of production, but
in the fluctuations of the world’s market prices. Whereas the
Hamburg price on 3rd July, 1911, was £ll for sugar of 88 n.t.,
the price on 3rd November was £l6 15s.
(2) When foreign market prices remain for any time at an abnormally
low figure, then, assuming the fixed import duty to have been
assessed in the first instance at a not unnecessarily high figure,
the local industry is being carrried on at loss. The loss may
not be equally shared between all branches. Far more probably,
the larger business concerns will throw the loss on the primary
producer. But even supposing the loss to be shared all
round, the condition of things is very unsatisfactory. The larger
business concerns may be able, as a result of profits accumulated
when foreign market prices were high, to stand the resulting
strain. The smaller concerns, and the primary producers more
especially, are threatened with extinction. This is especially the
case if, as may well happen, the period of low foreign prices for
sugar is coterminous with a period when, for local reasons, the
local industry is in a bad way.
19. In the opinion of Your Commissioners, the conclusion is irresistible that
the Import Duty, instead of being fixed at a certain amount, should fluctuate accord-
ing to foreign market prices, falling as those prices rise, rising as those prices fall.
F. 14881, fi


The conclusion appears to ns to be implied in the expression of opinion of a competent
sugar expert —Dr. A. J. Gibson.
9682. Increased protective duties. lam not in favour of high protective duties, but would prefer
to fix a standard with a rise and fall clause compatible with the application of reasonable up-to-date
methods in all branches or the industry, so that all those engaged in it (in suitable localities) shall receive
a fair return for their labour and capital expended. The importation of foreign sugar should receive
closer attention, and apply the Preservation of Australian Industries Act whenever it was found that the
foreign article was competing under unfair trade conditions. With an effective Statistical Branch the
Commonwealth should be able to control importations and decide the necessity for them and otherwise.
An excessively high protective duty avoulcl lead quickly to an over production of sugar within the Com-
monwealth. It must again be emphasized that the industry under present conditions cannot expand
beyond the limits of the Commonwealth consumption.
Aii indirect testimony to the same effect was given by Mr, C. E. Young of
Fairy mead.
22174. For a firm working in a large way, it is far better to get a regular price than an up-and-
down price. 1 think that fact contains a lesson for ns, when we are dealing Avith the price of cauc. If
you Avant to get the highest price possible for cane, then yon must take (he lowest price possible Avben
conditions are adverse. I think it would pay the Java manufacturer, avlio is making 80,000 tons of sugar,
to take a regular price; their profits for one year Avere i>328,000. 1 think it is better for the cane groAA r er
to have an even price going along a series of years, than to go very much up and down. lam not in favour
of the analysis system of buying cane, because it exposes a farmer to ups-and-doAvns, and the farmer
generally, if he is Avorking a small area, has not enough capital to stand ups-and-downs ; Avheu he goes
doAvu into the cold bottom, ho gets frozen out.
20. One important witness, Mr. E. W. Knox, General Manager of the Colonial
Sugar Refining Company, was opposed to the suggestion we have made. He urged
that a fluctuating duty u would introduce more uncertainties still in a business which
is uncertain from beginnning to end.” To us it seems to need no demonstration that
the fluctuating duty, by tending to standardise the prices of cane, raw sugar, and
refined sugar, would work rather in the direction of diminishing than increasing the
uncertainties in the Sugar Industry. It is, moreover, quite within the region of
possibility that if the witness just referred to had represented the growers, instead of
representing the millers and refiners, his view r s as to the expediency of a fluctuating
duty would have been different. We do not think it would he unfair to state
that the general scheme of prices for cane, raw sugar, and refined sugar in Australia
is so manipulated that the advantage of enhanced prices for sugar resulting from high
foreign prices nccrues, generally speaking, almost exclusively to the miller and
refiner. But even if this were not the case, it appears to us that nothing can justify
fluctuation in the price of Australian sugar depending upon causes which have no
connection with local costs of production. That an International Conference of
sugar producing States, or, possibly, an International Sugar Combine, should have
a power of determining to so large an extent, even indirectly, the price to Australian
consumers of an Australian produced and Tariff protected commodity, appears to
us a condition of things wdiich cannot be justified by argument or by practical
necessities.
21. We are not unaware of the existence of objections and difficulties which
might he urged to the proposal we have suggested. But we believe that the objec-
tions are far outweighed by the advantages. We believe also that the difficulties
could he easily overcome. All that would he necessary would he to-state a standard
price for Australian sugar of 1a grade. The duty payable on importation would
then he the difference between that price and the foreign market price of similar sugar
as stated from time to time by the Customs Department in the Commonwealth Gazette ,
sajq at intervals of three months. The “ standard Australian price ” should be based
primarily on costs of production—an estimate of which is implied in every fixed
import duty. We say primarily, because other factors would have to he borne in
mind. On the one hand, assuming the price representative of Australian costs
of production to be, say, £22 for refined sugar 1a grade, and assuming that the
London quotations are accepted by the Australian Customs Department,
as the basis of the foreign market price, and that the price of a similar
grade of sugar, f.0.b., London in bond to be £lB, the freights and insurance
payable by the importer of refined sugar from London, in addition to the duty
of £4 (the difference between £lB and £22) might enable the local refiner to
charge, say, £24—a price ex hypothesi excessive. On the other hand, it is highly
improbable that any substantial importations from London would he made in view of


the fact that such impbrtatio
In tins connection, the follow
the years 1900-11 deserves
118
dr
m
Fi,1
would imply double charge on freight and msurauca
,»■ Return of Importations of Sugar into Australia to
>tice : —
Year.
. |
Hong Kong and China.
Mauritius.
Gerrr
any.
1900
1901
1902
1903
1904
1905
1906
1907
1908
1909
1910
First six months, 1911 ...
cwt.
8,171
13,885
500
119,049
66,094
51,898
18,034
54,766
198,611
403,467
131,097
109,252
£
5,304
9,725
525
62,197
32,286
27,479
10,693
30,402
106,184
219,600
72,977
65,419
cwt. £
16,361 12,166
36,887 | 29,372
201,149 160,464
247,475 190,844
127,137 99,166
12,033 6,205
8,862 5,483
831 502
157 108
5,202 3,648
278 216
86 68
cwt. !
303,396
169,055
418,480
95,855
71,253
78.399
99,567
62,391
54,004
74,761
26,398
26.400
£
201,971
127,184
280,442
7C,444
49,622
57,723
65,566
43,672
39,022
54,256
19,533
18,519
cwt.
48,711
93,723
8,307
1
1
10
£
34,018
65,746
3,942
1
1
4
Year.
Java.
Other Countries.
Total.
1900 ‘ ... ••• — '
1901
1902
1903
1904
1905
1906
1907
1908
1909
1910
First six months, 1911
cwt.
1,070,537
1,452,868
1,234,754
1,350,900
489,860
356,002
712,545
5,153
138,214
1,510,349
522,351
188,088
£
652,645
875,359
675,102
719,867
230,013
184,475
357,809
2,547
100,126
845,228
313,940
115,200
cwt.
71,601
203,861
2,288
17,316
6,358
338
511
209
61
178
42
25
42,740
132,669
1,564
10,986
4,033
275
365
135
54
127
43
23
cwt.
1,518,777
1,970,279
1,865,478
1,830,595
760,702
498,670
839,519
123,351
391,048
1,993,967
680,166
323,851
A
948,844
1,240,055
1,122,039
1,054,338
415,120
276,157
439,916
77,259
245,495
1,122,863
406,709
‘ 199,229
of shinment
N.B.— Country of origin figures commence with year 1906 ; lor previous jeais countiy of F
is given.
Taking into consideration the various factors to which \ve haw- pievwusly
referred when discussing the fixed import duty, more> «~c..U y he ™s«o ft
which we deem necessary, we cannot recommenda.sum n ° f "j pi eduction a fan-
representative of the costs of production. ® '”1 Whether for the purpose of
interest on capital as well as a living wage o 11',.'.I I ',.'.- t or deduction from, this
the Australian standard price to w ad. we refer any to, declamtions of
amount should be made, and whether the Customs tllink sho „]d
foreign market prices from the London ma ’ ‘ ,1 Statistical Departments of the
he taken into consideration by the H ismUbuprohahle that
Commonwealth. As regards the Aus < hat \ s n0 ’ new phenomenon in the
the first statement would have to be r ■ > • • j s ] ess likely to occur
history of Tariff legislation. Indeed, the need for revision regardless of
than under a system where the import duty remains at «
foreign market prices. We confine ourselves here
principle, which we think of the greatest import!rnce 1 tlmt 1>» 1 . the
the local industry would he protected by dutaM wton^tliey > » g
foreign market, while the Australian he done alike
foreign market prices wereabnoima j ng V , . rvasa diole The fluctuating duty
eliminated, those risks would be very materially reduced.
22 We have given some consideration to the question whether a diffetentiabou
ought to he made, as regards the Customs D«|, of refiling
(Such a differentiation would be made presuma y


industry, and we can discover no reason for any further differentiation than is
involved in the’present practice of allowing all sugar to be refined in bond. In this
connection we may refer to the evidence of Mr. Knox, who expressed his opinion to
tne effect that no such differentiation was called for. (See Questions 26896-26904.)
23. Several of the witnesses whom we examined affirmed that an import dutv
? n m °lasses would be of service to the local industry in enabling it to utilize an
important by-product to greater advantage. We are of opinion that a dutv of £1
lUs - a ton should be imposed on imported molasses.
24. In the course of our investigations, the opinion has been expressed that the
duty on sugar machinery is insufficient. We feel that the subject is not sufficiently
ZhtV he K° P t° f ° Ur 'T-' 0 ' to ..j ustif >’ ollr ““king any recommendation on the
su Iject. -Noi have we sufficient evidence to enable us to form an opinion. We cite
nowever, the following extract from the evidences:
William Frederick Harrington, Lonfounder, Maryborough.
Limited" 18 ' Are y ° U th<? ma,mger ° f VVa ' ker ’ S Limited? ~ l the managing ’ director of Walker’s
199 ! 9 - D ° you desire to give evidence before the Commission ©n matters affecting the Tariff on
sugar machinery ?_Yes. The Tariff has been (oo low to enable us to compete satisfactorily wkhthe
makers of sugar machinery in America, Germany, France, and Great Britain Those ai/ the four
competitors we meet m open competition every year. The rates of wages that we pay are so mnch hi^
than those paid in the countries I have mentioned that the construction of any sugar machinery we
undertake does not yield us a satisfactory profit. ' g macnmery we
19920 What are the rates of wages yon pay ?—Mechanics, from 1 Is. to 1 Is, 4d. according to their
trades ; some trades get Us. 4d., and some 1 Is., for eight hours a day. ' °™ *
19921 What is the minimum wages paid by you ?—The minimum wao o is 7s for ordi.nrv
labourers, and for mechanics Us. c ommaiy
25. Our attention lias been drawn to the present differentiation between the
Customs Dutv of £6 on cane sugar and £lO on beet sugar. We deal with the Beet
udustry m Part VI. ol this Report. But the present seems the right place to deal
wit i the differentiation just mentioned. It was urged that the differentiation, by
narrowing the areas of possible supplies, tended to strengthen the present control of
the Australian Sugar Market by the Colonial Sugar Refining Company. The
representative of that Company, Mr. Knox, however, expressed himself as of opinion
that it was inoperative in practice. As the differentiation appears to us to
serve no useful purpose, we recommend its abolition. It is a survival from a
period when there was a danger of the Bounty-fed sugar of Europe being dumped on
the Australian market. But this danger has been removed by the Brussels Conven-
tion, which has been recently renewed (Appendix 12). Should the danger at any time
revive, the proper remedy, in our opinion, would be to impose an additional' duty
covering the extent to which the imported sugar is Bounty-fed.
n ± d uestl °n referred to the Commission, in a Memorandum from the
Customs, calls for mention here. The question is as follows “ The method of
paying Bounty, so as to avoid the imposition of sur-charges in other countries upon
Australian sugars on the ground that they are Bounty-fed.” The Brussels Conven-
tion fixes a sur-tax at approximately £2 10s. per ton.' Any country in which the net
protective duty to the local producer exceeds this sum comes within the definition of
Dounty-fed. In Australia such a net protection would be wholly inadequate. It
t ,erefore ,. q u ite impossible for any ingenious adjustment of Bounty, Excise, and
port Duty which would be sufficient to preserve the local industry, to escape the
? <m Tt\Z gar ’’ A e ma 7 P° int onti however, that si, J 1910
Great B dam has admitted Bounty-fed sugar without imposing a differential duty; and
that in the present year Great Britain has withdrawn altogether from the Convention.
27. Recommendations. —We recommend—
(l) That the Bounty and Excise he abolished, provided that the
Commonwealth Government, by co-operation with the States or
otherwise, take whatever steps may be necessary to promote the
White labour policy, and to ensure the maintenance of a living
wage in the Sugar Industry generally.


(2) 1 hat, pending the abolition of the Bounty and Excise, the amount of
the Bounty be raised to the Excise—this equalization, if practi-
cable, to date as from Ist July, 1912, in view of the Special Order
of August last raising the wages.
(d) I hat the Customs Duty on sugar, raw or refined, should fluctuate in
accordance with foreign market prices, falling as those prices rise,
rising as those prices fall.
(4) i hat the amount of the duty should be the difference between foreign
market price of sugar, of grade equal to 1a (as declared from
time to time by the Department of Customs), and a standard
price for Australian refined sugar fixed on the basis of not less
than £2l 10s. a ton (1a grade) as representative of Australian
costs of production.
(5) That the Import Duty be the same for beet as for cane sugar.
(6) That an Import Duty be imposed on molasses at the rate of £1 10s.
per ton.


PART III.—GROWERS, MILLERS, REFINERS.
] No problem with which Your Commissioners have had to deal presents so
many difficulties and complications as the problem of ensuring a reasonable dmsion
of the profits of the Sugar Industry among its various branches-gi-owing,
millin«- refini Some of the data of this problem are the subject of buef refercm,c
in ou v Summary of Existing Conditions (Part I.) In the present Part, we propose
to give a more adequate statement of data, to discuss some possible reforms, and to
make specific recommendations. _ M..,
2. The equitable distribution of profits among the various sections.of the
Sugar Industry primarily depends upon the prices of sugar cane, raw sugar, and
refined sugar respectively. Where competition is keen throughout an industry, the
prices of commodities produced at the several stages of the industry may be assumed
to be proximately fair. Even where competition is not actual, it may be potential,
as where a large business concern which is not subject to immediate competition pays
a fair price for its raw material, or charges a fair price for its output, through fear of
bringing new competitors into existence. Even where neither actual nor potential
competition exercises an appreciable influence upon price determination, fair prices
may result from collective bargaining.
3. It would be futile to contend that the foregoing factors are wholly
inoperative in Australia with respect to the prices of sugar cane, raw sugar, am
refined sugar respectively. It would be no less futile to contend that their operation
is reasonably effective as a means of securing an equitable distribution of the profits
in the Simar Industry. To discover the extent to which they operate in practice,
we have to consider in detail the several commodities to which reference is made.
4. For practical purposes, the price of refined sugar in Australia is fixed by the
Colonial Sugar Refining Company Limited. The absence of actual competition among
refiners is evidenced by the fact that the rival refinery at automatically
follows the lead of the Colonial Sugar Refining Company (Q. 226/9). Potential
competition can have little significance within an area where a dominant company is
already in the field and the market is too limited to invite new concerns to enter upon
a war of competition. Collective bargaining is inoperative. What actually happens
is that the Colonial Sugar Refining Company fixes the price subject to two mam
qualifications. The price must not be so high as to encourage large importations of
refined sugar by other persons or companies. On the other hand the price must he
at least high enough to admit of refining profits while paying for raw sugai a pi r e
sufficiently high to avoid squeezing producers of the raw material out of existence.
Mr. E. W. Knox, when giving evidence on behalf of the Company, disclaimed t ic
responsibility of fixing prices, declaring that the price was really fixed by the foreign
marketplace. The evidence serves to disclose absence of effective inteiual
competition. The nearest approach to such competition is the collateral competition
of “mill white” sugar—a commodity which is inadequate for the purposes under
consideration, mainly because the difference between the costs of production of mil
white” and refined sugar respectively is not sufficiently great to enable the manufacturer
of the former commodity to put it on the market at a price low enough to attract the
ordinary consumer who, by paying a slightly higher price, can obtain an obviously
superior commodity. In point of fact, the controlling position of the Colonial bugai
Refining Company is even illustrated by the tendency on the part of sellers of mill
white sugar to follow the market fluctuations of the refined article. The tendency is
shown by a letter cited in the evidence of Hon. A. Gibson, Managing Director of the
Bingera Sugar Plantation :
23018. What is the average difference in price between refined sugar and mill white sugai in the
market ?—Mill white sugar is generally from £1 to 30s. per ton lower than refined sugar.
23019. We have the following letter written by your firm : —“ Our new season’s Bingera 1a sugar
is now available, and we are posting you under separate cover sample of same. Price we are asking b'i
this sugar on rails Sydney or Newcastle, whichever you prefer, is £2l 7s. 6d. per ton. less 2.j per cent.,
30 days, or 30 days cash. Should the Colonial Sugar Refining Company advance price previous to
despatch of your order from plantation, we would have to charge the advance, but should they reduce
the figure previous to despatch, we would invoice at the lower figure.” You regulate your prices
Colonial Sugar Refining Company’s price for refined sugar ?—ln a sense, yes. We have to he £l to 80s.
under the Colonial Sugar Refining Company’s quality of sugar.


5. The Colonial Sugar Refining Company, in addition to fixing the price of
refined sugar, fixes also the price of raw sugar. The basic price of raw sugar is
fixed at £1) 7s. 6d. per ton, when the selling price of refined sugar is £l9. Tor every
£ I increase in the selling price of refined sugar, the price of raw sugar is enhanced
hy 18s. In establishing this sliding scale of prices for raw sugar, the Colonial k ugai
Refining Company cannot he said to he influenced hy any competition, actual or
potential. The only rival refinery falls into line with the Colonial Sugar Refining
Company for prudential reasons which, from a business point of view, may >e
regarded as conclusive. Collective bargaining, as a factor m price determination,
may he regarded as non-existent. The millers cannot export their raw sugai in
competition with the coloured grown sugar of Java. Though they might combine to
insist upon more liberal terms, the issue of such combination could hardly he doubtful.
The Colonial Sugar Refining Company, by virtue of its greater staying powers and
other advantages, must in the end get its way.
G. As the Colonial Sugar Refining Company fixes the prices of raw sugar, so
the mills fix the price for sugar cane within their respective areas. Competition
between mills is in most cases impossible owing to the bulk and the perishable natuie
of the cane The cane must he taken to the mill nearest at hand, and connected
with the fields by tram lines. Collective bargaining is a negligible factor for several
(!) The growers within any given area are less organized than the milling
company which they supply.
(2) The growers individually have less staying power than the milling
company.
(3) The occasional coincidence of growers with mill shareholders, while
it fails to protect growers as a class (since the mill shareholder
who is a grower is able to balance his losses as grower by his
profits as miller), tells at the same time against effective collective
bargaining on the part of the growers as a class.
(4) The grower is, not infrequently, heavily indebted to the millci foi
advances against crops and otherwise.
(5) The agreements between miller and grower are often for a term of
years.
7. With regard to those areas in which the mills are situated in sufficient
nroxiniit'v to admit”of the growers having a choice of market, the mills have icon
able hy agreements or understandings (either as to price or as to areas of supply) to
render the choice of little value to the grower. Indeed, as regards the Mackay
Sugar Manufacturers’ Association, it would be not unfair to assunie that thyiu
for cane fixed by the Association would he the price which the least efficient mil,
could afford to pay. In each year since 1907 the Association has fixed the price at
°3s peTton of cane, wholly disregarding the rise in the price of refine, and raw
sn-VaJ (See, for example, Questions 11162-3.) On this subject we wish to draw
attention to the following extracts from the evidence
tv. J. Edmonds, Chairman of Directors, Marian Central Mill Company Limited.
9435 Are you the Chairman of the Mill Owners’ Association that has been referred to in evidence
to-day am the chairman of the Mackajr Sugar Manufacturers Association.
' is merely a combination of business people, .be same as
the farmers have. . _ , T ,
9138. Is it a combination to regulate prices j xot necessauJ}.
9139. It has agreed to regulate prices ?—W edo that.
William Gibson, Manager Bingora Plantation (Gibson and Howes Ltd.), Bundaberg.
0 ic it ;11 arm fn Ins been taking cane out ot 01.11 aiea 101 mt tm c J .
own defined district r—MiHaqum nas nee o ■fii, o w taV P it We cannot stop them. We go
aSSS! tSStai SOS SS -" :i... ... A
people’s territory.' Many a time we could have done so profitably, but we never did it.
Bonn Mathibson, Secretary of the Australian Estates and Mortgage Company Limbed, Melbourne
14283. Are you aware that there is no competition between the Pioneer and Kalam.a mills ,-L es,
the b 7 • number of mills in an association of which
the Palms is a member ?-No ; I thought our mill worked on its own.


'John Drysdale, Sugar Planter and Mill-owner, Lower Burdekin.
7147. Although they may not be a combination, still, so far as the arrangement to pay the same
price operates on the grower, it has the same effect as a combination, has it not ?—They do not com note
against each other. J 1
7148. So far as the effect on the grower is concerned, it is a combination to pay one price 9 Yes
to pay one price. 1 ’
Hon. Angus Gibson, Managing Director (Gibson and Howes Ltd.), Bingera.
•ii 23?9 iV W h nt is your practice with regard to competing for the purchase of cane against your
neighbours, the Millaqum Coy. rnd hairymead—do you enter into what you believe to be their particular
areas or do youi not ? From Bingera we have spread out in every direction, and we have a radius of
lo miles <o work on. 1 might say 25 miles if I take in VYatawa. Anyone to get on my zone has to come
by tram. lhat was not always the case, but it is open now. Ido not encroach upon anybody's zone.
. f 379 3; What are your reasons for not encroaching upon their zones ?—We do not require to: we
are tairiy well supplied with cane. 1
23794. Are there some years during which you have been fully supplied?—Yes.
■znnp* ? 2 ?' n ight yOU h^ Ve bought more cane if you had gone further afield into your neighbours
/o nes '—No. On one occasion we joined issue with the Millaquin Company for coming into our zone a
good many years ago, but I do not think they did themselves any good. .
23796. Have they kept off your preserves since ?—Yes.
moved * 3 W« 7 ta b 6 ke P to, h the ' rs? ~ Y <y Si-oo then we have not been particular bow we
for it ' They olve be !™ "’° nld , not 6ncroac 7 °- e another’s preserves, and there is no occasion
or lt> lhe y g lve growers m some places more than we do, and in other places less.
. 8 - T lle practical failure of competition as a factor in the determination of
the pnee of cane might be supposed to be unimportant so far as concerns the Central
Mills since these mills purport to he established on a co-operative basis. But apart
from the fact that the large majority of mills are Proprietary mills, the Central Mills
are supplied m varying degrees by growers who are not shareholders in the mills
Ihese non-shareholding growers can be, and frequently have been, exploited by the
mill shareholders-for example, by being paid a lower price for their cane ; or by
icing paid a price for their cane which, though the same as that paid to shareholders
is_so low that only the milling profits have enabled the shareholding growers to vet a
an return on their total capital outlay. In this connexion we raav cite the followin'.-
irom tlie evidences : &
A. Stevenson, representing Pioneer Farmers’ Association and Cane Growers’ Union, Mackay.
di.rim^ 7 t 0 •° rrOCt an im P ression that Prevails —that the majority of farmers in (he Mack-tv
district are shareholders in co operative mills. The greater percentage of Mackay farmers have no «har/
folding interest in any mill m the district, and in the Central Mills, with one or two exceptions a higher
price is paid for shareholders’ cane than for non-shareholders’. exceptions, a h.ghei
a co-operative milT “ VXUohtU,ed which carries shares ’ is impossible to become a shareholder in
what aWo^ilMnf 6 , “ a;, ’ or , ity ° f cane -grew e rs in this district are suppliers to either private mills or to
what are, to all intents and purposes, privately-owned mills. The price of cane is based on the first offer*
T bed ri I s T ra w •"«“ » 7s ’ «• per ton). 'Let,, when a bZs Z
price agreed S foZIZ '" ills ““P 1 / »PP™pri.te it, saying that, having paid the
legitimate profit 7 "* ' ltltled *° any extra “ 0 "V wWeb they may obtain by way of
non-uhJe h hrfde?^ o^S ! r P»yi»B.« higher price tor shareholders’ eano, as against
the Sno-ar Wo-kers ("7.™!,! y 7," , 1-7 Sl ™°. nttlt - de s wl "lst mill ■- this district, creeled under
whr:/^Lr^:. sharehoUers with * hish - ••*«>*-»«».
Geohch, Johnson, Farmer (a Shareholder in the Double Peak Sugar Company), Mackay.
owuthGomranr'-lT n r,77r‘r yo "i a ( ™ n ° tget l il^“ f * lr deal M com P ar « l with the 13 men who
in respect to mat^other little tUngs'a's Jell! *"] T!* \° tllore is but
holders like that, preference is given to the shareholders over the non-share-
at the beginning 7m In cre , dits l of , shareholders with equal quantities of cane
xfo” rsr a L " v *•fnVrr;
Plough out cane which woSh! “ h “ ej rt.r^r” 7 W am ' ‘ ha ‘’ ‘°
railway! 868 ' tlle ‘ e any ° thCr raUl y ° n 00,lld ? - Jt is -<-t possible. lam eight miles from the
9869. You have to take their terms or starve ? Yes.
-It app!l!t tobe MmXuJin^lM- 8 co-operativ mill has crystallised into a small monopoly ?
the North Eton Company’s °' * ° f


T. W. Pbele, Secretary, North Eton Sugar Co. Ltd., Mackay.
10066. How many non-shareholders have you supplying to the mill?—About 65. That includes
the Double Peak shareholders.
10067. What proportion of the cane supplied to the mill is supplied by shareholders and non-
shareholders respectively ?—About one-quarter by shareholders.
10068. So that they were reaping a prolit from the cane supplied by three-fourths of the suppliers
to the mill ?—Yes.
10074. Can you state how many original shareholders there were ?—Roughly speaking, about 20.
10075. These assets are gradually dripping into the pockets of the 12?—Yes.
T. llodgbtt, Chairman Cattle Creek Sugar Co. Ltd., Mackay.
11661. Under the articles of association of your company, jou have the right, have you not, if you
choose, to pay the bonus only to the shareholders who supply the cane ?-—Yes.
11662. Could you pay even more for cane to the shareholders than to the non-shareholders?—l
suppose we could ; but we have never done it. Ido not think the articles of association provide for it.
There is nothing to prevent the directors refusing cane from those who are not shareholders. Share-
holders Avould have the preference.
W. J. Edmonds, Director Marian Central Mill Co. Ltd., Mackay.
10021. Do you know many cane-growers who have been successful ?—Not a great number.
10022. The Cane-growers who have been successful, and who can sell out at a considerable profit, are
those gentlemen, are they not, who have combined cane growing with manufacturing?—Probably the
majority would be.
10023. On those facts, manufacturing has been more profitable than cane-growing ?—-Yes, there is
no doubt about that.
9. It follows from what litis been said that neither competition nor co-operation
has proved an adequate protection to the growers as a class. The really operative
check upon the millers in fixing the price of cane is not, generally speaking,
competition (actual or potential), but the necessity of keeping the mills supplied. If
the miller does not pay the growers a subsistence price the growers can discontinue
supplies. I his operative check upon the miller might be a reasonably effective check
it the growers were in a position to refuse supplies. Unfortunately, speaking of the
great body of growers on the Queensland littoral, they are not in a position to employ
this weapon effectively. They have invested their all in their farms, and thev have
no alternative form of cultivation to which they can turn in self-defence. In this
connection, we may quote, by way of illustration, the remarks of Mr. Thomas Smith,
of Innisfail.
4706. During all the time I have owned the land I have endeavoured to utilize it in some way that
would be profitable. After spending money in selecting the land, and fulfilling the conditions, 1 thought
I should utilize the land, and I have tried several things with that object in view. I tried rice, but 1
found that under the existing labour conditions I could not make ends meet. I put cattle on it, but they
turned out most unprofitable. This is not a country for cattle, and they die off as rapidly as they
reproduce. I tried Angora goats and common goats, but without financial success. I was endeavouring
to make the land pay if I could, but I failed ignominiously upon all these pursuits, and I am satisfied
within my own mind, after giving several things a thorough trial and working hard myself, that nothing
can be produced in the north profitably on the land except sugar. 1 had my sons with me, and in each
enterprise that we undertook we worked as economically as possible. Ido not know any white men in
this district who are making a living from bananas. I was inquiring about it a week ago when I was
down oir the southern branch, and learned that there had been two or three who attempted it, but without
success.
10. The essential facts of existing conditions are disclosed in the evidence of
Mr. E. W. Knox, General Manager of the Colonial Sugar Eefining Company, who
speaks with very exceptional knowledge of the whole industry, and who, as a repre-
sentative of the milling and refining interests, cannot be accused of undue partiality
to the growers —
27003 The cane-grower in a particular neighbourhood has not competition amongst
buyers for his cane, has he?—How can he ? He cannot have offered inducement lor two mill-owners
at once to put up mills.
2<004. then it is sufficient to say that he has no competition ?—No.
27005. then what is the guarantee he enjoys that he will get a fair piice?—His guarantee lies in
our contract, his safety lies in the facr, taking the terms made out in our statement, we have paid more
than the mills paid which have been creeled by Government money, as to winch the grower had no risk
at all.


270U6. You ave speak!n£ of your company — lam speaking of mills geueially. 1 lie bulk of (he
eviilcuce so far seems to show that whether the millers exercised their powers jus(;y 01 not, the fact is they
have the power to fix the price lor cane, Jho price for cane is not fixed by competition like most
commodities ?—No, it cannot he.
2699 Y Do you take the position that your company, though it enjoys (ho power to fix prices for
sugar cape, raw sugar, and refined sugar, respectively, exercises that power with icasonahle regard to
other branches of the industry ?—Unquestionably ; I can say quite definitely we sometimes maintain the
price on an occasion when X myself was inclined to reduce it, in order that the mill-owners, from whom wo
purchased sugar in Queensland, might get the advantage. Of course, we derive some advantage
ourselves too.
27558. In your endeavour to do the fair thing to the other branches of the industry, what guarantee
is there that you will do it? Not merely as regards your mills, hut at most of the mills in Queensland,
the cane-grower must take the price offered, or cease growing cine. 1 hat is his alternative ? Are we
not bound to assume the whole community must respect the Mosaic law ?
27559. Ido not know that the assumption would be a safe one ? —I do not see how I can say any
more than that. We regard the Mosaic law as binding on us. L could not say any more.
11. In the preceding argument we have been chiefly concerned to show how
inadequate is the operation of competition in the sugar industry to insure a reasonable
distribution of profits among its various branches. The refiners dictate prices to the
millers; the millers dictate prices to the growers. Such dictation is not necessarily
inconsistent with a reasonable distribution of profits, presuming the refiners and
millers exercise the power, which they possess, subject to the injunction to love one’s
neighbour as oneself. A priori , an expectation that such an injunction would be
observed in the conduct of business concerns would imply a more sanguine view of
human nature than can he claimed by Your Commissioners. We think it would he
more safe to assume as typical the attitude of Mr. John Drysdale, of Pioneer Mill,
Lower Burdekin: —
7927. Dealing with the last five years, I must still press you to put a figure on what you think,
having regard to the nature of this business and its present position, would he a fair interest on your
capital? —As much as you can gei.
7930. What would you put it down at?—Fifteen per cent., or more, if you could get it.
12. Whether Mr. Drysdale’s attitude can he regarded as typical may he open
to question. We have, however, deemed it our duty to inquire closely into the profits
which, as a matter of fact, are made in the various branches of the Sugar Industry,
and we now proceed to state very generally the results of our investigations.
13. At the outset it is necessary to consider briefly the Colonial Sugar
Befitting Company, This Company refines, on the average, not less than three-fourths
of the entire output of Australian produced raw sugar. Its mills, for the manufacture
of raw sugar from the cane, deal with more than one-third of the Australian output.
It has a distillery. It makes manures and acids. Its policy, in the words of one
witness, “is to utilise everything.” It imports such raw sugar from abroad as may
be necessary for the purpose of meeting the Australian demand. It also conducts a
profitable business in Fiji and New Zealand.
14. In our examination into the Company’s profits we were limited by an
injunction issued by the High Court. As we have already explained in our Introduction
to this Report, under all the circumstances of the case, especially in view of the need
for presenting this Deport as early as possible, Your Commissioners decided to obtain
such information as they could without recourse to further litigation. As a result of
this attitude, our Report is not as complete in some important respects as we should
wish to have made it. It is true that the Company in its Statement (Question
2(1844) gave some figures indicative of milling and refining profits in Australia, and
offered to allow of these figures being tested by the President of the Australasian
Corporation of Public Accountants. Your Commissioners were of opinion that the
Company’s methods of hookkeping were such as to make any effective testing of the
Company’s figures a long and laborious if not impossible task. In Tour Commis-
sioners’ opinion, an examination of the balance-sheets of a company ought to reveal
the extent to which such figures as those referred to might he accepted as accurate.
When, however, Your Commissioners sought to obtain a view of the true position
and profits of the Company from its balance-sheets they were met with evidence
which, if not inconsistent, seemed designed or adapted to throw the veil of secrecy
over the facts with respect to which Your Commissioners were seeking enlightenment.
Mr. Knox, in giving evidence on behalf of the Company, said —“The inquiry, as we
make it out, is to inquire as to the Sugar Industry in Australia, and as to the cost of


profit attaching to the work there. In connection with that yon aked wha the
cost of sugar wo are making, what is the profit from it what marg nm-tp
from the sugar we are refining. We are prepared to tell you. lro ™/X/at
the information which could he of any possible service to yon irnvg .
conclusion as to Australian affairs. In our case you take hold of »
lias as large a capital outside Australia as m it; and capi a on .a - ‘ | j|
beyond the control of the t ommonwealth in every shape a"d 'vay.no four busings,
the Commission lias the smallest right to inqune as o in 1" ; t (| 1( .
Directly you begin to go into our genera profit and loss wlere we come to an
profits that are made in that, portion ot the business, am ('Question 26929 )
issue as to disclosure. We say it is very unfair, very improper (Question t
The Company’s Returns, however, state -« The Look, have
iraii as to show separately the profits made in and outside the Commmweu .
f Questions 26882 par. 17a.) “ The bittiness beins treated as a whole, our boo
tr
making such appropriations in any «f our hooks. (Question 21.882, pa . .)
15. The Balance Sheets of the Company, as a matter of fact, indicate, since th e
inauguration of the Commonwealth, an annual dividend of not less than 10
ou the subscribed capital. In addition there have been some louses For thereat
diner aoth Sentember 1912, the dividends (inclusive of bonuses) amount to l^ 2 pc
S e stssz w. i. r “ »*;,
the fact that at various times profits have been capitalized bv the issues ot suaies
(wholly or partially paid for out of profits). £625,000 has been m Bus
Now, a nominal dividend of 12* per cent, on nominally paid-up
in reality a dividend of approximately 15| per cent, on the actu 31 • 1 ‘1 t ,
£2 375,000. In addition, over £BO,OOO has been added tor the same yeai _to
Balance of the Profit and Loss Account. Taking into in
Balance to Profit and Loss Account, September, 1911, was ..g3, t4l, • ■- ,
mind that the Company has a further disclosed Reserve labe led the
Depreciation Fund of £500,000, the conclusion would appear to follow that tne
Comply nfigbt have distributed with perfect safety the £BO 000 carried for the year
to [he Balanl of Profit and Loss Account. Had this been .lone the dividend would
have exceeded 10 per cent, on actually subscribed capital.
16. The dividend (plus bonus) of 15| per cent, above referred to must- not he
i-nbeu as normal It represents, indeed, the maximum attained m a year 1 '
rale ofsugTwas highd But we have to remember the large addition to the Balance
of the Profit and Loss Account for the same year, and that the Balance Jiects gi\c
■ maipofion G f the extent to which declared profits have been diminished by approj f
Sons to otherlmposes The general policy' of the Company has been to declare a
dividend of 10 per cent, on nominal capital, and to utilize surplus profits m the creation
of reserves^and the extensions of plant. ‘‘ Since 1890,” said Mr. Knox, m giving evidence
“ we have told the shareholders from time to time that a certain amoun o p
kept in hand, and was being used in the development of the Australia have
tofd them that at the itime P^cally
ST tWhole of olr IsshsJirfet wither we ufed tlie 7 term ‘in Fiji' or ‘ outside
Australia ’-have been covered by undivided profits. I forget' )
Tiie assets outside Australia are between £2,000,000 and £3,000,000. (Q. - • •)
Obviously in a sound financial concern, the results of this expansion of business m .
lie expected sooner or later, to reveal themselves either m increased dividends, or m
bonuses or in capitalization of profits, or in some other form Bonuses to shareholders
and the issue of Lies to shareholders payable wholly or partially out ot profits, are t
ostensible forms in which the shareholders of the Colonial Sugai hu . 0 I >
lit by a renunciation in the past of the policy of declaring maximum poss.ble dividends.
27344. Mr. Knlor, in .he Octehey Z
cent, on (he cost of your lota We)!, *, v amount t ,o sav, £5,000,000
n:,E situ.. ...... -, -.... »--■
or whatever you like to call it, ol £2,500,000? 1< >.


Amount paid by shareholders in cash
£2,375,000
Shares capitalized out of profits and so distributed
among shareholders..
625,000
Making the published capital on which dividends are
paid
3,000,000
I he company possesses m addition an inner or undis-
closed reserve of, say
3,000,000
So that the true capital of the company is, say
£6,000,000
27345. It is i'eally ,£3,000,000, because, on (he liability dele is the item, “Replacement and
Depreciation Fund, £500,000, which should come off’that £5,000,000. So, really £4,500,000 is your
net total of assets, and yon earn a dividend on a capital of £7,500,000, which leaves surplus assets
undisclosed, an inner reserve of £3,000,000 ?—lf yon have been reading those reports, you would have
sccu * l,af f l u * te recently we told the shareholders that the whole of our assets —I forget whether we used
(he term “in Fiji ”or “ outside Australia’’—have been covered by undivided profits. I for-et exactly
the words used. The assets outside Australia are between £2,000,000 and £3,000,000, that is"the whole
explanation.
< 2 / 346, 1 1 . t .. i f in B enious ; You save enough profit out of the Australian business to raise a
competitor mhip . What we said was the amount invested outside Australia corresponded with the
earnings of that amount during the last fifteen years. In other words, we had not been required
to bring into the accounts the earnings outside Ausiralia. If you will turn up the speech of 27th October,
1010, you will see for yourself. ’
£o Ca * h ca l , jf al l is and after paying your dividend, you put aside
offhand’ 000 ’ £62 ’ ooo ’ Cap ' ta iZC( profits 1,1 shares were distributed ?—I could not answer that
27348. I have worked it out, and you will see that it is correct ?—The £625,000 is all disclosed
profits. It is right in that sense.
“■" f IK ! tll6r Z aJ ' Tl ‘ e actual araount of cash paid up by shareholders is
7I V ~ i Chen they received shares from capitalized profits, £62f,000. That makes £3,000,000,
the stated capital of the company i —Yes,
2/350. In addition, there are £3,000,000 of inner reserves ?—Those are the facts, as far as the
accounts are concerned. But there is one fact you do not know of, which is this : The shareholders in
W F4m r nm SUS r Co . mpa 7; be f re amalgamation, had to pay up £400,('00 to get clear. That company
lost £400,000 in the crisis of 1884. That might clear away any misunderstanding.
llie financial position of the Company as disclosed in the evidence thus appears
to be as follows : 11
means that £2,375,000 has yielded investors generous dividends distributed
halt-yearly, and reserves (inner and distributed) of £3,625,000. We think it fair to
conclude from these figures, supplied by a Company whose expansions of business have been
built on a basis of milling and refining profits, that the milling and refining industries
in Australia are conducted as a matter of fact under conditions which admit of hi<di
profits. &
17. The foregoing conclusion becomes irresistible when we remember that other
milling and refining concerns, conducted exclusively in Australia, and without the
enormous advantages of large scale organization, are also able to show substantial
pio ts. As regards the mills, other than those worked in conjunction with
re nenes, the evidence submitted to us demonstrates that, assuming moderate equip-
ment and reasonable efficiency of management (including therein a due regard to the
act that the price for cane must not be fixed so low as to squeeze growers out of
existence) high profits can be made under the average of prevailing prices for raw sugar
and sugar cane respectively. While some Central Mills, having failed for one reason
or another to meet their obligations, have been taken over by the Government, the
majority ol them have been enabled to pay working expenses, to pay interest and
redemption instalments on money borrowed from the Government for erection, to
increase their plant, and at the same time to accumulate profits for other purposes.
• , ls true that these mills have been specially favoured with respect to the low rate of
interest at which they borrowed money for mill erection. But Proprietary mills have
been no less successful. Mr. Knox, speaking for the Colonial Sugar Refining Company,
asserted that milling was a more profitable investment than refining. As that Company
mills over one-third of the Australian output of raw sugar, it may be expected to know
the exact facts. We may add that Mr. Knoxks evidence on this point was in accord


with our expectations based on evidence previously taken. From the body of that
evidence we may quote two witnesses who were specially qualified to express an opinion
on milling profits :
W illiam Gibson, Manager, Gibson and Howes Ltd., Bundaberg.
21828. What was your profit last year ? —£9,913.
21829 vVas that after allowing 5 per cent, interest on your capital ? —Yes.
21830. I hen your profit last year was 9 per cent., and adding 5 per cent, for interest, gave you a
return of 14 per cent, on your capital last year ? —Yes.
21831. hor the seven years, from 1904 to 1910, your average profits were £7,974, equal to 7| per
cent., and adding 5 per cent, interest on capital gives a return of 12J per cent. ? —Yes.
John Drysdale, Sugar Planter and Mill-owner, Lower Burdekin.
7974. Adding up your profit for the last 5 years, leaving out for the moment the interest on capital
cost—in 1906, you made £25,964 ; in 1907, £26,623 ; in 1908, £34,648 ; in 1909, £36,660 ; and in 1910,
£31,470. Leaving out the shillings, the total comes to £155,365 in 5 years ? —Yes.
7978 - • ■ • • • The result then of these calculations is that your profits have more than
doubled your capital in 5 years, irrespective of interest on that capital ? —Doub'e the capital is £250,000.
7979. You are right, but £155,000, irrespective of interest on your capita! of £125,000, more than
doubles your original capital in the 5 years ? —Yes.
18. We arrive, then, at the conclusion that, with respect to the general question
of an equitable distribution of profits among the various branches of the Sugar Industry,
neither the millers nor the refiners have cause for serious complaint. If, as just
suggested, the miller makes higher profits than the refiner, the remedy is in the hands
of the refiners. They fix the price for raw sugar ; and they are in a position to alter
the existing sliding scale whenever they choose to do so. It is, perhaps, due to a desire
to enrol on its side the milling interests that has dictated the general policy of the
Colonial Sugar liefining Company with respect to the price that it fixes for raw sugar.
The millers, with almost unanimous voice, expressed themselves as content with the
existing scale of prices for raw sugar.
19. Unfortunately, when we come to the growers, we find a very different story.
While the millers and refiners make handsome profits, the profits of the growers., as a
class, are quite inadequate. A proportion of the growers, as growers, do well. The
character and situation of the land, the price which was paid for the land, good fortune
as regards seasonable rainfall and immunity from pests, floods, or cyclones, the exceptional
ability or industry of the grower himself, or the employment by the grower of members
ol his own family-all or any of these may operate, and have operated, in favour of
particular growers to secure good results. But the growers as a class do not, in our
opinion, receive their fair share of the profits of the industry as a whole. Nor do they
receive that adequate return on their capital outlay which it should be one object of a
protective system to insure. On careful analysis of the evidence submitted by the
growers, the large majority were at one in maintaining that an increase in the price of
cane was imperative. “We hang on in the hope of better things,” expresses the
prevailing attitude. To quote at any length from the evidence on this point would
extend unduly the length of this Ileport. But the following extracts speak for
themselves :
H. E. Turner, Director, Plane Creek Central Mill Co. Ltd., Mackay.
10787-8. Now, would yon say, having analyzed the position in that way, that the grower for the
Plane ( reek Mill has been getting the full price which the mill could have afforded to have paid him ? —He
has not. It became absolutely necessary, in order to make a success of the Plane Creek business to get
in new machinery ; the mill was like a farmer who has a team of horses and no plough ; we were forced to
get the new appliances in order to make the mill a success.
10789. Being forced to get new appliances for the mill you got the money required from the grower ?
—The grower had to supply it.
10790. Having forced the grower to equip the mill so as to make it a magnificent profit producing
concern, do you think that, in 1910, you could have afforded to have paid the grower a little more for his
cane ?—They could have given the grower a little more last year ; as a director I admit that.
H. A. Cattermull, President Cane-growers’ Union of Australia, Bundaberg.
21297. (Witness). You will sec that the general manager of Millaquin, Mr. Johnston, made a
statement to the effect that his firm could buy cane cheaper from the farmers and growers than they could
grow it themselves. This statement, in the opinion of my union, shows that the growers generally cannot
allow themselves or their families the same rate of wages as the miller as the grower has to pay to his
workers, thus the miller, under existing conditions, is getting the farmer to work himself and his family
for his (the miller’s) benefit.


20. The injustice which is being done to the growers under existing conditions
derives an additional significance from two facts. In the first place, where, as in tic
case of some of the Central Mills, there is a virtual coincidence of growing and milling
interests, the evidences go to show that, under the hitherto prevailing rates of wages,
both the miller and the grower can get a fair return on his capital and ettorfc. in
the second place, while the growers, millers, and refiners represent the great balk
of the capital which is invested in the Sugar Industry, the relative importance
of these classes, from a national point of view, must be determined by reference
to the extent to which they severally contribute to the great problem of the settle-
ment of the tropical or semi-tropical areas. Most of the refineries are established
in temperate regions. Mills may, and in a number of cases do, represent the
capital of persons living in the temperate regions. Wage-earners come and go. the
growers, as a class, are tied to the lands. It follows that they possess a unique
importance and a special claim to legislative protection. It appears to us an intoler-
able condition of things that the class which it should be the first object of the
protective policy to protect, should be the class which receives the least, and a quite-
inadequate return on its capital and effort. We see exemplified in the conditions of
the Australian Sugar Industry that “ squeezing of the primary producer which is one
of the recognised dangers of modern capitalistic organisation. The fact that the evil
has not reached the magnitude it has attained in some other countries may be
conceded. But we take it that Australian statesmanship should seek to prevent as
well as to ameliorate—to deal with evils as they arise without waiting for them to reach
a stage when any remedy must involve far-reaching social and industrial dislocation.
21. We propose to consider some remedies which have been suggested to us, or
have occurred to us, in the course of our investigation -
(1) The revival of competition as a factor in price determination.
(2) The nationalization of the refining industry.
(3) Public competition in refining.
(4) The limitation of milling and refining profits.
(5) Public control of prices.
The Revival of Competition as a Factor in Price Determination.
22. The view has been frequently expressed that the problem of monopolistic
control can be dealt with most effectively by legislation in protection of fair
competition. The value of such legislation, under particular conditions, cannot
be questioned. But where, as in the case of the Colonial Sugar Refining Com-
pany, monopolistic control is the result, less of the pursuit of predatoiy
methods of certain American Trusts than of large scale industry, and a high efficiency
of organization, an attempt on the part oi the State to enforce a return to
competition, would imply a premium on inefficiency, a recurrence to the wastes
of the competitive • regime , and a disregard of the advantages of laige scale
organization both in steadying the market by preventing over production and crises
and in securing a relative permanence of employment. One curious advantage of
large scale organization was indicated by Mr. John Allison, who made the following
statement as representative of the Cane Growers’ Association at Gin Gin :
Question 218G3, page 782). —-Were the competition between the existing refineries in Australia more
keen the present import duty would be of little value as a preventative against the introduction of cheaply-
grown black labour sugar. ' Indeed, we consider were it not for the control which the aggressive monopoly,
the Colonial Sugar Refining Company, exercised, the Australian market would be flooded with cheap black-
grown simar. We would point out that the competition induced by Poolman refineries before they were
absorbed by the Colonial Sugar Refining Company for the protection of the industry, caused a reduction in
the price of sugar, and therefore in the price of cane, owing to their extensive importation of cheap black-
grown sugar, though the £6 impost duty operated fully against them.
As regards the mills generally, they enjoy from their local situation a natural
monopoly as purchasers of cane, and legislation for insuring free competition would
only apply to the exceptional cases where mills may come into competition. Even in
these areas no legislation can prohibit the honorable understanding.
The Nationalization of the Refining Industry.
23. The refineries are the controlling factor in the Sugar Industry. If the
refineries were nationalized by the Commonwealth Government, public authorities
would fix the price of refined and raw sugar respectively ; and they could also make the


payment of the fixed price for raw sugar conditional in the case of each mill upon a
payment by that mill of a fair- price for the cane. Any profits resulting from the control
of the industry would find their way to the public purse Despite these indisputable
advantages, we cannot recommend the course suggested. Several reasons, m t ici
cumulative aspect, convince us that, at any rate for the present the nationalization
of the refineries would be inexpedient. These reasons may be briefly stated .
(1) The Efficiency of the Refining Industry as it is at present carried on
Advocates of the public ownership of industries rightly dwell upon the
avoidance of the wastes of competition. But, in the case of the refining industry m
Australia, such wastes are negligible. Further, taking into consideration the various
difficulties with which public ownership has to contend, and the high efficiency of the
present refining business in Australia, we do not think that the public ownership o
the refineries would prove as financially successful as the present private owners up.
(2) Costs to the Treasury.— The cost of nationalizing the refining industry would
involve an initial capital outlay of some millions by the time allowance had been made
for the costs of refineries, good-will, floating capital, &c. To secure a fair interest on
this capital outlay without penalizing consumers would, we believe, be difficult, it not
impossible.
(a) Although the Colonial Sugar Refining Company makes large profits,
those profits accrue in part to their overseas trade and business,
their ownership of sugar mills, and their dealings on the market.
(h) Such profits as it does make on its refining are made under existing
conditions —conditions which give to its plant a value in excess
of earning capacity under the altered conditions which would be
involved in nationalization. In the general result, we cannot avoid
the conclusion that the Commonwealth Treasury would be involved
in a heavy financial loss, unless it were prepared to make higher
demands on the consumers than is necessary under a system of private
owned industry subject to appropriate regulation.
(3) The Speculative Character of the Refining Industry.— When it is proposed, as
we assume that the advocates of nationalization do propose, that the Commonwealth
Government should buy out the refineries at their present value as a going concern
it is impossible to ignore the statements of experts to the effect that the time is not
far distant when the rivalry of mill white sugar by discovery of new processes will
materially depreciate the value of the refined article. The making of mill white sugar
has made rapid progress in other countries. A new process has been submitted to re
Commission. (Compare also the Batelle White Sugar Process—Appendix No. 3
—and the proposals of Mr. J. E. Paddle for treating liquid sugar-Appendix No. 8-a
proposal which was favorably commented upon by Mr. J. C. Brunmch, Agricultural
Chemist to the Queensland Government. Q. 25927.) These various processes are in
too experimental a stage to be made the subject of specific recommendations by your
Commissioners, but they have an important bearing upon the proposal to nationalize
existing refineries. There is a possibility that the day is not far distant when the
business of sugar refining will be relatively of much less importance than at present
If this condition of things should come about, and if the Commonwealth had purchased
the existing refineries, while the Refining Companies might be grateful, the public
Treasury would be likely to incur a heavy financial loss.
We believe that the foregoing considerations constitute in their cumulative
aspect a convincing reason for seeking some other way of ensuring an equitable distri-
bution of the profits of the Sugar Industry among its various branches.
Public Competition and Refining.
24. The suggestion has been made that, since refiners are in a position to control
prices in the Sugar Industry generally, the Commonwealth might enter into competition
with existing concerns with a view to keeping down the price of refined sugar, while
raising the'price of raw sugar. We cannot recommend the adoption of this suggestion .
(1) The suggestion is probably due to an exaggeration of refining profits.
The profits of the Colonial Sugar Refining Company are largely due
to items other than refining.


(2) The suggestion is open to several of the objections already considered
in relation to nationalization.
(3) If the Commonwealth Refinery entered into competition with the Colonial
Sugar Refining Company, the Commonwealth Refinery would be
severely handicapped. It would have great difficulty in obtaining
regular supplies of Australian raw sugar, and in getting its refined article
regularly on the market. It would be expected to pay high prices for
raw sugar, and to accept low prices for refined sugar. It would,
moreover, come into competition with a long-established business
conducted with a very high degree of efficiency. We have frequently
had occasion to criticise the Colonial Sugar Refining Company from
various points of view, but we do not hesitate to express our
admiration of the economic efficiency which characterizes every branch
of its business which has come under our notice.
(4) In order to prove really effective for the purposes we have now in view,
the Commonwealth Refinery would have to proceed on a large scale.
This would imply a duplication of refining plants in Australia quite
inconsistent with a sound economy of national resources. For the
foregoing considerations, as well as for others, we are of opinion that
the proposal to establish a Commonwealth Refinery is impracticable.
Limitation of Refining and Milling Profits to a Fixed Percentage on
Capital Outlay.
25. We are of opinion that the solution of the problem of price determination
is not to be found in the limitation of milling and refining profits :
(1) The suggested solution would afford no guarantee of securing that
protection to the grower which should be the chief object in view.
(2) It would be as likely to tell for decreasing efficiency in milling and
refining as to tell for a more equitable distribution of profits.
(3) The proposal under consideration might well be nullified to a large
extent in practical operation by concealment of profits, e.g., stock
watering, renewal of plant when depreciation is allowed for, extensions
of plant, secret manipulation of reserves, nepotism, extravagant
salaries to directors, managers, &c., &c.
Public Control of Prices for Raw Sugar and Sugar Cane.
26. The cost of growing sugar-cane is difficult to estimate. Apart from
fluctuations in land values, allowance lias to be made for floods, cyclones, scarcity of
rainfall, pests, &c. The cost of the manufacture of raw sugar, and of sugar refining,
can be calculated with relative certainty. Hence the question arises whether it would
not be possible for public authorities to arrange a sliding scale according to which the
price to be paid for raw sugar and sugar-cane respectively would vary in a fixed propor-
tion to the selling price of refined sugar —due allowance being made for milling and
refining costs, inclusive of depreciation and a reasonable percentage on capital outlay.
The sliding scale of prices would, of course, be no novelty. The Colonial Sugar Refining
Company, as we have seen, pays £9 Ts. 6d. per ton for raw sugar when the selling price
of refined sugar is £l9. For each £1 increase in the price of refined sugar, the price of
raw sugar is enhanced by 18s. Further, the Colonial Sugar Refining Company has,
at one time or another, made overtures to the growers for the adoption of a sliding scale
of prices with respect to sugar cane, although the growers, for reasons not difficult to
understand, have generally preferred the offer of a straight-out price. Other millers
have paid for cane, or have offered to do so, on a sliding scale.
27. The disadvantages of existing arrangements or offers as to a sliding scale of
prices are chiefly two—
(1) The growers rarely share any part of the bonus paid to millers of 18s.
for every £1 increase in the selling value of refined sugar.
(2) The sliding scale, in so far as it is in operation, is fixed, not by com-
petition, nor by collective bargaining, nor by an impartial body,
but by private business concerns which enjoy a more or less monopo-
listic control.


28. The difficulties to which allusion has just been made could, as we believe, be
overcome by legislation constituting machinery for the purpose of insuring that the
prices for raw sugar and cane respectively shall be determined, not as at present by
one party to a bargain, but by some authority or authorities empowered by law to act
in the interest of all parties. We believe that along these lines is to be found the ideal
solution of the problem of insuring an equitable adjustment of the profits of the sugar
industry among its various branches. Before proceeding to work out this suggestion
in detail, we think it desirable to consider some preliminary objections which have been
submitted to us, or have occurred to us, in the course of our investigations.
29. It has been urged that the proposal is revolutionary. We are not disturbed
by this objection. The industrial organization of modern society is rapidly changing,
and, more especially in some of its branches, calls for novel legislation. Within the
Australian Commonwealth, probably no more striking example could be adduced than the
Sugar Industry. The existing methods of price determination place a virtually despotic
control in the hands of the purchasers. The substitution for those methods of a public
control of prices is one way out of existing difficulties. In our opinion, the other alternative
is nationalization of the refineries. We have already given our reasons for not advocating
nationalization. Moreover, Australia has already pledged itself to the determination,
by public authorities, of the price of labour. One witness expressed the present
situation as follows : —“ The grower is between the Devil and the deep sea.” The
grower has to pay a price which is fixed by public authorities for labour, while he receives
for cane a price which is fixed by the miller. We see no reason why the principles which
underlie our industrial legislation for the protection of the wage-earner should not be
extended to protect the grower. Parliament (whether Commonwealth or State),
following the analogy of legislation for fixing the price of labour, might adopt either
of three alternatives : —(1) It might fix prices by law directly —the policy of the
Legislative Minimum. (2) It might arrange for representatives of the various branches
of the industry to agree to a scale of prices—the policy of Wages Boards. (3) It might
intrust the determination of the sliding scale to an impartial tribunal —the policy of
Compulsory Arbitration. As to the choice between these various policies, we shall
venture to express an opinion later on.
30. One objection which has been urged is that prices can only be fixed by the
conditions of supply and demand, and that the public control of prices is therefore
impossible. We venture to make the following observations with respect to this
argument: —
(1) The argument is generally advanced by those who are, as we believe,
more interested in the maintenance of the status quo than in arriving
at a just solution of a difficult problem. We believe that the growers
would welcome the proposal we suggest. So much was expressly
admitted in evidence by many growers, and is implied in the state-
ments of the Combined Mackay Farmers’ Association (8757) and the
Cane Growers’ Union of Australia (21297). Mr. P. Kirwan, Vice-
President of the union just mentioned, said in his evidence (Question
11542) :
“By Way of Regulation. —lt would be necessary to form and maintain a permanent trust or
commission, representing the workers, growers, consumers, and any other interest that would have to be
taken into account, to regulate prices and conditions from time to time, so as to insure to every one connected
with the sugar industry a fair deal. The knowledge that no section was receiving more than its due share
would be the best means of allaying the unrest which now prevails in the sugar districts.
In taking the circumstances of the sugar industry into consideration, I would like to impress on the
Sugar Commission that it is the farmer and worker who carry most of the risk associated with the sugar
industry. The manufacturer of raw sugar can and does make sure that once the cane is delivered to him,
a certain profit is to be made out of each ton of cane. The refiner is sure of his profit once he takes delivery
of the raw sugar. Both the refiner and the raw sugar manufacturer fix their own terms. The farmer has to,
in practice, take whatever price is offered. Having spent up to £l3 growing an acre of cane, that acre
must be sold, even though only a slight profit, or even no profit at all, is made. The present rates paid to
the workers do not permit of a married population depending solely on the sugar industry.”
(2) We are quite at a loss to see why there would be any greater difficulties
to be overcome in regulating the prices of raw sugar and sugar-cane
than in regulating the price of labour.
F. 13881. p


(3) We are also at a loss to see why, if prices can be fixed as they are at
present by one party to a bargain, they cannot be fixed by a public
authority acting in the interest of both parties. The prices of raw
sugar and sugar-cane in Australia at present are fixed, not by laws of
supply and demand (within the Tariff wall), but by refiners in the one
case and millers in the other. We have already dwelt on this fact
at some length; but we cannot refrain from quoting here the
following significant extracts from the evidence :
William Alexander Gibson, Managing Director of the Marburg Sugar Company, Marburg.
26127. By the Chairman. —You are the successor in the Marburg Sugar Mill of Mr. Smith, who has
mst given evidence ? —Yes.
26131. What did you pay for cane last season ? —We have two prices for cane. We pay by weight.
There is one class of cane grown principally for cattle fodder, and when there is a surplus we take it and
pay Bs. 6d. per ton for it. It has a very low sugar content.
26132. What are the sugar contents ?—lt varies from 7 per cent, to 9 per cent. Then there is the
other cane which we approve of, and for it we pay 10s. per ton.
26133. For cane containing 7 per cent, of sugar the Colonial Sugar Refining Company’s schedule
price is 2s. per ton. How can you afford to pay Bs. 6d. per ton for it ? —We give 10s. per ton for the better
class of cane, which is really worth more, and that cane makes up for the loss on the lower quality of cane.
We strike an average.
26134. The lower class cane is principally grown, not to make sugar, but for cattle feed ? —Yes.
Our district combines cattle rearing and dairying with sugar growing.
26135. Then the general taxpayer, who is supposed to be paying through the Customs to encourage
the production of sugar as sugar, appears to be paying for the production of cane as fodder fro tanto ?
Yes, to a certain extent. We get the balance of it.
Hon. Angus Gibson, M.L.C., Managing Director of Bingera Sugar Plantation, Bingera.
22995. I understand you are the managing director of the firm of Messrs. Gibson & Howes ? —Yes.
22996. And, therefore, you are responsible for the general policy of the Company ? —Quite so.
22997. When, at the beginning of the season you are fixing the price of the cane you buy, what
do you take into account—supposing the base price of sugar is £9 7s. 6d. or £9 10s. per ton, as it has been
for a number of years ? —We generally make an examination of the district, go round, and have a look at
the cane, see the conditions, and find out how much cane there will be to supply to the mill. Then we have
to look at the quantity of cane to find whether it is going to be a paying concern. We have to look at
the cane from the point of view of the quantity in the fields, and we sit down and make our calculations
as to what is going to come out of it. We read the “ Sugar Journal,” the “ Louisiana Planter,” and other
sugar journals, and try to find out what are going to be the world’s requirements and supplies, and we try
to find out, if possible, just how that sugar is likely to be introduced into Australia, With all that infor-
mation before us, we say that we can pay so much.
John Drysdale, Sugar Planter and Mill-owner, Lower Burdekin.
7189. To the 39 growers who have declined the agreement, you are paying for cane 13s. per ton,
while you are paying those who have signed the agreement 18s, lid., taking the price of sugar to-day as
a basis ?—Yes.
7190. Then, if, as you admit, 18s. lid. is a fair market price, a price which will yield you a fair profit
as manufacturer, you are getting from these 39 growers a profit of ss. lid. per ton in addition to the profit
you reap, after paying 18s. lid. ?—Yes.
7191. Is this document a copy of the five years’ agreement—[ handing it to witness ] ? —Yes, this
document seems to be a copy of it: —
Memorandum of Agreement made and entered into this day of
one thousand nine hundred and between John Drysdale, for and on behalf
of the Australian Estates and Mortgage Company Limited, of Kalamia, and Drysdale
Brothers and Company, of Pioneer, Lower Burkedin, in the State of Queensland, sugar
manufacturers (hereinafter called the “ Mill-owners,”) of the one part, and
in the said State, cane farmer (hereinafter called “ the farmer ”), of the
other part; whereas the mill-owners have recently arranged to increase their crushing
power, and whereas the farmer is the owner (insert in fee simple or leasehold, as the case
may be) of certain land situate in the county of Gladstone, parish of ,
which said lands are planted with sugar-cane ; and whereas it has been agreed between
the mill-owners and the farmer, that, in consideration of the mill-owners increasing
their crushing powers as aforesaid, and also in consideration of the mill-owners agreeing
to pay to the farmer for cane the prices regulated as hereinafter appearing, he, the
said farmer, would enter into and execute this agreement.
Now this agreement witnesseth as follows :
(1) The Farmer, for himself, his heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns, agrees to sell to the
mill-owners the whole of the sugar cane grown on the hereinbefore-mentioned lands, during the period of
five years, ending with and including the crushing in the year 1915.


(2) The price to be paid by the mill-owners to the farmer for sugar-cane shall be as follows ■
The sum of 16s. 6d. per ton when raw sugar is at £l2 per ton loaded on trucks, with one penny
rise or fall for every shilling increase or decrease in the-price of sugar above or below
the said sum of £l2 per ton ; and for the purpose of avoiding fractions in the price to
be paid for cane the nearest shilling in the price of raw sugar shall be taken (that is to
say) : —if the price of raw sugar is £l2 Is. 7d., the price of cane shall be calculated on
£l2 25.; and if the price of raw sugar is £l2 Is. 5d., then the price of the cane shall be
calculated at £l2 Is.; and if the price should be £l2 Is, 6d., then the price of the cane
shall be 16s. 7|d.
(3) Subject as hereinafter mentioned, the price of raw sugar as set forth in paragraph 2 hereof shall
be regulated by the price paid by the Colonial Sugar Refining Company Limited for the time being for
94 net titre sugar, and payment shall be made by the Mill-owners aforesaid, at the time and in manner
following (that is to say) : By monthly payments on the amount of cane delivered, a certain part of the
price, not exceeding one shilling per ton, to be retained by the Mill-owners till the beginning of July in
each year, when the price to be paid for the cane is finally settled and ascertained.
(4) The price hereinbefore mentioned shall be subject to such deductions as may be made by the
Colonial Sugar Refining Company Limited, by reason of over-production or otherwise,
(5) The farmer agrees to supply the cane to the Mill-owners in the manner and subject to the
conditions upon which cane is usually supplied to, and received at, the mills, and in such quantities and
at such times as may be required by the Mill-owners,
In witness whereof the parties hereto have hereunto signed their names the day and year first
hereinbefore written.
Signed by John Drysdale for and on behalf of the Mill-owners, in the presence of—•
And by the said
In the presence of
John Alison, Farmer, Gin Gin, representing the Gin Gin Growers’ Association.
21863 (page 781). —Financial —Taking the first year under review (1907), the prices for canc at
the Gin Gin Central Mills, as fixed by Dr. Maxwell, were as under; —
11s. 6d. per ton for Stand-over cane;
10s. 6d. per ton for Highland cane.
These prices were subject to deductions for frosted and burnt cane, so that even with Is. 6d. per
ton additional, the average price paid for cane on that season’s deliveries amounted only to 11s. 7d. per
ton. The average tonnage per acre being 17'4 tons.
The following year, under the same control, the prices fixed were as above, with the exception of
Stand-over cane, which was paid for at the rate of 11s. per ton. These prices were, however, subject to
the following reductions :
Lowland cane, killed by frost, Is, 6d. per ton ;
Highland cane, injured by frost, Is. per-ton ;
Burnt cane (accidental), Is. per ton ;
Burnt cane (otherwise), 2s. per ton.
These deductions brought the average price to 9s. per ton, and out of 36,010 tons of cane, only 8,927
tons received full price. The growers, however, received an additional payment of Is. sd. per ton on this
year’s deliveries, which brought up the price to 10s. 5d., but later they had to refund 7/g-d. per ton of
that additional payment, as they had been overpaid to that extent, so that the average price for cane that
year was 9s. 9y F d. per ton. We would just here like to draw the Commission’s attention to the fact that
in 1908, 36,010 tons of cane were purchased for £16,220, whilst in 1909, 23,980 were bought for £13,422 ;
that is to say : we received for 12,030 tons of cane the sum of £2,798. By paying such a low price for cane
Dr. Maxwell was able to show a good profit in some of the Central Mills under his control. The average
tonnage per acre was 13-88 tons. In 1909, Dr. Maxwell’s successor fixed the prices as follows
Stand-over cane, 12s. 6d. per ton ;
Highland cane, 11s. 6d. per ton ;
Lowland cane, 10s. per ton.
The average price paid for the season being 11s. 2d. and no additional payment was made. The
average tonnage per acre was 10 • 5 tons.
31. Apart from the objections just considered that a public control of prices is
revolutionary and impossible, the objection has been urged that no reason exists for
singling out the Sugar Industry for special legislation. But to this, the obvious answer
is that the conditions in the Sugar Industry are exceptional, and call for exceptional
legislation. We have here in mind, less the national purposes which the industry
serves —though this aspect is of undoubted importance in view of the coincidence of
the class most useful in settlement with the class most in need of legislative aid —than
the practical abeyance of competition as a factor in price determination. We know of
no other industry in Australia in which the determination of prices is to so large an
extent in the hands of one party to the bargain.
32. It has been urged that, although prices may be fixed under public control,
no law could compel the miller or the refiner to buy. It has also been urged that, with
regard to the Central Mills, the State of Queensland has a vested interest in the main-
tenance of the present system until those mills have discharged their indebtedness to
D 2


the Government. We consider these objections together, because they both have
their apparent origin in a misunderstanding with respect to the purposes of any rational
scheme for the public control of prices. The objects of such a scheme would not be
to prevent any branch of the Sugar Industry from making reasonable profits, but to
secure a reasonable distribution of profits. If it were found upon such reasonable
distribution that one or more branches of the industry were not securing an adequate
return on capital outlay, then the Import Duty would have to be raised. We believe
that when once the scheme was established, it would be recognised by all parties,
and by the State of Queensland, as a just solution of existing problems.
33. One possible objection to public control of prices is that public control, by
giving a public guarantee of fair prices, would result in the production of a surplus.
There might be, for example, a surplus of Australian-produced sugar; or there might
be a surplus of cane supplied at one or more of the mills, i.e., a greater supply than
the mill could crush. As regards the latter surplus, the difficulties could be overcome
as at present by mutual arrangement between millers and growers. As regards the
surplus of Australian-produced sugar, we do not think it likely to occur for some years
to come in view of the expanding local market. Should it occur, however, a difficult
situation would arise in view of the facts that exportation must involve a loss, that
sugar is not a commodity which can be stored for indefinite periods, and that, being
one of the necessities of life, no great increase in the local demand would be stimulated
by lowering the price on the local market. The situation would not, however, be
wholly novel; and it might be dealt with as under existing conditions:
C. E. Young, Sugar Plantation Proprietor, Fairymead.
22221. {Witness. — If you have a consumption of 200,000 tons, and there is a
surplus of 20,000 tons, you sell the 200,000 at the regular price, and you export the 20,000 for what it
will fetch.
22222. That is the Cartel system ? —Well, Russia doubled its output under that system.
22223. That is possible where there is a private combination amongst refiners, but how would it
be possible here ? —Our good friends, the Colonial Sugar Refining Company, would carry the thing out
for us with the greatest ease. All we have to do is to arrange a glut by good farming, and then approach
the Colonial Sugar Refining Company and say that we have so much sugar, and ask them if they will export
10 per cent, of each man’s raw sugar.
22224. Could that be carried on indefinitely ? —lt could, for one year.
22229. If, under an £8 duty, the area under sugar was increased materially, you would immediately
have a heavy glut ? —lf you have to export a large quantity at a low price, that will reduce the price locally.
If you send only 10 per cent., it does not matter much what the surplus is sacrificed for, but if you send
out 50 per cent., it will lead to a drop in the price in Australia, and you will be unable to make ends meet ?
—lt would immediately cure itself,
22230. Supposing the industry were in the hands of “ our good friends ” as you called the Colonial
Sugar Refining Company, they would keep up the local price, no matter what price they were getting for
the surplus in foreign countries ?—But the consumer would pay the same price for sugar here.
22231. Would it not be rather exasperating for the consumer within a tariff wall of £8 a ton to know
that he was paying 4d. a lb. for his sugar, while sugar he was taxed to produce was selling in Timbuctoo
for 2d. a lb. ? —lt would no more upset his equanimity than it does in America.
William Gibson (Gibson & Howes, Ltd.), Bingera.
22365. Evidence was given the day before yesterday that the Colonial Sugar Refining Company
limited the quantity of sugar you are allowed to put on the Australian market. Is that so ? —At the
present time we have no arrangement with the company. Some years ago, if my memory serves me right,
we thought there would be a surplus, and the company made an arrangement with us, as it did with the
other raw millers, that if the Colonial Sugar Refining Company had to export, we would have to bear a
proportion of the loss. That was a mutual arrangement. I know there was more sugar produced that
year than was required ; at any rate, the company had to carry forward a very large quantity of sugar,
and it never asked us for one penny interest on that outlay. The Colonial Sugar Refining Company has
not brought that matter up since ; I think the arrangement of which I speak was 4 or 5 years ago.
if the surplus tended to recur, despite the deduction in price, the fact would
indicate that the protection was unnecessarily high; and the proper remedy would be
to lower the Import Duty. Otherwise there would be introduced into Australia some
of the more objectionable features of the Cartel system.
34. We have spoken hitherto, of the public control of prices. The expression is
designedly ambiguous. It evades the difficult question of the spheres of Common-
wealth and State action. It says nothing of the particular machinery which, whether
State or Federal, is to interpret public control in definite executive action. Under
other circumstances we might have felt entitled to leave such questions to the considera-
tion of Legislative Assemblies. But, as we have recommended a departure from existing
legislative practice in Australia, we feel it to be our duty to consider briefly the means
f or giving effect to the policy which we have advocated.


35. At the outset, we venture to express the opinion that the machinery should
be Federal. Several reasons, taken cumulatively, enforce this conclusion upon us ; —■
(1) The burden of protecting the Sugar Industry is borne by the consumers
of the Commonwealth.
(2) The purposes which are served by the Sugar Industry, more especially
the settlement and defence of tropical or semi-tropical areas, are
national in a special sense, and give to the industry a unique national
significance.
(3) The Import Duty (the amount of which should be assessed from time to
time by authorities in organic relationship with the authorities which
control prices) is fixed by the Commonwealth Parliament, and could
in the nature of things be fixed by no other body.
(4) The price of raw sugar could not be fixed by any one State, since the
refineries are established in several States. The absurdity of invoking
legislation and accessory machinery in four States when the same
object can be achieved by Commonwealth action must be apparent.
(5) Assuming, and we see no other conclusion possible, that Commonwealth
authority should control the price of raw sugar, it follows by inevitable
sequence that the same authority should control the price of sugar-
cane. We do not wish to call in question for a moment the claims
of the States to self-government in matters of purely local concern ;
but we are quite unable to resist the conclusions that what is impera-
tively needed in the case of the Sugar Industry is a single controlling
ultimate authority, and that such authority must in the very nature
of things derive from the Commonwealth. If sugar-cane were pro-
duced only in Queensland, the conclusions just suggested would follow
with less force than they do. But sugar-cane is already produced
in New South Wales on the Northern Rivers; and, in time to come,
it may be produced in the Northern Territory.
36. We are aware that an amendment of the Constitution may be necessary.
But we believe that the passing of such an amendment should not be difficult, in view
of the national importance of the Sugar Industry, the burden imposed upon the
Australian consumers by the continuance of the sugar policy, and the various reasons
which we have urged for securing by Commonwealth authority a just distribution of
the profits which accrue in the Sugar Industry as a result of the protective policy.
37. Bat, assuming the Commonwealth Parliament to obtain, by delegation from
the States or by amendment of the Constitution, the necessary powers to give effect
to the policy which we advocate, there remains the further question of the means which
should be adopted by that Parliament in the exercise of its powers. So far as the price
of raw sugar is concerned, the question does not appear to us to create any difficulty.
The price of raw sugar should depend, as hitherto, upon the price of refined sugar.
There should be, as at present, a sliding scale. But, in our opinion, that sliding scale
should be fixed, not by the refiners, but by the Inter-State Commission. That
Commission, after making a more complete estimate of refining costs than it has been
possible for us to make, should fix a sliding scale of prices for raw sugar which will
allow a fair return to the refiner on a basis of costs of manufacture.
38. The exercise of public control in relation to the price of sugar-cane is a more
difficult question. Experience has shown the practicability of fixing a universal sliding
scale price for raw sugar. In the case of the cane, however, there appear to us to be
insuperable objections to any single scheme —
(1) As we have already indicated in Part I. there are Proprietary mills and
Central Mills. Some of the Proprietary mills are small concerns;
some are large ; some are owned by the Colonial Sugar Refining
Company. Of the Central Mills, some have been taken over by the
Queensland Government. These latter would be obviously outside
of our present scheme altogether. The relief of the growers supplying
these, concerns solely the Queensland Government. That Government,
it may be pointed out, is not in the position towards the growers of an
ordinary buyer, whose interests are, to a large extent, antagonistic


to the seller. Moreover, that Government must be assumed to have
supremely in view one object, viz., to make the whole concern a
success in the interests of the growers. If the growers are not
satisfied, their remedy must be sought in appeal to the State
authorities.
(2) Mills vary, not only as to ownership, but also as to the proportion borne
by the capacity of the mill to the supply of available cane. To fix
a universal price for cane would involve the closing down of many
mills. We are not convinced that this would be to the interest of
the growers. Half a loaf may be better than no bread, especially if,
as we believe would be the case, the assurance to growers of a fair
price under all the circumstances of the case would stimulate the
growing industry, and thus tend to secure a full supply for mills
now only partially supplied. Such a supply would enable the mill
to pay normal prices.
(3) Mills sometimes enjoy special privileges from their locality which would
enable them to pay a slightly higher price for their cane (e.q.,
Questions 1092-3).
(4) The supply of cane differs greatly in quality as well as quantity.
Occasionally, the cane is grown mainly with a view to fodder. But
even when grown mainly with a view to sugar contents, there are
large variations in different types of cane, in different localities,
and in different seasons. Even assuming these differences non-
existent, cane may be frosted, &c. To make allowance for all these
divergencies, without inflicting injustice in particular instances,
would be extremely difficult, if not impossible.
J. R. Paddle, General Manager, Central Mills.
25585. What, in your opinion, is a sufficient price for cane in each of the four sugar districts
respectively, to enable a cane-grower who works his farm with reasonable skill and industry, to get a fair
return for his labour and capital, assuming a farm of 50 acres of average fertility ? —lt is a difficult matter
to say what is a sufficient price for cane. If it were possible to bring all conditions into line, then 15s.
would be considered a sufficient price, exclusive of the rebate, but owing to conditions being very much
out of line, namely, varying rainfall and temperature, the growth of the cane being more rapid in the north,
and its quotient of purity higher (according to variety), the freedom from frost in the north, as compared
with the south, the shortage of cane —I mean mills working only from one-half to two-thirds of their full
capacity—all these things conspire to bring about this differentiation in the price of cane.
39. Under all the circumstances of the case, we conclude that the price for cane
should be fixed for each mill on the Wages Board System, that the owners of the mill
should elect a representative, that the growers (who are not owners of the mill) should
appoint another representative, and that the Chairman should be either a member of,
or be appointed by, the Inter-State Commission. The Board so constituted would fix
the price for cane on a basis that would allow to the miller fair manufacturing profits,
proper maintenance, and proper writing off for depreciation. The Board might adopt
the system of payment according to the sugar content straight out, or according to
the sugar content varying in conjunction with the price of refined sugar, or according
to the total average results of the mill straight out, or according to those results taken
in conjunction with the refined sugar, or according to any other scheme which commended
itself to the Board as likely to be just to all parties under all the circumstances of the
case. It would stipulate what reductions should be made for damaged cane. It might
also provide that in case of there being a surplus in the Australian output of raw sugar,
involving the necessity for export at a loss, and a diminution in the price received by
the mill for its raw sugar, there should be a revision of the award as regards future
supplies.
40. We have already anticipated some of the objections which may be urged
against such a scheme. We believe, however, that it would, work equitably in practice
as, on the whole, the Wages Board system has worked in practice. We indorse the opinion
of Dr. Gibson (9682) —
I am of opinion that most difficulties can be overcome when both parties to a dispute come
together and reason, and are prepared to exercise a liberal spirit of compromise.


There are, of course, difficulties in carrying out any scheme of reform. The
practical question is, what are the alternative remedies ? We have considered those
remedies, and give an unhesitating expression of opinion in favour of the scheme here
outlined. Meanwhile, we venture to point out some of the positive advantages of the
scheme —
(1) Prices would be fixed, not by one party to a bargain, but by an authority
representative of both parties. This would not only involve a more just
settlement of prices, but would give to the growers a sense of having-
had afair deal. Neither the growers nor the millers would always be
satisfied. To expect so much would be to expect too much of average
human nature. But both the millers (as to the price for raw sugar)
and the growers (as to the price of cane) would be relieved from the
necessity of submitting to the dictation of prices by the purchaser.
(2) A real community of interest would be established between millers and
growers. The grower would be interested both in the efficiency of
the mill and in maintaining supplies. The price of raw sugar being
fixed by the Inter-State Commission, the problem of securing the
maximum of profits possible would be a problem in which millers
and growers would have a common interest instead of being, to the
extent to which they so often are under existing conditions, antago-
nistic parties.
(3) A new stability would be given to the growing and milling interests.
If those interests did not receive a fair return on their capital, it would
no longer be possible to say, as at present, that the fact was due to
an unfair absorption of profits by one branch of the industry.
Growers and millers alike could approach the Commonwealth Govern-
ment for an increase of the Import Duty with an assurance which
it is impossible for them to give under the existing conditions.
(4) The new stability thus given to the industry, and the additional
encouragements given to the growers, would result in the further
promotion of those important national purposes to which we
have so frequently referred. The consumers of the Common-
wealth would know that the burden placed upon their shoulders
was not resulting in enriching monopolistic concerns, but in the
achievement of national ends.
41. Recommendations. —(1) We recommend that the Parliament of the
Commonwealth should endeavour to acquire, by an amendment of the Constitution
or otherwise, such powers as would enable Commonwealth authorities to control the
prices of raw sugar and sugar cane.
(2) We recommend, should such powers be acquired—
(«) that the price of raw sugar be fixed on a sliding scale by the Inter-State
Commission ;
(b) that the price of cane be fixed by a Board for each mill consisting
of a representative of the growers, a representative of the millers,
and a chairman to be appointed by the Inter-State Commission.


PART IV.—WAGE EARNERS.
1. Importance of the Worker. —ln the problem of how, by whom, and for
whose benefit, the Sugar Industry should be controlled, the labour interest is larger
than that of any other factor. According to Mr. C. E. Young, of Fairymead (see
Question 22260 et seq.) the cost of labour in the field represents per cent, of the
whole cost of production of the cane, and in the sugar mills 59 68 per cent, of the
cost of manufacture (excluding price paid for cane). Other evidence suggests 75 per
cent, and 50 per cent, respectively.
2. Suitability of White Labour. —As we have already stated in Part I.
there appears to be no reason to doubt that white labourers can satisfactorily perform
all the work of the sugar fields. In fact, according to the evidence obtained by the
Commission that view of the case is now almost universal. It is a view founded
upon accomplished facts.
3. A considerable amount of medical testimony was given ( e.g ., Dr. P. S.
Clarke, Question 1827 ; Dr W. VV. Hoare, Question 11545 ; Dr. A. Breinl, Question
6b'Bs) ; and it may safely be said that the opinion generally held by medical
witnesses is that the white man can lead a healthy life and rear a vigorous family in
tropical Australia, provided he adapts himself to his surroundings as regards diet and
clothing, and avoids alcoholic excesses, which, while injurious in any climate, are
particularly debilitating in the tropics, and a fruitful source of sickness amongst the
workers in the Sugar Industry.
4. In addition to the medical evidence a large amount of testimony was o’iven
by other witnesses to the effect that the adoption of white labour had had a beneficial
effect generally, and the virtual unanimity of opinion against any proposed return to
black labour conditions was remarkable. In this connection it is interesting to
observe that one witness (Mr. Robert Adams, of Mackay District, Question 10718)
stated as his experience that the lads reared in the district made the best farm hands.
5. Remuneration of Labour. —lf white labour is to continue to be obtainable
in anything like satisfactory quality, it must be more adequately rewarded than it has
hitherto been. In the past, and up to the sth August last, when the Minister of
Customs raised the minimum rate for field labour, wages in all branches of the
industry were undoubtedly too low. They are still too low in the sugar mills of both
Queensland and New South Wales. The minimum wage under the Mackay Wages
Board determination—which is commonly adopted in Queensland mills— is 30s. per
week and found. In the New South Wales Sugar Mills the minimum paid is 20s. per
week and found, and bonuses of 2s. 6d. and 5 per cent. This subject is dealt
with elsewdiere.
6. One of the chief among the convictions of the Australian people is the belief
that ill-paid labour is inconsistent with a sound system of national economy, and it
has become a national aspiration that the Australian people shall be healthy citizens
rearing healthy families, and that the industrial life of the community shall be so
regulated that the workers, who form the physical backbone of the nation, shall
be saved from having to Jive at a standard below that necessary to keep themselves
and their families in a state of mere bodily efficiency.
7. Ihe rate of wages makes the standard of living ; and Tour Commissioners
believe that it is now the accepted policy of Australia that there shall be, if possible,
in every industry, a minimum wage sufficient to enable such a standard of living
to be maintained as will meet the needs of Australian citizenship for the ordinary
comforts and decencies of civilized life.
8. Following upon that belief, we are further of opinion that consumers would
not willingly continue to pay the present heavy tax upon sugar—a tax upon every
meal at every table, and paid chiefly, as all taxes upon food staples are, by the
working classes—if they believed that the million a year so exacted went to the
support of aii industry in which the worker is paid less than a minimum wage of the
standard indicated.


9. Conditions of Northern Australia . —ln their general bearing, the foregoing
observations apply to every protected industry within the Commonwealth. But
there are very special reasons why such a standard wage should be paid in the Sugar
Industry, and why the consumer, out of whose pocket the profits come, should
insist upon an adequate reward to labour. The position of its tropical areas
presents appalling difficulties to Australia. Whether it will be possible to save them
from alien invasion at all is doubted by many authorities. All must agree that it is
desirable to save them, and that, in order to do thi<, they must be permanently
settled by a white population.
10. As we have previously said in our remarks as to the necessity of settling
th cse regions (Part I,), the solution of this tremendous problem, if solution be
possible, must be attempted in a spirit of far-sighted policy. It cannot in any of its
aspects be left to the dictation of Directors or Shareholders in search of dividends.
In the balance-sheet of the Nation, the issues are far beyond mere considerations
of £. s. d.
11 If these tropical regions are to be settled at all by white people, it can
only be accomplished under conditions which will induce a settled and married class
of workers, who, with their families, will form a permanent reservoir of labour for
the industry, and a class from which the independent growers may be recruited.
12. Moreover, Your Commissioners feel that they cannot too strongly
emphasise the fact that, as a populating medium, sugar growing has narrow limits.
Exportations of Australian-grown sugar at a profit being out of the question, the
industry is elastic only to the extent of the demand within the Commonwealth ; and
it must be supplemented by other industries if our fertile tropical areas are to be even
sparsely settled. The families of a permanently settled working class would, it is
believed, gradually supply the labour necessary for the production of coffee, cocoa-
nuts, fruits, rice, rubber, and the many other products for which Northern Australia
is so eminently suited. (See evidence of Mr. IT. O. Newport, Question 4735).
Some of these industries, if they are to be established, may require higher
protection through the tariff than they now receive. But they can never be estab-
lished at all unless the worker receives—in the form of a wage suited to his
necessities in the tropics —his due share of the taxes paid by the consumer to support
such industries.
13. In the opinion of Your Commissioners it is hopeless to expect this to
happen unless protective tariffs are supplemented by legislation for the protection of
labour. Experience has shown that without such legislation the workers cannot
effectively protect themselves against an inadequate return for their labour, except
by resorting to the ruinous method of the strike. Strong confirmation of this opinion
came before the Commission in connexion with the Colonial Sugar Defining Com-
pany’s mills in New South Wales. At these mills adult workers, such as engine-
drivers’ assistants and those engaged in the heavy work of stacking and trucking
sugar, were paid only 20s. a week and found, with a bonus of 2s. fid. a week to men
who remained to the end of the season. From Ist January, 1912, an additional bonus
of 5 per cent, was paid. (Questions 16394, 1(5594-5). In Queensland, where in most
districts the Colonial Sugar Refining Company has to compete for labour with
Central and other mills, working under a standard fixed by the Mackay Wages Board
and the Brisbane Strike Conference, the lowest wage for adults is 2 7s. 6d. a vyeek
and found, with a bonus of 2s 6d. per week to men who remain till the end of the
season. The disparity between the wages paid in Queensland, where there is com-
petition for mill labour, and in New South Wales, where the Company has no such
competitor, suggests an adherence in practice to the law of supply and demand in
labour. In this connection we may quote from the evidence of Mr. E. W. Knox:
Question 2707 1 .—Page 21 {vide Q. 26844, par. 69) of your statement, speaking of labour conditions
existing in July, 1911, prior to the strike, you say, “ there cannot be the least doubt they were fair,
because there was not any difficulty in securing men to run the mill. Ihe standard of fairness is supply
and demand, of course? Answer. Yes.
Question 27072.—A good old “ Liberal ” standard, but not generally accepted in Australia ?
Answer.—How do you mean 1
Question 27073. —There are a good many people to-day in Australia who think that a fair wage
cannot be defined simply in terms of supply and demand. Of course, what you say in this statement
amounts to the fact that it can be ? Answer. —1 could say something on that point, but it would not be
evidence.


Mr. Knox’s attitude is in evident conflict with modern economists of standing.
To quote the words of a recent writer :
“ We are passing from the era in which the subsistence of any class of our working population can
be left to the uncontrolled fluctuations of supply and demand and the higgling of the market. A saner
regard for social order and progress enforces the need for regulating competition in the labour market by
laying down a level beneath which no wage bargain will be legally permissible.”
Jt. It would appear, however, that the Colonial Sugar lie fining Company,
which practically dominates the Australian Sugar Industry, is not satisfied to stand
alone in the endeavour to enforce the law of supply and demand in labour. It has
endeavoured to persuade the growers to combine with it to the same end, or at least
to secure their “ vote and influence” against any statutory regulation of wages. In
a circular (tendered by Mr. J. A. Ware in evidence, Question 10118) which the
Company sent to growers, relative to the price of sugar cane for the years 1911,
1912, and 1913, and which was published in the Australian Sugar' Journal of 4th
November, 1909, page 287, the following passage appears: —
“ We propose to pay to the suppliers the whole of the advantage to be derived from the reduction
of the Excise duties so long as the margin of profit now obtainable by us is not reduced by enforced
changes in our pay-sheets. Any advance in wages arising from natural causes we will bear, but the loss
that may ensue through attempts to interfere with the operations of the laws of nature must be chargeable
against the increased price that results from the changes in the Excise duty, because the margin of profit
now left to us will not stand any reduction.”
15 In this circular the Colonial Sugar Refining Company not only announces
that it adheres to the theory of supply and demand in the labour market. The
Company also uses, in a veiled though obvious way, pecuniary inducement to secure
the adhesion of the growers to the same policy.
16. The Sugar Workers. —As regards the workers employed for the season
only, who constitute a large proportion of the total number of men employed, the
work is subject to a number of disadvantages as compared with continuous
employment. Amongst these may be mentioned :
(1) The cost of getting to the place of employment and home again when
the work has ceased, which in the case of many men who do
not permanently reside in the district may be taken to amount
to from £3 to £4 per man on an average. Though this is some-
times paid by the grower (see Question 3789), it is more usually
paid by the wage earner.
(2) The loss of time thus occupied in going to, returning from, and
waiting for the work.
(3) As to a man employed only part of the year, the true value of his
wages must be ascertained by deducting time lost in securing
other work.
(1) The almost universal practice in the Sugar Industry, both in the field
and in the mill, is to pay the wages of the workers engaged by
the week once a month. As the United States Industrial
Commission put it, “ deferred payment means an advance by
the men to the employer.” The practice, in the opinion of
Your Commissioners, should be discontinued. No adequate
reason was given why the workers, apart from such advances
as he might receive through the good will of the employer,
should give the employers a month’s credit for weekly wages.
17. Labour in the Sugar Industry generally and Wages paid therein. —
Labour in the Sugar Industry falls into three broad divisions:—
(1) The field—in which it divides itself into two principal classes, viz.:—
{a) The cane cutter,
(5) The general hand.
(2) 4he Raw Sugar Mill.
(3) The Refinery.


18. In each of these divisions and subdivisions, except the cane cutters, the
wages paid at the time the Commission took evidence were below, and, in the case of
the Colonial Sugar Refining Company’s JMew South Wales Mills, distressingly below,
the standard of a reasonable living wage. The Commission took evidence showing
the wages paid in every grade of employment in field, mill, and refinery, and the
information thus gained will, it is hoped, be of future value. We here confine ourselves
chiefly to the fundamental question of the living wage —meaning by that a wage
of the character previously indicated in this Report.
19. As to what the living wage should be in the sugar-growing districts, we
may point out that GO per cent, of the growers who were examined on the question,
33 per cent, of those interested as directors, managers, and owners of mills, and 98
per cent, of those who gave evidence on behalf of the workers, agreed that it should
be Bs., at least , for an eight-hours day. With this estimate the Commission agrees.
20. The Cane Cutter. --The only workers who have been paid a living wage
hitherto have been the cane cutters. Cane cutting is generally let by contract to
gangs. The work is extremely arduous, and, speaking generally, only men in the
prime of life are fit for it. The earnings of cane cutters vary greatly, running up to
as high as 245. per day, but the average earnings of an expert cane-cutting gang may
be put down at from 12s. to 14s. a day per man. Out of this, the gang, as a rule, find
their own food and tent accommodation, and employ a cook. Many of the workers
object to the system of cane cutting by contract, practically for the reasons stated in
the Report of the United States Industrial Commission, in the following words:—
“ Piece-work, operating upon the industrial greed of each workman, with a goal set before him
each day, is unquestionably adapted to draw out his entire energies, leads to over exertion, exhausts body
and mind, and shortens the trade life of the worker. He mints his vitality into coin.”
21. Further objection was made to the system on the ground that cane farmers
put their cane-cutting work up for tender to the cheapest bidders, and that the result
was undesirable competition among the workers themselves. On the whole, however,
the balance of opinion was in favour of an open field, as far as cane cutting is
concerned ; and we are reluctant to suggest an interference with the only branch of the
industry in which workers have been hitherto able to earn a living wage. One matter,
however, appears to call for special mention. Much dissatisfaction existed in some
districts regarding what is known as “ detention ” money. In these districts, the practice
obtained of deferring payment of a percentage of the amount due on cane-cutting
contracts until the completion of the contract. In some cases where, under such a
contract, a forfeiture occurred through a cane cutter leaving his job, the forfeited money
was distributed amongst the men who remained in and fulfilled the obligations under the
contract. In others, it was taken by the employer himself. While it was generally
conceded that the retention of a small amount to insure the due fulfilment of a
contract was just and fair, the complaint was that the power thus given was sometimes
used harshly and to the injury of the worker.
22. The General Field Hand, —The ruling minimum wage for field hands at
the time the Commission took evidence in Queensland and Jsew South Wales may be
put down at 225. 6d. per week in the offseason, and 255. in the busy season, for a
ten hours’ day, with board and lodging These were at that time the minimum rates
stipulated for by the Minister under the Sugar Bounty Act. The wage was
inadequate and much below that now generally paid for similar work in other
industries in the other States. In the fruit industry at Mildura (Victoria) and
Renmark (South. Australia), for instance, “ dipper men, barrow men, carriers out
from dip and gangers” are paid Is. per hour. females cutting or pitting
stone-fruit receive 9d. peV hour, and other employees in connection with harvesting
operations, whether male or female, if over 18 years of age, receive Is. per hour.
23. Since the Commission sat in Queensland and New South Wales, the
Minister for Customs lias declared a minimum wage for field labourers of Bs. for a
day of eight hours. This is the first time in the history of the Sugar Industry in
which it has been authoritatively proposed to pay workers, other than cane-cutters,
a living wage.


24. In connection with field labour; we desire to bring under the notice of the
authorities the fact that the stipulation made by the Minister for Customs as one of
the conditions for payment of Bounty that no deduction should be made from the
wages for wet days, while adhered to by many of the small growers, is openly
disregarded on some plantations. For example, Mr. W. A. Thorne, manager of
Fairymead Plantation (Questions 23516-23534), admitted that a man’s wages would be
stopped on account of wet weather. Again, at Question 25088, Mr. James Clark,
of Ashgrove, states that they are aware there is a regulation regarding wet weather,
but they have not been guided by it. The situation thus created is unfair to those
who loyally obey the rule intended for all. In the cases just referred to there were
breaches of specific conditions laid down by the Customs Department. Evidence was
also tendered that on the Fairymead Plantation the men were unfairly treated by
being compelled to pay fees to a hiring agency which should have been paid bv the
employer. (Questions 23725-23791, 24292-24303.)
25. Wages and Conditions in the Raw Sugar Mills. —Prior to the strike which
took place amongst the men employed in the industry in Queensland in June, 1911,
the minimum wage ranged from 225. 6d. to 30s. for a week of 58 hours’ work. A
compromise was effected, and the uniform minimum wage was raised to 30s. and
keep for a week of 48 hours ; but complaint was made in evidence that though all
other mills paid the increased rate, the Colonial Sugar Refining Company paid only
275. 6d., with a bonus of 2s. 6d. additional, payable only if a man remained to the
end of the season. In justice to the Company, we should add that the accommodation
provided in its mills compared more than favourably with that provided in other
mills. But we do not think that this constitutes a justification for a departure from
the standard fixed, especially having in view the fact that that standard was below
the standard of the living wage as interpreted in other States.
2A Complaint was also made in evidence that, when the strike was over, the
Colon! 1 Sugar Refining Company failed for some time to pay considerable sums of
money to some of its employees who returned to work, although the agreement for
settlement (an agreement made by the Australian Sugar Producers’ Association, to
whose funds the Company contributes) contained a clause that no vindictive spirit
should be shown towards the men at the conclusion of the strike.
27. The General Manager of the Colonial Sugar Refining Company Limited,
in giving evidence in Sydney, stated—
When the men struck work at Hambledou Mill, the Company retained all the wages then in
hand, but after the trouble was over paid the wages withheld to all the men whose whereabouts were
known, with the exception of ten. The latter had been found guilty by the Local Court of breaking the
agreements made between them and the Company under the Masters aud Servants Act, and were fined
and ordered to pay costs. The penalties, however, were not paid, and consequently these men were not
entitled to receive anything out of the wages retained, for these only amounted to £ll 4s. 3d., whilst the
fines aud costs amounted to £36 Is., out of which the Company is entitled to receive £24 11s. I should
add that we offered to pay into Court the wages belonging to the men who were fined, but were told by
the Clerk of Petty Sessions that the authorities could not take this money and that the Company should
retain it.
in addition to (he sum of £] 1 4s. 3d. held by the Company, there is an amount due to seven of
the men whose whereabouts we could not ascertain which will be paid over when their addresses are
known.
28. Tliis is the explanation offered by the General Manager in October,
191 , and it may be assumed to represent the present attitude of the Company ; but
it contrasts strikingly with evidence given by the Colonial Sugar Refining Company’s
local manager at Hambledou Mill on the 14th November, 1911, three months after
the date (14th August, 1911) from which the Agreement for the settlement of the
strike took effect.
13. R. Riley, Manager, Hambledou Mill.
3340, “ I tender a statement of the money withheld at Hambledon Mill from men who broke their
agreement:
(а) From ihose who did not return to work—36 men, £9l 4s.
(б) From those who did return to work--5 men, £24 7s. 6d.”
That men who did return to work applied for their money and got no
satisfaction is shown by the evidence of H. G. Wood, labourer, Hambledon (who
states that about £5 10s. to £6 was due to him.)
2560. Did you go back after the strike ? —Yes,
2561. Did they keep that money ?—I have not got it yet.


2562. Did you ask for it ?—Once or twice.
2563. What was the answer ?—One said I might get it at the end of the season, and the other
said he knew nothing about it.
2564. Who said he know nothing about it ?—Mr. Plummer.
2565. Who said you might get it at the end of the season? —Mr. Hall, the chief engineer,
2566. Did you believe that when the strike was settled amicable arrangements were to be resumed?
—Yes.
Also Arthur Wyer, labourer, Hambledon.
2567. You were one of those who went on strike. Would you have gone back if there had been
a job ?—Yes.
2568. You were willing to go back ?—Yes, they reckoned the position was filled, and they kept
the money that was due to me,
2569. How much did they keep ?—About £6.
29. Overtime.— The custom in the Sugar Industry where men are kept is that
pay for overtime is calculated only on the money part of the wage. But the hoare
and lodging of a man are as much part of his wages as the cash he receives. ie
cost thereof can be ascertained without difficulty, and we are of opinion that overtime
should be calculated upon a sum equal to the total emolument consisting of hot i
wages and keep —which he receives.
80. Wages and Conditions in the Refineries.— The only refiners of sugar in
Australia are the Colonial Sugar Refining Company and the Millaquin Sugar Company.
The former have refineries at Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide, and the
latter at Bundaberg, Queensland. The conditions of employment in each are about
the same. The minimum wage paid to adults by the Colonial Sugar Refining
Company is 7s. for work outside the refinery and 7s. sd. for work inside the refinery
per day of eight hours. These rates are not less than the minimum rates paid in the raw
sugar mills, with the added advantages of a bonus and that employment is continuous
throughout the year. The men are also entitled to the benefits afforded by a well
organized Provident Fund and Benefit Society, to which the Company subscribes £1
for each £1 paid by the employees. (Q. 27286, 27291.) The conditions under which
some of the men have to work appeared to us to be very trying. r I Ins is particularly
so in what is technically known as the “ wash-house, where the men work in a veiy
humid atmosphere wearing nothing but a loin cloth. We were told in evidence that
these conditions are unavoidable and are the same in all refineries in other parts of
the w 7 orld. Your Commissioners are firmly of opinion that the minimum wage
for adults in the refineries should be at least Bs. per eight-hour day.
31. Improvement of Conditions Essential. —A general view of the labour
conditions in the sugar districts leads to the conclusion that existing conditions of
emplovment are not such as to encourage sufficiently the permanent settlement of a
reliable class of workers. Assuming the permanent settlement of such a class to be
one of the objects for which the consumer pays the heavy tax on sugar, that object
is not being accomplished at a rate of progress commensurate with the expenditure.
32. The first and absolutely essential thing necessary to procure better results
is the establishment of a living wage of the standard previously described. Ihe
tropical and semi-tropical regions of Australia can never be settled on tvages
sufficient only for the needs of nomads who are satisfied with bachelor conditions ot
life. The case w r as put in a nutshell by Mr. Edward Cooper, a cane farmer at
Nerang :
“ 17869. Have you any suggestion to make which would help to encourage permanent settlement
in the district of a class which would form a reservoir of labour for the industry ?-More money for the
men is the only suggestion I can make. Our present conditions are not very lavorable to induce
men to come in.”
33. Machinery.— ln a previous part of this Report, have recommended the
abolition of the Bounty System. As we there pointed out, the system, thong i a
means of excluding coloured labour from the fields, is open to various objections and
should be superseded by direct legislative action.


34. As regards the question of industrial conditions in the Sugar Industry
generally, viewed in relation to means of betterment, several alternatives surest
themselves—
(l) We understand that it is being proposed to ask the Australian
people to sanction an amendment of the Constitution empowering
the Federal Parliament to control industrial conditions throughout
the Commonwealth. Presuming such an amendment to be
adopted, we see no reason why the Federal authorities should
not deal with the labour problem in the Sugar Industry as in
other industries.
(2) So far, however, as the Sugar Industry is concerned, in view of
the urgent need for improving the labour conditions, and having
regard to our recommendation of an increase in the protective
duty on sugar, we feel entitled to assume that the Governments
of Queensland and New South Wales will be prepared to act in
co-operation with the Federal Government for the purpose of
giving effect in substance to the recommendations which we have
made after a careful examination of existing conditions.
(3) Apart any amendment of the Constitution, and apart from
co-operation of the Governments of the Commonwealth and the
sugar producing States, the sugar wmrkers in the two States
concerned are able, under the Commonwealth Conciliation and
Arbitration Acts, to bring the subject of labour conditions in
the Sugar Industry under the Commonwealth Arbitration Court.
Should such a course be taken, we venture to anticipate that the
Court would find in the evidence we have taken, and in the
conclusions we affirm in this Report, useful data for the purpose
of effecting a long-deserved justice to workers in the Sugar
Industrv.
J
35, hethei or not the Commonwealth Parliament attains enlarged powers
in respect to industrial conditions, there are directions in wffiich the sugar-growing
States, and particularly Queensland —concerning which the settlement question is
uigent might move to make labour conditions better. Amongst these w r e mention
the follow ing :
(1) A more liberal policy as regards working men’s blocks in the sugar-
growing districts, and the opening of more land to wmrking men
applicants under the block system. If no Government land is
available, other land might be repurchased for the purpose, as in
South Australia.
(2) Cheaper railway facilities.
(3) Stiicter control of the liquor traffic. There was an overwhelming
weight of evidence to the effect that indulgence in alcoholic
liquors is a great hindrance to successfully carrying on operations,
and is a most serious cause of illness and degeneration among the
wmrkeis in the industry. The following striking evidence may be
quoted, and could be amplified indefinitely
J. Ar.Lisox, Farmer, G-in Gin, representing 80 other Cane-Growers.
nn™ r!!i i deal tbe illferiori G of labour is due to the use of intoxicating liquors, and we
from 8 n° m l greß i could be Bflected by closing ali publichouses in sugar districts
SAKm 7 F, r™ e ,ollowi "« Mo " d »y. »«•! strictly enforcing Sunday closing,
which is allowed to be a dead letter in many country districts. J B
N. A. Joubert, Farmer, Chinderah, N.S.W.
flm nnhl- 7 °i 21 ’ TheS ? mBn T ° U . f ? r a few P ounds ’ and 7 0u do not see them for a week. They *o off to
the P" bl ' c -l>ouse and come back with a bottle of grog, and are no good for a day or two. °
E- C. J. Marks, Farmer, Tumbulgum, N.S.W.
17418. the majority of the men are very inferior and intemperate.
I*7ool r • Manager, Condong Mill.
7321. Is the chief trouble the propensity of the men for the liquor habit ?—Undoubtedly.


H. T. Easterby, General Manager, Maffra Factory.
13806. We have a number of men who may go off to the hotel and not come hack for two or throe
days. We have a good deal of that sort of thing. I think it is worse even than in the north of
Australia.
T. Hodgett, Chairman of Directors, Cattle Creek Mill, Mackay.
11620. Great difficulty has been experienced in getting reliable sober men.
W. W. Hoare, M.D., Medical Practitioner, Mackay.
11545. I regret to say that, as a class, sugar workers are not by any means exempt from alcoholic
excess, and they indulge in occasional outbreaks of intemperance, though probably not more so than those
engaged in other industries elsewhere, and with an excuse that thirst arises very quickly when working
hard under thermal conditions. However, it is certain that a large amount of the invalidity evident m
cane workers, after a few seasons, is due to alcoholism, more than to climate or work.
T. J. Whitcomb, Chairman of Directors, Racecourse Sugar Company, Mackay.
11240. Great difficulty has been experienced in getting reliable, sober men. The wage sheets
show a very large number of men passing through the mill We have had to pay fines to get men
out of the lock-up, to enable us to carry on the work. The principal fault is insobiiety.
(4) Amendment of the Queensland Shearers' and Sugar Workers'
Accommodation Act , to provide better housing, and the extension
of the Act to cases where less than nine men are employed. It
would appear that in such cases the requirements of the Act do
not apply. The minimum number appears to your Commission
to be too high, and a material reduction might well receive careful
consideration. Complaints were also made as to a general laxity
in the administration of the Act.
36. Recreation. —Upon the part of the large employers, an effort should be
made to provide reasonable recreation, in connection with the barrack system. This
is done in Hawaii to the extent of providing hospitals, swimming baths, tennis courts,
baseball grounds, dancing, and social halls, libraries, and even billiard tables and
pianos. It is also worthy of remark that great attention is there paid to labourers
houses, the custom on the islands being to give about a quarter of an acre ot land to
each dwelling. (See Mr. J, C. Penny’s Report, Appendix 3).
37. One of the drawbacks of rural life generally is its social stagnation, and if
this could be overcome, workers would be more satisfied to go into and remain in the
country. Fur the most part, the communities are too small to afford the necessary out-
lay to provide rational amusement for the workers, and it is worthy of consideration
whether something should not be undertaken by the (Government or the municipalities.
The suggestion is that some contribution might be made towards the establishment
of comfortable recreation rooms in all centres where a considerable number of men
are working, such rooms to consist of a writing-room, card-room, and billiard-ioom.
A club of this kind could be established at a cost of, say, £2OO, or £30.) (including
the cost of the billiard table), and should readily pay working expenses. The men
might pay a small sum for the privilege of membership, and so much per game
on the billiard table ; and there might also be provided for them, at reasonable cost,
tea, coffee, and light drinks and refreshments, there is little doubt that one ol
the main reasons why men go to the public-house is that they require recreation and
company; and they will continue to go there until adequate counter attractions aie
offered to them. Whatever either the millers or the growers can do to make the
quarters comfortable and even cheerful, and to provide facilities for social intercourse,
must react in the direction of a more attractive and efficient service. In this connec-
tion, we may refer to the evidence of Mr. John Drysdale, ot Pioneer Mill, Avi :
7963. With regard to the drink evil, and your attempt to combat it ; you built a model boarding-
house, did you not ?—Yes, a boarding-house in Brandon. It does fairly well, I think.
7964. Have you done anything at the Pioneer Mill to improve the social surroundings of the men
there ?—I built a reading-room and a music-room, and the men use them a good deal.
7965. Did you find it did some good ?—Yes.
7966. Did it improve the general tone of the men? —Yes, decidedly. It is very much liked by
many of them. .
7967. You found on the whole that it was satisfactory ?—Yes, I am glad 1 built it,
7968. Do the men contribute anything to the maintenance of the reading-room and music-room . -
I think they do. They have a small subscription, I think. I handed it over to them to do what they
thought best with it, to manage it, and everything else. I thought they had better manage it themselves.
I believe they have a number of newspapers and magazines.
7969. Do you contribute any cash to it ?—I did at first. They want so little now ; only a few
n ewspapers.


38* Savings Banks.- Some of the mills have a Savings Bank system, and this
is a facility that deserves the highest commendation. It would be a fortunate thino*
for the men if it could be extended to every mill.
39, To one important aspect of the labour question we have so far not referred
directly. We allude to the desirability of maintaining a high standard of efficiency.
While we believe that in Australia, as elsewhere, employers will find that it pays to
treat workmen well, the question remains whether in addition to such indirect means
as we have already suggested—a living wage, provision for recreation, savings
banks, &c.—something more might not be done to give to the worker a direct
interest in making the business with which he is associated profitable, in this con-
nection we may cite the evidence of Mr. C. E. Young, of Fairymead
. , + . 22163 ‘ Hav f y° u an J suggestion to make which in your opinion would tend to the promotion of
industrial peace and corresponding security both for employer and employee ?—Profit-sharing. This is a
scheme of my own, which I have not been able to bring about because my brother, who is a partner in the
place, is away m England; but he is returning shortly, and this scheme is to go before him when he
returns. My scheme is this : All workers shall be considered as having an interest to the extent of the
pay received by them for the year, and on this interest they should be entitled to a percentage equal to
tie amount the profits exceed o per cent. For example :If a man earned £lOO in the year, and the
plantation made a profit of 10 per cent, on the capital in the company, the employee would be entitled to
draw o per cent, on the amount of interest that was reckoned as his ; hence he would receive £5 If he
earned £l5O, and the profits were 11 per cent., he would draw £9 as his share of the profits.
22164. Is not that very much the same scheme as Messrs. Lever Brothers, the great soap
manufacturers have?—Yes ; but there is this difference, that they have a fixed population, and it is
always easier to do anything with a fixed population than with a floating population. We have to deal
with people who come and go ; but I think my scheme is elastic enough to apply to every man on our
40. As a substitute for a living wage policy, we cannot recommend profit-
sharing. But we see no reason why a provision for profit-sharing in the Sugar
Industry should not be superimposed upon the policy of a living wage. We
believe that if it pays an employer to employ men at the minimum "wage fixed by
law oi by administrative machinery, it will also prove a paying proposition, even at
the price of sharing profits, to give the worker a direct interest in maintaining a high
standard of industrial efficiency. Australia is rapidly solving the problem of the
living wage, but the solution of that problem to be "enduring should be
accompanied by means for maintaining such a reasonably efficient output as may be
anticipated with confidence if a direct community of interest be established between
employei and employee. We advocate no law or legal machinery for this purpose.
It is a purpose which should be effected by enlightened and voluntary co-operation
among the parties concerned.
41. Recommendations, —We recommend—
(l) That the minimum wage for adult workers in the Sugar Industry
should be not less than Bs. per day of eight hours.
(2) That remuneration for overtime should be fixed on a basis which takes
into. due consideration the fact that a worker’s keep is really part
of his wage.
(3) 1 hat the matters to which attention has been directed in paragraphs
35 and 37, being matters in which the amelioration of industrial
conditions is necessarily in the hands of the States, be referred
to the Governments concerned. We allude to the working men’s
blocks, the cheaper railway facilities, the control of the drink
traffic, the accommodation of the workers, and the increase of
facilities for recreation.


PART V.—ALLIED INDUSTRIES.
1. Large quantities of sugar are used in Australia as raw material in the
manufacture of jams, jellies, preserves, canned fruit, confectionery, condensed milk,
beer, and mineral waters. The precise amount so employed is variously estimated ;
but it may be assumed to be not less than 50,000 tons annually. One witness, Mr.
W. Peacock, jam maker, of Melbourne, estimates it somewhat higher—
-14879. What do you consider approximately the amount of sugar used in the jam and allied
industries?—For some time we have been reckoning it between 60,000 and 70,000 tons.
2. With regard to all such industries, a primd facie case can be made out
either for remission of the import duty in the case of imported sugar, or for the
remission of the excise in the case of sugar produced locally, on the ground that each
Australian industry should be enabled to obtain its raw material as cheaply as
possible and free from artificial restrictions.
3. While the principle which is implied on the ground just stated will be
generally recognised, there are certain objections to giving effect to it in the way
suggested.
(1) The Commonwealth Legislature, in its protection of industries to-day,
is not free from practical difficulties which arise out of the fact of
an already established scheme of protection. The Sugar Industry
has been developed under that scheme until its sugar lands, its
mills and its refineries, are capable of an output which, in normal
years, approximates to the local demand, even including within
that demand, the sugar which is required for the purposes
of manufacture in allied industries. One witness before the
Commission, when urging the claim for a rebate on the sugar
required for manufacturing purposes, referred to the practice of
Victoria in pre-federation times of granting a rebate of £3 per ton
of the import duty on all sugar used in jam making. But at the
time mentioned, Victoria had no sugar industry of which the
claims were likely to be threatened by the concession in question.
The Commonwealth to-day is in a different position. Already the
Australian Sugar Industry has attained such a magnitude, that in
normal years, if it cannot rely on the market which is offered for
its product by the allied industries there would be a surplus of
Australian produced sugar which could only be exported at a
heavy loss. Hence the practical dilemma suggests itself :—lf the
allied industries are allowed to get a rebate on their imported
sugar, irrespective of whether the commodity manufactured is for
export or not, a heavy loss is likely to be sustained in ordinary
years, by some portion of the existing and established sugar
industry. If, on the other hand, the manufacturers be allowed a
rebate on Australian produced sugar of an amount equal to the
Excise duty, a heavy charge is imposed on the Commonwealth
Treasury.
(2) So far as concerns any export trade in jams, jellies, condensed milk,
confectionery, and canned or preserved fruits, the several industries
are practically unaffected by the import duty on sugar since they
are entitled under existing regulations to obtain a Drawback of the
duty paid on the sugar, when the commodity is exported (Customs
Regulations, 1909, and Regulations under Excise Act 1901).
(3) Each of the allied industries already enjoys a protective duty, as
. regards their respective commodities, which, so far as we have been
able to ascertain, must be regarded as adequate for the purpose of
giving those industries a fair and reasonable chance of competing
with the imported article on the local market, even when allowance
is made for the present enhanced prices of sugar due to the
imposition of Customs duty.
(4) The allied industries have been specially favoured by the Colonial
Sugar Refining Company as to prices of sugar for manufacturing
purposes,
E. 13881.- E


4. In brief, then, the position is that, so far as we can learn, the allied industries
are amply protected already on the local market; that, generally speaking, they
already obtain a rebate of import duty on sugar where they manufacture for export;
and that any disturbance of the existing arrangements in the direction asked for
would involve either a drain upon the Commonwealth Treasury or a heavy
financial loss on the Australian Sugar Industry in normal years so far as part of its
output is concerned. These reasons appear to us to raise a presumption against the
proposal to allow “ free sugar” for the manufacturers engaged in the Allied
Industries. After taking a great deal of evidence in several of the States, we were
compelled to conclude that this presumption was not rebutted by the evidence
submitted to us with the possible exception of the jam industry. That industry is in
some respects peculiar. We publish in Appendix 9 to the evidence, a statement
prepared by Mr. Wm. Peacock, of Victoria, in which the case of the jam makers is
expressed at length. We here state our own conclusions with respect to the claims
asserted on behalf of this industry to “ free sugar.”
5. At the outset we may point out that the claim is advanced less on behalf
of the jam manufacturers themselves than of the fruit growers. Such evidence as
has been submitted to us, goes to show that, on the whole, the jam manufacturer gets
an adequate return on his capital outlay. Cases of inefficient return or of absolute
failure, have been alleged; but there is every reason to believe that jam manufacture,
if conducted with efficiency, is a reasonably profitable enterprise. So much the
manufacturers themselves generally concede; but they contend, and in this they are
supported by the growers of jam fruits, that the price paid for those fruits involves
an inadequate return to the grower. If, it is alleged, the jam manufacturer could
purchase his sugar duty-free, he would be able to make a reasonable profit for
himself, while paying a much higher price for those jam fruits upon the market value
of which the fruit grower is often dependent for his livelihood. It is not denied that
the import duty on jams is sufficiently high to admit of the jam manufacturers
achieving the same result by raising the price of jam; but it is contended that this
method of remedying the grievance of the fruit growers would prove ineffectual,
since any marked increase in the price of jam would materially lessen the demand for
that article on the Australian market.
6. We think it important to point out, however, that the real or alleged
grievances of the growers of jam fruits have very often no necessary connexion with
the maintenance of an import duty on sugar.
(1) According to the evidence of some of the leading jam manufacturers,
they have been prejudicially affected in their purchases of sugtir,
owing to a monopolistic control of the Australian sugar market by
the Colonial Sugar Refining Company. It is also alleged that the
present import duty of £lO a ton on beet sugar, by restricting the
sources of supply, has worked prejudicially to the jam making,
and inferentially, to the fruit growing industry. (Question 14621.)
2) The jam fruit grower is largely concerned in perishable commodities.
He is therefore far more at the mercy of the manufacturers than,
to take a striking contrast, the wheat farmer. Not infrequently,
he must accept the price of the manufacturer nearest at hand, if
he has a choice between several manufacturers, the choice may be
nominal on account of express or tacit agreement, or “ honourable
understanding,” among the manufacturers as to prices. He has, in
other words, to put on the market a commodity which is peculiarly
susceptible to monopolistic manipulation on the part of local
manufacturers. While the evidence goes to show that jam manu-
facturers in one State often buy a portion of their fruits in another
State, it must be obvious that the fact cannot operate in practice
to deprive a local manufacturer of peculiar advantages which he
can employ as a means of exploitation if he chooses to do so. It
is a significant fact that an important witness before this Com-
mission, who is at once a maker of jam and a large fruit grower,
was quite content with the existing order of things. (See evidence
of Mr. McEwin, of South Australia, Question 13309 et seq,)


(3) The fruit grower is sometimes a leaseholder whose root trouble may
be excessive rental; or if he is a land owner, he has, perhaps, paid
too much for his land. Or, again, the laud may be in a com-
paratively unsuitable location.
(4) The fruit grower suffers, like other producers, from the normal risks
of competitive industry. If, for example, there is no effective
co-operation among growers, with a view to the regulation of out-
put, the mere fact that a particular form of fruit has been profitable
in a particular season, is very likely to result in a surplus being
produced for local markets in the season or seasons following, with
the result that the jam-maker sooner or later has more fruit of a
particular type than he knows what to do with. Naturally he
lowers the price. The remedy for this evil is, of course, not
cheaper sugar, but co-operative and intelligent foresight on the
part of the growers with a view to some sort of regulation of the
output. The time has come for the producer to look well ahead;
and to do this effectively, he must act in co-operation with other
producers of the same commodity. The regulation or organisation
of the output need not necessarily be on the drastic lines adopted
in some European countries where producers who produce in
excess of a certain quantity are subject to special penalties.
Much might be done by periodic statements of the area which the
individual grower intended to have under cultivation for each
fruit. If such statements were tabulated by growers, and sum-
maries of the results were distributed, along with estimates,
official or other, of probable requirements, the evils of overpro-
duction would be to some extent guarded against.
7. The reasons just mentioned, taken together, may not constitute a valid
argument against duty-free sugar ; but they serve to illustrate some of the more
obvious of the difficulties in the way of this Commission, concerned as it specially is
with the Sugar Industry, in making any recommendation with regard to granting to
jam makers the sugar rebate for which they ask. Even if such a rebate were
granted, it would not necessarily follow that the fruit growers would receive
anything more than a transient advantage. It is true that the jam makers have
promised to pass on a substantial part of any gain resulting from cheaper sugar to
the fruit growers. We do not question the good faith of this promise ; but it
certainly cannot be regarded in the light of an effective and enduring guarantee ;
and even it it could, other questions would press for settlement—questions more
appropriate for the Commission now sitting on the Fruit Industry generally. One
important witness, when asked why he did not get over existing difficulties by raising
the price of jam, answered that competition among the manufacturers of jam
prevented such a suggestion from being carried into effect. It is not apparent to us
how, supposing the answer just stated to be accurate, competition among the jam
manufacturers would not, sooner or later, result in depressing the price paid to fruit
growers to the present level.
8. Apart from the difficulties just mentioned, if a discrimination is made
among the allied industries as regards duty-free sugar in favour of the Jam Industry,
the discrimination would invite agitation towards the same goal among other
industries. Indeed, the difficulty begins in the Jam Industry itself In this connection,
we may draw attention to the evidence of Mr. W. Peacock—
-14440. Supposing die manufacturer got cheaper sugar by a reduction of the import duly with respect
to making jam, how would you extend the same benefit to the domestic jam maker ?—That is the difficult
point. You can allow, jam to be manufactured in bond ; the jam manufacturers would save all the duty
on the sugar, and that would be very nice from the jam manufacturers* standpoint, but the domestic jam
maker is now being knocked out, because the domestic article cannot compete with the jam manu-
facturers.
9. If the evidence submitted to us had gone to show that, whatever else may be
necessary in the interests of the jam fruit growers, duty-free sugar is necessary, we
might feel at liberty to make a specific recommendation to that effect. But we feel
bound to state that we are of opinion that no such absolute necessity as that suggested
exists. We have it definitely in evidence that, even for the local market, with respect
E 2


to which alone the import duty on sugar is operative, the fruit grower, who is also a
jam maker, can secure a satisfactory return on his capital outlay. The circumstance
seems to indicate that other causes than the alleged cause of dear sugar must be
responsible for such real grievances as the growers may have. In this connection we
beg to draw attention to the following extract from the evidence of Mr. McEwin,
fruit grower and jam manufacturer, of South Australia :
13310. Do you grow fruit as well as make jam ?—I grow large quantities of fruit, I have 100
acres or more of an orchard. lam the largest jam manufacturer in South Australia.
13340. As a jam maker, are you satisfied with the condition of things in the industry ? —Yes ; we
are making 7 per cent., and that is a fair business profit all the world over. I have no serious complaint
if I can make 7 per cent.
13359. Can you tell me the average prices you have paid for your fruit for the last five or six
years?—The average for the past six years has been:—Raspberries, 2|d. a lb. ; black currants,
2^d.; gooseberries, 3s. a bushel of 54 lb.; blackberries, l|d. per lb. (they grow wild in the ranges);
plums, 2s. 6d. a bushel ; and mulberries, l|d. The prices for apricots were: —For 1912, Bs. per cwt.;
1911, 9s. ; 1910, Hs. Id. to 10s. ; 1909, 10s.; 1908, 9s. 3d. to Bs. ; 1907, 10s, to Bs. Oranges for Marma-
lade were : —1907, 7s. 6d. per cwt.; 1908, 10s. ; 1909, Bs. 6d. ; 1910, Bs. 6d.; and 1911, Bs.
13361. Do you think a fruit grower can make a fair living at the prices you have quoted ?—Yes;
and I speak as one having an orchard of 100 acres and more than 40 years’ experience.
13364. Under present conditions and efficient management, the industries of fruit growing and
jam making are in a fairly sound condition ?—Yes.
10. If, however, it could he shown that, at the present price of jams, it is not
possible for the jam manufacturer to pay a fair price for jam fruits so long as sugar is
not duty free, we conceive that the natural and proper remedy would he to raise the
price of jam. The present duty on jams (£l4 a ton British ; £lB 13s. 4d. a ton
foreign), is quite high enough to admit of this being done. In this connection we
may quote from the evidence of Mr. Henry Jones, jam maker, of Hobart.
12958, Is the duty effective to some extent in keeping English competition out ?—Yes ; but we
can put our jam up £l4 a ton, and England would not be able to compete with us then. That is to
say, if we put up our selling price another 50 per cent., we could still keep English competition out.
But it is alleged that there are other difficulties in the way of raising the price
of jam. One of these difficulties is stated to be the competition among the jam
manufacturers themselves as regards the selling price. (See Question 12923).
But we believe it would be quite possible for the growers to bring such pressure
to hear upon the jam manufacturer as to compel him to charge a higher price for
jam, on the assumption, of course, that otherwise he would not be making a fair
return. Naturally, cheap jam appeals to the jam manufacturer as likely to mean
an expanding market; and he will he not indisposed to fix a low price for jam
so long as the fruit growers are content to provide him with cheap jam fruits. But
they are not compellable to do this. We are, of course, aware that the difficulties of
effective collective bargaining on the part of the growers are undoubtedly greater
than in the case of the jam manufacturers, hut we believe far more could be done
in this way if the growers were prepared to make the sacrifices which co-operative
enterprise demands. Apart from co-operation, the growers are in a position to bring
pressure to bear upon manufacturers by diversion of their husbandry into other
channels. Mr. A. W. Smart, who had been appointed by the Australian Conference
of Fruit Growers to represent them before this Commission, dwelt upon the
apparent injustice of burdening the fruit grower with a sugar tax in order to support
artificially a producing industry of a similar character to his own. (Question 14662).
The suggested parallel between the two industries is open, to question. We are
not now concerned with the superior claims of an industry which is contributing to
the extremely difficult problem of the settlement and defence of tropical areas,
although it must be apparent that on this ground alone the Sugar Industry stands
upon a very special footing. What w r e are now concerned to point out is that the
sugar grower of the tropical and semi-tropical areas has all his eggs in one basket.
He must rely on the local market exclusively, and on a single commodity, sugar-cane.
The fruit grower, on the other hand, has an increasing export trade for fruits and for
canned fruits (the preservation of which is possible with very small sugar contents).
He has, moreover, some market outside of Australia for his fruit, either in the form
of pulp (which requires no sugar), or in the form of jam (with regard to wdiich there
is the drawback of the sugar duty). Even on the local market, there is great variety


of jams, involving, of course, a great variety of fruit culture, with a great variation
in the labour cost of production. Finally, since his commodity is of much lesser
bulk than sugar cane, he is less helpless, when bargaining with the local jam
manufacturer, than the sugar grower is when bargaining with the miller of raw sugar.
It will therefore be apparent that he is able by co-operation or by diversion of
the forms of his fruit culture, to bring very considerable pressure to bear upon the
jam manufacturer, if he is in earnest about doing so, and goes the right way to work.
We are aware that such considerations may seem outside our province. It is not our
direct concern to find remedies for the defects of competitive industries in fruit
growing and jam manufacture. But we have felt it necessary to touch upon this
matter in view of the argument that has been submitted to us that the jam
manufacturers were unable to improve their prices for fruit by charging a higher
rice for their jams on account of competition.
11. It is only fair to the jam manufacturer to say that, so far as most of those
who gave evidence were concerned, the chief objection to raising the price of jam was
not the fear of competition in the ordinary sense. The real fear was expressed to be a
diminution in the demand for jam, due to the collateral competition of butter, golden
syrup, &c. It was admitted in evidence that a substantial increase in the price of jam
in recent years had not been accompanied by a diminished local consumption; but it
was urged that further increase would necessarily have this effect. We will assume,
for the sake of argument, that this result would follow, and that some consumers
would substitute butter or golden syrup for local jam. Giolden syrup is a product
of the Australian sugar refining industry. The butter consumed in Australia is
also an Australian product. If the facts be as suggested, local market for local
produce would expand in the direction of butter, and remain stationary, or even
slightly decline, in jam. More people might be engaged in the dairying industry;
fewer people in the fruit growing and jam-making industry. The situation does not
appear to us to be one specially calling for legislative intervention so long as locally
produced jam is adequately protected against the imported article.
12. We have just conceded, for the sake of argument, that, as a result of an
increase in the price of jam, there might ensue some diminution in the volume of the
fruit-growing industry. We feel bound to state, however, that we do not regard
this diminution as a probability.
(1) The increase in population and the rising standard of living ought,
in our opinion, to be taken into consideration as likely to nullify
wholly or partially the effects of an increase in the price of jam
upon the local demand. This has happened in the past, as we
have already remarked. It may well happen again.
(2) According to Mr. Peacock’s evidence (Question 14506) the comparative
price of jam in Melbourne and f.0.b., London, would appear to
justify the expectation of an increase in the export trade in jam
in the near future, more than sufficient to compensate for any
decline in the Australian demand for jam. In this connection we
refer especially to Questions 14594-5.
14594. As to the comparison jon made between English f.o.b. and Australian jam, which showed
that the Australian article was, roughly, Is. a case cheaper than the English article, was that comparison
between English jam f.0.b,, and Australian jam for the Melbourne consumer! —Yes.
14595. That being so, and supposing you made jam here for export, and got (as at present) the
rebate on the sugar contained in the jam, it would be an enormous advantage to your manufacture. Why
could you not compete then with the English manufacturer in his export market ? We do that already ;
we compete with him in the East and other places he supplies.
(3) If neither of the probabilities just referred to resulted, we are still of
opinion that the Australian fruit industry, though it might decline
in the direction of jam fruits, would probably extend in other
directions, more especially along the lines of an export trade in
fruit, or canned fruits.
13. The Commission of Your Excellency which is now engaged in making
a more complete investigation of the Fruit Industry than it has been possible
for us to attempt, may arrive at conclusions different from those which we have


expressed. We can only say that, on the evidence submitted to us, we are
unable to recommend a remission of the Excise or Import duties on sugar used for
the manufacture of local jams. 5
Briefly stated, the position appears to us to be as follows:
(1) The Australian market for sugar, including the manufacture of
products out of sugar, is needed by the Australian Sugar Industry
which has been developed under the present scheme of Bounty
Excise, and Customs, and would be prejudiced if the manufacturers
in question were allowed to import sugar free of duty. Those
manufacturers, generally speaking, already have free sugar as far
as their export trade is concerned, and so far as their local trade
is concerned, they enjoy an adequate protection of their output in
the form of a high import duty.
(2) Although, m the fruit growers, some discrimination might
be made m favour of jams, it has not appeared to us that any
conclusive case for such discrimination has been made out. The
problem leally concerns the fruit growers whose grievances are
aygely due to other causes than the alleged cause of the sugar
duty. Where the jam maker is also the fruit grower, there is
evidence to show that he can make a fair return on his capital
outlay. Even if this were not the case, we conceive that the
proper remedy would be to raise the price of jam—a remedv which
the growers themselves can practically force upon the jam
manufacturer if they chose to do so, and act in co-operation
with a view to that end.
(3) Assuming for the sake of argument that such an increase in the price
ot jam were necessary to secure adequate returns all round, and
assuming that such an increase were actually made, we do not
anticipate any decline in the fruit growing industrv. Should it
happen that the consumption of Australian jan/ on the local
market were reduced, we think the probable effect would be the
diversion in the fruit growing industries in the direction of export
trade; either for export jam, or for export fruit, or for export
canned fruit. r
14. Recommendations.—
(1) Some of the manufacturers complained of the artificial and
monopolistic restrictions on the Australian sugar trade. This
subject is discussed in other parts of the present Report.
(2) Some witnesses complained of the artificial limitations of the area of
sugar supply resulting from the high duty on beet. We have
already recommended the removal of this anomaly.
(3) We are also of the opinion that a direct gain would result to the allied
industries as the result of an adoption of the recommendation we
have made with respect to standardising the price of sugar in
Australia. An automatically regulated Customs duty would we
believe, in standardising the price of sugar, tend to regularise’ the
puce of fruit, to discourage the overproduction likely to follow a
period of abnormally cheap sugar, and to prevent some of the
hardships which are likely to arise when the jam maker, owing to
the abnormally high price of sugar, is driven to pay abnormallv
low price for jam fruits. J
(4) We recommend the retention of the existing system of rebate of
sugar duty on export of manufactured products.
(5) While we believe that much more might be done than is beine done
towards the development of the export trade of fruit or its products
J e re fram from making specific recommendations, in view of the
fact that the subject will doubtless receive full consideration
at the hands of the Commission on the Fruit Industry now eno-ae-ed
m taking evidence. ° 8 u


PART VI.—BEET SUGAR.
1. In Part I. (p. xiii) we have dwelt upon the suitability of the soil and climate of
the Queensland littoral for the purposes of cane sugar cultivation. Our investigations
have led us to the conclusion that the soil and climate of large areas of land m t le
temperate regions of Australia are equally adapted for beet sugar cultivation. 01
some time past the Government of Victoria has looked upon beet cultivation as likely
to form an important element in the rural industries of that State. In the present
year some producers in New South Wales and in South Australia have urged t ic
extension of the industry to those States. Possibly Tasmania can claim even
superior facilities for beet culture. Under these it impoitant to
consider whether the continuation of the present protective policy with respect to
beet may not prove prejudicial to the achievement of those national purposes upon
the importance of which we have insisted in Part I (p. xxi).
2. The initial fact to be borne in mind is that, within the tropical areas, theie
exists abundant territory for the production of all the sugar for which a market can
be found, even if we assume a rapidly increasing Australian consumption of sugai.
Some advocates of the beet sugar industry appear to contemplate the rapid develop-
ment of that industry, a friendly rivalry between it and the cane sugar industry, anc
the gradual building up of a profitable export trade. In our opinion the last-named
is illusorv. A profitable export trade in Australian produced sugar, in competition
with the coloured grown sugar of Java and elsewhere, is only conceivable on tie
supposition of a large bonus on export. If that bonus were paid by the Commonwealth
Treasury, the burden would fall on the taxpayer. If it were paid by the Sugar Industiy
itself, as under the Cartel system, the burden would fall on the consumers of sugar
within the Commonwealth. In either case the Australian citizen would be paying a
sum of at least £5 a ton of sugar in order to supply foreign consumers with cheap
sugar. We are aware that this sum is already incurred by the Australian consumer
for his own supplies. But we presume that no one would urge the extension of this
burden to meet the indefinite demands of an export trade. It is clearly to the
interests of Australia to advance her export trade; but the advance must be along lines
where she can meet foreign competition on terms more nearly equal. Some witnesses
before the Commission have expressed a great faith in Imperial Preference. While a
scheme of Imperial Preference is possible, we cannot conceive that any one who has
realised the necessity of cheap sugar to several very important British industries
would venture to anticipate a differential treatment in favour of Australian sugar
substantial enough to enable Australian producers to meet the competition, or
example, of Java. While a political party in Great Britain has continued to
urge the claims of Imperial Preference, the drift of opinion, so far as the commodity
of sugar is concerned, appears to us to have been rather in the direction of a ree
trade policy. Even if Great Britain adopted a scheme of Imperial Preference it would
presumably apply to all coloured-grown sugar in the British possessions.
3. Doubts have been expressed in the past as to the possibility of beet culture
in Australian temperate regions surviving the competition of cane culture in t e
Queensland littoral —presuming an equality of treatment in the forms of Bounty,
Excise, and Customs. We are of opinion that these doubts were well founded. But
the rapid improvements of the methods of beet culture, the accessory advantages o
beet culture to the general agricultural and dairying industries, and the fact that there
is good reason to believe that the failure of Victorian experiments in the past may be
largely attributed to inexpert management and culture and other disadvantages
incidental to the starting of a new industry, are circumstances which, taken
cumulativelv, render it impossible to speak with confidence as to the ie
Hon. George Graham, Minister of Agriculture for the State of Victoria, in his
evidence before the Commission, went so far as to affirm that the economic
superiority of beet over cane culture is such that “ the day is not far distant when
the beet grown sugar of Queensland will displace the cane sugar of Queensland.


World’s Production' op Sugar in Tons
in the Years
AFTER THE BRUSSELS CONVENTION.
Year.
Total
Cane Sugar.
Per Cent.
Cane Sugar.
1 1
Including British India.
1903-04
|
1904-05
12,022,000
7,144,000
4,878,000
59*4
1905—06
14,007,000
6,834,000
7,173,000
48-8
1906-07
14,799,000
7,691,000
7,108,000
52-0
1907-08
13,861,0 0
6,866,000
6,995,000
49-5
1908-09
14,582,000
7,654,000
6,928,000
52*4
1909-10
14,981,000
8,303,000
6,588,000
55-7
1910-11
16,687,000
8,115,000
8,572,000
48*6
1911-12 (estimate)
15,449,000
8,648,000
6,80l'000
56*0
Not including British India
1903-04
10,080,000
4,234,000
5,746,000
42-0
1904-05
9,654,000
4,776,000
4,876,000
49-5
1905-06
12,083,000
4,910,000
7,173,000
40-9
1906-07
12,349,000
5,241,000
7,108,000
42-4
1907-08
11,745,000
4,750,000
6,995,000
40-5
1908-09
12,709,000
5,781,000
6,928,000
45-8
1909-10
12,766,000
6,177,000
6,589,000
48*3
1910-11
14,587,000
6,015,000
8,572,000
41-2
1911-1 2 (estimate) ...
13,349,000
6,548,000
6,801,000
49*0
(Question 14029.) While we cannot indorse this opinion, we feel that it would he
unsafe to assume as axiomatic that cane culture must always enjoy, from an economic
point of view, a superiority oxer beet culture. A recent" authority, after reviewing
the opinion of the world’s leading experts, concludes as follows :
Business men must draw their own conclusions from the varying (and conflicting) figures and facts
wnc i I have been able to bring together. The future of cane and beet in competition with one another
is certainly not a matter on which too readily to form an opinion. It is one of the most interesting but
one the most complicated agricultural and economical problems of the day. (Sugar Beet by “ Home
Counties” 1911, at page 272.) v J
It is interesting to compare with the foregoing, the statement of an eminent
expert on the Cane Sugar Industry :
Before the Brussels Convention had come into existence the much privileged and protected
jeetroot sugar industry towered over the suffering and unprotected cane sugar cultivation, on which
tull import duties had to be paid when exported to foreign markets. Nowadays we see the
reverse.. With tne exception of Russia and the United States, hardly any beetroot sugar-producing
country of importance subsidizes its home industry, whereas a great many cane sugar producing
countries now support their industry by means of differential import duties, surtaxes, and direct
governmental assistance, as will be shown in subsequent pages of this book. Owing to the above-
mentioned advantages the cane sugar industry, in its turn, predominates nowadays, but it will not be able
to oust the beetroot sugar manufacture, especially as an evergrowing consumption draws on both kinds of
sugar, and, consequently, gives both of them a chance to spread and flourish. To hoAv great an extent
mth branches of the industry have developed since the Brussels Convention can be seen from the following
u e (in which also a column is entered wnich does not include the British Indian industry, and this for
the sake of comparison with the table on page 21, which likewise, omits the Indian output). It shows
t iat neither industry is inferior to the other, a state of equilibrium which is not likely to cease.
Prinsbn Geerligs : The World's Production of Cane Sugar, 1912, at pages 38-9.
4. Even if it were possible to prove that beet culture in the Australian
temperate regions could not survive the competition of cane culture in the Queens-
and littoral, presuming an equality of treatment in the way of Government support
we may point out that the Federal Government is not in a position to insure such an
equality, lire Parliament of the Commonwealth enjoys exclusive powers with
regard to Customs and Excise. Nor can any State Government grant a bounty on
production save with the assent of the Commonwealth Parliament (Section 91 of
Constitution.) But public support may take other forms. The Victorian Govern-
ment, for example, controls the Maffra factory for the manufacture of sugar from the
beet ; and it can pay the producer of the beet any price which it deems necessary to
keep the industry going. Mr. Cameron, Director of the Victorian Department of
Agriculture, said in his evidence before the Commission :
w. J he figures the formers gave to the Commission were based on 16s. a ton, me price last vear
xen Mr. Dyer looked into the whole question, he came to the conclusion that it would be a safe
(QTeTtbri4°0 r B6) e G ° Vemment t 0 o£Eer 4s> more P er ton of beet > and his advice has been adopted.


5. The Commonwealth has therefore to recognise the possibility of a growing
rivalry between cane and beet culture in Australia. If an export trade m sugar were
to be hoped for, such a rivalry might well be welcomed. But since an export trade
in sugar is not to be hoped for, a serious rivalry between cane and beet culture must
involve serious consequences to the producers of cane sugar. In view ot the tact
that the rivalry in question is only a possibility, it might seem proper to await the
course of events in pious reliance on the belief that sufficient unto tne day is e
evil thereof. We believe such an attitude of laisser faire would be inexcusable. 11
the attitude were adopted, and if beet culture were once firmly established, the
difficulties in the way of effective action by the Commonwealth Government would be
increased bv the existence of large vested interests. Every consideration of sound
statesmanship requires that the Commonwealth Parliament should look ahead, and
should determine whether it is wise to run the risk of the industrial dislocation which
must follow if the beet industry were to establish itself as an effective rival or t e
cane industry. The Commonwealth Parliament must, in a word, face the intricate
problem of the relative claims of the two industries to the benefits conferred by the
present system of Commonwealth control.
6. The relative claims of beet and cane require to be considered from several
points of view ; —(1) The primary, though not the most important, thing to consider
is which is the cheaper method of producing sugar. We have already remarked
upon the difficulty of expressing a final opinion upon this subject in view of changing
conditions in the processes of production and manufacture. _ But we believe that the
production of sugar from the cane is probably cheaper, and likely to continue cheaper,
than the production of sugar from the beet. We believe that contrary opinion,
which is often expressed by advocates of beet, is the result of a failure to leahse to
what extent beet culture in other countries is conditional upon the employment of
cheap labour (including the labour of women and children) under conditions which
could not be tolerated in Australia. We will assume, however, for the sake of
aro-ument, that the production of beet sugar is economically as profitable as the
production of cane sugar. The relative claims of the two industries would then have
to be determined by other considerations to which we shall now refei.
(2) The cane industry is established, while the beet industry is not. The beet
industry has a single factory at Victoria, which is still in the experimental stagehand has
a milliner capacity stated at 4,000 tons of sugar per annum. According to the estimate ot
the Victorian Minister of Agriculture, it would take ten such mills to meet the Victorian
sucrar demand. On the other hand, the mills for the treatment of raw cane sugar m
Queensland and New South Wales have a capacity little, if at all, short of the total
demands of the Australian market. Assuming an expanding market, the new mills
which the Queensland Government contemplate erecting will, m all probability, be
more than equal to the increasing demand.
(31 Beet culture is an industry appropriate to the temperate regions. But those
regions are capable of being utilized for general agricultural, pastoral, dairying, and
other purposes. They do not present to Australian statesmanship the special
difficulties incidental to the problem of effecting the settlement of a white population
in tropical regions where the climate is less attractive, and the available forms of
profitable cultivation are far more limited. The superiority of the claims of cane
culture from the point of view of the present argument was stated to the Commission
tersely and forcibly by a witness who must be regarded as beyond the suspicion of
partiality, and who has had a large experience both of Queensland and Victorian
agriculture. We refer to Mr. Easterby, then General Manager of the Maffra Beet
Factory The witness in his very interesting statement before the Commission said
IX" '=r: ski:.;
f ™ U ' areas would become speedily
depopulated. (Q. 13783, p. 487.)
(4) As we have remarked in Part 1., the tropical or semi-tropical areas not only
present peculiar difficulties in relation to settlement, but their settlement is vitally
associated with the problem of national defence. The urgency and supreme importance
LXXIII


0f *1 j at P , ; oWem Ji ecomes ever more apparent in the existing unstable conditions of
world politics. The problem will be solved by no one device. Much certainly
remains to be done. But all impartial persons must agree that it is a first duty of
Australian statesmanship to conserve the results which have been achieved towards
its solution in the past; and among these results an important place must be found
tor the cane sugar industry. Anything which would imperil that industry must be
regarded as a menace to our national safety.
, , 7 ' *° r tbe r . easol , ls we have just indicated, we conclude that, as between cane
and beet, the superior claims of the former to the benefit of a protective policy are
clear and indisputable. The conclusion involves important consequences. " The
advocates of beet culture within the Commonwealth, who maintain the ability of beet
to hold its own as m competition with cane, are either right or wrong;. If they are wrong-
any encouragement to beet culture*by the Commonwealth Government must stand
condemned as a false economy of the national resources. On the other hand if the
advocates of beet he right in their contention as to the relative economic efficiency
o that industry, its encouragement by the Commonwealth must imperil the very
existence of an industry which has been built up at a great expense to the
Commonwealth and the State of Queensland, and which, as a contribution to the
solution of the problems of tropical settlement and defence, serves purposes of which
the importance to our national life can scarcely be exaggerated.
8. One apparent way out of the difficulties of the present situation would be
the imposition of a Special Excise duty of £2 a ton on the manufacture of sugar
from beet—subject to the proviso that the Excise should only be levied in any year
when the output of beet sugar should exceed 10,000 tons. It might be assumed that
the pi actical effect of such an Act would be to prevent the States other than Victoria
from embarking in the beet industry. The purpose of the proviso would be to
safeguard vested interests in Victoria. Since the potential output of the Maffra
mill is only 4,000 tons, the limit suggested by us would even allow the
Victorian Government to extend its experiment if it chose to do so—a course of
action which it might be not indisposed to adopt in view of the opinions which its
representatives have expressed before the Commission as to the possibilities of the
beet industry The suggested limit of the output of beet sugar might be
increased in later years should it become apparent that the cane industry was
likely to be unequal to the Australian demand. In the meantime the policy of the
Commonwealth would be clearly defined with respect to the conservation of the
cane industry—a conservation which we believe to be dictated by social and political
considerations of the first importance. We are aware that some objection may be
telt with respect to legislation for a contingency which may not arise But as
we Have already suggested, it is preferable to prevent an evil rather than to wait
tor the evil to arise, since m the latter case the Commonwealth Parliament would
be confronted by great, if not insurmountable, difficulties which do not at present
6XISt.
9. Recommendations. —We recommend for the consideration of the Common-
wealth Parliament the question whether it is not advisable to pass an Excise Act
imposing a special Excise of £2 a ton on the manufacture of sugar from beet
subject to the proviso that the Excise shall only be levied in any year when the total
output of beet sugar within the Commonwealth shall exceed 10,000 tons.


CONCLUSION.
Your Commissioners desire to record their high appreciation of the efficient
service rendered by Mr. E. T. Hall, the Secretary to the Commission.
In conclusion, Your Commissioners have much pleasure iu submitting to You
Excellency this Report.
Your Commissioners have the honour to be,
Your Excellency’s most obedient Servants,
(1.5.) W. JETHRO BROWN, Chairman.
(1.5.) ALBERT HTNCHCLIFFE.
(1.5.) ROBERT M. McC. ANDERSON.
(1.5.) M. R. SHANNON.
E. T. HALL, Secretary.
Melbourne, 2nd December, 1912.




ANNEX
DISSENTIENT MEMORANDUM.
I.—CONSUMERS.
1. Evidence was taken in all the State capitals, except Perth, as to the effect upon a
number of industries of the present conditions under which sugar for manufacturing
purposes was obtainable in the Commonwealth. . . .
2. It was learnt that at the time of inquiry, with the exception of some ot the
brewers, all manufacturers were being supplied under contract by the Colonial Sugar
Refining Company. J , , ~ . . •
3 A number of orchardists who gave evidence, complained that the prices o± ]am
fruits, and more especially raspberries and black currants, were not sufficiently remunera-
tive On the grounds that the market value of these fruits was largely governed by t e
price of sugar, witnesses urged that a rebate of at least the amount of the excise, namely,
£4 per ton, should be allowed on all sugars used in the manufacture of jam.
4. Manufacturers stated that if the above concessions were granted, they would
pay an increase of 25 per cent, on existing prices of fruit. Assuming this to average £7
per ton, the promised advance would amount to 355. per ton, and as fruit and sugar
are used in about equal proportions, the manufacturer would retain more than half the
remitted excise, thus profiting to a greater extent than the fruit-grower, m whose interests
the concession was ostensibly sought. . ,
5. Official figures showed that the production of jam was rapidly increasing It
was admitted that manufacturers were making a profit of from 7 to 10 per cent on their
capital, that their industry was flourishing under a system of protection that the
position had improved remarkably since Federation, while the price of fruit had
increased during the same period, and that supply and demand were really the factors
which determined its market value ; all of which may be gathered from extracts o
evidence hereto appended :
Question 12734.—L. M. Shoobridge, orcbardist, New Town, Tasmania ; The crops also vary from
year to year ; if there is a large crop there is an exceptionally low price.
Question 12825.—F. W. Lord, jam manufacturer, Hobart.—Question : Accordmg £ our
there has been a good deal of fluctuation from year to year in the price of various fruits . Answer . Iher
must necessarily be in small fruits, because the weather affects them rapidly ; one or two hot windy days
will considerably change the character of the marhet. , .
Question 12910.—H. Jones, jam manufacturer, Hobart.—ln Adelaide, plums are £o per on,
halt the price we are paying in Tasmania Question 12968.-We have contracts to buy at a
certain P?L. and we L™ Parted fruit round to the back of the factory and tipped it on ; but wi have
not destroyed any fruit for over ten years ; before that we often destroyed it. . . . . Question m
Tbp greatest depression in the jam trade in Australia was in 1899 Question i/y/u. ij g
the last ten the Tasmanian fruit-grower has not had the low prices to contend with that he had yeais
before, estion m 79 __ c A . Stubbings, farmer, Lower Longley, Tasmania—Excessive cropsi year after
year ; a lot of stuff from the previous year was carried forward, and a good crop followed. I think the
small B- Robson, fruit-grower and fruit-preserver, Hectorville, South Australia.—
The Australia, jam manufacturer and fruit-grower^
The market since Federation is a little better-but very little. It is substantially better for jam and a
little better for fruit. Our output since Federation has trebled, and I think that; statement; wouldapp y
to other jam-makers, too. In the early days a great deal of money was wasted m ffie ]am in^
£3OO 000 in South Australia. A number of firms went insolvent. .. . Question l.Wb4. Lnaer
p”cLditTous and efficient management, the industries of fruit-growing and jam-making are m a
failly Peacock, jam manufacturer, South Yarra, Victoria.-Eve W year there will
be a variation in price—some fruits will go up and some down.


a ton r z got l r £3to £5
law that you can never get over ; it affects plums’as' well as anything else 18 a natUral
Question 15106. —George Wright, managing director Tavlor Bros TimfWl q t a t
opinion it [the price of fruit] is purely a matter of supply and demand ’ Sydney ’~ ln m £
? 1 tlle fore f 01n 8 is s ® en tllat Prices vary from season to season irrespective
e price of sugar, and that even in the same season there is a wide difference between
the prices ruling m one State and another. Apart altogether from tWiceof sLar
these factors must continue to operate. From the evidence tomWorl £ i g t ’
concluded that, whatever may be the disabilities affekkg the™
to connect them with the price jam manufacturers have to pay for sxiga r P “
7. Imported sugar, supplied by the Colonial Sugar Refining Company as reouired
of £6 P er n IAwT^ 011 ’ “ d " P ° n thiS SUgar a rebate of tlle duty
lI.—LABOUR.
in the Lvarmms^nd^n 11of , of the unskilled labour supply
m tne sugar mills and on the farms is not of a high order. This is chief!v dim fn rWo
distance of the sugar districts from the centres of tt P d A .
cane-cutters arp affmpf-Arl w x , es ot population. Usually sufficient
cutters are attracted by the prospect of large earnings, but as a rule there is a
hortage of ploughmen and other field hands. The fact that most of tL work has
farthfs^ZAf^abour V 'b,rf°th lg m ° nthS ° f ear is res P ons Me to some extent
ne scarcity of labour, but there was a great deal more complaint made to the
Commission regarding the irregularity of the workers than there waT about the
nature of the work. It was very clear from the evidence that many
work tt "f: n o* d nf ire ° r WCTe i-paUe of a coZnf
steady men in regular employment appeared before the Commission. ’ f
own gangCT 1 the on .tte butty gang system, the men electing their
.Met tk. szia.'iESj:/
shows that in some cases gangs have earned as much as 245. per man per day The
average earnings may be set down at about 15s. a day. Accommodation cooking
utensils, wood, water, and all necessary field applianceskre provided by emrfoyem
a d the men find themselves in food. As a guarantee of good faith the usual practice
is for growers to retain a percentage of earnings until the completion of the contocte
if-1 U Tbe Shm^ er j’ am ' l t a,Jar Workers’ Accommodation Act prescribes in particular
detail the accommodation to be provided for both mill and farmtiands ikoutensTand
At the mil's visited the accommodation was in accordance with the provisions ofthe
Act and no fault could be found except in some cases where the occupants had neglected
Act k At* 16 ' 1 S ee P, l , ng “Payments in a proper state of cleanlinesses required by the
Act. At every mill careful attention had been given to sanitation andThower baths
and other necessary conveniences were provided® There were reading ro“t most
e mills, and m some oases spacious concert halls and provision foAut-door amuse
ment. In many instances the mills are adjacent to business cekres where mffl
employees and other workers may become members of schools of arts, recreation clubs
and other institutions. Where mills arp O p m o n p i J-eoiemion ciuds,
Savings Banks the State has
may conserve their earnings. at tne men
i n ;. T v e P aid t 0 « workers ranged from 22s 6d to SOs bpt
week with board and lodging, in the off season, and from 25s to per week Ath
per week. Since Augmf iqT d and accommodatl °n, is equivalent to £2 ss.
minimum wage for ordinary mill Tto Mother stages


are based upon the award of a State Wages Board for the Mackay District, which gave
its determination early in August, 1911. The Colonial Sugar Refining Company pays
a minimum wage of 275. 6d. par week and found, and gives a bonus of 2s. 6d. per week.
On the farms, workers usually have the same food and accommodation as the growers
and their families. At all the mills visited by the Commission, the food was abundant,
well cooked, and cleanly served.
12. At the Colonial Sugar Company’s refineries, the minimum wage paid to adults
is 7s. per eight-hour day to men engaged outside the buildings, and 7s. sd. per day
to those inside the buildings, with a bonus to each of 2s. 6d. per week. At the
Millaquin refinery, Bundaberg, the rate is 7s. per day, or 425. per week of 48 hours.
13. Little evidence was taken as to the rates of wages ruling in other land industries
of the Commonwealth. Proper comparison can only be made by sepaiating e d
workers into their several classes. It would, for example, be obviously unfair to
compare the wages of persons engaged for a few weeks fruit-picking or wheat harvesting
with the wages of men employed throughout the year or for several months in t e
sugar fields. Cane-cutters on contract earn vastly more than any other class ot
agricultural labour, and the wages of sugar workers generally compare favorably with
the rates paid for similar labour in the Commonwealth as a whole, which are omcia y
stated as follows :
General Weekly Wages 'paid to Agricultural Labourers in Commonwealth.
1. General hands .. • • 20s. to 255. and keep.
2. Ploughmen .. . • • • 20s. to 30s. ~ ~
3. Harvesters .. . • • • 30s. to 40s. ~ ~
14. During the crushing season, the mills are usually worked by two shifts of an
average of 10| hours each. All time over 48 hours is paid for as overtime at the rate
of time and a quarter. Millers contended that it would be impossible to rigidly
conform to eight-hour shifts. When the crop is light, as frequently happens, t e
adoption of three shifts would mean so short a season that neither cane-cutters nor
mill hands would undertake the work, while under normal conditions, owing to the
irregularity of harvesters, it is exceedingly difficult to maintain a full supply ot cane
throughout the 24 hours. Where one or two shifts are worked, it is necessary tor
employees on some stages to work overtime, as the process of manufacture must be
carried on for some time after crushing ceases. Much of the mill work is not laborious,
high wages are paid on important stations, and, as the men live practica yon e
premises, no time is lost or money expended in travelling. Consequently, even
when working overtime, they have more leisure than a great many town workers.
This also applies to men employed on the farms.
15 Labour witnesses as a rule urged the abolition of contract cane harvesting,
on the grounds that it tended to sweating and that under the system of daily or weekly
wages employment would be afforded to a greater number of men. The high earnings
of cane-cutters under conditions practically fixed by themselves is a complete reply to
any suggestion of sweating, and where there is an admitted scarcity o a 1 panno
be successfully urged that individual output should be limite • ie o jec ion o
contract work seemed to be founded on the idea that the lower the labour product of
each wage-earner the better for his class as a whole. On the other hand, the contract
system has many advantages from the farmer’s point of view. It is attractive to the
best class of workers, who prefer payment by results ;it saves supervision, thus; ena g
growers to attend to other work; and relieves the farmer s wife of the labour and
responsibility of providing food for a large number of men.^ ere 'Y ere - „ P T u *,!
upon which employers and employes held contrary views. Without having regard to
their importance, the multiplicity of these differences disc ose e urgen .. .
referring them to local tribunals which would enforce industrial peace U P“I,
of fairness to both employers and employees. Provision for this is “ ad e by |he Qu
land Industrial Peace Act, in which sugar workers are included. Employers were
unanimously in favour of industrial tribunals.
111. —GROWERS.
16. The inquiry has been practically confined to the ten years following Federation ,
very little information being sought or obtained concerning the condition of the Indus ry
in pre-Lederal days.


17. An appendix to the Report of the Select Committee on Sugar Industries
presented to the
production of sugar was 2,485 tons. According to Australian official records the yield
was 3,532 tons in 1870, and 22,864 tons in 1880. These figures indicate that the progress
made during the early years of the industry was slow. Many of the pioneers failed in
their undertakings. The shareholders in the Victorian Sugar Company lost no less
than £400,000 in their enterprises. (Question 27350.)
18. A return made to the Senate on the 18th December, 1911, gives the annual
production of Australian sugar from 1870 to 1910 inclusive. The figures show a great
fluctuation in output during different years, due chiefly to variation in seasonal conditions
but there is a substantial increase for each of the four decades as follows 1871 to 188o’
total production, 156,012 tons ; 1881 to 1890, total production, 583,865 tons ; increase’
y tons 5 *B9l to 1900, total production, 1,176,013 tons ; increase, 592,148 tons ;
1901 to 1910, 1,646,779 tons ; increase, 470,766 tons.
. 19. Thus it will be noted that the rate of increase prior to 1901 has not been
maintained past ten years, notwithstanding the favorable seasons. It must
be borne m mind that during the latter period the change from coloured to white
abour has been made. This is a most important and commendable achievement, even
though it may have temporarily impeded the expansion of the industry.
20. In the early days of the industry, practically the whole of the cane was grown
on large plantations. But this system was abandoned by most of the mill-owning
planters some years ago, and now the production of cane and the manufacture of sugar
are generally regarded as two distinct branches of the business. In the co-operative
mills, of course, the ownership is in a sense the same. The proprietors of Bingera and
Fairymead, both in the Bundaberg district, have not fallen in with the general custom
and continue to grow a large proportion of the cane required for their respective mills.
21. No infoimation was furnished the Commission as to the number of cane
farmers prior to 1902, in which year the number of registered growers was officially
returned as 2,496 in Queensland, and 1,120 in New South Wales, producin o, 1,367 802
tons of cane. In 1910, the numbers were 5,352 in Queensland, and 954 in New South
a es, producing for the year, 2,000,758 tons of cane. The number of farmers has,
therefore, increased in higher ratio than the yield of cane, and it is noteworthy that in
1910, the year in which the maximum production was attained, the average quantity
of cane per farmer was only 317 tons, or the product of 17 to 18 acres per farm.
22. The increase in the number of farmers was due principally to the subdivision
of lands pieviously cultivated in larger areas, and also to extensions, chiefly by the
State or local governing authorities, of railways and tramways, bringing new districts
into communication with the mills. It is doubtful whether the present number of
farmers can be materially increased without the erection of new mills and the opening
up of what are now practically unsettled districts, there being but little room for the
further subdivision of existing cane areas. The evidence tends to show that some
growers are at present working on what may be regarded as below the minimum
profitable area.
23. There was an annual increase in the area under cane from 1902-3—the last of
the drought years—until 1905-6, and thereafter the area gradually diminished. Next
to the improved seasons, the main reason for the increase seems to have been that a
great many growers made the most of their last opportunity to employ coloured labour
in the extension of their cane areas, clearing, planting, and cultivating with Kanakas
and other aliens, then registering for bounty, and, so far as the plant crop was concerned,
doing little more than harvesting with white labour. (Questions 122-124.) Under any
circumstances, there was necessarily a limit to this method of extension, and, with the
voluntary emigration and the deportation of the Kanakas and restriction of alien
immigration, the industry has been rapidly brought on to a white labour basis with all
its attendant difficulties. This has unquestionably been the most potent cause of
the shrinkage in the area under cultivation. Under the new order, farmers generally
are confining their attention to their most productive land.
24. In his report to the Minister of Trade and Customs in January, 1910, Depart-
mental copies of which were furnished to the Commission, Dr. Maxwell attributed the
diminution of the area under cane in the years following 1905-6 to the 1905 amendments
in the Kxcise and Bounty legislation, stating that “ after the revised legislation became
law, and provision was made for the gradual abolition of the Acts, the confidence of
the growers was disturbed. A position of uncertainty was before them, and from


that time many of the most pronounced supporters of white production became less
resolute in their operations. On the other hand, some of those who had continued in
producing by coloured labour were induced to hold on.” These conclusions are not
warranted by the evidence placed before the Commission. Some diminution in area
certainly did take place for the reasons already stated, but concurrent with the
reduction of area there was a steady and material increase both in the number of farmers
and the percentage of white growers, while the very highest point of production was
attained in 1910, in connection with which the whole of the field operations, except
harvesting, must have been performed before there was any indication of the intention
of Parliament to pass legislation providing for the continuance of Excise and Bounty.
25. The evidence shows some divergence of opinion among growers upon the
question of Excise and Bounty. A large majority, more particularly in the North, favour
the abolition of Excise and Bounty, while firm in their desire that the production of sugar
should be upon an absolutely white-labour basis. Others advocate the continuance
of the present legislation with the proviso that Excise and Bounty be equalized. Those
favouring continuance fear that the mill-owners may withhold for themselves some
part of the advantage accruing from the abolition of Excise ; quite overlooking the
fact that if the miller were really so rapacious he could now attain the same result by
a reduction in the ordinary price of cane.
26. The mill-owners disclaim any such intention, and have promised the growers —
some have entered into binding contracts —in the event of abolition to pay an additional
price for cane of from Bs. to 10s. per ton, the varying rates being in proportion to the
bounty now paid in the respective sugar districts. There is no evidence to show that
mill-owners do not, as a rule, carry out their undertakings to growers, and instances were
given where manufacturers had voluntarily paid more for cane than the stipulated
price. Some doubt was expressed concerning the attitude of the proprietors of Pioneer
Mill upon the subject, but Mr. John Drysdale’s statement to the Commission was clear
and emphatic, being as follows :
I have said that lam going to pass this £4 on to the farmer —the whole of it. (Question 7082.)
27. The present method of maintaining the production of sugar by means of an
import duty, minus Excise and plus Bounty, was held to be not only cumbersome,
but misleading as to the measure of protection really afforded to the industry, the
popular idea, outside of those engaged in the business, being that the Import Duty
and Bounty constituted a double impost upon the consumer, no allowance as a rule
being made for the Excise, which the industry itself has to l3ear. (Question 489.)
28. In the event of the continuation of Excise and Bounty, it was urged that
the formalities connected with the system should be simplified. Ihe grounds of
complaint were more particularly set out in a w'ritten statement presented by the
growers of the Cairns district. (Question 2688.)
29. Some 4‘ 7 per cent, of the cane is officially returned as the product of coloured
labour. This is produced almost entirely upon land occupied by coloured growers.
30. The Commission were repeatedly assured of the growers’ loyal adherence to the
National policy of a White Australia, and throughout the whole inquiry not a single
farmer expressed a doubt as to the ultimate success of the industry, provided the price
realized for their commodity rendered it possible for them to meet the increased cost
of production. In their opinion the problem of tropical settlement and production
in Australia was simply a question of economics.
31. In addition to evidence elicited by the interrogation of witnesses, written
statements were presented on behalf of growers in a number of centres. Special weight
should be given to these, because they embody the considered, as well as the collective,
judgment of the farmers of several districts upon the questions with which they deal.
These statements treated upon almost all the aspects of the industry, and the following
extracts are selected as illustrating, better than individual opinions, the views of growers
upon some of the most essential points :
Question 2688.—Statement handed in by Mr. A. J. Draper, and signed by 118 farmers of the Cairns
district: —
The complicated nature and incidence of the Excise and Bounty legislation has led to erroneous
ideas as to the help the industry is receiving from the Federal Government. The
main argument used by our detractors is that those engaged in the industry are enjoying
the advantages of a bounty, whereas there is in effect no such thing as bounty, but merely
a rebate of three-quarters of the Excise paid by the grower, provided he produces his
cane under certain prescribed conditions and regulations, arbitrarily laid down by the
Minister of Trade and Customs. These attacks and the consequent misunderstanding
F. 13881. F


very naturally act as a material check to financial institutions affording accommodatidri
to those in the industry, and prevent increased investments by those already occupied
in cane growing and sugar manufacture. They also act as a deterrent to those who
would otherwise be willing to employ their capital and labour in the sugar lands of North
Queensland.
Question 3988. —Statement presented by Mr. William Stevenson, and signed by 73 farmers of the
Johnston River district; —•
On the question of strikes and an attempt to bring about more settled conditions in the way
of industrial peace. We are in favour of State Wages Boards, but they must be clothed
with full power to enforce their awards upon both the employer and the employee.
We have no cause for complaint about the checks which are employed to ascertain the true
payment for the value of cane supplied.
Experience has proved that no other agricultural crops but sugar and bananas can be successfully
farmed in this district, and, as to bananas, they are only grown successfully on the
alluvial flats and river banks, and can only be maintained on the same land for five to
seven years.
Question 7507. —Statement handed in by Mr. P. J. Hoey, and signed by 31 farmers in the Burdekin
district:—
We regard it as useless to attempt settlement of our Northern lands for sugar-growing
purposes unless strong protective measures are adopted to exclude cheap black-grown
sugar from our markets.
Supplementing this, we have to say that the health of the district is excellent, and observation
will carry the conviction that the operations of sugar-growing here are quite compatible
with the best ideals of a White Australia.
Question 8757.—Statement handed in by Mr. Alexander Stevenson, on behalf of the Mackay Combined
Farmers’ Associations—
In a season such as we are passing through, the majority of farmers who employ labourinthis
district make absolutely no profit for themselves, and in numbers of cases have actually
incurred a loss in the year’s operations, with the prospect staring them in the face of a
further loss on next year’s crop.
When men are “ found,” in addition to their weekly wages, much work is thrust on the farmers’
wives and daughters, which work, in most cases, is greatly added to during the crushing
season, when the cane cutters, whether on daily wages or piece-work, are boarded in
addition to the ordinary farm labourer. Whatever difficulty may be experienced in
procuring men for field work, is multiplied over and over in procuring assistance for
the farmer’s wife, particularly if the farm is situated away from the railway line, or a
“ bit in the bush.”
Very few farmers find time, under present circumstances, to keep a set of books, naturally
thinking that each year will be better than the one that has run its course. Farmers
keep on growing cane in the hope of soon getting out of debt; but, latterly, confronted
with the prospect of having to pay an increased wage, without any corresponding increase
in the price of cane, farmers have had to look the position in the face, and the realization
has been forced on them that with comparatively good seasons and the former rate of
wages, very few profits have been made. Unless improved conditions are afforded,
numbers of farmers, particularly those on leasehold farms, will abandon
and seek other means of earning a livelihood.
We would impress upon the Sugar Commission that manuring has become imperatively
necessary. At the average price paid for cane, farmers are afraid to risk the cost of
manures. While the manure would amply pay for itself, if successful, a failure, on the
other hand, would involve the farmer in a considerable monetary loss, which the freehold
farmer will not face if he wishes to retain his holding.
Question 21863.—Statement presented by Mr. John Alison, on behalf of 80 farmers in the Gin Gin
district: —
A considerable area of cane has of late been taken out, and we cannot point out any new area
having been put in, while to our knowledge, many growers have expressed themselves
to the effect that they would plant no more cane until such time as there were some
more settled labour conditions; while others have expressed their intention of planting
such areas as could be planted, cultivated, and harvested by members of their own
families, and many acres which are now lying fallow or going into grass would be under
cane were there moke security in relation to labour.
. Question 22971. Statement presented by Mr. P. L. Elliot, on behalf of growers in the Bundaberg
district i
The accommodation for workers is laid down by the Shearers and Sugar Workers’Accommodation
Act, and is enforced by periodical inspection by a State official. On the question of strikes
and an attempt to bring about more settled conditions in the way of industrial peace we
are in favour of State Wages Boards ; but they must be clothed with full power to enforce
their awards upon both the employer and the employee. We have no cause for complaint
about the checks which are employed to ascertain the true payment for the value of
cane supplied.


32. Numerous estimates were submitted as to the costs and profits of cane produc-
tion, and a great many farmers were examined as to the actual result of their operations.
The evidence thus obtained showed that a few growers, working under specially favorable
circumstances, were doing fairly well, others were losing money, while the majority,
in the words of the witnesses themselves, were but “ holding their own.” In the case
of the large growers, Bingera and Fairymead (Questions 21754 and 22264) showed a
profit of £2 9s. 3d. and £2 2s. 6d. per acre respectively, but their yield of cane was con-
siderably above the average. On the other hand, Qunaba Plantation, owned by the
Millaquin Company, lost in nine years no less than £30,951 on their field operations.
This, however, it was explained, was partly due to costly experiments in irrigation.
(Question 22601.)
33. Seasonal conditions and the quality of the soil are probably the most potent
factors in sugar production, but pests and the personal equation are also important
elements. A combination of good soil, good seasons, good luck, and good husbandry
is bound to produce good results, and such were the favorable circumstances of the
more successful growers who appeared before the Commission.
34. Periodic reverses seriously discount any mere estimate of costs and profits, and
only the actual experience of a series of years can be accepted as proof of the true position.
35. It should be recognised that throughout the cane-growing world the cultivator
is dealing with a crop which takes enormous quantities of plant food out of the ground.
It is therefore evident that the cost of constant manuring is one which the farmer has
to meet, thus necessitating, on account of this item alone, a considerable floating capital.
36. The evidence shows that very few farmers do the whole of their work. Some
hired labour is necessary during part of the year on even the smallest holdings. The
production of sugar is not —and, indeed, cannot be—-carried on as a one-man industry.
In the case of the average grower, the change from black to white, whatever other
advantages it may have secured, has not made his calling any more profitable, but rather
the reverse, as the subjoined examples of the evidence upon this point disclose :• —
Question 2688. Extract from statements presented by the cane-growers of Cairns district. —It is
desired to point out particularly to the Commission that although the risks attending the industry are
the same as those that existed before Federal legislation, and the possibility of profit per acre no greater
than in former days, farmers require a much larger amount of capital to establish and maintain a sugar
farm.
Question ‘ Wkat, in your opinion, as regards the success of the industry, has been the result
of the change from black to white labour ? Answer.—The first effect of the change was a good one ; the
land increased in price and profits were obtained from the bonus. But the cane on the land itself had been
cultivated largely by black labour. Still, the change stimulated the price of land, and for some years
there was a general improvement.
Question 5747. All the money I have made and the farm I have got now, I made under the old
order of things. I have only been growing cane with white labour for four years. The returns show
my profits are diminishing.
Question 5932. What is your opinion of the effect of the change from black to white labour ? Has
it been beneficial to the district ? Answer.—Yes, to the district as a whole, particularly to the hotel-
keepers.
. Question 5933.—Has it been beneficial to the growers ? Answer.- —I would not like to say that
it has from the financial point of view. If I had to give an answer I would say, no, it has not.
37. From the foregoing it would appear that during the transition period, the farmer
gained by harvesting with white labour what he had planted with black, but now that
he has no such adventitious aid, he realises from, his diminished profits that the
measure of protection afforded the industry does not compensate him for his
additional outlay. Nevertheless, farmers are opposed to any return to coloured labour.
38. Evidence was obtained as to the bearing of the price of land upon the present
position of growers. Most of the land concerning which information was given, was more
or less highly improved, and carried a crop of cane which largely represented the price
paid. It is quite safe to say that, as disclosed by the evidence placed before the Com-
mission, sugar lands are commanding much lower prices than land of equal productivity
and accessibility in other parts of the Commonwealth, It was also made clear that in
some of the best of the sugar districts, despite increased settlement, the selling
value of land has not appreciated during recent years. On this particular point the
evidence of Mr. A. J. Draper, chairman of the Mulgrave Central Mill Company, and a
leading auctioneer and commission agent in North Queensland, may be quoted, as
follows : I cannot recall a single man who has sold out at a profit. They have lived
on their farms, and have sold at just c mark time * prices.” (Q. 2785.)
39. The only conclusion to be drawn from the evidence is that the agricultural
division of the industry is not in a flourishing condition, the margin between the cost of
production and the value of the cane being so extremely small that growers generally
just manage to struggle along, hoping for some future amelioration of their condition.


40. Such was the position when the Commission made its investigations in the
sugar districts. Since then field wages have been materially increased and hours of labour
reduced in conformity with the Ministerial Order of August last, copy of which has been
supplied to the Commission, thus making the condition of the grower more hazardous
even than before. (Appendix No. 1).
41. Various measures were suggested for the amelioration of the growers position.
Those generally favoured were the abolition or equalization of Excise and Bounty, a
higher protection against foreign sugars, and independent industrial tribunals, whose
awards should be rigidly enforced upon both employers and employees.
42. In support of the request for a higher measure of protection, attention was
directed to the wide disparity between the remuneration of labour in Australia and that
in Fiji, Mauritius, and Java, which are the more immediate competitors with Australian
sugar.
43. Evidence was furnished that in Fiji the wages of workers in both field and
ranged from Is. sd. to 2s. 6d. per day, while statistics compiled by Mr. H. Prmsen
Geerligs, a recognised authority, and which were included in the documents supplied by
the Government to the Commission, showed that the rate of remuneration in Java
averaged about sixpence per day for men and threepence per day for women.
44. The Javan and Fijian rates of remuneration are understood to include cost of
accommodation, where provided, and in both instances the workers find their own food.
45. To realize the full significance which should be attached to the wide difference
between the remuneration of workers in the Australian industry and the rates ruling
in countries where the standard of living is incomparably lower, consideration must be
given to the very high proportion of labour employed in the cultivation and harvesting
of sugar cane. Details, furnished by Mr. C. E. Young, of Fairymead, undoubtedly a
well-managed estate, showed that labour represented 85| per cent, of the total cost of
field operations. (Q. 22264.)
46. While, generally speaking, it may be said that growers attributed their unsatis-
factory position to the low prices of cane, as compared with the relatively high cost o
production, and to unsettled labour conditions, there were also other grounds o com
plaint. These, however, had little, if any, bearing upon the general situation, being
local and not fundamental, and for that reason are not dealt with herein.
47. Both from the statements of witnesses and the observations it was possible to
make, it was abundantly evident that the industry supports a large and hea t ly popu
lation in the sugar districts, while its area of activities is so extensive as to ma e i
impossible to calculate the direct and indirect advantages accruing from the home
production of our sugar. Facilities for communication must have a most importan
bearing upon all the problems involved in the question of tropical settlement. a ever
other forms of production may be established in Australian tropical areas, f ie evl en ce
conclusively shows that, so far as can now be seen, if these are to be effectively occupied,
sugar must remain the staple industry. Without it the present shipping aci i res cou
not have been established or maintained, nor would there have been any justification
for the coastal railway now under construction from Rockhampton to bairns, and
which, when completed, will connect practically the whole of the Queensland sugar
districts and adjacent high lands with the railway systems of the Commonwealth.
IV.—MANUFACTURERS.
48. The manufacturers of raw sugar may be divided into two classes:
(a) The refiners who manufacture raw sugar, or those who make marketable
sugar for direct consumption.
(b) The owners of mills who manufacture raw sugar and sell to the refiners.
49. When mills are owned by private individuals or companies they are termed
“ Proprietary Mills,” while the Co-operative Mills, where the business is controlled by
the farmers supplying cane, are designated “ Central Mills.” There are also four mills
vested in the Treasurer of Queensland, and these are known as “ Government Mills.
50. The evidence shows that nearly the whole of the Proprietary Mills were erected
between the years 1880 to 1895. Since that time the expansion, of the manufacturing
branch of the industry has been almost entirely provided by capital advanced by the
State to co-operative bodies of farmers on the security of their freeholds, and supple-
mented from time to time by sums taken out of mill earnings for improvement or
extension.


51. The nine mills owned by the Colonial Sugar Refining Company make about
one-third of the Australian output of raw sugar. The capital outlay on these mills
was £1,647,122, approximately £lBO,OOO for each mill. The capital cost of other mills
was from £125,000 downwards. As a rule, these mills are of smaller capacity than those
owned by the refining company. Every mill requires a considerable amount of working
capital.
52. Apart from the price of sugar, the supply of cane, relative to the capacity and
cost of the mill, is the most important element in the manufacturing department. Next
in order rank the quafity of the cane, the cost of labour, and the efficiency of both the
technical and commercial control of the business.
53. The law of averages must prevail, at any rate so far as irremediable circum-
stances are concerned, if we wish to arrive at a true appreciation of the position. Both the
quantity and quality of cane largely depend upon variable and uncontrollable conditions,
and the price of sugar is regulated by the markets of the world. In some cases years
of loss alternate with years of profit. Just calculations therefore can only be based
upon a series of seasons.
54. In the case of new mills, many years are sometimes occupied in working up to a
profitable output. It was stated in evidence that the Pioneer Mill, owned by Messrs.
Drysdale Bros., made no profit for the first twelve years. (Q. 7915.)
55. It was generally claimed that the mills were up-to-date and of reasonable
efficiency. In the case of mills behind modern standards it was contended that the present
circumstances of the industry did not justify any expenditure upon improvements.
56. Some witnesses expressed the opinion that present plants should be scrapped
and superseded by mammoth factories, such as now obtain in Hawaii. Figures sub-
mitted to the Commission showed that, if properly equipped and managed, mills of
moderate size could do very satisfactory work, and there appeared to be much to confirm
the view that in Australian circumstances the most profitable results can be secured
by mills treating about 100,000 tons of cane in a season. Many of the mills inspected
by the Commission were of this standard, but a full supply of cane is seldom available.
In consequence of the great variation in crops, the capacity of mills has to be in excess
of average requirements. Only in the Burdekin district can an even output be main-
tained. This is a dry area, but all the natural requirements for successful irrigation
are present, and are taken full advantage of by farmers. Hence, being largely indepen-
dent of seasonal conditions, both millers and growers are more successful in that district
than in any other.
57. The idea prevailed among a section of the growers that he mills were retaining
an excessive share of the proceeds of the business. As proof of this an elaborate table
of alleged cane values was submitted to the Commission at Bundaberg. Examination
showed that this table was founded on the fallacy that each unit of sugar in the cane
was of equal value irrespective of whether the percentage of sugar in the juice was ig
or low, while in estimating refined sugar values both Excise and discounts were omi ted.
This was only one of many instances indicating the extent to which the economics ot
the industry are misunderstood, even by some of those engaged in it.
58. Most of the shareholders in the Central Mills are growers,but many of the growers
are not shareholders, and this difference of relationship to the mill appeared to be a
fruitful source of discontent even when it implied no actual disadvantage.
59. In several of the Central Mills shareholders and non-shareholders are on an equal
footing, except that the latter have no part in the management of the business, in a
few cases there have been, in some years, a differentiation in the prices paid for cane
to the two classes of growers. In the Racecourse Central Mill, the shareholders^ d
received bonuses on their cane, averaging 4jd. per ton It was claimed tat
shareholders were entitled to some privileges in return for pledging eir e 0 Bas
security for advances made by the State, besides undertaking other responsi ii ies rmn
which non-shareholders were free,|and which many of them at the inception ot the
mills had distinctly refused to undertake. (Questions 18013-18014.)
60. The opinion was advanced that the risks taken by mortgagees under the Sugar
Works Guarantee Act were only nominal. Where mills have been taken over y e
Government, their deeds have been returned to land-owners. Evidence was given,
however, that in the case of the East Moreton Mill, notices of loiec osure on
lands were actually given by the Government, and foreclosure was on y P®® ve “® '
the bank advancing £32,000 to liquidate the Company s whole liability to the State.


61. Shares in the Central Mills were issued in proportion to the amount advanced by
the Treasurer on the respective securities. Hence it followed that some holdings of shares
were larger than others. Exception was taken to this on the ground that it was con-
trary to the “ true principles ” of co-operation. In the case of most of the mills it
was clear that, without the large properties, the necessary freehold security could not
have been obtained. In the Plane Creek Company, where the alleged evil was most
prominent, every shareholder has but one vote, and all suppliers are treated exactly
alike. In many instances it was clear that the success of the mills was due to the
business capacity of the larger shareholders.
62. The most successful of the central factories, having regard to both price of cane
and mill profits, has been the Mulgrave Central Mill. Its circumstances have been
unusually favourable, particularly in regard to the supply of cane. The net profits of
this company for a period of fifteen years were set out as follows :
Question 3339. —The total quantity of cane crushed by the Mulgrave Mill up to 31st December
1910?—746,913 tons. Net profit made by the company per ton of cane crushed? — Total quantity
of sugar manufactured by the company up to 31st December, 1910 ?—88,787 tons. Profit per ton of sugar ?
—4s. 3d. Percentage of profit on the value of the manufactured sugar? —2 14 per cent.
63. In regard to the Central Mills generally, it may be said that the sums set aside
for liquidation of liabilities to the State Treasurer, and necessary maintenance and
improvement, were never more than ordinary business prudence should dictate.
64. Excepting those of very limited capacity, all Australian mills have a properly
staffed and equipped laboratory, and the process of manufacture is generally under
complete chemical control. The Colonial Sugar Refining Company has in this respect
a great advantage, because its large interests enable it to maintain a central staff of
highly trained experts to check, compare, and advise upon the work of its several mills.
In this way a degree of efficiency is secured, quite unattainable by mills working as
separate units.
65. T 1 le value of cane to the mill-owner does not depend entirely upon the
percentage of sugar it contains. A small supply of very rich cane is not so
profitable to a mill as a full supply of cane of fair average quality. Usually mills
pay the same price to all their suppliers for sound and mature cane, but with some
restrictions as to the varieties to be grown. This is the most popular system with
growers, as it avoids the risks connected with payment by analysis, under which the
value of a farmer’s cane may be depreciated by a number of causes, including the
period of the season at which it is harvested.
66. The Colonial Sugar Refining Company gives its growers the option of
payment under a number of different schemes, based upon the sugar contents of the
cane. Under the individual system this is ascertained by the daily analysis of each
grower’s cane. When growers unite and choose to be paid on the collective value
of their cane, they have the further option of deciding w r hether payment shall be
based upon laboratory tests or upon the sugar actually made during the season.
In districts where serious loss is likely to arise from severe frosts, growers have the
additional option of a fixed price for their cane. The quality of cane is affected by
many influences, and when growers choose to be treated individually wide differences
in price occur. The Company’s mills are worked as a single proposition, and the
same price is paid for cane of equal quality throughout, irrespective of local con-
siderations. It is contended, therefore, that comparisons between the Company’s
prices and others should be based upon averages, and not upon prices paid by
particular mills.
67. Prices of cane vary considerably, but except in the case of very small mills
the minimum price paid is about 12s. 6d. per ton, while the average would be,
approximately, 1 Is. 6d. The average price paid by the Colonial Sugar Refining
Company for ten years ended 1910 was 15s. 4|d per ton. The prices paid by the
more successful co-operative mills are naturally higher than those paid by proprietary
mills, but the higher rates of the former during recent years were preceded by very
low prices while these mills were contending against initial difficulties and working
up to a profitable output. Prices in the Aorth, where the cane is richer in sugar,
are usually higher than those ruling in the South.
68. With reference to the manufacture by the mills of a white sugar for direct
consumption, it was shown that the demand for this class of sugar was very limited,
that theie was great difficulty in selling it, and that the price realized was 30s per
ton below the price of refined sugar, Mr, W. Gibson, of Bingera, where half of the


output is sold to the refinery and the other half put on the open market, stated that
there was practically no extra profit in making white sugar. (Q. 22459.) At
Nerang Central Mill, after allowing for the additional quantity of cane required, a
loss of about 10s. per ton was sustained in 1910 by making white sugar instead
of raw.
V.—REFINERS.
69. The refining business is carried on by two companies. The Colonial Sugar
Refining Company is much the larger concern, having refineries at Brisbane, Sydney,
Melbourne, Adelaide, and Auckland. The last-named was beyond the scope of the Com-
mission’s inquiry. The capital outlay on the Company’s refineries in Australia was
£1,401,110, and the refineries now stand in the Company’s books at a value of £1,163,404.
70. The Millaquin Company only refines at Bundaberg, but sells its sugar wherever
it can find a market in the Commonwealth. The value of this Company’s refinerv is
set down at £138,769.
71. Both companies distil industrial or other spirits from molasses. Millaquin
draws its supplies from the mills in the Bundaberg district only, and the Colonial Sugar
Refining Company from Fiji, supplemented to some extent by molasses from its New
South Wales mills.
72. The predecessor of the Colonial Sugar Refining Company, in the production
of refined sugar, was the Australasian Sugar Company, established in Sydney in 1842.
The present company was formed in 1854, and, on the Ist January, 1855, took over the
business then carried on by the Australasian Sugar Company. From 1855 to 1887, the
liability of shareholders was unlimited, and the accounts were not published. In 1887,
the company was registered as with limited liability, and copies of the published records
of the company since that date were furnished to the Commission.
73. These records show that the company has a paid-up capital of £3,000,000,
which, on the 29th April, 1910, was divided among 1,740 shareholders. No watering of
stock has taken place. The great part of the capital has been contributed by the share-
holders, and the balance transferred to capital account from reserves accumulated
during the 70 years of the company’s existence.
74. Mr. Knox, the company’s general manager, informed the Commission that
there were considerable reserves, in addition to those disclosed in the balance-sheets.
They are all employed in the activities of the company, and materially assist in the produc-
tion of profits. The profits made outside Australia have been applied to the extension of
the company’s operations in Fiji. The business is conducted as a whole, and no separate
accounts are kept showing the profit or loss of each of the company’s several undertakings.
Exact figures, however, were given as to the profits per ton of sugar in refining, and the
profits per ton of cane in the manufacture of raw sugar.
75. The business of the Millaquin Company was originally established by a private
firm, and was subsequently taken over by the Queensland National Bank. The present
company was formed on the 4th April, 1911, with a capital of £500,000. The Queensland
National Bank still holds the bulk of the stock. In the case of this company, statements
were submitted, showing in detail the result of each branch of the company’s business
for the nine years ending 1910.
76. The two refining companies purchase raw and sell refined sugars on similar
terms and conditions.
77. Sugar is purchased by the refineries on a basis of 94percent.net titre, sugars
of a higher or lower strength being paid for proportionately, provided a certain average
standard of quality is maintained. Mr. S. W. Davids, manager of the Mulgrave Central
Mill Company, thus explained the precautions taken by millers to check the analyses of
the refinery : Our own chemist analyses the sugar before it goes away, and we get
the returns from every shipment. Our analyses tally with the Colonial Sugar Refining
Company’s every time absolutely.” (Q. 3313.)
78. Sugar is purchased by the refiners from the mills at a basic price of £9 7s. 6d.
for sugar analyzing 94 per cent, net titre. An additional payment—usually called
“ bonus is made by the refiner to the extent of 90 per cent., or 18s. in the £l, on
any increase in the selling price of the quality of sugar known as lA, in excess of £l9
per ton. In actual practice, the whole of the increase in selling price above the standard
of £l9 is paid to the miller. The difference between 18s. and £1 is fully absorbed by
discounts to purchasers, and the extra number of tons of raw sugar upon which the
bonus is paid. It is manifestly impossible to make from a ton of 94 per cent, net titre
a ton of almost absolutely pure sugar.


79. In every case the refiners supply the mills with bags free of charge, and pay
exchange, insurance, harbor dues, and all freights- and other transport charges on raw
sugar from the port of production to the refineries.
80. In calculating refiners’ profits on the basis of £l9 for refined sugar, £4 per ton
has to be allowed for JExcise and £1 7s. for discounts, the latter including special
reduction to manufacturers. This leaves a net price of £l3 13s. per ton. The principal
charges to be met by the refiners are bags and transport charges on raw sugar £1 4s.
per ton, cost of refining £1 ss. 9d. per ton, depreciation 4s. 6d. per ton. The reduction
in tonnage owing to wastage in the process of refining and the great difference between
the strength of raw and refined sugar has also to be taken into account. This was
explained to the Commission in the following question and answer
Question 27457—Y0u say in your statement that the conversion of raw sugar of a strength of
94 per cent, net titre means a loss of at least per cent. Is that per cent, exclusive of the syrup ?
Answer (bv Mr. Knox) ; It is not inclusive of the syrups. It is the difference in strengths plus the actual
loss in manufacture. You cannot melt sugar and recover the whole of it. There is some destruction, once
you melt sugar, before you turn it into sugar again.
81. It is impossible to make reliable comparisons as to the margins between the prices
of raw and refined sugar in Australia and elsewhere. Such comparisons can only be
approximations, because the conditions upon which raw sugar is bought and refined
sugar sold vary largely, and, to be of any value at all, care must be taken that the sugars
are of the same quality. In his statement, published as an Appendix to the Minutes of
Evidence, Mr. Peacock erroneously places German first marks granulated on an equality
with Colonial Sugar Company’s lA. This particular grade of beet sugar is not a refined
sugar, as the term is understood in Australia. In the world s markets it sells at prices
far below those quoted for refined sugar of the standard produced by Australian refineries.
The sample submitted to the Commission in Sydney was so much inferior in appearance
to the white cane sugars made by the Queensland mills, and the beet sugar made at the
Maffra factory, that it is quite safe to say it would be practically unsaleable in Australia,
at any rate for domestic purposes. Dr. Maxwell, in his report to the Minister of Trade
and Customs, in January, 1910, in which he compared refiners’ margins in Australia,
London, and New York, omitted to take into account freights on raw sugar, dis-
counts, ’&c., which would have reduced the Australian margin by over £2 per ton.
82. The Milliquin Company sells the whole of its sugar to distributors, but the
Colonial Sugar Refining Company disposes of one-fourth ot its total output to manu-
facturers at a price usually about £1 per ton less than the net price received for sugar
sold to traders. This reduces the average return from the company’s sales by at least
ss. per ton. In some years, however, it has a greater effect. In 1911-12, for instance,
owing to the unexpected rise in the world’s markets after contracts for the year had
been made, the difference between the price paid by manufacturers and that received
for sugar sold for direct consumption amounted to no less than £3 per ton.
83. The profit on refining made by the Colonial Sugar Refining Company during
the five years, 1906-1910, was stated as 15s. per ton of raw sugar. (Question
26844 Statement “A”). After allowing for depreciation, the net profit on refining
was said to be 12s. 6d. per ton.
84. The result of the Millaquin Company’s refining operations for nine and a half
years was explained by the Secretary as follows :
From January to June we refine raw sugars, and this is known as our refining
season; from July to December we refine raw and juice mixed, and
this is called the juice season. Of the profits above shown, £18,883
* was made in the refining seasons. During the refining periods 80,539
tons of raws were melted, so that the profits on the raw sugar refined
amounts to 4s. Bd. per ton. (Q. 22603).
85. Most of the Colonial Sugar Refining Company’s sugar is sold through wholesale
firms, to which discounts are allowed, according to the quantity purchased and the
time within which payment is made. The wholesale distributors in turn allow their
customers similar but smaller discounts, owing to the lesser quantities purchased.
All deliveries are made direct from the refineries, and only in such quantities as are
necessary to meet purchasers’ current requirements. In this way speculation is checked,
and all possibility of a corner in sugar prevented, the company is enabled to maintain
supplies for all its customers, keep its refineries and employees working throughout the
year, and give its Australian suppliers of raw sugar the full benefit of any increase in
market values which may arise. Otherwise, no restriction is imposed upon buyers or


sellers, and it was emphatically denied that there is any arrangement between refiners
themselves, or with the mill-owners making white sugars, either for the regulation of
prices or output, or allocation of markets. (Q. 22251.)
86. The price charged the manufacturers is net, and usually about £1 per ton less
than the net price to wholesale traders. To secure this advantage, manufacturers have
to undertake to limit their purchases to Australian sugars, but the company supplies
imported sugar when required by manufacturers for exportation. A early contracts
are usually made, and are for the supply of current requirements. When manufacturers
have obtained supplies in excess of requirements, increased or reduced prices have been
arranged regarding stocks in hand, according to whether the rates provided in the new
contract are higher or lower than those of the expiring agreement. (Q. 15044.)
87. Imported sugar is not old to any great extent for general distribution, but the
evidence shows that merchants are always on the qui vive for opportunities to place
foreign sugar when Australian market rates will permit them to do so at a profit.
88. The reasons for the “ cut ” price of the sugar supplied to manufacturers were
explained in the Colonial Sugar Company’s general statement, as follows :
(c) The primary point we have to keep in mind is that all the raw sugar
produced in Australia under a protective Tariff must, after refining,
be consumed in Australia, otherwise the surplus would have to be
exported at a heavy loss in competition with sugar produced elsewhere
with coloured labour.
89. Manufacturers generally expressed a preference for Australian refined sugar,
but admitted that a less finished article would suit their purposes. Hence, manufacturers
have to be supplied at prices about on a parity with the landed cost of Java and Mau-
ritius unrefined white sugars.
90. The Colonial Sugar Refining Company imports from Java or Fiji sufficient sugar
to cover shortages in Australian production. During the five years ended 1910, this
sugar, according to the evidence of Mr. Knox, after payment of import duty, cost the
company Is. Bd. per ton less than its Australian purchases. (Question 26844,
paragraph 33.)
91. In the evidence of Mr. G. S. Pearson, of Messrs. Gibbs, Bright, and Co.,
importers, Sydney, some allegations were made against the Colonial Sugar Refining
Company. These charges were recapitulated and emphatically denied by the general
manager of the company in a written statement, tendered in evidence (Question 27521,
paragraphs 6-22). Otherwise, no really definite complaints were made regarding the
company’s business methods, the evidence generally being of a commendatory nature,
as the following extracts illustrate :
Question 12850. —Mr. H. Jones, jam manufacturer, Hobart.—ln Australia they give us better
terms and more conveniences than other people can give us. . . . Question 12856. —How long is it
since }mu bought imported sugar for your jam factory ?—Answer : About three years ago. It was some
hundreds of tons. It was the end of June when our contract expired. We started in July and went on
for some months, and then found it better to go back to the company.
Question 13290. —Mr. T. B. Robson, fruit preserver and jam manufacturer, Hectorville, South
Australia. —We can get sugar from the Colonial Sugar Refining Company just as cheap, or cheaper, than we
can import it. I think that company treats the jam makers very well.
Question 13326.—Mr. Robert McEwin, Glen Ewin, South Australia—The company has not taken
the smallest advantage, and they expect me to behave to them in exactly the same way. . . . Question
13329. —Have you studied the sugar market to see if you could do better by importing sugar ? Answer :
I have, and I could not do better for the past ten years. Some years ago I spoke to the manager of the
Colonial Sugar Refining Company here, and I said, “ I would like to import Mauritius sugar,” and he said,
Certainly, and see how you get on.” I did so, and found that although cheaper at first cost, it lost con-
siderably in weight, and by the time I had it delivered at the factory, it was dearer than the sugar of the
Colonial Sugar Refining Company. The quality was not so good either, and it sweats in the ship’s hold.
The sugar we get from the Colonial Sugar Refining Company is excellent.
Question 14453. —Mr. William Peacock, jam manufacturer, Melbourne. —They always treat the
jam manufacturers very well —they always did.
Question 14600. —Mr. A. C. Palfreyman, jam manufacturer, Melbourne. —The Colonial Sugar Refilling
Company has treated us always better than any other individual or company would. . . Question
14618. —We were free to contract outside, but we thought we could do a little better with the Company.
Question 14919—Randal James Alcock, merchant, Melbourne.—As a dealer in sugar, and allowing
for the duty, do you always find your market free ? —We can get what sugar we want. . . . Question
14920.—C0u1d you get the" Colonial Sugar Refining Company to fulfil an order of 50,000 tons ?—No, we
would not want it; we could order all our legitimate requirements. . . . Question 14921. What do
you mean by legitimate requirements ? —The Company would not let us speculate in sugar. If I thought
the price was going up, and I wanted to buy 1,000 tons, the Company would not supply me. lor all our
trade purposes I have not had any difficulty in getting supplies.
F. 13881. G


Question 14991. —Mr. Macpherson Macßobertson, manufacturing confectioner, Melbourne.—l
cannot impute anything unfair to the Company, but they are strict business people.
Question 15064. —Mr. Abel Hoadley, manufacturing confectioner, South Melbourne.—We get sugar
to-day cheaper than we did twenty years ago.
Question 15115. —Mr. G. Wright, managing director of Taylor Bros., Limited, jam manufacturers,
Sydney.—-I am quite satisfied with my arrangement with the Colonial Sugar Refining Company, and the
Company has always treated me very fairly.
92. Mr. C. E. Young, of Fairymead, referring to a statement made by a witness,
saidl would like to refer to some evidence given by Mr. Pearson, on behalf of Gibbs,
Bright, and Co. His statement was that plantation whites are controlled by the Colonial
Sugar Refining Company. That does not apply to Fairymead. We are absolutely free
from any such control. In regard to our mill output, we are active competitors in the
open market, selling our sugars in Queensland, Yew South W ales, Victoria, South
Australia, and Tasmania without hindrance. (Question 22251.)
93. The evidence reveals that the Colonial Sugar Refining Company occupies
a commanding position in the industry, secured by steadily pursuing for a long course
of years a policy which has won for it the confidence and good will of practically the
whole of those with whom it has had business dealings. There is nothing to indicate
that any of the Company’s transactions have been in the slightest degree of a
predatory character. Amicable relations subsist between the Company on the one
hand, and the manufacturers of raw and the purchasers of refined sugar on the other.
That the Company earns large profits, both within and without the Commonwealth,
appears to be entirely due to the volume of its business, the command of adequate
capital, the complete utilization of by-products, thorough organization, able adminis-
tration, and high efficiency in every department.
VI. —BEET SUGAR.
94. All that need be said concerning the sugar beet industry in Victoria is that it
should be encouraged as far as possible. In present circumstances, it is not likely that
the sugar requirements of Australia will be met by the production of cane sugar in New
South Wales and Queensland for several years to come. I have no sympathy with the
suggestion that, on political grounds, the Victorian beet sugar industry should be
sacrificed to the cane sugar interests. It must be admitted, however, that the evidence
did not disclose any earnest desire on the part of Victorian farmers to extend the
cultivation of sugar beets.
VII. —SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS.
95. From the evidence submitted to tbe Commission, the following conclusions
are drawn:—
(1.) That an earnest and intelligent endeavour has been made, throughout the
industry, to meet the change of conditions involved by the substitution of white foi
coloured labour.
(2.) That this has been so far successful that the coloured labour is now less
than 5 per cent, of the total labour employed in the production of cane.
(3.) That concurrent with this change in labour conditions, there has been a
large increase in the number of white farmers, and of the white population generally,
in all the sugar districts.
(4.) That the Excise and Bounty legislation, in conjunction with other
measures, has fulfilled the purpose for which it was passed.
(5.) That the total exclusion of coloured labour from the industry is desirable
and should be effected by such legislation as the Premier of Queensland has advised
the Prime Minister that he is prepared to submit to the State Parliament.
(6.) That the profits of Mill-owners and Refiners, while sufficient, are not
excessive.
(7.) That the Consumer and the Primary Producer are better served under
existing conditions than they would be under a system of small independent
Refineries.
(8.) That fanners are not receiving an adequate return for their labour anti
enterprise.


(9.) That the Excise and Bounty legislation should be repealed. This would
place sugar production on the same footing as other indufAies, would afford fanners
substantial relief, and would not increase the cost of sugar to the consumer.
(10.) That the most satisfactory method of regulating wages and conditions of
employment is by means of local Wages Boards.
96. In conclusion, I have the honour to recommend as follows:
(1) Abolition of Excise and Bounty.
(2) Legislation by Commonwealth or States to prevent any coloured
labour being employed in the production of sugar in Australia.
(3) Increase of Import Duty on sugar to £7 per ton.
(4) If Excise and Bounty retained, increase of Import Duty on sugar to
£9 per ton.
(5) Regulation of wages and conditions of employment to be left under
the control of local Industrial or Wages Boards.
(6) That a special Bounty of 2s. per ton be paid on all cane harvested
under Bounty conditions during the 1912 season, as compensation
to growers for the increased cost of production due to the Minister’s
order of August last.
Your Commissioner has the honour to be,
Your Excellency’s most obedient servant,
(1.5.) THOS. W. CRAWFORD.
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia bv Albert J. Mullett,
Acting Government Printer for the State of Victoria.






