

SOUVENIR
Jubiee.
Mount Pleasant
Methodist
Church,
Ballarat East.
1855-1905.




REPORT
Trustees of the Methodis. Church, Mount Pleasant,
FOR THE
50th or Jubilee Year, 1905.
Christian Friends,
J7E, your Trustees, naturally feel reluctant to review
]P \/fyl t^le Histor y y° ur Church for the past half-
century. Whilst some remember the Bunin-
yong Tribe of Aborigines wandering over this place, and the kangaroo with
other marsupials which were occasionally seen and captured, very few remember
vividly the first established Church. It is doubtful whether any but Mr. and
Mrs. Peter Blight remember the small tent which was used for prayer meeting
purposes. Subsequently, we think, we have sufficient data to be able to say that
about the end of 1854 some of our Christian fathers established a Wesleyan
Methodist Chapel, by bringing a large tent from Pennyweight and fixing it on
Mount Pleasant for public worship, and, from information obtained, many a
warm, hearty meeting they had. The presiding minister was the Rev. Theophilus
Taylor —a most earnest and enthusiastic preacher. He died in 1857, and was
succeeded by the Rev. Jas. Bickford. Amongst the early founders may be


Mrs. John James.
Mrs. Eustace
Mrs. John Dunn


mentioned a few without invidiousness : Messrs. Blight, Phillips, J Caddy
Dennis, Osbourne, Trathan, J. Jeffrey, and R. Harris. Ihe first evolution from
the primitive tent was the addition of rude slab walls., with firmly fixed seats.
It goes without saying that happy and prosperous times followed, abundant
mercy bestowed, souls saved, and a growing Church. In the middle of 18551
families began to settle, forming quite a little tent town. Mr. and Mrs. Tre-
thowan, with a family of six children, pitched a large tent, and it maybe added a
constant Church membership has been maintained up to the present time.
Mrs. Trethowan, being now 88 years of age, has survived her husband by
several years, but the bond of affedtion still remains. Mr. and Mrs. John Dunn
about this time also pitched their home tent, and became true and consistent
members until the Lord called Mr. Dunn to Himself, leaving Mrs. Dunn and
family to mourn their loss ; also the James family, with Mr. and Mrs.
Champion, Anthony, Skewes, Eustace, and others too numerous to mention,
arrived. This of course caused another development, culminating in the
eredtion of a wooden construaion which was considered almost a colossal
structure. Some that are present will well remember the buttresses fixed to the
sides, making it look rather abortive. Messrs. Corin, Champion, Roberts,
Berriman, Tredinnick, Russell, Casley, Benney, Capt. S. Osbourne, Eustace,
John James, S. James, and J. S. Trethowan were some of the leading men at
that time; other comers included the Rev. Thos. James, then a distinguished
preacher in the Circuit, also Mr. William James, one of our present Trustees,
and late Secretary.


MR. PETER BLICHT
MRS. PETER BLICHT
MRS JS. TR[?]OWAN SO[?]


The various reports which follow show that the power of God worked
marvellous results, and that the undertaking was approved by the Master.
Souls were saved, poverty alleviated, social reforms began, and a truly forward
movement resulted; a Band of Hope was commenced; and several wonderful
revivals were the result of earnest prayer and submission to Christ; “ imitation
of Christ being the creed. A decade having passed away, this present building
was erected about 40 years ago, showing the continual evolutionary process.
Mr. Doane was the architect, and the names of Messrs. Champion, Skewes,
Trathan, Bernman, Biight, Opie, J. S. Trethowan, C. C. Growcott, and Capt.
Morton may be mentioned with honor as active men connected with the build-
ing. It also may be truly said that vigorous piety, combined with pure light and
truth, continued, and many were “ born of the Lord.” Whilst the old pioneers
were struggling with the battles of life, this spiritual home afforded a shady
retreat and gave opportunity for “ perennial life and spiritual growth.” Revi-
vals of religion of a remarkable kind at various periods have taken place, and
these walls have re-echoed with Hallelujahs. Some men object to revivals
nowadays, but rarely is this the case with the man of active piety, experiencing
conscious spiritual life and power. It seems to need sometimes “ a sound as of
a rushing of a mighty wind ” to set us right and clear the mists of doubt and sin
away.
One of the principal attractions of this Church has been its choir singing.
Messrs. Glasson, Vawdrey, Stevens, Sampson, J. S. Trethowan, and Nicholas


SABBATH SCHOOL
MOUNT PLEASANT METHODIST CHURCH.


are some of the conductors that may be mentioned, with Mr. J. Woolcock and
the Misses Webster, Champion, and Hosking as organists. It is certain that
for earnest and vigorous singing no choir has excelled Mount Pleasant.
Harmony has characterised it for years, and if one man may be mentioned as
its central figure and rallying point it is without doubt Mr. J. S. Trethowan.
It may not be uninteresting to state that the first marriage in this building was,
that of Mr. and Mrs. Caddy, who received a Bible as a memento of the event.
Mrs. Eustace may be mentioned as one that attended the first Anniversary in
the Tent Church. It is said that the name of Mount Pleasant was first
suggested by Messrs. Roach, Thomas, Caddy, and Moyle.
In conclusion, your Trustees hope and trust that the imperfect description
given here will elicit charity at your hands, as many imperfections, missing and
broken links, will be discovered by some, mistakes by others, and perhaps
apparent indiviousness in omitting to mention some and mentioning others.
However, we trust it will be received in the spirit in which it is given, and that
it may incite us as we begin another half-century to carry on the evolving work
under God’s blessing, the good spirit meanwhile so moulding the characters
of the young, that when they become old they will not depart from the way of
loyalty to the God of their fathers.
CHAS. W. GROWCOTT, HON. SECRETARY.
HENRY CHAMPION, HON. TREASURER.
BALLARAT LITNQ. AND PRINTING CO. (SUCCESSORS TO NIVEN & CoJ


The
PRESEAR
MINISTER
REV
HORTON
WILLAMS




r.®
itVM ft P.in* .nv
Ik W«Pm ltd. > !
