

VICTORIAN RAILWAYS.
ROPORT
UPON THE
APPLICATION OF ELECTRIC TRACTION
TO THE
MELBOURNE
SUBURBAN RAILWAY SYSTEM.
CHARLES H, MERZ,
28, Victoria Street,
London, S.W.


VICTORIAN RAILWAYS.
Report
UPON THE
APPLICATION OF ELECTRIC TRACTION
I
TO THE
MELBOURNE
SUBURBAN RAILWAY SYSTEM.
CHARLES H. MERZ,
28, Victoria Street,
London, S.W.




28, Victoria Street,
Westminster,
London, S.W.
30 th June, 1908.
Gentlemen,
MELBOURNE SUBURBAN RAILWAYS.
In accordance with, the arrangement made with the Hon. Sir Thomas Bent,
K.C.M.G., Premier and Minister of Railways of Victoria, and Mr. Thomas
Tait, Chairman, Victorian Railways Commissioners, contained in the Memoran-
dum of Agreement, dated June 12th, 1907, I beg to present herewith my report
upon the application of electric traction to the Melbourne Suburban Railway
System.
Under the terms of this arrangement I visited Melbourne, accompanied
by Mr. Redman, one of my Engineers, at the end of last year and made a
careful investigation of the whole of the suburban system, considering the
special features of each route separately. The detailed information thus
obtained and the valuable discussions I had with yourselves and with the Chief
Officers of the Railway Department have enabled me to consider the question
from every point of view, engineering, traffic and financial.
I was greatly impressed with the importance of your suburban traffic;
whilst at the present time it is apparently handled with little difficulty, it is
steadily growing, and the question of providing additional facilities involving
further capital expenditure, would in any case have to be considered before
very long. The present is therefore an opportune time for examining the
possibilities of electric traction, apart altogether from the advantages it offers
to the Public.
I have divided my report i£fti five sections :
Section A.—The general problem and the system of electric traction
recommended.
Section- B.—Power production and the supply of power to the trains.
Section C.—Rolling stock for electric service.
Section D.—lncidental considerations.
Section E.—Estimates of capital outlay, revenue, and expenses and
conclusions.
Besides giving estimates of the result of operating the whole system
electrically, the report gives detailed estimates for the different stages in which


I consider the work could best be carried out. It also gives, as requested, the
■cost of converting the Port Melbourne and St. Kilda Branches only, although
it will be seen that I recommend a somewhat larger scheme for the first stage.
My estimates are based upon actual experience of similar work elsewhere,
allowance being of course made for Australian conditions, freight charges and
customs duties. The allowance for the last named is based upon the latest
information which you have sent me with regard to the new Tariff and for the
complete scheme amounts to over £125,000; as I understand that the Common-
wealth Government returns a portion of this sum to the State, the question as
to how this amount should be treated in calculating the total expenditure
involved, is worthy of consideration.
So many heavy suburban lines in this and other countries have been
converted to electric traction that there is nothing experimental about the
present proposal. Previous investigations, both in America and Europe, and
practical acquaintance with the results actually obtained on many of the
largest systems already in operation, enable me to predict with some assurance
the results obtainable in Melbourne.
A summary of the more important conclusions and recommendations will
be found on page 72.
A list of the specifications proposed for the various parts of the work
and of the drawings, tables and maps which accompany the Report is given
after the Table of Contents, on pages vi. to viii. Technical details are, as far as
possible, omitted from the Report itself, being fully dealt with in the Speci-
fications.
I have to express my thanks to yourselves, the Chief Officers of the Rail-
way Department, the members of the Electrification Committee, and many
others for the cordial assistance given me while in Melbourne, and for the
great trouble they have taken throughout in supplying me with information,
which has added materially to the value of my report.
I have the honour to be,
Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
(Signed) CHARLES H. MERZ.
To
The Victorian Railways Commissioners.
Melbourne.


THE APPLICATION OF ELECTRIC TRACTION
TO THE
MELBOURNE SUBURBAN RAILWAY SYSTEM.
Victorian Railways.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
SECTION A .
THE GENERAL PROBLEM AND
THE SYSTEM OF ELECTRIC TRACTION RECOMMENDED.
Page.
Introductory.— Primary Object of Report — Proposed Stages of Con- 1
version—Suburban Traffic : Railways and Tramways—Tramway
Competition—Cost and Advantages of Electric Traction.
Schedule Speed and Acceleration.— lmportance and Cost of High 7
Speed and Acceleration—Schedule Speed Recommendations —
Effect of Acceleration on Power Consumption Acceleration
Recommended.
Multiple-unit System.—Advantages and Recommendations. 12
Train Service and Time-Table.— Estimated Increase of Traffic — 13
Service Allowed for and Time-Table Proposed—lmportance of
Regular Service--Existing and Proposed Services Compared.
Systems oe Electric Traction. —Conductor Rail—Overhead Line— 18
High Tension Direct Current—Three Phase Alternating
Current—Single Phase—Direct Current Relative Cost and
Advantages.
System Recommended. — Advantages of Conductor Rail —Superiority of 23
Direct Current Motor Equipment—Conclusions as to System—
Supply and Consumption of Power.
SECTION B.
POWER PRODUCTION AND
THE SUPPLY OF POWER TO THE TRAINS.
General. —Importance of Cost of Power —Unsuitability of Existing 26
Power Stations in Melbourne —Essential features of a good
Power Station Site—Demand on Power Station.
Location oe Power Station.— Considerations affecting Choice of Site 27
—Available Sources of Coal Supply --Proximity of Power
Station to Railways—Cost of Transmitting Power Electrically
from Coalfields —Cost of Carrying Coal to Melbourne- Site in
Central Position Recommended—Available Sites in Melbourne—
Advantages of Yarraville Site.
Yarraville Power Station and Tyre oe Plant Proposed.—Condi- 31
uons of Loud— Type and Particulars of Plant Recommended,
and Capacity of Power Station.
Substations.- -Position —Equipment—Supply from Power Station : 35
Overhead Wires and Underground Cables Compared.


SECTION B {Continued).
Page.
Power Department. —Estimated Capital and Operating Costs. 37
Track Equipment.— Conductor Bail — Bonding—Section Switches — 39
Alterations to Permanent Way—Capital Cost and Maintenance
of Track Equipment.
SECTION C.
ROLLING STOCK FOR ELECTRIC SERVICE.
General.— Size and Number of Train-Units — Types of Stock — Cost of 43
New Type of Stock —Existing Steam Stock: Cost of Alterations
Bequired—Station Staff determined by Type of Stock—Type
Becommended.
Electrical Equipment.— Details of Electrical Equipment — Total Cost 49
of Stock—Cost of Maintenance —Inspection Pits—Car Shed—
Train Operating Staff.
SECTION D.
INCIDENTAL CONSIDERATIONS.
Train Working.— Block Sections — Signalling and Safety Devices — 52
System of Train Despatch —Alterations or Additions to Existing
Track and Stations—Provision for Holiday and Special Traffic.
Power and Lighting Scheme.— Spencer Street Pow r er Station — St. 57
Kilda Tramways—Bailway Stations and Offices —Newport and
North Melbourne Workshops—Cost of Cables and Substations—
Energy Consumption—Revenue to Power Department.
SECTION E.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS.
Cost of Steam Traction. — Normal Increase of Traffic with Steam; 62
Capital and Operating Cost.
Cost of Electric Traction.— Summaries of Capital and Operating Cost 65
—Electric v. Steam Traction; Capital and Operating Costs com-
pared—Einancial Besults of Electric Traction at each Stage.
Becommendation. — Order of Conversion Becommended : Beasons — 68
Reserve and Depreciation Funds—lnsurance and Renewal Funds
—Tramway Competition—Conclusion.
Summary of Conclusions. 72
A List of Tables, Diagrams and Plates will be found on next page.


TABLES.
(in the Report).
Pagjb.
Section A, I. Victorian Railways—Analysis of Passenger Traffic. 2
11. Growth of Suburban travel in Melbourne. 4
111. Schedule speed and length of average run on various 9
electric railways.
IV. Traffic on which proposed Time Table is based. 15
I'. Summary of proposed Time Table and comparison with 16
steam service.
VI. Annual train mileage with the 1906 and 1912 services. 17
VII. Total energy consumption for traction purposes. 25
Section B. VIII. Demand on Power Station. 27
IX. Cost of transmitting power electrically from Latrobe 29
Valley and of carrying coal to Melbourne by rail.
X. Details of plant in Power Station at Yarraville. 33
XI. Substations required for different stages. 35
XII. Cost of overhead lines and underground cables. 36
XIII. Cost of power station, substations and high tension feeders. 37
XIV. Operating expenses of Power Department. 38
XV. Situation of section switch gear. 40
XVI. Capital cost of track equipment. 41
XVII. Cost of maintenance of the electrical track equipment. 42'
Section C. XVIII. Make-up of trains for proposed electric service. 43
XIX. Xumber and type of stock required at each stage. 44
XX. Existing suburban rolling stock. 46
XXI. Cost of lengthening and altering suburban steam stock. 47
XXII. Cost of lengthening and altering country steam stock. 48>
XXIII. Cost of new rolling stock, alterations to existing stock and 50
electrical equipment.
XXIV. Cost of inspection pits and Flinders Street Car Shed. 50
XXV. Cost of maintaining rolling stock and electrical equipment. 51
XXVI. Annual cost of train operating staff. 51
Section D. XXVII. Time of trains on block sections (Stage I.). . 53
XXVIII. Cost of and Revenue from, Race traffic in 1912. 56
XXIX. Economy of bulk supply for lighting and tramways. 57
XXX. Cost of cables and substations for power and lighting. 60
XXXI. Energy consumption for Power and Lighting scheme. 61
Section E. XXXII. Capital expenditure on rolling stock with steam traction 63
to deal with a 20 per cent, increase of traffic.
XXXIII. Total capital expenditure at each stage with steam trac- 63
tion to deal with 20 per cent, increase of traffic.
XXXIV. Operating expenses necessary with steam traction to deal 64
with a 20 per cent, increase of suburban traffic.
XXXV. Summary of capital expenditure involved in electric 64
traction and resultant increased interest charges.
XXXVI. Summary of operating expenses with electric traction. 65
XXXVII. Comparison of increased cost of electric service with in- 66
creased revenue due to improved facilities.
XXXVIII. Profit from suburban service—l9o6 and 1912. 67


DIAGRAMS.
(in the Report).
Section A. Rig- 1. Growth of suburban travel in Melbourne. 3
Fig. 2. The effect of acceleration on running speed. 7
Fig. 3. Margin with electrical operation for making up time. 8
Fig. 4. Influence of acceleration upon power consumption. 10'
Fig. 5. Margins for making up time with various accelerations. 11
Fig. 6. Probable increase in suburban railway traffic. 14
Fig. 7. Number of coaches in operation throughout the day. 18
Stage 111.
Fig. 8. Number of coaches in operation throughout the day. 19 1
Preliminary Stages.
Section B. Fig. 9. Load on Power Station over 24 hours. 31
PLAT E S .
(At the end of Report.)
I. Map of Suburban Railway System.
11. Map of Suburban Railways and Tramways.
111.-YI. Gradients.
YII.-XIV. Speed Time Distance Curves.
XY.-XYI. Graphic Time Tables.
XYII. Yarraville Electric Power Station.
XYIII. Traction Substation.
XIX. Diagrams of 12,000 volt cable network.
XX. Types of protected Conductor Rail.
XXI. Track Equipment Proposed location of Conductor Rail on
Track.
XXII. Rolling Stock- General arrangement of Stock for electric
working.
XXIII. Types of Stock in use on electrically operated Railways.
XXIY. Rolling Stock —Arrangement of proposed new stock.
XXY. Rolling Stock —Arrangement of Driving cab.
XXYI. Graphic Time Table.
A List of the Documents accompanying the report and bound separately
will be found on the next page.


DOCUMENTS ACCOMPANYING REPORT, BOUND
SEPARATELY.
SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE CONVERSION SCHEME RECOMMENDED,
COVERING THE PORT MELBOURNE, ST. KILDA, SANDRINGHAM
AND BROADMEADOWS BRANCHES. (STAGE I.).
No.
1. Steel Work for Engine and Boiler House including the complete Boiler
House equipment, piping, coal and ash handling gear and Overhead
Traveller.
2. Turbo-Alternators and Condensing Plants.
3. Power Station Switchgear, Auxiliary Motors, etc.
4. Foundations, Jetty, Sidings, Switch House and Auxiliary Buildings.*
5. Equipment of Substations.
6. Substation Buildings.*
7. Overhead Wires and Insulators.
8. H.T. and L.T. Underground Cables.
9 Supply and delivery of Conductor Bail.
10. Supply and delivery of Insulators for Conductor Rail.
11. Supply and delivery of bonds for Conductor and Track Rails.
12. Electrical Equipment of Rolling Stock.
SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE CONVERSION OF THE PORT MELBOURNE
AND ST. KILDA BRANCHES ONLY.
No.
la. Steel Work for Engine and Boiler House including the complete Boiler
House equipment, piping, coal and ash handling gear and Overhead
Traveller.
2a. Turbo-Alternators and Condensing Plants.
3a. Power Station Switchgear, Auxiliary Motors, etc.
4a. Foundations, Jetty, Sidings, Switch House and Auxiliary Buildings.
•sa. Substation Buildings.
6a. Equipment of Substations.
Ta. Overhead Wires and Insulators.
Ba. H.T. and L.T. Underground Cables.
9a. Supply and delivery of Conductor Rail.
10a. Supply and delivery of Insulators for Conductor Rail.
11a. Supply and delivery of bonds for Conductor and Track Rails.
12a. Electrical Equipment of Rolling Stock.
TRAIN WORKING FOR THE CONVERSION SCHEME COVERING PORT
MELBOURNE, ST. KILDA, SANDRINGHAM AND BROADMEADOWS
BRANCHES.
No.
1. Set-working.
2. Roster for motormen and guards.
REPORT AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
OF THE NEWPORT AND NORTH MELBOURNE WORKSHOPS.
*To follow. See pages 34 and 35.


SECTION “ A.”
THE GENERAL PROBLEM
AND
THE SYSTEM OF ELECTRIC TRACTION RECOMMENDED.
INTRODUCTORY.
The primary object of the Report is to determine whether the substitution
of Electric Traction for Steam Traction ou the Melbourne Suburban Railway
System is financially justifiable. This involves a decision as to how, from an
engineering point of view, such a change should be carried out. It also
involves a consideration of the advantages which the Public would secure from
such a change.
A map of the Railways referred to is given on Plate I.
For the purposes of this Report and the various estimates presented, I
have divided the conversion of the Suburban System into three progressive
stages. It may be well at once to define these stages in order that they may be
borne in mind when discussing the various questions. They are: —
Stage I.* The Port Melbourne, St. Hilda, Sandringham and Broad-
meadows Brandies. Route Length, 29 miles.
Stage 11. Stage I. and, in addition, the Camberwell and Williamstown
Branches. Route Length, G 5 miles.
Stage 111. The complete scheme as shown on Plate 1., including, in
addition to Stage 11., the Sunshine, Coburg, Preston,
Heidelberg, Dandenong and Mordialloc Branches. Route
Length, 124 miles.
These three stages are frequently referred to throughout the Report as
Stage 1., Stage 11., Stage 111., but I have also given separately, as requested,
figures for the conversion of the Port Melbourne and St. Hilda Branches only
(Route Length, 6'4 miles). It will be more convenient to state the reasons
for this subdivision towards the end of the Report.
The Melbourne Suburban System bears a relation to the Railway System
as a whole very different from that obtaining in most leading cities of Europe
* It will be seen when we come to the end of the Report that those lines form that portion of the
complete scheme which I recommend should be proceeded with in the first instance.


Yeak ending 30th June, 1906.
Track
Mileage.
' Train
Mileage.
Passenger
Journeys.
1
Passenger |
Receipts.
Suburban System §
298
2,772,669
£595,669
Remaining System
4,006
4,080,135
5,218,252
£903,118 i
Total
4,304
6,852,804
61,695,375
GO
CO
Suburban Percentage
6'92 %
40’5 %
92'0 %
39 - 7 %
and America. The relative importance of the suburban and country- passenger
traffic is shown by- Table I.
TABLE I .
VICTORIAN RAILWAYS—ANALYSIS OF PASSENGER TRAFFIC.
While possibly the Melbourne System is not unique in this respect, it is
doubtful if on any other large railway system the metropolitan traffic forms
so large a proportion of the whole passenger business dealt with, either as
regards train mileage or receipts. In numbers, of course, the suburban
trains exceed the other trains in most great cities, but while in London,
for instance, the long distance trains entering the Metropolis on an ordinary-
day number about 500 out of a total of 8,000 or some 0 per cent., in Melbourne
they form only- 4'5 per cent, of the total. The best comparison is that of
the train mileage: if all the railways having termini in London be con-
sidered, it will be found that the suburban train mileage on those railways is
less than 20 per cent, of their total train mileage; in New York the proportion
is even less. In Victoria, however, the suburban train mileage forms as much
as 40 per cent, of the total train mileage.
In short, whereas in Europe and America the suburban passenger business
of the chief railway’s is in general of less importance than the main line
business, the Victorian Railway System may be considered as divided into
two parts- the suburban and the remainder. The lay-out of the System bears
witness to the great importance of the suburban business, special and distinct
tracks for the radial lines having been laid right into the city to a greater
extent than in any- other place with which I am acquainted.
The preponderance of suburban passenger traffic over the country- traffic
has continued for some y-ears in Melbourne and, looking as far as possible into
the future, it appears likely- to,continue. This seems to be due:— Firstly, to
the large population of Melbourne (520,400) compared with that of the whole
State, amounting to 42-5 per cent, as compared with London 20 per cent.,
Edinburgh TB per cent., Paris till per cent, and Berlin 5 per cent. Secondly,
to the fact that people live away from the centre of the city and are scattered
over a wider area than is general even in American cities, and certainly- to a
greater extent than is usual in England or even on the Continent of Europe.
This is apparent from the density of population which, in Melbourne, is 2,064
per square mile as against 9,510 in Greater London, 11,195 in New York
19,060 in Edinburgh, and a still greater density in Paris and Berlin. In
Sydney, Perth and Wellington, the populations are all denser than in Mel-
bourne. Thirdly, in large measure, to the fact that a large part of the business
■which, in a European or American city, would be dealt with by electric tram-
§ The figures given for the Suburban System in Table I. include the returns for Race and Special
Traffic, and also those for certain outlying sections not comprised in Stage 111. above, viz., Sunshine
to St. Albans, Heidelberg to Eltham, and Mordialloc to Frankston.


ways or separate electric railway systems, is dealt with in Melbourne by the
Suburban Railways.*
I make this last statement having fully in mind that the Cable Tram-
way System in Melbourne is really excellent. Nevertheless, the fact that
the Tramway System is a cable system is no doubt in favour of the Suburban
Railways securing a larger proportion of the longer distance suburban traffic
than would be the case if the Tramways were electrically operated. This
arises, not only from the higher speed possible with an electric tramway system
in the outskirts, but also because a cable tramway system is necessarily re-
stricted in regard to facility of extension and ability to deal commercially with
light and infrequent traffic. A cable tramway is expensive to build and hence
unremunerative to operate unless there is a demand for a more frequent
Causes of
preponder-
ance of
Suburban
Railway
Traffic.
( continued ).
FIG. I—GROWTH OF SUBURBAN TRAVEL IN MELBOURNE
service of cars than is the
case on the outskirts of a
large town. These draw-
backs of a cable system, viz.,
the high first cost and the
difficulty of extending it and
of operatingit economically
with an infrequent service,
prevent new lines, and es-
pecially long lines, being
built so readily as with an
electric system.
The growth of travel
in Melbourne and suburbs,
both tramway and railway,
is shown graphically by
the curve in Fig. 1. Ex-
cept for the depression
during 1902 —1904, the
growth has been continu-
ous and marked.
Table 11. compares the
Suburban Railway and
Tramway traffic and gives
also the travel per head of
the population.
Growth of
Travel in
Melbourne.
As the State owns the Railways, and as the business done by the Suburban
Railways is such an important one, it is of course proper as well as of
great benefit to the community, that the best possible service should be
given consistent with considerations of economy. Apart altogether from any
question of competition, this is a sufficient reason for a thorough investigation
into what electric traction can do in the way of improving the present service,
although this is already better than the steam service to be found in most
capitals.
The routes of the Melbourne Railways and Tramways (shown on Plate II.)
are in many cases parallel, especially near the centre of the city. It will be
* In London the suburban systems that form part of main line railways carry less than one-
fourth of the total suburban passenger traffic, the remainder being handled by separate and
exclusively suburban railway systems and by tramways and omnibuses. In Sydney the suburban
railways carry only a fifth of the total suburban traffic and account for less than one-third of the
total revenue from the suburban passenger business ; in Paris and New York the ordinary railways
carry an even smaller proportion of the total suburban traffic of those cities ; in Melbourne, out of
the total traffic handled by the tramways and suburban railways, the railways now account for
more than one-half.


Year ending BOth June.
Passenger
Journeys.
Journeys
per Head of
Population.
Receipts.
Receipts
per Hoad of
Population.
£
£
1898 —Railways
Tramways
38,912,268
36,245,280
J 159 1
405,776
370,477
\ 1-64
1899 —Railways
Tramways
41,406,374
38,875,210
1 im 1
424,708
889,427
| 1-68
1900 —Railways
Tramways
45,103,936
41,661,580
} 157 )
479,080
415,023
| 1-82
1901 —Railways
Tramways
50,120,411
47,195,647
1 im 1
531,505
465,427
| 2-00
1902 —Railways
Tramways
52,892,749
47,261,572
| 199 |
540,671
454,683
| 1-98
1903 —Railways
Tramways
50,064,367
46,832,910
199 {
527,228
432,505
| 1-91
1904 —Railways
Tramways
49,495,788
49,188,742
| 196 -[
531,902
444,495
| 1-94
1905 —Railways
Tramways
55,156,545
50,297,357
| 206 |
554,532
448,740
| 1-96
1906 —Railways
Tramways
59,477,123
52,925,654
I 216 (
595,669
469,079
j- 2-04
1907 —Railways
Tramways
64,162,344
60,558,098
| 236 |
645,448
518,548
j- 2-20
seen (Table II.) that the Tramway receipts are practically equal to the Subur-
ban Railway receipts and on the routes which are parallel there is, of course,
considerable competition between the two systems, the traffic on any particular
route, no doubt, going to that system which in that particular instance gives
the greater facilities, having in view, of course, both frequency of service and
distance to be travelled. Apart altogether, therefore, from the normal growth
of traffic, there is the question of how far the adoption of electric traction
in Melbourne, with an improved schedule speed and frequency of service,
would result in the Railways securing a greater proportion of the total traffic
than is possible with steam traction.
TABLE 11.
GROWTH OF SUBURBAN TRAVEL IN MELBOURNE.*
I have thought it well to call attention to these general considerations
at the commencement of my Report because they have an important bearing
upon the electrification problem. The real problem is to decide whether it
is commercially sound to adopt electric traction on any or all of the Suburban
Railways. This is necessarily largely dependent upon the natural growth of
the suburban business that will in any ease have to be provided for ;it also
depends upon the increase of traffic which will result from the adoption of
electric traction and the additional facilities offered thereby.
There can be no question that, even when considering the operation of an
entirely new system where an existing equipment has not to be replaced,
electrical operation necessitates a higher capital expenditure than steam opera-
# Tramway Returns (1898-1906) abstracted from Victorian Year Books.


tion does. That is to say, more capital is involved in providing the Electric
Power Station, Line and Rolling Stock Equipment than in providing Steam
Locomotives.
In return for this, and especially if the train service he fairly frequent,
electrical operation should show, if properly carried out, a considerable sav-
ing of operating expenses, especially if these he considered per train mile.*
In addition, electric traction compared with steam traction ensures,
with a well ballasted track such as that of the Melbourne Suburban Railways,
an almost complete abolition of dirt, smoke, noise and smell; such improve-
ments are, perhaps, of even more benefit to people who have to travel every
day than to long distance travellers and will be secured even if the goods
traffic continues to be operated by steam locomotives, for most of the draw-
backs of steam traction arising in this way are caused by the locomotive on
the train itself, and only to a much less degree by locomotives on other trains.
Besides these incidental advantages, electrical operation affords,
where stops are frequent, the means of increasing the schedule speed, that is,
of reducing the time for any particular journey, to an extent commercially
impossible with steam locomotives. This arises from the fact that, as the source
of power is not carried on the train itself, a much greater amount of power can
be applied to the train, especially for short times, and thus the acceleration
can be increased beyond what is possible with a steam locomotive. This same
feature of greater acceleration also greatly facilitates the handling of a large
number of trains over heavily worked lines and in crowded termini, and re-
duces to a minimum the possibility of delay due to stoppages by signals. The
advantages usually claimed for electric traction compared with steam traction
for suburban traffic, may be stated as follows :
From the Public Poixt of View :
1. Regular and more frequent service throughout the day,
2. Greater punctuality, due to the greater ability of an electric train
to make up lost time (See Fig-. 3).
3. General improvement in the smoothness and safety of working,
duo to the automatic controlling devices whose adoption usually
accompanies electrification.
4. Prevention of fires on property adjacent to the line arising out
of sparks from locomotive uptakes.
5. Practical abolition of smoke, steam and dust and a great reduction
of noise.
6. Possibility of shortening the time of journeys below anything
possible with steam.
7. Improved lighting and cleanliness of carriages and stations.
8. Satisfactory regulation of the heating of coaches.
From the Railwav Manager's Point of Yiew :
1. Higher schedule speed enabling a larger mileage to be obtained
from a given amount of rolling stock and a greater number of
trains to be operated over a given length of track.
2. Continuous and regular movement of trains, and in consequence,
3. More economical employment of train crews.
4. Greater flexibility in making up trains to meet the varying
* It is usual with electric traction to run many more train miles than with steam traction
because the capital having once been spent extra train miles involve very little additional expenditure.
This results in a reduction of the average costs per train mile, even if there be no reduction
in the total cost of operation. (See also page 65.)


From the Railway Manager's Point of View (Continued): -
requirements of the traffic, both throughout the day and on
special occasions, such as race days.*
5. Ability to reverse trains at termini immediately, without engine
shunting, thus reducing the time wasted, the tracks occupied
and the signal and point movements, and entirely dispensing
with shunting locomotives,* and in consequence,
G. Increase in the capacity of termini,* and postponement of terminal
extensions.
7. Elimination of the lighting up of locomotives, and of the ineffi-
cient water, coal handling, auxiliary, lighting, and heating
appliances.
8. Use in the Power Station of a cheaper fuel than can be used in
locomotives.
9. Supply of electric power at a low price available for a number of
purposes, such as railway workshops, cranes and capstans, for
which an independent installation would not be justifiable
or economical.
10. Reduction in repairs and an increased life of track, due to the
weight of the driving machinery being distributed throughout
the train instead of being concentrated as in the steam loco-
motive.*
11. Reduced cost of painting, and increased life of all metallic structures
near the railway due to absence of corrosive fumes.
From a Profit Point of Yiew ;
1. Reduction of operating expenses even for the same train mileage,
and considerably greater saving in the expenses per train mile
when the mileage is increased.
2. Increase of revenue due to an increase of traffic.
3. Improved earning power of capital sunk in lines, stations and
rolling stock, due to the increased traffic capacity, thus saving
capital expenditure which would otherwise be necessary to
meet growth of traffic.
The electrification problem in regard to any particular system of suburban
railways already operated by steam, is to decide how far these advantages will
counterbalance the large capital expenditure. If the mere reduction in
operating expenses were to pay interest charges upon this capital expenditure,
there would not be much question, provided the necessary money were avail-
able, of the wisdom of adopting electric traction.
If, however, this be not the case —and it is very seldom the case —it be-
comes necessary, in order to judge the matter from a commercial standpoint,
to put a value upon the other advantages referred to and particularly to
consider the probable increase of traffic due to the more frequent service
which can, in nearly all cases, be profitably run when once electrical opera-
tion is introduced. It is also necessary to make an accurate estimate
of the operating costs if the use of steam locomotives were continued. As
has already been pointed out, electrical operation generally results in a con-
siderable reduction in operating costs per train mile, but if the service is to
be increased in order to obtain the increase of traffic mentioned, it does not
follow that the total operating costs will also be less. On the other hand,
* These assume the adoption of the Multiple-Unit System of electrical operation described on
page 12.


they should not, even taking into account the additional train mileage, greatly
exceed those with steam, especially on a system such as the Melbourne
Suburban System where there is already a fairly frequent service. In order
to make an accurate comparison of the operating costs, it is necessary to
decide upon and compare the service of trains that would be given by the
two systems. By service is meant not only the actual number of trains run,
but also the schedule speed; before discussing the former it may be well to
explain in detail the effect of electrical operation upon schedule speed and see
in what respects this differs from steam operation.
SCHEDULE SPEED AND ACCELERATION.
The possibility of increased schedule speed is the characteristic feature
of electrical operation, especially for a suburban service, that is, a service
with frequent stops. An increase in schedule speed not only benefits the
passenger by shortening the time of his journey, but it increases the desire to
travel and, hence, the revenue of the system. It also enables a given amount
■of rolling stock and permanent way, and a given operating staff, to handle an
increased traffic and, hence, to yield a greater daily revenue.
On a suburban system with frequent stops, such as that in Melbourne,
what is primarily inquired in order to increase the schedule speed is a more
rapid acceleration. Referring to Tig. 2 it will be seen that on a typical run
SECONDS.
FIG. 2.—THE EFFECT OF ACCELERATION ON RUNNING SPEED.
of '825 mile on the level (the
average length of run on
the Melbourne Suburban
System) one of the present
steam trains could cover
the distance in 14T seconds,
the speed increasing up to
the time the brakes are
applied. If we wish to re-
duce the time taken we
must get up speed more
quickly —in other words
we must increase the accel-
eration.
The average acceleration obtained at present on the Melbourne Suburban
System with steam operation, as shown in Tig. 2 by the dotted curve, is '36
miles per hour per second. The full curve shows the reduction in time taken
for the run as a result of increasing the acceleration to !J miles per hour per
second. Xumerous attempts have, from time to time, been made on other
railway systems to obtain high acceleration with steam locomotives but it is
obvious that in the case of Melbourne this could not be done without new
locomotives, and even then, the improvement which can be made is limited.
On the other hand, with electrical operation, accelerations up to two miles per
hour per second have been obtained in practice.
In actual operation it is usual to take advantage of the high acceleration
possible with electric traction and to accomplish as much as possible of each
run by coasting. Tig. 3 illustrates this. It shows how, in ordinary work-
ing, the motor would accelerate the train from A to B where current would be
cut off and the train allowed to coast from B to C, the speed getting gradually
less due to friction and windage. At C the brakes would be applied in order
to bring the train to rest at 1), completing the run in 240 seconds. If,
however, the time-table be arranged so as to allow of the run under normal


running conditions being accomplished as per the curve ABC'])* it is always
possible in emergency, as when it is desired to make up time, to allow the
train to take current to C l , at which point the brakes would be applied,
bringing the train to rest at D 1 thus decreasing the time by 8 per cent., though
SECONDS.
FIG. 3. MARGIN WITH ELECTRICAL OPERATION FOR MAKING UP TIME.
with a greater expenditure of current. While this is a perfectly permissible
way of operating the trains when they are late, or in emergency, and is a
valuable feature of electric traction, it is not a course that would be adopted
normally if the greatest economy were desired.
We have seen that it is the high acceleration possible with electric
traction, and more particularly with the system of propulsion by motors
distributed along the train and known as the “ multiple-unit ” system,! which
makes an increase in speed possible. The decision as to the schedule speed and
acceleration to be used is fundamental and one of the starting points of all
calculations relating to electric traction.
Yery high schedule speeds cannot, however, even with electric traction,,
be obtained for nothing—in other words, the higher the schedule speed the
greater the first cost of the equipment and the expenditure of power. The first
question, therefore, which has to be settled in considering the basis upon which
a comparison should be made between the costs of steam and electrical opera-
tion, is the schedule speed we are to adopt compared with the existing schedule
speed. If, on the one hand, the only desire is to give the public a better service,
independent of financial considerations, the schedule speed is limited only by
the maximum acceleration possible and which can be adopted consistently
with comfort to passengers. If, on the other hand, one were to be content with
the present schedule speeds, and were only to consider electrical operation
from the point of view of securing the other advantages mentioned on page 5,
it would be possible to reduce considerably the capital cost of converting the
system, and the operating expenses.
It has been the starting point in these calculations that some increase
in schedule speed is desirable although the present speed of the suburban trains
is considerably better than that obtained to-day in many cities. The Suburban
System of Melbourne is, however, for reasons already touched upon, of
exceptional importance, and as the electrification of the Railways would form
a fitting opportunity for increasing the schedule speed, I have been very closely
into the question as to how far in this direction it would be practicable to gO'
having regard to commercial considerations. I have reached the conclusion,
after studying fully the effect of various other schedule speeds, both higher
* In order to accomplish this it is worth while in practice to erect posts where current should
normally be cut off; the points where these should be fixed can be obtained from Plates VII. to XIV.
t See page 12.


Length of
Railway. Single Line.
Miles.
Average
Distance
between
Stops.
Yards.
Schedule
Speed.
Miles per
Hour.
Boston Elevated ...
16
2,400
13-0
Central London ... ... ... ... ...
13
840
14-0
Lancashire & Yorkshire (Liverpool & Southport)
69
2,290
30-0
Liverpool Overhead
13
670
19-0
London Metropolitan District ... ... ...
56
1,042
15-7
Manhattan Elevated ... ... ... ... *
118
1,775
14-7
New York Central (New York) ...
85
4,600
21-0
New York Subway
55
2,030
16-0
North Eastern (Tynemouth Branches) ...
78
2,000
20-5
North Western Elevated (Chicago)
25
1,320
10-0
Prussian State Railways (Hamburg-Altona)
45
2,190
19T
Pennsylvania E.R. (West Jersey) ... ... j
160
8,800
28-8
Paris Metropolitan ... ... ... ...
30
540
16-2
and lower, and the consequent financial results, that an increase of 25 per cent,
in the average speed of trains over the system is the correct limit, taking every-
thing into consideration, and I think this improvement ample to justify the
figures discussed on page 15 as to the increase in passenger receipts to be
anticipated.
Table 111. gives particulars of the schedule speeds on various systems
operated electrically, the actual schedule speed on any particular system
being controlled to a great extent by the average length of run.
TABLE 111.
SCHEDULE SPEED AND LENGTH OF AVERAGE RUN ON VARIOUS
ELECTRIC RAILWAYS.
Assuming, therefore, that a schedule speed 25 per cent, higher than
that of the present trains is a set requirement, it remains to examine what
acceleration and motive power this will involve. The present schedule speed
on the average over the whole Suburban System is 16 miles per hour.
The actual acceleration to be adopted must be considered concurrently
with various factors; it must be so chosen that it is at least sufficiently high
to admit of the desired schedule speed being maintained under the ascertained
conditions of service (of which the most important is the frequency of stops)
with a fair margin. This has the double advantage of enabling the driver
to make up lost time and of economising current under normal conditions as
part of each run is accomplished by coasting (See Fig. 3). On the other
hand, the acceleration is limited (1) by the comfort of passengers, (2) by the
cost (and weight) of motors and of all those portions of the distributing system
whose cost depends upon the maximum current required by one train, (3) by
the slipping of the driving wheels, which is, of course, bound up with the
question of the number of coaches equipped with motors.
These considerations are almost entirely independent of the type of current
adopted and the method by which it is conveyed to the train and can, therefore,
bo discussed independently of these questions.
Calculations have been made as to the effect upon the consumption, of
varying the acceleration, and the results have been embodied in the curves
B


Effect of
Acceleration
upon Power
Consumption.
shown in Fig. 4, a study of which will show that the gain in economy by
raising the acceleration above one mile per hour per second is comparatively
small for the' schedule speed chosen; whilst the increased consumption of
electricity, if an acceleration less than "8 be chosen, is very marked indeed.
ACCELERATION MILES PER HOUR PER SECOND.
FIG. 4.—INFLUENCE OF ACCELERATION UPON POWER CONSUMPTION FOR TYPICAL RUNS AT
THE SPEEDS CHOSEN.*
Acceleration
Recom-
mended.
Fig. 5 shows the margin of speed at the disposal of the driver for making up
lost time on different lengths of run.
In view of these calculations and the other considerations given on page 7,
I recommend an acceleration of - 92 miles per hour per second, or F 35 feet per
second per second.t This acceleration is about the maximum possible with the
weight and arrangement of coaches proposed; in order to facilitate inspection,
to reduce the cost of repairs and to enable the maximum benefit possible to be
* The effect upon the consumption of electrical energy of varying the acceleration follows the
same general principle whatever system of motor equipment be adopted ; in making the calculations
for Figs. 3,4, and 5 direct current characteristics have been assumed.
f This is of course the acceleration on the level—it is somewhat lower on the up-grades and
somewhat higher on down-grades ; the exact figure to be finally adopted in practice is dependent
upon the particular motor chosen.


obtained from multiple-unit operation, I propose to have an equal number of
motor coaches and trailer coaches, and to instal motors on one only of the two
bogies of each motor coach. I may also mention that with side doors—which
ACCELERATION MILES PER HOUR PER SECOND.
FIG. 5.—MARGINS FOR MAKING UP TIME ON TYPICAL RUNS (AT THE SPEEDS CHOSEN)
WITH DIFFERENT ACCELERATIONS.
have many advantages, especially in your case on account of tlie large amount
of existing stock suitable for conversion to electric coaches (see page 46) —a
much higher acceleration would not materially improve the schedule speed
as, on account of the difficulty of shutting the doors while the train was
starting, a longer stop at every station would be necessary.
The general principles hitherto discussed apply to electrical operation
whatever the system—whether Locomotive or Multiple-Unit, Third Rail or
Overhead Wire, Direct or Alternating Current—the selection from these of
the particular system to be adopted requires a close consideration of the
relative capital and annual costs and of the practical question of which system
is the most appropriate to the local conditions.
Having decided on the schedule speed and acceleration, I have investigated
fully the details of a suitable motor and control equipment for your service


and, from the characteristic curves of such an equipment, I have calculated
the actual running- speeds which would be attained in practice between each
station and the next for both directions, taking into account the gradients and
curves which occur in each case. Plates 111. to VI. show the profiles of the
lines, and Plaies I'll, to XI\ r .* reproduce graphically the results of the calcula-
tions with regard to the lines covered by Stage I. These curves illustrate the
way in which the train would actually be handled by the motorman in practice
in order to get the most advantageous results,
I may here point out that the order in which matters are dealt with in
this Report has been chosen os a convenient one in which to give my recom-
mendations and calculations rather than as representing the exact procedure
adopted in arriving at the conclusions. For instance, it is not possible, as
already stated, to arrive at a final conclusion as to the schedule speed to recom-
mend without estimating the capital cost of the different parts of the scheme,
the cost of power and the other operating expenses. Xo one question can be
settled by itself and it is necessary to keep the general problem always in view.
THE MULTIPLE-UNIT SYSTEM OF TRAIN OPERATION.
If the Suburban Railways be converted to electric traction, I recommend
the adoption of the multiple-unit system of train operation. This system
consists in making up every train of so many coaches or sets of coaches, each
a duplicate of the other as regards motor equipment, but so arranged as to be
all controlled electrically from the driving cab of any coach irrespective of
its position in the train; normally the train, is driven from the coach which, for
the time being, occupies the leading end. In other words, each coach or set of
coaches making up a unit is complete in itself; it has its own motor, its own
control equipment, its own driving cab, its own air compressor for the brakes,
and can, therefore, be operated either by itself or in conjunction with any
number of other units similarly equipped.
One advantage of this system compared with using an electric locomotive
to draw a train in the ordinary way, as with steam traction, is that a train
of any desired size can be made up with a certainty that the motor equipment
will be ample to draw it and that the efficiency will be substantially the same
whether the train be large or small. A locomotive, on the contrary, is
designed for a given speed and weight of train, and if, as in operation is often
the case, only a few coaches are required, an unnecessary amount of dead
weight has to be hauled with no corresponding advantage. If, on the other
hand, due to stress of traffic the weight of the train needs to be increased,
the locomotive being chosen for the normal size of train is either incapable
of hauling the heavier train or can only do so at a reduced schedule speed
just when a high speed would be of most advantage.
Another great and important advantage of multiple-unit operation as
against locomotive operation, especially for suburban work, is that at crowded
termini, when the direction of the train has to be reversed, it is only necessary
for the motorman to change into the driving cab at the reverse end —no shunt-
ing of a locomotive being required. Again, if it be desired, owing to varia-
tions of the amount of traffic, to reduce the capacity of any train, the unneces-
sary coaches are uncoupled and the reduced train proceeds into traffic, the un-
coupled portion, operated from one of its own driving cabs, being run into
# The characteristics of a motor suitable for performing the required service have been assumed
for these curves.


a siding without the aid of any shunting locomotive. The advantages of
multiple-unit operation may he summarised as follows:
1. Each set is a complete unit of itself ; a train consisting of any num-
ber of units may be operated in exactly the same manner as
a single unit, and from any driving cab on the train.
2. The adjustment of train capacity from time to time through-
out the day to suit variations of traffic is made practicable—
no shunting locomotives being required.
3. Shunting at termini is abolished—thus increasing station capacity
and reducing the number of train and signal movements by at
least one half.
4. A uniform schedule speed can be maintained irrespective of the
size of train, and a close headway made practicable as the
power available on the train is directly proportional to the
number of motor coaches.
5. Trains can be reversed on any cross-over road and the rolling
stock concentrated on a busy section of the line.
6. The cost of motive power is made proportional to the paying load
by adapting the capacity of the train to the traffic demands.
7. The marshalling of trains is simplified.
8. The number of driving wheels, and consequently the adhesion, is
directly proportional to the length of the train; therefore a high
limit of adhesion can be worked to; in other words, the ratio of
useful weight to total weight moved is high.
9. The weight is distributed over the entire train instead of being
concentrated in a locomotive.
Multiple-unit operation, carried to the extreme limit, consists in making
each coach complete in itself, with its own motors, compressors, driving cabs
and complete control equipment, the other extreme being to have either one
motor coach per train or a locomotive. In the case of Melbourne, I recommend
that normally the trains should be made up of an equal number of motor
coaches and trailer coaches ; that is to say, of a number of two-coach units, each
consisting of one motor coach and one trailer coach.* This arrangement
secures the full advantages of a multiple-unit system with a reasonable number
of motors and, consequently, with economy of capital cost and of operating
expenses. On outlying routes the traffic can be dealt with at certain times of
the day by a single-coach train and, for this purpose, a certain number of
motor coaches would be equipped with driving cabs at both ends. In general,
however, the trains will consist of either two, four, six or eight coaches.
PROPOSED TRAIN SERVICE AND TIME-TABLE.
Having, on general principles as applied to Melbourne, settled upon the
schedule speed at which the equipment will have to operate, upon the accelera-
tion, and upon the general system of train operation, it remains, before we
can efficiently discuss the system of electric traction to be adopted or consider
any estimates of capital or annual expenditure, to decide upon the train
service required to handle the traffic. Very complete data have been furnished
for the year 1906 both as regards traffic and as regards operating expenses,
and as the 1906 figures have been adopted as a basis for comparison in various
* Except where arranged to operate only in four and six-coach trains on the heavy sections of the
system, the trailer coaches will be provided with a driving cab ; all motor coaches will be provided
with at least one driving cab (see page 47). r


Estimated
Increase of
Traffic
( continued)
places throughout the Report, it will be well to take these as a basis for
estimates of traffic also.
Fig. 6, which is prepared from the data given in Table 11., shows the
growdh of the passenger traffic on the Suburban System from the year 1898
to the present time, and shows by a dotted line the estimated traffic during the
FIG. 6.—PROBABLE INCREASE IN SUBURBAN RAILWAY TRAFFIC.
next few years if the traffic
were to continue increas-
ing at the same average
rate. Even if you were to
start converting the lines
to electric traction at once
and were to decide to pro-
ceed with the whole scheme,
it would probably take
three years to make the
change. The year 1912,
therefore, would be the first
complete year of electrical
operation and it is obvious
that all estimates of finan-
cial results should be made
on the basis of the traffic
at that time and not on the
basis of the present traffic.
From Fig. 6 it appears that
the traffic for 1912, if the
rate of increase were to
continue at the same
average rate would be 3F5
per cent, greater than for
the year 1906. It was
decided, however, after a
full discussion in Mel-
Traffic
allowed for
in 1912.
bourne, that all estimates of traffic with electrical operation should be based
upon a 25 per cent, increase compared with the year 1906, and the electric
train service proposed is, therefore, arranged to be capable of dealing with
such a traffic.*
Table IY. shows, in actual figures, this estimated increased traffic with
electrical operation by the year 1912.
In view of the rate of increase in the past and the further increase which
is certain to result merely on account of the adoption of electric traction and
the better and more frequent service which will be provided, I consider this a
conservative estimate and it might be even suggested that I have not allowed
for sufficient increase in traffic. My reply is that the greater the traffic on any
given line the more favourable will be the comparison between the costs of
electrical operation and steam operation.! If, therefore, when wc come to deal
with the estimates, we make a comparison between the costs of the two systems
on the basis of a traffic somewhat smaller than we may reasonably expect to
reach, we shall at any rate be on the safe side.
Although, for the reasons stated, I have adopted a conservative estimate
* The increase in passenger journeys is assumed to be 25 per cent,, both during hours of rush
traffic and during the s l ack periods of the day.
f The cost of operating that system which has the greater fixed charges and smaller variable
charges obviously goes up less rapidly with the increase of business than that of the system whose
operating expenses consist of smaller fixed charges and greater variable charges. I have already
referred to the increased capital charges with electrical operation compared with steam operation.


Route.
Passenger
Journeys.
Millions per
Annum.
Receipts.
1906
Steam
Service.
1912
Electric
Service.
1906
Steam
Service.
1912
Electric
Service.
Port Melbourne ...
1-34
1-68
£
15,500
£
19,375
St. Hilda ...
3-64
4-55
34,500
43,125
Sandringham
10-47
13-09
110,500
138,125
Broadmeadows ...
5-75
7-19
60,950
76,188
Williamstown
6-62
8-27
61,000
76,250
Eiugwood (including Kew, Darling,
Ashburton and Deepdene)
9-99
12-49
127,950
159,937
Coburg ... ...
2-11
2-64
8,500
10,625
Sunshine ...
0-57
0-71
2,600
3,250
Preston, Heidelberg and North Fitzroy..
7-53
9-11
49,500
61,875
Dandenoug and Mordialloc
10-58
13-23
101,650
127,062
Totals
58-60
72-26
£572,650
£715,812
for the 1912 traffic requirements, the whole system has been designed with
considerable margin so that should the traffic on any section exceed the assumed
figures no inconvenience will result; not only has ample margin been allowed
but the whole system has been so designed that extension of any portion of the
TABLE IY.
TRAFFIC ON WHICH PROPOSED TIME-TABLE IS BASED.
equipment can readily be made without sacrificing in any way capital already
spent. As regards rolling stock equipment, new coaches are, of course, easily
arranged for at any time. I think, therefore, that 25 per cent, increase of
traffic is a sound basis to proceed upon and I may repeat that there would
be a considerable improvement in the financial results if the traffic estimates
should turn out to be somewhat under the mark. A time-table has, therefore,
been prepared on this basis.
Table Y. gives a synopsis of the time-table for the different routes and also
a comparison between the proposed and the existing schedule speeds. This
time-table is based on the discussions which took place in Melbourne, and is, I
agree, a wise one to commence with. I think it quite possible, if an electric
traction scheme be proceeded with, that an increase in this train service may
prove justifiable, but it is easier to give the public a better service than to
reduce it and, therefore, it is good commercial policy to commence with a
service on the low side.
Plates XY. and XYI. show graphically the actual time-table proposed for
the routes included in Stage 1., during the hours of heaviest traffic (5 p.m. to T
p.m.). They also show the number of coaches required on each of the trains, on
the basis of an average seating capacity of 160 passengers per train unit. This
service of trains would be ample to deal with the traffic allowed for in the
estimate of receipts (Table IY.).


Number of trains j
per day in each
direction. i
Number of down
trains starting be-
tween 5*30 p in. and
6‘30 p.m.
Average time for
journey.
Minutes.
Per-
centage
Increase
ROUTE.
in
Schedule
1906
1912
1906
1912
1906
1912
Speed.
Steam
Electric
Steam
Electric
Service.
Service.
Service.
Service.
Service.
Service.
Leaving Flinders St. for —
North Melbourne
146
264
16
20
8
23
Footscrav
53
104
6
7
14k
12k
16
Newport ...
47
81
5
5
26k*
21k
23
Williamstown
40
75
4
5
37*
31
19
Footscray West ...
6
23
1
2
20*
16k
21
Sunshine ...
6
21
1
2
28k*
23k
21
Essendon...
70
88
7
9
22k
18k
22
Broadmeadows ...
10
22
1
2
44
34k
27
Coburg
23
72
3
4
26k
23
15
Richmond
242
317
31
41
4
3]
23
Burnley ...
95
126
13
16
9
71
24
Hawthorn
92
126
12
16
12
10
20
Camberwell
70
94
9
12
20k
16k
24
Canterbury
41
76
7
6
27
21
28
Box Hill
85
74
4
5
86
28k
26
Ringwood t
8
18
1
1
69
43k
36
Darling ...
12
21
2
2
83
24k
35
Kew f
50
75
3
4
16
14-i
10
Deepdene...
18
19
2
2
35 k
26
36
Ashburton
12
19
1
1
38 k
31
24
South Yarra
147
191
18
25
8
61
28
Caulfield ...
72
95
11
12
221
18k,
22
Oakleigh ...
29
41
3
4
32 k
27
20
Daudenong t
4
17
—
1
55k
46
21
Mordialloc
14
20
2
2
55
45
22
Elsternwick
75
96
7
13
20
16
25
Brighton Beach ...
52
80
5
7
32*
25-k
25
Sandringham
28
73
3
6
38k*
31
24
St. Kilda ...
70
86
6
9
m
10
30
Port Melbourne ...
...
62
72
5
5
9
8
13
Leaving Princes Bridge for —
Clifton Hill
93
122
8
10
14
Hk
22
North Fitzroy
25
39
2
3
18
15
20
Preston ...
22
43
3
8
36
30
20
Heidelberg
23
39
2
3
31k
"
25
26
TABLE V.
SUMMARY OF PROPOSED TIME TABLE AND COMPARISON WITH
STEAM SERVICE.
* A new station has been opened on this route since 1906, and therefore in order to obtain a
comparison with the electric service this figure has been taken from the 1907 time-table.
t In these cases the service is partly through and partly local, but the times given refer to-
through runs ; when passengers have to change trains these times must be increased,
t Since 1906 the speed of steam trains on this route has been increased by 9 %.


Port Melbourne and
St. Kilda Branches.
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III.
1906
Steam
Service.
1912
Electric
Service.
1906
Steam
Service.
1912
Electric
Service.
1906 ! 1912
Steam Electric
Service. Service.
1908
Steam
Sevrice.
1912
Electric
Service.
Train miles per annum in
millions (including
waste mileage) * ...
0-255
0-834
0-965
1-458
1-807 2-923
2-795
4-780
Ton-miles per annum in
millions (including
waste mileage) *
43-40
36-96
179-14
203-00
323-30 391-90
494-15
608-14
There is one feature of electrical operation to which special attention has
been devoted in drawing up this time-table, namely, the desirability of keeping
a uniform and frequent service of trains on each line throughout the day.
It is, of course, necessary to insert additional trains at the busy times, and this
has been done, but as electrical working compared with steam working allows
of such a uniform service of trains being run at a minimum of expense, it is, in
my opinion, very desirable—in fact, essential —that such a uniform and
frequent service should be maintained throughout the day. This is obviously
a great convenience to the travelling public; they can rely on catching a train
without having to consult a time-table and are encouraged to travel at all
times—not merely at the accustomed times of rush traffic but during the, at
present, slack portions of the day.
Apart from this convenience to the public, it is most profitable to the
Railways to encourage as far as possible travelling at times of light traffic.
Every additional train run at busy times ultimately means additional capital
expenditure and operating expenses on power station, feeders, substations and
rolling stock; it also results in difficulties in arranging for the necessary
motormen and guards. Such additional trains, however, are necessary since it
is the duty of the Railways to cope with the traffic presented, but the capital
having been once spent, very little extra expense is entailed by maintaining a
uniform and regular service throughout the day. Such a service undoubtedly
promotes travel during the slack hours when every additional passenger repre-
sents revenue which is practically all profit as compared with additional
passengers carried during rush hours. This—-the difference between the profit
made out of a passenger depending on the hour of the day at which he travels—
is true of all systems, hut the difference is greater with electrical working than
with steam working, because with electrical working the capital charges (which
depend upon the maximum rather than upon the average traffic) are of more
importance relatively to the operating expenses than they are with steam.
Again, with electrical operation and especially with the multiple-unit system
which I recommend for the operation of your Suburban service, it is possible
to run short trains at regular and frequent intervals with maximum economy.
With electrical working, therefore, a frequent service should be maintained
throughout the day.
Table YI. shows the train and ton-miles which would be run per annum
with the proposed electric service as compared with the steam service.
TABLE VI.
COMPARISON OF ANNUAL MILEAGES WITH THE 1906 AND PROPOSED
1912 SERVICES.
c
* By waste mileage is meant the miles that would have to be run to give the proposed service
over and above the miles obtained directly from the time-table. It includes all mileage run in
shunting and making up trains and in taking trains to and from the Car Sheds both in the morning
and in the evening and at times when the service has to be varied.


Number of
Coaches in
Operation.
The increase in train mileage compared with 1906, which is a measure
of the, improvement in the frequency of the service, is 71 per cent. The increase
in ton-mileage is, however, only 23 per cent, owing to the size of train being
more closely proportioned to the traffic variations throughout the day and the
saving in locomotive weight with the multiple-unit system of train operation
(see page 12).
Fig. 7 shows for the complete scheme and on the basis of the electric
service proposed the number of coaches in operation throughout the 24 hours
for an ordinary week day. Fig. 8 gives the same information for the earlier
Fig. 7.—NUMBER OF COACHES IN OPERATION THROUGHOUT THE DAY.—STAGE III.
Systems of
Electric
Traction.
stages of the work. These curves, in conjunction with the speed time curves
which I have had drawn, have enabled me to calculate the amount of power
required by the Railway System*
We are now in a position to make accurate estimates of the capital cost
and operating expenses with different systems of electric traction and it will,
therefore, he convenient, I think, to deal at once with the system of electric
traction recommended. After having done this I will deal, in the order named,
with the power station and the supply of power to the railway system, the
track equipment and the rolling stock and the electrical equipment thereof.
SYSTEMS OF ELECTRIC TRACTION.
To decide upon the system of electric traction most suitable for the
operation of the Melbourne Suburban Railways, involves a discussion not only
of the kinds of electric current to be generated by the power station and collected
by the moving trains, but also of the method to be adopted for conveying the
current to the trains. The system chosen must, in any case, be suitable, for
extension to deal with the whole of the Suburban Railways. It may be useful
to refer briefly to the different systems which might be considered for such a
* Speed time curves for the lines covered by Stage I are reproduced on Plates VII.-XIV.


scheme; these may be conveniently grouped as “ Conductor Rail Systems ”
and “ Overhead Wire Systems.”
Conductor Rail Systems—
1. Direct current at low or medium pressure, using an unpro-
tected, or partially protected, conductor rail for conveying
the current to the trains, commonly referred to as “ The
Third Rail System.” This system has been in actual com-
mercial operation for several years, dealing with the most
severe services. It is used on the Underground Railways
of London and Paris, the North Eastern Railway, the
Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway, the Pennsylvania R.R.,
and numerous other lines in Europe and America.
Systems of
Electric
Traction
(continued).
FIG. 8,—NUMBER OF COACHES IN OPERATION THROUGHOUT THE DAY —PRELIMINARY STAGES.
2. Direct Current at low or medium pressure using a protected
conductor rail for conveying current to the trains, commonly
referred to as “ The Protected Conductor Rail System.” This
system is in use on the New York Central Railway and the
Berlin Elevated Railway, and is about to be adopted on certain


of the Belgian. State Railways. It may be looked upon as an
improvement on No. 1.
3. Direct Current at high pressure (1,200 volts or over), using a
protected conductor rail for conveying current to the trains,
commonly referred to as “ The High Tension Direct Current
Protected Conductor Rail System.’' This system is to be used
on certain railways in the Western States of America.
Overhead Line Systems—
-- Direct Current at high pressure (1,200 volts or over), using over-
head wires for carrying the current to the trains, commonly
referred to as “The High Tension Direct Current Overhead
Wire System.” The Cologne-Bonn line is one of the best
examples of this in actual operation and has been running
for three years. It is also in use on various interurban roads*
in the United States amongst which may be mentioned the
Indianapolis and Louisville Traction Company and the Central
Californian Traction Company.
2. Three Phase Alternating Current at high pressure (3,000 volts or
over), using two overhead wires for each track, commonly called
“ The Three Phase System.” This system is in successful
operation and is used largely in conjunction with electric loco-
motives. Notable examples are the Yaltellina line in Italy
and the Great Northern in the United States.
3. Single Phase Current at extra high pressure (6,000 to 10,000 volts),
using an overhead wire for conveying the current to the
trains, commonly referred to as “ The Single Phase System.”
The best example of this for suburban service is perhaps the
Hamburg-Altona line which was first electrically operated in
October, 1907. This system has also been adopted by the New
York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad on the outskirts of
New York (electric locomotives being used), and by various
interurban roads* in the United States, many of which I have
visited. It is also about to be used by the London, Brighton
and South Coast Railway for one of their South London
suburban lines.
Before visiting Melbourne I was able, with the data furnished by your
Electrification Committee, to make general estimates of how each system
would work out, from a financial point of view, for the Yictorian Railways,
both as regards capital cost and operating expenses. Since my visit I have
been able to make a more detailed and exact investigation in the light of my
knowledge of the local conditions. As the investigation proceeded, and the
conditions to be met with on the system were fully realised, it became apparent
that we might put on one side all the Systems with the exception of the
Unprotected Third Rail System, the Protected Conductor Rail System, and
the Single Phase Overhead Wire System; I give briefly the reasons which have
led me to this conclusion.
Apart from financial considerations, I am not prepared to recommend a
High Tension Direct Current system for the Melbourne Suburban Railways
* A distinction must be drawn between interurban railways (sq called) and railway systems
proper. Interurban systems are, as a rule, surface tracks practically ungraded, connecting distant
townships and operating a service of single coach trains at comparatively long intervals under tramway
conditions. Frequently, no railway system of signalling or train despatch is in use and their classifica-
tion as “railways” is probably only due to their being operated over a private right-of-way. The
conditions of working on interurban roads differ entirely from those on such systems as the North
Eastern Railway and the Hamburg-Altona line which are more comparable with the Melbourne
System.


on account of the extra complication and cost of the equipment of the trains
themselves compared with a Direct Current system at a lower voltage. Used
with a conductor rail for conveying the current to the trains, pressures of
1,000 volts and over are not the most suitable for such a system of railways as
those in Melbourne, and, used with overhead wires, the system does not
compare favourably with the Single Phase System. < The Cologne-Bonn
line,* upon which a High Tension Direct Current equipment has given satis-
faction, is not comparable with the Melbourne Suburban System either as
regards the weight and size of trains dealt with, or as regards the extent and
importance of the railway itself. While in special cases a High Tension Direct
■Current system, with either overhead wires or conductor rails (depending on
the conditions of service), may show advantages, it is not, in my opinion,
suited to Melbourne conditions.
The Three Phase system has been used with very considerable success for
locomotive work and is specially suitable for long runs over heavy gradients.
The characteristics of the three phase motor, however, do not render it the best
for a suburban service. The double overhead wires are in themselves a
complication to be avoided in such a case as that under consideration,
although on long straight runs without complicated junctions the difficulty is
less, and, for such routes, the system has proved in every way successful.
Tor the Melbourne Suburban Railways I consider that the Three Phase system
is less suitable than the Single Phase system.
Having eliminated these systems, I have made a careful comparison in
Retail between the following alternatives, viz.:
1. An Unprotected Third Rail system, working at 600 volts.t
2. A Protected Conductor Rail system, working at 800 volts.f
3. A Single Phase High Tension system, working at 10,000 volts. +
The calculations show that a Protected Conductor Rail system with a
voltage of 800 has many advantages over the Unprotected Third Rail system at
a lower voltage, from both financial and operation points of view. Although
the Unprotected Third Rail system has been operated with great success both
in England and abroad, and although the accidents from shock have been
remarkably few even in a country like England, where for a large part of the
year the ground is more or less saturated with moisture, there is no doubt
as to the superiority of the Protected Conductor Rail system, even in a climate
like that of Melbourne. When in addition, it is found, as is here the case,
that an 800 volt Protected Conductor Rail system can be installed for con-
siderably less money and will operate at a higher efficiency on account of the
lower losses in the conductor rails and track, I have no hesitation in recom-
mending it in preference to any Unprotected Third Rail system, even under
the particularly favourable conditions of track and climate existing in Mel-
bourne. For the Melbourne Suburban Railways, therefore, it comes down
to a choice between the 800 volt Direct Current Protected Conductor Rail
system and the Single Phase Overhead Wire system.
For many years before the development of the single phase commutator
motor (which makes possible the Single Phase Overhead Wire system), electrical
engineers had been looking for a system which would allow of high-tension
* This line may be termed an interurban road.
11 should not advise the use of a higher pressure than 600 volts with an unprotected or partially
unprotected rail—with a protected rail as proposed, higher pressures are permissible, the limit in
practice being the complexity in the train! equipment in the case of pressures appreciably above 800
volts (see High Tension Direct Current system above).
1 My project for the use of the Single Phase system has been based upon 10,000 volts—a lower
voltage such as 6,000 volts (the pressure used at Hamburg) would for the case under consideration be
more expensive.


current being distributed to the trains by a single overhead wire, chiefly because
it was realised that for distances of 100 miles or over the energy could, with
such a system using the track as a return circuit, be distributed to the trains
with reasonable first cost and efficiency. If, for example, the important and
heavy main line traffic between such places as Hamburg and Berlin or Hew
York and Buffalo is ever to be handled electrically, the comparative infre-
quency* of the train service compared with that upon a suburban system, and
the long distance over which the current has to be conveyed, render some such
system desirable, and there is no doubt that for such lines the Single Phase-
system to-day shows advantages over any Direct Current system, especially in
first cost. It was also hoped that in countries where fuel is dear and cheap*
water power is available, such as Italy, Sweden and certain parts of America,
this system would render electrical operation of main line railways feasible
even where there was a still less frequent service.
I called attention at the beginning of this Report to the importance, in the
case of the Victorian State Railways, of the suburban business. This fact has-
a direct bearing on the question as to which is the most suitable system
of electrical operation to adopt for dealing with this traffic because, even if it
were necessary or desirable to consider at the present time the operation of the
main or country lines electrically, it would not be right to sacrifice the effi-
ciency or reliability of electrical operation on the important suburban system
to the comparatively infrequent service on the country lines. This point
does not arise, however, because the train service at present required on
the country lines in Victoria, and likely to be required in the future,
would not warrant the operation of any of these lines electrically by any
system, and therefore the choice of a system for the suburban work need
not be influenced by any such consideration. We are, therefore, free, in
the case of Melbourne, at any rate, as distinct possibly from places where
the suburban railways run in conjunction with main lines upon which there
is a more frequent service, to consider the interests of the suburban system
alone.
It has been claimed that even for such suburban railways on which there
is a frequent service, the Single Phase system shows very considerable advantage
in first cost compared with the Direct Current system. This, however, has
not proved to be the case after working out in detail the cost of dealing with the
Melbourne Suburban traffic, for not only would the overhead lines be very
much more costly than has frequently been stated to be the case, but the addi-
tional cost of the large number of train equipments required would practically
balance the extra expenditure on the substations required in the case of the
Direct Current system: t in fact, the very complete investigation which I have
made into the first cost of providing the electrical equipment for the Melbourne
Suburban Railways has confirmed the opinion as to the relative first cost of
the two systems which I had formed in investigating similar problems for
other suburban railways. In the case of Melbourne it is only when we include
very long and sparsely populated lines, such as the Frankston Branch, to
which in any case I should not consider the extension of electrical operation
justifiable, that the Single Phase system shows any appreciable saving in first
cost over the Direct Current system.
When, however, we come to consider the total annual cost (which is the
* The less frequent the service the less important is the high first cost of Single Phase train
equipments because the cost of the train equipment forms a much smaller proportion of the total
capital expenditure than on a system where a close headway of trains is a necessity.
f In such a comparison we must assume overhead transmission lines throughout for both
schemes. Although overhead lines in the central area are objectionable, they are essential to the
Single Phase system, and, if their erection for this purpose be justified, we must assume them also
in the case of the Direct Current system instead of underground cables for the feeders to sub-
stations. (See page 36 for capital costs of overhead and underground transmission lines.)


important figure), including operating expenses and interest charges, it is
found that under Melbourne conditions the Direct Current system shows a ,
saving compared with the Single-phase system. It is, therefore, not possible to
recommend the adoption of the Single-phase system on financial grounds. '
When it comes to a question of considering, apart from financial reasons,
which is the more suitable system for dealing with the large suburban traffic
which the Melbourne Suburban Railways have to cope with, a comparatively
new system, such as the Single Phase system, must obviously show some very
decided advantages in operating facilities before it should be adopted in prefer-
ence to the well-tried Direct Current system, especially when it shows no advan-
tage from a financial point of view. It must not be forgotten that the only
line at all comparable with the Melbourne Suburban System that is operating
to-day on the Single Phase system, is the Hamburg-Altona line, and that this
line has only been in regular operation since January of this year, and
even yet can hardly be considered complete. There are also many cases in
America where long distance interurban lines are operated on the Single Phase
system, but these are not comparable with the Melbourne System for com-
plexity, as they mostly operate single coaches, not trains. The New Haven
line outside New York also operates on this system, but at present only
locomotives are in use.
SYSTEM OF ELECTRIC TRACTION RECOMMENDED.
As, therefore, I cannot recommend you to consider the Single Phase
system for financial reasons, and as I consider that the Direct Current system
is superior to it in a case such as that of the Melbourne Suburban Railways
from an operating standpoint, I have decided, after having studied the whole
problem in great detail and from all points of view, that the Direct Current
800 volt Protected Conductor Rail system is the right one to adopt for Mel-
bourne. I will briefly state my reasons for considering this the better system
from an operating standpoint.
As a mechanical structure a protected conductor rail, compared with
overhead wires, is superior in both simplicity and reliability; it not only needs
less repair, but less inspection. Most important of all, the inspection and
repair work can be done by the ordinary permanent way- staff in daylight
and when the service is in full operation, whereas the inspection and repair
of overhead wires requires a special staff, not only because it has to be done
at night, but also on account of the class of labour required. This is
obviously very important in a country where electrical operation has not
hitherto been adopted and where labour is dear. When it is also con-
sidered that the wear on the conductor rail is practically negligible whereas
the wear on the overhead wire is not inconsiderable, this point becomes still
more important. While overhead wires may be in every way suited to long
lines on which the service is not so frequent and where there is consequently
less wear and tear and where, also, there may be time between trains to
inspect and to do repair work, the protected conductor rail, which needs
less inspection and can be, and is, inspected at any time by the ordinary per-
manent way men, offers a more reliable service on a busy suburban system.
It would obviously, in the case of overhead wires, be impossible to carry'
out repairs on a system such as the Melbourne Suburban System except at
night, firstly because, for any detailed inspection, a tower waggon is required
for which the exclusive use of the track is necessary, and secondly because, in
case of any repairs being necessary to the overhead wires, the power must,


Advantages
of Conductor
Rail in
Operation
(continued).
Single Phase
Train Equip-
ments.
Interference
with
Telephone
System.
Method of
supplying
Current to
Conductor
Rail.
on account of the high voltage employed, be completely cut off. It would
be a serious matter and would cause great inconvenience to the public if,
owing to lack of inspection and consequent break-down of the overhead sys-
tem, the traffic were dislocated on lines operating from two to five minutes-
headways. With a conductor rail, on the other hand, not only are break-
downs requiring instant attention extremely rare but the repairs thereto-
are effected more easily and without interruption to the traffic.
The Melbourne system is particularly suitable for conductor rail opera-
tion on account of the dryness of the climate and the excellent condition of
the ballast and track.
On a system where as many as 500 motors will be required, reliability
of the train equipment is a matter of not less importance than the reliability
of the conductor rail equipment itself. The (Single Phase motor equipment,
such as would be required for the Melbourne service, is not only some 50 per-
cent. heavier than the Direct Current equipment, but it is also very much more-
expensive on account of the greater complexity and weight of the motor and
of the equipment as a whole. This necessarily means more costly repairs, apart
altogether from the fact that the commutation of the Single Phase motor is
not as satisfactory as that of the modern Direct Current motor. Obviously,
other things being equal, the lighter the equipment the better, as the dead-
weight of the motor, which comes more or less directly on the axle, means
increased cost of repairs to both track and rolling stock.
To sum up then, I am of opinion that the Direct Current system will,
in the present state of development of the different electric traction systems,
give more satisfactory operation and, taking into account all interest charges-
and operation expenses, be cheaper than a Single Phase system for such a
service as has to be given by the Melbourne Suburban Railways. I have
arrived at this conclusion taking into account the fact that a considerable
sum will have to be spent on altering the bridges in order satisfactorily to
locate the conductor rail (see page 41) but without allowing, in the Single
Phase estimates, for any possible alterations to telephone mains strung parallel
to the Railways.
The question of interference with the important telephone system of Mel-
bourne, although not a matter which concerns the State so much as it does
the Commonwealth Government, might have justified our taking into con-
sideration—though this has not been done—the large extra expense which
the installation of high tension overhead wires closely adjacent to the telephone-
wires would probably mean, not to mention the great public inconvenience
of having the telephone service seriously interfered with, even temporarily.
GENERAL SYSTEM OF GENERATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF POWER.
Having settled upon direct current at 800 volts for distributing the
energy to the moving trains it is necessary, in order to limit the losses in
the conductor rail and track, to make arrangements for feeding them at
various points on the system. This can be most conveniently arranged by
generating and transmitting the energy as high-voltage three-phase alternating
current, and converting it into direct current at substations spaced at suitable-
intervals, depending on the density of the load on the different lines.
There will be installed in the substations rotary converter sets consisting
of three-phase stationary transformers, for transforming the current to a lower
pressure, and rotary converters for converting the alternating current into
direct current. These rotary converter sets are very economical and reliable


Units Per Annum.
Port
Melbourne
and St. Kilda
P>ranclies.
Stage I.
Stage II.
I
1
Stage III.
Consumption at train
3,100,000
16,990,000
32,800,000
51,000,000
Loss in Track Conductors, Sub-
stations and Transmission Cables
780,000
4,410.000
9,600,000
17.000.000
Total Units generated for Traction
3,880,000
21,400,000
42,400,000
68,000,000
E.H.P. required from Power Station
during heaviest half-hour
1.920
10,200
19,800
32,100
pieces of apparatus capable of dealing with the large variations of load met
with on a railway system of the magnitude of the Melbourne Suburban Rail-
ways. They also allow of the use of three-phase generators, the most suitable
type of generator for coupling direct to steam turbines.
Assuming the use of direct current equipments capable of giving the
acceleration determined upon and the information already given by Plates YII.
to XIY., I have calculated the average energy consumption at the train to
be 83'7 watt-hours per ton mile which figure includes due allowance for coach
lighting, heating, control circuit and motor-driven compressor for supplying
the power brakes, and irregularities in operation.
Table YII. shows the total amount of energy required by the trains
per annum, the calculated losses in the transmission and distribution systems,
and the total output of the power station at each stage of the conversion;
the maximum demand on the generating plant during the heaviest traffic corres-
ponding to these outputs is also given in terms of electrical horsepower.
T ABLE YII.
TOTAL ENERGY CONSUMPTION FOR TRACTION PURPOSES.
I have allowed in the estimates throughout the Report for the work in-
cluded in each stage being so carried out that the next stage can be proceeded
with without waste of capital expenditure; in other words, everything is
designed with a view to the ultimate conversion of the whole system of Suburban
Railways to electrical operation. For the sake of convenience the
estimates for all stages have been based upon the same percentage increase in
traffic (that for the year 1912), though according to my recommendation Stages
11. and 111. would not be completed until a later date (see page 14).
I am now able to deal in detail with the generation and supply of power
to the Railways, and in doing so will take into account, not only the power
required for traction purposes, but also that required for general power and
lighting purposes (see page 27).


SECTION “ B.”
POWER PRODUCTION
AND
THE SUPPLY OF POWER TO THE TRAINS*
Cost of Power
an Important
Part of Cost
of Operation.
Source of
Power.
Existing
Power
Stations in
Melbourne.
Essential
Features of
Power
Station Site
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS.
A reference to the General Estimates given on pages G 4 and 65, will show
that, according to my recommendations, the total cost of Power, including
interest charges, for working all the Suburban Lines electrically will amount
to over £lOO,OOO per annum. The question, therefore, of the way in which
this power should be obtained is a very important one. It has also an import-
ant bearing upon the question of the size of scheme that can be economically
proceeded with in the first instance.
I deal in this section with the supply of power to the Suburban Railway
System and for the other purposes for which electric power is required by the
Railway Department (referred to in Section “ D ”) on the assumption that
this will have to be considered and dealt with by itself as an individual
problem. I also assume that the power will be derived from coal. The
Trawool Power Scheme will in any case not be ready for some years and the
question of using electrical energy generated at Trawool for railways and other
purposes is discussed fully in my Report upon the production and use of
electric power in Victoria.*
As it is frequently found that it pays better to buy power than to erect
a special power station for railway purposes, I will first dispose of this alter-
native. There are only two power stations of any size in the neighbourhood
of Melbourne; the Corporation station, situated in Spencer Street, and the
station of the Electric Lighting and Traction Company of Australia, situated
at Richmond. Neither of these (nor any other station) is suitable for the
production of power in sufficient quantities or at a low enough price for the
working of the Railways. The essential conditions of any site for a power
station producing energy from coal or other fuel by any method known to-day
are:
(1) A good foundation.
(2) Good facilities for obtaining coal from various sources and for
* Report to the Premier on the Production and Use of Electric Power in Victoria, 1908.


Port
Melbourne
and St. Kilda
Branches.
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III.
Traction : —
Demand, in E.H.P.* (Table YII.)
] ,920
10,200
19,800
82,100
Power and Lighting ; —
Demand, in E.H.P.§ (Table XXXI.)
1,943
2,193
2,790
3,466
Total Demand on Power Station, in
E.H.P. (allowing for diversity)..
3,480
12,000
22,100
35,000
Load Factor... ...
84 %
33 %
33 %
33 %
bringing it to the power station, preferably both by water
and by rail.
(3) An ample supply of water.
(4) Ample room for coal storage and for future extensions.
(5) Unless inconsistent with the foregoing, the power station should
be situated near to the electrical centre of the system to be
supplied with power.
Neither of the sites on which the two existing stations, referred to above,
are built, can be said to satisfy these conditions, apart from the fact that
the existing plant and buildings would not be suitable for extension for the
purposes of supplying the Railways. This being so, it is necessary to consider
obtaining the electrical power for working the railways from a new station
or stations. The demand which such a station would have to be capable of
meeting is given in Table Till.
TABLE Y 111 .
DEMAND ON POWER STATION.
THE LOCATION OF THE POWER STATION.
In considering the question of wliere such a new power station should
he located, it is necessary to consider the available sources of coal supply.
These are:
(1) New South Wales Coal, obtainable by sea.
(2) Victorian Black Coal, obtainable from a district some TO miles
south-east of Melbourne.
(-3) Victorian Brown Coal, obtainable, firstly from a district some 10
miles south-west of Melbourne, referred to hereafter as the
“ Altona District,” and secondly from a district some 80 miles
to the east of Melbourne, referred to hereafter as the “ Latrobe
Valley.”
As the relative importance of these different coals is discussed at length
in the Power Report already mentioned, I will not deal with the matter
again here except to repeat that the most reliable supply at the present time
in sufficient quantities for the purposes of the Railways, is obtainable from
the New South Wales coalfields by ship; this is shown by the fact that over
80 per cent, of the coal for railway purposes has been obtained from this
# The Demands are based upon the heaviest consumption of electrical energy during any
half-hour.
§ See page 61.


Trans-
mission of
Electrical
Energy from
Coalfields.
Cost of
Transmitting
Power
Electrically.
source in the past. Victorian Black coal is of good quality and quite com-
parable with Xew South Wales coal; the total quantity mined at present,
is, however, comparatively speaking, not very large. It is desirable that if
possible the Power Station site should be so chosen as to be suitable for using
any of these coals, and that the plant should be designed with the same end
in view.
Other things being equal, the natural thing, as I have indicated, is to
erect a power station as near as possible to the centre of the system, which,
in the case of Melbourne, happens to be close to the spot where Sew South
Wales coal would naturally be most easily unloaded. As, however, the
Victorian Black Coalfields and some of the Brown Coalfields are situated
at some distance from the centre of the system, the alternative is to erect
a power station in close proximity to one or other of these coalfields with
a view to saving the cost of carrying the fuel to Melbourne by rail—
if this were done, the power would be transmitted electrically to Melbourne.
The majority of long distance transmissions in the world are in con-
nection with water power, in the ease of which there is the great
advantage that the entile cost of fuel is saved, and there is this large saving
to be set against the interest charges on the capital cost of the transmission
line and the development of the water power. When, however, it is a
question of buying coal in any case, it is frequently stated as a general
proposition, and usually found to be true, that it is cheaper to carry the
coal than to spend capital upon pole lines for transmitting the power elec-
trically. This might be expected to be especially true in the case of the
Victorian Railways, because the State, being owner of the Railways, is
obviously able to carry coal at the lowest possible price. In the case, how-
ever, of Brown coal from the Latrobe Valley, there are special reasons for-
considering the question of electrical transmission as against carrying the
coal to a centrally situated power station, for Brown coal, being of a poorer
quality than Black coal, a larger quantity has to be burned to produce a
given amount of power and, therefore, the carriage item is particularly
heavy.
Table IX. gives my calculations as to the relative cost of transmitting
electrical energy from the Latrobe Valley as against carry inn- the coal, both
for the initial scheme (the lines covered by Stage 1., page 1), and for the
whole scheme: the amount of coal required is based upon the use of plant
of the type recommended on page 31, and the cost of the overhead trans-
mission is based on the maximum loads given in Table VIII., page 27. The
transmission of the power electrically as against carrying the coal from the
Latrobe Valley is specially dealt with because it appears probable that in
this district the Brown coal can be obtained at a very low cost. In the case
of Altona coal there is no argument for electrical transmission as the coal-
fields are in close proximity to the Yarraville Bower Station and it would
be difficult to obtain a more suitable site (see page 30).
Table IX. shows that if the Railways be dealt with by themselves,
even for the whole scheme there is no gain worth the extra complication
and cost in locating the power station away from the centre of the system
in order to save the cost of rail carriage on Brown coal.*
* This conclusion, as I have explained in the Power Report above referred to, would be materially
modified if, instead of the load factor being 25 per cent., it were higher ; and in the event of a general
Power Scheme being proceeded with, I have made certain recommendations as to transmitting a
certain portion of the power electrically, viz., the high load factor portion (see page 25 of Power
Report). It would not pay to do this for the railway load treated by itself, even if all the lines
were converted at once, not only because the load factor is not high enough to make it feasible to
divide the load in the way suggested between two power stations, but also because the total amount
of electrical energy required for the Suburban Railways alone would not justify dividing the plant
between two power stations.


Stage I.
Stage III.
Coal carried
by Rail to
Melbourne.
Electrical
Power
transmitted
by Overhead
Wires.
Coal carried
by Rail to
Melbourne.
Electrical
Power
transmitted
by Overhead
Wires.
Maximum E.H.P. delivered to 12,000
volt feeders over heaviest half hour
Maximum E.H.P. sent out of Power
Station
Capital Cost of Generating Plant
Capital Cost of transmission line* and
transforming substations
Additional Capital Expenditure in the
ease of electrical transmission ...
Standing Charges on additional capital
expenditure for electrical trans-
mission, including interest, depre-
ciation, and maintenance
12,000
12,000
£235,000
12,000
13,500
£260,000
£153,000
£178,000
£19,580
35.000
35.000
£451,000
35,000
39,100
£514,000
£286,000
£349,000
£38,390
Load Factor
33 % •
33 %
33 %
33 %
Tons of Black coal required per
annum
88,000
102,100
Equivalent tons of Brown eoal§
95,000
106,900
255,250
287,150
Cost of Carriage of Brown coal from
Mine to Power Station, per ton...
t C-
JSd.
t4/-
$8d.
Cost of Carriage per annum ...
£19.000
£3,560
£51,050
£9,570
Cost of extra coal at Is. 4d. per ton at
mine, per annum ...
—
£800
—
£2,130
Total Cost ...
£19,000
£4,860
£51,050
£11,700
7
Additional Running Cost of carrying-
coal by rail to Melbourne, per
annum
£14.640
_
£39.350
Xett Balance in favour of hauling coal
£1,910
Nett Balance in favour of electrical
1 transmission
£960
TABLE IX.
RELATIVE- COST OF TRANSMITTING POWER ELECTRICALLY FROM
THE LATROBE VALLEY AND OF CARRYING COAL TO MELBOURNE
BY RAIL.
* Two overhead lines are allowed for, each of which would, in emergency, be capable of
dealing with the whole load. These two lines would be run by different routes as a further
safeguard against interruption of service. Even, however, if both these lines were to be put
on the same pole line, the conclusion arrived at in Table IX. would not be affected by more
than .£l,lOO and .£2,200 per annum respectively in the two comparisons.
§Two and one-half tons of Brown coal as delivered to the power station are assumed to
be equal to one ton of Black coal for steam raising purposes ; if Brown coal turns out
to be of more value or if, for any other reason, less coal is required than the quantity
assumed, the conditions would be less favourable to electrical transmission because the cost
of carriage saved would be less. The table also assumes that a suitable site, with the facilities
mentioned on page 26, is obtainable within a mile or two of the coal workings. This is possible in
the Latrobe Y alley.
Jit is assumed that the cost of handling the coal between the colliery and the local
power station would not be less than Bd. per ton as, even if to-day it were possible to locate
the power station close to the mine or quarry from which the coal is obtained, it is certain
that in time other coal workings would be opened up, and the coal would have to be conveyed some
distance, even if only a mile or two. In each case the assumption is that all the power would be
obtained from the particular district where the power station is situated. If it were assumed that
only part of the power was obtained from the Latrobe Valley, the comparison would be less
favourable to electrical transmission.
f Estimate by Railway Department.


Power Station
near
Melbourne
recommended
Site for
Power
Station near
Melbourne.
Advantages
of Yarraville
.Site.
There is less reason still for considering a coalfield power station near
Victorian Black coal workings, for the coal being of better quality less is re-
quired to produce a given quantity of electrical energy and therefore the cost
of carriage to be saved by electrical transmission is less.
Whether the railway load is dealt with by itself or combined in any
way with the industrial requirements of the neighbourhood, I consider that
if the electrical energy is to be obtained at the lowest possible cost and if all
the factors are taken into consideration, a power station in Melbourne will
in any case be necessary. This is apart altogether from the fact that it would
be difficult to decide at the moment as to the exact position of any coalfield
power station with any assurance that it would ultimately be in the best
possible position. This conclusion does not mean that I recommend Black
coal should always be used in preference to Brown coal; on the contrary, I
anticipate that if and when the Brown coal can be delivered at the Power
Station in sufficient quantities and at a price of 4s. 6d. per ton, or less, its
substitution for Black coal would commence to represent a saving; and as
recommended in my Power Report, page 18, I think it would be highly
desirable in any case to burn a considerable quantity of Brown coal in order
to fully investigate its value.
CHOICE OF SITE.
The requirements of any site adapted for a central power station have
already been stated. A careful consideration of these requirements at once
considerably narrows the choice, but there are two sites which from their
situation are eminently suitable and which it would appear fulfil the conditions
given. They may be called for convenience the Dudley Street site and the
Yarraville site.* Borings have been made on both these sites in order to
determine the cost of foundations, and these borings have shown the land
at Dudley Street to be so unsuitable from a foundation point of view that
I have no hesitation in saying that the Yarraville site is the most satisfactory
available. I should not like to be responsible for constructing a power station
at all upon the Dudley Street site, and, even if it could be done, the cost
would be prohibitive. The Yarraville site entirely fulfils the conditions set
forth on page 26, having the following advantages:—
(1) The foundation is good, a good clay having been found 10 feet
below the surface and more or less uniformly over the site.
(2) It is on the river where a quay can be constructed at a minimum
of expense and capable, if Yew South Wales coal be used, of
unloading the largest ships.
(3) It can be readily connected to the Williamstown line by means
of a siding which I understand will in any case be con-
structed to deal with the goods traffic of the factories in the
neighbourhood. It is therefore very conveniently situated also
for burning either Victorian Black coal or Brown coal.
(4) There is ample water for condensing purposes ; thus no cooling
towers will be necessary and, on account of the level of the
site, the power station can be so constructed as to involve a
minimum lift in pumping.
(5) There is ample room for coal storage and extensions.
(6) It is within three miles of the centre of the system; but the extra
cost of cables or overhead lines, compared with a site actually
at the centre, cannot be judged by this as, while it lengthens
somewdrat the cables in one direction, it shortens those in the
other.
In fact it is very fortunate that a site so suitable and so near the centre
* Amongst other sites which have had my careful consideration I may mention sites at Spotswood
and at Port Melbourne.


is still unoccupied. It is especially suitable for burning Altona Brown coal,
if subsequently this be obtainable at a price comparable with Black coal,
taking into account the extra quantity required ; in fact it would be impossible
to find a site more suitable from this point of view.
Having settled upon a suitable site for the power station, I may proceed
to deal with the design and equipment of the station on the assumption
that it is to be capable of using either Vew South Wales coal or Victorian
Black or Brown coal and bearing in mind that, although a portion only will
be built to commence with, it is to be capable of extension to deal with the
whole railway load without wasting the initial expenditure.
DESIGN OF YARRAVILLE POWER STATION AND TYPE OF
PLANT PROPOSED.
Every traction power station has to deal with variations of load, but a
power station dealing with a supply such as that required for the Melbourne
Suburban service would have to deal with very large variations of load, both
momentarily and at different times of the day. This will be the case for
many years at any rate, if not always, whether the station supplies the re-
quirements of the railways and their workshops only, or also supplies power
outside. Fig. 9 shows the Load Curve which the Power Station would have to
deal with throughout the twenty-four hours with the service proposed for a
typical week-day, supposing all the Suburban Railways were electrified, i.e..
FIG. 9.—VARIATION OF LOAD ON POWER STATION OVER 24 HOURS.
Stage 111. Tliis curve is based on average readings over short periods; that is
to say, momentary variations, which are liable to be very severe on such a system,
are not taken into account. The Load Factor, which is the relation between
the actual output in units and the possible output if the maximu m load were
maintained throughout the twenty-four hours, is 3d per cent.
Under these conditions it is obvious that a type of prime mover should
be adopted which can economically deal with such large variati )ns of load;
that is, a prime mover which has a large overload capacity beyond its normal
or economical load. The functions of such a prime mover are exactly ful-
filled by the Steam Turbine, and this is recognised to be the most efficient
machine for producing power for such a load. Compared with the reciprocating
steam engine, its steam consumption is less, it requires considerably less attend-


ance, and its use represents a substantial saving in oil consumption and re-
pairs. I can, from actual experience of both types of plant, speak of the great
economy, both in capital cost and in the above respects, which results from
the use of the steam turbine.
The largest power stations erected, both in Europe and America, during
the last five years have been equipped with steam turbines, and have shown
a considerable economy compared with stations not so equipped. I, myself,
have had considerable experience of the use of large steam turbines, as the
Carville Power Station on the Tyne was the first power station in England to use
them. This station to-day contains eight 7,000 H.P. turbines and is pro-
ducing electric power as economically as, if not more economically than, any
other station in the world.
Though Gas Engines might be considered for dealing with a load which
resulted in a much better load factor on the station, say 70 per cent, to 100
per cent., and which had not the same momentary variations, they could not,
on account of the absence of overload capacity, deal with a load such as
that now under consideration without very excessive capital expenditure.
This is the position to-day and is likely to remain the position for some con-
siderable time. In saying this I have fully in mind the possibility of saving
and disposing of the bye-products if gas were utilised.
It is important when working with steam' turbines to use superheated
steam, and I recommend that the steam should be generated at a pressure of
200 lbs. per square inch above atmospheric pressure and superheated to a tem-
perature of 300 degrees Centigrade. For generating this steam I recommend
the use of water-tube boilers as, with this type of boiler, superheaters can be
very conveniently arranged, and they have the following further advantages ;
(1) They are very adaptable to constant changes of load on account
of their quick steam-raising properties.
(2) They allow of the construction of large combustion chambers
such as are necessary to deal economically with Brown coal.
(3) They can be fitted with chain-grate stokers which are the most
reliable and efficient stokers for the conditions under
consideration.
(4) The boilers are easily kept clean and the repair bill is a minimum.
I have devoted considerable thought and attention to the question of
burning Brown coal, if and when this should be available, and the Specifica-
tion for Boiler Plant specially provides for this. In addition to providing
specially large combustion chambers and grate area, I propose to utilise
induced draught, the fans being specified to produce a difference of pressure
equal to one inch of wmter at the boiler dampers.
In designing the Yarraville Power Station I have taken into account,
not only the power required for traction purposes, but also that required for
the Newport Workshops, Station Lighting, etc. Plate XYII. show's the general
arrangement of the plant, the number of generating sets actually shewn in
the drawing being that proposed for Stage 11. Table X. gives the more
important technical details for each of the four stages.
The Station is designed to deliver electrical energy as three phase current
at a periodicity of 25 complete cycles per second and at a voltage between
phases of 12,000 volts. This voltage is chosen because it is the highest voltage
for which I can recommend that Turbo-Generators should be wound and
because it is sufficiently high for economically transmitting the electrical
energy the necessary distance to the several sub-stations. A periodicity of


Port
Melbourne
and
St. Kilda
Branches.
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III.
Geneeating Plant—
Number of Generating Sets
installed
Normal continuous capacity of
each set, in E.H.P.*
Capacity of each set for two
hours, in E.H.P.* ...
Number of spare sets ...
Number of sets working at
peak
Overload capacity during peak,
in E.H.P
Maximum load to be dealt
with (see Table YIIL), in
E.H.P
8
5.000
_ 6,000
->
1
6.000
3,480
4
5.000
6.000
2
2
12,000
12,000
6
5.000
6.000
2
4
24,000
22,100
8
5.000
6.000
2
6
36.000
35.000
Boiler House Plant —
Continuous steaming capacity
of boilers installed in lbs. of
steam per hour
80,000
200,000
320,000
480,000
Approximate percentage of
spare boilers allowed for
cleaning and repairs
25 %
25 %
19 %
17 %
Continuous steaming capacity
of boilers working in lbs. of
steam per hour
60,000
150,000
260,000
400,000
Peak steaming capacity of
boilers working in lbs. of
steam net- hour
75,000
188,000
825,000
500,000
1
25 complete cycles per second is chosen as the most adaptable for any general
developments likely to take place. It is also the most suitable for the
operation of 800 volt Rotary Converters.
TABLE X.
TECHNICAL DETAILS OF PLANT IN PROPOSED POWER STATION
AT YARRAVILLE.
The following is a general description of the proposed plant and its
arrangement:
Bunding.l. —The Buildings will be steel-framed structures carried
on concrete foundations. The Engine Room is designed to entail the
minimum amount of labour in operation and to admit of all machinery
being kept in view and accessible to the overhead crane.
The coal, after being unloaded from a steamer at the station
wharf, or from the railway trucks, as the case may be, will be delivered
to Coal Bunkers situated above the boilers, by automatic Coal Con-
veying Gear.
Generating Units. —The Engine Room will contain turbo-genera-
tors of the Parsons, Curtis, or other type depending upon the tenders
* The actual outputs specified for (Specification No. 2) allow a margin on these figures for low
power factor and abnormal working conditions.


received, and the steam will be exhausted from them into Condensers
arranged with suitable Circulating and Air Pumps capable of main-
taining the highest vacuum commercially possible. The capacity of
each turbo-generator will be 6,000 H.P.* This size of turbo-generator
is chosen because it is about the maximum size of alternator that can
be conveniently built for 1,500 revolutions, the highest speed for which
a 25-cycle generator can be built, and with steam turbines the higher
the speed, the better is the economy.
To deal with the lines covered by Stage 1., the Station will contain
four generating sets, two of which will easily be able to deal with the
load, thus allowing two generating sets as spare.f It can, however,
be readily extended as may be required from time to time, though the
intention is that it should not be extended beyond a total of ten units,
this being the greatest number of units that can, in my opinion, be
advantageously operated in one power station. When this number
is reached it may, in general, be taken that it is better to commence
a second station entirely distinct from the first. From Fig. 9it will
be seen that the maximum Peak load, even if all the lines be converted
to electric traction, is estimated to amount to about 115,000 H.P.
Six of the above turbo-generator units would, therefore, be capable
of dealing with this load, and assuming two units spare, we obtain
a total of eight units as the equipment of a station to deal with the
requirements of tire whole of the Suburban Railways on present esti-
mates. This allows two additional units, without extending the station
beyond what it was originally designed for.
Boiler House Equipment. —The Boilers will be of the water tube
type and will deliver steam at a pressure of 200 lbs. per square inch
above the atmosphere and superheated to 300 degrees Centigrade.
The coal will be fed into Mechanical Stokers by gravity, the stokers
being specially designed to burn the coal with a maximum of economy
and smokelessly. The ashes will be raised by special hoists into the
bunkers provided for the purpose.
Switchhovse.- -The Switchgear will be situated in a special Switch-
house where there will also be a Control Room from which all the
generators and the feeders going out of the Power Station will be
controlled. This control room will be connected by telephone with
the engine room, the boiler house, and the various substations.
Operation Offices. —The necessary Operation Offices are provided
in part of the switchhouse building.
The technical details of the proposed plant are dealt with fully by the
Specifications presented with this Report. The specifications suggested to cover
the construction of the Power Station are:
(1) Steel work for Engine and Boiler House, including the complete
boiler house equipment, piping, coal and ash handling gear and
overhead traveller (Specification No. 1).
(2) Turbo-Alternators and Condensing Plant (Specification No. 2).
(3) Switchgear, control panels, motor generators, auxiliary motors,
main wiring and lighting (Specification No. 3).
(4) Foundations, jetty, sidings and auxiliary buildings (Specification
No. 4).
It is impossible to draft specification No. 4 or draw detailed plans for these
wmrks until the type of plant under specifications Nos. 1, 2 and 3 has been
* This size of generator is really too large if you were to consider dealing with the Port
Melbourne and St. Kilda Branches only as only one would be working out of three provided (three are
necessary to allow two units spare). On the other hand a smaller size would not be so economical
and would not be the best size when the station came to be extended.
f It is, in my opinion, necessary to have two spare sets, one set standing-by and one set being
overhauled.


Port Melbourne
Kilda Bran
Names of
Substations.
and St.
ches.
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III.
Capacity
in K.W.
Names of
Substations.
Capacity
in K.W.
Names of
Substations.
Capacity
in K.W.
Names of
Substations.
Capacity
in K.W.
1
South
South
South
South
Melbourne
4,500
Melbourne
4,500
Melbourne
4,500
Melbourne
4,500
2
Pascoe Yale
1,500
Pascoe Vale
1,500
Pascoe Yale
1,500
3
North
North
North
Melbourne
8,000
Melbourne
4,500
Melbourne
6,000
4
Richmond
3,000
Richmond
6,000
Richmond
6,000
5
Balaclava
8,000
Balaclava
3,000
Balaclava
4,500
6
i
Brighton
Brighton
Brighton
Beach ...
1,500
Beach
1,500
Beach
1,500
7
Newport...
3,000
Newport...
3,000
8
Camberwell
3,000
Camberwell
8,000
9
Blackburn
1,500
Blackburn
1,500
10
1
Caulfield ...
4,500
11
Spring Yale
1,500
12
Mentone..
1,500
13
Clifton
Hill
4,500
14
i
1
Ivanhoe ...
1,500
15
Bell
1,500
16
Brunswick
1,500
definitely decided upon. For instance, the specification for the boiler house
equipment leaves the actual number of boilers open, so that a manufacturer
may quote for either a smaller number of large boilers or a larger number of
small boilers, always providing the steaming capacity required is obtained
with the necessary spare plant. This allows manufacturers to quote on their
standard apparatus. Further, some turbo-generators are arranged with ver-
tical shafts and others with horizontal shafts, and, this affects the design of
foundation. The specification is specially arranged to cover either type of plant
in order that you may be free to accept the most satisfactory proposition taking
everything into consideration.
SUBSTATIONS.
The positions recommended for the substations for converting the elec-
trical energy from High Tension Three-phase Current to Low Tension Direct
Current for dealing with the whole Suburban System are shown on Plate I.
The substations are covered by the following specifications:—
(1) Equipment of substations. (Specification No. 5).
(2) Substation buildings. (Specification No. 6).
The remarks with regard to Specification No. 4 apply also to No. (i and for
the same reason. Plate XYIII. show T s the general arrangement of substation
proposed, which has been specially designed to facilitate economical operation.
Table XI. gives the number, and indicates the position of each substation for
the different stages; it also gives the capacity of plant proposed to be installed.
TABLE XI.
SUBSTATIONS REQUIRED FOR THE DIFFERENT STAGES.*
Generally, the substation equipment consists of:
(1) High Tension Feeder Panels, equipped with oil switches.
* The substation capacities given in Table XI. are on the two-hour rating. See Specification No. 5.


Port
Melbourne
and St. Kilda
Branches.
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III.
1. —Underground Cables throughout
£
27,301
£
75,653
£
119,47 2
£
211,776
2. —Underground Cables to Rich-
mond, round the inner circle
and to Camberwell, Caulfield
and Balaclava —overhead lines
elsewhere
27,301
67,562
102,996
176,238
3. —Underground Cables to Rich-
mond and round inner circle
—overhead lines elsewhere ...
27,301
63,555
93,293
159,962
4.—Overhead lines throughout, with
duplicate lines on steel poles
in central area
18,453
47,469
67,324
113,533
(2) High Tension Machine Panels, equipped with oil switches.
(3) Rotary Converter Sets, each consisting of a 12,000/550 volt three-
phase Stationary Transformer and a Rotary Converter specified
to give 1,000 K.W. continuously, and 1,500 K.W. for two hours,
with momentary outputs up to 3,000 K.W.
(4) Direct Current Switchboard for controlling Rotary Converters and
Feeders to Conductor Rail.
(5) Lighting Equipment, Air Compressor for cleaning, Ventilating
Fans, and all auxiliaries.
TRANSMISSION OF HIGH TENSION CURRENT TO SUBSTATIONS.
The three phase electrical energy generated at Yarraville will be trans-
mitted to the substations at 12,000 volts, and this may be done either by
overhead wires or by underground cables, or partly by one method and partly
by the other. As we do not require, with the 800 volt direct current system
chosen, any overhead wires for distributing the current from the substations
to the trains, we recommend that advantage be taken of this to avoid all over-
head wires in the central area ; that is, between the Power Station, on the
west, and Richmond, on the east. The cost of four alternative arrangements,
as between overhead wires and underground cables, is given in Table XII.
TABLE XII.
COST OF OVERHEAD LINES AND UNDERGROUND CABLES.
In my estimates I have included alternative 3 which I recommend as
giving somewhat greater security of supply due to the absence of overhead
wires from the centre of the city. There is no reason, however, why you
should not adopt overhead lines throughout if you do not consider the extra
cost of underground cables justified for the reasons stated or for the sake of
appearance and convenience. Conversely, there is no technical reason why
you should not adopt underground cables throughout according to alternative
lif you consider the greater expense justified, ihe arrangement of feeders,
both for the whole scheme and to deal with the lines covered by the different
stages, is given on Plate XIX. "Where more than one underground cable is
required they would be laid on both sides of the track, thus giving greater
security of supply. With the underground cables, test wires would be laid for
recording the drop in voltage in the track, and telephone wires for communicat-
ing with the different substations.
I suggest that the overhead lines should be erected by your own staff,


Port
Melbourne
and St. Kilda
Branches.
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III.
Power Station ;—
Foundations, quays, main circulat-
ing water pipes and sumps, and
all brick and concrete work ...
Steel building and chimneys, boiler
house equipment, pipe system,
feed pumps and sump pumps ...
Main generating units, condensing
plant, air and circulating pumps
Switchboard, wiring, auxiliary
motors, etc.
Fitting shop and tools, stores,
cranes and sundry equipment ...
£
26,000
67.000
59.000
13.000
6,300
£
33.600
96.600
78,500
19,000
7,300
£
42.000
150,700
118,000
26.000
8,400
£
52.500
195,500
157,000
36.500
9,500
| Total Capital Cost of Power Station
£171,800
£235,000
£345,100
£451,000
Substations : —
Buildings and equipment ...
18,732
78,059
132,294
225,984
High Tension Feeders : —
High Tension Feeders between
Power Station and Substations
(on the basis of Alternative 8,
Table XII.)
27,801
63,555
93,293
159.962
Spares for Power Department
4,000
9.743
9,743
9,743
Total
£221,388
£386.857
£580,430
£846,689
the underground cables being laid by contract, the labour being provided by
the Railway Department. This work is covered by the following specifica-
tions :
(1) Overhead Wires and Insulators (Specification Xo. 7).
(2) High and Low Tension Underground Cables (Specification Xo. 8).
The High Tension Feeder Cables will consist of three-core paper insrrlated,
lead covered cables laid solid in wood troughing, or armoured, according to
their location. They are specified to stand a test pressure of 24,000 volts after
laying, but a sample tested in the factory is not to break down under a two-
minute test of 60,000 volts. The contracts for cables are arranged on a
schedule basis and it is proposed that the w r ork should be paid for per yard laid.
SUMMARY OF CAPITAL COST.
Table XIII. gives a summarized estimate of the capital cost of the Power
Station equipment necessary to deliver power to the Conductor Rail, including
the High Tension Feeders and Substations.
TABLE XIII.
CAPITAL COST OF POWER STATION, SUBSTATIONS AND
HIGH TENSION FEEDERS.*
As some of the material will not be manufactured in Australia it would
take some time to obtain new parts and hence the question of what spare parts
should be kept in stock is very important. I have considered this very care-
fully and have included in all Specifications, schedules, to be filled in by the
tenderer, giving prices for spare parts, the total estimated cost of which, for the
Power Department, is included in Table XIII.
# Including freight, tariff, engineering and contingencies.


Port Melbourne
and Sfc. Kilda
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III.
Branches.
No.
Cost
No.
Cost
No.
Cost
No.
Cost
of
per
of
per
of
per
of
per
Men.
annum.
Men.
annum.
Men.
annum.
Men.
annum.
Power Station —Operating
£
£
Staff : —
Engineers in Charge ...
8
750
4
1,000
4
1,000
4
1,000
Switch Board Attendants
4
568
4
568
5
710
5
710
Telephone Attendants
1
102
2
204
2
204
3
806
Head Drivers ...
4
628
4
628
4
628
5
785
Assistant Drivers
3
426
4
568
5
710
Head Firemen...
4
536
4
536
6
804
7
938
Under Firemen
5
690
7
826
10
1,180
Water Tenders
3
330
3
330
5
550
6
660
Cleaners
1
102
2
204
3
306
4
408 j
Coal and Ash Handling Men ...
2
220
4
440
6
660
8
880
Total ...
22
£3 236
85
£4,926
46
£6,256
57
£7,577
Cost per annum.
Cost per annum.
Cost per annum.
Cost
per annum. |
i
Fixed Charges—Power Station
-P
£
4? i
Operating Staff : —
Wages
3,286
4,926
6.256
7,577
Repairs
Labour
1,100
1,500
2,250
8,000
Material
750
1,000
1,500
2.00G
General:—
Clerical Staff
120
150
200
250
Stationery and Sundries ...
90
120
160
200
i Supervision ...
300
850
400
500 :
j Insurance —Boilers and Staff
90
150
210
280
Total Fixed Charges ...
£5,686
£8,196
£10,976
£13.807
! (Power Station)
Fixed Charges—Substations
and High Tension Feeders—
Operating Wages including
Insurance
1,360
8,570
5,440
7,710
Stores, Repairs and Main-
tenance ...
1,269
2,123
3,495
5,080
Total fixed charges
£2.629
£5,698
£8,935
£12,790
(Substations)
Total fixed charges (Power De-
£8,315
£18,889
£19,911
£26,597
partment)
Variable Charges — Power
Station —
Coal, Oil, and Stores (Black
coal at 12s. per ton)* ...
£9,210
£28,200
£41,450
£62,260
Total Fixed and Variable
Charges (Power Depart-
ment) ...
£17,525
£37,089
£61,361
£88,857
Table XIY. gives my estimate of the cost of operation of the Power
TABLE XIY.
OPERATING EXPENSES OF POWER DEPARTMENT.
** The price of Black coal burned at Yarraville is taken at 12s. per ton as against 14s. per ton
for that burned by steam locomotives (see page 64), because the power station is especially designed
to burn the poorest and smallest coal, which is obtainable at a low price, but which cannot be
burned in locomotives. If anything, 12s. per ton is on the high side as compared with 14s.


Department for the different stages including not only the Power Station itself
hut also the High Tension Feeders and Substations.
The estimates given in this Table are based on the use of Black
coal as, although the Power Station is specially designed to burn either
Brown coal, or Black coal, it is only the latter that can be bought to-day
as a commercial article in sufficient quantities for the production of the
electrical energy required for the Railways; if, when the scheme starts, Brown
coal should be obtainable in sufficient quantities, the saving made will, of
course, depend entirely on the prices at which it can be delivered into the
Power Station bunkers. I should hope this saving will be considerable.
TRACK EQUIPMENT.
The distribution of energy from the substations to the motors on the
trains will be by means of a “ Contact ” or “ Conductor ” Rail, the circuit
being completed by the track rails which will be rendered electrically con-
tinuous for the purpose by bonding at the joints. The Conductor Rail itself
should be of a special composition of steel in order to reduce the electrical
resistance to a minimum. The supply of material under this section is covered
by the following specifications
(1) Supply and Delivery of Conductor Rail (Specification No. 9.)
(2) Supply and Delivery of Insulators for Conductor Rail (Specifica-
tion No. 10.)
(d) Supply and Delivery of Ponds for Conductor and Track Rails
(Specification No. 11.)
The specifications cover the supply and delivery of material only, as in
my opinion all the work on the ground can be carried out with advantage
by the Railway Department.
The collection of current from the Conductor Rail is by means of a contact
shoe attached to the bogie trucks, and this may be of either the under, over,
or side contact type. The decision as to which of these alternatives should be
adopted depends upon the exact design of protection. On Plate XX. two of
the rails shown are for under contact shoes and one for top contact shoes.
Whilst I was in Melbourne some samples of typical forms of protection were
made and erected on the track and it was decided to leave these exposed to
the atmosphere for a considerable time before coming to a final decision as to the
best form of protection and kind of wood to adopt. I also had sent here, for
laboratory tests, samples of various woods which it would be possible to use for
this protection and, although it seems certain that Messmate gives the best result
electrically, I withhold my decision as to the exact design of protection for
the time being until 1 hear how the samples erected in Melbourne have stood
the effect of sun and weather and also until the laboratory tests being made here
are completed. The estimates, however, allow for the adoption of any of the
types shown, and the specifications provide for the supply of rails, insulators,
and bonds of such design that the Conductor Rail may be completely protected
throughout its length.
On double track roads the Conductor Rails for both tracks will be laid
in the six-foot way, thus leaving the tracks themselves, and the outside of the
tracks, free from obstruction. Where there are level road crossings or special
track work, such as cross-over roads or junctions, the Conductor Rail will be
discontinued and the gap bridged by lengths of low tension cable laid under-
ground, the supply and delivery of which is included in Specification No. 8
covering all cable work. Plate XXI. shows the normal position of the
Conductor Rail relatively to the track rails.
Operating
Expenses of
Power
Department
{ continued ).
Conductor
Rail.
Protection of
Conductor
Rail.
Location of
Conductor
Rail.


No.
Port Melbourne and
St. Kilda Branches.
Stage I.
Stage 11.
Stage III.
i
Flinders St. Box A
Flinders St. Box A
Flinders St. Box A
Flinders St. Box A
2
Flinders St. Box 0
Flinders St. Box 0
Flinders St. Box C
Flinders St. Box C
8
St. Kilda Junction
St. Kilda Junction
St. Kilda Junction
St, Kilda Junction
4
—
Flinders St. Box B
Flinders St. Box E
Flinders St. Box E
5
—
Spencer St. Box No.1
Spencer St. Box No.l
Spencer St. Box No.l
6
—
Newmarket
Newmarket
Newmarket
7
—
Essendon
Essendon
Essendon
8
—
—
Burnley
Burnley
9
—
—
Hawthorn
Hawthorn
10
—
—
Tooronga
Tooronga
11
—
—
Footscray
Footscray
12
—
—
East Camberwell
East Camberwell
13
—
—
Gardenvale
Gardenvale
14
—
—
Mont Albert
Mont Albert
15
—
—
Williamstown
Williamstown
1 16
—
—
Mitcham
Mitcham
17
—
—
—
Flinders St. Box I)
i 18
—
—
South Yarra
19
—
—
—
Royal Park
i 20
—
—
—
North Fitzroy
2!
—
—
Preston Junction
1 22
—
—
—
Fairfield Park
23
—
—
—
Armadale
24
—
—
Northcote
25
—
—
—
Oakleigh
26
'
—
—
South Brighton
The Bonds, covered by Specification No. 11 will be placed under the
existing fish-plates, firstly to reduce the length and, therefore, the cost as
much as possible, and secondly, to protect the bonds against mechanical injury.
For the 100 lbs. rail, and for a large portion of the 80 lbs. rail, this arrangement
of joint bonding can be adopted without alteration to the standard fish-plate.
In the case of some of the lighter fish-plates, however, some machining of the
plates will be necessary and has been allowed for in the estimates. Cross
bonds will also be provided at intervals between the two rails of the same
track and between different tracks so that, in the event of any repairs being
carried out, there may be no danger of the electrical circuit being broken ;
this also provides against open-circuiting in the event of failure of the bonding
in one or more lines of rail.
In order to give the operating staff complete control of the track circuits,
it is proposed to instal section switches in the signal boxes at all junctions
and, where the length between junctions justifies it, at intermediate boxes.
These switches will be operated by the signalmen on duty. The telephone
circuits provided for throughout the route will be looped in at all signal
TABLE XY .
SITUATION OF SECTION SWITCHGEAR.
cabins so as to place the signalmen in direct communication with the sub-
stations supplying the power to the particular sections which they control.


Port
Melbourne
and St. Kilda
Branches.
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III.
£
£
£
£
1. — Conductor Rail, including all
“special work,” bonding, pro-
tection and cable work
22,370
102,045
211,225
400,515
2. —Track Bonding ...
2,523
11,580
23,514
44,989
8.—Section switchgear and all low
tension cables
8,355
12,510
18,030
25,680
4. —Alterations to fish plates, sleepers,
signal gear and bridges
19,656
43,397
57,087
95,429
5. —Spare Material! •• •
426
796
1,179
1,526
Total
£53,330
£170,328
£311,035
£568,189
It is, of course, only necessary for the signalman to operate these switches
occasionally. The signal boxes which it is proposed to equip for each Stage
are given in Table XV., and the supply and erection of these switchboards is
covered by the specification for Substation Equipment (Xo. 5).
The laying of the Conductor Rail in the position shown on Plate XXI.
will necessitate the reconstruction of a certain number of bridges in order that
there may be ample clearance between the rail and these structures. I have
obtained from the Engineer of Way and Works an estimate of the cost of
this work and this estimate is included in the cost of the electrical equipment.
The bridges which have to be altered are largely of an old pattern and a
proportion of them will require to be replaced if steam working be continued
as they are hardly suitable for carrying as heavy locomotives as you will require
in the near future for country service on some of the lines in question. I have
also included an ample allowance for the extension of those sleepers upon which
insulators will be placed for supporting the Conductor Rail, and any moving
of signal rods and wires that may be necessary; my estimates are based upon
Australian conditions and upon prices obtained while in Melbourne.
Table XVI. gives my estimates of the capital cost of the Track Equipment,
the Permanent "Way alterations and the Low Tension cables necessary to
connect up the substations and section switches to the Conductor Rail and
Track.
TABLE XVI.
CAPITAL COST OF TRACK EQUIPMENT.-
As already mentioned when discussing the choice of system, the inspection
and maintenance of the track equipment can he efficiently dealt with by the
present permanent way inspectors. The renewal of bonds and insulators can
be carried out by the existing staff, but in order to deal with cable work, it
will be necessary to keep one or more cable jointers, according to the number
of lines in operation. I have allowed in my estimates for the additional labour
;md material based on my experience of the cost of similar maintenance work
elsewhere, but increased to cover the higher cost of labour in Victoria. The
figures in Table XVII. for this maintenance are based on the mileage proposed
* Including freight, tariff, engineering and contingences.
t As the material required in connection with the track work can all be standardized and as the
different items themselves include a considerable margin, I have not allowed for any very large
amount of spare material.


Port Melbourne
and
St, Kilda Branches.
Stage I.
Stage II.
1
Stage HI.
1
£720
£3,300
£6,70 ii
i
£12,800
i
to be equipped under each stage, being practically independent of tbe number
of train miles operated over the section.
TABLE X Yll.
ANNUAL COST OF MAINTENANCE OF THE ELECTRICAL TRACK
EQUIPMENT, INCLUDING MATERIAL.


1
Make-up of Trains.
Port
Melbourne
and
St. Kilda
Branches.
Stage I.
Stage 11.
Stage III.
fi (InarVi ( Number of Trains
2
12
21
24
Train < Number of Motor Coaches
6
36
63
72
(8 Units) 1 Number of Trailer Coaches
6
36
63
72
4 Coach ( Number of Trains
3
12
23
47
Train < Number of Motor Coaches
6
24
46
94
(2 Units) | Number of Trailer Coaches
6
24
46
94
9 rinnoVi 1 Number of Trains
6
15
33
59
Train < Number of Motor Coaches 6
15
33
59
(1 Unit) I Number of Trailer Coachesi 6
V
15
33
59
Single j
SX < Number of Trains
1
3
3
Train {
SECTION “ C.”
ROLLING STOCK FOR ELECTRIC SERVICE.
AMOUNT OF STOCK REQUIRED.
It has already been recommended that if electric traction he adopted,
the Suburban trains should he operated on the multiple-unit system (see
page 12).
For your service I recommend a standard train unit consisting of one
motor coach and one trailer coach, with a seating capacity of 160 and equipped
with two motors on one bogie of the motor coach (see page 11). As there
are many trains required for the service outlined which will never consist
of less than two units (4 coaches) and in some cases three units (6 coaches)
it is unnecessary to provide for driving cabs at both ends of all units, whilst
TABLE X Ylll.
MAKE-UP OF TRAINS FOR PROPOSED ELECTRIC SERVICE.


Type of Stock.
Port Mel-
bourne and
; St. Kilda
Branches.
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III.
Motor Coaches (2 driving cabs)
2
4
6
9
Motor Coaches (1 driving cab)
20
85
160
241
Trailer Coaches (1 driving cab)
.. 8
20
40
78
Trailer Coaches (no driving cab)
12
60
109
GO
i
Total ...
42
169
815
496
a proportion of the motor coaches must be equipped with two driving cabs
so that single motor coach trains may be used on the outlying lines to provide
a frequent yet economical service. Plato XXII. shews the general arrangement
of multiple-unit trains for the different services.
Set-workings for the proposed time-table have been drawn up from
which the number and type of coaches required can be definitely ascertained
and also the number of coaches which it will be necessary to fit with one
and with two driving equipments respectively. The set-workings for Stag;*
I. accompany the Report under separate cover, and the number and make-up
of the trains required for each stage is given in tabular form (Table XYIIL).
Eor these trains, including an allowance of spare stock, the coaches in
Table XIX. would be required:
T A RLE XIX.
NUMBER AND TYPE OF STOCK REQUIRED AT EACH STAGE OF
CONVERSION (INCLUDING SPARES).
In considering tlie question of flic most suitable type of rolling' stock for
a large, important and rapid suburban service, tlie two chief considerations
are: Firstly, to secure the maximum passenger accommodation for a given
weight of coach ; this is particularly important with electrical operation
because the amount of electrical energy used in driving the trains increases
in almost direct proportion to the weight. Secondly, to adopt a design which
will enable the passengers to enter and leave the trains at the different stations
as rapidly as possible, thus reducing the time spent in stops to a minimum
and thereby increasing the schedule speed. As would be expected, the first
of these considerations is best met by making each coach as large as possible,
that is, as long and as wide as possible. The length and width of coach
are, in practice, limited, not by difficulties of construction, but by the
fact that the dimensions have to be kept within such limits that the coaches
io not foul platforms or other trains on adjacent tracks when rounding curves.
The second consideration is almost entirely one of arrangement of seats and
doors.
The types of stock generally in use may be classified under two general
heads; Corridor Stock with doors at each end, and Cross-compartment Stock
with side doors. Plate XXIII. illustrates the general outline and seating
capacity of different designs in use for suburban traffic. Whereas End-door
stock is usual in America to the almost entire exclusion of Side-door stock,
the reverse holds good on the Continent of Europe. For main line and
high speed working, corridor stock has great advantages; the design may
be made rigid and strong and the side framing, being without openings
or breaks for doors, can be built in the form of a continuous girder.
The corridor also admits of communication throughout the length of the


train, a requirement of all modern main line stock, and the doors at the
ends being- arranged to open inwards the coaches can be built of maximum
width, i.e., with minimum clearance between passing trains.
In America, and to a certain extent in England, the corridor type of coacli
lias also been developed for suburban working, Tor tube, subway or under-
ground railways dealing with very heavy traffic, it has undoubted advantages,
if train men are stationed at each end of every coach to open and shut the
doors and to hurry up passengers in entering and leaving cars at stations, and
if it be a question rather of coping with the traffic than of operating at minimum
cost. It is not necessary to delay the starting of the trains to shut the doors,
an important matter with high acceleration, and passengers do not waste time
walking up and down the platforms looking for seats as they do where there
are separate compartments, and further, this design provides for a maximum
of standing room, which for short journey traffic is a valuable feature.
On the other hand, for ordinary suburban working, the expense of so many
train attendants is prohibitive and without them there is delay in discharging
and loading trains where all passengers have to leave by comparatively small
end doors. The importance of providing ample door area may be judged from
the fact that on some lines where corridor stock is in use, additional doors in
the ends and also in the centre of the coaches have been proposed and in some
cases adopted.
While such a coach may be best suited to the special conditions of tube
and subway working- where there are very frequent stations and where, in
consequence, very high accelerations and short time stops have to be adopted
to maintain a good schedule speed, I do not think that the extra expense
of the train crews involved would be justified, or that a type of coach, the chief
merit of which is large standing space, is the best suited to the conditions on
the Melbourne Suburban System on which many people have daily to travel
considerable distances.
Plate XXIII. shows that, although with the corridor type of coach there
is a large amount of standing room, the seats provided for the same length of
coach are considerably less than in the case of the compartment coaches;
corridor stock, on the other hand, provides facilities for changing from one
compartment to another in a crowded coach even after the train has started,
and this is an advantage not lightly to be sacrificed. If, therefore, it were a
question of building new stock, I consider the type of stock shown on Plate
XXIY., originally suggested by your Chairman and designed by the Chief
Mechanical Engineer while I was in Melbourne, -would be the most advantag-
eous. This design is really a combination of the two types, being a cross-
compartment coach with a communication-way between compartments. Such
a coach has been used on certain of the American and German lines and has
been proposed for some of the English systems. The use of sliding doors that
can be easily closed by the passengers without danger even after the train starts,
avoids delay at stations compared with the ordinary outward swinging doors, the
absence of which also enables the coaches to be built of the maximum width,
since even if the sliding doors were inadvertently left open, there would be no
danger of fouling- passing trains as would be the case with swinging doors.
Thus, in the case of Melbourne you would, while retaining the large seating
capacity of the cross-compartment coaches, also obtain the advantages of the
communication passage between compartments; such a design of coach is a
combination of the best points of the latest types of suburban stock of Europe
and America.
The estimated cost of a coach body of this type complete with trucks, but
without electrical equipment, varies from £1,050 to £1,790 according to the


Type of Stock.
Description.
Number.
Length in Feet.
Average
Seating
Capacity.
Bogie
AA
155
45
61
99
BB
29
45. 50
78
99
A B 11 ' 1
21|
44, 45, 50
66
”
AD a<l
82
45, 50
52
99
BD M
18
50
70
Fixed Wheel-Base
A
36
30
32
99
B
220
24, 25i, 27j, 30
47
99
BH
12
25|
50
99
ABD
1
24
25
95
BD
43
24, 26
26
„
D
3
24
Van
V
AB
1
30
50
class of compartment provided and the provision made for motormen’s and
guards’ compartments.
While any new stock should, I think, be built generally in accordance
with this design, it does not follow that you would be justified in scrapping
all the existing stocK and, if it be not scrapped and new stock built, the question
arises as to what the existing stock should be used for. The importance of this
question is obviously in inverse proportion to the magnitude of the electrifica-
tion scheme. If the contemplated conversion affects a small fraction only of
the stock, the provision of new electric stock could be easily justified, since the
necessity for continually adding to the steam stock to provide for the increasing
traffic would, in a very short space of time, absorb the steam stock thus dis-
placed. As, however, I do not recommend proceeding with a small portion
of the scheme only, I do not consider that you would be justified in providing
new rolling stock throughout, more especially as the existing stock is of the
cross-compartment type which, in that it provides large seating capacity
and avoids the necessity for a large number of attendants on the trains, is in
every way suited to the Melbourne Suburban Service.
Table XX. gives leading particulars of the existing rolling stock which is
run in the present Suburban Service.
TABLE XX.
EXISTING SUBURBAN ROLLING STOCK."
Total Number of Bogie Coaches ... ... ... ... ... ... 305
Total Number of Fixed Wheel-base Coaches ... ... ... ... 316
Of this stock neither the six nor the four wheeled stock with fixed wheel-
base is at all suitable for the electric service, but such bogie stock as is con-
structed with all-steel underframes could be utilised, if it were not for its
varying length which results in considerable variation both of weight and of
seating accommodation.
Coaches of different lengths are very undesirable, especially for multiple-
unit working, the essence of which is uniformity among the different sections
making up the train, as regards capacity and interchangeability of motor equip-
* Excluding stock required for Frankston, St. Albans, Werribee and Eltham.
t 10 AB ai ’ stock are not suitable for conversion.


No. New Class.
1
Cost. |
£
2 | Motor Coach with 2 Driving Compartments
981
9 9
55 55 w 59 5?
1,179
78 Motor Coach with 1 Driving Compartment ...
88,393 '
85 ,, 55 1 5 5 5 5 • * * * * ‘
47,297
21 Trailer Coach with 1. Driving Compartment
9,516
Q 1
° j 55 55 - 1 55 55
4,009
4 1 ...
•±| 5) 55 55 55
2,144
60 ' Trailer Coach without Driving Compartment
24,747
89 ,, 55 55 55
19,619
10 ,, ,, 55 55
2,447
305
£145,332
ment. Further, as already stated, the maximum accommodation per ton
weight of coach is secured by the longest practicable coach; for your Suburban
Lines and with ordinary compartment doors opening outwards, the limit of
length is about 60 feet.
I have inspected the design and condition of this bogie stock in the
sheds at Melbourne, and the Chief Mechanical Engineer has handed me draw-
ings showing in detail the construction (which is quite in line with the best
current steam practice) and how it is proposed to lengthen the stock to the
limiting dimension and, although certain alterations would be necessary in
order to make the underframe suitable for carrying the electrical equipment
with the clearances required, these are not calculated to increase the weight
or to complicate the underframe to any appreciable extent.
As a result of the discussion on these matters which took place while I
was in Melbourne, complete estimates of cost were got out by the Chief
Mechanical Engineer for lengthening nearly all these coaches and for a cor-
responding strengthening of the underframes and trucks and also for the
provision of driving compartments. These estimates, summarised in Table
XXI., show that the carrying out of these alterations would be a very much,
cheaper matter than building entirely new stock.
TABLE XXI.
COST OF LENGTHENING AND ALTERING SUBURBAN
STEAM STOCK.
If all tlie suitable bogie coaches given in Table XX., and also the
10 new coaches,* were dealt with in this way, there would be a total of 305
coaches, each capable of seating from 70 to 80 passengers, depending on
whether motormen’s and guards’ compartments were required or not.
Since a total of 490 coaches of this size would be required for the proposed
Service, there is, for Stage 111., a balance of 191 coaches to be provided, and
these could all be of the new type referred to on page 45 (Plate XXIY.)
or, if it be desired to provide corridor stock for all the country lines, there
are 124 bogie coaches at present in use in this service which might be replaced
by corridor stock and altered in the same way as the present suburban coaches
* 10 Coaches completed subsequent to the Report of the Electrification Committee and treated
as additional stock (see Table XXIII.).


No.
New Class.
Cost. 1
45
Motor Ooach with 1 Driving Compartment
£
25,039
20
Trailer Coach with 1 Driving Compartment
10,721
58
Trailer Coach without Driving Compartment
29,176
1
Trailer Ooach without. Driving Compartment
458
124
£65,394
for electric working, thus leaving only’ (>7 new coaches to be provided. I
assume that the latter course will be adopted and give in Table XXII. a
summary- of the cost of carrying out the alterations. The amount to be
credited to the country service for the loss of this stock is included in
Table XXIII. under “ Additional Rolling Stock.”
TABLE XXII.
COST OF LENGTHENING AND ALTERING COUNTRY STEAM STOCK.
lii order that a high schedule speed may be maintained, the advantage
gained by the quick acceleration of the electric trains must not bo lost in long
stops at stations, and the public should be induced to assist the operation
of the railway by entering and leaving trains as quickly as possible. It is
in connection with this station stop that the outward swinging side-door
stock is at some disadvantage as it is essential that the doors should be closed
before the train leaves the platform.
The duty of closing the carriage doors, at present devolving upon the
station staff, will be rendered more difficult by the higher acceleration. With
an acceleration of ’9 miles per hour per second and the maximum length of
train proposed, the speed at which the last door will pass a point at the end
of a 300-foot platform, would be 21 miles per hour—too high to contemplate
the effectual closing of swing doors from the platform. It must be arranged,
therefore, either to close tire doors before the train starts, or if, with the
present staff, this would mean increasing the stopping time required, to provide
additional men at the more busy stations. This applies only at such times
as six coach trains are in service; on the majority of the branches this would
be during the heavy morning and evening traffic only, and I recommend that
such additional- staff should be provided at such times and places.
Alternative ways of dealing with the matter are either to close the doors
automatically’ or to convert them from outward swinging doors to sliding doors.
Neither of tires# methods can, however, be recommended, the former on account
of the complication, the latter on account of the cost.
I therefore recommend that if any Electrification Scheme be proceeded
with, such of the existing stock as is suitable for the purpose be lengthened and
altered for the Electric Service, and that, on routes where this is used, addi-
tional staff be provided at the busier stations during rush hours of traffic and
that new’ stock be provided to make up the required number of coaches.
In order, however, that ample experience of the proposed new’ type of
coach may’ be obtained before building it in large quantities, I consider suffi-
cient coaches should be built to form two complete six-coach trains for Stage I.
of the conversion ; this has been allowed for in the estimates.
The existing trucks, while they’ can conveniently be made suitable for
use as trailer trucks, are not suitable for currying the motors themselves. I,


therefore, recommend that new motor trucks he built according to the design
discussed in Melbourne, and the cost of these is included in Tables XXI. and
XXII.
I have assumed that all the work in connection with the rolling stock for
the electric service would be carried out in your own workshops; I have, how-
ever, fully allowed in the estimates for the cost of this work, basing my
figures upon the information prepared by your Chief Mechanical Engineer.
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT OF ROLLING STOCK.
Specification Xo. 12 gives in detail the conditions to be met by the
motors themselves and also particulars of the electrical equipment recom-
mended. Briefly, the equipment of each motor coach will consist of two motors
mounted on one bogie, contact shoes or collectors on each side, a set of
“ contactors ” or switches, a master controller, a motor driven air-compressor
for the brakes, and the necessary cables and connections for this apparatus
and for lighting and heating. Plate XXY. shows a typical arrangement of
motorman’s cab.
To connect up the electrical equipment the following circuits are
required :—
The Control Circuit , consisting of a number of small cables connecting
the master controllers with the contactors and enabling the former to operate
the latter.
The Motor Circuit which carries the main current from the contact shoes
through the contactors to the motors and thence back to the rails.
The Train Line, a continuous conductor connected to all the contact shoes,
which is carried throughout the length of the train and enables a train to
“ bridge ” the gaps in the conductor rail at special track work.
The Auxiliary Circuits for the air pump motor and for the lighting and
heating circuits, controlled from a separate switchboard preferably erected
in the driving cab.
The arrangement of the cables and wiring on electrically equipped trains
is a matter requiring more attention than is sometimes given to it. Upon
it depends very largely not only the freedom from accidents, but also the
cost of maintenance and the life of the apparatus.
There are two systems of wiring each of which has advantages. In one
of these the insulation of the cables is supplemented by running them in
insulated troughing made fire proof by lining the interior surface with uralite
or asbestos; this system is particularly adapted to a type of construction where
wood-work forms part of the coach sub-structure. The other method is to
depend entirely upon the insulation of the cables and to run them in weldless
steel conduit, preferably carrying the conduit right up to the apparatus. In
your case I recommend that the latter method should be adoped as far as
possible.
The handle of the master controller will be so arranged that if the motor-
man’s hand is removed while the power is on the current is automatically
cut off and the brakes applied.
Table XXIII. gives for each stage the net estimated cost of the rolling
stock and electrical equipment thereof, after allowing credit for the steam
locomotives and rolling stock displaced, these credits being based on the figures
agreed while in Melbourne.
7


Port
Melbourne
and
St. Kilda
Branches.
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III.
Alterations to existing Rolling Stock
(Tables XXI and XXII)
Additional Rolling Stock |
Complete Electrical Equipment
£
13,175
20,724
39,028
£
69,917
20,724
157,278
£
146,802
20,724
293,381
£
210,726
201,930
445,038
Total
72,927
247,919
460,907
857,694
Less Credits for Locomotives and
Rolling Stock released ...
6,608
28,903
38,615
107,442
Total
Spare Material
66,319
1,355
219,016
2,641
422,292
3,762
750,252
4,629
Total
£67,674
£221,657
£426,044
£754,881
Port
Melbourne
and St. Kilda
Branches.
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III.
£
£
Jb
£
Oar Shed ...
8,795
8,795
17,591
24,251
Inspection Pits
5,597
14,743
27,588
33,090
Total
£14,392
£23,538
£45,179
£57,341
TABLE XXIII.
COST OF NEW ROLLING STOCK, ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING
STOCK AND ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT*
MAINTENANCE OF THE ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT OF THE
ROLLING STOCK.
Under the climatic conditions existing in Melbourne it is not necessary
to provide sheds for the housing and routine inspection of the whole of the
stock. I, however, recommend that inspection pits to accommodate all the motor
coaches necessary for Stage 1., and three-quarters of the motor coaches necessary
for Stage 111., he constructed under the Flinders Street sidings. I also recom-
mend that an inspection pit to accommodate one motor coach be provided
at certain outlying stations.
In addition to this routine inspection, it is necessary to provide for the
thorough examination and overhaul of the electrical equipment after each
motor coach and trailer coach has run a certain number of miles. For this
purpose I recommend the erection of a small car shed on the site available
at Flinders Street in preference to running the stock into the Newport Shops
TABLE XXIY .
CAPITAL COST OF INSPECTION PITS AND PROPOSED FLINDERS
STREET CAR SHED.
* Including freight, tariff, engineering and contingencies.
d These figures include the amount to be credited to the country service for the transfer of its
cross-compartment stock to the suburban service.


Port
Melbourne
and
St. Kilda
Branches.
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III.
£
£
£
£
Cleaning of Cars
Inspection and Cleaning of Equip-
481
2,638
5,084
7,888
ments ...
1,058
5,769
11,122
17,256
Sundries —Oil and Stores
Repairs —(at Flinders Street Car
451
2,473
4,766
7,395
Shed and at Newport)...
2,707
14,834
28,598
44,372
Total
£4,692
£25,714
£49,570
£76,911
Port
Melbourne
and
St. Kilda
Branches.
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III.
£
£
£
£
Motormen’s Wages and Stores ...
2,693
10,052
19,027
29,079
Guards’ Wages and Stores
2,229
7
7,728
15,158
23,479
Total
£4,922
£17,780
£84,185
£52,558
which would involve an unnecessary increase in the waste mileage. Eor heavy
repairs, painting, etc., the stock would be taken to Newport as at present.
The Flinders Street Car Shed will be provided with electrically operated
cranes for lifting the coach bodies, and the' necessary stores and tools for
dealing with minor repairs and renewals of the electrical equipment.
Table XXIY. gives my estimate of the cost of the inspection pits and car
shed proposed.
The cost of maintaining the electrical equipment is almost directly pro-
portional to the mileage run. Table XXY. gives my estimate of the annual
cost of cleaning and repairs to rolling stock. This estimate is based upon my
experience with similar equipments.
TABLE XXY.
ANNUAL COST OF MAINTAINING ROLLING STOCK AND
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENTS.
TRAIN OPERATING STAFF.
In order to obtain the motormen’s and guards’ wages for working the
services proposed, Hesters have been prepared on the basis of the Set-Workings
referred to on page 44, and from these the number of men required to work
the service has been estimated. The rosters for Stage I. accompany the Report
under separate cover, and the totals of the wages sheets corresponding to the
estimates which have been made for each stage, are given in Table XXYI.
TABLE XXYI.
ANNUAL COST OF TRAIN OPERATING STAFF


SECTION “ D.”
INCIDENTAL CONSIDERATIONS.
AUXILIARY WORKS.
Having dealt with the main works involved in the electrical equipment
of the Suburban Railways I proceed to deal with the other matters incidental
to the main object of the Report which I have been asked to consider. These
may be grouped as follows: —
1. Provision of new Block Sections and Systems of Signalling and
Train Despatch.
2. Alteration or Duplication of Existing Roads and Increase in the
Number of Passenger Stations.
3. Provision for Holiday and Special Traffic.
4. General Power and Lighting.
Questions arising under the first three heads can, and need, only be
discussed generally at present, as they are essentially matters which must be
worked out in detail by the Operating Departments as the traffic increases.
While they may be considered quite apart from any system of train propulsion,
it may be taken as an underlying principle that Electric Traction will render
all train operations both easier and more elastic.
i.—PROVISION OF NEW BLOCK SECTIONS, AND SYSTEMS OF
SIGNALLING AND TRAIN DESPATCH.
I have considered the location of the block sections and, taking into
account the extra facilities afforded by a multiple-unit system of electric train
operation for handling the additional trains which it is proposed to run, I do
not anticipate that for Stage I. of the proposed conversion any difficulties need
be feared with the sections as now set out. From the detailed particulars of
the running speed over each section of the lines covered by Stage I., given, on
Plates YII.-XIY., your Signalling Department will be able to decide definitely
by how much the proposed service can be increased without necessitating a
rearrangement of the existing block sections.
Table XXYII. compares the time taken by the present steam trains in
running over each block section with that which would be taken by the electric
trains. The fact that the electric trains occupy the block sections for a shorter
time allows of a closer headway, i.e., a more frequent service, and so increases
the capacity of the lines.
I have also investigated the effect upon the location and number of the
block sections in the central area if Stages II. and III. of the scheme were


Down.
Time
taken
ty
Steam
Trains.
Time
taken
by
Electric
Trains.
Up.
Time
taken
by
Steam
Trains.
Time
taken
by
Electric
Trains. ;
Port Melbourne Branch.
Min
Sec.
Min
Sec.
Port Melbourne Branch.
Min
See.
Min
Sec,
Flinders St. —Ferrars St. ...
4
0
2
16
Port Melbourne —Graham St.
2
0
0
56
Ferrars St. —Graham St. ...
5
0
4
54
Graham St.—Ferrars St. ...
5
0
4
51 1
Graham St. —Port Melbourne
1
30
0
50
Ferrars St. —Flinders St. ...
3
0
2
8
10
30
8
0
10
0
7
65 |
St. Kilda Branch.
St. Kilda Branch.
Flinders Street—Albert Park
7
0
4
37
St. Kilda—Albert Park ...
7
0
5
2
Albert Park—St. Kilda
5
30
5
23
Albert Park—Flinders St....
5
0
4
58
12
30
10
0
12
0
10
0
Sandringham Branch.
Sandringham Branch.
Flinders St. — Box E
2
0
1
46
Sandringham — Brighton
Box E — Richmond
1
30
1
12
Beach
8
0
6
4
Richmond — South Yarra ...
4
0
2
36
Brighton Beach — Mid.
Brighton
2
30
1
44
South Yarra — Prahran
3
0
2
24
Prahran—Windsor...
1
1
36
Mid. Brighton —N . Brighton
3
0
2
ii
30
N. Brighton — Elsternwick...
6
30
5
33
Windsor — Balaclava
J
i
3
26
Elsternwick — Balaclava ...
3
0
2
8
Balaclava — Elsternwick ...
3
0
2
26
Bal aciava — W indsor
4
0
3
35
Elsternwick — N. Brighton
6
30
; 5
25
Windsor — Prahran...
)
(
1
32
N. Brighton — Mid. Brighton
3
0
; 2
12
5
30
1
Brahran —South Yarra
J
1
2
23
Mid. Brighton—Brighton
Beach ...
2
30
1
37
South Yarra —Richmond ...
3
30
3
9
Brighton Beach—Sandring-
Richmond —Box E
1
30
1
6
ham
7
30
5
50
Box E—Flinders St.
2
0
1
35
39
30
30
30
39
30
31
0
Essendon Branch.
Essbndon Branch.
Flinders Street —Box A ...
to
f
0
42
Essendon Box—Moonee
Box A—Viaduct ...
I 2
30 j
1
85
Ponds ...
3
80
2
34
Viaduct —No. 1 Box
2
0
1
58
Moonee Ponds —Ascot Vale
2
0
1
53
No. 1 Box—Franklin Street
1
0
0
41
Ascot Vale—Newmarket ...
3
0
1
33
Franklin St.—N. Melbourne
Newmarket—Kensington ...
2
30
2
50
June. ...
3
0
2
7
Kensington—N. Melbourne
N. Melbourne June.—Ken-
Junction
2
0
1
32
sing ton...
2
0
1
39
N. Melbourne June. —Frank-
Kensington —Newmarket ...
3
0
2
56
lin Street
2
30
2
16
Newmarket—Ascot Vale ...
3
30
2
10
Franklin Street—No. 1 Box
1
0
0
44
Ascot Vale—Moonee Ponds
3
0
2
15
No. 1 Box —Viaduct
3
0
2
19
Moonee Ponds—Essendon...
3
0
2
42
Viaduct —Box A
12
801
1
40
Box A—Flinders Street ...
;
0
39
23
0
18
45
22
0
18
0
put into operation, and the above remarks as to Stage I. apply to the future
stages with the exception of the traffic between Flinders Street and North
TABLE IXYII.
TIME OF TRAINS IN BLOCK SECTIONS (STAGE I.).


Melbourne Junction Signal Box. I have had prepared from the time-table a
diagram (Plate XXYI.) showing graphically the train operation over these sec-
tions and indicating by full and dotted lines the amount of traffic for each of the
Stages 1., 11. and 111. of this Report. In Stage I. the Essendon trains only
are concerned, and there is no difficulty. In Stage 11. the introduction of the
TYilliamstown service results in a two minutes’ headway at intervals for two
trains, and in Stage 111. the superimposing of the Coburg and Sunshine trains-
on the previous services introduces a two minutes’ headway at intervals for
three trains. While Ido not think that the principle of maintaining a regular
service over the entire day, independently of the extra trains put on to cope
with the rush traffic, should be interfered with, it is possible that your Traffic
Department may be able to lay out the time-table to somewhat better- advan-
tage and thus improve these conditions; but, if not, additional and automatic-
ally operated block sections should be introduced on this section to avoid
possible short signal checks to one train affecting the trains following.
There are many arrangements of automatic signalling on the market but
my experience under operating conditions is confined to the Westinghouse and
the Hall systems, both of which give good results, the cost of maintenance
being low and the irregularities few. In the case of a London railway equipped
with the former, a four months' special record was recently taken and gave
only one failure for 570,000 signal movements.
The introduction of electrical working renders possible some signal and
safety devices which are not readily adaptable for steam locomotive operation.
For example, the necessary supply of electrical energy for any power
signalling system is placed at the disposal of the Railway Department at
minimum cost. This renders such a system possible commercially in cases
where the cost of providing and running special plant for supplying the elec-
trical energy required for power signalling alone would be prohibitive. In
spite of this advantage, however, I do not consider that the installation of a
power signalling system on your lines would at present show an actual economy
if interest and capital expenditure were taken into consideration.* I also see
considerable disadvantage in attempting alterations to the signalling system
at a time when in any case the railway staff will already be very fully occupied.
As regards automatic safety devices it may, for example, be arranged
that the signals are interlocked with track levers which, in the event of signals
being over-run for any reason, will engage with a lever on the train arranged
to open a valve on the air brake pipe line and so apply the brakes throughout
the train wffiile simultaneously causing the overload device on the main power
switch on the train to open and interrupt the supply of power to the motor
circuit, thus bringing the train to rest quite independently of the motorman.
Again, in the case of a train over-running a signal, power can be cut off
that section of the line at the discretion of the signalman and the train brought
to a standstill.
I would, however, recommend that the whole question of signalling and of
the provision of special automatic safety devices be left over at any rate until
the first section of the lines is being operated electrically so as to profit by the
experience of actual working conditions.
The systems of train despatch do not, in my opinion, require any modifica-
tion for the time being; they are sufficiently good not to have any retarding
effect on the improvement in the train service proposed, and can be conveniently
considered in detail and dealt with at some later stage when actual experience
* The main gain is in the safety of the system, the working and checking being more precise and
the relief of physical strain on the signalmen tending to reduce fatigue and increase the efficiency of
the men. The abolition of noise from the cabin is also in favour of better concentration of the
operators upon the work in their charge.


-with the larger number of trains has directed your attention to any real
improvement that might he made, and then one or more of the numerous fully
-developed systems on the market could be adapted for your purpose. This
applies to the central area. In the more remote districts, where the traffic is
dealt with by single or two-coach trains, it is possible that some economy might
be effected by operating under tramway conditions, i.e., by providing no staff
at the stations at all and making the train staff responsible for the collection
•of fares.
2. — ALTERATION OR DUPLICATION OF EXISTING ROADS AND
INCREASE IN THE NUMBER OF PASSENGER STATIONS.
The mere introduction of Electric Traction necessitates neither duplica-
tion nor alteration of roads; whatever roads have been operated by steam can
be operated at least as, and generally more, expeditiously by electric trains;
electrical operation, in fact, affords a means of dealing with increased traffic
without increasing the number of tracks (see also pages 5 and 13). I
therefore do not suggest any duplication of the tracks for the estimated traffic
of 1912. Alterations, beyond those to bridges and sleepers already included
in the estimates, consist chiefly in the removal of the “ special work ” now in
use at the “ run-rounds ” for the shunting locomotives at the termini, which
might he carried out as soon as the whole system is being operated electrically.
Incidental to the erection of a car shed at Flinders Street, there will be works
in connection with the approach and marshalling tracks; there will also be a
short siding into each substation. These are items the cost of -which cannot
be accurately estimated until the actual positions of the buildings on the land
available have been settled, but they may be considered as covered by the
■contingency percentages already allowed. I know of no other necessary exten-
sions of the permanent way.
In view of the short distance traffic facilities offered by the present
tramway service, additional stations in the City area would not, in my opinion,
be of any real value to the Railways. The situation of the Central Suburban
Station is eminently suitable for dealing with the massed traffic and the Railway
System, if electrically operated, will be in the best possible position for dealing
with the suburban traffic for which a tramway, with its speed limitations, cannot
compete. The question of new stations in the outside districts is a matter to he
settled entirely by the requirements of the district concerned as the population
and traffic increase.
3.—PROVISION FOR HOLIDAY AND SPECIAL TRAFFIC.
Whether you should or should not deal with holiday and special traffic,
■especially race traffic, by means of electric trains depends almost entirely upon
the quantity of rolling stock required and upon whether the demand for special
traffic arrangements occurs at times when the stock normally in use for regular
traffic on other branches can he released. The heaviest special traffic is that
to the Flemington Race Course, and the steam stock provided to deal with this
by steam working is a maximum of 21 trains. I find, by plotting a non-stop
run curve for an electric train and adhering to the speed restrictions, that the
running time for the round trip is 16 minutes, so that, assuming a 2J minutes’
lie-over at each end, a continuous 3 minutes’ service could be maintained at each
of two platforms with 14 trains. Assuming six-coach trains are used through-


£
Capital cost of equipping Race Course Lines and Sidings
30,407
Capital charges, at 4 per cent.
1,216
Operating costs ...
1,528
Total Annual Cost ...
2,744
Gross Revenue ... ...
22,224
Nett Revenue
£19,480
out, we have a combined capacity of 19,000 seats to or from the Course per hour
—if eight-coach trains be used this figure would be correspondingly increased.
To run this service by Electric Traction requires that eighty-four coaches should
be available, i.e., half of the whole stock to be provided under vStage I. and
considerably more than the entire spare stock allowed for even in the final stage.
Unless, therefore, you are prepared to withdraw the electric service from
some of the lines on which it is regularly in use, I do not recommend any
attempt being made at Stage I. to deal with this traffic with electric coaches.
In saying this I assume that, to begin with at any rate, you will have
no electric locomotives or special goods vehicles generally in use. On
lines where electric locomotives or special goods vehicles are used for dealing
with traffic, other than ordinary passenger traffic, it is quite a. satisfactory
and usual arrangement to deal with abnormal traffic by hauling standard
steam stock by motor-coaches or electric locomotives, but I do not think
that the provision of such vehicles, in the first instance, is justified under the
conditions existing in Melbourne, and I suggest that the whole question
be left over until a considerable part of the Suburban traffic is being dealt
with electrically. I have, therefore, not included in my estimates of capital
expenditure on the Electric Traction scheme proper, the equipment of the
special tracks to Flernington and other Race Courses, and have also excluded
from my estimates both the receipts from, and the operating costs of, these
special services. In case, however, it should in the future be decided to
deal with this traffic electrically, I give in Table XXYIII. the cost of doing so,
and the revenue it would produce, omitting the capital cost of rolling
stock ; and, assuming that this would be temporarily drawn from other routes.
TABLE XXYIII.
COST OF, AND REVENUE FROM, RACE TRAFFIC IN 1912.
Table XXYIII. shows that if you decide to proceed with the electrification
scheme it will be an inexpensive matter to provide hereafter for the equipment
of these tracks, and you may find it convenient or desirable to deal with this
traffic electrically by drawing electric stock from the other routes. The in-
creased profit from this source of revenue with Electric Traction might even
justify, to some extent, the provision of additional stock.*
It would, of course, be possible with multiple-unit trains to deal with a
materially greater traffic at Flernington and further, if additional platforms
were provided at the Race Course Station in place of the present run-round
tracks necessary for locomotives, the passengers might be diverted from one
* A substation is provided under Stage I. at North Melbourne, which would be very convenient
for dealing with the heavy loads that would result from the Flernington traffic.


j Present
Units used Working
per Annum. Costs
per Annum.
Cost if
supplied by
Traction
Power Dept.
@ |d. per
unit.
Saving
per Annum.
£
£
£
Spencer Street Lighting Station ...
1,260,000 ,
4,594
3,937
657
St. Kilda Tramway Power Station
314,700
1,958
984
974
Total Saving
£1,631
platform to another as the trains filled instead of having the gates closed against
them as at present. In this case, due to the more rapid acceleration of electric
trains resulting not only in a decrease in the time taken by trains entering and
leaving platforms but also in a decrease in the time lost by signal stops, there
would be a considerable improvement in the capacity of the tracks between the
Course and Spencer Street.
4. — GENERAL POWER AND LIGHTING SCHEME.
The electrification of the railways and the consequent erection of a large
and economical power station capable of generating electrical energy at the
lowest possible cost, enables a supply of power to be obtained for any other
requirements of the railways at a very low price, and this use of current for
•other purposes, such as Power and Lighting, in connection with the Railway
System should produce, not only a saving in cost compared with the present
methods of producing power and light, but also, by improving the load on
the power station, a beneficial effect on the cost of producing energy for the
Railways themselves.
The directions in which such power can profitably be utilised may be
summarised as follows :
1. The supply of energy in bulk to the Spencer Street Lighting
Station.
2. The supply of energy to the St. Kilda Tramway.
■3. Lighting of Railway Stations and Offices.
4. Driving of Newport and North Melbourne Workshops.
There is a considerable amount of electrical energy used at present by
the Railways for lighting and other purposes, that for lighting being generated
at the Spencer Street Lighting station, and that for the St. Kilda Tramway at
the power station at Elsternwick. The saving which would be effected if these
stations were shut down and the Railway Department were to supply electricity
in bulk at a fixed price of fd. per unit, is given in Table XXIX. below.
TABLE XXIX.
ECONOMY OF BULK SUPPLY FOR LIGHTING AND TRAMWAY
OPERATION.
There is thus a saving by this bulk supply and, as the fd. per unit allows
for working expenses, interest on capital, and some profit to the traction scheme,
X certainly recommend that the works necessary to give these supplies from
8


Yarraville be proceeded with concurrently with any electrification scheme.
I will refer briefly to the work involved.
The Spencer Street Electric Lighting Station at present supplies electrical
energy at a periodicity of 50 complete cycles per second, which is a very suitable
periodicity for lighting purposes and I should not propose to alter this but
to supply the existing load at a periodicity of 50 complete cycles per second
by means of frequency converters driven from the 12,000 volt three phase
system. Two 500 K.W. sets will be ample to deal with the load and their
provision is covered by Specification No. 5.
For the supply to the St. Kilda Tramway, I propose providing two rotary
converters each of 200 K.W. (normal continuous rating).* If the preliminary
scheme for the Port Melbourne and St. Kilda Branches of the Railways only
were considered, a special feeder would have to be run to Elsternwick for
supplying the Tramway. If, however, the Essendon and Brighton Lines also
were proceeded with—that is, Stage I. of my Report—these sets could be very
conveniently installed, one at Brighton Beach, and one at Balaclava Sub-
stations. So far, therefore, as the supply to the St. Kilda Tramway is concerned,
there is a considerable saving in proceeding with Stage I. as against the pre-
liminary scheme only. The provision of these rotary converter sets is covered
by Specification No. 5, and an estimate of the cost is given in Table XXX.
It is convenient to consider the lighting of railway stations and offices
under two heads :
1. Stations in the central area, such as Spencer Street, Flinders
Street, Princes Bridge, Richmond and North Melbourne.
2. All other stations within the radius covered by this Report.
The Flinders Street and Spencer Street railway stations already obtain
a large supply for lighting from the Spencer Street Lighting station, but
the lighting has not been extended because the existing plant is, I understand,
already fully loaded.
The 500 K.W. frequency converters referred to above will, however, pro-
vide a considerable margin over the present load and I suggest that the stations
throughout the central area should be lit from the 50 cycle circuits.
Allowing for losses in conversion, the electricity will be obtained under Id.
per unit and this would certainly show, light for light, a saving over the
present working costs. I do not, however, present any estimate as to the
actual cost as this is entirely a question of how much light is provided, and no
doubt if a change be made you will consider it desirable to do the lighting on
a rather more liberal scale than at present. I should recommend that all
the stations in the central area be lighted by enclosed arc lamps or else by
groups of metallic filament lamps, lamps of this type suitable for station
lighting being now obtainable.
For stations outside the central area, I recommend that the lighting
should be done from the conductor rail by means of incandescent lamps
arranged in series, the number and arrangement of circuits depending upon
the size of the station. It will be well to allow for at least two circuits on each
platform so that the number of lights on a platform, including offices, should
either consist of eight, sixteen or some multiple thereof. This would, in my
opinion, provide quite a satisfactory service and be an improvement on the
existing lighting.
In the more important stations, where, on account of the number of offices
and buildings, it might not be convenient to adopt series incandescent lighting,
* These seta will each be capable of dealing with overloads up to 400 K.W.


I recommend the provision of a small motor-generator supplied from the con-
ductor rail, suitable for transforming down to 100 volts and running in parallel
with a small emergency battery. The operation of this equipment could be
safely left in the hands of one of the station officials, the motor-generator being
started up when required just like an ordinary motor. The battery would be of
sufficient capacity to maintain the lighting service in the event of failure
of the supply to the conductor rail due to a circuit breaker in the substation
coming out or some other cause.
Such a motor-generator set and battery are specified for in Specification No.
■5 and in it firms tendering are asked to quote an extra price per set for the
provision of these. The only stations, however, where I think their installation
would be justified at present are Camberwell, South Yarra, Port Melbourne and
Williamstown.
Assuming that the lighting of 126 stations in the suburban area covered
by the Electric Traction scheme were carried out, and the lighting of Spencer
Street and Flinders Street extended to cover all requirements, the maximum
demand (at the stations) is estimated as 574 K.W. The minimum number
-of lamps per station allowed in this estimate is 16 100-watt lamps (or group
lamps) for outdoor lighting and 2o 50-watt lamps for the interior of station
buildings.
The average cost of wiring, fittings, etc., may he taken as ranging from
£2 10s. to £3 per point for platform and outdoor lighting generally, and £1
per lamp for interior work. These prices are inclusive of all material and
labour up to and covering the switchboard, and vary with the facilities avail-
able for open wiring.* Arc lighting, with enclosed arcs, for piers and yards
may be taken at £l7 per lamp inclusive. On the basis of these prices, I
estimate that the whole of the stations could be wired and fitted, including
extensions at Flinders Street and Spencer Street and 50 cycle transformers
at North Melbourne and Richmond, and four motor-generator sets as described,
for the sum of £13,816.
I need hardly add that the lighting of the suburban stations is in no
sense an essential part of the Electric Traction scheme, but merely a possible
incidental advantage. I would not suggest that any attempt be made to deal
with it, except in the central area, until the scheme is at work, beyond equip-
ping one station for lighting direct from the conductor rail, and one with a
motor-generator and battery as suggested. This would enable your Traffic
Department to decide upon the most suitable method to adopt for the different
-stations.
If any electrification scheme be proceeded with the Railway Department
will have available a supply of electrical energy at a low price and I certainly
consider that it would pay to equip the Newport 'Workshops and the North
Melbourne Workshops for electrical driving. I have prepared a complete
scheme for this, which is submitted with this Report.
The following is a summary of my recommendations:
1. That three-phase induction motors he used throughout.
2. That a voltage of 400 to 440 volts he adopted for power distribution
purposes throughout the Works.
3. That the energy be obtained from the Yarraville Power Station
and transmitted to Newport by an overhead line at the gener-
ated pressure, to he transformed at Newport down to a pressure
* It is assumed that the existing standards or pendants, including the lanterns, would, if
suitable, be available for wiring and fitting with electric lamps.


Substation
Equipment.
High Tension
Mains.
Estimated
Cost,
including
Connections.
Spencer Street Lighting
Station
2-500 K.W. Fre-
quency Converters
in existing build-
ing
12.000 Yolt cable
connection at
Spencer Street.
2.000 Yolt cable
to Richmond and
North Melbourne
£
10,254
St. Kilda Tramway Power
Station
*2-200 K.W. Rotary
Converters, 1 in
Brighton Beach
and 1 in Balaclava
Substations
fNone
2,795
General Station Lighting
Scheme
Supplied from
Conductor rail
None
—
Newport W orkshops
2-750 K.W. Station-
ary Transformers
Overhead line from
Yarraville
5,661
North Melbourne
Workshops
1-100 K.W. Station-
ary Transformer in
North Melbourne
Substation
None
654
£19,864
of 440 volts, by means of two 750 K.W. stationary trans-
formers.
4. That, if it he decided to proceed eventually with the electrification
of the Williamstown branch, these transformers he situated
in a substation close to the railway which will ultimately ho-
used also for the purposes of the railway.
5. That the sizes of motors adopted throughout the Workshops be
standardized as to both H.P. and speed.
6. That the North Melbourne Workshops be converted to electrical
driving on the same system, the energy in this case being
obtained from stationary transformers installed in North Mel-
bourne substation.
The whole installation involves some 980 B.H.P. in motors and the
estimated capital cost is £9,550.
The cables and substation plant necessary for delivering this energy to
the points required do not really form part of the Railway scheme, and Table
TABLE XXX.
CAPITAL COST OF CABLES AND SUBSTATION EQUIPMENT FOR
POWER AND LIGHTING SCHEME.
XXX. therefore gives separately my estimate of the cost of providing a
supply in hulk to the Spencer Street Lighting Station, the St. Kilda Tramway,.
* These sets will each be capable of dealing with overloads up to 400 K.W.
f An expenditure of approximately £7,273 for mains would be incurred if this work were put
in hand before Stage I.


Port
Melbourne
and
St. Kilda
Branches.
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III.
Output in units at Power Station
per annum
Consumption in units at meters per
annum ...
3,922,400
3,137,920
5,070,450
3 929,600
6,440,110
4,830,080
7,793,490
5,845,120
Cost to Power and Lighting Scheme
@ |d. per unit ...
£9,803
£12,280
£16,094
£18,266
Maximum Demand in K.W. (allow-
1,449
1,636
2,081
2,585
ing for diversity)
Maximum demand in E.H.P. (Table
YIII.)
1,943
2,193
2,790
3,466
for general Lighting purposes and for the Newport and Xorth Melbourne
Workshops. It does not deal with the cost of the actual equipment of the
Newport shops themselves or the wiring of the passenger stations, these matters
being separately dealt with.
Table XXXI. shows the total consumption of electrical energy and the
estimated maximum demand for power and lighting at the different stages.
TABLE XXXI.
TOTAL ENERGY CONSUMPTION FOR POWER AND LIGHTING SCHEME.
In. preparing Table XXXI. I assume that at Stage I. practically all tbe
work will be complete with the exception of that portion of the Station Lighting
included only in Stages 11. and 111. and that thereafter it will gradually
increase due to the extended use of electricity for power and lighting purposes
by the Railways.
In designing the Power Station at Yarraville, allowance has been made
for this load and in the estimates of Power Costs (Table XIY.) I have allowed
for the cost of generating this additional energy. It is desirable, however, in
order that careful costs and records may he kept, that the amount of electrical
energy so used be recorded separately and I have allowed for meters being
erected on the low tension side at the different points where current is required.
As already mentioned, I suggest that the electrical energy should be charged
out at the supply meters at an average rate of Jd. per unit (kilowatt-hour).*
Thble XXXI. also shows the amount chargeable to power and lighting at the
different stages on this assumption.
In Table XXXVI., therefore, which gives my estimates of the cost of power
debitable to traction I have assumed that this would be done and have deducted
from the total generating costs given in Table XIY. the cost of the electrical
energy used for Power and Lighting at |d. per unit.
* It would be a matter of Departmental arrangement as to whether each section of the scheme
should be charged this average price or whether a graduated scale of charging should be adopted
based on the load factors of the various supplies given.


SECTION "E.”
SUMMARY OF ESTIMATES AND CONCLUSION.
In the preceding pages I have given my conclusions as to how, from an
engineering point of view, the scheme should he carried out if it he decided
to substitute Electric Traction for Steam Traction on any of the Suburban
Lines; I have also given my reasons for these conclusions in considerable
detail. Estimates have been presented of the Capital Cost involved by the
different parts of the work, and of the Operating Expenses of the different
departments. We are now in a position to summarise these estimates,* to state
the total Capital Expenditure involved for the different stages of the work,
and to give the total Operating Expenses with Electric Traction.
COST OF STEAM TRACTION.
If we wish to make a fair comparison between these and the alternative
of continuing to operate the Suburban System with Steam Traction, we must
also include an estimate of the additional capital expenditure and operating
expenses which would be necessary to enable Steam Traction to cope with
the increased traffic in 1912. There will obviously be some addition to the
present figures, as regards both capital expenditure and operating expenses,
as these are the figures for the present traffic and would not cover the increased
traffic which we may look for in 1912. (See Eig. (i).
This raises the question as to what traffic we are to base these steam
figures upon, for of course, as one of the advantages claimed for Electric Trac-
tion is an increase of traffic, it would not be fair to debit Steam Traction with
the cost of carrying the same traffic as we have assumed for Electric Traction
unless we credit it with the same Eevenue. I therefore base the costs of Steam
Traction on a traffic only 20 per cent, greater than the 1906 figures, as against
25 per cent., the increase assumed with Electric Traction. The service to
be given is assumed to be the present service strengthened where necessary to
deal with the greater traffic, and no allowance has been made for any large
increase in the number of trains throughout the day, as in the case of the
electric service. The figures which I give are those prepared, after our
discussion in Melbourne on this subject, by the General Passenger and Freight
Agent; these figures have already received approval.
Table XXXII. gives the capital expenditure necessary with Steam Traction
to provide the additional rolling stock required to deal with a 20 per cent,
increase of traffic on the whole Suburban System.
* For the sake of convenience the estimates for all stages have been based upon the same
percentage increase in traffic (that for the year 1912) though according to my recommendation Stages
11. and 111. would not be completed until a later date (see page 14).


Longthening and strengthening 344 forty-five foot coaches and
£
providing new axles and bogies ...
127,423
Lengthening and strengthening 75 fifty-nine foot coaches and
providing new axles and bogies ...
19,500
Necessary alterations to provide desired proportion of 1st and 2nd
class accommodation
5,709
Credit made to country service for 114 coaches taken into suburban
working
67,830
10 BDbd Coaches in course of construction, 1906 ...
13,170
68 New 2nd class coaches
102,000
49 New 1st class coaches...
78,400
12 New Locomotives. E class ...
25,200
Total ...
£439,232
10 per cent, for contingencies ...
43,923
Total ...
£483,155
Credits for the release of fixed wheel-base passenger stock, short
bogie trucks and out of date wheels and axles ...
74,797
Total Nett Cost ...
£408,358
Port
Melbourne
and
St. Kilda
Branches.
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III,
£
£
£
£
Capital Expenditure on Rolling Stock
necessary with Steam Traction to
deal with a 20 % increase of
suburban traffic, allocated on a
train mile basis ...
37,315
141,019
264,008
408,358
Cost of bridge alterations necessary
with Steam Traction
4,415
8,926
10,688
17,232
Total
£41,730
£149,945
£274,696
£425,590
TABLE XXXII.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE ON ROLLING STOCK NECESSARY WITH STEAM
TRACTION TO DEAL WITH A 20 PER CENT. INCREASE OF
SUBURBAN TRAFFIC (WHOLE SYSTEM).
Table XXXII. gives the total capital expenditure required to deal with
this increased traffic under steam working allocated, on a train mile basis,
to the different stages which we have adopted throughout this Report in
the case of the Electric Traction scheme.
TABLE XXXIII.
TOTAL CAPITAL EXPENDITURE AT EACH STAGE NECESSARY WITH
STEAM TRACTION TO DEAL WITH A 20 PER CENT.
INCREASE OF SUBURBAN TRAFFIC*
* Table XXXIII. includes nothing for any increase in the terminal capacity or number of
roads which may be necessary to deal with the increased traffic by Steam, but which will not be
necessary with Electric Traction for some considerable time.


Port
Melbourne
and
St. Kilda
Branches.
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III.
Operating Expenses in 1906 —
£
£
£
£
Transportation
1,429
5,739
10,596
15,911
Rolling Stock (excluding coni)
13,229
49,280
92,323
143,277
„ „ (coal only) f
3,581
13.358
25,140
38,829
Train Lighting
1,034
3,264
5,409
7,854
Total
£19 273
£71,641
£133,468
£205,871
Additional expense of increased
traffic ...
3,827
14,236
26,629
41,096
i Total Operating Expenses;}:...
£23,100
£85,877
£160,097
£246,967
Port
Melbourne
and St. Kilda
Branches.
Stage I.
Stage 11.
Stage III.
1. —Power Station, high-tension
feeders and substations, includ-
ing spares for Power Depart-
ment (Table XIII., page 87)
£
£
£
221,338
386,357
580,430
846,689
2. —Track Equipment, including
low-tension cables, and altera-
tions to Permanent Way, and
spares (Table XVI., page 41)
53,380
170,328
311,035
568,139
3. — New Rolling Stock (less credits),
alterations to existing stock,
and electrical equipments, in-
cluding spares (Table XXIII.,
page 50)
67,674
221,657
426,044
754,881
4. — Inspection Pits and Flinders
Street Car Shed (Table XXIV.,
page 50)
14,392
28,538
45,179
57,341
5. — Total Cost of Electrical Scheme
£356,729
£801,880
£1,362,688
£2,227,050
6. — Less Expenditure to deal with
Traffic by Steam Traction
(Table XXXIII., page 63) ...
£41,730
£149,945
£274,696
£425,590
7. — Nett Additional Cost of Elec-
trical Scheme
£314,999
£651,935
£1,087,992
£1,801,4 60
8. — Interest Charges, at 4 % per
annum
£12,600
£26,077
£43,520
£72,058
Table XXXIV. gives in detail the corresponding increase in the operating
expenses, also divided into stages. The operating expenses* referred to in this
and the following Tables are those which would be varied bv the introduction
of Electric Traction. The items dealt with are, generally speaking, those,
which in the case of Steam Traction would be included under “ Locomotive
T ABLE XXX I Y .
OPERATING EXPENSES WITH STEAM TRACTION TO DEAL WITH
A 20 PER CENT. INCREASE OF SUBURBAN TRAFFIC.
and Rolling Stock Expenses.’’ I include, however, in the case of Electric
Traction, the maintenance of the Conductor Rail which would be dealt with
TABLE lIIY,
SUMMARY OF CAPITAL EXPENDITURE INVOLVED BY ELECTRIC
TRACTION AND RESULTANT INCREASED INTEREST CHARGES.
t These figures allow for the estimated increase in the price of coal from 10s. 2d. per ton in
1906 to 14s. per ton in 1912. See also note, page 38.
J These figures only include the Operating Expenses referred to above *


Port
|
Melbourne
and
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III.
St. Kilda
Branches.
£
£
£
£
Power Department—
Cost of Power (see Tables XIV.,
XXXI., and page 61)
7,719
24,809
46 267
70,591
Rolling Stock Department—
Motormen’s Wanes and Stores
(Table XXYI., page 51) ...
2,693
10,052
19,027
29,079
Inspection and Maintenance of
Rolling Stock and Equip-
ment (Table XXV., page
51)
4,692
25,714
49,570
76,911
Transportation Department—
Additional Staff at Stations
510
1,968
3,640
6,840
Guards’ Wages and Stores (Table
XXYI., page 51)
2,229
7,728
15,158
23,479
Way and Works Department—
Maintenance of Electrical Track
Equipment (Table XYII.,
l»ge 42)
720
3,300
6,700
12,800
Electric Traction—
Operating Costs —Total*
£18,568
£73,571
£140,362
£219,700
,, ,, per train mile ...
1S'34/1.
12-Id.
11-5 2d.
11 -03d.
Steam Traction—
Operating Costs —Total* (Table !
XXXIV., page 64)
£23,100
£85,877
£160,097
£246,967
„ ,, per train mite f...
J9S8d.
19'06(i.
18 98d.
18-9 3d.
Difference in favour of Elec-
trig Traction —Total ...
£4,537
£12,306
£19,785
£27,267
,, „ per train mile
6-04d.
6-96d.
7-46d.
7'90d.
by tbe Permanent-Way .Staff and which is, of course, an additional expense
compared with Steam Traction. I also include, in the case of both Electric
and Steam Traction, the total amount of the Guards’ wages, because, on
account of the increased service proposed with Electric Traction, this item is
greater than it would be with Steam. It would also seem that in the case of
Electric Traction some addition may have to be made to the Station Staff to
deal with the more frequent service (See page 48) and this has been allowed for.
COST OF ELECTRIC TRACTION.
Table XXXY. gives, for the different Stages of the work, a summary
of the previous estimates of Capital Expenditure necessary for the introduction
of Electric Traction.
Table XXXTI. gives a summary of the operating expenses with Electric
Traction. These are comparable with the operating expenses with Steam
Traction given in Table XXXIY. Table XXXYI. shews that although a much
TABLE XXXYI.
OPERATING EXPENSES WITH ELECTRIC TRACTION.
9
* See note page 04. J
t Train miles 12 % increase on 1906 returns.


Port
Melbourne
and
St. Kilda
Branches.
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III.
£
£
£
£
1. — Interest charges @ 4 per cent,
on capital cost of Electrifica-
tion Scheme. (See Table
XXXV., page 64)
12,600
26,077
48,520
72,058
2. — Saving in operating expenses
with Electric Traction. (See
Table XXXYI., page 65) ...
4,537
12,306
19,735
27,267
3. — Extra cost of Electric Traction,
including interest charges
8,063
13,771
23,785
44,791
4. — Additional Increase in Revenue
on a basis of 5 per cent, greater
traffic, with Electric Traction
2,500
11,073
20,520
28,632
*5. — Additional Increase in Revenue on
a basis ofl 0 per cent, greater traffic
5,000
22,145
41,040
57,265
*6. —Additional Increase in Revenue on
a basis of J 5pm' cent, greater traffic
7.500
38,218
61,560
85,897
7.—Actual percentage increase of
Revenue above the assumed
normal growth of 20 per cent,
necessary for the Revenue at
the different Stages to balance
the additional capital charges,
less the saving in operating
expenses
16T %
6-2 %
5'8 %
7-8 %
more frequent service and a greater schedule speed would be given with Electric
Traction than with Steam Traction, the operating expenses of the former
would be slightly lower (See note, page 5); if the two systems be compared on
the basis of the operating expenses per train mile Electric Traction shows up
still more favourably, Steam Traction costing from 45 per cent, to 72 per cent,
more according to the stage taken.
COMPARATIVE COSTS.
Table XXXVII. gives a comparison between the cost of Steam and of
Electric Traction if interest on the capital cost of the electrification scheme
be taken at 4 per cent, per annum and debited to the cost of Electric Traction.
This Table also compares these results, for each stage, with the increase in
revenue resulting from the improved facilities for travel rendered practicable
by Electric Traction. If the comparison as to financial results from Steam
and Electric Traction be based solely upon the figures shewn in Table XXXVII.
TABLE XXXVII.
COM PARI SI ON OF INCREASED COST OF ELECTRIC SERVICE WITH
INCREASED REVENUE DUE TO IMPROVED FACILITIES.
* The estimates assume a difference of 5 per cent, only in additional revenue, but for con-
venience corresponding figures are also given for increases of 10 per cent, and 15 per cent.


Port Mel-
bourne and
St. Kilda
Branches.
Stage I.
Stage II.
Stage III.
Operating expenses in 1912 (Electri-
cal). "(See Table XXXVI., page
65)
£
18,563
£
73,571
£
140,362
£
219,700
Operating expenses in 1906 (Steam).
(See Table XXXIV., page 64)...
19,273
71,641
133,468
205,871
Increase in operating expenses
- 710
1,930
6,894
13,829
Increase in revenue ...
12,500
55,363
102,600
143,162
Increase in gross pro6t ...
13,210
53,433
95,706
129,333
a slightly larger increase in traffic than the 5 per cent, suggested, is necessary
to justify the substitution of Electric Traction for Steam. It will be seen,
however, that the amount required in order to restore the financial balance m
favour of electricity is comparatively small at all stages except that for the
Port Melbourne and St. Hilda Branches only.
The factors affecting the growth of a large system like this are so
numerous as to make it impossible to speak positively as to the increase in
traffic following on the introduction of Electric Traction, but after a very care-
ful comparison of your conditions with those of other suburban systems before
and after their conversion to Electrical Working, I am of the opinion that 10
per cent, is a conservative estimate of the additional revenue which will result
within a comparatively short time from the improved service proposed.
PROFIT IN 1906 AND 1912.
I have now compared the results obtainable by Electrical Working with
those to be expected if Steam Working be continued. Another, and somewhat
different way of looking at the matter is to take Electric Traction by itself
and consider whether, in view of its many advantages, the fact that it can
be installed and worked so as to yield a steadily increasing profit justifies
its adoption. Table XXXYIII. compares the estimated profits from the Sub-
urban Railways in 1912 with Electrical Operation (assuming the normal
increase of traffic (20 per cent.) plus the minimum of 5 per cent, due to improved
service), with the actual profits for the year 1906 with Steam Traction.
TABLE XXXYIII.
PROFIT FROM SUBURBAN BUSINESS IN 1906 (STEAM) AND 1912 (ELECTRIC).
It will be seen that if the Port Melbourne and St. Hilda Lines only are
proceeded with there will hardly be sufficient profit to pay the interest charges
on the new capital expenditure (see Table XXXV.). This arises largely
because, in this case, the amount of electrical energy required is really not
sufficient to bring the cost of generation down to a reasonably low figure.
But, if in addition to the Port Melbourne and St. Hilda Lines, we include
the Brighton and Essendon Lines, Stage 1., the scheme becomes one of
sufficient size to secure real economy of generation, and the financial results
from the Suburban System in the year 1912 would be considerably better


than they were for the year 1900;* the additional surplus is, in fact, £21,358
after paying interest on the new capital expenditure. For the complete scheme
this figure rises to £40,251.
RECOMMENDATION.
I, therefore, recommend that if any of the Suburban lines are to be con-
verted to Electrical Operation, the lines dealt with in the first instance include
a larger scheme than the Port Melbourne and St. Kilda Lines alone.
My reasons for the sub-division of the lines into groups—Stages 1., 11.
and 111., referred to at the commencement of this Report—and for my recom-
mendations as to the order in which the work should he carried out, may he
briefly stated as follows :
(1) It is desirable, if the capital expenditure is to he kept within
reasonable limits, so to group the lines that it is not necessary
to spend all the capital upon feeders, substations, etc., at the
commencement. The grouping of lines for the different stages
which I have adopted is the best from this point of view.
(2) The grouping suggested has the further advantage of providing for
the conversion, in the first instance, of those lines to which
Electric Traction is the best suited. These may he stated
generally to he the lines with the greatest density of traffic
compared with their mileage. It is because Stage I. includes
the most profitable lines from the point of view of electrical
working that the results with Stage I. are so good compared with
Stages 11. and 111. and that the results with Stage 11. are
nearly as good as with Stage 111. (see Table XXXVIII.). If the
lines which I propose should he left over till Stage 111. were
dealt with alone, in the first instance 1 , the results would not
come out nearly so well for Electric Traction as in the case, of
the lines covered by the suggested Stage I.
(3) It is very desirable, of course, in proceeding with any scheme of
this magnitude, not to incur capital expenditure upon works
which wfill afterwards have to he modified if extensions be
made. It would be difficult to avoid this if the. Port Melbourne
and St. Kilda Brandies were proceeded with by themselves.
On the other hand, if a scheme were decided upon embracing
not only the Port Melbourne and St. Kilda Branches, the con-
version of the Xewport Simps and a General Power and Light-
ing Scheme, hut also the Brighton and Essendon Branches, it
would he possible to proceed with the design on the same lines
as if it had been decided to convert the whole of the Suburban
System to Electrical Operation at once. To give an instance,
the size of generating unit in the Power Station proposed for
Stage I. is in every respect suitable for dealing with
the whole scheme, whereas it is really too big if the Port
Melbourne and St. Kilda Branches are proceeded with
alone. It is also possible to make final arrangements for
operating the St. Kilda Tramway from the main Power Station
* The estimated Operating Costs in Table XXXVIII. assume at all stages that the Power
and Lighting scheme would be proceeded with and that the amount of electrical energy required
for this purpose would reduce the cost of power to the Traction scheme. If this allowance were
not made, the financial result of converting the Port Melbourne and St. Kilda Branches only
would be even worse as, at this stage, the el.ect upon our estimated operating costs of the Power
and Lighting scheme is considerable owing to the relatively large amount of electrical energy it
would require.


if tlie Brighton and Essendon Branches are proceeded with,
whereas, if the Port Melbourne and St. Kilda Branches only
are proceeded with, temporary arrangements would be
necessary.
(4) It is necessary to generate electrical energy on a. fairly large scale
if the cost of Electrical Operation is to be brought down to a
low figure.
Although I am in favour, if any conversion scheme be decided upon,
of proceeding with a considerable section of the work, I do not recommend
you to make any attempt to deal with the whole system at once, firstly, be-
cause this would mean too much disorganisation and it would be difficult
to arrange the work, and secondly, because it would actuallv save money to
draw up a proper programme and to proceed with the work in stages. On
the other hand, the scheme I recommend you to proceed with in the first
instance is of sufficient magnitude to induce manufacturers to quote their
lowest prices.
In my calculations I have taken Interest on Capital at 4 per cent, per
annum but have so far made no reference to provision for depreciation. This
is a question which arises in all problems involving the use of machinery,
and you will probably desire that I should say something upon it with special
reference to the class of machinery and apparatus entailed by an electric
traction scheme.
My estimates of the operating costs allow for keeping the plant perman-
ently in an efficient state of repair, replacing parts as they wear out and
generally maintaining the whole equipment in such a condition that the ser-
vice can be efficiently run. In this respect the conditions are somewhat diff-
erent from those existing with steam traction, because a steam locomotive after
a series of years, actually wears out and has to be entirely replaced, apart
altogether from the question as to whether it is any longer suitable for giving
tire service required as regards power and speed. An annual appropriation is
therefore desirable to cover this replacement which has to be made all at once
in the case of a steam locomotive; the motor equipment, on the other
hand, can be kept permanently in good order by the expenditure of the annual
amounts allowed in my estimates. On this account Ido not think it is neces-
sary to estimate upon making any further and special appropriation for
the replacement of apparatus after a period of years.
My estimates do not, on the other hand, allow for any annual appropria-
tion for writing off the plant because it becomes antiquated, and this question
of replacement on account of improvements is an important one in connection
with the generation of power. I think that you would be well advised to set
aside such a sum per annum that the cost of machinery in the Power Station
may be written-off over a period of, say, 20 or 25 years. Although such a
power station as I propose would be very efficient indeed according to the
practice of the day and comparable in this respect with any other power
station anywhere, the efficiency of all methods of generating power is to-day
very low; the efficiencies, on the other hand, of the distributing system and
the motor equipments on the cars are high in comparison.* It is probable
that in the future improvements will be made in the methods of generating
* The thermo-dynamic efficiency of a modern power station is only of the order of 11 per cent.,
though this is from two to three times as good as that of a steam locomotive. The efficiency of the
distribution system may be taken as 75 per cent, and the efficiency of the motors on the trains
as 87 per cent.


Provision for
Depreciation
( Confirmed ).
Combination
of Traction
with General
Power Load.
Tramway
Competition.
power and, tliis being so, it is desirable that the Railway Department should
be in a position to take advantage of such improvements as they appear,
though it is not necessary to set aside any very large sum in the first
few years because there is no sign of any immediate and great improvement of
the kind indicated. As, however, the traffic on the Suburban System grows
and the profits increase—as they certainly will if Electrical Operation be
adopted —it would be desirable to begin setting aside a certain sum per
annum for the purpose indicated, and I suggest that this should commence with
an appropriation of not less than 1 per cent, per annum in the second or third
year, based on the actual cost of the generating plant, and that this amount
should be increased by not less than \ per cent, per annum until a maximum
of 5 per cent, per annum is being set aside.
This suggestion is apart altogether from any Insurance or Depreciation
Fund which you may consider it desirable to provide at the present time for
such purposes as the renewal of Permanent-Way, writing-off of Rolling Stock,
etc. There is no reason on account of the introduction of Electric Traction to
depart, in this respect, from the methods adopted in the past.
All the estimates given above as to the financial results which may be
expected from Electric Traction are on the assumption that the power is gener-
ated in a power station specially built for railway purposes and using
Black coal. The effect of adopting the first alternative, which is to use
Brown coal instead of Black coal in Yarraville Power Station, is referred
to on page 1)9. The second alternative of combining the railway load with the
general power requirements of the neighbourhood, is dealt with fully in my
Power Report, and I may refer you to that Report for my suggestions as to
how, after the Yarraville Power Station has been built, this might be
combined with the general power development throughout the State, and as
to the effect which this would eventually have upon the cost of power to
the Railway Department.
Before I conclude, there is one other point of view from which the whole
question or policy of whether Electric Traction should be adopted for the
Suburban Railway System or not, may be considered, and that is the point
of view of competition.
I dealt, at the commencement of the Report, with the relative position of
the Tramways and Suburban Railways in Melbourne. It is almost certain, not
only that the Tramways will eventually be operated electrically, but that
when this is done, if not before, additional trolley lines will be run out into
the suburbs, and if this were done there would probably be a very large reduc-
tion in the revenue from the Suburban Railways. If, however, these are
operated electrically, and especially if this begins before the City tramways
are worked electrically, it is my opinion that not only will the Railways be able
to hold their own in competition with any new tramways that may be built, but
the mere fact that the Railways are operated by electricity will result in
considerably reducing the number of new tramways that are necessary. That
this is a point of view which you should take into consideration is borne out
by experience in other places. In Sydney, unlike Melbourne, the railways and
tramways are both owned by the State; hence the fact that the former carry
four-fifths of the total traffic of the city, has not the same significance for the
Railways as it would have in Melbourne.
I do not enter into the question of which, from the point of view of the
Public, is the better line of development—an extended system of electric
street tramways or of railways on private right-of-way. The former has been
the line of development in Sydney, the latter, so far, in Melbourne. The
question as to which is the better is a matter of opinion and of local conditions,


but if the capital has once been sunk in one system, as is the case with the
Melbourne Suburban Railways, it is economically sound to employ that capital
to the best possible advantage rather than, by neglecting the advantages of
electric traction to encourage competing street lines which, if built, would to a
large extent detract from the value of the large capital sunk in the Suburban
Railway System. I would be justified in going further and saying that, owing
to the comprehensive way in which the Suburban Railway System has been laid
it would seem that, just as a more complete system of electric tramways
might draw passengers from the Suburban Railways, so Electrical Operation
on the Railways and the consequent improved service, should result in the
Railways securing a large share of the increase of traffic even in the central
area apart altogether from the great development which is certain to result
from an improved and more frequent service on the very complete system of
lines serving the country around Melbourne.
These are all questions which must be considered together with the benefits
which the travelling public would derive from a rapid and frequent electric
service; these have already been referred to in Section “A” in our discussion
of the general problem.
To conclude, I am of opinion that the application of Electric Traction
to the Melbourne Suburban System is justified from a financial point of view,
and that you would be well advised to proceed with such a Scheme, commenc-
ing with the Port Melbourne, St. Kilda, Brighton and Essendon Branches,
everything being designed, and the work being carried out so as to facilitate
the extension of the electric zone hereafter to the whole Suburban System.
FOR SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS SEE PAGE 72.


SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS.
The Report deals with two main questions ;
I. Is THE SUBSTITUTION OF ELECTRIC TRACTION FOR STEAM TRACTION
on the Melbourne Suburban System financially' justifiable ?'
11. If so, how can electric working be best applied?
After referring to the special importance of the suburban business, the
experience of other Cities and the advantages offered by electric traction, both
to the Public and to the management, technical considerations are dealt with
and financial results determined.
The main conclusion is that on account of the great advantages to the
Public and the improvement in financial results to be expected from so doing,
the application of electrical operation to the suburban railways is justified.
The more important conclusions and recommendations are here giv'en in
order of coiiY'enience rather than in their actual sequence in the report itself.
CAPITAL OUTLAY.
(1) The total capital outlay for the conversion of the whole suburban
system will be £2,227,050. It is recommended that a portion
only of the system be converted at present (see No. 19).
(2) In considering these figures the expenditure necessary if steam
traction be retained must also be taken into account. This,
expenditure, on rolling stock only, amounts tc £408,358.
COST OF ELECTRIC WORKING.
(3) The expenses per train mile with electric traction would be ll'Od.
as against 18‘9d. with steam. With the former, however,
there would be a greater train mileage.
(4) The total operating expenses with electric traction for the whole
suburban service would be £27,267 per annum less than with
steam (see No. 9).
FINANCIAL RESULT.
(5) The total annual expenditure for the whole service including 4
per cent, on the new capital outlay would be £44,791 more
than with steam; against this must be put the additional
revenue due to the improved service.
(6) The surplus, after paying interest on new capital for the com-
plete scheme, would, with electric traction, be £40,251 greater
than was obtained in 1906. with steam.
IMPROVED SERVICE.
(7) If electric traction be adopted an improved schedule speed and
frequency of service becomes possible, with the existing tracks
and termini.
(8) An increase of 20 per cent, over the present schedule speed and
an increase of 71 per cent, in the train mileage are financially
justifiable and are covered by the expenses referred to above.


ROLLING STOCK.
(9) The adoption instead of locomotives of the “multiple-unit” sys-
tem of train operation is recommended, giving this increase of
71 per cent, in the train mileage with an increase of only
2-1 per. cent, in the ton mileage.
(10) Cross-compartment coaches should he adopted, the existing bogie
stock being altered and used for the electric service.
(11) The total stock required would he 490 coaches with electric work-
ing, as compared with 540 coaches and 110 locomotives with
steam, the reduction in the number of coaches being due to the
higher schedule speed.
ELECTRICAL SYSTEM.
(12) A direct current 800 volt system would be the cheapest and best
system for this particular case.
(13 The direct current should bo distributed to the trains from sub-
stations by means of a protected conductor rail.
(14) The sub-stations should be supplied with 3-phase high tension
current from the power station by means of underground
cables in the central areas, and by overhead lines in the less
populous districts.
POWER STATION.
(15) The energy required should be generated in a central power station
situated at Yarraville designed to handle the load of 35,000
electrical horsepower.
(10) This power station should be designed to burn either black or
brown coal, and the power plant consist of water tube boilers
and steam turbines.
(17) The Spencer Street and Elsternwick Stations should be shut down,
and the St. Hilda Tramway and the existing lighting system be
supplied in bulk from Yarraville.
(18) The Yarraville Power Station should bo also used for the lighting
of the railway stations and the driving of the Newport and
North Melbourne Workshops.
INITIAL SCHEME.
(19) If electric traction be decided on, the scheme proceeded with in
the first instance should consist of the Port Melbourne and
St. Hilda and the Brighton and Esseudon branches, involving,
with power plant, an initial expenditure of £891,880.
(20) After paying interest on this sum the surplus from those lines
would, with electric traction, be £21,358 greater than was
obtained in 190 G with steam traction.
(21) If steam be retained upon these lines £141,019 will have to be
spent on rolling stock for thorn alone.
(22) The conversion of these lines should be so arranged that the
electric zone might be extended to the other suburban lines
at a future date with a minimum of alteration and expense.
OTHER OPERATING CHANGES.
(23) Such questions as systems of train despatching, automatic signal-
ling, new block sections, special provisions for race traffic, etc.,
would be best deferred until part, at least, of the system is
being worked electrically.
