

\ '' ' ■ '
: ,_'■■■■ ✓
f) / t >, ,
,
/>
, ; x ’ ;.•-*>
1
V
AIR ACCIDENT IRYESTIG. COM.
.
v-■■ ■-' • ' ■ v ii^^R^S
V r l
"•' :.- : ji —7-77— f - ‘ v ’ s^r^'s^T
[ ' •
1 ' ; , ! '
i
■<
iiiiiill - > ■’ < ". M
' ' /
I
|_ ' 'n v
' V
i m .


DEPARTMENT
DEFENCE •
AIR ACCIDENTS INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE.
REPORT
AIR ACCIDENTS INVESTIGATION
COMMITTEE.
LOSS OF AIRCRAFT VH-UMF 11 (SOUTHERN CLOUD* 1 ),
THE PROPERTY OF AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL AIRWAYS
LIMITED? WHICH OOCuRRHIb" BETWEEN SYDNEY aND
MELBOURNE? ON ’SATURDAY, 2X3-0. Marrh," 19M*
CHAIRMAN.
Lt.-Col. H.B.L. GIPPS.
MEMBERS.
Wing Commander E. HARRISON*
Captain E.Ci JOHNSTON.
SECRETARY.
Flight Lieutenant T.A. SY/INBOURNE*


1. On the 21st March, 193"* » the Australian
National Airways aircraft VH-4JMF ( u Southdrn Cloud")
left Mascot Aerodrome, Sydney, bound for Essendon
prodrome, Melbourne. The aircraft was piloted by
Mr. T. W. Shortridge with Mr. C. T. Dunell as his
assistant. There were six passengers, namely. Misses
B. Glasgow and C. Stokes, Messrs. H. A. Farrell,
J. Margules, C. C. Hood, and W. O’Reilly. The air-
craft took off at about 8.15 a.m., but did not arrive
at its destination and has not since been found.
2. On Ist April, 1 931 > the Hon. the Minister
•f State for Defence directed that the Air Accidents
Investigation Committee should commence an open
investigation of the occurrence with a ,r iew to
determining the caur e vf tVs 3 acoid'v i, 7/ Ith special
reference to -
(a) the airworthiness, equipment and loading
of aircraft VH>£.iiF, at time of departure;
(b) the qualifications and medical fitness of
the pilots in charge of the aeroplane;
(c) the weather conditions existing between
Sydney and Melbourne on 21st March, 1931 f
and whether the pilots concerned had
previous warning of the cyclonic con-
ditions in the area towards which the
machine was in flight;
(d)recommending action which may prevent a
recurrence of accidents of this nature
(G&py of Ministerial direction attached at
Appendix ”A H )*
3. The Inquiry was opened at 11 a.m. on the
10th April, 1931 f at the Commonwealth Bank Chambers,
Sydney, N.S.W.
Mr. Little of Counsel, instructed by
the Commonwealth Crown Solicitor, appeared to assist
the Committee.
Mr. A. R. Campbell of Counsel, instructed
by Messrs. Campbell, Campbell & Campbell, appealed
•n behalf of Australian National Airways Ltd.
Mr. C. B. Kearney, Solicitor, appeared on
behalf of the relatives of two «f the passengers,
(Messrs. Farrell and Margules).
Mr. B. G. Curtiss, Solicitor, appeared on
behalf of the relatives if Mr. G. T. dunell.
/4. Evidence


4. Evidence was taken at Sydney on the 10th, 11th,
13th, and 14th* April, 1931> from the undermentioned‘
persons s-
Flight Lieutenant C.T.P. Ulm, A.F.C., Managing
Director, Australian National Airways, Ltd,
Mr* F.W. Hewitt, Chief Engineer, A.N.A., Ltd.,
Flying Officer J.A. Mollison, Pilot, A.N.A. Ltd.,
Mr. E.H. Chaseling, Pilot, A.N.A. Ltd.
Mr. V. Hamilton, Aircraft Foreman, A.N.A. Ltd.
Mr. H.E. Camm, Assistant Meteorologist, Weather
Bureau, Sydney, N.S.W.
Mr. F.W. Ball, Aircraft Inspector, A.N.A. Ltd.,
Mr. T.E. Johnston, Senior Aircraft Inspector,
Civil Aviation Department.
Flight Lieutenant E.J. Stephens, Pilot, A.N.A. Ltd.
Mr. H.V. Danes, Ground Engineer, A.N.A. Ltd.
Mr. L.E. Turnill, Engine Foreman, A.N.A. Ltd.
5. On the afternoon of 10th. April, the Committee
adjourned to Mascot Aerodrome and there, hy courtesy of
A.N.A. Ltd., carried out a detailed inspection of the
Company’s Workshops and an aircraft similar to the ’’Southern
Cloud”. In doing so, the systems of maintenance and
inspection were closely examined. The Committee was favorably
impressed with the thoroughness of the system in force at this
establishment.
6. All available and farthcoming evidence in New South
Wales having been taken by midday on 14th. April, 193^ » the
Committee adjourned to Melbourne where the Inquiry was resumed
at 2. 30. p.m. on l6th. April, in the Beard Room,
Commonwealth Offices, Treasury Gardens.
At the Melbourne sittings, Mr. W. Slater, Solicitor,
appeared for the relatives of two passengers, Messrs. Farrell
and Margules, in place of Mr. C.B. Kearney, Mr. A.R. Campbell
did not appear for A.N.A. Ltd., who were represented by one «f
their Managing Directors, Flight Lieutenant C.T.P. Ulm.
7. Evidence was taken in Melbourne on the l6th. and 17th.
April, 1931, from the undermentioned persons:-


Mr. G.U. Allan, Pilot, A.N.A. Ltd.
Squadron Leader A. Murrey-Jones, Superintendent
of Plying Operations, Oivil Aviation Department.
Lieut.-Colonel H. 0. Brinsmead, Controller of Civil
Aviation.
Y/ing Commander A.P. Lawrence, Deputy Director of
Medical Services# Royal Australian Air Force.
Mr. H. Barkley, Assistant Director, Meteorological
Bureau.
Mr. J.N. Robinson, Motor Driver, A.N.A. Ltd.
Electrical Commander P.G. Gressoell* Director-.of
Signals and Communi cat ions, R.A.H.
Plight Lieutenant T.A. Swinboume* Director of
Organization and Staff Duties, RiA.A.P.
Plight Lieutenant C.T.P. Dim, A.P.C. Managing
Director, A.N.A. Ltd.
8. At 4 p.m., on 17th April, 1931» all forth-
coming evidence having been taken, the public sittings
•f the Committee were declared closed and the Committee
adjourned to examine the evidence and consider its
findings.
9« Before dealing with the specific points
set out in the Ministerial direction, the Committee
desires to officially record the efforts and scope of
the search for the missing aircraft.
Prom the time that it became, known that the
"Southern Cloud" had failed to arrive at its destination,
the air search operations were directed by the Civil
Aviation Branch. The failure of the machine to arrive
at its destination first became known officially on the
morning of Sunday, the 22nd March, and immediately
advantage was taken of the very wide facilities possessed
the Postmaster-General's Department to trace the
route and whereabouts of the missing machine.
In the air search, the Civil Aviation
Branch had the full co-operation of the Royal Australian
Air Force, Australian National Airways, and numerous
aircraft owners and pilots who quite voluntarily made
their resources available and accepted the directions
of the Civil Aviation Branch. The Civil Aviation
Branch rightly realised that ground searches could
best be directed by the police, and left this sphere
to the control of that authority. Intensive searches


by air were carried out over those areas which, at the
time, were considered to be the probable location of the
machine, and later the area of search was extended to cfvver
all areas which it seemed thb machine might possibly have
come to earth# At the same time numerous ground parties,
locally organised, effected searches over numerous areas
where it was thought the machine might have descended#
These searches were mainly over mountainous and dense
forest country and the action of.those tAio undertook this
difficult and hazardous task is deserving of high commendat-
ion# The searches both from the air and from the land
were continued until it was felt that there was no prospect
of finding the occupants of the machine alive, and although
these searches have proved fruitless, the Committee is
satisfied that everything humanly possible was done to
locate the machine and succour the occupants.
The Committee feels that it should place on
record an appreciation of the valuable services rendered
in the search by the Civil Aviation Branch, the Postmaster-
Geheral*s Department, the Royal Australian Air Force,
Australian National Airways, the numerous aviation interests,
the Police Forces and the ground parties, all of which
combined to make up vhat is probably the most intensive
search for a missing aircraft that has ever been carried
out in the history of aviation*
10. From the evidence available it cannot be establish-
ed what happened to the aircraft after the departure from
Masctt and pending the finding of the aircraft the
Committee cannot definitely assign any eause for the loss#
It is of opinion, however, that the extreme weather condit-
ions contributed greatly to the loss#
11. After carefully considering the evidence and
after due deliberation, the following observations and
findings, in regard to the specific points, (a), (b), and
(c) set out in para'2# above, are recorded:-
(a) the airworthiness, equipment and loading
of aircraft VH-UMF, at time flf departure•
(i) The aircraft was of a type known as
the Avr© X# It had been built in 1929 by Messrs.
A.V. Roe, Ltd., Aircraft Manufacturers, of Woodford,
Ingland. It was specially built for passenger
carrying - its normal complement being ten persons
including the pilcat# It had been tested at the
Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough, and
had been issued with a Certificate of Airworthin-
ess by the British Air Ministry. This type is
flown on other recognized air routes such as the
Royal Lv.toh Mail Service, from Amsterdam to
Batavia, and


in Europe, and has .proved itself in Australia
and elsewhere to be a satisfactory type of
aircraft*
(i:V) The power installation consisted
of three 215 H.P. Lynx engines manufaotured by
Messrs. Armstrong Siddeley Ltd., Aero Engine
Manufacturers of Coventry, England.
(ill) The aircraft had an Australian
Certificate Airworthiness dated 17th December,
1930» which was valid on the 21st March, 193^•
Civ) A certificate of safety had been
issued on 21st March 1931» in accordance with the
Air Navigation Regulations and was signed by two.
licenced ground engineers and the pilot.
(v) Although these Regulations lay
down that a certificate of safety need only be
issued once per week, Australian National Airways
Ltd., make out certificates daily as an added
precaution♦
Cvi) AH equipment prescribed In the
Certificate if Airworthiness was carried in this
aircraft 1 >and in addition, a bank and turn
indicator and a fore and aft inclinometer* The
instruments were in working order and good condition*
(vit) The laadihg was normal and gave
a good margin of safety* The actual loading on
this flight was 10,099 lbs*, as against the
permissible loading of 10,225 lbs*
(vlii) Bearing in mind the foregoing the
Committee finds that the aircraft and engines were
airworthy, that the instruments were in working
order and were satisfactory, and that the loading
of the aircraft was safe and within the maximum
prescribed in the Certificate of Airworthiness.
(ix) The Committee realizing the great
importance of the compass and altimeter in. blind
flying, recommends that consideration be given to
the advisability ef carrying a duplicate compass
when no wireless navigation aids are available
and of fitting a duplicate altimeter where it can
be- seen by the pilot.
(b) the qualifications and medical fitness
of the pilots in charge of the aeroplane;
(i) Mr, T.W. Shortridge, the pilot
of the aircraft, held a W B W Class Pilot's Licence
which was current on.the 21st March, He
/wa5.......


was a pilot of outstanding ability and had
flown frequently over this route. lie had
served as a pilot in the Royal Air Feme and
the Royal Australian Air Force and had been
employed before joining A.N.A,Ltd. as an
instructor to the New South Wales Aero Club.
He had been employed by A.N.A. Ltd. since the
inception of their services in 1929* He had
upwards of 4,600 hours flying as pilot to his
credit, 1,340 hours of which had been carried
out in the avro X. aircraft.
(ii) Mr. T,W.Shortridge was medically
examined on 4th February, 1931» and assessed
by the Departmental Medical Assessor as fit.
There is no evidence to show that there was any
change in his physical condition between that
date and the 2lst March, 1931; in fact, all
the evidence tends to show that he was in normal
health and spirits immediately prior to
setting out on this last trip.
The examination of Mr. Shortridge
on 4th February 1931 waB the normal half-yearly
pilot*s examination. The standard of this
examination is very high and is prescribed by
international convention.
(iii) Mr. C.T.Dunell was an engineer
apprentice undergoing training as a pilot. He
held Ground Engineer’s Licence in Division C.
He was available to act as assistant pilot and
as such had had considerable experience. He
was considered capable under normal conditions
of flying the aircraft.
(iv) There was no evidence to show that
Mr.Dunell was other than medically fit on the day
of the accident.
(v) The Air Navigation Regulations do not
require 2nd pilots to be carried but A.N.A, Ltd.
carry an assistant to the pilot as an additional
security measure.
(vi) Bearing in mind the foregoing, the
Committee finds that the pilot of the aircraft,
(Mr. T.W.Shortridge) was a highly qualified
pilot,was licenced, and was medically fit, and
that his assistant, Mr.Dunell, was capable of
performing any duties he would normally be called
upon to do and was medically fit.
Ac)


( 0 ) the weather con dit long existing between'
Sydney and Melbourne on.T>lst March.
1911, .an*s 'Nil ethe r' the hi lo t s r. or. kerned
condi
the machine was in -flight
(i) the weather conditions existing
on Saturday morning', 2lst March,l93T» were as
follows
axmmr* - At 8 a.m, t:
fine hut cloudy to over
weather w
base of t:
The wind
surface,
ast. ' The
800 feet.
n the
: cloud at 9 a.m* was at
.s light from the north,
t it increased greatly i
ion and at 9 a.m. the up
s .showed that the wind r
velocity
er air
with elev
ohservat i
ached a
5,000
60 at a height o
■KT W , *
velocit
feet an
(B) OVZSR THS ROUTS. - Betwe
and Moss Tale the weather was fin
Between Moss Tale and Goulhur.
was showery. There were viole.
ydney and Moss Vi
loudy. Bet wee;
r eather was showe:
quails with chan;
rn th
ent 1
e of wind from N. 1.1
0-8
.p.h. to Vi ,3 .W * about m.p.h, with
lies . Line squalls vary greatly in
t different points. This one was p:
ery severe with perhaps strong verti
ntens
hahly
very severe with
currents and g
eat turbulence.
Bet wee,
Goulburn and Melbourne, there
as almos
ith thun
,nd snow
con
rst
inuous low cloud and rai
rms and hail near the Murray
tablelands. Thunderstorms
robably
rke
the junction of two win
t learns
e present at isolated points
f juncti
The cloud was probably some
Thou
bad
ands of feet thick. Visibility
.11 the way from Goulhurn to Melbou
as
ne.
(c) imBOOBKE. - At Melbourne
steady rain continued from 9 a.m. to 3
after wh
there were occasional showers
During the day visibility
until 9
a few hundred yards to a few
varied f
miles, b
■g 3 miles at 3 P*m» The cloud
•ably varied from $OO to 1,500
height
he showers but towards the sea
coast wo
e lower. Hear the shores of
the Bay al
the visibi
ng the coast and over the sea
vis ibili
y would be at times as low as
200 to 400 y
rds and the cloud height down
to a few hun
.red feet.
fii) These weather conditions were
extreme, outstanding features being th© extra-
ordinarily large area covered by low cloud and
the unexpectedly strong wind forces.
Clii) It is the practice of AJST.A.Ltd.
pilots to consult the weather maps published in
the press and to read the forecast published
therewith*


that Mr.3^ortridg& e S?aBt£se
on the morning of the 21st March, 1931.
(?) . The forecast was published in
Sydney on that particular morning, as follows
H Cloudy and, un
tied generally
with rain and thund
Toms - further heavy
falls and some floo
gs likely also isolated
strong blows - weat
soon becoming fine in
the far west and so
-warm and sultry
at first, with north
y winds but a cool,
squally southerly c
State from the west
.ange spreading over the
ard in the week-end. M
(vi) There was nothing in the weather
map or In the forecast which would lead to the
conclusion that extrem
be encountered on the :
map and forecast avail
conditions would not b
had frequently been en
this run on other occai
(vii) The
the I.S.W. State Mete
its pilots that ext re:
Victoria was not rece
10.45 a.m., when the 1
for about two and a h
existing
not such
expertenc
commencin
(ix) B
Committee finds
between Sydney a
question were pa
extent of the dii
as abnormal
oncerned probabl
onditions over t
he extreme condi
resent arranges©
ould not have be
eparture of the
ather conditions would
:ht to Melbourne. The
indicated that the
od but not worse than
tered by the pilots on
s,
irst
ndication received by
st | A • »Xitd., or
It ions were present in
til approximately
* had been in flight
olog
con
Ed u
chin
If ho
,r©.
ii) The actual weather conditions
t Mascot at the time of the flight were
s to raise any doubt in the mind of an
d pilot of the advisability of
the flight.
taring in mind the foregoing the
hat the weather conditions
d Melbourne on the date in
icularly severe, and that the
urbanee - low clouds and rain
also finds that the pilot
foresaw moderately bad
.e route but had no warning of
ions which existed. Under
ts these extreme conditions
n foreseen prior to the
ircraft.
! W
lii
bl
' £
OUi
ioi
12.
With regard to paragraph 2(d) -
(d) recommending action which nay prevent a
recurrence of accidents of this nature;
the Committee throughout the Inquiry has given
very carsful consideration to this aspect.
/itn ...


(b) that the Departmental scheme for
a ground wireless D.j?. organization be
proceeded with and expedited as an urgent
measure ;
Observing that the expert committee
regards the present proposed scheme as a
temporary one, it is further recommended that
investigations be made into wireless direction
finding services, throughout the world with a
view to ensuring that the most satisfactory
service is adopted as the permanent scheme for
Australia ;
(c) that the Department should make
available to the operating companies specialist
advice on the bonding and screening of their
aircrart and upon the selection, fitting,
operating,etc. of the aircraft wireless equipment^
(d) that in view of the urgency of the
matter, pending the operating companies obtaining
suitable wireless equipment, consideration be
given to the extent to which the Department
TR.A.A.F.) can assist the companies to
immediately install and operate wireless in
aircraft engaged on the Sydney-Melbourne-Launceston
route.
(b) Signals. -
{i) In the event of a forced landing of one
of the A.N.A. Ltd. aircraft, it might be most difficult
to locate it from the air owing to its colour.
(li) Air craft operating in regular passenger
air services are not required to carry means of signalling
to other aircraft in the event of a forced landing and
have no means of attracting attention other than
materials (i.e. petrol) for making a flee.
(iii) It appears to the Committee to be
essential that some signalling apparatus should be carried
in aircraft operating over scheduled passenger air routes.
Bearing this and the foregoing sub-paragraphs in mind
the Committee recommends ;-
(a) that all such aircraft be required by
regulations to carry a Verey light pistol and an
adequate supply of Verey light cartridges.
Those aircraft operating over the sea should be
required to carry an additional supply of white
Verey light cartridges, so that the International
Marine Distress signal could be made;
(b) that all such aircraft should be
required by regulations to carry three ground
strips as a means of signalling to other aircraft.
A definite code of signals should then be laid
down as standard for this class of signal;
(c) that all such aircraft should be
painted a ccnsjpicuous colour in order that they
may be more easily detected from the air in the
event of a forced landing;


(d) that serious consideration be
given to the practicability of extending the
above recommendations, (a), (b), and (c), to
all aircraft engaged in cross-country flights
{c) Routes.
(i) It was established in evidence that A .IT .A
Ltd. left to the discretion of its pilots the decision
as to whether the flight should commence and the route
which should be taken between the terminals. Pilots in
selecting the route are governed by the prevailing
weather conditions as met and consideration of the safety
of the aircraft.
(ii) The Committee agrees with this principle,
that, generally speaking, these matters should be left
to the pilot of the aircraft who is best qualified to
make the decisions*
(d) Weather Reports.
(i) At present synoptic charts are drawn at
the Weather Bureau at about 11am. from observations
made at 9 a.m. throughout Australia. A forecast is
then issued and is corrected by observations taken at
3 p.m. at a limited number of stations. The chart
appears in the next morning’s press accompanied by the
corrected forecast which is really for the twenty-four
hours following on the observations at 9 a.m.
(ii) In addition the Bureau issues at about
11 a.m. an aviation forecast covering the air routes
radiating from Melbourne.
(iil) It will therefore be seen that the forecast
available to pilots undertaking early morning flights
is primarily based on information nearly twenty-four
hours old, and that the aviation forecast is issued at a
time when most of the aviation business for the day is
well on its way and probably drawing to a conclusion.
(iv) The Committee realises that the ideal scheme
would be for an extensive series of observations to be
made early in the morning, probably before 6 a.m., and
forwarded to the Bureau, so that a chart could be drawn
before 6 a.m. A forecast could then be given of
conditions likely to arise during the day and also
current weather conditions could be distributed.
Realizing, however, that this objective may not be immed-
iately or easily attainable owing to the difficulties
of communication at such an early hour, the Committee
considers that a great step forward would be the collect-
ion of a set of observations at 6 p.m., i.e., just before
the Post Offices close. The Weather Bureau could then
draw a synoptic chart based on this information and issue
a forecast that night which would be of considerably more
value than present arrangements would allow.


(v) As there can be no question that up to
date weather information is of great importance in the
successful and safe operation of air services, the
Committee recommends
(a) that endeavours be made to have an
additional synoptic chart drawn by the V/eather
Bureau based on a set of observations made at
6 p.ra.;
(b) that an aviation forecast for the
next day be made from this chart and widely
distributed?
(c) that arrangements be made for
observations of current weather at selected points
along the air routes at 7 a.m. daily and forwarded
to the V/eather Bureau to allow corrections to
the forecast?
(d) that this corrected aviation forecast,
together with a statement of the actual conditions
over the routes be issued by the V/eather Bureau
at 3 a.m. for rapid distribution to all civil
aviation terminal aerodromes and R.A.A.P. stations;
(e) that in order to make a success of
the foregoing recommendations the closest co-
ordination? both in professional and administrative
sense, should be maintained between the aviation
authorities and the Commonwealth Meteorological
Bureau.
13* Summarised, the findings and recommendations
of the Committee are as follows
(A) FimiNSS.
(i) That from svidence available it cannot be
established what happened to the aircraft after the
departure from Mascot, and pending the finding of the
aircraft the Committee cannot definitely assign any
cause for the loss. It is of opinion, however, that
the extreme weather conditions contributed greatly
to the loss.
(ii) That all possible efforts were made and
action taken to locate the missing aircraft.
(iii) That the aircraft and engines were airworthy,
that the instruments were in working order and were
satisfactory, and that the loading of the aircraft
was safe and within the maximum prescribed in the
Certificate of Airworthiness.
(iv) That the pilot of the aircraft (Mr. T. W.
Shortridge) was a highly qualified pilot, was licenced
and was red'-crlly fit, and that his assistant,
Mr. Bunell, was capable of performing any duties he
would normally be called upon to do and was medically
fit.
(r)


(v) That the weather conditions between
Sydney and Melbourne on the date in question
were particularly severe, and that the extent
of the disturbance - low clouds and rain - was
abnormal* It also finds that the pilot
concerned probably foresaw moderately bad
conditions over the route but had no warning
of the extreme conditions which existed* Under
present arrangements these extreme conditions
could not have been foreseen prior to the
departure of the aircraft*
(B) RBCOinraQATIOMS. -
(a) Wireless Communication* •
(i) That as soon as practicable the
carrying of two-way wireless and a qualified
operator be made compulsory in aircraft engaged
in regular scheduled passenger services. Action
should be taken to give immediate effect to this
on the Sydney-Melbourne-Launceston service where
bad weather conditions often occur and cloud
flying is frequently necessary*
(li) That the Departmental scheme for a
ground wireless D. F* organisation be proceeded
with and expedited, as an urgent measure.
Observing that the expert committee
regards the present proposed scheme as a temporary
one* it is further recommended that investigations
be made into wireless direction finding services
throughout the world with a view to ensuring that
the most satisfactory service is adopted as the
permanent scheme for Australia*
(iii) That the Department should make
available to the operating companies specialist
advice on the bonding and screening of their
aircraft and upon the selection, fitting and
operating of the aircraft wireless equipment*
(iv) That in view of the urgency of the
matter, pending the operating companies obtaining
suitable wireless equipment, consideration be
given to the extent to which the Department
(R.A.A.F*) can assist the companies to immediately
install and operate wireless in aircraft engaged
on the Sydney-Melbourne-Launceston route*
(b) Signals * -
(i) fl hat all aircraft aperating over
scheduled pessei-eer a? r routes v 'e required by
regulations to u; rr,/ r\ Verey light pistol and an
adequate sutpl; r i-t la::eyI a ::ey light cartridges. Those
aircraft oneracing the sea should be required
to carry an additional supply of white Verey light
cartridges, so that the International Marines
distress signal coj«.i be made.


(lx) That all such aircraft should be
required by regulations to carry three ground
strips as a means of signalling to other aircraft.
A definite code of signals should then be laid
down as standard for this class of signal.
(iii) That all such aircraft should be
painted a conspicuous colour in order that they
may be more easily detected from the air in the
event of a forced landing.
(Tv) That serious consideration be given
to the practicability of extending the above
recommendations, (i), (ii) and (iii), to all
aircraft engaged in cross-country flights.
( 0 ) Weather Reports.
(i) That endeavours be made to have
an additional synoptic chart drawn by the Weather
Bureau based on a set of observations made at 6 p.m.
(ii) That an aviation forecast for the
next day be made from this chart and widely
distributed*
(iii) That arrangements be made for
observations of current weather at selected points
along the air routes at 7 a.m. daily and forwarded
to the Weather Bureau to allow corrections to the
forecast.
(iv) That this corrected aviation
forecast, together with a statement of the actual
conditions over the routes be issued by the Weather
Bureau at 8 a.m. for rapid distribution to all
civil aviation terminal aerodromes and H.A.A.?.
Stations•
(v) That in order to make a success of
the foregoing recommendations the closest co-ordin-
ation, both in a professional and administrative sense,
should be maintained between the aviation
authorities and the Commonwealth Meteorological
Bureau.
(d) Equipment»
That consideration be given to the
advisability of carrying a duplicate compass when
no wireless navigation aids are available and of
fitting a duplicate altimeter where it can be seen
by the pilot.


Signed at MSI/BOURNS, this twenty-eighth
day of April, 1931*
(Signed) . H : I'M 31 ? P3
CHAIRMAN
(Signed) . 3 :
mbmbsr
(Signed) . s : C*.JOW3TOir
msmtsr


APPENDIX "A"
COPY
COMMOOTBALTH OF AUSTRALIA
DEPARTMENT OP DEFENCE.
Ist April, 1931•
10HANDUM FOR
The Chairman,
,ir Accidents Investigation Committee*
A report has been received that aircraft
VH-UMF owned by Australian National Airways Ltd.
departed from Sydney at 8.15 a.m. on Saturday, 21st
March, 1931, piloted by T. W. SHORTRIDGrE and C.T.DUNELL
as second pilot and six passengers, and that the machine
is missing - believed lost.
I desire that the Air Accidents Investig-
ation Committee shall now commence an investigation
of the occurrence with a view to determining the cause
of the accident, with special reference to -
(a) the airworthiness, equipment and loading of
aircraft VH-UMP at time of departure;
(b) the qualifications and medical fitness of the
pilots in charge of the aeroplane;
(c) the weather conditions existing between Sydney
and Melbourne on 21st March, 193*1 > an( *
whether the pilots concerned had previous
warning of the cyclonic conditions in the
area towards which the machine was in
flight.
It is my desire that the Committee, during
their investigation, shall be in no way limited to
these Terms of Reference, but shall take and consider
any evidence forthcoming with a view to recommending
action which may prevent a recurrence of accidents of
this nature.
The investigation is to be conducted as
an open one.
Signed
J. 3. CHIFLEY
MINISTER DEFENCE.
//
yC, /SXSS’ ■


' V
1 /
