

1955
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
DEPARTMENT OF LANDS & SURVEYS
REPORT
ON
CENTRAL
NORTH KIMBERLEY REGION
BY
JOHN F. MORGAN, L.S., M.I.A. M.I.C.W.A.,
LEADER
NORTH KIMBERLEY SURVEY AND MAPPING
EXPEDITION, 1954




1955
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
DEPARTMENT OF LANDS & SURVEYS
REPORT
ON
CENTRAL
NORTH KIMBERLEY REGION
BY
JOHN F. MORGAN, L.S., M.I.S.A., M.I.C.W.A.,
LEADER
NORTH KIMBERLEY SURVEY AND MAPPING
EXPEDITION, 1954




CONTENTS
Paragraph Page
1. INTRODUCTION 1 7
2. SUMMARY OF EVENTS—
PERTH TO WYNDHAM 2-7 7
WYNDHAM TO KARUNJIE STATION 8-14 7-9
KARUNJIE TO GIBB RIVER STATION 15-18 9
GIBB RIVER TO KALUMBURU MISSION 19-42 9-14
KALUMBURU TO DRYSDALE RIVER CROSSING .. .. 43-66 14-18
EXAMINATION OF WOODHOUSE, WEST DRYSDALE, KING
EDWARD AND CARSON RIVER AREAS 67-92 18-24
VISIT BY SURVEYOR GENERAL 93-96 24-25
EXAMINATION OF NORTHERN AREAS, DRYSDALE RIVER,
DAMPER CREEK. CHAPMAN RIVER, KARUNJIE
STATION 97-129 25-33
CONCLUSION OF FIELD ACTIVITIES 130-138 33-34
3. ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE EXPEDITION 139-140 34
4. RECONNAISSANCE PROCEDURE 141-144 34-35
5. RESOURCES OF THE NORTH KIMBERLEY—
DESCRIPTION AND CLASSIFICATION 145-165 35-38
VOLCANIC SOILS—
(a) Black Soil Plains 166 38-39
(b) Alluvial Red Loams .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 39
(c) Undulating Red Soil Country .. .. .. .. .. 39-40
(d) Undulating Broken Country .. .. .. .. .. .. 40
(e) Volcanic Ranges .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 40-41
SEDIMENTARY AREAS—
(a) Seepage Flats .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 167 41
(b) Alluvial Sand .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 41
(c) Undulating Sandy Areas .. .. . ♦ •. ♦ • • ♦ 41
(d) Sand and Outcropping Sandstone .. .. .. .. .. 41
(e) Rough Dissected Sandstone .. .. .. .. .. .. 42
(f) Sandstone Scarps and Tablelands .. .. .. .. .. 42
(g) Shale Country .. .. .. .. .. .. • ♦ • • 43
ASSESSMENT AND VEGETATION OF SEDIMENTARY
AREAS 168 43-44
TOXIC PLANTS 169 44
SOIL SALINITY 170 44
6. CLIMATE OF THE NORTH KIMBERLEY 171-182 44
7. POTENTIAL-
PASTORAL 183 45
AGRICULTURAL 183 45
MINERAL 183 45


8. ADDITIONAL FIELD ACTIVITIES— Paragraph Page
SURVEY TRAVERSE ■ I 84 _ 191 46
ASTRAFIXES 192-196
TRANSPORT AND CONSTRUCTION SECTIONS .. .. 197-198 47
PERMANENCE AND STATE OF TRACKS 199-202 47-48
(i) Carson River Route .. .. .. .. .. 200 48
(ii) King Edward Route .. .. .. .. .. 200 48
PORTSITE 203-204 48
9. RESERVES AND STOCK ROUTES 205-208 48-49
10. ABORIGINAL HABITATION 209-214 49-50
11. FAUNA 215-218 51
12. UNBRANDED CATTLE 219 51
13. PHOTOGRAPHIC RECORD 220 52
14. NOMENCLATURE 221 52
15. CONCLUSION-
SPECIAL EQUIPMENT 222-223 54
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 224-230 54-55
16. APPENDIX A—
REPORT TO THE SURVEYOR-IN-CHARGE BY MR. T. V.
KEATING (SECOND-IN-COMMAND) .. . 57 __ 58
17. APPENDIX B—
COMMON AND BOTANICAL NAMES OF TIMBERS AND
GRASSES REFERRED TO WITHIN THIS REPORT. CON-
TRIBUTED BY MR. C. A. GARDNER, GOVERNMENT
BOTANIST 59-60
18. APPENDIX C—
INSTRUCTION FROM THE SURVEYOR GENERAL TO
THE SURVEYOR-IN-CHARGE BEFORE DEPARTURE
FROM PERTH—
(a) Instruction Number 1 61-62
(b) Instruction Number 2 .. .. .. ## 63-67
19. APPENDIX D—
RESULTS OF ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATIONS .. 68
20. APPENDIX E—
CLASSIFICATION PLAN OF THE CENTRAL NORTH KIM-
BERLEY REGION sn


INDEX TO ILLUSTRATIONS
Page
1. Bogged Vehicle .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8
2. Pool on Gibb River .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10
A
3. Open Box Country—Crossland Creek near JM .. .. .. .. .. .. 10
A 6
4. Plain Country South of the Foster Range .. .. .. .. .. ..11
5. Wongaroodoo .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 12
6. Moongiyarrie .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 12
7. Pool on Carson River, 22 miles from the coast .. .. .. .. .. 13
8. Sandstone in Jooroo Ridge .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14
9. Native Paintings near Jooroo Ridge .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 15
10. Mongonai Creek above Moongool .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 15
11. Moongool Gorge .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..16
12. Construction Equipment near Moongool .. .. .. .. .. .. 16
13. Large Ironwood Tree between Woodhouse and Drysdale Rivers .. .. .. 19
14. Rough Broken Sandstone North of Woodhouse River .. .. .. .. 20
15. Dawrra .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 20
16. Bed of Creek above Waterfall .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 21
17. Pool at Base of Main Fall .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 22
18. Gorge Running North from Waterfall .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 22
19. Bed of the Carson River, near Woorakin Creek .. .. .. .. .. .. 23
20. Wonjarring, near Larryoo .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 24
21. Merringa .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 25
22. River Pool West of Palmoondoora .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 26
23. Basaltic Range South of Mt. Teeming .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
24. Sago Palms in Volcanic Range, eight miles South of Mt. Teeming .. .. .. 27
25. Bed of Drysdale River. Sandstone Bluff in Background .. .. .. .. 28
26. Drysdale River near Johnson Creek, 48 miles from the Coast .. .. .. .. 29
27. Pool in Drysdale River, 85 miles from its mouth .. .. .. .. .. 30
28. Oogalanoongoo .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 30
29. Native Rock Markings—Damper Creek .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 31
30. Shale and Sandstone Hill with Adjacent Flat near Ellenbrae Creek .. .. .. 32
31. Looking North from Scarp, 26 miles N.N.W. of Karunjie Homestead. Wade’s
Bluff in Distance .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 32
32. Camp near Centipede Creek .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 33
33. Carson Escarpment .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 35
34. Spear Grass .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 36
35. Cypress Pine .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 37
A
36. Grove of Cabbage Palms five miles North of JM .. .. .. .. .. .. 37
Al 4
37. Red Flinders Grass on Black-Soil Plain, four miles West of Noachitty .. .. .. 38
38. Soil Erosion on Bank of Crossland Creek near Junction with Drysdale River .. .. 39
39. Red Soil Box Country .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 40
40. Sandy Country North of Ellenbrae Creek .. .. .. .. .. .. 42
41. Country South of Ellenbrae Creek .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 42
42. Sedimentary Area near Oogalanoongoo .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 43
43. Mission Garden at Kalumburu .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 45
44. Personnel of the Survey Section .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 46
45. Grader Cutting Down Bank of Plain Creek .. .. .. .. .. .. 47
A
46. Native Wet Camp on bank of Drysdale River near JM .. .. .. .. .. 49
A 4
47. Native Painting near Wongalwarra .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 50
48. Bower Bird’s Nest .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 50
49. A Long-nosed Freshwater Crocodile (Crocodilia Johnsonii) .. .. .. .. 51




DEPARTMENT OF LANDS AND SURVEYS
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
NORTH KIMBERLEY SURVEY AND MAPPING
EXPEDITION, 1954
INTRODUCTION
Surveyor General :
1. In submitting this report I feel it unnecessary to recapitulate the initial organisation
and preparations that occurred before the expedition’s departure for the North Kimberley. These
matters were covered in your initial instructions to me, copies of which are shown as appendices
to this report.
SUMMARY OF EVENTS
PERTH TO WYNDHAM
2. The field activities of the expedition commenced on the 26th March, 1954, when a
party, allotted by the Main Roads Department to assist the expedition, and equipped with a
bulldozer and a grader, departed from Wyndham for Karunjie Station. Under the control of Mr.
H. Gattenhof, this Section’s initial objective was to improve the existing Wyndham-Karunjie
track, and, where necessary, open up creek crossings, etc., to permit speedy travelling by the major
transport units in mid-April.
3. Meanwhile preliminary arrangements had been finalised in Perth and on the 7th April,
two vehicles, a G.M.C. 6 x 6 and a Willys Jeep, commenced the overland trip to Wyndham,
carrying supplies and equipment which were additional to shipments made on the M.V. Dulver-
ton ” (17th March), the M.V. " Koolinda ” (7th April,) and the M.V. " Kabbarli ” (26th June).
This party of four men, under the control of Cadet Surveyor W. F. Johnson, arrived at Onslow
on 10th April, where they were delayed by unseasonal rains until the 19th April, when they pro-
ceeded overland to Port Hedland, arriving there on the 20th. In the interim, essential items
being carried on the vehicles had been air freighted to Wyndham from Onslow.
4. On learning that all roads were closed indefinitely, Mr. Johnson contacted the Master
of the M.V. “ Dorrigo ” (Captain Evans), and arranged for the shipping of the vehicles on this
vessel to Wyndham. Captain Evans kindly delayed his departure from Port Hedland 12 hours
to permit loading of the vehicles and equipment.
5. On the 23rd April, Mr. Johnson and Party arrived at Wyndham by aircraft, where
they were met by Mr. Keating, who had returned to Wyndham from a point some 68 miles West
under extremely difficult conditions.
6. Accompanied by Mr. Keating and six additional members of the expedition, I de-
parted by air from Perth on the Bth April, 1954, arriving at Wyndham on Friday, the 9th April.
The next ensuing few days the entire party was engaged on the segregation of supplies and equip-
ment that had preceded our arrival. In addition, I secured the release of Native Wallis from his
police tracking duties, and established liaison with representatives of several government depart-
ments in regard to the supplies and equipment I would require to be air freighted to Gibb River
Station and Kalumburu Mission during the season. In addition, procedure was finalised with
the agent for Macßobertson Miller Aviation Company, who would be responsible for the en-
gaging of aircraft when required, and with Mr. Ryle of the Flying Doctor Service (Wyndham
base) in regard to procedure and operation of our portable transmitting and receiving sets which
would be operating on this network,
7. The vehicles which had preceded our arrival had been inspected and overhauled by
the Plant Engineer’s Depot and I was able to complete arrangements with this section in regard
to the storage, etc., of two Jeep type vehicles which would be used by three members of C.5.1.R.0.
expected to join the expedition in September.
WYNDHAM TO KARUNJIE STATION
8. In view of the delay of the Johnson Party further South, and no adverse weather reports
in this locality, I decided to utilise the vehicles at my disposal to overland fuel to Karunjie Station,
and accordingly left Wyndham on Tuesday the 13th April.


9. Unfortunately, the bad weather spread northwards and the transport, en route to
Karunjie, was caught in the centre. Accompanied by Constable Shaw and Native Wallis, I
finally arrived at Karunjie on Monday, the 26th April, and apart from the period, 30th April’ to
the 3rd May, when I returned 55 miles to render assistance to an isolated and bogged vehicle,
I remained in the proximity of Karunjie Station until all vehicles and personnel arrived on Sunday
the 9th May.
Bogged Vehicle
10. At this juncture, the Durack River was still flowing strongly to a depth of five feet
over the crossing formerly graded by Mr. Gattenhof's Section. Therefore, the opportunity was
taken to thoroughly overhaul and service all vehicles, and segregate all stores and equipment into
their respective sections so that each unit would be completely operational and independent
from this point.
11. During this period Constable Shaw had been preparing the equipment required by
the Reconnaissance Section. Unfortunately, the new pack saddles had not been finished satis-
factorily by the manufacturers and major amendments were required before they could be put
into service.
12. The plant of seven riding horses and 17 pack donkeys, which had departed from
Moola Bulla Station on the Bth April, were deviated from Gibb River Station to Karunjie, where
they arrived on the 6th May in very poor condition. This proved extremely disappointing to
Mr. Shaw and myself, and severely handicapped the activities of the mounted section for some
time.
13. As the level of the water in the Durack River showed no signs of abating, a rough
and stony fording spot a short distance above the crossing was cleared sufficiently to enable the
vehicles to negotiate smooth and slippery boulders lying in swiftly flowing water, two or three
feet deep in places. This crossing enabled me to complete all arrangements for immediate de-
parture from Karunjie, whereby I made the following plans ;
1. Reconnaissance Section to leave immediately and, after conferring with Main
Road Section at Blackfellow Creek, to push forward to Gibb River Station.
2. Transport Section to unite with the Construction Party and proceed as one group.
3. Survey Section to travel independently to Gibb River Station where they would
immediately commence the Northern Traverse.
14. The composition and disposition of the expedition for the succeeding three months
was ;
(a) Reconnaissance Section :
Self.
Constable L. E. Shaw.
Natives—Wallis (Head Boy).
Ned.
Duncan.
Transport —7 riding horses and 17 pack donkeys.


(b) Survey Section :
Messrs. J. V. Keating .. Second-in-Command and Section Leader.
W. F. Johnson .. Cadet Surveyor.
F. L. Swider .. Field Assistant.
E. Granville .. Field Assistant.
A. V. Proudfoot Field Assistant
W. S. Jones .. Cook.
Transport —One 4x4 truck ; 1 Jeep type vehicle.
(c) Transport Section :
Messrs. T. E. Cole .. Section Leader.
D. J. Pollard .. Draftsman and Computer.
I. K. Head .. Draftsman and Radio Technician.
J. A. Salmond .. Guide (equipped with horse and mule).
S. R. Hair .. Driver.
Transport —One 6x6 truck ; one 4x4 truck ; two Jeep type vehicles.
(d) Construction Section :
Messrs. H. Gattenhof .. In Charge.
R. Young .. Contract Truck Driver.
F. McDonald .. Grader Driver.
D. Bruce .. .. Bulldozer Driver. (Replaced W. Rosser on
7th June).
S. Rivers .. .. Cook.
Transport—l bulldozer ; 1 grader ; 1 truck.
The Transport and Construction parties were associated as one unit
until the completion of the track construction.
KARUNJIE TO GIBB RIVER STATION
15. In company with Constable Shaw and Natives Wallis, Duncan and Ned, I departed
from Karunjie with the plant of animals on Sunday, 16th May, and was followed by the Transport
Section on the 17th, and the Survey Section on the 18th.
16. After spending the evening of the 17th May with the Transport and Road Con-
struction Sections at Blackfellow Creek, where the latter party had been isolated by the rains for
several weeks, I proceeded towards Gibb River Station, arriving there at noon on the 21st May.
To my amazement, the Survey Section, under Mr. J. V. Keating, arrived at this point some five
hours later, having pushed ahead of the Construction group in their vehicles. They had been
assisted in this task by the services of Mr. J. Salmond, who acted as a guide for them. This was
a highly commendable feat, as progress had only been possible by the removal, by hand, of numer-
ous sandstone boulders encountered in the rough Gibb Range and other formations. This was
indicative of the enthusiasm and initiative displayed by all members of the expedition.
17. During the next few days all members of the Survey Section were engaged in slaughter-
ing beasts and salting beef prior to departure North, and 1 took this opportunity to establish a
concrete bench mark from which the Northern Traverse was to commence and to conduct stellar
observations for Latitude and Longitude.
18. The bench mark is five inches square, 30 inches high on a base 12 inches square.
A
It was sunk flush with the surface of the ground, the top engraved JM and a cairn of stones erected
A 1
over it. In addition, a Bloodwood tree which was identified on an aerial photograph, was marked
A
JM and connected to the bench mark by bearing and distance.
A 1
GIBB RIVER TO KALUMBURU MISSION
19. On Tuesday, the 25th May, the Survey Section commenced the Northern Traverse,
and at noon the same day the Transport and Construction parties arrived at Gibb River, having
completed the construction of the track from Karunjie.


20. The Reconnaissance Section departed Northerly on the 26th May, and was followed
by the Construction Group on the 27th, having no difficulty in following the route I had preselected
on the aerial photographs. On the Ist June, the Gibb River was crossed, after corduroying the
bed of the stream with timber. At this juncture, the Gibb was flowing quite strongly to a depth
of about 18 inches.
Pool on Gibb River
21. The Reconnaissance and Transport Sections united at Plain Creek on the 2nd June.
Immediate maintenance requirements were effected to the bulldozer at this point, the repairs
being of a temporary nature until a mechanic inspected the machine.
22. My photo, interpretation having proved accurate, and an apparent easy course ex-
isting to the Drysdale River, Mr. Gattenhof’s party proceeded with the construction of the track
along the plotted route while I examined country further to the West. On the evening of the
sth June, I arrived at the Drysdale River and was joined on Monday, the 7th June, by the mech-
anised equipment which immediately commenced cutting down the river banks prior to crossing.
A radio message from Wyndham advised me that a mechanic and a new bulldozer driver were
proceeding to Gibb River Station by charter aircraft, and I despatched a vehicle to meet them.
The mechanic’s inspection indicated that about one week’s work was required on the bulldozer
to make it operational.
Open Box Country—Crossland Creek near JM
A6


23. I was engaged on reconnaissance work in this locality on the 6th and 7th June, and
conducted stellar observations for the determination of Latitude and Longitude, this being the
third observational point since leaving Gibb River Station.
24. The Mounted Section left the Drysdale River crossing, where water was still flowing
to a depth of 2 ft. 6 ins., on the 10th June, and travelled North-East, as I wished to locate a road
through a laterite range and thus shorten by some 15 or 20 miles the route tentatively located
on the aerial photographs. This task was accomplished on the first day, and I was able to trans-
mit, by radio, the necessary information to the Construction party still camped on the Drysdale.
As the country from this point to the Carson River was comparatively open, and it being obvious
that no major adjustments would be required to the tentative route, 1 decided to examine extensive
areas of country lying on either side of the proposed road, while the Road Construction party
proceeded Northerly along the Carson River.
25. On the 11th June, stellar observations were conducted, and 1 then proceeded North-
East and South-East, (in the vicinity of a large creek I have named Crossland Creek), until the
Drysdale River was again encountered.
26. On the 12th June, 1 moved Northerly to the junction of Crossland Creek and the
Drysdale River. It being impossible to cross either the creek or the river near the junction,
we moved upstream along the creek for about one mile where a crossing was effected and camp
made for the night. The animals were rested on Monday, the 14th June, and in the evening further
observations were conducted.
27. On the 15th June we proceeded Westerly and then North-Westerly under the Ashton
Range and camped this night on a small creek which forms portion of the headwaters of the
Carson River. It is in this vicinity that the Carson Escarpment commences ; its height at this
point being about 70 feet above the valley floor. The Carson Valley, which visibly extended
many miles to the North, was clouded with a smoke haze, obviously the result of Native encamp-
ments or " smokes ”.
28. On the 16th and 17th June, progress was made Westwards along the Southern limits
of the Foster Range, through volcanic plain country and stony basaltic ridges. A number of
the minor watercourses still contained small pools, but it was obvious that this water would
not last more than a few weeks.
Plain Country South of the Foster Range
29. On the 18th June, we extended our activities Northerly, passing through a saddle
on the summit of the Carson-Drysdale River Divide, and came to the headwaters of a large creek
which flows Easterly to the Carson River. We camped on this creek and during the evening were
A
engaged on stellar observations JM . I have named this watercourse Laurie Creek, in honour of
A 7
Constable Laurie Shaw, who was my constant companion during seven months’ field activity.


30. During the 19th and 20th June, we continued downstream, and on the 20th camped
about 20 chains West of a basalt " wet ” waterfall, some 15 feet high, at the base of which a per-
manent pool exists. Surmounting this pool are precipitous basalt hills pocketing the creek into
a tight gorge which is known to the Aboriginals as W ongavoodoo. It is believed the English trans-
lation for this word is " Crow.”
Wongaroodoo
31. Departure from the river banks had been virtually impossible up to this time because
of the inhospitable nature of the adjacent hills ; steep-sided, rock-strewn formations over which
progress was often impossible. Nevertheless, we did negotiate them in the vicinity of Wongar-
oodoo Gorge, and proceeded Easterly to the Carson River on the 21st June, encountering the river
at a natural basalt crossing, where the downstream edge is a small " wet ” waterfall, known to
the Blacks as M oongiyarrie. The bed of the stream at the base is littered with tremendous ir-
regularly-shaped basalt boulders, and is overlooked on its East side by a sandstone scarp which
rises in places to a height of 400 feet above the river. The Survey Section later discovered Native
paintings under an overhanging ledge on the cliff face three-quarters of a mile South. About
two hours after our arrival at M oongiyarrie, we were joined by the Construction and Transport
unit, which crossed the river over the sheet basalt.
Moongiyarrie


32. The animals were spelled on Tuesday, 22nd June, and in the evening further astro-
/ 4v \
nomical observations taken. I JM I
\ AB/
33. On the 23rd June, I returned to the Survey Section by vehicle, while the Reconnais-
sance Section continued North, abreast of the motorised transport. I joined Mr. Keating’s Section
at their new campsite (about four and a half miles East of JM I , and after spending the day with
A 5 /
this party, returned to the Transport Section on the afternoon of the 24th June. To this date the
Survey Section had completed 71 miles of accurate traverse from Gibb River Station, a highly
commendable feat, their efficiency and high morale reflecting great credit on their Section Leader.
34. 1 rejoined the Reconnaissance Section on the 25th June, and then preceded the mech-
anised party Northwards along the Carson River, passing J. C. Eagleson’s Homestead on Sunday,
the 27th June.
Pool on Carson 22 miles from the coast
35. One interesting feature of this locality is that the Carson River was flowing quite
strongly in its lower reaches, but in the headwaters the surface supplies were disappearing rapidly,
A
and in the vicinity of JM had already formed into pools. Later investigation proved that the
A 8
source of these additional waters is a previously unexplored river which drains a very large area,
much of which comprises sandstone formations.
36. After passing the junction of the Carson and King Edward Rivers, we rode into Kal-
umburu Mission (located near the mouth of the King Edward River), in the late afternoon of
Monday, the 28th June, where we were warmly welcomed by the Mission Brethren.
37. The first vehicle to travel through the region from Gibb River Station to the North coast
reached the Mission on 30th June, bearing Messrs. Gattenhof and Cole, who returned immediately
to the balance of their parties located about eight miles South.
38. On Thursday, Ist July, all Construction Equipment and Transport arrived at Kalum-
buru, having completed the construction of 220 miles of track from Gibb River Station, the rapid
progress being a reflection of the enthusiasm displayed by all engaged on the project.
39. During the period 2nd to 12th July, personnel of the Transport and Construction Sec-
tions were engaged on vehicle maintenance, the bulldozer again requiring major repairs. To
effect this latter work, a mechanic and equipment had been flown from Wyndham and although the
work was initially estimated to occupy two weeks, the Public Works representative (Mr. D.
Simms), completed the task in six days. Meanwhile, Messrs. Cole and Hair returned to the Survey
Section to assist in any maintenance required on that party’s vehicles.


40. Work completed at the Mission included :
1. Stellar observations for the precise determination of Latitude and Longitude.
2. A brief and cursory examination of Napier Broome Bay, made possible by the
Rev. Father Basil Noseda, 0.5.8., who kindly took me out on the Mission
Lugger from the 4th to the 6th July for that purpose.
3. Vehicular reconnaissance to determine a crossing point of the Carson River,
with a view to constructing a loop road from near the junction of the Carson
and King Edward Rivers to the road crossing of the Drysdale River ; this road
to be as far West as possible.
4. Tentative location of the proposed King Edward route on aerial photographs.
5. Grading of runways on the Mission’s airstrip, which badly required maintenance.
6. Unloading of fuel air freighted from Wyndham.
41. Whilst the health of the party had been generally good, one of the Native plant boys
had an infected toe, and on the Flying Doctor’s orders was flown to Wyndham for treatment on
the 30th June. He was returned, by air, on the 6th July.
42. On the 6th July, Mr. Pollard was flown to Wyndham in the Flying Doctor aircraft,
having suffered a sudden and severe attack of appendicitis. He underwent a successful operation
and on the 13th July returned to the Mission, where, at the Superior’s invitation, he convalesced
for a further three weeks before rejoining the expedition on the 3rd August.
KALUMBURU TO DRYSDALE RIVER CROSSING
43. The point selected for crossing the Carson River on the loop road lay 11 miles South
of the Mission, immediately West of MooLMool Lagoon, and on Tuesday, 13th July, all personnel
and equipment of the Reconnaissance, Construction and Transport Sections assembled at this
point.
Sandstone in Jooroo Ridge


44. Because of the nature of the country to be negotiated, much of which includes sand-
stone formations, 1 decided to locate this " King Edward Track ” with the plant, and after I had
proceeded with this, Mr. J. Salmond, equipped with a horse and mule, tracked the Reconnaissance
Section and acted as a " sighter ” for the Construction equipment.
45. After passing through a small belt of volcanic plain country North of Mt. Teeming
(Oonjerol to the Aborigines), we travelled through a narrow pass under a dissected sandstone
ridge, known to the Aborigines as Jooroo (Bower Bird).
46. About seven miles West-South-West of Mt. Teeming, Aboriginal paintings were
found on the face of a sandstone boulder. The paintings were photographed, and the location
of the rock established on the appropriate aerial photograph.
Native Paintings near Jooroo Ridge
47. While travelling through the area, 1 was fortunate in securing the Aboriginal names
of a number of features, all of which are shown on my deposited plans, and which I recommend
for adoption.
48. The most noteworthy feature is M oongool Gorge, located on a small creek named
Mongonai. Surrounded by an area of broken and dissected sandstone, M oongool is a beautiful
pool, about 100 yards long, at the Eastern end of which are densely clustered Pandanus Palms
surmounted by graceful Cajuput trees.
Mongonai Creek above Moongool


Moongool Gorge
49. On its Northern and Southern sides the pool is overlooked by perpendicular sand-
stone walls, about 40 feet in height, and is fed from the Western side by M ongonai Creek, which
for some distance above the pool has cut its bed through orange tinted sandstone, the banks being
about 10 feet deep immediately above the pool. The water entering the pool descends al2 feet
fall, then runs over flat sandstone for several yards before dropping another four feet into the
pool. Within the pool are the usual forms of life common to all permanent waters of the North
Kimberley : Bream, Catfish, Perch, Crocodile, Turtle.
50. Downstream from Moongool, water occurs extensively for some distance, but the bed
of the stream is dry for several miles above its junction with the King Edward River.
51. It is noteworthy that a small quantity of water continues to cascade over the fall
throughout the entire dry season, and is indicative of the holding capacity of this sandstone country.
52. In the vicinity of Moongool, construction work had to be done to surmount a low
sandstone cliff and at this point the pack donkeys went M bush ”. Four days elapsed before
they were returned, but their absence did not impede progress, as the location of the road was
continued by foot and vehicle until the plant’s re-assembly.
53. On the 22nd July, we travelled Westerly over the Northern extremities of the Couch-
man Range, and entered sedimentary areas. The division between the basaltic and sandstone
formations is marked by necks of black soil, Gilgai areas, which are heavily grassed. The elevated
Construction Equipment near Moongool


volcanic areas in this locality are covered with Blue Grass, Sugar Grass, Spear Grass, Burdekin
and Kangaroo Grass, while predominant timbers are Box, Ironwood, Bloodwood, Cabbage Gum.
Dense growths of Cabbage Palms were seen in the elevated gullies. The soils vary in colour
between brown, red, orange and yellow, with some stony content, while the peaks alternate from
slopes covered with protruding and broken basalt formations to outcropping laterite.
54. On the 26th July, Mr. Gattenhof was driven back to Kalumburu Mission to confer
with the Commissioner of Main Roads. Natives Ned and Duncan were despatched with him
to visit the Flying Doctor : Duncan with a painful Whitlow on one finger and Ned with his pre-
viously injured toe. These boys were subsequently flown to the Native Hospital, Wyndham,
from where they were returned toMoola Bulla Station, Hall’s Creek, on the 15th August.
55. From the 23rd to 28th July, we travelled through sandy and broken sandstone country
through which progress was frequently difficult. During this period, several running creeks
were crossed, all of them being tributaries of the unexplored river.
56. On the 28th July, we were fortunate to locate at the head of a seepage flat, a narrow,
comparatively stone-free pass on to a fairly stoneless, sandy plateau. Although only 20 to 30
feet high, this plateau is abrupt-faced, and I am sure that another entry point would have been
extremely difficult to locate. After travelling about 10 miles in a South-Westerly direction from
this pass, and with deviations to avoid stony areas, we camped on the banks of the King Edward
River. At dusk, Messrs. Salmond and Head arrived at our camp in a Jeep, having pushed on ahead
of the Construction equipment, and having followed the plant’s tracks. Their purpose in coming
forward was to advise me that word had been received from Mr. Keating that a vehicle attached
to the Survey Section had been severely damaged by fire about 40 miles South of Kalumburu Mis-
sion, destroying all this Section’s stores and some minor items of equipment.
57. 1 remained at this camp on the 29th July, and after ensuring that field operations
would not be disrupted by the loss of equipment, completed arrangements, by radio conversa-
tions, with Messrs. Rust and Russ of Karunjie and Gibb River Stations respectively, for the supply
of additional pack mules and riding horses in the near future.
58. We proceeded Southerly on the 30th July, and camped this night on the head of
Crossland Creek, which for the initial three miles of its course was still trickling. It may be
noted that the point at which the water ceased running was the dividing line between the sandy
areas and volcanic soils, and from this point to its junction with the Drysdale River, some 27
miles to the East, there are no permanent surface water supplies in the stream.
59. On the 31st July, a further 10 miles of track were located East and Southerly to the
Northern edge of volcanic plains, and on Sunday, Ist August, I inspected additional country
in this locality. By the latter date the Transport and Construction groups were abreast of the
Reconnaissance Section, and as the remaining distance to the Drysdale River crossing was through
undulating basic soils, they proceeded to that point while 1 examined country to the West of their
course. After camping on the head of M eelarrie Creek, the Reconnaissance Section proceeded
to the Drysdale Crossing on Tuesday, 3rd August, where we rejoined the Transport Section, who
had arrived at this point the previous afternoon. The mileage completed by the transport in
constructing the loop road from Kalumburu Mission to the Drysdale River amounted to 140
miles, and this brought the total mileage of tracks constructed through virgin country to 420
miles, excluding 140 miles from Wyndham to Karunjie. Of these totals, 360 miles of track were
constructed through country never previously negotiated by vehicles.
60. As this work completed the construction programme and the bulldozer was incapable
of effecting the clearing of an airstrip in the vicinity of the Drysdale Crossing, steps were taken
to immediately despatch the Main Roads Department party back to Wyndham.
61. On Thursday, sth August, Mr. Keating arrived at my camp for consultations in re-
gard to the future disposition of remaining personnel and additional field activities, and on the
6th August, the Main Roads party, under Mr. H. Gattenhof, departed for Wyndham. On this
day, Messrs. Head and Salmond departed, by vehicle, for Karunjie Station, where Mr. Salmond
was to pick up eight pack mules, and on his return journey, one mule and three riding horses
from Gibb River Station. Another departure this day was that of Mr. Hair, with a 6 x 6 G.M.C.
truck, to the Survey Section, and Mr. Cole to Gibb River Station to meet the scheduled aircraft
and collect mail.
62. With the completion of the tracks, the opportunity was presented to extend our
mapping activities. Therefore, it was resolved that Mr. Keating would assume command of an
observational party of three and traverse the tracks by vehicle, taking Circum-meridian and
Almucantar observations (for Latitude and Longitude) at desirable points, the distance between


observations not to exceed 20 miles. Similarly, Mr. W. F. Johnson would be responsible for the
completion of the remaining 30 miles of the survey traverse from Gibb River Station to the North
coast, and, in addition, effect the survey of the 1,000 acre Crown Grant to the Benedictine Com-
munity at Kalumburu Mission.
63. These measures would enable me, with the Reconnaissance Section, to extend my
activities Westerly and examine a greater area of country than would be otherwise possible. A
radiogram had been despatched to the Surveyor General, requesting additional photo coverage
and I anticipated the arrival of these within several days.
64. Upon the return of Mr. Salmond with the additional animals, I included him in the
Reconnaissance Section, and the disposition of the expedition was ;
1. Reconnaissance Section :
Self.
Constable L. E. Shaw.
Mr. J, A. Salmond.
Native Wallis.
2. Observation Section :
Messrs. J. V. Keating .. Second-in-Command and Section Leader.
D. J. Pollard .. Draftsman and Computer.
T. E. Cole.
3. Survey Section :
Messrs. \V. F. Johnson .. Section Leader.
I. K. Head ~ Draftsman.
F. L. Swider .. Field Assistant.
E. Granville .. Field Assistant.
A. V. Proudfoot .. Field Assistant.
S. R. Hair ~ Field Assistant.
65. On the 11th August, Messrs. Keating and Cole departed for the Survey Section’s
camp to complete the re-organisation of personnel, and on the 14th August, Mr. Head returned
from Gibb River Station with the required aerial photographs. Arrangements were completed
immediately for Messrs. Head and Pollard to travel North and join the main body, while Con-
stable Shaw, Wallis and myself prepared to move West.
66. This spell on the Drysdalc River had vastly improved the condition of the animals.
Considering their poor condition when we left Karunjie, they had stood up to the gruelling con-
ditions of the last three months remarkably well ; particularly when it is realised that we had
been unable to spell any of the horses from riding.
EXAMINATION OF WOODHOUSE, WEST DRYSDALE RIVER, KING EDWARD AND
CARSON RIVER AREAS
67. We left the Drysdale Crossing on Monday, 16th August, and travelled Westerly
through Spinifex-clad sand and sandy gravel ridges with intermittent sandstone, camping this
night on the head of a small tributary of the Woodhouse River, which, due to its proximity to
outcropping sandstone, was still trickling.
68. After travelling South and crossing the Woodhouse River, we camped on the Drys-
dale River on the 17th August, and then proceeded Westerly through sand and broken sandstone
country on the 18th August, when we again intersected, and camped on, the Drysdale. More
Native drawings were located this day, and in the vicinity of our camp a large number of old
Native " wet ” camps were seen. Such camps had been sighted frequently on the Drysdale and
its tributaries, including the Woodhouse River.
69. The Drysdale River at this point flows in a number of Pandanus-lined channels and
was flowing quite freely, although at our previous camp it had formed into independent pools.
70. We proceeded upstream past some excellent pools for about one and a half miles,
and then travelled Northerly and North-Easterly through broken and dissected sandstone forma-
tions, containing frequent gorges and intermittent sandy areas, the latter always having a top
cover of Spinifex and a wide occurrence of Cockatoo Grass.
71. The Woodhouse River was crossed on the 20th August, and immediately North of this
point our course took us through areas of tumbled and disjointed sandstone, dissected by gorges,
for about two miles. Thence we travelled under the lee of a sandstone hill through sandy country


until we arrived at the junction of two creeks, which are tributaries of the Woodhouse River.
During the latter course, 1 was able to observe bearings to a high bluff-faced hill which is known
to the Blacks as Oowal. The intersection of the creeks is known to the Aboriginals as Daivrra,
and the interpretation for this word in " Opossum At this point permanent pools up to
100 yards in length exist in the stream, the depth of water being about five feet. Fish, crocodile
and turtle are plentiful and the surface of the water is covered by attractively coloured lilies.
Large Ironwood Tree between Woodhouse and Drysdale Rivers
72. On Sunday, the 22nd August, we continued North-Easterly and crossed the extreme
headwaters of the King Edward River, which at this point comprises a long, boggy, timber-free
flat extending for several miles. Continuing on this course through sand and broken sandstone
for a further five and a half miles, we again crossed the King Edward and camped. The stream
was now flowing freely and commencing to form into long pools, from which Wallis extracted
a number of excellent fish. Several of the Bream caught here weighed approximately three pounds.
73. On the 23rd August, we proceeded about four miles to, and camped on, the head of
Crossland Creek at the same spot occupied by us on the 30th July. At 4.30 p.m., Mr. Salmond,
accompanied by one native from Gibb River Station, rode into camp with the nine mules
and three horses from Karunjie and Gibb River Stations. He was followed an hour later by
Mr. Granville who arrived by vehicle from Mr. Johnson’s camp near Kalumburu Mission.
74. Mr. Granville departed for Gibb River Station on the 24th August, conveying the
station boy home. The boy showed some concern about riding in a vehicle.
75. We remained at this camp pending Mr. Granville’s return from Gibb River with mail,
which he did on the 26th August. Mr. Granville then immediately proceeded North to the other
Sections.


Rough Broken Sandstone North of Woodhouse River
Dawrra
76. On the 27th August, we proceeded North-Easterly through country composed of later-
xte and sandstone-capped mesas, undulating gravelly ridges, and basic soil flats, and camped on
a rapidly diminishing small pool located at the head of a basalt based creek, which runs South
into Crossland Creek.
77. On the 28th August, we proceeded across volcanic soils for about two miles before
entering laterite range country, which carries excellent pasture in the basaltic valleys. After
crossing the range our path lay through loamy soils heavily grassed, intersected by low gravelly
ridges. After negotiating a black soil flat at the head of a creek, the topography changed to spini-
fex-clad sand and broken stone. Water was located in this vicinity and we camped at a spot
known as Gnamoongie to the Aboriginals. The interpretation of this word is " Old Woman ”.
78. We continued Easterly on Sunday, 29th August, and passed through sand and sandy
gravelly soil, which changed to undulating laterite ridges, with frequent knobby hills covered by
outcropping ironstone. A number of small, dry gullies were crossed, the majority of which
contained an ironstone base. After riding nine miles, we descended steep laterite slopes and
intersected a creek just above a sandstone gorge. The gully contained a pocket of excellent feed
and several small but permanent lagoons. I have named this watercourse Abandon Creek to
perpetuate the turning loose of an aged horse which was unable to travel efficiently. This horse
was suffering from extreme age and his teeth were worn down ; furthermore, he was scouring


badly. It was regrettable that he had been forwarded to me for field use, as his extreme age and
consequent feebleness had prevented any use being made of him. The only service he had per-
formed during our activities was that of a pack horse for the initial two weeks after our departure
from Karunjie.
79. Both above and below the gorge the country opens into undulating volcanic areas
devoid of permanent surface waters. To the East the igneous area comprises ridges of Gibba
or broken stone, basaltic hills, and excellent flats with a high grazing potential. After traversing
similar country for four miles, 1 turned North-East and after re-crossing the dry bed of Abandon
Creek, proceeded through sand and outcropping sandstone for two and a half miles before camping
on the banks of a sandstone-lined creek, containing long, shallow pools of water,
80. Travelling parallel to this creek, we moved Easterly on the 30th August, through
sandy formations, intersected by one small, well-grassed, black soil area. Six miles from the
previous night’s camp, and on the same creek, we came upon the spectacle of a magnificent sand-
stone gorge and " wet ” waterfall several hundred feet in height. Viewed in the dry season, this
formation presents something of the following appearance :
81. Some 10 chains above the waterfall is a permanent pool, about 70 yards wide, fringed
by Pandanus Palms, and from this point forward, the bed of the creek is sheet sandstone with
water-worn holes up to 10 and 20 feet in depth. During the wet season the water rushes over
a series of perpendicular drops, each several feet high, the bed being littered with huge sandstone
slabs. On the sides of increasing vertical walls are water-worn caverns where old, but barely
discernible, native paintings were seen. Next a sheer drop of about 80 feet occurs, at the base
of which is a permanent pool with abrupt sandstone walls overlooking it. The stream now
turns a complete right angle to the South and falls about 200 feet to another pool on the valley
floor, then flows East, and after a distance of 10 chains, turns and flows Northerly through a tight,
perpendicular-walled sandstone gorge which commences about three-quarters of a mile South
of the fall. This gorge presented a picture of sheer multi-coloured walls from which, with the
assistance of binoculars, water could be seen percolating. At the foot of this formation the creek
winds its way in a blue ribbon of water, surmounted by tall white gums and stately Cajuputs.
1 was unable to spend sufficient time at the fall to descend the gorge and assess the true height
of this feature, as I had an appointment to meet three members of the C.5.1.R.0. who had recently
entered the area.
Bed of Creek above Waterfall
82; After passing the Southern end of the gorge, our forward course lay in a South-Easterly
direction through sandy country, which, after about three and a half miles, included broken sand-
stone. In this locality Native paintings were found on the face of a number of over-hanging
rocks, and the large number of old camp fires under these shelters indicated its popularity. A
bundle of spears, from which the heads had been broken, were found on a ledge under a mushroom-
shaped rock. I learnt subsequently from another Black that a buck and his gin had been in this
area when we rode through, but on seeing us had become terrified and fled into the bush, leaving
their possessions behind.


83. We continued South-Easterly through stone which was increasing in density, and,
in common with similar localities, was distorted into a number of weird shapes. After passing
through a narrow, rough gorge, we emerged on the brink of a sandstone formation, and looked
down on a dark ribbon of green, representing the Carson River, several hundred feet below us.
Pool at Base of Main Fall
84. At this point a basaltic range of hills occurs between the river and the escarpment
to the East, and I have named the most prominent peak Gattenhof Hill, after Mr. H. Gattenhof
of the Mam Roads Department. The panorama of hills beyond the river valley was most
spectacular, the colours varying from dark brown, chocolate, gold, green, black, red and blue :
representing burnt areas, soils, grasses, timber, protruding basalt and sandstone.
85. Our descent to the watercourse was made over vast areas of slippery sheet sandstone,
much of which was dissected by jump-ups two or three feet in height. As the sheet stone ex-
tended to the river bed, we travelled about 30 chains upstream to a small pocket of loam where
we camped. This spot is known to the Aboriginals as Cheringoomerie, while the hill immediately
on the East is named Coodimirrie. In places this watercourse consists of several channels, each
lined with masses of Pandanus Palms, vines and bamboo, with dense foliage overhead. It may
be noted that the road has been constructed under the escarpment about four miles East of the
river, the intervening rough basaltic hills extending to the stream’s edge.
Gorge Running North from Waterfall


Bed of the Carson River near Woorakin Creek
86 On the 31st August, we moved about 10 miles down the Carson River to our pre-
A
viously arranged rendezvous with the Commonwealth party one mile North of JM. The coun-
Al 2
try traversed on the West side of the Carson River was initially of a sedimentary nature changing
to undulating volcanics with loamy flats and basalt strewn hillsides in the vicinity of Wooralan
Creek (Aboriginal). As indicated previously, the basaltic hills on the East side of the river are
A
particularly rough, but terminate in the vicinity of JM where the track runs along a narrow
Al 2
plain between the river and sandstone escarpment.
87. The personnel of the Commonwealth party appeared at the rendezvous about two
hours after our arrival and comprised N. H. Speck (Ecologist C.5.1.R.0.), M. Lazari es ( as
ture Botanist- C.5.1.R.0.), R. A. Patterson (Beef Cattle Economist-Bureau of Agricultural
Economics). They were accompanied by J. B. Ritson, Agricultural Adviser to the East Kim-
berley and North Kimberley, of the Department of Agriculture, Perth. This Section s arrival
was coincidental with that of Mr. J. Harms, Geologist, of 8.H.P., Ltd., and his Assistant, r.
J. Stuart, who were the first private personnel to negotiate the constructed tracks.
88. Equipped with two vehicles supplied by this Department, and the Department of
the Army, the Commonwealth party had left Wyndham on the 26th August, and proceeded
North from Gibb River on the 28th August. They returned to Gibb River about the 11th Sep-
tember and then returned to Wyndham.
89. Upon completion of our discussions, the Commonwealth party continued Northerly
on the Ist September. During this and the following day 1 proceeded with routine work, in-
cluding the examination of aerial photographs to determine the future activities of the Recon-
naissance Section. No advantage was to be gained in travelling Westerly from this point, as the
rough volcanic range to our immediate West only gave way to dissected sandstone formations,
all of which would provide extremely rough travelling for the plant. Arrangements were also
concluded, by radio, for a vehicle to pick me up 11 miles North of this point on Saturday, 4th
September, and transport me to Kalumburu Mission to confer with Mr. Johnson ; then convey
me to Gibb River Station to meet the Surveyor General of Western Australia, who had
finalised plans to visit the area.
90. While riding down the Carson Valley on the 3rd September, we traversed broken
country ; areas of red soil and frequent low basalt ridges. Where free of stone, excellent pasture
was seen and. in places, isolated black soil pockets were of high order. Travelling under the
lee of the escarpment, we passed a point on the bluff which bears a remarkable similarity to a
man’s features, and 1 have named the protrusion Face Point.


91. Camp was made on the West bank of the Carson River in a spot overlooked by an
egg-shaped rock on top of the cliff. This rock is known to the Blacks as Larryoo and is involved
in one of their dream time ” stories. Sheet basalt in the river bed at this point had been used
for a road crossing. About four miles West-South-West of Larryoo is a prominent double hill
by the Aboriginals. I have named this feature Mt. Keating in honour
of Mr. J. V. Keating Second-in-Command of the expedition. During this day’s journey, it was
increasingly evident that the level of water in pools on the Carson River was rapidly diminishing
as the dry season lengthened. In the late afternoon, Mr. Granville arrived at this camp in the
vehicle to convey me to Kalumburu Mission.
Wonjarring near Larryoo
4,h W* u M i? nV ‘ e and , 1 ac /° mp f nied b V Native Wallis, travelled to the Mission on the
4th September. The remainder of the day I spent with Mr. Johnson on work connected with
I 4 r'T y u CCt T S f C '' Vlt ' eS ’ and on the m ° rnin s: of Sunday, the sth September, he and I travel-
led to the abandoned Pago Mission site and established certain identifiable features on the aerial
comp°Sn S ’ f ° connections were required from the survey traverse, now nearing its
VISIT BY SURVEYOR GENERAL
, 93 ‘ 1 de P arted from Kalumburu Mission at 1.30 p.m. and with Wallis, travelled via
the King Edward route to Gibb River Station, where we arrived at 7 a.m. on the 7th September.
About 1 p m. on the same day, the Surveyor General (Mr. W. V. Fyfe), accompanied by Mr. L
bv°afrcraft L'r at, ° n Branch of Government Instructional Films, arrived at Gibb River
y ircratt. Mr. Goodall s purpose in accompanying the Surveyor General was to photograph
C ° ndUCted *** eXpediti °" a " d S ° d “« a "


94. After enjoying further hospitality from Mr. and Mrs. Russ, Messrs. Fyfe, Goodall
and I travelled North, taking Wallis with us, and on the Bth September camped the night at the
Drysdale Crossing. Following an examination of M erringa (Aboriginal), a most unusual Pan-
danus covered black soil spring located a few miles North-West of the Crossing, we proceeded
along the Carson route and met the Commonwealth party South of Crossland Creek. This
Section was now returning South, and after some discussion we continued North, camping at
A
a pool on the Carson River, alongside JM survey post. Known to the Blacks as Wongahvarra,
103 M
the pool lies immediately West of the escarpment paintings previously located by the Survey
Section.
Merringa
95. On Friday, the 10th September, half a day was spent with Messrs. Shaw and Salmond,
who were awaiting my return at Larryoo, and at 9.45 p.m., we arrived at the survey camp at Kalum-
buru Mission. At the invitation of the Principal, Messrs. Fyfe, Goodall and I stayed at the Mission
for the next four days. During our journey North, Mr. Goodall filmed the activities of the Com-
monwealth and Reconnaissance Sections and also secured photographs of many natural features.
On the 11th and 13th September, he'secured photographs of the Survey and Transport Sections,
and on Sunday, the 12th September, we visited M oongool Gorge.
96. The plane to convey the Surveyor General to Wyndham had been delayed, but finally
took off at 6.20 a.m. on the 15th September, bearing Mr. Fyfe and Messrs. Goodall and F. L.
Swider. Mr. Swider, who was a member of the Survey Section throughout the season, had been
suffering abdominal pains for several days, and had been the recipient of Penicillin injections.
On arrival at the Wyndham Hospital, his illness was diagnosed as Appendicitis, but owing to the
severity of his recent attack, an operation was not performed immediately. Instead Mr. Swider
was flown to Perth where he underwent a successful operation.
EXAMINATION OF NORTHERN AREAS, DRYSDALE RIVER, DAMPER CREEK,
CHAPMAN RIVER, KARUNJIE STATION
97. The visit by the Surveyor General had permitted me to report on the progress made
to date ; prospective future movements ; and discuss with him, in the area, aspects affecting
the future development of the region. In the meantime all the required field work had been
completed by the Survey and Transport Sections, and the last South-bound vehicle left Kalumburu
on the 15th September. On this day I rejoined the Reconnaissance Section at Larryoo, whence
I proposed to examine additional areas before returning to Karunjie Station. To facilitate the
operations of this Section, I seconded Mr. W. F. Johnson to its strength, and was joined by
him on the 16th September.
98. It had been resolved that all transport was to leave the region before early " wet ”
seasonal rains could impede its progress, and to this end, the vehicles and personnel assembled
at Gibb River Station. Under the control of Mr. Keating, the convoy left Gibb on the 22nd


September, arriving in Wyndham on the 24th September. Upon completion of boundary survey
work at Wyndham, the party proceeded South on the 29th September, and arrived in Perth on
the Bth October, the long journey being completed without incident.
99. The Reconnaissance Section moved Westwards on Saturday, the 18th September,
and until the 26th September, was engaged on widespread examination of a major watercourse
which flows into the Carson about five miles North-North-West of Larryoo, the junction being
known to the Blacks as Moorello. Although its existence had been known from the study of
aerial photographs, it had not been traversed previously, and I was able to prove conclusively
that this river supplied the main waters of the Carson.
100. This river, with its tributaries, drains an area of about 1,000 square miles which
is largely of a sedimentary nature, with resulting areas of sand and dissected sandstone. However,
in its Northern and Western extremities heavy soils occur and include the greatest extent of black
soil 1 encountered in the North Kimberley. These plains are comparatively narrow and relatively
small in area, consisting of pockets between basalt ranges and sedimentary areas, all of which
are clearly indicated on my classification sheets. The tributaries of this river contain excellent
supplies of permanent fresh water ; extensive pools are frequent in its main bed and small creeks
near the headwaters were still trickling. Throughout its length the river is lined with excellent
stands of Cajuput trees, a very dense grove occurring between N oachitty Rapids and Wollan-
gooyoo Pool.
River Pool West of Palmoondoora
101. Native paintings were found in the vicinity of N oachitty but the majority were
very faded ; their position has been clearly established on the aerial photographs. Different
in design to previous paintings, they were clear in detail and indicated artistic ability by the painter.
102. Our camp on the 25th September was at the end of a one and a half mile long pool,
three miles West of M oondoalnee, and on Sunday, the 26th September, we travelled Northerly
into the volcanic range running parallel to the river. During our traverses of the past eight days,
Native grass fires or " smokes ” were particularly frequent, the flames from several of them being
clearly discernible at night, and caused some concern when our night camps were in overgrown
areas.
103. After crossing a three-quarter mile flat, we ascended the very steep face of the range,
about 570 feet high, and found undulating country with a number of small mesas surmounting
the topography. The upper surface of these mesas, or table tops, was invariably covered with
laterite and sandstone, and timbered with Messmate, while the side slopes and undulating plateau
were composed of gravel and broken down basalt, the predominant timbers being Grey Box and
Cabbage Gum. We descended through rough stone to an elevated, extensive valley in which
the basic soil was dark brown in colour and clayey in texture. Within a dry creek bed several
permanent billabongs exist, the most prominent being named Y oorawai (Aboriginal), and at this
spot we camped. To the East of Y oorawai is a creek junction known to the Aboriginals as Mer-
rinjie : formerly a gathering spot for tribes and the settling of disputes ; usually by spear fighting.


Basaltic Range South of Mt. Leeming
104. On the 27th September, we continued North-East and after traversing the valley
for four and a half miles climbed through a saddle in the hills and negotiated another fold before
again ascending the summit of the basaltic plateau, which contained shallow and limited depres-
sions carrying excellent pasture between the peaks.
105. We made a further descent into a deep valley and passed down a particularly rough
and steep basalt formation, the side slopes being, in places over 30 degrees. The valley floor
contained patches of red and brown loams carrying first class pasture between sheet basalt, but
in the vicinity of the creek and ridges, the ground was very stony. Within the creek bed we
located a slime-covered permanent billabong, and because of the absence of water on the ad-
jacent hills, were forced to camp on it. In addition, Constable Shaw was experiencing a bout
of fever, but with the assistance of Sulphur drugs, was strong enough to carry on after a spell of
two days, when we moved to better water. This spell was also appreciated by the animals who
were all weary and footsore after the rough travelling we had experienced.
106. A distance of 12 miles lay between us and the Carson River and on the 30th Septem-
ber we proceeded Easterly, having first to ascend a steep sided stony formation on which Sago
Palms provided a variety in vegetation. The country encountered was similar to that negotiated
on preceding days, and, as anticipated, the final two and a half miles descent to the Carson Valley
Sago Palms in Volcanic Range eight miles South of Mt. Leeming


was most unpleasant. Here we were again confronted by huge masses of protruding and sheet
basalt occurring on side slopes of 20 and 30 degrees. The two mile plain between the foot of
the range and the Carson contained red loam and black soil areas, all heavily grassed.
107. We camped on the same site occupied by this Section on the 26th June, but on this
occasion the water supplies in the river were greatly reduced. For instance, the river bed at this
locality contained only two small pools of water six inches deep where previously it had been
a running stream. Similarly, a large billabong on the East side which had been full in June was
now completely dry. The ground showed traces of recent light rain which coincided with in-
dications in the range the previous day. For some time we had been travelling under skies fre-
quently overcast and these had afforded us welcome relief from the burning rays of the sun. During
several evenings we experienced the sound and sight of tremendous electrical disturbances occur-
ring in adjacent localities, but though threatened by rain, we had received no falls of consequence.
108. On Friday, the Ist October, we travelled North-East to the Drysdale River, the
initial stage being across basic soils and the latter over sandy clays. Our intersection of the Drysdale
occurred in the Southern region of the Barton Plain, which in this locality comprised undulating
stony basalt ridges. Our camp for the succeeding two days was on a sandy patch of the dry por-
tion of the river bed. During this period electrical storms were prevalent, and although rain could
be seen falling to every point of the compass, we did not receive any.
109. The bed of the Drysdale at this point was sheet basalt and although the pools were
extensive, the depth of water was not greater than 12 inches. To the East of the river, and not
far distant, a high sandstone scarp could be seen running parallel to it.
110. After a late start on the 4th October, we travelled South-East for six miles through
undulating volcanics, and camped again in the bed of the Drysdale, from where I proposed travel-
ling on the West side. The dry portion of the river bed contained a growth of pale green-grey
leafed stunted Cajuputs, and as we proceeded we found them to be a common feature of this
watercourse. This spot was the starting point of a pool extending about six miles upstream,
and the escarpment on the East was adjacent to the river shelf, which would be flooded during the
wet.
111. On the sth October we continued Southerly, and after negotiating sand formations
for six miles, crossed to the East side of the river under a jutting portion of the bluff. The country
on the West side was now barred by an abrupt sandstone cliff which was the prolongation of
the Carson Escarpment, and in travelling on the East side we were able to traverse a pocket of
alluvial sandy clay and sandy ridges. Two and a half miles South of our fording spot, we again
crossed the Drysdale where it oxbows to the East through a tight, precipitous sandstone gorge,
the walls rising to a height of about 250 feet. The Northern or Eastern bank consists of a sandy
ridge about 40 feet high which falls sharply to a dry, sandy bed 15 chains wide, before encounter-
ing a two chain Cajuput lined channel of water overlooked by the bluff. Having crossed the
river, our only possibility of surmounting the plateau lay in negotiating a tight, boulder-strewn
Bed of Drysdale River. Sandstone Bluff in Background


gorge with perpendicular walls, and after a somewhat intrepid journey, we finally arrived on
the broken sandstone and sandy surface of the tableland. The chances of an animal breaking
a limb had never been remote during this ascent.
112. We travelled a further mile before commencing the descent to the river, the journey
being completed, for the greater part, through a narrow, stony gulch. After locating a suitable
crossing point of the Drysdale, we camped in a stony area devoid of good pasture, but which
overlooked a fine pool, alongside which we found a Native paper-bark raft. A large creek from
the South-East flows into the Drysdale about one and a half miles East of our camp, and I have
named this stream Johnson Creek, after Cadet Surveyor W. F. Johnson.
Drysdale River near Johnson Creek 48 miles from the Coast
113. Having crossed the river to its Southern bank, we proceeded South-West on the
6th October and covered three miles before intersecting the Drysdale again. After riding down-
stream for one and a half miles to avoid the disjointed sandstone ford which had confronted
us when we first encountered the river, we crossed to the West side and then continued South-
South-West through sand formations with occasional outcropping sandstone. We camped on
a creek traversed by Surveyor Crossland in 1901, the location being about 5 and a half miles East-
South-East of Larryoo. About one and a half miles East of our camp a conical shale peak sur-
mounted a sandstone bluff, and 1 have named this feature Wallis Peak after Native Wallis, who
rendered loyal and valuable service throughout the season. During the latter few hours of this
day’s riding thunderstorms had been monotonously frequent, but we received only one light
shower of rain. The ground in the vicinity of the spot selected for our camp was wet to a depth
of two inches, and indicated that rain had fallen about an hour before our arrival.
114. The bluff referred to in the previous paragraph rises about 200 feet above the flat
and runs along the East bank of the creek upon which we had camped.
115. We travelled up the West side of this creek on the 7th October, the stream contain-
ing a ribbon of water which was bordered by Pandanus Palms, Grevilleas and 40 feet Cajuputs.
After crossing the head of this creek, we encountered a second stream from the South-South-
West which was overlooked on its East side by another steep sided bluff. Camp was made on
4v
a small pool in this creek bed, in the vicinity of C, but I could not locate this marked tree. The
39
immediate area carries a fine stand of Cajuputs and White Gums, with some very large Woolybutts.
We had encountered drizzling rain at the commencement of this day’s journey, and had been
sheltered from the sun all day by heavily overcast skies which resolved into a brief drizzle by the
early evening.
116. The country encountered during the last two days had comprised the usual sedi-
mentary formations : sand, sandy gravel with occasional outcropping sandstone, all clad with
spinifex and some Sorghum. In the vicinity of the creek good feed existed, but on an average
did not extend beyond a chain of the banks.


117. We continued Southerly on the Bth October, and after travelling eight miles, ascended
the 250 feet bluff, and from there travelled South-East to the Drysdale River. Immediately after
scaling the cliff face we encountered brief squally rain and heavy downpours, which later subsided
to intermittent light showers. About 50 per cent, of the last six miles had been through useless
broken sandstone, and the remainder through sand formations, finally finding ourselves on a
70 feet sandstone ridge overlooking a lovely pool which extended North. After negotiating
an area of rough, broken sandstone, we travelled South-East and camped on a heavily grassed
alluvial flat adjacent to a large pool about 20 chains wide.
Pool in Drysdale River 85 miles from its Mouth
118. Our initial stage on the 9th October was through sandy gravel country and Pindan
Cajuput flats, after which we gradually descended through a mile of broken sandstone ridges.
From this point our course lay through spinifex-clad sandy areas until the Drysdale was crossed
to its East bank six and a half miles South of our starting point. Travelling South-South-West
we passed through sandstone areas and crossed Damper Creek just above its junction with the
Drysdale River, the bed of the stream at this point being quite shallow and composed of broken
flat sandstone. A little North of Damper Creek we passed over Oogalanoongoo, an area of flat,
bare sandstone, on which flat slabs of stone have been placed in a perpendicular position, and
in other cases, heaped together to form low pyramid-like structures. This appears to have re-
presented a " Debil-Debil ” locality to the old inhabitants.
Oogalanoongoo


119. Continuing Southerly, we passed through alternating areas of gravelly sand, sandy
clay Pindan flats, sand, sand and outcropping sandstone, a 50 feet sandstone jump-up, and sand,
A
finally camping on a small pool in Damper Creek, about 12 miles East-South-East of JM.
A 6
120. On Sunday, the 10th October, we traversed about 13 miles Southerly, encountering
similar country to that experienced the previous day, and camped again on Damper Creek on
one of its last isolated waters. Fresh tracks of cleanskin cattle were sighted but we were unable
to locate the animals.
121. About 10 chains North of our camp Native markings were found on the flat sand-
stone bed of Damper Creek. These marks which are illustrated in an attached sketch have been
chiselled into the stone, giving smooth groovings, and appear to have been expertly executed.
Native Rock Markings—Damper Creek
122. The uppermost marking, is about five yards in length, while the lower five markings
appear to have been approximately 20 yards long. In the latter case, the bottom ends have been
partially obliterated by the erosion of sections of the stone, which is an indication of their ex*
treme age. Further evidence that this may have been an old ceremonial ground is indicated by
the presence of a number of slabs of sandstone buried vertically in the ground in the immediate
vicinity of the creek.
123. 1 was unable to determine the significance of these markings and it is quite possible
that their meaning has been lost.
124. Travelling East of South on the 11th October, we proceeded about 13 and a half
miles through sand, gravelly sand, minor Pindan areas and intermittent outcropping sandstone,
this country being quite suitable for stock-raising. Thence for two miles through coarse gravel
and broken sandstone before travelling down a well-watered creek for about one mile.
125. Here we were delighted to find some cleanskin cattle and as a result ate our first meal
of fresh beef for some time. Owing to the scarcity of game, our meals of crocodile eggs, kangaroo,
fish and emu had been all too rare.
126. The stream on which we camped joins Ellenbrae Creek about half a mile downstream
and although the spelling of the larger watercourse indicates Scottish derivation, the pronunciation
closely resembles the Aboriginal name. We proceeded East-South-East from our over-night camp,
travelling parallel to Ellenbrae Creek for several miles. For some distance a bluff-faced shale
and sandstone scarp runs parallel to, and about three quarters of a mile distant from, the South
bank. The intervening area contains shale and sandy clay soils, numerous small anthills and is
covered with Cotton Wool, Grevillea and stunted Paperbark, while the areas to the North of
the creek comprise sandy flats ascending to a sandstone ridge. Beyond the point where the bluff


swings South the country changes from shale and red and brown clays, carrying Cockatoo Grass
and Sorghums, to Spinifex-covered sand, where Bao-bab or Bottle trees re-appear. In the vicinity
of permanent water on Ellenbrae Creek, Bauhinia trees were observed, this timber being com-
paratively alien to the Northern region.
Shale and Sandstone Hill with Adjacent Flat near Ellenbrae Creek
127. After crossing a South-Western tributary of Ellenbrae Creek, we travelled South-
East and East-South-East over sand and gravelly sand plain country, enclosed between high sand-
stone scarps, and in which Yellow Box and Ironbark were quite common. We finally inter-
cepted another tributary of Ellenbrae Creek, and upon the location of water, camped. The
width of this creek between levee banks is five chains, and is lined with Bauhinia, Cajuput and
White Gum.
128. On the 13th October, we travelled East-South-East, and after several miles ascended
a 480 feet sandstone scarp which presented a wonderful view of the country to the North. Pro-
ceeding South-South-East, we descended through broken sandstone before entering sand formations.
The remainder of our day’s journey to the Chapman River, immediately West of its junction
with Centipede Creek, was completed without incident, the majority of the country being of a sandy
nature with a few dissecting Pindan-Cajuput and Grey Box flats. Little sandstone was encoun-
tered although we had travelled abreast of several hills and one bluff. During the night we ex-
perienced a light fall of rain.
Looking North from Scarp 26 miles N.N.W. of Karunjie Homestead. Wades Bluff in Distance


129. After crossing the Chapman River on Thursday, the 14th October, we travelled
South-Easterly through broken sedimentary formations until we crossed the Durack River at
Donkey Crossing, and after a further one and a half hours, arrived at Karunjie Station, where
we were warmly welcomed by Mr. D. Rust. The total distance covered by the plant from the
time of its departure from Karunjie Station until its return was approximately 1,400 miles.
Camp near Centipede Creek
CONCLUSION OF FIELD ACTIVITIES
130. Despite the continuous travelling and the hard conditions to which they were fre-
quently subjected, the plant returned to Karunjie in better condition than when we had first de-
parted from this point, although, as was to be expected, they were very leg-weary. The addi-
tional animals supplied by Messrs. Rust and Russ had proved invaluable, for without them we
were sorely pressed.
131. Mention must here be made of Constable Laurie Shaw who gave sterling service,
and it was due to his constant vigilance and care that the plant performed so ably. He volun-
tarily undertook the menial duties of camp life, and was largely responsible for the first-class
condition of our equipment at the completion of the seasonal activities.
132. To Messrs. J. (Scotty) Salmond and Warren Johnson, who were transferred to this
Section during the season, I would like to express my appreciation for the manner in which they,
too, gave their loyal and whole-hearted support to ensure the success of this venture ; on numer-
ous occasions under trying conditions. A veteran of the Kimberley, Mr. Salmond was able to
impart much valuable information from his years of experience and wonderful store of know-
ledge.
133. The plant boys had performed ably, the outstanding personality being Wallis, who
accompanied us during the entire season. A tracker on loan from the Police Department, Wallis
conducted his duties as head boy with commendable energy and loyalty. He also acted as in-
terpreter on many occasions, and was of tremendous assistance in determining the Aboriginal
names of a large number of features.
134. From the 15th to the 18th October, all equipment was packed, accounts finalised,
and arrangements made for the return of the animals to Gibb River and Moola Bulla Stations.
The saddlery was transported to Wyndham by a truck which had conveyed stores to Karunjie.
135. On Tuesday, the 19th October, Messrs. Johnson, Shaw and Native Wallis, ac-
companied me to Wyndham by charter aircraft, this same aircraft having conveyed two stock
boys from Moola Bulla to Karunjie to take the plant back to that point. Mr. J. Salmond re-
mained at Karunjie Station.
136. On the 20th and 21st October, I was actively engaged in Wyndham on the completion
of business, incidental to the disbanding of the expedition.
137. On Friday, the 22nd October, Mr. Shaw returned to Perth by aircraft, and Mr. John-
son and 1 left Wyndham by vehicle for Derby, where we arrived on the morning of Wednesday,
the 27th October, having travelled via the Kimberley Research Station, Ord River, Nicholson and


Moola Bulla Stations. A day was spent at Moola Bulla, finalising arrangements for the storage
and maintenance of pack bags and pack saddles : and payment was effected for the hire of pack
donkeys used by the expedition, which were owned by Station Natives.
138. After completion of arrangements for the transport by sea, of our vehicle from
Derby to Fremantle, Mr. Johnson and I returned to Perth by aircraft on Thursday, the 28th Oct-
ober, just one week short of seven calendar months since my departure.
ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE EXPEDITION
139. Broadly speaking, the achievements of the expedition may be summarised
as follows :
1. An examination of about 15,000 square miles to determine the possibility of
pastoral development. From the data gathered and by air photo, interpretation,
about 17,000 square miles have been classified.
2. An accurate survey traverse from the Northern extremity of settlement (Gibb
River Station) to the North coast, about 189 miles distant.
3. A number of astronomical observations for the precise determination of Latitude
and Longitude to permit accurate mapping of the area.
4. Construction of about 420 miles of access track through virgin country.
5. Additional data was collected by two members of the Land Research and Regional
Survey Section of the C.5.1.R.0., and one member of the Bureau of Agricul-
tural Economics, during a visit to the area in early September. The information
gathered by this party is now being used to provide a scientific report on the
region.
140. One mile to the inch mosaics (reproduced from aerial photographs) lodged in the
Plan Room, Department of Lands and Surveys, Perth, show detailed information resulting from
the expedition’s work. This includes :
1. All traverses made by the Reconnaissance Section.
2. A pastoral assessment of about 17,000 square miles, showing the area embraced
by varying soil types, grasses, timbers, rock frequency, etc. This broad classi-
fication should not be confused with a scientific report being prepared by officers
of the Commonwealth Government.
3. The position of the standard survey traverse.
4. The position of astrafixes (i.e., Astronomical Observations for the precise de-
termination of Latitude and Longitude).
5. The constructed tracks (420 miles).
6. Location of Native paintings and markings.
7. The names of topographical features which are recommended for the approval
of the Surveyor General and the Nomenclature Committee.
8. Proposed reservations for public purposes.
9. Recommended pastoral lease boundaries.
10. Proposed stock routes.
RECONNAISSANCE PROCEDURE
141. All mounted traverses throughout the region were done in conjunction with aerial
photographs which were oriented by observing the compass bearing between at least two identi-
fiable ground features. The proposed route for each day was selected after a precise stereo-
scopic study of the photographs, and the bearing and distance of each course deduced therefrom.
142. A daily diary was kept, in which was recorded the time of departure from each
starting point and a full description noted of all changes in topography, together with the times
at which these changes were encountered. The intermediate distances were estimated by the
speed at which the animals travelled. When in the vicinity of watercourses, hills, and other
identifiable landmarks, our relative positions were checked on the photos, so that a complete
and accurate record exists of the paths taken. This accumulated information provides an ac-
curate description of " photo, patterns ”, thus facilitating an accurate classification by photo,
interpretation. During our field activities, every photo, pattern was traversed at least once, so
that no confusion exists.
143. Relative heights of features were obtained by Aneroid Barometers ; and weather
conditions, together with atmospheric temperatures, were recorded whenever possible.


144. However, these factors, together with others affecting the region, will be dealt with
more fully in succeeding discussions.
RESOURCES OF THE NORTH KIMBERLEY
DESCRIPTION AND CLASSIFICATION
145. The remote North Kimberley area, which lies at the extreme North-Western tip of
our Continent, includes about 30,000 square miles of country uninhabited by whites. Commonly
referred to in the Kimberley as " Over the Range ”, its previous seclusion from pastoral settle-
ment may be attributed to the existence of natural barriers of rough sandstone ranges to its South-
West and South-East, and until early this century, the large number of Natives who inhabited
the region would have undoubtedly resulted in losses of cattle. However, the numbers of these
Natives has declined rapidly, and apart from those associated with the Missions on the coast,
there are now not many in the area.
146. The dominating feature of the North Kimberley is an elevated plateau in the vicinity
of Mt. Hann (2,800 feet), which is only 800 feet higher than the adjoining country. From this
locality such rivers as the King Edward, Drysdale, Hann and Prince Regent rise and flow to all
points of the compass.
147. The topography of the region may be classified as two distinct types, volcanic and
sedimentary, in which the principal rocks are basalt and sandstone respectively.
148. Its general appearance indicates it may once have been a vast sandstone plateau,
which, because of the action of erosive agents, has now acquired in places a rugged countenance
of rough volcanic ranges and tumbled sandstone gorges. Where the basic or igneous rocks have
been exposed, hills have been formed with resulting natural fertile valleys which are often ex-
tensive and provide the most valuable areas of pasture. A typical example may be witnessed
in the vicinity of the Carson River where, for about 60 miles of its course, the river is bounded
on its East side by a precipitous sandstone formation extending to a height of approximately 400
feet above the valley floor. Conversely, the areas to the immediate West are predominantly
of a basic rock formation occasionally opening on to a broad plain and at times rising into rugged
basaltic ranges and sandstone formations.
Carson Escarpment
149. Within the volcanic areas the hills vary between mesas and conical formations which
seldom exceed a height of several hundred feet above the surrounding plains and valleys.
150. The mesas owe their formation to an overcapping layer of indurated sandstone
and laterite, which has resisted the effects of erosion. In such cases, the hills present a bluff face
of laterite or ironstone for perhaps 20 feet and then fall away rapidly, the side slopes being covered
with a rubble of stone. It is not uncommon to find pockets of basic soil supporting succulent
pastures, surmounted by table top hills whose surface is composed of sandstone and laterite.


151. The cone-shaped hills frequently have huge protruding masses of basalt, while the
steep side slopes form a jagged carpet of stones and rocks. Nevertheless, they are heavily grassed,
predominantly with a type referred to as Basalt white grass,” which has some feeding value when
young, but loses its palatability when matured and dry.
152. However, the majority of the region is of a sedimentary nature, and varies from
extensive sandy plains to rugged sandstone formations.
153. The latter areas frequently have a disjointed appearance with perpendicular faces
of stone and impassable gorges. The scenery within these localities is magnificent, comprising
waterfalls and gorges hundreds of feet in depth, while in places spectacular contrasts of colour
may be seen in the " painted ” sandstones of the area.
154. A feature of the region is the manner in which the country frequently presents a
series of sandy plateaux, the line of demarcation being a vertical, or near vertical, wall of broken
sandstone which may be anything from 10 to 500 feet in height. The surface is invariably sandy
with frequent intrusions of gravel and outcropping sandstone. Its main top cover is spinifex.
Other herbage does exist in places but generally comprises coarse varieties. It is interesting to
note that " buck ” spinifex is comparatively rare, and is confined to the rough areas.
155. But the most interesting feature of the sedimentary areas is the magnificent fresh
water pools that exist in the major watercourses during the dry seasonal months of April to Octo-
ber. In addition, it is not uncommon to find small streams still trickling at the end of the " dry,”
the water obviously seeping through from natural catchments of igneous rocks lying beneath
the surface formations of sandstone. Within these creeks pools are formed, and although the
depth of water may be only four or five feet, they are of a permanent nature and frequently present
an attractive picture of variegated coloured lilies on their surface.
156. In contrast to these conditions, the basic soils are poor retainers of water, and the
supplies furnished by the " wet ” rains disappear rapidly after the commencement of the dry
season. It is quite obvious that subterranean supplies will have to be utilised within the volcanic
regions for future development. In the alluvial soil areas the creeks have cut steep-sided chan-
nels, and frequently attain depths of 20 or 30 feet. This indicates that future settlers of the area
will have to avoid overstocking and destruction of surface timber, or extensive erosion will rapidly
follow.
157. It would be a tragedy to repeat the errors made in other localities of this State where
fertile country has frequently been left barren through careless and unscrupulous management.
158. Although the area under review lies between the 14th and 17th parallels of Latitude,
the only resemblance to tropical vegetation exists along the banks of watercourses, particularly
in the volcanic regions. Here the ribbons of dense, deep green foliage present a striking con-
trast to the more open country of the adjoining areas.
Spear Grass


Cypress Pine
Grove of Cabbage Palms five miles North of JM
A14


159. The rivers are usually lined with thickly clustered Pandanus over which extends
a clustered canopy of White Gums, Cajuputs or Paperbark, leichardt trees, spreading Freshwater
Mangroves, Native Fig trees and Chestnut trees. Beneath this shelter a tangled mass of Bamboo
and creepers present a matted effect. Along the banks and surrounding alluvial areas one finds
a number of tall coarse grasses growing in profusion, the predominant variety being Spear grass
which frequently attains a height of 12 feet.
160. Eucalyptus forests occur throughout the region but although the majority of this
species are piped, they are admirably suited to a number of station uses.
161. Other varieties are to be found, including Cypress Pine, which is the outstanding
timber of the area and has a wide occurrence throughout the sandstone regions. It has a large
variety of uses and has a high resistance to white ants, but is susceptible to fire.
162. Native fruit trees, which bear during the " wet ” season include Orange, Fig, Plum,
Apricot and a wide variety of nutwoods. The names are derived from a similarity that exists
between these fruits and the cultivated varieties, while the nutwoods bear a hard shelled kernel.
163. A number of edible berries also occur and include Wild Gooseberries, Passion Fruit
and Konkerberri ; the latter bearing a faint resemblance to Strawberries in flavour.
164. In the central region palm growth is fairly restricted, the occurrence varying from
Pandanus Palms in the vicinity of water, to Sago Palms in the rough volcanic areas and Cabbage
Palms in the laterite ridges and mesa formations. The core at the base of the fronds of the Cab-
bage Palm is edible and has a cabbage-like flavour. It may be eaten raw or cooked.
165. Having classified the region into volcanic and sedimentary groups, 1 now propose
to discuss, in detail, the soils encountered in each, and which are indicated on the attached eight
miles to the inch plan.
166. VOLCANIC AREAS
(a) Black Soil Plains :
These soils have a wide occurrence throughout the region but are
restricted in area, and cannot compare with the vast expanses of similar
localities in the East Kimberley. The majority comprise grey-brown
clays which are probably alluvial in origin and have an undulating surface
somewhat resembling road corrugations which give rise to the term " Gil-
gai.” Usually low-lying, these soils would be subject to flooding from
the adjacent higher country and are frequently damp in the lower horizons.
When bisected by streams the deeper depressions sometimes contain
water, e.g., Yoorawai.
Red Flinders Grass on Black-Soil Plain four miles West of Noachitty


In the vicinity of Ngoolalah Creek some of these soils are covered
solely with Red Flinders grass which provides suitable fodder when young,
but is neglected by stock when matured and dry. Unlike many Kimberley
grasses, it does not provide re-growth immediately after burning, although
I believe it is suitable for hand feeding if cut green.
Principal Grasses and Edible Shrubs. —Red Flinders grass, Sugar grass,
Kangaroo grass, Sorghums, Blue grass, Balsalt White Grass, Bundle Bundle,
Mimosa, Rosewood, occasional Couch and in the vicinity of Eagleson s
Homestead some Mitchell grass.
Principal Timbers. —Cockatoo Apple and varieties of Nutwoods ;
occasional Ghost Gums, Pindan-Cajuput and stunted Paperbark.
(b) Alluvial Red Loams :
These are encountered in river and creek levees in the volcanic areas,
the width being dependent on the adjacent topography. They are fre-
quently of a great depth, deposits of over 20 feet being observed where
precipitous sided streams have exposed the profile. The possibility
of future erosion in these localities is always evident, for if the top cover
of grass and timber is removed these light-textured soils would be rapidly
eroded by wind and water. In its present state some protection is afforded
to the country from flood waters by the river forests which trap and re-
tain large amounts of silt and debris, quantities of which may be observed
suspended in the upper branches of many trees.
Examples of erosion may be witnessed in many localities where the
river and creek banks have encroached on the adjacent flats.
Soil Erosion on Bank of Crossland Creek near Junction with Drysdale River
On the river flats the soil is frequently of a " crabhole ” nature : hollow
ground through which an animal can plunge up to its fetlocks ; and is
usually covered by dense grasses, the predominant variety being Spear
grass. Beneath this prolific top-cover palatable herbage exists in the
form of Blue Grass, Cockatoo grass and Red Burdekin, Mimosa and
Rosewood. Many of these flats are treeless, but sometimes have a light
growth of Grey Box, Cabbage Gum, Ghost Gum and Ironwood.
(c) Undulating Red Soils :
Of basaltic origin these soils experience frequent intrusions of black
soil areas, and provide a high stock potential. Their most frequent
occurrence is in the Carson Valley ; South of the Drysdale Crossing ; and
extending North from the Drysdale to the foothills of the Foster Range.
A similar belt exists in the vicinity of Abandon Creek.


They are comparatively free from protruding stone, but frequently
contain proportions of gravel, broken down basalt and quartzite. " Crab-
hole ” country also occurs in these localities.
As with the alluvial loams, the depth of these soils is considerable.
The principal herbage is Blue grass, Bundle Bundle, Red Burdekin,
Red Flinders grass, Sorghums and Everlastings. The latter were relished
by the animals. Mimosa, Rosewood and Peach Bush have a wide oc-
currence.
Principal Timber. —Grey Box, with minor growths of Cabbage Gum,
Ironwood, Nutwood, Bloodwood, Kapoc and Cotton Wool.
The creeks through these areas are usually lined with a light growth
of Freshwater Mangroves, Leichardt trees and Rosewood.
Red Soil Box Country
(d) Undulating Broken Country :
This country includes the foothills of volcanic ranges, and while
the slopes are not severe the surface is frequently rough. Sheet basalt
is common and the general surface is extensively covered with broken
igneous rock and quartzite. Where depressions occur they are rock-free
but are limited in area. All sloping ground is stony.
The principal grasses are Basalt Wbite grass and Red Burdekin,
with some Kangaroo grass, Blue grass and Sorghums, while the timbers
comprise Grey Box, Cotton Vool, Ironwood and Nutwoods.
(e) Volcanic Ranges ;
These contain many extremely rough, stony areas over which travel-
ling is difficult. Access is also impeded by steep-sided rocky hills fronting
the ranges.
The top of the ranges are usually undulating plateaux with mesas
and conical hills surmounting the topography. A number of steep-sided
valleys dissect these formations. The surface of the bluff-faced laterite
mesas is invariably composed of gravel, outcropping laterite and oc-
casional sandstone. The timbers include Messmate, Woolybutt, Iron-
wood, some Box and numerous Cabbage Palms, while the pasture com-
prises poor Spinifex, coarse Sorghum and Red Burdekin grasses. The
gravel and stony side slopes carry similar grasses to the rock-studded
conical hills ; Basalt White grass, Sorghums, Red Burdekin and some
Blue grass.
The depressions on the plateaux and the dissecting valleys furnish
good feed ; the loamy deposits in the confined and elevated valleys being
conducive to Blue grass, Red Flinders grass, Everlastings, Red Burdekin,
Kangaroo grass, Spear grass, Basalt White grass. Mimosa and Rosewood.


The timbers within these areas, with the exception of the mesas,
are similar to the volcanic plains : predominantly Box, with Cabbage
Gum, Cotton Wool, Ironwood, Bloodwood, and occasionally Corkwood,
while Ironbark was seen in one sheltered volcanic valley.
Permanent water supplies are at a premium in the ranges, and this
factor, combined with the difficulties of access, provide a serious problem
to development. I have no doubt that cattle would enter these regions,
particularly during the wet season, but mustering would be an intrepid
operation.
A notable exception to the preceding paragraph exists at the head
of Laurie Creek, where a shallow, well grassed, rocky valley does contain
permanent water in the creek bed. Seepages from the basalt-strewn
side slopes were seen in June, and cattle would undoubtedly cross the
ridges and thrive in this locality.
The possibility of water conservation in elevated areas is very good,
particularly in the vicinity of Wongaroodoo Gorge, but further information
in regard to sub-surface structures would be desirable.
167. SEDIMENTARY AREAS
(a) Seepage Flats :
These are to be found at the head of watercourses and are repre-
sented by treeless, heavily overgrown, boggy areas which derive their
water from adjacent higher country. The transition from the water-
logged area to the drier sandy soils is marked by a fringe of Pandanus
Palms, Banksia and Grevilleas. The heavy growth of grasses on the flats
represents a wide variety of sedges.
The above information was noted at the head of the King Edward
River, Crossland Creek and wet areas under sandstone formations.
Seepage flats may be detected on gentle slopes where the surface is
dry, when Cabbage Gum and Ghost Gum are numerous, and the grass
a fine, stringy variety known as Spring grass. Where a heavy content
of clay occurs, and when adjoining volcanic regions, these areas may be
covered with Box timbers and Blue grass, etc.
(b) Alluvial Sand :
This soil occurs in the vicinity of river and creek levees and because
of the presence of silt deposited during floods, Box timber may be found
in association with Bloodwood, Cabbage Gum and Ghost Gum trees.
Occasional Bauhinia may be seen in the Northern regions, but it has a
wide occurrence in the Southern limits. Grasses include Cockatoo grass,
Red Burdekin, " Everlastings,” and Spear grass.
(c) Undulating Sandy Areas (White and Red Sands) :
These occur extensively throughout the North Kimberley and are
represented by deep sand formations overlying broken sandstone and
laterite. Where the surface has been compacted, Cockatoo grass is found
in association with Spinifex, annual and perrenial Sorghums and Wire
grass.
In depressions between ridges, and in low-lying flat areas, the surface
is further compacted and Pindan*Cajuput flats occur, where Cockatoo
grass is prevalent.
Intrusions of gravel are frequent, forming a surface of Gravelly Sand,
which frequently indicates the proximity of sandstone and ironstone.
These soils have a loose, fluffy texture, and Spinifex is the main top cover.
(d) Sand and Outcropping Sandstone :
This term denotes the presence, with sands, of surface floaters and
flat sandstone, and as with Sand and Broken Sandstone, which represents
sandy areas with large boulders, carries similar vegetation to that referred
to in the preceding paragraph.


Sandy Country North of Ellenbrae Creek
(e) Rough Dissected Sandstone :
This represents the areas where weathering processes have reduced
the former surface to a disjointed mass of stone, seamed by gorges and
rugged features. The useless Buck Spinifex is indigenous to these localities
but does not occur in any of the open areas.
Magnificent freshwater pools are always found in the beds of major
watercourses which flow nearby. These pools vary from one to 10 miles
in length.
These regions are completely useless for any agricultural or pastoral
pursuit, and the area embraced by this classification is considerable.
(f) Sandstone Scarps and Tablelands :
Large areas of tableland country exist, and the boundaries are repre-
sented by sandstone formations of varying heights. The surfaces of many
plateaux are extensive and comparatively stone free, and have been in-
cluded in this assessment only when they occur in close proximity to
other country suitable for development. While the carrying capacity
Country South of Ellenbrae Creek


of this country is low, its ability to carry stock was observed last year,
when cattle tracks made during the previous wet season were seen on many
tableland areas.
The areas of useful country have been included under the heading
of sandy plains, gravelly sand, etc. It does not include vast areas to the
East of the Drysdale River where a series of sedimentary plateaux join
one another by abrupt changes of elevation.
(g) Shale Country :
The shales are associated with broken sandstone hills and can be
seen in the Eastern and Southern regions. Flats adjacent to the hills
are composed of red, sandy clay shale, and carry poor pasture of Spinifex,
Cockatoo grass and Sorghums. Where seepages occur, dense Spear grass
may be observed. Small anthills are common.
The timbers comprise stunted Paperbark, Pindan-Cajuput, Cabbage
Gum and Cotton Wool. Where indigenous to the locality, Baobabs
are common.
168. ASSESSMENT AND VEGETATION OF SEDIMENTARY AREAS
Because of continual seepage from sandstone areas, the lower regions of deep
sands are frequently moist, which is conducive to the formation of sub-surface
ironstone hardpans. Leaching of the sandy soils occurs during the wet season,
and the rapid drying during the dry season.
The carrying capacity of these areas is much lower than in the volcanic
regions, but the prevalence of water in this light country makes it invaluable when
combined with the heavier soils. While it is recognised that the Spinifex-
clad, sandy, areas represent the lowest economical stock-raising units, I have
no doubt that the figures could be raised by the introduction of trace elements
and new pasture. Endeavours by Mr. D. W. Rust of Karunjie Station and the
Principal of Kalumburu Mission (Rev. Father Basil Noseda), to establish Bird-
wood and Buffel grasses on similar country may be watched with interest.
Soft Spinifex provides the principal pasture throughout the sedimentary
areas, but a number of coarse grasses also occur. The feeding value of these
varieties can be enhanced by controlled burning, which promotes a growth
of fresh, succulent pasture. Additional fodder is provided by a number of
leguminous plants and edible shrubs, principally Grevilleas.
Similar timbers occur throughout the sedimentary regions and can be
referred to in a broad sense. They include Messmate, Woolybutt, several var-
ieties of Bloodwood, Cabbage Gum, Kurrajong, Ghost Gum, Iron wood, a
number of Grevilleas and Acacias, Quinine, Emu Apple, Pindan-Cajuput, Cypress
Pine, and Nutwoods.
Sedimentary Area near Oogalanoongoo


In the Southern limits, Yellow Box, Bauhinia, Ironbark and Baobabs are
fairly common, but are rarely seen in the North. Banksia, Corkwood, and
Grevillea may be seen in the vicinity of moist areas.
It may be noted that the native fruit trees, referred to previously, have
a wide occurrence throughout the sedimentary areas.
169. TOXIC PLANTS
Investigations as to the prevalence of toxic plants throughout the region
are being conducted by the Government Botanist.
170. SOIL SALINITY
No indications of soil salinity were seen in the Central North Kimberley :
similarly all waters were free from brackishness.
CLIMATE OF THE NORTH KIMBERLEY
171. The North Kimberley region falls within the Monsoonal Zone, the rains of the
wet usually falling between October and May.
172. The dry seasonal months of May to August provide delightful weather in the ele-
vated inland regions ; warm days with maximum temperatures up to 85 degrees Farenheit, fol-
lowed by cold nights when the mercury averages 35 degrees to 45 degrees Farenheit. The lowest
recorded temperature last season was 26 degrees Farenheit, at 4.30 a.m. on the 7th June, and
again on the 16th August ; on each occasion we were camped at the Drysdale Crossing.
173. By the end of August the maximum readings were approaching the century, which
was frequently passed during September.
174. During September and October, overcast skies were frequent, the clouds usually
appearing about 9 a.m. and dissipating about 5 p.m., and as stated in my diary, often provided a
welcome relief from the heat of the sun.
175. During October, we experienced light showers of rain, and frequently observed
downpours in other localities.
176. Dews were a common occurrence throughout the " dry ” season, the precipitation
increasing as the " wet ” season drew nearer.
177. Growth of vegetation is prolific during the wet season, and indications of its ap-
proach were seen in October, by the blossoming of a number of trees, the most outstanding of
which was the Native Plum.
178. The heaviest rains occur between November and March, when individual falls
are frequently measured in inches. Consequently, a large porportion of the water runs off and
creates excessive flows in the rivers, evidence of flooding being seen in places where large tree
trunks have been deposited on ledges of sandstone 20 to 30 feet above the " dry ” water levels.
These Monsoonal rains are frequently interrupted by weeks of fine weather, when loss of water
through evaporation occurs in the high temperatures, particularly in the heavy volcanic soils
which do not readily absorb the moisture.
179. Minor showers occur during a normal dry season, but unless the total fall exceeds
about half an inch its effectiveness is minimised by the high rate of evaporation.
180. Electrical storms occur frequently throughout the wet season and the large number
of shattered tree trunks bear mute evidence of their severity. A gorge, North of the Woodhouse
River, through which we travelled, contained no standing timber : the floor being littered with
the remnants of former standing trees, all destroyed by lightning.
181. I understand that the climate is not unpleasant in the elevated inland during the wet.
Humidity is experienced during storms, but in the intervening dry spells is quite satisfactory.
Blankets are used at Gibb River Station throughout the year.
182. It is impossible to provide an accurate estimate of rainfall received in the unsettled
areas, as ground indications show that the falls vary in different localities. For example, Kalum-
buru Mission has averaged about 39 inches for 18 years, whereas the abandoned Pago Mission, only
13 miles to the North-East, received at least seven inches per annum less. Meanwhile, Gibb
River Station, about 200 road miles South, averages about 28 inches per annum. The Mission
Brethren informed me that they were sure that the country about 15 miles South of Kalumburu
received heavier falls of rain than did their Mission.


POTENTIAL
183. (a) Pastoral :
Because of its environment, the North Kimberley may be considered
primarily from the viewpoint of pastoral development in the form of beef
raising, and to this end, settlement in the initial stages should be confined
to the country embraced by my recommended limit of pastoral settlement,
which is indicated on the attached plan.
The Carson Escarpment provides a barrier to the Drysdale River in
A
The East, although access is readily obtained in the vicinity of JM and im-
A 6
mediately East of Mr. Eagleson’s Homestead, i.e., North of Mt. Connolly.
Within the area specified there is a total of about 3,750,000 acres of
virgin Crown Land, capable, in my opinion, of supporting 41,000 head
of cattle.
The large areas of Spinifex covered sands, with their permanent sup-
plies of fresh water, should offset any danger of drought, and are of major
importance for this reason.
Reference has been made to the possibility of extensive soil erosion
through over-stocking and destruction of surface timber. Therefore,
1 must object to any suggestion that Cypress Pine be cut in this region
for use throughout the Kimberley. However, it will afford settlers with
a suitable timber for a variety of station purposes if cut judiciously.
A major problem confronting future settlers of this area is the acute
shortage of Native stockmen, due to the decreasing numbers of Aborigines.
(b) Agricultural :
Certain restricted areas are suitable for cultivation. These areas in-
clude black soils, alluvial loams and undulating red soil areas. However,
the distance from suitable markets, and the presence of vast areas of rich
land in the more accessible East Kimberley, precludes any possibility
of immediate development of this nature. Such produce as Peanuts,
Pineapples, Bananas, Custard Apples, Coconuts, Cotton and
Upland Rice, have been grown at Kalumburu Mission.
(c) Mineral :
Indication of surface auriferous metals was negative.
Mission Garden at Kalumburu


ADDITIONAL FIELD ACTIVITIES
SURVEY TRAVERSE
184. The survey of the standard traverse, from Gibb River Station to High Water Mark in
Napier Broome Bay, was conducted by Mr. J. V. Keating and his party in accordance with normal
cadastral survey practice,
185. At Gibb River Station and Kalumburu Mission, concrete bench marks were placed
in the ground and stellar observations conducted to determine the precise Latitude and Longitude
of these points. The bench marks were referenced by steel rods sunk below ground level, and
at Gibb River Station a connection was made to a tree identified on the aerial photographs, and
A
which was marked JM. At Kalumburu Mission connections were made to nearby buildings.
A 1
186. Survey posts, not less than four inches square, were placed at each mile and every
AAA
angle from the starting point, and were marked JM, JM, JM, etc., the numbers representing the
1M 2M 3M
mileage from Gibb River Station. Wherever possible, the posts were connected, by bearing and
AAA
distance, to a marked reference tree, the trees being marked JM, JM, JM, etc. In this case, the
R 1 R 2 R 3
numbers denote the sequence of reference trees and the letter " R ” denotes reference.
187. A connection was made, by bearing and distance, to each astrafix occurring within
reasonable proximity to the survey traverse.
188. Angles of elevation and depression were read between instrument points throughout
the traverse, from which the approximate relative heights above sea level may be determined.
Solar observations for the determination of Azimuth were taken at intervals of not more than five
miles along the traverse.
189. Connections were made to features identifiable on the aerial photographs.
190. The speed with which the traverse was completed, often under difficult conditions,
reflects great credit on all concerned.
191. A 1,000 acre Crown Grant to the Benedictine Community was surveyed at Kalum-
buru Mission.
Personnel of the Survey Section
ASTRAFIXES
192. To further facilitate the accurate mapping of the area, 16 stellar observations for
the precise determination of Latitude and Longitude were taken throughout the region.
193. The points of observation were adjacent to trees identifiable on aerial photographs
and the distances between the observations do not exceed 20 miles.


194. Initially conducted by myself, the observations were concluded by Mr. Keating,
assisted by Mr. Pollard, Computer, and Mr. Cole.
195. Position Line methods were adopted for three of the observations, the other 13
being completed by using the Circum-meridian method for Latitude and Almucantar for Time.
The Longitude of each point was determined by reference to wireless time signals transmitted
from Honolulu. No great difficulty was experienced in the reception of these time signals on
the portable Trans-ceiver radio sets carried by the expedition.
196. Each observation point was connected, by bearing and distance, to an identified
A A A
tree which was marked JM, JM, JM, etc., the "A ” denoting astrafix and the number repre-
A 1 A 2 A 3
senting the sequence of observation.
TRANSPORT AND CONSTRUCTION SECTIONS
197. The Transport Section was manned by personnel of the Department of Lands and
Surveys, Perth, who operated vehicles supplied by this Department and the Department of the
Army. Its function was to transport and provide supplies and equipment to the other Sections,
as and when required. Motor fuel, much of which was air-freighted from Vyndham to Gibb
River Station and Kalumburu Mission during the season, formed the bulk of the vehicles’ loading.
The first-class condition of the vehicles at the end of the season was a credit to the drivers of the
Transport Section, operating under the Section leadership of Mr. T. E. Cole. A report on the
performance of the vehicles in various types of country has been supplied by Mr. Cole, and is
recorded on a Departmental file.
198. From the 17th May until the 3rd August, the Transport Section operated con-
jointly with the Road Construction Party, which, under the supervision of Mr. H. Gattenhof, com-
prised personnel and equipment of the Main Roads Department, Perth. This party was respon-
sible for the construction of tracks through the region, details of which are contained in my diary.
Apart from its value in negotiating rough areas and timbered regions, the Construction equip-
ment proved invaluable for cutting down the steep banks of many creeks and rivers. The members
of this party, too, were responsive to all demands made of them and performed their duties to
my utmost satisfaction
Grader Cutting Down Bank of Plain Creek
PERMANENCE AND STATE OF TRACKS
199. The tracks constructed through virgin country North of Gibb River Station may,
for easy identification, be referred to as the Carson Route and the King Edward Route. The
former represents the track from Gibb River Station to Kalumburu Mission which traverses the
Carson River ; while the latter refers to the loop road from Kalumburu Mission to the Drysdale
Crossing via the King Edward River country.


200. (a) Carson River Route :
In Perth, before 1 left, I made a close study of aerial photographs,
and tentatively selected the position of this road. Minor adjustments
were made on the ground but the general alignment was correct. For
the greater part of its length the Carson Route traverses heavy, volcanic
soil, and in its Northern extremities bypasses rough and stony country.
Numerous gullies were encountered North of Crossland Creek, and the
Carson River was crossed five times. These crossings could be reduced
in number by more precise reconnaissance and the use of heavier equip-
ment for crossing stony ridges.
(b) The major portion of the King Edward Route lies in sedimentary areas and
• consequently provides easier travelling than along the Carson River.
Fewer creeks are crossed and there are no major watercourses to be nego-
tiated, except, of course, the Carson Crossing East of Mt. Teeming.
201. These roads may be classified as 15 to 20 miles per hour tracks, as the surfaces were
not formed. They provide dry seasonal access only, as they will be impassable during the wet :
and in places will be overgrown with grass. Scouring of track surfaces will probably occur in
certain localities during the wet.
202. The construction of these tracks proves that the North Kimberley region is not
inaccessible to vehicles during a dry season. This factor, combined with the presence of large
cultivable areas adjacent to supplies of permanent fresh water, dispels any theory that in a state
of war an enemy force could not survive in this area, even if isolated for a long period.
PORT SITE
203. A brief inspection was made of Napier Broome Bay, where West Bay appears to
offer the best possibility for a future anchorage ; and from a study of the aerial photographs,
lam of the opinion that access to such an anchorage could be gained from the interior. More
precise examinations of this Bay were made by Surveyors Brockman and Easton in 1901 and
1921 respectively, each of whom recommended its adoption as a port site. The existence of
Truscott air strip, and West Bay’s wartime use as a Flying Boat Base, must lend further support
to their recommendations. The possibility of establishing a lighter service for the shipment
of beef may arise if an Air Beef Scheme is not established in this area.
204. This brief inspection indicated that the coast line, for the greater part, is flanked
by low, rugged sandstone ridges, at the base of which, and in tidal estuaries, are inter-knit, dense
masses of Mangroves.
RESERVES AND STOCK ROUTES
205. Provision has been made for the establishment of a number of reserves for future
public purposes. The principal of these is a proposed 25,000 acre reservation in the vicinity
of the Drysdale Crossing which, for the present, may be listed for " Travellers and Stock ”. This
particular locality is of major importance, as it could quite easily become the focal point of the
Central North Kimberley, particularly in regard to road access and stock routes.
(a) It is fairly central to the North coast, West coast, Wyndham, and existing stations
to the South.
(b) It is adjacent to excellent supplies of permanent fresh water in the Drysdale River.
(c) An air strip could be provided in close proximity.
(d) It is closely situated to the junction of the Carson and King Edward Routes, and
road access could be provided to areas West of the King Edward River.
(e) Road access could be provided to the South-East, to join the existing Wyndham-
Karunjie track and stock route.
(f) May be suitable for a future Air Beef site, if required.
(g) Would be suitable for the establishment of a townsite, if ever required.
206. The positions of the constructed King Edward and Carson tracks are admirably
suited for stock routes, and provision has been made for another stock route to join the existing
Karunjie-Wyndham stock route near Tommy Creek. It is suggested that a reservation be pro-
claimed over the belt of country lying between the Carson River and the Carson Escarpment.
207. Additional reservations which are submitted for your approval include :
(a) The area in which Native rock markings were discovered in the bed of Damper
Creek.


(b) The waterfall discovered on the 29th August, 1954 ; this reservation to extend
Easterly to the Carson River and include the region in which Native paintings
were found.
208. It is suggested that discretion be used in the proclamation of reserves over areas
in which Native paintings occur, as most of these areas are widespread, isolated, and are usually
found in comparatively rough sandstone areas.
ABORIGINAL HABITATION
209. Although few bush Natives were sighted, their presence was indicated frequently
by the sight of " Smokes,” which generally represent hunting fires or encampments. I have
no doubt that they do use grass fires to indicate their presence to other Blacks, but 1 was unable
to substantiate the suggestion that an alphabetical or phonetical form of signalling is used.
210. In view of the small number of Natives in the region, I recommend that procedure be
adopted to effect the closure of the Mt. Hann Aboriginal Reserve, The Aboriginals are a nomadic
race, continually on the move in search of food. Consequently, their most popular resorts are
in sandstone ridges, where Kangaroos and Rock Wallabies are fairly numerous, and in which
vicinity water is readily obtained ; or along permanent lagoons or billabongs, in creeks and rivers,
where Crocodile, Turtle, Goanna, Fish and Lily Roots may be used to supplement their diet.
211. To my knowledge, they only utilise shelters during the wet season, when they camp
under bark humpies or overhanging sandstone. In the former case, they strip the bark from
trees to lengths of up to 10 feet and utilise the full circumference. Placed over a ridge pole which
is supported at each end by forked sticks the erection would not exceed three or four feet in height.
This type of shelter was observed frequently in the vicinity of watercourses, the greatest number
being in evidence along the Drysdale River and its tributaries. Alongside one pool of the Drys-
dale a Paperbark raft was found which was constructed of layers of Paperbark to a thickness
of about nine inches and was in the shape of a coracle.
Native Wet Camp on Bank of Drysdale River near JM
A4
212. In regard to the sandstone areas, residence is taken up under rocks which have over-
hanging " roofs,” thereby creating a shelter for the occupants. Evidence of habitation was in-
dicated by ashes from old camp fires and remains of former repasts of animals and fish.
213. Where the face of the rocks have a smooth surface, and protection from the rain,
paintings are sometimes found. The colours used include black, white and red, from ashes and
ochres, but more frequently red is the sole colour, in which case the colouring appears to have
been administered by the use of pigments or some form of oxidation. It is very durable and not
easily affected by water. I observed a number of paintings where the surface of the stone had
flaked away, thus breaking the continuity of the drawings, and suggesting they had been there
for a number of years.


214. Unfortunately, the majority were too faded to permit photography, but the subjects
included animals and reptiles, hunters with their game, corroboree scenes and personnel.
Native Painting near Wongalwarra
Bower Bird’s Nest


FAUNA
215. Despite the prevalence of water, Water-fowl, etc., were very scarce. Birds of many
varieties were seen throughout the region, their numbers becoming increasingly evident towards
the end of the dry season, when the number of water-holes were reduced. A report issued by
Dr. House, who accompanied the Brockman expedition in 1901, furnishes details of the varieties
to be encountered.
216. Emus were seen in small numbers throughout the region but Kangaroos were very
scarce, their main occurrence being in the sandstone areas, where a type of Rock Wallaby ap-
peared to be fairly numerous. Wild turkeys were seen frequently, particularly in the basic areas,
whilst Brolgas were a common sight throughout the region.
217. The presence of fish, etc., in permanent waters has been referred to previously.
218. Dingoes and wild domestic cats exist in large numbers in this virgin country. Wild
Donkeys, which are a menace in other portions of the Kimberley, and are very numerous in the
Pentecost Range, were seen in the vicinity of Ellenbrae Creek. No indication of their presence
was observed North or West of this point.
A long-nosed freshwater crocodile (Crocodilia Johnsonii)
UNBRANDED CATTLE
219. Unbranded cattle, and tracks made during the previous wet season, were seen through'
out the Southern limits of the region, but I do not anticipate that their numbers would total more
than several hundreds.


PHOTOGRAPHIC RECORD
220. Photographs in colour were taken throughout the season and depicted the activities
of each Section, together with descriptive country scenes. It is regretted that a large number of
exposed colour films, together with a number of exposed black and white films, sere sent by air,
but did not reach their destination.
NOMENCLATURE
221. While at Kalumburu Mission, Karunjie and Gibb River Stations, I was fortunate
to secure the names applied by residents to a number of features. In addition, the Aboriginal
names for a large number of features in the interior were obtained by interrogation of Natives.
All of these, together with additional names adopted by myself, are submitted herewith for the
approval of the Nomenclature Committee. Where possible, 1 have bracketed the English trans-
lation for a number of Aboriginal words and have indicated the features to which the name may
be applied. Unfortunately, it has not been practicable to indicate all of these landmarks on the
attached eight miles to an inch plan.
1. Names used at Karunjie and Gibb River Stations :
Royston Creek
Dead Horse Creek
Cockatoo Creek
Lambo Creek .. .. (means Pindan-Cajuput)
Horse Creek
McLachlan Creek
Loongra Pool .. ~ On the Durack River. (Name of a Centipede-
like insect.)
Larrikin Creek
Spring Creek
Scotty Creek
Suzy Creek
Charlie Creek
Oolrui Creek .. .. (pronounced Oolroy)
Nugget Creek
Sullivan Creek
Mt. Sullivan
Goanna Creek
White Gum Creek
Neil Creek
Brill Creek
Gorge Creek
Scotty Salmond Gorge
Rust Range
Patsy Creek
Schutt-Schutt Creek
Rosewood Creek
Paddy Spring Creek
Brockman Creek
Snake Creek]
Pindan Creek
Bamboo Creek
Plain Creek
Donkey Creek
2. Names adopted by myself : .
Poompangala Hill
Ooraro Hill
Eeryroo .. .. .. fording spot over King Edward River
Parndia Creek


Aragoon .. .. .. junction of King Edward and Carson Rivers
Oonjerol .. .. .. Aboriginal name for Mt. Leeming
Mool-Mool Lagoon
Milyoonga .. .. a jump-up
Ponai Creek
Putairta Hill
Pronga-Marie Creek
Noseda Creek ~ .. (after Father Basil Noseda—Principal of Kalum-
bum Mission)
Rosendo Creek .. .. (after Father Rosendo—Kalumburu Mission)
Übach Creek .. .. (after Father Übach —Kalumburu Mission)
Placid Creek .. .. (after Brother Placid—Kalumburu Mission)
Andrew Creek .. .. (after Brother Andrew—Kalumburu Mission)
Dominic Creek .. .. (after Brother Dominic —Kalumburu Mission)
Mt. Keating .. .. (Aboriginal name Wootyaloongoo)
Gattenhof Hill .. .. (Aboriginal name Wonoomboorie)
Head Hill
Pollard Hill
Johnson Creek
Laurie Creek
Wallis Peak
Cole Creek
Swider Creek
Granville Creek
Proudfoot Creek
Hair Creek
Bruce Creek
McDonald Creek
Rivers Creek
Young Creek
Abandon Creek
Crossland Creek
Campbell Creek .. .. (after J. Campbell—Karunjie Station)
Russ Creek .. .. .. (after F. Russ—Gibb River Station)
Jooroo Ridge .. .. (means Bower Bird)
Moongool Gorge
Mongonai Creek
Merrinjie .. .. .. (junction of two creeks)
Yoorawai .. .. .. (a black soil billabong)
Noolawayoo Creek
Ngoollalah Creek .. .. (means Old Woman)
Noachitty Rapids .. .. (means Cloudy Water)
Moondoalnee .. .. (junction of watercourses)
Pangoor .. .. .. (junction of watercourses)
Palmoondoora .. .. (junction of watercourses)
Moorello .. .. .. (junction of watercourses)
Loonjool Creek .. .. (junction of watercourses)
Larryoo .. .. .. (Rock on Carson Escarpment)
Wonjarring .. .. .. (Two caves on Escarpment face near Larryoo)
Face Point
Gnamoongie Creek
Lorroomoondanee Creek
Oombrai Hill
Jumburr Hill
Worriga Gorge


Woorakin Creek
Arnyo Pool .. .. (on Carson River)
Cheringoomerie Pool .. (on Carson River)
Coodimirrie Hill
Moongiyarrie Pool .. (on Carson near paintings)
Wongaroodoo Gorge .. (on Laurie Creek (means Crow))
Changoola Creek
Dawrra Creek
Meelarrie Creek
Merringa (Black Soil Spring)
Woonjah Creek . . .. (means Bamboo)
Wollangooyoo Pool
Langoor Hill .. .. (means Tiger Snake)
Monorromboora Hill
Meealoyoo Hill
Oogalanoongoo .. .. (near Damper Creek)
Wongalwarra .. .. (Pool on Carson River)
CONCLUSION
SPECIAL EQUIPMENT
222. The use of aerial photographs and radio equipment were invaluable in the expedi-
tious execution of the work in hand, for by use of the former I was able to plan my work further
ahead than would otherwise have been possible, while the latter enabled me to maintain
contact at all times with other Sections of the party. I was thus able to receive progress reports
and transmit instructions without loss of time, regardless of the locality. Further evidence of
the value of these Trans-ceiver sets, tuned in to the Wyndham Base of the Flying Doctor Service,
is indicated when, through its medium, arrangements were made for two members of the party
to be flown out of the area. They both subsequently underwent successful operations for Ap-
pendicitis.
223. My deepest appreciation is accorded to Mr. F. Ryle of the Wyndham Base, Flying
Doctor Service, for his courtesy and co-operation at all times.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
, 224 * . The successful completion of the field activities of the expedition in one season
may be attributed to the initiative and enthusiasm displayed by all members, who at all times
acted as an efficient team. I would like to express my appreciation to them for the manner in
which they gave me their whole-hearted support throughout.
225. Gratitude is also expressed to Mr. D. W. Rust of Karunjie Station, Mr. F. A Russ
of Gibb River Station, Father Basil Noseda, 0.5.8., and the members of the Benedictine Com-
munity at Kalumburu Mission, for the generous hospitality accorded, and the valuable informa-
tion imparted, to myself and party when in their vicinity.
226. To the officers of various private firms and a number of State and Commonwealth
epartments, who rendered assistance in the supply of personnel, material and information,
1 accord my thanks. More particularly, to the Commissioner of Main Roads (Mr. J. D. Leach),
for the release of personnel and mechanical equipment to co-operate with the expedition : to
die Commissioner of Police (Mr. T. Andersen), for the release of Constable L. E. Shaw and Native
racker Wallis for service with the expedition. In addition, the Deputy Commissioner of Native
Affairs (Mr F. W. G. Andersen), was responsible for providing me with the services of two
Native stock boys, and a number of riding horses and pack donkeys from Moola Bulla Station •
while the Department of the Army supplied three vehicles for the expedition’s use.
227. I wish to accord appreciation also of the competent services rendered by Dr. Grigher-
off and the staff of the Wyndham Hospital during the season.
228. The attached classification was compiled after intensive air-photo, interpretation
m which 1 was capably assisted by Mr. W. F. Johnson and Mr. F. L. Swider. The plan was pro-
duced by officers of the Chief Draftsman’s Branch.


229. I desire also to thank Miss J. L. Farrant, typiste, for the efficient and diligent manner
in which she assisted me with the production of this report.
230. In conclusion, may I express my appreciation to the Surveyor General (Mr. W. V.
Fyfe), and the Deputy Surveyor General (Mr. H. Camm), for my appointment as Leader of the
Expedition.
JOHN F. MORGAN, L.S., M.I.S.A., M.I.C.W.A.,
Leader,
North Kimberley Survey and Mapping Expedition, 1954.
Ist August, 1955.




APPENDIX A
REPORT TO THE SURVEYOR-IN-CHARGE
BY
MR. J. V. KEATING—Second-m-Command
Surveyor Morgan,
Surveyor-in-Charge,
North Kimberley Survey and Mapping Expedition, 1954.
I herewith respectfully submit the report of my activities as Second-in-Command and
Survey Section Leader of the Expedition during the period from my departure on the sth May,
1954, from Wyndham till my arrival back in Perth on the Bth October, 1954.
Having accompanied you with the advance party to Bindoola Creek, 1 returned to Wynd-
ham and, in accordance with your instructions, the entire remaining members of the party, namely,
the Survey and Transport Sections, consisting of eight men and three vehicles, departed from
Wyndham on the morning of Wednesday, sth May, en route to Karunjie Station. The two
members of the party stranded adjacent to New York Jump-ups in an Austin 4x4 joined the
party on Friday, 7th May. All vehicles had arrived at Karunjie Homestead by Sunday, 9th May.
The following week was spent unpacking and resorting equipment and stores.
On Monday, 17th May, the Transport Section moved off to make contact with the Main
Roads Section at Blackfellow Creek. The Survey Section set out from Karunjie for Gibb River
Station on the following day, camping that night on Blackfellow Creek with the other Sections and
continuing on to Gibb River on Wednesday, 19th May, with Mr. J. A. Salmond acting as guide,
arriving at the Homestead late on Friday, 21st May. The Reconnaissance Section had arrived
several hours previously.
The survey traverse Northwards from Gibb River Homestead was commenced on Tues-
day, 25th May, and during the following week a distance of 15 miles had been covered.
On Monday, 31st May, camp was shifted to Gibb River itself, a distance of 23 miles from
the Homestead. The traverse progressed to the 29 mile post during this week.
Sixteen miles were run during the next week, making the total 45 miles. Camp was shifted
on the 10th June to a position on Donkey Creek, a distance of 50 miles from Gibb River Station.
Shifted camp again on Wednesday, 16th June, to the Drysdale River crossing. The 66
mile post was reached at the end of this week.
Twelve miles were covered during the week commencing on Monday, 21st June, and on
the Wednesday of the same week camp was shifted to a position on a tributary of the Carson
River, some 81 miles from Gibb River Homestead.
The 94 mile post was reached at the end of the following week. Friday, 2nd July, some
of the party camped adjacent to the 103 mile post on the Carson, 80 miles from Kalumburu Mis-
sion. Here some excellent Native paintings were found in a cave in the escarpment opposite
our camp. These paintings later proved to be the best seen by the Survey Section
From Monday, the sth July, to Saturday, the 10th July, 16 miles were traversed, taking
the total to 110 miles.
The following week saw the traverse at 122 miles. Camp was shifted to a position on the
Carson River, 53 miles from the Mission.
Next week produced 20 miles, taking the total to 142 miles.
On Monday, 26th July, camp was shifted to a position approximately one mile North of
J. Eagleson’s Carson River Station Homestead, which is situated 23 miles from Kalumburu Mission.
On Tuesday, 27th July, the Austin 4x4 attached to the Section, caught fire and was completely
gutted, destroying all the stores and sundry items of equipment. Owing to the fire and incon-
venience caused by the resignation of the cook, only 5 miles were traversed during this week,
taking the total to 147 miles.
On the Thursday of the following week, the sth August, with the total mileage at 157
miles, I handed the party over to Mr. Cadet Surveyor Johnson and returned to Drysdale River
Crossing to take over an observing party. Mr. Johnson continued the survey, and after obtaining
a connection to Kalumburu Mission, reached Pago Mission and the sea, a distance of 189 miles
10 chains from Gibb River Homestead. The time engaged on the traverse survey was approx-
imately 12 weeks.
From 9th August to 22nd September, I took a series of astrafixes extending from Gibb
River Homestead to Kalumburu Mission, both along the Carson and King Edward Rivers routes.
In all, a distance of,over 400 miles was covered and 11 astrafixes taken.


On Wednesday, 22nd September, the entire Transport and Survey Sections departed from
Gibb River Homestead en route to Perth via Karunjie and Wyndham, while you were continuing
your examination of additional country in the vicinity of the Drysdale River area. Karunjie was
reached on the night of the 22nd September, and Wyndham at noon on Friday, the 24th September.
The next four days were spent in completing a subdivision at the three mile in Wyndham,
and servicing the vehicles.
Wednesday, the 29th September, saw all vehicles on the road for Perth. Little serious
trouble was experienced on the journey Southwards and all safely arrived on Friday, the Bth
October. Exactly six calendar months had elapsed since our departure by air for Wyndham on
the Bth April.
During the trip all vehicles did the job that was required of them. Some criticism could
possibly be aimed at the Austin Champs insofar that in light country dust enters the vehicle in
large quantities, and to say the least, makes riding in the Champs somewhat unpleasant. A second
fact is that, due to their complicated mechanism, servicing is rather a long and tedious job.
Much difficulty was experienced in obtaining suitable timber for survey posts. The Grey
Box, Messmate, Ironwood and Ironbark were all, practically without exception, " piped ” or
hollow. The Mountain Bloodwood and Cypress Pine were the only timbers of any value for posts.
In conclusion, I would like to express my thanks to the members of the Survey Section—
namely, Mr. Cadet Surveyor W. F. Johnson, Mr. F. Swider, Mr. E. Granville and Mr. A. V. Proud-
foot. Especially to Mr. Johnson who at all times was of great assistance to me, both in the field
and office. All these men carried out their specific duties with a personal interest, and at no time
was there any dissention evident. Even when the stores truck was burnt, destroying practically
all the supplies, they continued for over a week with their tedious and by then monotonous task
on what could only be called iron rations, without the slightest hesitation or complaint.
Before closing, 1 would also like to thank Mr. J. F. Morgan, Surveyor-in-Charge of the
Expedition, for his leadership and guidance, for undoubtedly both factors, combined with his
own personal energy, brought such an extensive endeavour to a more than successful conclusion.
JOHN V. KEATING,
Second-in-Command.
2nd May, 1955.


APPENDIX B
COMMON AND BOTANICAL NAMES OF TIMBERS AND GRASSES
REFERRED TO WITHIN THIS REPORT
Contributed by : C. A. Gardner, Government Botanist
Common Name. Botanical Name.
(a) Timbers :
Grey Box .. .. .. Eucalyptus microtheca
Cabbage Gum .. .. Eucalyptus clavigera
Ghost Gum (Sometimes
called Carbean) .. .. Eucalyptus papuana
White Gum .. .. Eucalyptus houseana
Cajuput .. .. .. Melaleuca Leucadendron
Pindan-Cajuput .. .. Melaleuca Leucadendron
Wattle (Comprise broad and
narrow leaf) .. .. Number of Acacias
Bloodwoods .. .. Number of varieties of Eucalyptus
Woolybutt .. .. .. Eucalyptus miniata
Silver Box .. .. Eucalyptus pruinosa
Messmate .. .. .. Eucalyptus tetrodonta
Cypress Pine .. .. Callitris intratropica
Corkwood .. .. .. Hakea species
Kurrajong .. .. .. Brachychiton caudatum
Emu Apple .. .. Owenia
Quinine .. .. .. Petalostigma quadrilocularis
Ironwood .. .. .. Erythrophleum chlorostachys
Ironbark .. .. .. Terminalia circumalata
Grevillea .. .. .. A number of species
Nutwoods .. *.. Terminalia species
Leichardt .. .. .. Nauclea coadunatus
Native Fig .. .. .. Ficus glomerata
Chestnut .. .. .. Terminalia platyphylla
Cockatoo Apple, Native
Apple, or Pear (Aboriginal
Mangaloo) .. .. Planchonia Careya
Swamp Banksia .. .. Banksia dentata
Kapoc .. .. .. Gossampinus heptophylla
Cotton Wool .. .. Cochlospermuam heteroneurum
Freshwater Mangrove .. Tristania Susveolens and Barringtonia acut<
angula
Rosewood .. .. .. Terminalia volucris
Mimosa .. .. .. Acacia Bidwilli and Suberosa
Peachbush .. .. Ehretia saligna
Bauhinia .. .. .. Bauhinia Cunninghamii
Bao-bab .. .. .. Adansonia Gregorii
Yellow Box
Palms :
Cabbage Palm .. .. Livistona humilis
Sago Palm .. .. .. Cycas angulata
Pandanus Palm .. .. Pandanus spiralis


(b) Grasses :
" Everlastings ” .. .. Polycarpaea longiflora
Cockatoo Grass .. .. Alloteropsis semialata
Spear Grass .. .. Sorghum stipoideum
Red Burdekin .. .. Heteropogon contortus
Blue Grass .. .. .. Dichanthium sericeum
Red Flinders Grass .. Iseilema species
Basalt White Grass .. Sehima nervosum
Wire Grass .. .. Triodia species
Sugar Grass
Kangaroo Grass .. .. Themeda arguens
Soft Spinifex .. .. Triodia species
Buck Spinifex .. .. Plectrachne Schinzii
Mitchell Grass .. .. Astrebla pectinata
Couch .. .. .. Cynodon dactylon
Bundle Bundle .. .. Dichanthium fecundum
Sorghums .. .. .. Represents Annual and Perennial Sorghums


APPENDIX C
INSTRUCTION FROM THE SURVEYOR GENERAL
TO
THE SURVEYOR-IN-CHARGE BEFORE DEPARTURE FROM PERTH
(a) Instruction No. 1
(b) Instruction No. 2.
(a)
THE DEPUTY SURVEYOR GENERAL:
I should be pleased if you would instruct Surveyor Morgan to proceed to the North Kim-
berley region and carry out the surveys, classification and topographical work outlined here-
under. His party should be divided into three sections, named for the purpose of this instruction
only—the Survey, Transport and Reconnaissance Sections.
Surveyor Morgan shall be in charge of the three Sections, each of which must carry out
his instructions. This remark may appear superfluous, but having in mind the procedure which
will be followed, it is desired to give emphasis to it.
Broadly, the work of the three Sections shall be as follows ;
Survey Section :
(1) To run a theodolite and chain traverse Northwards from Gibb River to the
Kalumburu Mission at the mouth of the King Edward River.
(2) To make such triangulation and topographical surveys as might be possible
without unduly delaying the progress of the traverse.
(3) To carry out a general classification of the country which might be possible,
having in mind that this work is only incidental to the main survey pro-
gramme.
(4) To take such observations as Surveyor Morgan might consider necessary.
(5) This Section shall include an assistant surveyor who shall be second-in-
command of the whole party, plus two survey hands, one of whom might
be a staff cadet, acting as a survey hand for this survey only. A draftsman
will also be included, and he will be responsible for booking observations
and doing such drafting and clerical work as might be necessary in con-
nection with the operations of the three Sections of the party.
Transport Section :
This Section will be equipped with four 4-wheel drive vehicles, two being
" Champs ” with trailers, and the other two being 30 cwt. 4x4 Austin trucks.
Its duty will be to establish a rough track and keep the three Sections sup-
plied with stores, equipment, etc.
It should be comprised of four drivers and one mechanic.
Reconnaissance Section :
The Commissioner of Police readily agreed to my suggestion for assistance
from his Department and has made available for this survey Constable Shaw
who has had extensive experience on patrol work through the North Kimber-
leys, and who is desirous of accompanying the party.
The party will include such pack animals and horses as might be decided
upon by Surveyor Morgan after further consultation with Constable Shaw.
Its duty will be to locate a track which the Transport Section is to follow,
and will be accompanied by Surveyor Morgan, when necessary, and will carry
out a general classification to the extent that is possible, having in mind the main
purpose—to locate a track through from Gibb River to the mouth of the King
Edward River.
Whilst with the Section, Surveyor Morgan should make astronomical ob-
servations to determine Latitudes and Longitudes of features which are unmis-
takably identifiable on the aerial photographs.
It will be equipped with a portable 2-way wireless unit suitable for com-
munication with the Transport and Survey parties, with the stations used by the
Flying Doctor Service, and also for receiving time signals from overseas.
The Section will consist of Constable Shaw and two Native police boys
who have had experience with him in that region.


In addition to this survey party, arrangements have been made with the Commissioner
of Main Roads, Mr. Leach, who has promised assistance in this surveying and classification pro-
ject to provide for :
(a) The use of his Depot and Workshop at Wyndham.
(b) To improve the track from Wyndham to Karunjie.
(c) To open up a track from Karunjie to Gibb River Station in order that the whole
of the vehicles and equipment, stores, etc., may be transported from Wyndham
to Gibb River, which shall be the base and starting point for the survey.
(d) He will then provide a bulldozer to assist the Transport Section in opening up
a track, as indicated in the foregoing, from Gibb River Northwards. The
extent to which this might be possible will depend on the nature of the country
and the progress that can be made ; having in mind that the whole party, with
vehicles, equipment, etc., must return to 'vVyndham before the commencement
of the set season —by the end of September or early in October, according to
the season.
Surveyor Morgan should locate, if possible, a landing ground about half way between
Gibb River and the mouth of the King Edward River, and if it be possible for the bulldozer to
proceed this far, it could be employed in the preparation of that landing ground, having in mind,
the great advantage it will be if petrol and other supplies can be taken in by ’plane to it.
Efforts to obtain assistance from the Royal Australian Navy and the State Shipping Service
to provide landing craft at Napier Broome Bay to bring the whole party, or such sections of it
as might be possible, with vehicles and equipment, South from the Bay have been unsuccessful.
It will be necessary, therefore, to so arrange the programme of work of the three Sections to ensure
as indicated in the foregoing, that they shall be able to get out of the region with all vehicles and
equipment before the wet season makes travel impossible.
The Manager of the State Shipping Service, Mr. Owens, has agreed to arrange for the trans-
port of vehicles, stores, equipment and personnel, to Wyndham in time for the survey project
referred to herein to be commenced in the 1954 dry season. It will be necessary to let him know
as soon as possible the approximate space and tonnage required.
The preliminary work that has been done to date may be summarised as follows :
(1) Examination of all explorers’ records, aerial photographs and other information
collected from various sources.
(2) The tentative location of a possible route for the track from Gibb River to the
mouth of the King Edward River, and also from Karunjie to Gibb River Station.
(3) The preparation of a rough classification map by aerial photo, interpretation
done by Commonwealth officers in Canberra, working under the direction
of Mr. Christian of the Land research Section of the C.5.1.R.0.
(4) Correspondence over a long period with Commonwealth interested departments
and the attendance at a conference of representatives of them by the Surveyor
General in Canberra in 1953.
(5) Discussions with the Hon. Minister for Lands who has conferred with the Hon.
Premier and members of the Cabinet, who supported my proposal for the carry-
ing out of this long overdue survey and classification of the North Kimberley
region.
(6) Discussions between the Hon. Strickland, Minister for the North-West and the
Hon. Spooner, Minister for National Development in Canberra.
(7) The obtaining of prints necessary for Stereograph study from the R.A.A.F.
(8) The obtaining of shingle mosaics and line compilations prepared by the Director
of National Mapping in Canberra.
(9) Extensive enquiries and arrangements made with Commonwealth and State De-
partments by Surveyor Morgan, in particular, in regard to the whole range of
matters relating to equipment, supplies, transport and the carrying out of this
important survey.
This instruction may be regarded as preliminary and will be followed by other instructions
dealing in detail with relevant matters, including the final selection of personnel.
W. V. FYFE,
Surveyor General.
25th January, 1954.


(b)
The Deputy Surveyor General :
NORTH KIMBERLEY SURVEY, 1954
Instruction No. 2
The Instruction for the North Kimberley Survey, 1954, issued on the 25th January last
dealt with the objects and general plan of operations ; now this Instruction (No. 2) is issued
as supplementary to the abovementioned main Instruction to be regarded as No. 1.
GENERAL
Arrangements have been completed for the provision of transport and equipment, and
the appointment of personnel for this survey, and, in addition, the action to be taken by the Com-
monwealth and the Main Roads Department of this State has been defined by agreement.
Surveyor Morgan’s party now consists of the following :
Leader .. .. .. Surveyor John F. Morgan
Survey Section .. .. Acting Assistant Surveyor J. V. Keating,
Second-in-Command, and Section Leader
Cadet Surveyor W. F. Johnson
Mr. F. L. Swider
Mr. E. Granville
Mr. A. V. Proudfoot
Reconnaissance Section .. Constable L. E. Shaw, Section Leader
3 Trained Natives
Transport Section .. .. Mr. T. E. Cole, Section Leader
Mr. D. J. Pollard
Mr. I. K. Head
Mr. S. R. Hair
The vehicles and part of the equipment and stores have been shipped to Wyndham, and,
in addition, a two and a half ton truck, on loan from the Army, left this morning loaded with
equipment, etc., on the overland journey to Wyndham via the coast road. One of the jeeps,
with trailer, to be used by the Commonwealth officers attached to Surveyor Morgan’s party in
August next will proceed with the abovementioned truck—the two vehicles having four members
of the party to take them through to Wyndham.
The details of the arrangements with the Commissioner of Police, Mr. T. Andersen, for
the release of Constable Shaw to lead the Reconnaissance party ; with the Public Service Com-
missioner, in regard to salaries, allowances, etc., for departmental officers, and with the Secretary
for Labour in regard to wages and allowances for the wages staff, are on the relevant official files.
Similarly, the arrangements with the various Commonwealth and State authorities, regarding
plant, equipment and personnel, etc., are on appropriate files.
SURVEY SECTION:
(a) Accuracy
On the traverse the angles and distances are to be measured within
the limits for cadastral surveys, as laid down in the regulations. An
academic standard of accuracy is not required.
(b) Angles and Bearings
At each station on the traverse the bearing must be carried forward,
and then the angle read twice, i.e., face left and face right, the bearing
of the forward line derived from the resultant angle to be compared with
the bearing " carried forward ”. If the difference is more than 30 seconds
the angle should be read again.
(c) Observations
On the traverse observations for azimuth should be taken at inter-
vals of not more than five miles and discrepancies of more than two min-
utes should be located.


Stellar observations for Latitude and Longitude are to be taken at in-
tervals of not more than 20 miles and the stations from which they are
taken must be connected to some clearly identifiable feature on the aerial
photographs, and also to the traverse where possible without serious
delay.
The Circum-meridian observation for Latitude should be adopted
at Gibb River and at intervals of not more than 40 miles to the Northern
end of the traverse and, similarly the almucantar method should be used
for Longitude observations at the same stations.
At all other stations the methods to be used for observations for Azi-
muth, Latitude and Longitude will be at the discretion of Surveyor Morgan.
If time permits it might be advisable to take some intermediate Latitude
shots for the purpose of a general check on chainage. As it is presumed
that the traverse will be generally in a Northerly direction from Gibb
River Station, the precise observation points at that Station and the North
end of the traverse, and also any outstanding features identifiable on the
aerial photographs at which observation for Latitude and Longitude are
taken, should be permanently marked and referenced, the referencing
being to trees or marks on rocks and the point of observation to be a
survey post, or if on rock, a copper inset and arrow with a cairn built
over them ; the basic starting point at Gibb River should be marked in
cement.
(d) Marking
Commencing at a fixed point at Gibb River Station, every mile shall
be marked by a survey post, the posts to be three feet six inches long and
sunk 18 inches into the ground. When in the vicinity of standing timber,
such positions should be connected by bearing and distance to a suitably
A
marked reference tree, e.g., JM.
R 1
When these instrument points occur in rocky areas, reference should
be made to copper rods inserted in punched holes in solid rock.
Each post should be trenched in conformance with normal rural
standards, and the surplus earth heaped around the post. The standard
survey blaze shall be superimposed on all standing timber within two
feet of the line.
Survey points should be marked with a broad arrow and the following
numbers for identification in the following manner :
A
(1) Survey posts.. JM.
1
A
(2) Reference trees JM.
R 1
A
(3) Trig, points .. JM.
T 1
A
(4) Astrafixes .. JM.
A 1
The first station in any of the four series will be numbered 1, and other
stations should be numbered consecutively.
(e) Chainage Procedure
Extreme care will require to be exercised to minimise the risk of
major chainage errors. The following procedure may be of assistance .
(i) A fixed number of chainage arrows to be used.
(ii) The chainman to keep an independent chainage record ; his
tally to be recorded either by a scratched distance on the
ground or on a piece of paper attached to the chainage arrow.


(iii) Where a " broken ” chainage is necessitated, the succeeding
recording should be the complement of five chain.
(iv) Take angular recordings to permanent topographical features
to permit a check by triangulalion.
(V) All angles of elevation and depression to be carefully recorded.
(f) Hsighting
Datum. Gibb River Air Strip 1,600 feet.
The method used for heighting must take into account the heights
of instruments and the referring mark at each reading and the greatest
care should be exercised to record whether the angle is one of elevation
or deoression. A high degree of accuracy in vertical control is not re-
quired, consequently any method to give a plus or minus result within
three feet per mile might be adopted. (Errors no doubt would be com-
pensating.)
If the traverse is carried forward to the coast or to the tidal waters
of one of the rivers a connection with sea level should be made, if possible.
On the traverse vertical angles may be read to suitably situated easily
identifiable features, with readings from two or more points to the same
feature in each case as a check on heighting and also where the features are
prominent to ascertain their heights. In those cases bearings also would be
necessary.
For any precise heighting of key landmarks, readings should be taken
in the middle of the day and readings of the barometer and temperature
should be recorded at the point of observation.
(g) Field Notes
Clarity of field notes is essential and where necessary explanatory
diagrams should be included. Concise booking of soil types, timber,
grasses, rock formations and natural water supplies is desirable. Column
notes may be used if desired for more speed and greater freedom of notation,
care being taken to show the position and length of all offsets.
Offsets to large water courses should be estimated or measured only
to the extent required to show their positions for identification on the
air photos., except in special cases when some more accurate determination
might be necessary.
(h) Meteorological Record
The Deputy Director, Meteorological Services, W.A., Mr. G. W.
Mackey, has supplied a number of field books in which it is desired that
certain meteorological information be recorded. Care should be taken,
however, to ensure that the progress of the survey is not in any way re-
tarded by this work. A copy of the letter which 1 received from Mr.
Mackey is supplied herewith for the guidance of Surveyor Morgan. The
minimum requirement is a daily record of weather, barometric pressure
and temperature.
RECONNAISSANCE SECTION
As indicated in No. 1 Instruction, the Reconnaissance Section Leader
will be Constable L. E. Shaw, and arrangements have been made for him
to have three Natives, including one police tracker in his Section. Sur-
veyor Morgan will also accompany this Section on much of its work.
Sixteen pack donkeys and seven horses have been provided by Mr. Mc-
Beath, Officer-in-Charge of Moola Bulla Native Station near Hall’s Creek,
and are at present on their way to Gibb River Station.
Pack saddles have been obtained from South Australia, and saddles
for the horses have been supplied by the Police Department.
The duties of this Section are set out in No. 1 Instruction.
The necessary wireless units for the three Sections of the party have
been obtained from Adelaide.


TRANSPORT SECTION
This Section has been equipped with the vehicles mentioned in No,
1 Instruction, and also a two and a half ton 6-wheel drive truck has been
obtained on loan from the Army. The Leader of the Section is Mr.
T. E. Cole.
The Main Roads party, with bulldozer, carrier, and grader commenced
on the reconditioning of the Wyndham-Karunjie track as the first step
in this survey project on the 26th March, 1954. Their progress is along
the lines indicated in No. 1 Instruction.
Surveyor Morgan expects to confer with the officers of the Main Roads
Department in Wyndham next week and arrange for the necessary co-
ordination of effort in regard to location of a track from Karunjie to Gibb
River Station, and also in connection with the movement of the vehicles
with his party.
A history and record of use of each vehicle in the Transport Section, or otherwise used
by the party, should be kept, and in accordance with the usual procedure the list of tools, spares,
etc., prepared at the commencement of this project should be maintained, and at the conclusion
of it, a final list should be sent to the Storekeeper, Department of Lands and Surveys.
COMMUNICATIONS
Wireless communication between the three Sections, the Flying Doctor Base at Wyndham,
and overseas time signal stations, should be maintained. Transport Section to maintain track
access to the Gibb River Station.
DIARY
Surveyor Morgan and each Section Leader should keep a diary, recording very briefly
the work done each day and commenting on any other relevant matters, such as the health of
the party, state of equipment, class of country, water supplies, etc.
SUPPLIES
Petrol, equipment and stores, etc., to be carried by truck from Wyndham for the first
stage of survey. The air freight may be used to the full extent required— at the discretion of
Surveyor Morgan.
MONTHLY RETURNS
Forms 5.743 and 742 should be completed monthly.
PHOTOGRAPHIC RECORD
Photographs in colour should be taken to show types of country, topographical and geo-
logical features, and to depict the progress, difficulties and routine of the Sections. The position,
description, and date of each photograph to be noted.
NOMENCLATURE
If Native names can be obtained by interrogation of Natives, they should be recorded for
important topographical features.
NATIVE PAINTINGS
If any Native paintings or other markings in caves, or on rocks, are found, if convenient,
they should be photographed so that prints can be made available to the Curator of the Perth
Museum, Mr. Glauert, who has requested that this action be taken. The approximate position
of each painting or marking photographed should be noted, and, if necessary, small reserves could
be created to ensure the protection of them,
STOCK ROUTES
It is expected that sufficient information will be obtained from this survey to enable Sur-
veyor Morgan to recommend very approximately where stock routes might be located—par-
ticularly through the main axis of the region to be traversed, that is, from Gibb River to Kalumburu,
and if time permits the possibility of locating a track and stock route from Karunjie North- West-
erly to the main route from Gibb River Northwards might be investigated.


PORT SITE
Surveyor Morgan, at the Mission, should make enquiries to ascertain whether a port site
could be located in Napier Broome Bay.
NATIVES
It is desired that the progress of the survey should not be in any way hampered by Natives.
Apparently there are very few of them in the central North Kimberley, and the possibility of
their following the party to obtain food, etc., is remote.
On the coastal region to the West and North-East there are apparently a fair number of
bush Natives, and if any members of the party meet these, a certain amount of caution might
be necessary. However, Constable Shaw will, no doubt, give valuable advice in regard to any
matters relating to the Natives in that far Northern part of the State, and Surveyor Morgan will
issue such instructions as may be necessary.
CLEANSKIN CATTLE
The greatest care should be exercised, if cattle are to be taken for meat, to ensure that only
cleanskins are shot, and this should be avoided, except in cases of emergency. If, however, by
mistake a branded beast is killed, the owner, if known, should be advised, regret expressed and
he be requested to submit a claim for compensation.
REPORTS
Surveyor Morgan should send to the Surveyor General brief progress reports each month,
and submit a full report on the whole survey project after the return of the expedition to Perth.
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, I wish to emphasise the fact that these Instructions are for the purpose of
setting out the main objectives to be aimed at, and the procedure to be followed. They are,
however, for the guidance of Surveyor Morgan and his party, and he may vary them according to
any unforseen circumstances, or developments, which, in his opinion, renders a variation neces-
sary, having in mind the purposes of the survey.
It is not considered necessary to comment on the matters of health, use of firearms, the
caution necessary to avoid loss of time through men getting out of touch with their Sections, nor
to detail the nature of the reports as to vegetation, geology, topography, etc. Mr. Morgan will
deal with these matters to the extent required.
Surveyor Morgan must return with personnel and equipment to Wyndham before the
wet season. It is realised that he might not be able to complete more than a portion of the work
covered by these Instructions. On the other hand, progress might be more rapid than expected
and he may be able to carry out certain reconnaissance work in the King Edward River country,
which is next in priority to the Carson and Drysdale River systems.
The total area of the region is about 20,000,000 acres, and this 1954 survey, in addition
to its use for mapping purposes, is aimed at obtaining a general stocktaking to indicate the poten-
tialities of that area.
W. V. FYFE,
Surveyor General .
7th April, 1954.


Station.
Geographical.
Rectangular.
References.
Latitude.
Longitude.
Easting.
Northing.
Map Area.
Photo Area.
Run
No.
Photo.
No.
JM A1 ..
16° 25' 38-79"
126° 25' 47-76"
450 219
2 928 833
Mt. Elizabeth
Mt. Elizabeth
7
5059
JM A2 ..
16° 12' 25-00"
126° 29' 19-50"
457 154
2 955 502
do.
do.
4
5204
JM A3 ..
16° 01' 01-83"
126° 27' 04-29"
452 812
2 978 478
do.
Ashton
15A
5085
JM A4 ..
15° 40' 23-00"
126° 23' 46-05"
446 445
3 020 134
Ashton
do.
10
5036
JM A5 ..
15° 26' 20-31"
126° 26' 53-55"
452 611
3 048 448
do.
do.
7
5150
JM A6 ..
15° 25' 01-60"
126° 40' 36-00"
479 437
3 051 023
do.
do.
7
5156
JM A7 ..
15° 14' 31-00"
126° 24' 21-00"
447 682
3 072 300
do.
do.
4
5083
JM A8 ..
15° 10' 28-96"
126° 41' 28-05"
481 227
3 080 351
do.
do.
3
5136
JM A9 ..
14° 17' 45-80"
126° 38' 27-30"
475 629
3 186 691
Drysdale . .
Drysdale ..
5
5127
JM A10 ..
14° 31' 07-74"
126° 47' 09-90"
492 667
3 159 683
do.
do.
8
5162
JM All ..
14° 46' 39-04"
126° 47' 20-25"
492 897
3 128 378
do.
do.
12
5195
JM A12 ..
14° 59' 48-81"
126° 48' 37-95"
495 342
3 101 821
do.
Ashton
1
5019
JM A13 ..
15° 16' 23-75"
126° 38' 41-55"
475 756
3 068 442
Ashton
do.
4
5088
JM A14 ..
15° 24' 11-29"
126° 13' 08-85"
425 725
3 052 826
do.
do.
6
5219
JM A15 ..
15° 03' 30-25"
126° 17' 36-30"
434 503
3 094 530
do.
do.
1
5032
JM A16 ..
14° 38' 53-56"
126° 23' 42-45"
446 551
3 144 145
Drysdale ..
Drysdale ..
10
5103
APPENDIX D
RESULTS OF ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATIONS
ASTRO. STATIONS—NORTH KIMBERLEY SURVEY, 1954
CO-ORDINATES
NOTE.—The above values are subject to amendment upon completion of check on calculations.




