

NEW SOUTH WALES.
DEPARTMENT OF MINES AND AGRICULTURE.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY.
E. F. PITTMAN, A.R.S.M., GOVERMENT GEOLOGIST.
MINERAL RESOURCES.
No. 9.
REPORT
ON THE
YALWAL GOLD-FIELD.
BY
E. C. ANDREWS, B.A.,
GEOLOGICAL SURVEYOR.
1901.
SYDNEY: WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1901.
*72012 A [2s.]


PLATE I.
VIEW OF YALWAL FROM THE SOUTH.


NEW SOUTH WALES.
DEPARTMENT OF MINES AND AGRICULTURE.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY.
E. F. PITTMAN, A.R.S.M., Government Geologist.
MINERAL RESOURCES.
No. 9.
REPORT
ON THE
YALWAL GOLD-FIELD.
BY
E. C. ANDREWS, B.A.,
GEOLOGICAL SURVEYOR.
1901.
SYDNEY : WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1901.
* 72912 A [2s.]




Geological Survey Office,
Department of Mines and Agriculture,
Sydney, 17 October, 1901.
Sir,
I have the honor to submit for publication Report No, 9 of the
Mineral Resources Series, being a description of the geology of the Talwal
Gold-field, by Mr. E. C. Andrews, 8.A., Geological Surveyor.
Gold-mining operations have been carried on at Talwal for about thirty
years, and although some extremely rich patches of stone have been
extracted from such mines as The Pinnacle, The Caledonia, The Pioneer,
and The Homeward Bound, it is chiefly upon the low grade ores of the field
that the gold-mining industry has had to depend.
- The Talwal field is of interest, owing to the fact that the mining and
treatment of auriferous ores has been effected here at a lower cost than in
any other part of the State; one of the principal reasons for this is that the
ore can be extracted in open cuts or quarries at a very low rate. The gold
occurs chiefly as impregnations in indurated slates, quartzites, and con-
glomerates of Devonian age, and although minute quartz veins are
occasionally visible in these, it is found to be more economical to extract
and treat the whole of the material rather than to attempt to pick out the
richer portions.
The Homeward Bound and Pioneer Mines have been able to pay their way
for some years by treating ore of exceptionally low value; and in view of
this fact it seems probable that good profits could be obtained if these
mines were worked on a much larger scale, as is done, for instance, with
analogous ores at the Treadwell mine, Alaska, U.S.A,
EDWARD F. PITTMAN,
Government Geologist.
The Under Secretary for Mines and Agriculture.


SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS.
Frontispiece.
1. Introduction.
2. Synopsis op Contents.
3. History op Development op Mining :
Report by A. Mackay in 1852.
> Reports by Rev. W. B. Clarke, F.R.S., 1860-72 :—Sluicing operations by J.
Sivewright and Party. Inception of operations at Pinnacle and Eclipse
Claims. Alluvial gold found in Sawpit Gully, 1871. Discovery of Pioneer
Claim, 1872. Homward Bound Mine, 1874. Erection of batteries. Find of
alluvial in Sawpit Gully, 1893. Caledonian rich finds, 1895. Payable gold
prospects at Grassy Gully, 1895. Summary.
-4. Previous References to Yalwal Gold-field -. —
(a) A. Mackay. (6) W. B. Clarke. (c) E. F. Pittman. (d) J. B. Jaquet.
• (e) Wardens’ Reports.
5. Physical Geography :
Mountain and river systems. Scenic features determined by slope of strata and
nature of rocks. Meteorology.
6. General Geology :
A. Upper Marine Sandstones.
Carboniferous—Granites and porphyries.
Devonian Lepidodendron Beds. Sills and contemporaneous flows. Gold-
bearing rocks. Rhyolites.
B. The Sedimentary Rocks—(a) Upper Marine sandstones. (5) Devonian.
C. Eruptive Rocks.—(a) Rhyolites. (5) Dolerites. (c) Granites and porphyries.
D. Metamorphism.
E. Petrology.
7. Economic Geology :
(a) Alluvial Mining. (5) Occurrence of gold at Yalwal and Grassy Gully, (c) Other
mineral occurrences.
8. Description op Mining Properties :
A. Yalwal (a) Pinnacle, (i) Eclipse. (c) Pioneer, (d) Homeward Bound.
(e) Caledonian. (/) Star. ( g) Golden Crown, (h) Usher, (i) Golden Quarry
(Nos. 1 & 2). (j) Victory, (i) Poor Man. (?) Minor properties.
B. Grassy Gully— (a) Grassy Gully Mine. ( h) Percival’s Claim.
9. Appendices.
10. Description of Plates.
PREVIOUS REFERENCES TO THE YALWAL AND GRASSY GULLY
GOLD-FIELDS.
(1.) In 1852, Mr. A. Mackay, Commissioner of Crown Lands, reported on the
geology of Yalwal.*
(2.) The Rev. W. B. Clarke, F.R.S., also reported on the Yalwal Gold-field at various
times between 1860 and 1872.+
<3.) Mr. E. F. Pittman, Government, Government Geologist in 1883, made a report
also on the Yalwal field J
(4.) Mr. J. B. Jaquet, Geological Surveyor, reported on a gold-bearing rhyolite at
Grassy Gully. §
(5.) Mr. W. H. J. Slee, Chief Mining Inspector, reported on the Bundundah reefs. ||
(6.) Various Wardens’ reports are to be found in the Annual Reports of the Depart,
ment of Mines for the years 1878-79, 1880-81, 1887-88, 1888-89, 1889-90-
1890-91, 1891-92.
•Southern Gold-fields, pp. 39 and 40. f Ibid., pp, 40-45. J Ann. Kept., Dept. Mines for 1883-84
pp. 169 and 160. | Records Geol, Survey N. S. Wales, 1900, vii. p. 17. 1 Ann. Kept., Dept. Mines,
N. S. Wales, for 1889, p. 134.


INTRODUCTION.
Many of the gold bearing areas in New South Wales are closely connected
with granite masses of Carboniferous age.
The main mountain makers of the Cordillera of New South Wales (as also
of Queensland) are Carboniferous rocks of basic granite types, and the
auriferous areas skirting these masses are more or less dependent on them
for their gold supply.*
The gold may be contained in the granite or felsite itself; it may exist
throughout the contiguous strata in veins caused by intrusion of the igneous
masses, and subsequently filled by circulating mineralised waters; or the
gold, under the influence of the igneous masses, may be segregated from
the strata themselves into veins or pockets.
Talwal and Grassy Gully appear to be additional examples of this,
influence of Carboniferous (?) granitic masses.
In Talwal itself, the gold, though not mined for in the granite, is yet hr
such association with it as to suggest its influence.
At Grassy Gully, five miles north of Talwal, the gold-bearing reefs are
contained in an old rhyolite, which exhibits traces of flow structure.f
The rough and mountainous character of the country made Talwal'
difficult of access in former times. Even at present the road down the
mountain leading to the township coiltains a grade of lin near the
summit. A new road, with a grade of lin 12, is almost completed, and this
will benefit the Nowra-Talwal traffic considerably.
Hitherto Grassy Gully has been heavily handicapped for the same reason,,
although a new road, almost completed to Burrier, will give the residents
access to the outer world. All these means of communication with Nowra.
will make for progress in this district.
•Address delivered to Royal Society of N. S. Wales, September, 1900, by Prof. T. W. E. David, F.R.S.
f J. B. Jaquet, Records Geol. Survey, N. S. Wales, 1900, vii p. 17.


The map of Yalwal Gold-field accompanying this Eeport is fairly
accurate with respect to the central portion. The junctions of the sandstone
with the granitic rocks tp the north-west and south-west of the map are,
however, approximately correct only. This is due to the broken nature of
the country, and the scrubby character of the vegetation.
I desire here to cordially thank Mr. A. P. Mixner, manager of the Home-
ward Bound Mine ; Mr. V. Petherick, the former manager of this property;
Mr. 1.1. Chappie, manager of Mr. A. Hay’s properties; Mr. C. Potts, 8.A.;
Mr. John Maclean, of Nowra; Mr. Durkin, manager of Grassy Gully
Mine; Mr. A. Hielman; Mr. H. Martin; Mr. J. Sivewright; Mr. G.
Davidson ; and many others, who have most courteously volunteered both
help and information.
The maps and sections, were prepared by Mr. 0. Trickett, L.S., of the
Geological Branch.


History of the Development of Mining
at Yalwal.
In 1852, Mr. A. Mackay, Commissioner of Crown Lands for the County of
St. Vincent, communicated with Mr. J. E. Hardy, Commissioner of Crown
Lands, concerning the geological and auriferous character of the Talwal
District.*
During various periods between 1860 and 1872, the Eev. ~W. B. Clarke,
examined the district under consideration in some detail.f
In these earlier days the whole country stretching from the mouth of
the Talwal Creek to the head of J;he Tarramunmun (known as Sassafras),
belonged to W. Elyard. Toorooroo, situate at the junction of the Danjera
and Tarramunmun Creeks, was the head station; and close to this spot,
early in 1870, the first real efforts at prospecting were undertaken.
The original prospectors were Messrs. J. Sivewright, J. Brakewell
and S. Donovan. The site chosen for working the alluvial was along the
Danjera, immediately above its confluence with the Tarramunmun. Here
350 feet of boxes for sluicing operations were set up. Prom this alluvial
claim, J. Sivewright, with six men on wages, recovered 1£ to 2 ounces of
gold per week.
The great flood of 1871 washed away all the sluicing apparatus, and
caused suspension of operations for a time.
In the same year, and a little higher up the creek, J. Sivewright and E.
Curtis discovered reef gold in situ. The spot is now known as “ The
Pinnacle” or No. 1 Claim. The stone was found on the summit of a bluff
rising some 150 feet out of the creek.
Prospects were crushed in a sandstone mortar.
A parcel of 2 cwt. was sent to Mori's, in Pitt-street, with a result of
7 dwt. per ton from surface stone. This dismayed the prospectors for a
while, hut on Sivewright’s return from Queensland in 1873, he essayed a
second time the working of the Pinnacle.
Prom a small parcel of ore 30 oz. of gold were obtained. Por four
months’ work the result was 140 oz. of gold.
The stone was carried down the bluff to the creek, and dollied there by
means of crowbars working in nail cans. By preliminary roasting of the
ore each man was enabled to crush 56 lb. weight per day. The gold was
then amalgamated dry after passing the crushed material through very fine
sieves. The prospects being still payable, one of Dr. Beer’s one stamper
spring machines was procured. This gave a strike equal to 2 cwt. One
man with this machine could crush half a ton of stone per week. The
returns were from 24 to 30 oz. per ton, extracted from hard clean quartz.
* W. B. Clarke, Southern Gold-fields, pp. 39*40. Also Appendix Ito this report. t J&uZ, pp. 40*45.
Also Appendix 11.


Shortly afterwards, a 3-head battery, constructed at Lutton’s, supplanted
Dr. Beer’s machine. "With the improved machinery, 3 to 4 tons of stone
were crushed every week.
In 1871, alluvial gold was obtained in Sawpit Gully. The metal was
coarse in character, but did not appear to occur in payable quantities.
E. Aldis and J. Caddie discovered gold in 1872 from surface prospects on
the property now known as the Pioneer. The stone was treated at the creek
below, but the gold was of too fine a nature for the crude methods of saving
employed, and prospecting was discontinued on this claim for a period.
About the year 1874 Michael Harvey and another found gold on the
present Homeward Bound Claim.
About the year 1875 J. Mae Arthur & Company erected a 5-head battery,
driven by an engine of 8-horse power. It was an odd five of an original
30-head battery, procured for the Upper Shoalhaven Eiver.
A 16-ton parcel was made up from the Homeward Bound Claim, and
crushed at this battery. The result was 1 oz. 6 dwt. per ton.
J. Sivewright and Party hired this plant for their work, its crushing
efficiency being 40-45 tons per week.
Gold in the stone (the Pinnacle) varied from 1-3 J oz. per ton. The
Pinnacle owners used this plant for 12 months. The property was then
taken up by a company of 24,000 £1 shares, with 12,000 paid up to £l.
The Homeward Bound Claim was then taken up by T. Thorburn and Party.
In 1887 they bought a 10-head battery from J. Mae Arthur & Company,
which had been originally used for public crushings, and fixed it on the site
of the present cyanide plant. A shaft was sunk for 50 feet on a quartz
vein, but later, finding that the gold was scattered in “stringers” throughout
the country, the company excavated a large chamber in the vicinity of the
quartz vein. More gold was found from surface crushings near the original
workings. The surface was then broken through and the open cut system
established. The country was worked north and south for gold.
As the success of the Homeward Bound Claim became .assured, another
trial was made on the adjoining Pioneer property.
A shaft was sunk on a small quartz “ leader,” and good returns were
crushed from the same. Stoping was resorted to, and several crushings
taken from both shaft and stope.
Prior to 1885, the original company (consisting of T. Thorburn, J.
Maclean, and 30 others) had sunk the shaft 60 feet.
The claim next to the Pinnacle on the north, and known as the Eclipse or
Ho. 2, was taken up by J. Maclean and Party about the year 1874.
A 10-head battery was erected in 1878. This was purchased from Dr.
H. J. Tarrant. The second crushing gave a result of 7 oz. gold per ton from
761 tons of ore.
In 1881, £2,795 worth of gold was extracted from this claim.
In 1880, E. Curtis and E. Plctcher discovered gold in a claim north of the
Eclipse property, and known as the Poor Man.
In February, 1881, a 15-head battery was procured for the Pinnacle
Company from the Atlas Works. This company at the time mentioned was
known as the Talwal Quartz-mining Company.
The “ Star” lease was taken up by Kennedy, Maclean and Party in 1883.
The shareholders numbered eighteen. £2,000 were spent in driving tunnels
without any return.
This property immediately adjoins the Homeward Bound lease to the
south, and it was the prosperity of the latter which urged the lessees of the
Star to take up and explore the claim.


Accordingly three tunnels were put in as closely as possible to the southern
boundary of the neighbouring property. The tunnels were driven vertically
above each other in the rough hillside which composes the claim.
The lower tunnel was started in 1883 and completed in 1885. Its length
is 450 feet and its direction easterly. This is near the level of the creek.
The upper tunnel was driven by Peter Matson in 1887, under the sand-
stone capping of the hill, and 350 feet above the level of the creek. The
total length driven was 200 feet.
Prom this part of the claim 10 tons of stone were extracted in 1893,
yielding an average of 7 dwts. of gold per ton.
A middle tunnel was also driven about 100 feet below the upper one
between the years 1890-92. The total length driven was 350 feet.
Prospects amounting to 10 and 12 dwt. per ton were obtained from this
working.
Prior to 1885, the work on the Pioneer consisted of a shaft some 50 or
60 feet deep, and a few small surface workings.
Mr. J. Hanson, in 1890, bought the property for £15,000. Stone taken
from various spots on the lease gave satisfactory results, individual crushings
yielding returns as high as 3 oz. per ton. Three quarries, or open cuts,
exist on this property. The two westerly ones represent earlier exploitings
for gold. The eastern one, shown on the map as continuous with the
Homeward Bound open cut, is of more recent date than the others.
A tunnel was driven nearly 900 feet into the hill in 1891. In 1901 the
tunnel was carried a further 100 feet. The idea was to test the hill, and to
connect the open cuts with the battery.
Another tunnel at a higher level was driven 400 feet to prove the
property, and to connect the workings with the main pass.
A 40-head battery was erected by Mr. Hanson in 1891.
The property was then resold to a Nowra syndicate, having practically the
same personnel as the original company. This was in 1892.
The approximate cost of erecting the mining plant and in developing the
property was £27,000.
The Caledonian Claim was taken up in 1885, and amalgamated with the
Star in 1887.
In that year, prospectors found an auriferous vein in the first-named
property. A 5-head battery for public use was employed, a road being cut
round the hillside to convey the ore to the battery. One hundred tons were
crushed from the lease for a return of £5OO, the maximum yield being 6 oz.
per ton.
The road just mentioned passed through what is now known as Underwood’s
Cut, splendid stone lying unnoticed on the roadside for four or five years.
The mine lay idle until 1892, in which year W. Underwood and E.
Johnson took the mine on tribute. Opening up a small quartz vein showing
in the roadside at Underwood’s Cut, they crushed, at the first trial, stone
varying from 23 to 30 oz. of gold per ton. From this vein, varying from
3 to 9 inches in width, they crushed £3,500 worth of gold in three months.
One parcel of 34 cwt. yielded 750 oz. of gold. This rich stone was, from
all accounts, very unpromising in appearance; only on being crushed or
scratched did it reveal its true nature. The tributers, apparently, then lost
the vein against a “ floor.”
Fletcher Brothers then took the property on lease from the original tribu-
ters. Following the “floor” up, they again came on the vein, which proved
richer than before.
Fletcher Brothers won £6,500 worth of gold as the result of their tribute.


These latter then closed in with an offer of £950 from the original
company, who, in a short space of time, extracted gold to the value of
£6,900.
Other veins, running parallel to the direction of Underwood’s Cut and
known as Ison’s and Sandeman’s Cuts, were worked also with success, the
stone varying from 2 to 6 oz. of gold per ton.
In 1886, the Eclipse Company, having excavated a system of large chambers
from an extensive lode formation, connected the same with their battery by
means of a long and sinuous tunnel.
Erom 1882 to 1889 the Homeward Bound Company crushed with a 10-
head battery.
In 1885, £5,132, and in 1887, £6,105 worth of gold was won by the
company.
After 1889, the property was sold to the Homeward Bound Hold-mining
Company, who erected twenty head of stampers (exclusive of the original
10-head battery).
In 1891, another twenty head of stampers was added, and two years after
the original 10-head battery was incorporated with the 40-head, to form
a 50-head battery.
From June, 1893, to December, 1896, the mine was hampered considerably,
sometimes closed altogether, owing to litigation.
This threw the miners out of employment, and an alluvial prospect being
found by Middleton and Prince, in a shaft 15 feet deep, in Sawpit Gully, a
small rush took place in 1893.
Thirty men were soon at work, the gully being rushed, although the ground
was leased. £2,500 worth of gold was extracted in eight months. Nuggets
varying in weight from 15 dwts. to 2 ozs. were found.
In 1894, J. Sivewright and T. Mason attempted to sink through a vesicular
dolerite at Grassy Gully (five miles north of Talwal) for alluvial gold.
The following year, It. Ison and Charles Moffatt discovered payable gold
at the same locality (Grassy Gully).
This was in close proximity to the sandstone cap which forms the ridge
between the Shoalhaven River and Yalwal Creek. The auriferous belt was
found to extend in a north and south direction through a rhyolite flow, and
the country was rapidly taken up over a narrow area exceeding a mile in
length.
In 1896, a great number of the minor properties belonging to the Talwal
area were worked with varying success.
In this year 113 tons of stone were crushed, for a return of ozs. of
gold, from “The Golden Quarry ” (G.L. 27.28).
In the early part of February, 1898, a cyanide plant was erected by the
Pioneer Company.
During the same month, the Homeward Bound Claim was placed under
new management. Mr. Petherick came into charge, and, in view of the low
class of the ore, he decided to erect an experimental cyanide plant.
Mr. A. F. Mixner had charge of the cyanide plant. It worked so well
that a much larger plant was erected, which ultimately became the mainstay
of the mine.
In November, 1900, Mr. Mixner was appointed general manager.
Moffatt, one of the discoverers of Grassy Gully gold, took up a lease in
this locality in 1895, and sold, shortly afterwards, to the Anglo-Australian
Company. The lease was forfeited in June, 1898, and taken up by Messrs.
Hanson and Barron, by whom it was worked for nine months.


It was then sold to Mr. "W. H. E. Lovely and Party, and'worked for six
months.
In January, 1900, it was formed into the Grassy Gully Gold-mining
Company, with P. Durkin as manager.
The mine had been sunk to 185 feet in June, 1900.
A 10-head battery and a Wilfley vanner were erected in September, 1900.
Summary.
1852. Report on Yalwal, by Mr. A. Maekay. Reports by Rev. W. B. Clarke, F.R.S.
1870. Prospecting for alluvial by J. Sivewright and Party.
1871. Abandonment of sluicing operations. Alluvial found in Sawpit Gully. , Discovery
of gold in situ (Pinnacle).
1872. Gold discovery in Pioneer Claim.
1873. Pinnacle worked a second time.
1874. Gold discovered in Homeward Bound Claim. Eclipse Claim taken up (?).
1875. Erection of 5-bead battery for public crushing purposes.
1878. Ten-head battery erected for Eclipse Claim.
18S0. “ Poor Man ” discovered.
1831. Fifteen-head battery procured for Pinnacle.
1883. “ Star ” lease taken up.
1885. “ Caledonian ” lease pegged out.
1887. Homeward Bound Company purchased 10-head battery.
1889. Additional 20-head of stampers erected for Homeward Bound Company.
1890. Mr. J. Hanson purchased Pioneer property for £15,000. Eorty-head battery erected
for Pioneer property.
1891. Pioneer Lower Tunnel driven 850 feet.
1892. Additional 20-head battery erected for Homeward Bound Company. The old
10-head included, bringing total up to 50-head. W. Underwood and R. Johnson
crushed £3,000 worth of gold in three months from Caledonian Claim. Pioneer
property rebought by original shareholders.
1893. £2,500 worth of alluvial gold won from Sawpit Gully.
1894. T. Mason and J. Sivewright attempted to sink through dolerite for alluvial in
Grassy Gully.
1895. C. Moffatt and R. Ison discovered gold at Grassy Gully. “ Grassy Gully Mine ”
started. Pioneer and Caledonian properties yielded £18,565 worth of gold. 4 tons
crushed from Caledonian for 1,664 oz. of gold.
1896. Numerous minor properties worked.
1898. Cyanide plant erected for Pioneer Claim. Experimental cyanide plant erected for
Homeward Bound Claim.
1900. Present Homeward Bound cyanide plant erected (March). Ten-head battery and
Wilfley vanner erected at Grassy Gully.
Physical Geography.
Talwal, by road, is about eighteen miles west of Nowra. It is approached
from the latter by crossing a couple of ridges, and is situate at the base of a
gorge, through which the Danjera Creek flows in its passage to the Shoal-
haven Eiver.
Eor a distance of seven miles out of Nowra, the road makes a gradual
ascent for about 600 feet. Saltwater Creek is then crossed. Thence to the
16-mile peg, the road follows a narrow ridge, at which point a descent is made
of 900 feet to the junction of the Danjera and Tarramunmun Creeks.
Drainage System. —The Shoalhaven Eiver has a northerly course from
Braidwood to Bungonia. A little below the latter place, however, it alters
its direction sharply to the east. Sweeping clean through the mountainous
belt between Bungonia and the coast, it persists in its new course until it
reaches the sea, eighty miles distant. In this easterly direction it drains the
whole of the Talwal District, and takes in also the waters of the Kangaroo
Eiver.


The country is very rugged and broken, especially to the west of Talwal.
The district represents a thoroughly dissected plateau with ridges or
“razorbaeks ” marking the extensive denudation to which the old upland
has been subjected, and, at the same time, separating the various creeks,
which feed the Shoalhaven, from each other.
From an eminence immediately behind the village of Talwal, and 1,250
feet above the Danjera Creek, the leading features in the topography can
easily be made out.
To the north and west the Shoalhaven River has eroded an old sandstone
plateau to a marvellous extent. From the spot where it gathers in the
waters of the Kangaroo River (and also far above this point) to its junction
with the Talwal Creek, bold escarpments, 2,000 feet and more in height,
with cliffs 1,000 feet high in places, mark the course of the canon-like valley
of the main stream.
A little below its junction with the Talwal Creek, the river spreads itself
over the flatter country caused by the retreat of the hills from the stream.
On the east bank, the huge pile known as the Cambewarra Mountain (a
portion of the coast range), 2,000 feet in height, divides the waters of
the main stream from its large tributary, the Kangaroo River. This high-
land supports luxuriant growths of grass, which constitute one of the sources
of wealth of the district. Thence towards the sea the mountains dwindle
in height, and with the exception of Coolongatta, a rounded eminence, 1,000
feet high, they become less and less separable from the gentle undulations
of the surrounding country.
The creeks in the immediate neighbourhood of Talwal are the Danjera
(Plate II), the Right Arm or Bundundah, the Ettrema, and the Tarra-
munmun. These have approximately parallel courses for considerable
distances, finally joining the Talwal near its confluence with the main stream.
The sandstone cap constituting the former plateau at one time extended
in unbroken continuity from the present coast .line through Talwal and
across the Shoalhaven River. This has since been trenched or dissected so
thoroughly in the vicinity of Talwal by the creeks just enumerated that
their courses are marked by gorges varying from 1,000 to 1,500 feet in depth,
the summits of their various watersheds being represented merely by lines
of cliffs in many places not more than a chain in width.
The cap comprises two series of hard sandstones, with soft intercalated
shales. These harder beds divide the district into two “ platforms ”or
“ terraces.” The upper some 200 feet thick and from 1,200 to 1,400 feet
above the creeks, forms precipices over which the pioneers of the district
found it difficult to force a way. Also a lower platform 500 feet below the
upper one, and some 150 feet in thickness. This also faces the valleys in
precipitous manner.
The upper series is broken here and there by lower gaps or passes allowing
ingress and egress to and from the valleys.
The hard strata underlying the sandstone cap are exposed at a general
height of 500 feet above the creeks. These, unlike the sandstone (which
forms “terraces”), weather out into long hard spurs, which advance to the
creeks from the cliffs above, after the manner of great buttresses.
These platforms or “terraces” are to be expected in greatly denuded
horizontal strata, where the beds are of varying hardness. A still later phase
of denudation is the “ mesa ” stage, when creeks have so intersected a plateau
as to leave isolated flat-topped hills with precipitous sides. Several examples
of these occur in the vicinity of Talwal. They are about 1,000 feet in iieight,
have high cliffs surmounting very steep slopes, and possess quite flat tops, a
few acres only in extent.


PLATE II.
GENERAL VIEW OF DANJERA CREEK FROM THE PINNACLE CLAIM. PIONEER AND HOMEWARD BOUND
BATTERIES IN THE MIDDLE GROUND


The appearance of the Devonian rocks conforms also to the generally
observed order of phenomena in the weathering of strata nearly vertical,
containing beds of varying hardness, i.e., rough spurs with dyke-like for-
mations (representing the harder layers), running parallel to the strike.
The valleys widen in and out most capriciously. The trend, however, of
the minor streams is nearly north and south.
Five miles above Talwal, along the Danjera Creek, bluffs occur nearly
1,000 feet in height, composed of red granite and rhyolites.
Meteorology. —Yalwal, although eighteen miles only from Nowra, ex-
periences intense heat in summer. This is due to its being cut off from sea
influences by a mountain ridge, 1,100 feet high, rising immediately to the
east of the village and trending so as to intercept any sea breeze; to the
narrowness of the gorge itself in which the village is situated ; and to the
fact of its being less than 200 feet above sea level. On exceptional days the
shade temperature reaches 115° Fahrenheit.
The rainfall varies from 40 to 50 inches per annum.
Vegetation. —The granite areas contain great escarpments supporting a
very meagre and stunted vegetation.
The sandstone below the upper line of cliffs supports dense growths from
six to ten feet high, through which it is difficult to force one’s way. The lower
gullies, enclosed by the spurs of Devonian strata, are full of myrtle and
allied growths, while the basic igneous rocks may at times be traced by the
luxuriant crops of grass they support when cleared of timber.
General Geoloot.
The surface of the Talwal District being much broken, very little difficulty
is experienced in ascertaining the various sedimentary and igneous rock
junctions. They are, however, obscured in many places owing to the great
amount of talus derived from the Permo-Carboniferous sandstone, and the
thick scrub-growths that fill the gullies.
The geological formations of this locality are as follows ;
1. Recent and Pleistocene—Alluvium and river terraces.
2. Permo-Carboniferous—Lavas and tuffs, upper marine sandstones.
3. Carboniferous—Granites and quartz-felspar porphyries.
4. Devonian—Dolerite sills, rhyolite lavas, dolerite lavas, slates, quartzites, con-
glomerates, schists, and shales.
1. Becent and Pleistocene. —To this date belongs the period of deposition
of alluvium in the various creeks about Talwal. The Shoalhaven is said to
possess river “ terraces ”or marks of former river levels. These may be
referred to this period also.
2. Permo-Carboniferous. —The formations of this period consist of a huge
covering of sandstones, grits, and mudstones, which formerly extended across
the whole of the district. The older underlying formations have been exposed
by the erosion of this Permo-Carboniferous crust.
To understand the geological position of this sandstone cap, a brief resume
of conditions obtaining in New South Wales during Permo-Carboniferous
times is inserted here:—
The Permo-Carboniferous period was the great coal making epoch of the
southern hemisphere, and is further remarkable by reason of great alternating
periods of heat and cold (glacial periods) which occurred shortly after the
Carboniferous period.
In New South Wales, the period is divided into several great divisions.


The oldest beds comprise The Lower Marine Series, consisting of various
sedimentary rocks containing marine fossils. This series is 4,770 feet in
total thickness, and contains abundant evidence of glacial action in its lower
beds.
The Greta Coal Measures were then laid down. The equivalent of these
in the South Coast District is the Clyde Seam.
To this succeeded the Upper Marine Beds, a mass of sedimentary rocks
5,000 feet in maximum thickness. Especially well are these beds developed
in the Maitland District. G-reat periods of cold occurred also during the
deposition of these beds.
It is to this latter series that the Talwal sandstones belong. They lie
directly on the older Carboniferous granite and Devonian inkers with no
intervening coal seam (Clyde) ; since the granite hills represented high land
during the deposition of the Greta or Clyde coal.
Subsequently the great Maitland and Newcastle Coal Measures, with a
total thickness of 3,900 feet, were deposited. Both of these are supposed to
have coalesced to the south to form the Bulli Seam. This also is absent from
Talwal. If present it would form a cap to the sandstone above the Talwal
Trig. Station.
After the deposition of the coal measures a great period of volcanicity
supervened. The lavas and tuffs of Cambewarra and Kiama are expressions
of this volcanic activity.
3. Carboniferous. —To this period the granites and quartz-felspar porphyries
of the district may bo assigned.
4. The Devonian. —The formations belonging to this period consist of
rhyolite and basic lavas, basic sills, and various metamorphosed and folded
strata.
The Permo-Carboniferous sandstone, although subjected to extensive
denudation, still occupies by far a greater extent of the surface rocks than
those of Carboniferous and Devonian age. Only at the bases of the ravines
can the latter be examined, with the exception of a few granite and rhyolite
hills lying some six miles to the south and south-west of Talwal. These
were the more prominent features of the landscape in early Permo-Carboni-
ferous times, just prior to their sinking below the sea in the Upper Marine
period. Even these higher points are, however, but partially exposed.
■ It will thus be seen that our knowledge of the formations older than the
Upper Marine are confined to exposures found in the lower parts of the
various gorges of the district. • •
Yarramunmun Creek. —In following this watercourse above its junction
with the Danjera, a narrow belt of contorted strata is found underlying the
sandstone as far as Dean’s Plat. A valley existed hero in the Pre-Upper
Marine times, and sandstone alone is found filling the basin.
The Danjera Creek at Talwal exposes numerous belts of basic igneous,
rocks, whose strike conforms to that of the contorted strata they are
associated with. Two miles above the village these open out into steep
grassy hills abutting on to-the creek, while immediately alongside of these
rise rough, broken hills of quartz-felspar, porphyry, and granite.
Pour miles above the village the granite advances across the creek, and
occupies most of the valley slopes.
A couple of miles higher up still, great precipitous faces of rhyolite
succeed to the rounded masses of the coarser granite. In places these
rhyolite masses rise nearly 1,000 feet above the creek, and present the
appearance of the. rougher granite gullies of New England.


The formations exposed by the Right Arm or Bundundah Creek are
repetitions, mainly, of those found in the Danjera Creek. Amygdaloidal
lavas are very plentiful. Quartz-felspar porphyries are in_ evidence toward
the head of the creek. The lower five miles of the creek sides consist of a
fine grained and very siliceous granitic type of rock.
The Talwal Creek slopes from their start as far down as Mackenzie’s
Station, consist almost solely of granite and porphyries. The land at the
station itself is a series of steep, well-grassed downs, consisting of vesicular
basic rocks, with long lines of acid rocks either alternating with or intrusive
into the basic rocks.
Thence to the Shoalhaven the underlying rocks occur as bold escarpments
of contorted strata and felsite lavas. Especially well are these seen near the
junction of the Ettrema and Talwal Creeks. Cliffs several hundreds of feet
in height expose sections of strata bent into almost perfect folds, standing
out in sharp contrast with the overlying horizontally bedded sandstone.
Near the Shoalhaven the sandstone encroaches on the Talwal Creek, and
occupies even the lowest part of the gorge.
The older formations between Talwal Creek and Grassy Gully are almost
entirely hidden beneath the sandstone cap.
At Grassy Gully itself, the older rocks are exposed in part and rhyolite
flows associated with basic amygdaloidal rocks occupy the gold mining area.
It will thus be seen that (vide map) a very large area of the underlying
rocks consist of rhyolites, quartz-felspar porphyries and granites. They
may be considered as extending from the village west and south-west
right under the sandstone across the Right Arm Creek, and northwards for
miles along the Talwal-Creek.
A considerable area is occupied also by basic igneous rocks.
These basic rocks, intrusive or as contemporaneous flows, consist of
amygdaloidal and compact ophitic dolerites and basalts in an advanced stage
of decomposition.
The order of succession appears to be as follows: —First, a series of
Devonian mudstones, sandstones, and allied rocks were laid down.
Intermittent periods of intense volcanicity occurred at this period, during
which immense rhyolite and basic flows were poured forth from various
local centres.
The higher members of the Devonian series consist of soft shales, grits,
and soft and hard brown tuffaceous material containing numerous
Lepidodendron remains. With these are associated several sheets of very
vesicular dolerite, numerous dolerite sills, and smaller rhyolite flows.
The dolerite sills may be contemporaneous with some of the interbedded
sheets, or they may be of later origin.
At a much later date, probably in Carboniferous times, quartz-felspar
porphyries (typically as vertical bosses or tongues) and red granites of
most pronounced acid affinities made their appearance.
To this date, also, probably belongs the age of the auriferous deposits.
The whole surface then suffered long-continued denudation, causing the
aforetime fairly deeply-seated granite masses to stand out boldly above the
general surface.
The sinking of the district was accompanied by a deposit of Upper Marine
sandstone.
- Subsequently the slumbering volcanic forces again came into play, and
the basic lavas and tuffs of Sassafras, Cambewarra, and Kiama resulted.


The reasons for assuming these ages and the order of succession is as
follows:
The Age of the oldest Strata. —These are assigned to the Devonian, both
on account of their lithological characters and their mode of occurrence.
The Eev. "W. B. Clarke* placed these sediments in two divisions—
(l) An upper series containing Lepidodendron and Sigillaria. These he
included as Carboniferous.
(2) A lower series composed of quartzites, slates, &c., and comprising
the gold-bearing rocks. These he placed in the Silurian.
Lepidodendra obtained from Mr. Clarke’s upper series have been described
as follows by Mr. "W. S. Dun, Paleontologist to the Survey:— I, A most
interesting, small-patterned Lepidodendron. The leaf bases vary in size from
3mm. x 2'2smm. to 4mm. x 3mm. Several specimens, however, show a more
elongated form—7mm. x 4mm. The leaf cushion is well raised, about one-
third along axis from the apex of the leaf-base. The print of the vascular
bundle is well marked. No traces of parichnos or ligule are preserved.
There appears to be no doubt that this species is new. The smaller leaf
bases have much the appearance of some forms described as Ulodendron
(without the large rounded scars). There is an apparent resemblance to
forms of L. Sternhergi and L. Heeri, Uathorst from Spitzbergen. A descrip-
tion and figures will be published in the forthcoming “ Eecords of the
Geological Survey.”
The Sigillaria mentioned by the Eev. W. B. Clarke has not been dis-
covered since.
In the Eclipse and Pinnacle workings well-preserved Lepidodendra occur,
and identical with those found in the upper beds.
The broad belts of conglomerate traversing the Pinnacle, Eclipse, Golden
Crown, Usher, and Caledonian Claims are also probably closely related with
the less altered conglomerates of the Jinkbilly Creek.
The evidence points, therefore, to one formation rather than to two dis-
tinct periods of deposition. The apparent break in the geological continuity
is caused by altered topographical conditions occasioned by the sudden
disappearance of the amygdaloids, whose presence causes steep grassy
downs, and whose absence allows of rugged gullies in the slates and
quartzites, and a fold in the country which has given the idea of a basin
(containing Lepidodendron remains) in the midst of older formations.
The old rhyolites and dolerites around Grassy Gully appear to be con-
temporaneous with the associated Devonian strata.
Two great sheets of rhyolite lava are separated by a 2-chain wide band of
very vesicular dolerite.
Between the dolerite and the upper sheet a thin selvage of tuffaceous
mudstone and slate occurs.
The rhyolites to the south of Talwal represent yet other enormous acid
flows, or the continuation of those occurring at Grassy Gully and cut off by
the granites.
Here, also, two rhyolite sheets are separated by a large dolerite sheet.
Between the two a belt of basic tuffs occurs.
The banded nature-and characteristic contortion flow-structure of the
rhyolites, the presence of acid tuffs, the very marked vesicular character
of the dolerites, the presence of basic tuffs, the intercalation of mudstones,
shales, and allied 'rocks with the igneous rocks, and the coincidence of
strike as regards both igneous and sedimentary rocks, point to great alter-
nating submarine outbursts of acid and basic lavas in Devonian times.
* Southern Gold-fields, pp. 41, 240; also Appendix 2to this Report.


PLATE III.
"THE BUCK REEF,” AN ALTERED CONGLOMERATE BELT NEART THE PINNACLE CLAIM.


PLATE IV
THE GAP SHOWING BLUFFS OF UPPER MARINE SANDSTONE.


The sills (?) are placed as younger members of the series, on account of
their apparent origin:—
( a ) They are unaccompanied with tuffs.
(b) They transgress planes of bedding in places.
The granites and quartz-felspar porphyries send out long red aplitic dykes
into the surrounding strata, the rhyolites, the basic lavas, and sills alike.
Both the granites and porphyries possibly represent different phases of
consolidation of a plutonic mass, and thus may be of the same age.
In this limited area we have then :
(a) Alternating basic and acid lavas of Devonian age.
( b ) Granites and microgranites of Carboniferous age.
(c) Basic lavas of the Permo-Carboniferous.
The alternation of acid and basic lavas in Devonian times points, possibly,
to a remarkable differentiation of a common magma. What that magma
consisted of is not yet evident, as no plutonic “ boss ” has been discovered
in the district which could serve as a feeder to the various lavas of the
locality.
B. — Sedimentary Hocks.
( a ) Eecent or Pleistocene. —As mentioned before, to this period belong the
alluvial of the creeks and the river terraces (?) of the Shoalhaven.
( b ) Permo-Carboniferous. —This is represented by a thick capping of
coarse and fine sandstones, mudstones, and shales of Upper Marine age.
The maximum thickness of the beds, occurring some two miles south-east of
Yalwal, is 1,000 feet, and the general thickness varies from 600 to 800 feet.
The strata fall naturally into three divisions (see sketch) :
(1) Lower.
(2) Middle.
(3) Upper,
SECTION OF SANDSTONE CAP NEAR YALWAL.
A. Upper hard belt of sandstone.
B. Middle belt of soft shales, sandstones, &c.; almost barren of fossils.
C. Lower hard belt of sandstone.
D. Conglomerate,
E. Granite.
(a) Lower Beds. —These consist of hard belts of sandstone varying from
25 to 200 feet in thickness.
The basal beds lie upon patches of conglomerate, and consist for the
greater part of coarse and hard sandstones, brownish-black, red, yellow, and
white in colour. Intercalated with, these are soft -white sandstones and
mudstones containing numerous plant impressions.
B


The cementing material consists generally of red and yellow oxides of
iron, with traces of manganese oxide.
Numerous fossil remains occur in the lowest of the beds.
The conglomerates, which are very patchy, and appear to occupy local
hollows once existing in the underlying formations, are composed of granite
and quartz pebbles.
(b) Middle Beds. —These comprise a mass of soft sandstones, mudstones,
and carbonaceous shales, weathering into gentle land slopes.
The members of this series are frequently full of whitish micaceous
material, and are almost barren of fossil remains.
(o) Upper Beds. —These consist of very coarse sandstones lying upon
fine shales, and pacing above into alternating grits and conglomerates.
The maximum thickness is 200 feet in the immediate vicinity of Talwal.
The lower shales are frequentty black by reason of much carbonaceous
matter present.
One of the shale beds is eighteen inches in thickness, and is composed of
masses of Productus and Spirifers remains held loosely together by soft
cement.
Sketch Section of Upper Portion of Upper Marine Sandstone Cliffs, at Yalwal.
Top of cliff 1,050 feet above Danjera Creek.
White sandstone
Red and Yellow sandstone „..
Black carbonaceous
Sandstones and Shales
Reference,
A. Coarse unfossiliferous sandstone.
B. Thin beds of conglomerate. Casts of Spirifera.
C. Coarse sandstone,
D. Red sandstone with Spirifera .
E. Conglomerate, consisting of large quartzite pebbles and granite slate, quartz, &c.
F. Sandstone filled with Producing and Spirifera.
G. Coarse sandstone with alum deposits.
H. Fossil horizon.
I. Soft black sandstones.
J. 16 inch band, thick with Producing, &Q,
K. Carbonaceous shales,
L. Talus blocks.


The alternating fossil shales and coarse barren sandstones indicate rapid
deposition with periods of more settled conditions when fossils flourished to
such an extent as to form an integral part of the strata.
The conglomerates and grits consist of well rounded pebbles of rhyolites,
granites, porphyries, and quartzites, and express the amount of degradation
that the older strata were subjected to.
On superficial examination, the whole series presents lithological features
analagous to those seen in the Hawkesbury sandstone of Sydney and its
environments.
The Hawkesbury sandstone indeed forms the summits of the Cambewarra
hills, just across the Shoalhaven.
Huge outlines of this upper series occur frequently. One represented
below, and named the Chimney Stack, is 130 feet high, and but three yards
in breadth at the summit.
“THE CHIMMEY STACK."
The fossils obtained from these sandstones have been named as follows,-
by Mr. "VV. S. Dun, Palaeontologist to the survey:—
I. Lower Series.
Chtcnomya.
Platyschisma oculum. J. de O. Sby.
Spirifera. Sp. indeterminate.
„ tasmaniensis.
Martiniopsis subradiata. (Young).
Dielasma sp. indeterminate.
Mourlonia strzeleckiana. Morris (?).
Goniatitcs (Agathicras) micromphalum. {Morris.)
Martiniopsis oviformis. McGoy.
Aviculopecten cf. subquinquelineatus. McGoy.


11, Upper Series.
Martiniopsis oviformis. McCoy.
Productus Crachythoerus. Q. Shy. (very abundant).
Spirifera tasmaniensis. G. Shy. (Young).
Dielasma inversa. De Kon. Sp.
Spirifer duodecimcostata. McCoy.
~ convolutus. Do Kon. =S. vespertilio. G. Shy.
Protorelepora ampla, var. Woodsi. Uth.fil.
Pachydomus pusillus. McCoy.
Spirifera, very indistinct, may be S. duodecimcostata. McCoy.
' (This occurred at the summit of the cliffs near “ The Gap.”)
At Grassy Gully the basal beds contained :
Platysehisma oculum. J. de O. Shy.
Pleurophorus gregarius. Uth.fil.
Spirifera duodecimcostata. McCoy.
(3.) Devonian.
This formation underlies the whole of the cap of Upper Marine sandstone.
The general trend of these older rocks is approximately that of the main
divide of the Colony, viz., north and south. Small variations from this
meridional direction occur, causing the strike to vary between K.N.E. and
S.S.W., N. 10° W. and S. 10° E.
The dips, however, are exceedingly variable, the whole district having
been thrown into a series of folds.
As will be seen on the appended map of Talwal, there is evidence of a
syncline in the centre of the field.
Lepidodendron beds, grits, and contemporaneous lavas occupy the upper
part of this syncline.
The conglomerates found in the Jinkbilly Creek, which have a decided dip
to the W.N’.W. at 45°, are very possibly represented at the opposite side of
the synclino by what is known as the Buck Eeef, possessing a variable dip,
but almost invariably in an easterly direction.
Conglomerates similar to the Jinkbilly variety occur some seven or eight
miles above Yalwal along the Danjera.
Evidence of sharp folding occurs near the mouth of the Ettrema Creek.
Originally, perfect arches stretched across the whole width of the creek at
this spot. These have been partially removed by atmospheric agencies.
Of the rocks composing this Devonian series, highly siliceous varieties,
consisting almost solely of quartz grains, are the most common. Generally
they are finely laminated, but at times occurring in beds from twelve to
eighteen inches in thickness.
With these are associated curly and siliceous slates, mudstones, spotted
slates, and quartzites.
Higher up in the series are conglomerates in various stages of alteration.
The pebbles are well rounded, and consist, for the most part, of fine-grained
quartzites and claystones.
Intercalated with them are mudstones, shales, and claystones.
These pass upwards into felsite and basic lavas with tuffs, grits, sand-
stones, and fossil shales.


Eruptive Rocks.
(a) Rhyolite and dolerite lavas.
(1.) Field relations.—These lavas are so closely associated that they are
here considered together, in so far as their field relations are concerned.
They persist in a N.N.E. and S.S. W. direction, over a distance exceeding
twelve miles. "What their further extension north and south may be, lam
unable to say.
To the N.E. of Grassy Gully, on both banks of the Shoalhaven River, the
rhyolites abut on the stream in precipitous manner.
Thence southwards, through Grassy Gully, the basic and acid lavas may
he traced to the Upper Marine sandstone.
Reappearing at Yalwal Creek, the rhyolite is subordinate in amount to
the dolerite, occurring only in small patches.
Here, however, the basic lavas make a great display, occupying almost
the whole of Mackenzie’s Station. These, however, appear to lie above the
main rhyolite sheet.
The line of continuity of the lavas has also here been broken by the granitic
intrusion.
Five or six miles above Yalwal, the associated rhyolites and dolerites
appear to the south of the granitic masses, and then stretch for miles along
the Upper Danjera, the rhyolites showing out beneath the Upper Marine
sandstone as huge inaccessible cliffs, and the dolerites flanking them as steep
wooded slopes.
The largest basic sheet is eight to ten chains in width, and may be traced
for miles along the Danjera.
Beneath this agalp, in the bed of the creek, a second rhyolite outcrop
occurs.
The acid lavas are pierced by the red granite in a remarkable manner,
the intruding granite forming, throughout the rhyolite mass, an anastomosing
system of lenticular veins and threads. The coarser rock partakes more of
the nature of a huge apophysis than a boss, and roughly approximates to the
strike of the rhyolite, piercing it in the manner above described for a dis-
tance exceeding two miles.
In Portion 1, Parish Yalwal, a small contemporaneous rhyolite occurs. It
is of very limited extent, being some six chains in width and about 500 yards
in length. It appears to have been intruded by one of the dolerite sills of
the locality, and occurs among a great number of basic flows.
Contemporaneously with the more important Lepidodendron beds, several'
acid and basic lava flows occurred, accompanied by tuffs.
In Fletcher’s paddocks, to the east of the Jinkbilly Creek, a similar con-,
dition of things obtains.
The great development of the dolerite sheets may he inferred from a
glance at the map.
In some of the patches marked on the map as “ dolerite lavas and tuffs,
with associated sedimentary rocks,’’ as many as a dozen basic sheets occur in
less than a quarter of a mile traverse across the strike of these beds. These
alternate with the Lepidodendron shales, felsite tuffs, tuffaceous mudstones,
&c.
(2.) Structures observable in the Field.
(a) Rhyolites.
These possess conspicuous flow-structure. "Well developed complicated
flow-contortion markings are also common, imparting to the rocks the
appearance of intensely folded laminated strata.


At Grassy Gully, the surfaces of the flow structure are persistently
straight for considerable distances. In the process of weathering, these
have become divisional planes, and the similarity to tilted laminated rocks
is very pronounced.
Here, also, a certain amount of crushing is observable locally, the frag-
ments being cemented by silica. These rhyolite breccias possibly bear some
connection with the movements which caused the Grassy Gully reefs.
Along the Upper Danjera, porphyritic felspars are plentiful. Around
these the flow structure is well shown, the felspars giving to the rhyolite an
appearance similar to the “ eye ” structures of certain rocks.
The bands generally weather out in alternate black and white tints.
Many of the black bands are not continuous in the lavas south of Yalwal as
they are at Grassy Gully, but appear in the form of flattened spindles and
cylinders with drawn-out ends.
The rock also develops locally as a black flinty-looking mass, filled with
white inclusions.
A most interesting feature is the occurrence of largo spherulites, varying
in size from a pin’s head to subspherical and ellipsoidal bodies two inches
in diameter. The flow structure passes uninterruptedly through them.
Concentric structure is plainly visible in some of the individual spherulites.
These interesting structures are described in rhyolites from other
localities.
From Pambula nodular felsites have been described.*
Banded rhyolites occur at Bulladelah, containing spherulites over an inch
in diameter. These belong to the Perrno-Carboniferou^.f
The spherulitic rhyolites of Yellowstone Park,** The Channel Islands,ff
Hungary,J and other localities,JJ have been described in detail.
For the discrimination of structures, these rhyolites should be studied in
the creek exposures. Here the selective action of the water has exposed
their peculiarities. In the mass they are obscured, owing to the apparent
homogeneity of the rock in fresh fractures, and its characteristically decom-
posed nature.
(b) Dolerites. —These consist of a series of dark-greenish black rocks, of
high specific gravity, exhibiting most decided vesicular structure. The
vesicles are frequently filled with products of decomposition, causing the
rocks to become amygdaloids. The amygdules consist of soft chloritic
products, quartz, calcite, and epidote. Calcite and chlorite are the most
common of these secondary minerals.
The rocks have suffered great decomposition, long strings of epidote and
serpentine crossing the rock frequently,
Yery vesicular types occur to the immediate south-east of the cemetery,
the east side of Sawpit Gully, and in front of the Public School.
Copper, associated with abundant zinc blende, iron, and arsenical pyrites,
has been found in one of the dolerite flows. The occurrence is three miles
.above the village.
*J. E. Carne. Ann. Kept. Dept. Mines N.S. Wales for 1896, pp. 111, 112.
t E. F. Pittman, Min. Res. N.S. Wales, 1901, p. 416.
** Iddings, vii Ann. Rept. U.S. Geol. Survey, 1888, 249-295.
tf J- Parkinson, Q.J.G.S., 1898, liv, 101-118.
J Cole and Butler, Q. J.G.S, 1892, xlviii, pp. 438-445 and references,
tt Barker, Petrology for Students, 2nd Ed., 1897, p. 159,


(2.) Intrusive dolerites.
These possess great similarity to the contemporaneous basic lavas. They
are generally fine-grained, greenish, and very compact rocks, devoid of
vesicular structure.
It is probable that they are closely related in age to the higher members
of the Devonian contemporaneous flows. They appear to transgress the
bedding planes of the associated strata.
3. Granites and microgranites (acid porphyries).
The area occupied by the acid eruptives, as also their probable age, has
been referred to in the notes on the general geology.
The occurrences are mostly of the nature of vertical bosses and huge
tongues of quartz felspar porphyry. The main central mass may, however,
be of the nature of a boss which has tilted the surrounding strata.
The rocks consist of red granites, quartz and felspar porphyries (micro-
granites), and aplite veins.
The granite is of medium coarseness, and is composed, essentially, of
quartz and red felspar. Ferro-magnesian constituents are conspicuous by
their absence. When present, they are of the nature of biotite or chlorite.
The porphyries consist of crystalline quartz and felspar in a pink granular
base of the same minerals, the crystals being decidedly porphyritic towards
the base. The quartz is of the smoky variety.
The unaltered quartzes, with their perfect contours set in a pink matrix,
the latter only just discernible as granular in hand specimens, present a very
fine appearance.
Miarolitic structure is well shown in a few varieties, the druses being very
plentiful, the quartz and felspar being perfectly crystallised in the cavities.
The granitic and micro-granitic structures appear to shade off into each
other by every gradation. As a rule, however, the granitic structure is
confined to the more central portions of the larger masses.
Five or six miles above Yalwal the rock is typically a fine-grained granite,
red in colour and miarolitic in character.
The porphyries of the Danjera Creek frequently weather out into pinnacle
forms. As they become more granitic in character, typical granite weathering
obtains, the sharp pinnacles giving place to dome-shaped hills.
About three miles above the village the rock is darker in colour, and is split
up into huge slabs or tables by a uniform system of jointings possessing a
south-east dip at 30°.
In Crawford, Johnson, and Hamilton Gullies, opposite the Homeward
Bound battery, the rock approximates more to the quartz-felspar porphyries
than the granites. The miarolitic structure is well marked.
The rock in the Yalwal Creek is also partly plutonic, and partly hypa-
byssal in habit.
Both varieties contain crystals of quartz; are almost devoid of ferro-
magnesian constituents; and are crossed by a series of narrow aplite veins,
probably representing segregation into cracks before final consolidation had
set in.
It is here, along the road to Grassy Gully, that the finest examples of the
porphyries occur.
In the great mass occupying the whole of the lower four or five miles of the
Bundundah (Right Arm) Creek, the rock posseses the same high acid per-
centage as the Danjera and Yalwal Creek granites, but the appearance of
the rock is rather different.


At Silver Dell a fine granular base of quartz and felspar is present with
quartz more or less in crystal form scattered throughout the mass, and
imparting a semi-porphyritic character to the rock.
This granite has a dark vitreous appearance, owing to the great amount of
cairngorm present.
A system of vertical jointings crosses this mass. These fissures are some-
times filled witli greenish material, which appears to have permeated the
country rock for a few inches distance from the fissures.
Zincblende and pyrites occur in abundance in these fissures, and are
associated with silver and copper.
The amount of decomposition the granites have undergone is remarkable.
It is difficult to secure a piece that will stand the process of preparation for
microscopical examination. The felspars have become so kaolinised as to
have lost almost all trace of cohesion, and in places the igneous nature of
the rock is obscured.
The granite masses exposed in the Danjera and Talwal Creeks by the
partial removal of the Upper Marine sandstone cap, are identically the same
as the granite eminences of the Permo-Carboniferous landscape, actual
summits of which still lie beneath the sandstone.
Ever since that period the porous sandstone cap has readily permitted
surface waters to attack the granite, without allowing the crust so decom-
posed to be removed. This would account for the generally rotten state of
the granites, with the exception of that occurring at the bases of the deeper
gullies.
Petrological Notes ojt some Talwal Eocks.
The Basic Bochs. —An examination was made of specimens numbered
4,434, 4,430, 4,437, 4,439, 4,440, 4,442, 4,444, and 4,415 in the official
register of rock specimens.
They represent rocks gathered from various portions of the field. In
hand specimens they appear as greenish black compact rocks, varying from
fine-grained basaltic varieties to coarse dolerites, and they may be grouped
together as ophitic dolerites.
The base consists of lath-shaped felspars, with decomposed granular
augite, iron ores, and needles of apatite. At times masses of exceedingly
small felspars occur. The ground mass is generally finely holocrystalline. A
glassy residuum, however, may have been present in certain instances, but
owing to the great decomposition present, it is difficult to ascertain its
existence.
Phenocrysts of felspar are rare, but in sections like 4,445, two crops of
plagioclase arc plainly visible, representing both intratelluric and effusive
stages. The felspars are mostly of basic varieties, and are lath-like in habit.
One slide represents largo irregularly shaped phenocrysts, the contours
being due to interpenetration growths. The first crop is represented by
moderately sized plagioclase idiomorphs showing polysynthetic twinning.
Broad twinning bands are present. Extinction angles, measured from the
traces of the twinning planes, varied between 25° and 30°. This points
probably to a basic variety, such as labradorite.
The second crop consists of abundant small lath-shaped forms.
Small idiomorphs at times appear partly enveloped by iron ores.
The ferromagnesian constituents are represented by augite, which is
present both as phenocrysts and as grains in the base. All the members of
the first crop are moulded on the felspars, thus giving rise to the ophitic


structure (Plate IX). Under the influences of decomposition, the phenocrysts
appear to be granular, but examination under crossed nicols proves the masses
connecting the felspars to be in optical continuity.
In the coarsest dolerite examined some of the augite automorphs are as
much as £ and f inch in length, and contain as many as a score of felspar
crystals in one individual.
These rocks are very difficult to examine in detail, the original structures
being masked by alteration products.
The felspars are changed to opaque products, through kaolinization.
The augites are corroded, and appear as grains or strings, or irregularly
shaped masses, greenish and brownish-green in colour. Serpentine and
chloritic products are invariably present. Long strings of the former
traverse the body of the rock. At times the serpentinous products form
concentric radial fringes in the amygdules, after the fashion of agate struc-
tures. The angite also, in conjunction with the plagioclase, alters to
saussuritic products. Epidote is abundantly represented in field examination,
and calcite occupies the majority of the original rock cavities, and shows the
characteristic rhombohedral clearago and bright polarisation colours.
Ilmenite is -well represented in the base. The Grassy Gully dolerites
show squarish to rectangularly shaped iron ores, and decomposition is some-
times seen taking place along traces of cleavage planes. One mass, result-
ing from alteration of the ilmenite, posseses high refractive index, is trans-
parent, and shows pinks and greens of high order under crossed nicols.
This variety of leucoxeue may be related to sphene. Inclusions of apatite
also occur in the ilmenite. Secondary quartz is also common.
The Rhyolites, as determined bv examination of rock specimens, numbered
4,420, 4,430, 4,432.
These were selected from lava flows along the Danjera Creek and Grassy
Gully,t and they represent rocks yellowish-brown to blackish in colour,
showing marked fluidal and spherulitic structures.
Large porphyritic crystals of felspar are plentiful, scattered through a
very fine base. Associated with the porphyritic felspar are biotite flakes
much decomposed.
These phenocrysts represent the intratelluric phase of crystallisation. The
felspars are generally rectangular, but .at times show corrosion by the magma.
Polysynthetic twinning is common. The twinning bands are narrow, and at
times the extinction is slightly undulose. This may be due to excessively
fine twinning. The felspar is probably an acid variety of plagioclase.
Peculiar forms of twinning occur in some of the felspars of tho older
crystallisation. Opposite quadrants extinguish and brighten simultaneously
in polarised light (Plate X). The appearance is possibly due to Baveno
twinning. Inclusions also occur which are opaque and white, and may be
due to the decomposition of ilmenite.
The ground mass of the rocks shows under crossed nicols the peculiar
dappled appearance of crypto-crystalline aggregates. Flow structures are
invariably present as straight or wavy lines. Less frequently, they present
all the appearance of minute foldings with sharp anticlines and synclines.
Perlitic structure is well shown between the straight lines of flow.
The “flow” phenomena are specially well marked round the felspar
automorphs, the appearance being similar to the “ eye ” structure noticeable
in certain rocks.
Spherulites were not observed in the perlitic specimens, but in the rocks
showing contorted fluxion phenomena, well-formed spherulitic growths
f For Grassy Gully rhyolites, see also J. B. Jaquet, op. cit .


occupied the interspaces between the lines of flow. These are well
developed and microscopic in size. This is known as the microspherulitic
structure.
Along the bent lines of flow themselves the radiate growths occur in
abundance. They do not start from a number of independent centres to
form distinct spherical growths linearly arranged, but radiate from the
contorted lines of flow themselves as axes. This is the axiolitic structure of
Zirkel.
The finest examples of microspherulites, however, occur in a homogeneous
looking felsite, in hand specimens almost devoid of the porphyritic element.
The microspherulites themselves occur as patches of irregular shape set in a
felsitic base. Under-crossed nicols the dark brushes of the tiny growths are
arranged collinearly.
Some of these microscopic radiate growths have been replaced by quartz,
secondary quartz is also very common, forming along lines of flow.
Iron oxide is common in red and brown stains.
llmenite is present, though not in great quantity. It is generally decom-
posed. Small zircons also occur.
Largo spherulites are fairly common. They vary in diameter from |th
to 2 inches. The lines of flow pass uninterruptedly through them.
The examination of these rocks points to a former vitrophyric condition,
in which phenoerysts of an earlier period of consolidation occurred in a
glassy base representing the effusive stage.
The base is cryptocrystalline (felsophyrie) at present, but the great
development of perlitic cracks points to former glassy conditions.
Divitrification in the case of the contorted flow-structure appears to have
taken place as spherulitic and axiolitic growths. The non-association of the
spherulites and perlitic growths is interesting.
Microgranites. —Determined by examination of rock specimens 4,428,
4,434.
The specimens described were chosen as typical examples from the Yalwal
Creek, and the country rock of the lodes at Bundundah Creek.
These rocks are red to reddish brown in colour, and show idiomorphs of
quartz and felspar plentifully scattered through a very fine but holocrystalline
base. The individuals of this base are composed of quartz and felspar
grains, which are roughly equidimensional, and show a tendency, in some
instances, especially in the case of the felspars, to be idiomorphic. This
matrix may then he described as hypidiomorphic granular. The rock is
hypabyssal in character, and may be described as a quartz-felspar porphyry.
In the narrow aplitic tongues which pierce alike the dolerites and the
rhyolites, the rock represents an almost simultaneous microscopic separation
out of quartz and felspar. This is the mieropegmatitic or granophyric
structure. A decided tendency to graphic growth is observable in rocks
from other portions of the field, the quartz showing characteristic six-sided
skeleton crystals, the central portions being occupied by felspar.
The felspar of the first generation is represented by rectangular pheno-
crysts, i to f inch in length, much decomposed, and generally present as
opaque white and pink kaolinised masses. In less decomposed examples,
multiple twinning is frequently observed, pointing to plagioclase as the
dominant felspar.
In rare instances, albite and pericline types of twinning, associated with
quartz intergrowths, are exhibited by the same crystal. The crystals are
coloured red and yellow with iron oxide, the edges being deeply stained at
times.


The felspar of the effusive stage is clearer than that of the earlier
periods, and has a great tendency to form granophyric growths with the
later quartz.
The quartz of the earlier stage of crystallisation occurs as bihexahedral
plienocrysts. Corrosion has, however, been set up, and inlets of the magma
occur in the peripheries of the crystals These phenoerysts vary from
iV to i inch in diameter, measured across the hexagonal sections. Inclu-
sions are numerous, and arranged linearly. The base becomes much finer
in texture as it nears the point of contact with these quartz idiomorphs.
Ferro-magnesian material is present as a few irregularly distributed
green patches. It is pleoehroic, and probably represents some decomposi-
tion product of biotite. Iron ores occur as ilmenite, weathering into
leucoxene. Iron oxide is abundant, sometimes as inclusions in the viridite.
Apatite is present.
A noticeable feature in the Yalwal granites is the absence of large
felspar phenoerysts so common in the granitic rocks of New England.
Another point of interest is that while the granites, or granitites, of
New South Wales are generally basic in character, containing (especially in
the porphyritic types) abundant plagioclase, biotite, hornblende, sphene,
apatite, and zircons, the Yalwal rock is characterised by its high silica
percentage and its lack of basic constituents.
Eock specimen, 4,429. —This is a rock much like spherulitic pitchstone in
hand specimens.
The bulk of the rock is composed of concentric growths about \ to £ inch
in diameter.
The field evidence points to a tuffaceous origin.
Under the microscope, these structures are seen to consist of tiny flakes
of haematite, with smaller quantities of limonite arranged concentrically,
the long axes of the flakes being set parallel to the peripheries of the
circles.
The base appears to be cryptocrystalline. The spheroidal growths are
possibly expressions of weathering.
Economic Geology.
1. —Alluvial Mining.
The whole of the lower course of the Danjera and its continuance to the
Shoalhaven as the Yalwal Creek contains alluvial gold, though not in great
quantities
The majority of the gold found is fine in nature.
The whole course of the Yalwal Creek, as also many miles of the lower
portion of the Shoalhaven, has been leased for dredging purposes.
The gold of the Danjera and Yalwal Creeks, being in a fine state of
division, is difficult to recover by sluicing operations.
Saw-pit Gully (Plate III), a small watercourse draining the eastern part
of the gold-bearing area, has, at various times, yielded a fair amount of gold.
The alluvial containing the gold consists of angular fragments of the
associated Devonian strata and very large blocks of Upper Marine sand-
stone.
The gully is not of great age, the sandstone cap having but recently been
worn through at this point, and the alluvial deposits of the stream postdate
the degradation of the sandstone covering.
As the gold is, therefore, derived from the adjacent claims of the Cale-
donian, Bismarck, Usher, and Golden Quarry, one would naturally expect


to find it but slightly rounded. It is generally coarse at this spot, one
nugget weighing as much as 3 or 4 ounces. Other specimens varied in
weight from 15 dwt. to 3 ounces.
Gold to the value of £2,500 was extracted from the Sawpit alluvial in
1893.
Alluvial has also been worked at GrasSy Gully, its discovery leading to
the working of the Grassy Gully Beef.
(2.) The Lodes.
As far as at present known, no reefs with decided walls exist in the
Yalwal district.
In 1883, Mr. Pittman,t Government Geologist, declared that the ore
deposits were of the nature of impregnations in stratified rocks. Since then
mining developments have done nothing further to indicate the existence of
pronounced fissure veins.
The gold-bearing area proper is confined to a hard belt of rocks immedi-
ately south of the village of Yalwal, and occupies both east and west banks
of the creek.
These sediments consist of quartzites, conglomerates altered in places to
quartzites, schists and slates.
The greater number of workings occur on the eastern bank of the creek,
those on the western bank being confined to a few blocks known as the
Eclipse, Pinnacle, and Poor Man Claims.
Three large belts of conglomerate pass through the field.
One “makes” strongly through the Usher tunnel, across the Saw-pit
Gully, and into the Golden Crown property.
Another and parallel belt emerges from the sandstone immediately to the
cast of the Homeward Bound open cut, thence through the eastern pegs of
the Pioneer, across the llanjera Creek, as the “ Buck Beef,” Plate 111, or
“ Mother Lode,” and clean through the Pinnacle and Eclipse leases, leaving
the latter property at the mouth of the No. 2 tunnel. Thence, with varying
dip, it passes to the north.
These conglomerates consist of black and grey quartzite, slate and quartz
pebbles, set in a fine siliceous cement. They have been so altered in places
as to have lost all trace of their pebbly origin. The first stage in their
metamorphism consisted in the reduction of the whole to a quartzite in
which the matrix and enclosed pebbles are almost indistinguishable.
Further stages arc marked by masses of impure quartz, all traces of
pebbles having vanished.
The softer strata between the conglomerates, as also those beneath them
have been subjected to great crushing.
All this line of country is auriferous in a greater or lesser degree.
Large low grade deposits have been found closely associated with the
conglomerates, e.g. Golden Crown, Usher, Hidden Treasure, Pinnacle, and
Eclipse claims.
These conglomerates are probably connected with less altered beds in the
Jinkbilly Creek. In the latter locality, epigenetic agencies have not had
nearly so much influence on the strata, the nature of the pebbles and the
cement, as also the strike and dip being evident at a glance. Curious
alteration products are observable in the Golden Crown and Pinnacle claims.
A rock of felsitic appearance occurs in the lodes of these properties in great
abundance, being as much as ten yards in width near the surface of the
t Annual Report, Department of Mines, 1833, 159-160. Vide also, The Mineral Resources of N. S. Wales,
1001, p. 59.


PLATE V.
SOUTH END OF FOMEWARD BOUND OPEN CUT.


Pinnacle workings. It is, however, so soft that it can he scratched with the
finger nail. It is whitish, brownish, and occasionally bright green in colour,
being also in the latter case translucent, and of au oily appearance resembling
pargasite.
Earely it has the appearance of certain dolomites. In these cases it con-
tains small radial aggregates.
Threads and lenticular bunches of quartz intersect it in all directions.
Frequently also it is intimately associated with a dense, hard, siliceous rock
resembling impure quartz.
Throughout these soft and hard silicate masses, large bunches of pyrites
are capriciously distributed; there are also innumerable black strings repre-
senting oxidised pyrites.
Below the water level these formations contain huge masses of iron and
arsenical pyrites, with white quartz. In the case of the Pinnacle, the Eclipse,
and the Golden Crown, the “formation” is crossed with numerous slides,
some of which have been mistaken for true reef walls, as “Reynolds’ Hanging
Wall ” —a slide,in the Eclipse.
The Homeward Bound, Pioneer, and Star leases represent the western
portion of the auriferous area. The former two are worked as large “ open
cuts ” or quarries, all the quarried matter passing through the batteries.
References to the diagrams shew the quarries to be contained in quartzites,
iron-stained slates, possessing various dips, and traversed by slides.
The mass of strata worked for gold in the west is intersected with innum-
erable quartz-veins or “ stringers.”
Although these properties are not so intimately related to the conglomerates
as the eastern leases, they may nevertheless be considered as associated with
them, inasmuch as their strike is almost coincident with the western belt of
conglomerate, and their distance apart is insignificant.
In the Caledonian property, a closer approximation to true veins is found.
The strata here vary in dip from 30°-Go° to the north-west and west-north-
west. Narrow veins of chalcedonic quartz run across the “combs” of the
country. These, however, appear to have no depth, and, as far as at present
proved, pinch in and out with wonderful rapidity.
The quartz of the field is generally very impure, being for the greater
part of the chalcedonic variety, bluish to grayish in colour, and weathering
into products having the appearance of whitish and yellow clays.
Opaque white quartz occurs associated with the pyritic masses of the
conglomerate area.
The bulk of the soft material in the lodes appears to be derived from
crushing of the strata.
The only important constituent of the lodes is gold.
It is marked by its occurrence in an extremely fine state of division.
Similar occurrences are noted from Wyalong* and Pambula.f
Free gold occurs in the oxidised zones, but, as far as at present known,
not in the sulphide zones. The pyrites of the sulphide zone yield on assay
from 2 to 24 dwt. of gold per ton, the bulk of the mineral being of poor
quality, rarely exceeding 2 dwt. per ton. This information was supplied by
the mining men of the field.
The surface gold was contained in a variety of gossan, and was at times
coarse in nature. Throughout the lode the gold occurs in irregularly dis-
tributed patches, and as films coating divisional rock planes. Very often no
trace of the gold is to be seen in the solid rock between these gold-covered
jointings.
*J. A. Watt, Min. Resources, No. 6, p. 19. tJ. E. Came, Ann. Kpt. Dept. Mines, 1896, p. 116.


Prom this it seems evident that the sulphides contained the gold, and that
surface waters reduced the auriferous pyrites to iron-oxide, free gold, and
various soluble products.
At Grassy Gully the auriferous belts occur in felsite formations, traversed
by thin quartz veins. Gold is found in a finely-divided state on the joint
faces of the crushed felsite.
Three miles to the north of Talwal, along the Talwal Creek, the granite
has surrounded a mass of basic rock. A white variety of quartz occurs in
the granite near the junction of the two rocks. Silver has been found at
this spot.
In the Right Arm (Bundundah) Creek, silver, lead, and copper have been
mined for in granite.
The minerals occur in joints and fissures, which are traceable over con-
siderable distances in an approximately north and south direction.
The vein material is at times greenish in colour.
Copper associated with zinc-blende and pyrites has also been found in the
dolerites. Granitic dykes occur in close proximity to this lode.
The Genesis of the Deposits.
It is very probable that the intrusion of the Carboniferous (?) granites and
micro-granites formed the most important factor in the folding of the Talwal
district.
These foldings were accompanied by intense local deformations
The axes of the foldings coincide with the strike of the beds, and the
ruptures forming the lodes appear to follow the lines of greatest weakness.
This is plainly seen in the Homeward Bound, Pioneer, Pinnacle, Eclipse, and
other auriferous belts.
The cooling of the eruptive masses was also attended with crushing owing
to the shrinkage of the mass.
The soft green-and-white lode products are, doubtless, due to the crushing
of the softer strata against the harder belts, the nature of the material so
derived being modified subsequently by mineralised waters.
Innumerable shrinkage cracks were developed in the strata, which had
been twisted into sharp anticlines and synclines. Into these cracks quartz,
auriferous pyrites, and other minerals were introduced by circulating waters.
The faces of the joints and faults were also charged with gold in the same
manner.
The Caledonian deposits admit of a similar explanation, although here the
“reefs,” which are larger than the “stringers” of the Homeward Bound, do
not follow the strike of the country, but break across it. They are, however,
very limited in extent, and represent slight ruptures in the harder and more
compact rocks, which crossing the “ combs ” of the country, were allowed to
remain open until filled with chalcedonic quartz. It is very probable that
these lenticular masses of chalcedonic quartz, containing rich gold patches
may exist in other portions of this belt of country. A single tunnel cannot
be expected to prove the ground entirely, as these small veins pinch in and
out with great rapidity.
Similar conditions appear to have obtained at Grassy Gully. Here, how-
ever, the disturbed rocks consist of rhyolites and dolerites.
Grassy Gully reef appears to lie along a line of crushed rhyolite. The
fragments resulting from crushing have been cemented by quartz, and the
breccia itself is traversed by very small quartz veins.
The general appearance is that of local crushing, which took place along
meridional lines.


This brecciation in certain cases may be due to the opening of fissures, and
subsequent movement of the walls on one another.
Other occurrences are at times suggestive of “ crush breccias,” the frag-
ments being subsequently cemented by silica and tiny veins of chalcedonic
quartz developed throughout the mass.
The gold occurs in joints throughout the formation of crushed rhyolite,
and is found both in the igneous rock and in the quartz.*
It is associated with pyrites and occurs in a very fine state of division, as
at Talwal. Eich specimens at’ times consist of rhyolite masses having thin
coats of gold on one or more sides determined by rock joints, the rock
between the cleavages being absolutely barren of the auriferous material.
It appears then that the Yalwal district was much contorted, that
the contortion or movement was of considerable duration, during which fis-
sures opened along the lines of maximum weakness (the axes of the folds)
and were closed again, a grinding action ensuing, the outward and visible
signs of which are the various lode formations ; and that innumerable cracks
sent their tiny ramifications through the mass as a result of the above men-
tioned forces and also of the shrinkage due to settling down of the disturb-
ing agents; and that highly mineralised waters circulating through the mass
deposited gold bound up in pyrites.
Description or Mining Properties.
The Pinnacle.
This claim, known also as No. 1, lies on the north and south line of the
crushed formation that follows the belts of conglomerate. The lode is
exceedingly variable in width, and is apparently due to the metamorphism
of the associated conglomerates and intercalated beds. The alteration
products at times have the appearance of felsites. They can, however,
be scratched with the finger nail. Quartz occurs throughout this
“ formation ” generally as white opaque varieties, in irregular patches, as
though filling cracks in the soft crushed mass. Throughout the lode, also,
black oxidised pyritie bunches occur in the same irregular manner. These,
at about a depth of 100 feet from the cap of the lode, make into large
bunches of pyrites. Their assay value is very low. In other places the
formation consists of a dense, opaque, iron-stained siliceous material, resem-
bling an impure quartz.
The country consists of mudstones, shales, quartzites, slates, and siliceous
schists, having a general north-east dip, varying from 30° to 50°. This dip,
however, exhibits numerous variations from the general north-east direction,
indicative of minor crumplings superimposed on a general fold.
The methods of working adopted consisted of excavating the top to a
width of nearly two chains, and a corresponding length along the line of
strike, and a depth of about fifty feet. A floor was here left, and beneath
this again another large excavation was made, connected with the upper
workings by passes. This bottom chamber narrows at about 100 feet below
the cap to eleven yards in width. Two tunnels are driven into it from the
hillside, near the battery.
The upper one is some 100 feet in length, and passes through beds con-
taining Lepidodendra.
* J. B. Jaquefc, Records Geol. Surrey, 1900, vii., p. 17.


Gold Returns.
Date.
Tons crushed.
Oz. of gold.
118
Nov., 1872-March, 1873
80
120
1874
220
330
1875-1878
Returns lost.
700 (?)
May-Dec., 1878
315
382
Jan.-Feb.,1879
53
115
April-July, 1880
280
670
March-Nov., 1881
1,406
282
Feb.-Oct., 1882
, 341
69
Total from 1872-1882
.....
2,786
The lower one, some 60 yards in length, is the main outlet for the ore
passing to the battery, and is cat out of the creek bluffs at 45 feet above the
water. This lower tunnel has been continued through the workings for
another 100 feet to prove the country west of the lode.
The battery in use consists of fifteen head of stampers, 800 lb. each in
weight. It is attached by gearing to a Kobey engine of 20 h.p., worked
with a multi-tubular boiler. A Jacques rock-breaker is employed, as also
automatic feeders. Two Berdan pans and Huntingdon mills were originally
in use, but have since been discarded.
The gold returns were furnished by Mr. J. Bievewright, and represent a
few of the better yields from this, the pioneer property of the field.
The Eclipse.
This property, also known as No. 2, joins the Pinnacle to the south, and
appears to be continuous with it. The workings of both properties open
freely into each other, and give the idea of a series of gigantic caves, super-
imposed one above the other, and connected by narrow passages.
The uppermost workings exist (as described for the Pinnacle) in the form
of an open cut, terminated below by an irregularly shaped floor. Below
this, however, still larger caverns exist, with attached side caverns, and
below this again another series of chambers.
Some of these are as much as fifty or sixty feet in height, fifty feet in
length, and thirty to forty feet in width. The total depth of the Eclipse
series of chambers is 160 or 170 feet. Eecently raining operations have
been revived in this property, and the top floor, in the immediate vicinity of
“Reynolds’ HangingAVall ” (a joint-face mistaken for a true fissure wall),
has been blown away by explosives, and exposes a cavern 100 feet in depth.
Some of the individual shots used in blasting the material, forming the floor
between the uppermost and middle chambers, brought away over 100 tons
of stone.
The whole of the material left by stoping operations presents a dangerous
appearance. Fragments of rock, several tons in weight, project loosely
from the walls. Under the present management, however, these are being
removed, and the workings will henceforth be safe to work in.


PLATE VI.
PINNACLE AND ECLIPSE CLAIMS. FROM THE NORTH.


"What has teen said concerning the Pinnacle applies with equal force to
the Eclipse, except the presence of the soft-green crushed material. The
country is harder in the Eclipse than in the neighbouring property.
The workings are also much deeper.
A large chamber, fifty-five feet deep, and of almost equal length, exists in
the Eclipse below the bottom level of the Pinnacle. Two shafts, also some
sixty feet deep, were sunk in the lower level. Much of the work was carried
on in solid pyrites and opaque white quartz.
A small tunnel has been driven near the top of the workings, to afford an
outlet for the ore of the open cut.
A lower tunnel was driven in the hill-side to prove the northern side of
the property.
SKETCH SECTION ILLUSTRATING THE METHOD OF WORKI NG THE ECLIPSE MINE."
Reference,
A.—Contorted slates.
B.—Hard siliceous rocks.
C.—Altered conglomerates.
D.—Intrusive dolerite.
E.—Much oxidised pyrites.
F.—Much arsenical and iron pyrites.
Note.—The Pinnacle tunnel, as indicated above, is projected into the same plane,
as the Eclipse workings. There are no defined boundaries to the lode as shewn in the
section.
An almost circular route was taken with the open cut as goal.
This tunnel was used to convey the ore to the battery.
At present, however, the two properties (Pinnacle and Eclipse) have been
amalgamated, being the property of Mr. Alex. Hay. The stone in the
vicinity of Hanging Wall is broken down, passing over a large
tip in its fall into the Pinnacle claim, whence it is trucked along the lower
tunnel (Pinnacle) to the Eclipse battery, as the Pinnacle battery, a larger
and much better plant, is slightly out of repair.
The Eclipse battery [Plate Vl] consists of ten head of stampers, each
600 lb. in weight. Punched screens and copper amalgamating plates are in,
use. The battery is connected with a portable liobey engine, of ten horse-
power, by bevelled-gearing.
The tailings passed into settling pits, and were then turned into vats to
undergo the cyanide process. Two leaching vats were used, each ten feet in
diameter, with a working depth of four feet and a capacity of nine tons.
This plant is not used at present.
Good crushings have been obtained from the mine during the last few.
months.
c


Date.
Tons
Crushed.
Oz. of Gold.
Amount.
Results as per Mint Proceeds during Suffolk’s Tribute.
£
s.
d.
IBS
1
0
U AT aroh. 1879 to 15 Anril. 1879
02 19
0
Results obtained by Eclipse Gold-mining Co.
October, 1879, to 22 December, 1879
161
264-73
886 14
0
14 February
to 23 December, 1880
376
573-84
1,895
3
0
22 July
„ 22 „ 1881
1,034
801-00
.2,795
3
0
4 March
,, 10 August, 1882
851
307-66
1,015
10
0
27 June
„ (?) 1883
160
230 00
578 13
0
4 April
(?) 1884
100
95 06
330
0
0
m 1885
120 19
0
.. (?) 1886
502
2
0
„ 14 December, 1887
1,751
11
0
703
7
0
27 March
964
0
0
Total till July, 1889
£11,543
2
0
8.
d.
Mining
I
84 per ton.
Crashing
i
74 ,,
Fuel
0
91
Stores
i
>>
Approximately (mine to Mint).
5
244
The following gold yields of the Eclipse Mine were kindly supplied by
Mr. John Maclean, of Nowra, and date from 15th May, 1878, to 14th July,
1889
The following averages represent a nine months’ continuous crushing, i.e.,
the averages of the monthly percentages of the total amount of stone mined
and treated during that period (prior to 1889) :
The Pioneer Claim. —This property consists of three open cuts of large
size, a lower tunnel 950 feet in length, an upper tunnel some 450 feet in
length, and a fine battery situated about twenty-five feet above creek level.
After being worked for a while at the surface, shafts were sunk on
supposed reefs. The gold, however, being discovered in “stringers” through-
out the country, it was found advisable to adopt the quarry or open cut
system.
In all there are three open cuts, Nos. 1,2, and 3.
Nos. 1 and 2 open cuts are about fifty to sixty feet deep in very nnsettled
Country, the strata having suffered much from crushing.
The material from these open cuts was conveyed to the battery by means
of a short tunnel driven in from the hill-side, and by a pass connecting with
the main tunnel.
No. 3 open cut is larger than Nos. 1 and 2. It is continuous with the
Homeward Bound workings, and its floor is about fifteen feet lower than
that of its neighbour. Tt is also of more recent date than the other Pioneer
workings. The ground is also more settled, the beds having a general
west-north-west to north-west dip, varying from 30° to 40°.
A fault runs alohg the eastern boundary and disappears in the wall about
half-way along the quarry’s length. The beds of this open cut may be seen
to cross the north and north-west ends of the Homeward Bound open cut.


PLAT E VII.
PIONEER BATTERY. FROM THE NORTH.


Mr. J.Hanson purchased this property in,1890, and became sole proprietor
He drove a tunnel into the hill from a spot not far removed from the site of
the present battery. This tunnel was driven with the double object of
conveying the stone to the.battery and proving the existence of ,any lodes.
Its course is straight for some 8 chains, thence under the open cuts its
course is sinuous. It is 130. feet below the floor of Ho. 3 open cut, and
passes connect it with the various workings.
The strata passed through consists of .curly and siliceous slates, quartzites,
etc. Small quartz veins cross the directions of the bedding but appear to
be only.slightly auriferous.
On completion of the tunnel in 1891, a forty-head battery-was.erected
(Plate VII). Each stamper is 900.1 b. in weight, and .works .at from sixty-
five to seventy drops per minute. Punched screens, land - copper plates
(twelve to fifteen feet in length) are in use. A-giant rock-breaker, fifteen
inches by nine inches, is employed as also'Challenge automatic feeders.
The battery is driven by gearing from the engine,.which as of the compound
condensing type of eighty LH.P., and giving seventy revolutions.per minute.
Two boilers are in use, made by’the Otis Co. of .Melbourne from Eatcox
■and "Wilcox pattern.
SKETCH SECTION OF “PIONEER” WORKING, ILLUSTRATING THE METHOD OF SENDING
ORE TO MILL AND CYANIDE PLANT.
The diagram illustrates the method of conveyance of ore to the battery.
The stone is sent down a pass 130 feet in depth to trucks running on a
slightly inclined tramway to a shoot, whence the ore is conducted into the
rock-breaker and thence to the battery.
The cyanide plant which was erected in February, 1898, is worked on the
New Zealand plan, and consists of three solution tanks. Two of these are
each of fifteen feet diameter and six feet working depth. The other is ten
feet in diameter and six-feet in working depth. The leaching vats are five in
number. Four of these are twenty feet each in diameter and of four fee*
working depth. The capacity of each is sixty tons. The .remaining vat is
fifteen feet in diameter and of forty tons capacity. These vats are fixed on
a concrete foundation. No upward current of water,is used whereby to
minimise the deleterious effects of the slimes, but instead Spitzkastens are
attached to the end of the amalgamating tables.
Lime is employed as the neutralising agent, 2j to '5 lb. being used to each
ton of tailings. Three precipitation boxes are used to recover the gold. A
complete assay plant is attached,to the battery.


The gold returns for individual years are not available, but the total
amount won from the inception of mining operations until the end of
August, 1895, was £24,000.
In 1896, 9,664 tons of stone were crushed for a yield of 454 ounces of
smelted gold.
Since that time very little mining has been carried on.
Homeward Bound Claim.
This property is the only one on the field that has been worked continu-
ously for the past three years.
The property consists of two gold leases, containing nearly fifteen acres and
two mining tenements.
About the year 1872 the surface of the present Homeward Bound Claim
was prospected for gold. Shafts were then sunk on supposed quartz veins
and stoping afterwards carried on to such an extent that the various work-
ings became connected. The cap was then broken down, and mining oper-
ations have since been'confined to the formation of a large open cut.
A glance at the plan and sketch sections of the workings reveals the vary-
ing dips of the strata.
SKETCH SECTIONS ACROSS “HOMEWARD BOUND” CO.’S QUARRY.
Section from W. to E. through middle of quarry; dip slightly exaggerated; no reefs
are visible.
N.N.W. and S.S.E. section through S.W. corner of quarry, showing possible anticline,
signs of which are visible from the south; no reefs showing.


At the north-west and north-east extremities, the prominent dips noticeable
in the “ Pioneer claim” obtain, viz., north-west to west-north-west at angles
varying from thirty to forty degiees. The dip then rises rapidly to the
s.uth-west and near a fault on the western boundary is north-west at sixty-
five degrees.
At the extreme south-west portion there is evidence of a small anticline
among the slaty rocks, the beds at this spot dipping in an easterly direction
at thirty degrees.
A slide (fault) occurs alongside the eastern wall of the open cut. This
also passes into the “ Pioneer” claim and has influenced the beds there. The
ground immediately to the east of this fault is much crushed, the rock dips
not being recognisable.
The open cut is rectangular in plan. At the sutfate the length is about
four chains, and the width three chains.
The batter of the open cut is about sixty degrees, although in places slides
have caused the walls to assume an almost perpendicular appearance.
An an icline occurs between the open cut and the mouth of the tunnel.
The open cut is ICO feet in depth at the southern end, but tapers away to
the north owing to the hill slope.
Throughout the whole of the excavation there is no sign of a decided reef,
the gold occurring in small quartz “ stringers ” scattered in all directions
throughout the country.
In 1891 a tunnel was driven into the hillside to facilitate the conveyance
of the ore to the battery below.
The walls are broken down and trucked to one of the several passes in the
floor of the workings; thence they pass to the tunnel twenty feet below and
are trucked by horses to the ore bin. Here a bull wheel enables the trucks-
to be sent down an inclined tramway by the force of gravitation alone.
The inclination of this tramline is from eleven to fifteen degrees, and- •
its length is t? 00 yards. The stone is tipped into the rock-breaker and
passes thence through automatic feeders into the battery.
The failings are conveyed directly from the amalgamating plates by a_
launder to the cyanide plant.
This method of procedure is explained by the sketch section.
SKETCH SECTION SHOWING METHOD OF SENDING ORE TO BAŢERY BY GRAVITATION,
“HOMEWARD" BOUND G.M. Co.
The battery in use consists of forty head cf stampers, each 900 lb. in
weight, also ten head of stampers, each 700 lb. in weight. The average
speed is seventy-two drops per minute. Punched screens (190 holes to the


inch) are in use and copper amalgamating plates. (Plate YIII.) The battery
is driven by a horizontal, high pressure, non-condensing engine, having-a
cylinder of twenty inches diameter and a stroke of forty inches.
The two boilers are multitubular, twelve and fifteen feet respectively in
length, and six and a half feet in diameter.
A Worthington Duplex pumping engine is employed.
The following notes on the cyanide plant were supplied by Mr. A. P.
Mixner, . General Manager of the “ Homeward Bound” Gold-mining Com-
pany.
The vats (leaching) are nine in number having a total capacity of 350
tons. Five vats are of thirty tons, and four of fifty tons capacity.
The diameters are twelve and fifteen feet respectively and- the working
depth of all seven feet three inches.
Owing to the hilly charaeter'of the locality the plant had necessarily to
be constructed with the solution Vats and zinc precipitation boxes on the
high ground, and by this arrangement the solution has to be pumped to the
zinc boxes for the extraction of the gold. The pump works the three solu-
tion valves (alkaline wash, strong and weak solutions) with the one piston,
and the amount of solution required lo be lifted’is regulated ■with bye-passes
connecting the delivery pipe and the collecting pumps, so that the solution
running with the greatest strength governs the speed of the pump) and the
bye-passes are opened to such a degree as to compensate for the suction of
the other two. The tailings are conveyed to the cyanide plant by a wooden
launder and iron pipe. From the main sand pipe, each vat is connected by
a separate pipe leading into a distributor, the height of the sand launder
being nine reet above the vats. Under the launder the solution pipes are
placed, each vat having its own connection with the same, and in such a way
that the solution can be either applied to the top or forced in from below,
this being one of the advantages gained from the situation of the solution
vats. ■
The solution connections are simplified by the arrangement of three-
way valves leading from the main, and also a two way valve at the side of
each vat, acting so as to divert the current of the solution either up or down
into the vessel. This solution pipe is also connected with a three inch water
main so that the water can be applied in a similar manner.
Great difficulty was at first experienced' owing to the slimy nature of the
pulp, and it has been found advantageous to apply an upward current of
water whilst the vat is being filled. Thus the slimes are borne upwards
over the vat rims, and a free leaching pulp remains.
The treatment. —The principle of the process is continuous percolation.
Filling takes place at the rate of one ton and a half per hour.
Draining water from tailings occupies eight hours.
Treatment with alkaline wash occupies twenty-two hours.
„ „ strong solution occupies seventy-two hours.
„ „ weak solution occupies ninety hours.
Draining after weak solution occupies eight hours.
Discharging residues occupies three to four hours.
The strength of the strong solution varies from - 2G to - 3 per cent, of
potassium cyanide (KCT). That of the weak Solution of potassium cyanide
Varies from 'l4 to 'lB per cent.


PLATE VIII.
HOMEWARD BOUND BATTERY AND CYANID E PLANT.


8.
d.
Mining
2
0
Explosives
468
Fuel
1
6 .
General Stores
1-90
Up-keeps and Repairs
9-16,
Milling
1
7
Oyaniding (including smelting, refining, assaying, etc.)
3
0
Total
9
4-74
The alkaline wash required,is made up with '8 lb. alkali to the ton of
tailings treated. The.effect of this wash is to neutralise the natural acidity
of the tailings.
After the alkaline wash the strong solution is applied, and then the
weak.
The clean-up is conducted in the ordinary manner by rubbing the deposit
off the zinc filament, drying and roasting with ten per cent, of nitre,
then fluxing with borax, soda, bicarbonate and manganese dioxide, under
which treatment a rough bullion of a value of fifteen shillings per ounce
results.
This is refined and is forwarded to the bank having an average value of
about £3 per ounce, whereas the native gold of the mine is worth about
£3 ss. per ounce. The alloy is silver.
Generally speaking the amenability of the ore to cyanide treatment allows
of a very cheap method of treatment. This smallness of cost is further
accentuated by the fact of the porous nature of the material acted on,
allowing a coarse (120 holes to the inch) screen to be used.
The precipitation in the cyanide treatment is by zinc filaments. Pour
boxes are in use, each 13 feet 6 inches long, 2 feet 6| inches wide, and 2
feet 2 inches working depth. There are nine working compartments in
each.
The consumption of zinc per ton of tailings actually treated is - 75 lb.
The average percentage of extraction by amalgnmafion is 40 to 44 per
cent., and the extraction of gold from the tailings by cyaniding ranges from
66 to 84 per cent., according to the value of the material under treatment,
and this value varies from 30 grains to 4 dwt. of fine gold per ton.
The plant is almost automatic, one lad in each shift doing all the work.
A considerable space has been devoted to this cyanide treatment at the
Homeward Bound, but the simplicity and cheapness of treatment coupled
with the fact that the cyanide plant saved the mine when recovery by
amalgamation was rapidly approximating to a negligible quantity, justifies
the extra space given up to its description.
The percentage of extractions is:—Milling, from 15 to 47 per cent.;
cyaniding, from 50 to 84 per cent. The cost of treatment per ton at this
mine is as follows:
The foregoing figures are averaged from 30,000 tons of stone treated.
Twenty-eight men are employed in the. mine; in the mill three men and
three boys, three stokers, and two others.


Silver.
£
R.
d.
£
R.
d.
.Time 1—Au£U«t ?0, 1882
6
18
4
575
is
11
March 4—December 20, 18l3
29
12
3
2 o"5
17
1)
January 0 —October 3, 1881
20
I
6
2,051
7
6
May 8 —October 3, 1835
61 17
5
5,133
11
1»
•Tancarv 15—December 24, 1886.
3.564
7
0
Fe‘ nuirv 18 —December 0, 1887...
60
13
11
6,105
10
0
January 10—December (i, 18-8 ...
11
3
5,478
2
11
1'ebiuary 7 —July 24, 1889
2,It 6
2
3
Totals
216
18
8
27,650
IS
1
210
18
8
Total
27,867
16
9
Gold returns of Homeward Bound Mine.
(1.) Fiom crusbings dating from 1882-1389, wi b a 10-head bittiry.
(2) Later returns datinp from ISDO-100.
.Tune, X3'o —April, 18 -7 (from Augm-t, IS!U —Fe'.ruarv, IS!-7, tlia mine was not worked
owing to litigation) 0,801 cz 10 dnt. 20 grs. of go d were recovered. Average value
£3 4s. 9d. per oz.
From September, 18C8,*o Pfcem' cr, LOO, 37,893 *o> s crushed, and 13,371 tons cvanided.
The gold won by amalgamation amounted to 3,723 oz 2 dvvt. 10 gre. (Standard gold) 702
oz. i f lilter were also won.
From cyar.iding, 1,570 oz. 5 dwt. 15 grs. of geld recovered at value of £4,229 Bs. 2d.
The Caledonian Property.
This is the claim from which all the sensational gold finds have come.
The property is also known as G.L. 20, and is twelve acres in extent. The
Permo-Carboniferous sandstone forma a cap over the whole claim except
over a small patch at the north-west corner.
The workings consist of two tunnels, one being 100 yards in length, and
a few open cuts about a couple of yards in width, varying in length irom one
to four chains, and in depth from ten to fifty feet.
It will thus be seen that the ground is by no means proved as yet.
SKETCH.—SECTION ACROSS THE CALEDONIAN PROPERTY PROM THE ROBERT BRUCE
CLAIM E.S.E TO THE GOLDEN QUARRY CLAIM AND SAWPIT GULLY.
Note —The ground from Ato D shows numerous irregular fissures (especially near the
summit of the auCeline) filled with chalccdonic quartz.


The gold is confined to small chalcedonic quartz veins crossing the combs
of the country. The enclosing strata consist of siliceous and curly slates,
quartzites and conglomerates dipping north GO 0 west at angles varying from
15° to Go°.
In the lower tunnel the strata dip in opposite directions at the two ends
of the drive. This shows the existence of an anticline immediately to the
cast of the workings.
The gold occurred in patches of exceptional richness, as explained by a
perusal of the gold returns.
The open cuts, whence the gold was won, were driven on small veins.
They are named as follows: —
1. Sandemtn’s Cut. —This is 100 feet in length, thirty feet in height, and
having a direction of 220°.
The gold was found in 11 stringers ”of bluish and whitish quartz of felsitic
appearance. The underlay of the vein is about IQ°.
2. Underwood’s Gut. —This is one chain in length and about thirty feet in
depth. , Nearly £40,000 of gold were said to have been extracted hence.
3. Ison's C»f. —Occurs one chain north of Underwood’s Cut. The length
is some four chains, and it has a direction of 200°.
A line due north and south connects the mouths of the various cuts.
Gold Feturns. —Only a few of the better returns were obtainable, the
total amount of gold uoc being known—
£
3892. (Three months’ crushing) 3,5t0
1895. 2“i tons for 1,487 oz 4,833
1895. 11- „ 7o'J 2,433
Original company since that time obtained more than £O,OOO worth of
gold in a few months.
It is also stated that in the year 1805, 4 tons of stone yielded 1,604 oz. of
gold.
The Star.
This claim was taken up in 1883 by a Nowra syndicate.
It occurs on a very rough sideling.
Three tunnels have been driven at various levels into the hillside, with an
almost due east direction. They are driven as closely as possible to the
Homeward Bound property, and they lie vertically one above the other.
’I ho upper one is 200 feet in length and 400 feet above the creek, the
middle 33 ) feet m length, and the lower 450 feet long.
T his lower tunnel is driven almost at the creek level.
Ju the two upper drives a little gold was found.
The country consists of siliceous slates principally, that show an easterly
dip. Small qutrfz veins cross the property.
This claim lay idle for years. In 1000 it was taken up by Mr. 11. Martin,
and subsequently amalgamated with other leases belonging to Mr. A. Hay.
In Sep'ember, 1900, four tons of stone were crushed for a return of 5 oz.
7 dwt. per ton.
Shortly afterwards, a parcel of 100 tons was made up and crushed at the
Pioneer battery. The yield was a little less than 10 dwt. per ton.


The Golden Grown.- —This property, also known as G.L. 1., occurs inmuch
altered country in close: association with the conglomerate belts. An
intrusive sheet of dolerite occurs, immediately to the east.
The country has been subjected to great crushing and extreme silicifica-
tion, the latter possibly through the agency of heated mineral waters.
The soft magnesian silicate rock with the appearance of felsite is of
frequent occurrence. Here much of it occurs in patches of bright green
translucent to almost transparent masses.
The workings consist of an open cut at the base of which is a shaft about
ninety feet in depth. A tunnel nearly sixty-five yards in length was driven
in the hill from Sawpit Gully to connect with the various workings.
Great quantities of pyrites occurred.in the lower portions of the workings.
The Ushers
This property is known also as G.L. 17. It contains a tunnel 230 feet in
length driven towards the western boundary of the lease. After passing
through slates, a belt of soft conglomerate was encountered.
A shaft was also sunk on the hill side to a depth of forty feet. The mass
of the material driven through consisted of oxidised pyrites, associated with
quartz and conglomerate
■ The pyrites on assay are said to yield 24 dwt. per ton.
Golden Quarry (A T os. 1 and 2).
G.L. 27 and 28. Golden Quarry No. 1 has a shaft sunk thirty-three feet
east of G.L. 19 and thirty-four feet deep. A cross-cut fourteen feet long
was driven on a formation six feet in width.
A tunnel also 208 feet in length was driven west from the level of the
gully
In 1896, 113 tons of stone extracted from both claims were crushed for a
yield of 188 oz. 8 dwt. of gold.
The Victory.
The country is much altered, intense siliciflcation having occurred in the
slates and other rocks. Many of the strata now consist of quartzites. A
hard belt of country occurs in this claim which is being mined for gold. A
tunnel has been driven through the property for a distance of 500 feet.
This property is situate between the Pioneer and Pinnacle Claims,
The Poor Man.
This claim was prospected for gold in 1880, and then taken up. i The
country consists of narrow belts of quartzites, slates, and shales, much bent,
crushed, and faulted.
The workings consist of a large open cut, and a tunnel a couple of chains
in length.
Gold was found on the faces of the rock joints. The occurrence of the
metal was extremely irregular, as in the cases of the other Talwal claims.
No account was kept of the better gold returns. In 1896, 311 tons of
stone were crushed for 75f oz. of gold.
Other minor Properties..
These consist of properties, such as Baberton’s lease, Sir Julian’s Leg,
The Albion, The Coolongatta, The Daydawn, and The Bruce.
Balerton’s Lease —This occurs in crushed and faulted quartzites and
shales to the north-west of the Poor Man. An open cnt was started.


The Albion (G-.L. 2G). —This contains a drive, 130 feet long, and also a
cross-cut. Much pyritic material was found here.
The Ooolangatta (G.L. 39) gave good prospects, and contained much
pyrites.
The Daydaivn (G.L 23). —A tunnel, 100 feet long, has been driven in at
the level of Sawpit Gully. Pyrites occurred in great abundance, with an
assay value of 8 dwt.
The Bruce (G.L. 18 and 19). —This property adjoins the Homeward
Bound to the east. Very little work has been done. The country is
similar to that of the Homeward Bound.
. In 189 G a parcel of 18 tons was crushed for 16J oz. of gold.
B. Grassy Gully.
(a) Grassy Gully Mine. —In 1895 the lease was taken up by Moffat. In
January, 1900, it passed into the hands of the Grassy Gully Gold-mining
Company, with Mr. P. Durkin as mining manager.
The workings consist of three shafts. The principal one was sunk to
185 feet in June, 1900.
At the 170 feet level a drive nineteen feet long was put in to the south.
At the 140 feet level a drive twenty-three feet long was also put in to test
the country to the south, and at the seventy-eight feet level also a sixty-
eight feet long drive was put in (to the south).
These workings are all on the- main lode.
No. 2 shaft was sunk on a parallel lode, twenty-five yards to the east of
the main lode. This is sixty-six feet in depth. Both “ reefs ” underlay
fifteen feet in every 100 feet to the west. Their strike is almost true north
and south.
No. 3 shaft is sixty-seven feet deep. It occurs on the main lode, and has
the same underlay as Nos. 1 and 2.
SECTION ON LINE H.G. ON MAP OF GRASSY GULLY GOLD-FIELD.
Reference.
U Upper marine sandstone.
D Dolerite.
S Tuffaceous rocks.
R Rhyolite,
Everything sent up from the process of sinking and driving is passed
through the battery. The average width worked is from four to five feet.
The formation consists of crushed rhyolite, cemented by silica, and a so-called


Gold Etturns.
Since June, 1S9S, tlie following gold yields have been reported:—
• Tons treated.
oz. gold. £ 8. d.
5*5
93f>i 3,741 9 2
4»-4
344J 1,3:*5 17 2
77 - 6
181’ 721 14 1
“reef” of quartz traverses the breech in places along its line of strike,
varying in width from two to twelve inches. Gobi occurs in the quartz, and
also in joints throughout the crushed igneous rock.
The formation is five feet wdde at the bottom of the shaft, at.d averages
!]■£ dwt. of gold per ton.
Sixty-five per cent, of the gold in the stone is recovered by the battery and
vanntrs.
The battery consists of ten head of stampers, each weighing six hundred-
weight.
Pur'died screens (200 holes to the inch) and copper amalgamating plates
are in use. The jdant was erected in September 17th, 1000.
A Wilfley vanner is in use. According t • Mr. P. Durkin, the capacity of
this machine is from fifteen to twenty-four tons ptr day.
A cyanide plant is to be erected, capa’ 1* of treating 10,' tons per day.
It is expected that eighty-five per cent, of the go'd in the ladings will be
recovered by cyaniding.
Tor tlie several monihs prior to 21th November, 1000, 500 tons were also
eru.'he 1 for a yield of 100 oz. free gold, and 4 tans concentrates, averaging
8 oz. per ton. Total, 182 oz.
Total from June, 1808, to November, 1000, (581 tons, crushed for 1,038
oz. of gold.
(h) Farch-oVs Claim. —Th s is almost in lino with the main Grassy Gully
Peef. It h, however, said to occur on the No. 2 lode, twenty-live yards
east of the main lode.
The shaft is about seventy-five ftet deep, and the gold is contained both in
quartz and felsile.
N T o gold returns tvere obtained from this properly.


APPENDIX I.
Extracts from TV. B. Clarke's “ Southern Oold-felds,” p. 39-40.
. . . . Yalwal Creek consists of three branches, exclusive of Ettrema Creek. As to
the auriferous indications of the Yalwal locality, I can only say, from twelve years inti-
mate knowledge of it, that for several years back I considered it to develop more mineral
indications than I had seen elsewhere ; and that from my first perusals of the descriptions
given of the Turon geology, I felt such a strong conviction of its being auriferous, that
during the last six months, I have said to many of the Shoalhaven settlers that, ere long,
they should find gold much nearer home than they were aware of, and that as soon as
they concluded their harvest I would direct them where to find it; and, accordingly,
about three weeks ago, I got a gentleman who had some months’ experience at the Turon
to accompany me to Yalwal, and who, at one part of the locality said that, had I brought
him there blindfolded, he would have declared he was on the Turon ranges. But from
all I can learn, I have reason to conclude that most of the Yalwal geology and auriferous
indications are more assimilated to those of the Braidwood diggings than any other, as
most of its rocks consist of coarse red granite, with a good deal of the “conglomerate ”
in some parts, and interspersed with ranges of red earth, trap rock, and schist without
much quartz, except in one of the creeks, where there are considerable rocks of rather a
bastard kind. I have often regretted that Mr. Clarke, in his survey of the Shoalhaven,
had not his attention directed to Yalwal I have just returned from seeing
the prospectors ; they have found less or more in every place they tried, except one, and
rather more of what I conceive to be platina than gold, but some of which they cast
away before I arrived there
I have, &c.,
A. K. MACKAY,
J. R. Hardy, Esq., C. C. Lands. Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Extracts from TV. B. Clarice, “Southern Oold-felch," pp. 42,
43, 44, 45, 250.
. . . . In that part of Tasmania, and in the country along Yalwal and the Clyde,
Silurian slates bearing auriferous quartz veins undoubtedly occur; and I have also
detected abundance of auriferous pyrites, not only in the ferruginous schist, but in the
quartzose rocks, and even in the granite of Yalwal, and from the decomposition of these
auriferous rocks some gold has been set free in the alluvia. But the mass of the country
consists of the rocks of the carboniferous formation, all the members of which may be dis-
tinguished, from the lower fossiliferous beds between the coast and Yerrirong Creek and
sigillaria shales (in the Danjera Creek gullies) And, whilst poryphyries
underlie the fossiliferous beds below tbe coal and overlie the gold-bearing rocks, the more
recent igneous rocks have broken through the carboniferous formation, transmuted and
covered it in various parts of the district, appearing in dykes and in overlying and pris-
matic masses I do not doubt, therefore, that there is some gold to be yet
found in the ravines, and all along the broken country between the niouth of the Yalwal
Creek and the head of Mongarlow River; but it occurs in iron pyrites mechanically
united, and in thin quartz veins, which will require the processes of science for the
extraction of the metal. The bearing of these remarks on the general capabilities of the
Shoalhaven basin will be seen by reference to the Araluen district. . . . . ; but,
knowing how necessary is the existence of uncovered auriferous rocks, or it covered,
covered only by drift of a certain epoch, I could not, even in 1851, have searched the
Yalwal country with any respect for my own opinion of it I still incline to
think that the drift, and the ferruginous schists and quartzose rocks of the Yalwal
Peninsula, will not be found very rich in gold. ,Not till we have got well up on the table-
land of Argyle and Murray, have we reason to conclude that an extensive gold-field can
exist. No doubt in my mind remains, that though in Tasmania and in the Yalwal
Peni isula the true auriferous slates, with the granites of a more recent date, occur
beneath the overlying formations; yet in both regions, alluvial gold can only be expected


in small quantity. Nevertheless, lam of opinion, that between the Sassafras Range and
the eastern course of the Shoalhaven, an independent auriferous region does exist, but
the value of it can only be determined by long and persevering researches. No sooner,
however, do we reach the area of the grey hornblendio or syenitio granites, which are so
well developed about Araluen, than gold becomes abundant, diminishing in quantity as
we enter the quartziferous schists surrounding it, and becoming very scanty so soon as
we come into contact, as in Yalwal Peninsula, with the covering sedimentary deposits of
the carboniferous epoch. It has been before stated that the granite of Yalwal is not of
that kind ; it is rather a coarse pale pinkish rock of loose texture, and having little or no
hornblende, with a small amount of mica and bihexahedral crystals of quartz
It may be mentioned, that on Talwal Creek, which is a Yalwal water, a lode of argen-
tiferous galena was found in 1849, of which an analysis appeared in June of that year.
The result gave a very high percentage of silver, but the analyst did not consider it
likely to be payable.
Extract from page 250.
,In the Yalwal Peninsula, as on Danjera Creek, the same rockf appears associated with
Silurian shales and other members of the series, but all of which have been so transmuted
by the trappean rocks, as to have become quartzites, or silicified into chalcedony or tra-
versed by thin veins of quartz. This part of the Carboniferous formation has, therefore,
undergone the same kind qf metamorphosis which distinguishes the lower Palaeozoic
formation, on which it rests.
t Lower Carboniferous.
DESCRIPTION OF PLATES.
I. Frontispiece. View of Yalwal, looking north.
11. General view of Danjera Creek, looking south from the Pinnacle Claim. Pioneer
and Homeward Bound Batteries in middle distance.
111. The Buck Reef. A metamorphosed belt of conglomerate. From the Pinnacle
.Tunnel. , ,
TV. The Gap. Showing bluffs of upper marine sandstone.
V. Homeward Bound Open Cut. From the Pioneer Open Cut.
VI. Pinnacle and Eclipse Batteries. From the bridge, looking south-west.
VII. Pioneer. Battery. From the north.
VIH. .Homeward Bound Battery and Cyanide Plant. Looking south-east.
Miorophotographs—
IX. Ophitio dolerite.
, X., Peculiar Felspar Twinning.
Sydney: William Applegate Gollick, Government Printer.—l9ol.


PLATE IX.
OPHITIC DOLERITE.


PLATE X.
FELSPAR CRYSTAL IN RHYOLITE.








