

i? UtxiZ32s:i r uXSgZtS&agM
■•. r. uv* v ufe&sr£.r?tt ;
.;: ras*t..r.i?;
' ijg fesggs l jS&iSg ' ir*/<: '^SSSfip*




1934-35-36.
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OP AUSTRALIA,
ELLSWORTH ANTARCTIC RELIEF EXPEDITION
REPORT
CAPTAIN L. C. HILL,
COMMANDING OFFICER
OF THE
ROYAL RESEARCH SHIP DISCOVERYII
Presented by Command , 13 th March, 1936; ordered to he ■printed, 21s£ May, 1936.
[Cost of Paper. —Preparation, not given ; 720 copies ; approximate cost of printing and publishing, £l6.]
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth op Australia by
L. F. Johnston, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
No. 246, —F. 2837 9d.


-6 JUN 1938
R.R.S. Discovery 11.,
Melbourne,
16th February, 1936.
Captain J. K. Davis,
Director of Navigation,
35 Wills-street, Melbourne, C.l.
Sm,
I have the honour to submit the following Letter of Proceedings covering tire period from
December, 1935 —16th February, 1936.
The vessel left Melbourne at 1900 on the 23rd December, and proceeded to a position off Point
Cook, where I anchored to calibrate the Direction Finding apparatus. Lieutenant-Commander
Newman, a wireless expert from the Royal Australian Navy, assisted me in this operation. This
calibration took longer than I anticipated, but I considered it essential that every reasonable
precaution should be taken by Discovery to ensure the safe and easy return of the aerial search
party. The calibration was completed and Lieutenant-Commander Newman discharged to the
shore by 1230 on the 24th December.
I then proceeded to sea and finally discharged the pilot off Port Phillip Heads at 1620.
A heavy sea was running at this time, and to assist the safe discharge of the pilot I pumped a small
quantity of oil fuel overboard. This procedure smoothed the sea considerably.
From the time of discharging the pilot until about noon on the 28th December, we
experienced strong head winds, which at Mimes reached gale force. Our average speeds were
poor and considerable time was lost. the 25th-26th,*,only 3.96 knots were recorded. At
noon on the 29th December I increased speed to 105 revolutions. Conditions by this time were
reasonably good and remained so until the pilot boarded Off Otago Heads at 1440 on the 31st
December. The vessel was finally secured alongside at Dunedin by 1700 on the 31st December.
I had originally intended to leave Dunedin immediately after oiling, but on the voyage from
Melbourne I began to doubt the value of our wireless direction finding apparatus for keeping in
constant touch with the Wapiti sea-plane during her search flight of 200 miles. In order to settle
this doubt I telegraphed to the New Zealand Shipping Company at Dunedin and asked them to
meet me on arrival with a Direction Finding Adviser. They arranged for Mr. Cookson of the
Amalgamated AVireless Association to meet me, and after I had explained my requirements to him I
decided to remain at Dunedin until 0600 on 2nd January. This enabled Mr. Cookson to inspect
the instrument thoroughly. He reported that the Direction Finder was only suitable for the
purpose for which it was originally intended, and definitely stated that it was too weak for use
with aircraft. This was disappointing, but at least I knew that our preparations would require
modification.
I left Dunedin at 0600 on 2nd January. Our voyage to the southward was mainly favoured
by good weather. This assisted the preparations for those possible emergencies which we had to
be ready for. Sledges were overhauled and rebound, sledge harnesses were made and rations
weighed and packed. The oil fuel which was stowed in drums was gradually pumped below. On
an average about 30 drums per day were emptied. The airmen, too, were constantly busy with
their own preparations.
At 1740 on 7th January (zone -f- 12 hours), light pack ice was encountered in latitude
66 degrees 48 minutes South, longitude 178 degrees 51 minutes West. There was no swell at this
time, and as the ice looked open I decided to penetrate into it rather than to linger at the edge, where
a rising swell is dangerous. Throughout the evening of the 7th January and the forenoon of the
Bth January steady progress was made through small soft floes which were liberally composed
of snow. But on the afternoon of the Bth January the ice was a little closer. I set a maximum
speed of 30 revolutions through this belt, and without straining in any way a large lead was reached
at 1700. Speed was increased, and by varying the speeds as leads were approached and left a
really large expanse of open water was reached by 2100 in latitude 68 degrees 24 minutes South,
longitude 178 degrees 15 minutes West. I thought that this was the last of the pack ice and
increased speed to 100 revolutions. The flying season was advancing and I hoped to gain as
much time as possible. Ice, however, was again encountered at 2300 on Bth January. From
this moment slow southerly progress was made through pack and leads till 0800 on 10th January.
At 0800 on 10th January, in latitude 71 degrees 37 minutes South, longitude 177 degrees
42 minutes AVest, we were surrounded with very heavy pack ice. There was no room for a
reconnaissance flight, so I continued to the southward endeavouring all the time to make westing;
by following the ice leads I had reached what I considered to be the maximum eastern limit
F. 2837. —2


for reasonable penetration to the Ross Sea. By 1000 on 10th January I resolved to have both
anchors lifted clear of the ice. I was afraid of them being caught and perhaps ripping the outboard
face of the hawsepipes. This operation took some time, and I lay to till 1600 before endeavouring
to proceed. By 2030 I had made about half a mile progress, when conditions became worse. I
decided to lay to, for it seemed foolish to proceed and every one required some sleep.
At 0530 on 11th January I sent an officer aloft to report conditions to me. I frankly
admit at this moment to being perplexed and if water sky had been visible to the north I would
have turned in that direction. But there was no such sky. A study of the available records,
too, indicated that unless an unusual ice year was to be experienced the open sea to the southward
should be encountered in about latitude 72 degrees south, and surely by latitude 73 degrees
south. That was only 83 miles away as opposed to 311 miles to the north. I decided
to continue. At this period the ship’s company supported me splendidly. All available
hands, including the scientific officers and the airmen, stationed themselves aft with poles.
By a system of whistles an officer indicated to me whether I could manoeuvre ahead or
astern. If I could not, then the poling party exerted their strength to push the floes away from
the rudder and propeller. These parts are extremely vulnerable. When the oil fuel was being
pumped from the drums into the tanks I gave instructions that the drums in the after hold should
not be emptied. This increased the after draught and was an additional safeguard to the rudder.
Outboard platforms had been rigged to assist the airmen when working with their aeroplane.
These platforms proved most helpful for by lying flat on them one could actually see the propeller
and the rudder. I always tried to manoeuvre through the cracks or if no cracks were visible
I endeavoured to bring the ship gently head on to the floes. After impact it was safe to increase
speed until the pressure forced the floes apart. Although the floes at times were as large as the
football fields encountered by Captain Scott, and had sheer sides of about 10 feet high, they had
mostly an overhanging soft buffer of snow which acted like a fender between the ship’s side and
the hard ice spurs.
Our noon position on 11th January was latitude 71 degrees 35 minutes south, longitude
]77 degrees 34 minutes east. This would appear to be two miles north of our noon position on
10th January, but I really think that the difference was due to a northerly current. Relative to
the pack ice we must have made about 4 miles to the south.
At 1700 on 11th January there was still no sign of the ice opening up. The wind, though
still moderate, had increased sufficiently to make manoeuvring difficult. In an ordinary vessel the
bow moves to starboard when the engines are put astern. In this ship the stern is inclined to
move in the direction of the wind whether the wind is on the starboard quarter or on the port
quarter. As I could not always anticipate this movement I decided again to lie to and await
better conditions. While in this position a Fin whale was observed blowing in a small opening
not far from the ship. Dr. Ommanney told me then that this suggested that open water could
not be far away.
I proceeded ahead again at 0400 on 12th January. Two icebergs had drifted through the
pack ice during the night. If these bergs had not been near I would have remained stopped for
some time longer ; bergs are dangerous in pack ice and as I wished to keep away from them I
considered that working ahead through difficult pack ice was the more reasonable course to follow.
After about two hours difficult progress conditions eased and by 0800 I had reached a pool of open
water. This was the first pool which was large enough for flying safety and Flight-Lieutenant
Douglas offered to inspect the ice from the air. Before taking off, Flight-Lieutenant Douglas assured
me that he would not fly in over the ice but that he would circle the ship and if possible attain an
altitude of about 2,000 feet. From this height it was estimated that he could see approximately
45 miles. While he was away the ship’s motor boat was close at hand, all ready to proceed
to their assistance should a forced landing take place in the water. The flight was completed and
the Moth plane hoisted inboard by 1200. Flight-Lieutenant Douglas reported heavy floes ahead
with several good leads in the distance. His report was sound and better progress was made
until 1700 on 12th January. At this point some old and rugged floes stretched right across
our path. A moderate wind was blowing and I again decided to wait. This was fortunate, for
only one hour later the wind had made openings through which with caution we were able to
proceed. Conditions from then onwards improved until by 2000 I decided it was safe to proceed
all evening with Lieutenant Walker and myself taking alternate four hour watches.
At 1200 on 13th January the Moth plane was again flown. The report this time was of
the utmost value for impenetrable pack ice was observed to the east. On closer inspection this
unbroken ice stretched to the east as far as could be seen. By keeping away to the western edge
of this ice I was able to make my way through cracks and leads until about 1500 when a lead of
15 miles was reached. From this time onwards ice streams and leads were navigated alter-
natively until 0250 on 14th January when the open Ross Sea was reached in latitude 73 degrees,
23 minutes south, longitude 179 degrees, 15 minutes west.


I would like to take this opportunity of expressing my gratitude to Captain J. K. Davis
for his hints to me on ice navigation and to thank the Discovery Committee for the encourage-
ment their telegram No. 3 gave to me. The ice was undoubtedly very heavy but the ship was
never in-danger. Soundings were taken every four hours and no leaks were reported. This was
only achieved by waiting and never charging or “ butting” the ice while the safety of the rudder and
propeller was ensured by the efforts of the men who formed the poling party ” We were perhaps
lucky in having such good weather for it was evident that it would have been difficult for me to
manoeuvre at the slow speeds I desired if a strong wind had been blowing.
After leaving the main pack ice belt I set a course to reach latitude 75 degrees south in
longitude 180 degrees as suggested in the Discovery Committee’s telegram No. 27. This
position was reached at 1003 on 14th January when the course was re-adjusted to sight the Ross
Ice Barrier near Discovery Inlet. The ice barrier was sighted ahead at 1200 on 15th January ;
the weather was good and the visibility about 30 miles. All this afternoon, while coasting the
Barrier towards the Bay of Whales, the effect of mirage was remarkable. Ice bergs and growlers
were raised well clear of the horizon.
At 1938 on 15th January the vessel rounded the West Cape of the Bay of Whales. Shortly
afterwards a tent was observed on the Barrier surface at the east side of the bay. Two orange
coloured streamers were standing close beside the tent. I steamed as near to the position of the
tent as possible, blowing the siren and firing a series of rockets in an endeavour to attract attention.
No answer was made to my signals and there were no other signs of life. As the weather was calm
and I had been told by Sir Hubert AVilkins that orange was Air. Ellsworth’s signal colour I asked
Flight-Lieutenant Douglas to fly in over the tent and then on towards the charted position of
Little America. The airmen left the ship at 2058 and returned at 2135 with the report that one
man had been seen at Little America. AVhile circling this area a food parachute was dropped and
the man on the ground was seen to pick it up.
By 2315 a party had left the ship to go and meet the American airman. They had not
gone far however when they met Air, Kenyon who persuaded them all to return to the ship. They
arrived on board at 0055 on 16th January. Air. Kenyon told me then that Air. Ellsworth was safe
at Little America and that blistered feet had prevented him from joining us that evening. I
was prepared to go out then and bring Air. Ellsworth in but Air. Kenyon assured me that there
was really no need for such haste. He also mentioned that he would like a rest before going out
again to guide the ship’s party over a large tide crack which existed between the sea ice and the
Barrier. I therefore stood out to sea until clear of the bay ice and lay to.
At 0900 on 16th January Air. Kenjmn set out with a ship’s party towards Little America.
He guided them over the tide crack which I have mentioned and returned alone to the ship by
1230. A scientific station was worked while waiting for Air. Ellsworth who arrived on board at
2137 on 16th January. He seemed comparatively well but it was perhaps fortunate that his
relief was not delayed. His foot was poisoned and though not very bad when we met him it might
have had serious consequences within a short time. He received medical attention for several
days.
From information I acquired in conversation with Air. Ellsworth and Air. Kenyon I learned
that the severance of their wireless communication during their flight was caused by the breakdown
of their transmitter. Air. Ellsworth has agreed to the accompanying brief report on his flight
being forwarded to you.
Having some time to spare before the arrival of the Wyatt Earp I agreed with Air.
Deacon, the senior scientific officer on board, that we might use the time most profitably by starting
a brief scientific survey. I accordingly sailed from the Bay of AAJiales at 0740 on 17th January.
There were periods during the voyage when the wireless communication could not be
followed between the ship and London, Alelbourne and New Zealand. Aly messages were therefore
unavoidably delayed and I am sorry if this delay caused any anxiety.
On Saturday, 18th January, the vessel was again close to the Barrier on her return voyage
to the Bay of AVhales. This time however visibility was poor. A strong southerly wind was
blowing. This caused drifting frost smoke and by Saturday evening the visibility was so poor
that I decided to stand out to sea, and await better conditions. I was able to proceed ahead
again by 0260 on 19th January. At 1800 on this same evening the Wyatt Earp was sighted
ahead and I decided to ask Sir Hubert Wilkins on board. This enabled him to discuss his business
with Air. Ellsworth and hastened our final departure from the Bay of Whales. It was decided
that evening that Air, Ellsworth should return to Australia on the Discovery 11. and that Air.
Kenyon should transfer to the Wyatt Earp to assist in the salving of the abandoned aeroplane.
The vessel arrived at the Bay of AVhales at 0400 on 20th January, and left again at 0040
on 22nd January to complete a series of stations in the Ross Sea. Apart from the scientific value
of these stations, I was anxious to remain south for some days longer before attempting the return
passage through the pack ice belt.


The vessel approached Cape Orozier at 0030 on 26th January, where the scientific officers
landed to collect some rock specimens. They returned to the ship at 0200, and I set a course to
pass between Cape Bird and Beaufort Islands so as to arrive at McMurdo Sound, where a dredging
station had been arranged. At 0420 pack ice was sighted ahead. There seemed no limit to this
ice, so I turned to the north and headed towards Franklin Island. This island was sighted close
to, but pack ice again hindered our movements. The ice stretched far west towards the coast of
Victoria Land.
From the position off Franklin Island course was directed to a position in 73 degrees south
and 178 degrees east. I hoped to have a favorable passage north near this meridian. Pack ice
was sighted at 2115 on 27th January in latitude 73 degrees 37 minutes south, longitude 177 degrees
59 minutes east, but as it appeared to be rather heavy, I steamed west to longitude 176 degrees
43 minutes east, before entering. Little difficulty was experienced on this northern voyage apart
from one period between 0400 and 0900 on 29th January in latitude 72 degrees 41 minutes south
and longitude 178 degrees east. The floes here were large, like those seen on the southern voyage,
but the openings were bigger. After passing this area the ice opened up. There were no large leads;
the ice seemed to have spread out into the leads which we had noted on the way down, while the
floes were generally much smaller and softer. Two aerial flights were made to inspect the pack
ice on 28th January. At 0000 on 30th January, a definite northerly swell was observed in latitude
71 degrees 57 minutes south, longitude 178 degrees 38 minutes east. This persisted until 1800
on 30th January, when open water was reached in latitude 70 degrees 55 minutes south and
longitude 178 degrees 40 minutes east.
The Australian airmen with whom I have been co-operating have been of great assistance
to me. When arranging for an aerial inspection of the pack ice I was always extremely anxious
that Flight-Lieutenant Douglas and Flying-Officer Murdoch should not fly out of sight of the ship.
If they had crashed on the pack ice it would have been difficult for me to help them, but they never
gave me any anxiety, and I soon had the utmost confidence in their abilities and in their ice reports.
All the airmen readily conformed to the discipline of the ship and I cannot speak too highly of them.
I am forwarding a separate Aerial Report by Flight-Lieutenant Douglas.
After leaving the pack ice a course of 000 degrees was steered until 1051 on Ist February,
when I altered course and headed west towards the Balleny Islands. Ordinary scientific
observations were being made. At 0500 on 3rd February the most northern island of the Balleny
group was sighted ahead. There was no sign of Row Island, and as the weather was clear and
there was no pack ice to be seen, Mr. Deacon and I agreed that a brief survey of the islands would
be of great interest. I surveyed until 1430 and during the morning obtained good observations.
At 1430 the vessel had reached a position off Borradaile Island, where a spit suitable for landing was
seen. The motor boat was launched and a party left the ship to make a landing and collect rock
specimens. They had only left the ship for about half an hour when the weather set in thick with
snow. I immediately recalled them and guided them back with the siren. They arrived on
board at 1647 and reported they had not landed. I then steamed clear of the islands and lay to,
hoping for the weather to clear. A closer inspection of the islands seemed valuable to us, for what
we had seen differed greatly from Balleny’s report in 1839. The islands appeared much closer
together than charted, while the 12,000 ft. peak marked on Young Island does not exist. Young
Island and Buckle Island rise gently to about 3,000 feet: there are no peaks or any recent
sign of volcanic activity. The weather, however, remained thick, and at 0432 on sth February
the survey was abandoned.
After the Balleny Islands had been cleared I set a course to pass over the reported position
of Emerald Island. Good sun observations were obtained at 1729 on 7th February, and moonlight
star observations were taken at 0011 on Bth February. These observations and other sun
observations taken at 1429 on Bth February show that the vessel passed 2 miles east of the
charted position of the island at 0615 on Bth February. The sky was heavily clouded at that
time, but the visibility was about 10 miles. The island was not sighted, while the sounding at
0612 on Bth February was 2595 fathoms.
From Bth February until 0400 on 13th February strong north-westerly winds were
experienced, and we made little progress. By 1853 on 11th February, a very high sea was running,
and I hove to until 0910 on 12th February. Conditions were then easier and by 1200 on 13th
February moderate south-westerly winds had developed.
Eddystone Lighthouse was sighted at 1553 on 15th February. The course was directed
through Banks Strait and the Pilot boarded off Port Phillip Heads at 1651 on 16th February.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant.
(Sgd.) L. C. HILL,
Commanding Officer.


Copy of wireless message transmitted by Mr. Lincoln Ellsworth from R.R.S. “ Discovery II.” to Sir Hubert Wilkins aboard
M.V. U Wyatt Earp”.
“ After passing the mountains of Hearst Land we flew at altitude 10,000 feet over liigli plateau with isolated
mountains at intervals then these gave way to unbroken plateau. At 1615 G.C.T. found transmitter broken down
later found switch and antenna lead defective. At 1745 dropped flags in sight of another mountain range. At 1935
abeam mountain range 75 miles long highest peaks about 13,000 feet visibility throughout journey 120 to 150 miles.
At 2105 went down to 0,400 feet and landed 2155 due low visibility longitude 104 degrees 10 minutes west latitude 79
degrees 12 minutes south altitude 6,400 feet.
Left 24th November 1700 and landed 1730 low visibility longitude 107 degrees 55 minutes west latitude 79
degrees 30 minutes south..
November 27th flying again at 0000 landed 0050 cloud and snow 6,300 feet stop longitude 114 degrees 45 minutes
west latitude 79 degrees 58 minutes south blizzard three days had to wait for weather till December 4th 1935 and then
flew till 2310 and landed longitude 153 degrees 46 minutes west latitude 79 degrees 17 minutes south to obtain position
flew on December sth 0900 till 1005 when fuel gave out landed 163 degrees 36 minutes west 78 degrees 45 minutes south.
Remained there operating radio till December 9th when we left with sledge arrived Byrd’s camp December 15th and
lived in radio cabin very comfortable. Trail radio generator defective and no fuel for aircraft transmitter. Aircraft
undamaged.”
Lincoln Ellsworth,




REPORT
RELIEF FLIGHT TO Mr. LINCOLN ELLSWORTH AND
Mr. HOLLICK KENYON PER R.R.S. DISCOVERY //.,
JANUARY, 1936.


SUBJECT: RELIEF FLIGHT TO MR. LINCOLN ELLSWORTH AND MR. HOLLICK
KENYON PER R.R.S. DISCOVERY 11., JANUARY, 1936.
The subject is set out under the following headings :
L Equipment— (a) Moth; ( b ) "Wapiti; (c) Emergency equipment
2. Personnel.
3. Flying operations (proposed).
4. Flying operations (actual) —
(a) Pack ice area ;
(/;) Bay of Whales.
5. General considerations.
1. EQUIPMENT.
Two standard aircraft of the Royal Australian Air Force, namely a Gipsy Moth 6 OX and
a Westland "Wapiti Mark la. with Jupiter VIIIf. engine were to be employed.
(a) Gipsy Moth.
This aircraft is a float seaplane. A land under-carriage and skis were carried to convert
this machine for operations from the ice and snow. The machine was fitted with an extra fuel
tank of 12 gallons capacity which, together with the normal tankage of 19 gallons, would have
4j hours safe duration at a cruising speed of 80 miles per hour. Due to the lack of communication
between the aircraft in the air and the ship, this machine was to be primarily employed on local
reconnaissance and not to proceed beyond visibility distance from the ship.
(6) Westland Wapiti.
This aircraft is a float seaplane having a pilot’s and observer’s cockpit and fitted with one
520 h.p. engine. The necessary equipment for conversion to a land plane with skis, for operation
on the Ross Ice Barrier, was included in the aircraft stores. The total fuel to be carried was 165
gallons giving a safe endurance of 6 hours and maximum endurance of 7 hours at cruising speed of
100 miles per hour. For communication, a long and short wave transmitter and receiver was to
be carried, which under normal conditions has a range of 300 miles on long wave and 2,000 miles
on short wave. The short wave set could be operated successfully from the ground in advent
of forced landing. For navigational purposes a Sperry directional gyro steering compass was fitted
on the pilot’s dashboard, together with the necessary blind flying instruments. The observer
was to carry a sun compass, a pioneer drift indicator, an observer’s magnetic compass type 03
and the necessary tables, charts, &c. Arrangements had been made with the ship’s Commander
for the D.F. wireless bearings. In advent of a forced landing, a prismatic compass was also to
be employed by the aircraft crew while sledging back to the base.
(c) Emergency Forced Landing Equipment.
The following items were also to be carried by the Wapiti
one sledge, 11 feet long, with harness and rope ;
one tent and small sail;
two sleeping bags :
sufficient food for two men for 30 days ;
one Nansen cooker and Primus stove ;
three gallons kerosene ;
one small spade ;
one pair skis ;
one small kit of tools ; and
one medical kit.
Royal Air Force supply dropping parachute containers were to be carried, one under each lower
main plane. Into these containers was packed 24 days food for two men, leaving six days food
for dropping to the rescued-party. (This latter food with medical kit was to be dropped by
parachute from the observer’s cockpit, and on the next flight out, one of the Royal Air Force
supply containers was to be dropped followed up by more containers if necessary. Six containers
were included in the stores.) An adequate quantity of aircraft stores was carried in the ship,
including a spare engine for the AVapiti, air screws for the AVapiti and Moth, 2,000 gallons of petrol,
5 gallons of benzoline for engine priming, 200 gallons of lubricating oil and items for general
maintenance.


2. PERSONNEL.
Flight-Lieutenant Douglas, Ist pilot and in charge of flight.
Flying Officer Murdoch, navigator and 2nd pilot.
Sergeant Spooner, engine fitter and emergency pilot.
Sergeant Easterbrook, metal rigger.
Corporal Cottee, metal rigger.
A.C.I Corporal Gibbs, engine fitter.
Sergeant Reddrop, wireless operator mechanic.
3. FLYING OPERATIONS PROPOSED.
(a) Moth Seaplane.
1. Vicinity of pack ice for information to Commander of ship.
2. Short reconnaissance flights in vicinity of the Bay of Whales.
3. For location of Wapiti or crew should this machine have a forced landing within 130
miles from the ship.
{b) Wapiti Seaplane.
1. Three flights being on pre-arranged courses of approximately 450 miles in length (200
miles out, 40 miles on base of triangle and 200 miles in.)
4. FLYING OPERATIONS ACTUAL (MOTH).
(a) 1. On the 12th January, 1936, the first flight took place in a pool in the pack ice at
approximately latitude 71 degrees 45 minutes south, longitude 178 degrees west; altitude was
confined to 1,200 feet due to low cloud. This flight lasted 30 minutes. Air temperature 30° F.
(а) 2. On the 13th January, 1936, the second flight was carried out in latitude 73 degrees
south, longitude 178 degrees west, again 1,200 feet was the maximum altitude ; this flight lasted
one hour. Air temperature 30° F. Due to a fairly strong wind (18 M.P.H.) and a choppy sea
with some ice obstructions, conditions were severe for a flight in this type of machine.
(б) 1. At the Bay of AVhales on the 15th January, 1936, a flight to “ Little America ” was
made. One man was observed and provisions were dropped by parachute. Owing to subdued
light and ice glare, conditions for flying whilst at “ Little America ” were most difficult. This
flight was of one hour duration. Another difficulty encountered was the freezing of the salt water
spray on the aircraft during the take off (due to the low air temperature B°F.).
(a) 3. On the 28th January, 1936, in approximately latitude 73 degrees south, longitude
175 degrees east, a reconnaissance flight of pack ice was made in ideal conditions, except for clouds
being encountered at 1,500 feet. Duration of flight one hour. Air temperature 33° F.
(a) 4. Later on the same day another flight was made in approximately latitude 72 degrees
30 minutes south, longitude 175 degrees east; again the maximum altitude was in the region of
1,200 feet. This flight lasting one hour and five minutes. Air temperature 32° F.
5. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS.
(a) Pre-heating and Starting Engine (Gipsy Engine).
When the air temperature is below 34° F. it is necessary to pre-heat the engine and lubricating
oil prior to starting. This requires an asbestos lined engine cover, having some form of flue for
receiving hot air from a kerosene burner. It was found necessary to continue this process from
20 to 30 minutes. Benzoline was used for priming the cylinders.
(6) Running of Engine.
It was found necessary to richen the carburation mixture, especially at medium revolutions
by fitting a larger compensating jet. All exposed oil pipe lines were lagged with asbestos. The
induction elbow was also lagged. To reduce excessive cooling, approximately half of the normal
open engine cowling was closed. Before taking off, the engine must be thoroughly warmed up
by steady taxying at medium revolutions. In flight, the engine behaved normally, but when
gliding in prior to alighting, it is advisable to run the engine at at least half the normal full
revolutions to keep the engine warm should it be required in a hurry.
(c) Aircraft (Moth and Wapiti).
The fuselage and floats were painted yellow, as this is undoubtedly the most conspicuous
colour, to observe from ground to air and air to ground. A very light oil is essential for all moving
controls.


( d) Slinging of Seaplanes.
{a) The most suitable derrick boom is one of sufficient length which enables the machine
to be hoisted out nose first with its engine running.
( h) For the take off, the best position of the ship is one where sufficient “up wind ” distance
(at least 400 yards) exists, with the machine lowered over on the lee side and the ship practically
stationary. For alighting, the ship to be at least 200 yards up wind from the nearest low
obstruction. The machine to come aboard on the ship’s lee side with the ship stationary, or
nearly so. It is advisable to have a motor boat standing by during the flying operations. The
machine is best stowed with its nose facing the bow of the ship.
( e ) Weather Conditions.
Given clear sky and horizon, or at least absence of cloud to eight or nine thousand feet,
reconnaissance flights to an altitude of six to eight thousand feet above the ship will ascertain,
with accuracy, pack ice conditions to at least 70 miles in all horizontal directions, which would
be of immense value in helping the ice navigation of the ship.
(/) Flying Comfort and Efficiency.
For flights of not over two hours’ duration open cockpit machines are reasonably satisfactory,
but for flights of two hours and over, it is almost essential that the crew of the aircraft are enclosed
in a cabin or at least sheltered by some efficient form of wind and draught break. This is
particularly necessary for the observer, who is taking sun and drift observations almost
continuously.
(Sgd.) E. DOUGLAS,
Flight-Lieutenant.
R.R.S. Discovery 11 .,
sth February, 1936.
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by
L. F. Johnston, Commomvealth Government Printer, Canberra.


R100 WEsnr I7£j
r
iCleared Pack | t /
| j 0 ' /
S. s # a / /
22 ;V\ \ / / C,Col beck/ % v /7\
«- *\A(5'" V ,., / * / / V 1/
r\o ,A / <> wA /
nl l • ||| " , »l/,,| I / #Q \\l / °t). dj' / y\ / V -2s<o**. /
- - ~f Vw7 i
U‘° / / '
I / / / • Indicates Noon Position
I / / / ■■■.■■■. ■.-.=. Light Pack Ice
| / / / Tmi *- Heavy Loose Pack Ice
I / / / / -j_n_r Close Heavy Pack Ice /
I I I / /m pen etna Ice
ELLSWORTH RELIEF EXPEDITION
Track of R.R.S. “Discovery II”
70°S. —Bay of Whales-Ross Is.-70°S.
Drawn by Property and Surrey Branch, Dept of the Interior. Canberra.


«50 East 180 West . . , , > 50 . . ; . .
\ \ ..a... , \ \ \ \ \ \ \ v.. \ v \ \ \ \ v \ \ \ \ ' \ \ i ri '1 I I I 1 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I / I I I I I I I....I I i i / / it t 1.1/ i ./ / f f ' \
y // I? /
: ♦ JV-" 152 —/ X \ :
,20 ; \ / /"AMacqua r.ej \ ” \;
' t -\/j / \ \ 65 / '
- / / \ I It / \ <*
' I ( Nxnn \
• Indicates Noon Position ~_
South Pole
ELLSWORTH RELIEF EXPEDITI ON-Track of R.R.S. “Discovery IT
Melbourne —Dunedin —Bay of Whales —Melbourne
via Ross Island and Balleny Islands
23.12.35-17.2.36
Drawn by Property and Survey Branch, Dept of the Interior. Canberra


~ ■» '


sa* . ;
;v. ■ : *. w
■ ' ■ : ■• •- ./« J ,-;:-..-v *. • • _.»*. ha*& -. • ■'• : v -. ■- -j »«r t•. \t-Jri* ~ , --^.i m ~',i*fr: •■%> ,**f: : ■TT&Ss&sr'J .. il :is£Vu; •*. , ...- '■»«. • - ■• . :-t- :••; n-- ■• •-_•* •: -' ■-> - - —-•■ •■
