

Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission
REPORT
ON
Lachlan River Water
Conservation Scheme
SYDNEY: JOHN SPENCE ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER-1922
*14732—A


Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission
REPORT
ON
Lachlan River Water
Conservation Scheme
SYDNEY: JOHN SPENCE, ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER-1922
*14732—A


Lachlan River Water Conservation Scheme.
Proposals for improving the water supply in the Lachlan River have been under
consideration for many years, and considerable sums have already been spent, both by
the State and private holders, in the construction of works on the main and effluent
streams.
The scheme for constructing a head storage at Wyangala has been thoroughly
investigated, both from the point of view of the water available for storage, and of the
improvement of the river flow which could be depended upon if the storage were built.
These matters, together with the proposal for increasing the storage in Lake Cudgeljico,
are dealt with fully in the attached Report, which was first published as an Appendix to
the Annual Report of the Commission, but without the diagrams now included.
Later it is intended to refer these proposals to the Public Works Committee for
inquiry and report. In the meanwhile it is thought that the details now furnished will
be of service as a basis for local discussion, and it is suggested that the preparation of
statistics of production and particulars of the areas which would be benefited if the
scheme were carried out, be taken in hand by riparian holders.
Careful consideration will be required of the financial side of the proposition,
especially in the case of the Wyangala Storage, where the expenditure required will be
heavy compared with the benefit received. It will be noted that the scheme as prepared
includes no proposal for the utilisation of the regulated flow from the storage on any
area to be developed by the State, such as is the case on the Murrumbidgee River. The
water will, therefore, be available for diversion by riparian holders, and the method by
which their contributions towards repaying the cost of the scheme should be made—
whether by a rate per mile of frontage, per acre of holding within a certain distance of
stream, or other means—might, it is thought, be a matter for discussion between the
various local bodies interested.
Any information or assistance required in connection with this matter will bo
given by officers of the Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission.
FRANK A. CHAFFEY,
( Minister for Agriculture and Chairman
' of the Water Conservation and Irriga
( tion Commission.
H. H. DARE, Commissioner.
G. J. EVATT, Commissioner.
•14733—8


Report on Lachlan River Water Conservation Scheme.
LACHLAN RIVER WATER CONSERVATION SCHEME.
Preliminary.
For the information of my colleagues, and in order that the Commission may arrive at a decision as
to future action with regard to this scheme, the following report has been prepared.
The scheme of Water Conservation on the Lachlan River has been under consideration for many
years. The following is an extract from a statement by Mr. C. A. Lee, Secretary for Public Works,
submitted to the Public Works Committee in January, 1906, in connection with their inquiry into the
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Scheme: —•
Streams Favourable for Conserving Water.
The three most favourable streams in this State for conserving water and applying it for the
purpose of irrigation, are the Murray, Lachlan, and Murrumbidgee. The Government intend to
utilise these waters in the near future in forming part of a great national scheme of water
conservation, for the development and closer settlement of the Central and Western Divisions
of the State.
The question of submitting the Lachlan scheme to the Works Committee will receive
early attention after this initial scheme (Murrumbidgee) shall have been dealt with.
Survey and other information was prepared and an estimate of cost for a dam at Wyangala
was submitted by the late Mr. L. A. B. Wade, M.lnst.C.E., then Chief Engineer for Irrigation and
Drainage, in 1909, but no further action was taken at that time.
Since that date systematic observations of river flow have been continued and a quantity of
valuable information obtained. It may be stated that with this fuller information available it has
been ascertained that the spillway provision, allowed for in 1909, would have been quite inadequate,
and in view of this fact, and of the great increase in the cost of construction since that date, the
cost of the Wyangala dam as now estimated shows a considerable increase.
Recently extensive investigations have been made by means of a diamond drill and trial
shafts of the formation' at the dam site, and a revised estimate of cost is now submitted, together
with the cost of increasing the Lake Uudgellico storage, and other particulars connected with the
scheme.
The submission of this report has been delayed by reason of the necessity for carefully
considering in all its aspects this scheme, which has been a most difficult one to deal with on account
of the great variations of the river flow, the large quantity of water lost in transit, the different
interests involved along the main river and effluent streams, and the limited benefit to be expected
from the expenditure of a considerable sum of money. With a view to a full discussion of these
matters, the report has been made as comprehensive as possible and deals not only with proposed
tuture works, but also with existing works and the regulations governing their operations.
Historical.
Discovery of Lachlan River, 1815
The Lachlan River was discovered on 27th May, 1815, by Deputy-Surveyor G. W. Evans.
The expedition was despatched bv His Excellency Lachlan Macquarie, Esq., Captain-General
and Govcrnor-in-Chief of New South Wales, who directed Mr, Evans “ to pursue his discoveries as
tar westward as his supply of provisions, the nature of the country, and other circumstances would
permit, ’ and is thus described in the “ Historical Records of Australia, ” Vol. VIII;
“G. W. Evans and his party of four men left Bathurst on the loth of May, 1815, and
encamped in the evening in the neighbourhood of Perth. One day was lost in searching for the


horses which had strayed, and on the 16th he reached the centre of the three peaks now known
as the Three Brothers." Evans named these hills AntilTs Peak, Mount Macquarie, and Maclaine’s
Peak. On the 22nd he discovered and named Mount Lachlan, about 3 miles south-east of
Carcoar. He camped 4 miles south of this peak; and on the following day he travelled west
for 4 miles, when in the distance he sighted the Canobolas, and named the peak Jamison’s Table
Mountain. On the 24th he discovered Limestone Creek at a point a little north of west from
Lvndhurst. He followed the creek down to its junction with the Belubula River, which he
named Lewis’ Creek. On the 25th he ascended the Sugarloaf, which he named Mount Lewin.
On the 2Gth ho passed Licking Hole Creek, and on the following day he discovered the
Lachlan River between North Logan and Cowra. On Sunday, the 28th, he allowed three of
liis men to rest in camp, and with the fourth man he ascended the river for 6 miles to the
neighbourhood of Cowra, and named the river flats Oxley’s Plains. During the next four days,
he traced the river down to its junction with Mandagery Creek, which he named Byrne’s Creek.
From this point ho was compelled to commence his return journey on the 2nd of June, 1815,
and he arrived at Bathurst ten days later.”
Mr. Evans, in his Journal, refers to his discovery in the following w'ords :
“ . . . I arrive on the bank of a river, but am much mortified to see the stream run
N.W.; as I intend to follow it, I shall not have time to go up to the plains. A very little rain
would make this river navigable for Boats; the banks are steep as the South Creek at Windsor,
but much wider, and the soil equally as rich; there are exceeding large gum trees growing on
each side.
“ From the hill native smokes were discerned in many directions, and find they must be
numerous indeed from the number of fire-places on the river bank; it appears as tho’ they had
been lately successful in obtaining emu. as I counted 23 large heaps of feathers by their different
Fire sides at this lately forsaken camp.”
Later, in his entry for 2nd June, he states ;
“The river 1 can distinctly discover to continue near due west, and rest confident that
when it is full, boats may go down it in safety; my meaning of being full is its general height in
moderate seasons, which the banks show about 5 feet above the present level; it would then
earn 7 boats over trees and narrows that now obstruct the passage; no doubt the stream
connects with Macquarie or some other river further west; the channel then sure is of great
magnitude; I should think so to carry oft the body of water that must in time of floods cover
these very extensive flats.”
Expedition of Snrveyor-Ceuerxl Oxley, 1817.
The following account of Oxley’s expedition down the Lachlan from Mandagery Creek to the
vicinity of Oxley is taken from the “ Historical Records of Australia,” Vol. IX; —
“ After receiving Earl Bathurst’s instructions. Governor Macquarie commenced prepara-
tions for the expedition. Twelve men svere selected to accompany John Oxley; (r. W. Evans
was appointed second in command, Allan Cunningham and Charles Fraser, botanists, and
William Parr, mineralogist. A depot was formed on the Lachlan River about 9 miles above
its junction with the Belubula River. All provisions and equipment were taken to the depdt,
and two boats were built there by George Hubbard, a member of the expedition. John Oxley
received his instructions from Macquarie on the 24th of March, 1817, and on the 28th of April
following a start was made from the depot. Part of the expedition proceeded down the river
in the boats, whilst Oxlev, travelling with the horses, examined the surrounding country. In
this way, the Lachlan River was followed to the neighbourhood of the modem town of Monwonga
below Forbes. It was then found impracticable to follow the river further owing to the flooded
state of the country. Accordingly Oxlev abandoned the boats, and on the 18th of May
commenced a south-westerly course away from the river, hoping to reach the coast near cape
Northumberland. This course was followed until in the neighbourhood of Mirrool creek, a little
more than 20 miles from the Murrumbidgee River, when he turned north, keeping to the
west of the Cocoparra range. On the 13rd of June he unexpectedly fell in with the Lachlan
4


River about 20 miles above Hillston north. The river was then traced until the 9th of July,
when the party was near the modern town of Oxley. On the return journey the river was
followed to the neighbourhood of the junction of Goobang Creek, where, on the Ist of August,
the main stream was crossed on a raft. Taking a course in a general direction of E.N.E. the
tributaries of the Little River were crossed, and the Macquarie River was met with about 20
miles above the town of Wellington. This river was then followed to Bathurst, which was
reached on the 29th of August.”
Referring to his first sight of the Lachlan, Oxley writes in his Journal of 2oth April:—
“At two o’clock saw the river, which certainly did not disappoint me; it was evidently
much higher than usual, running a strong stream.”
In his report of 30th August, 1817, to Governor Macquarie, Oxley states: —
“ . . . I proceeded down the Lachlan in Company with the Boats until the 12th May,
the Country rapidly descending, until the Waters of the River rose to a level with it, and, dividing
into Numerous branches inundated the Country to the West and N.W., prevented any further
progression in that Direction, the River itself being lost among marshes. Up to this Point it had
received no Accession of Waters from either side, but on the Contrary was Constantly dissipating in
Lagoons and Swamps.
“ The impossibility of proceeding further in Conjunction with the Boats being evident, I
determined upon the maturest deliberation to haul them up, and, divesting ourselves of every
thing that Could possibly be spared, proceed with the Horses, loaded with the additional pro-
visions from the Boats, on such a Course towards the Coast as would intersect any Stream that
might arise from the divided Waters of the Lachlan.
“ In Pursuance of this Plan I quitted the River on the 17th May, taking a S. W. Course
towards Cape Northumberland, as the best One to answer my intended purpose. 1 will not
here detail the difficulties and privations we experienced in passing through a Barren and desolate
Country, without anv water, but such Rain Water as was found remaining in Holes and the
Crevices of Rocks; I continued this course until the 9th June, when, having lost Two Horses
through fatigue and Want, and the others in a deplorable Condition, I changed our Course to
North, along a Range of lofty Hills running in that direction, as they afforded the only mean?
of procuring Water, until we should fall in with some running stream. On this Course I con-
tinued until the 23d June, when we again fell in with a Stream, which we had at first some
difficulty to Recognise as the Lachlan, it being little larger than one of the Branches of it, where
it was quitted on the 17 th May.
“ I did not hesitate a Moment to pursue the Course of this Stream, Not that the Nature of
the Country or its own Appearance in Any Manner indicated that it would become Navigable or
was even permanent, but I was unwilling that the smallest doubt should remain of Any
Navigable Waters falling Westward into the Sea between the limits pointed out in my
Instructions.
“I Continued along the Banks of the Stream until the Bth July, it having taken during
this period a Westerly direction and passing through a perfectly level Country, barren in the
Extreme, and being evidently at periods entirely under Water. To this point it had been
gradually diminishing and spreading its Waters over Stagnant Lagoons and Morasses, without
receiving any Stream that we know of during the whole extent of its Course. The Banks were
not more than Three feet high, and the Marks of flood on the Shrubs and Bushes shewed that
at times it rose between Two and Three feet higher, Causing the whole Country to become a
Marsh and altogether uninhabitable.
“ Further progress Westward, had it been possible, was now useless, as there was neither
Hill or rising Ground of any kind within the Compass of our View, which was only bounded by
the Horizon in every quarter, entirely devoid of Timber except a few diminutive Gums on the
very edge of the Stream might be so termed. The Water in the Bed of the Lagoon, as it might
now properly be denominated, was stagnant, its Breadth about 20 feet and the Heads of Grass
growing in it showed it to be about 3 feet deep.


“ This originally unloosed for and truly singular termination of a River, which we had
anxiously hoped and reasonably expected would have led to a far different conclusion, filled us
with the most painful sensations. We were full 500 Miles West of Sydney and nearly in its
Latitude, and it had taken ns Ten Weeks of Unremltteu exertion to proceed so far; the Nearest
Part of the Coast about Cape Bernoulli, had it been accessible, was distant about 150 Miles.
We had demonstrated, beyond the shadow of a doubt, that no River whatever could fall into
the Sea between Cape Otway and Spencer Gulpb, at least none deriving their waters from the
Eastern Coast, and that the Country South of the Parallel of 34° and west of the Meridian of
147° 30' E't was uninhabitable, and useless for all the purposes of Civilised Man.
“ It now became my duty to make our remaining resources as extensively useful to the Colony
as our Circumstances would allow; These were much diminished; An Accident to one of the
Boats in the outset of the Expedition had deprived us of one third of our dry provisions, of which
we had originally but 18 Weeks, and we had been iji consequence for some time on a reduced ration
of Two Quarts of Flour per Man per Week. To return to the Depot by the Route we had come
would have been useless as impossible, and seriously considering the Spirit of Your Excellency’s
Instructions I determined upon the most Mature deliberation to take such a route on our return
as would, I hoped, best Comport with Your Excellency’s Views, had our present Situation ever
been Contemplated.
“Returning down the Lachlan I recommenced the Survey of it from the Point on which
it was made the 23rd June, intending to Continue up its Banks until its Connection with the
Marshes, where we quitted it on the 17th May, was satisfactorily established, as also to ascertain
if any Streams might have escaped our research. The Connection with ail the points of the
Survey, previously ascertained, was Completed between the 19th July and the 3rd August. In
the Space passed over within that period, the River had divided into Various branches, and formed
Three fine lakes, which, with one near the Termination of our Journey Westward, were the only
Considerable pieces of Water we had Yet Seen, and I now estimate that the River from the Place
when first made by Mr. Evans has run a Course, taking all its Windings, of upwards 1,200 Miles,
a length of Coarse altogether unprecedented, when the Single Nature of the River is considered
and that its Original is its only supply of Water during that distance.
<s Crossing at this Point, it was my intention to take a N.E. Course to intersect the
Country, and, if possible, ascertain what had become of the Macquarie River, which it was clear
had never joined the Lachlan. . . .”
Governor Macquarie, in his despatch to Earl Bathurst, refers to the results of the expedition in
the following terms:
4 * The Result of this Tour leaves me to lament that the River Lachlan, of which the most
Sanguine Hopes had been entertained that it would in its Course to the Sea have become of great
and Important Magnitude for the purposes of Navigation and Commerce, loses itself altogether
over a large Extent of Morasses, the Limits of which Mr. Oxley has not been enabled to make
any probable Conjecture Concerning.
“ This Singular Circumstance of a River, after having attained Considerable Magnitude
and ran (According to Mr. Oxley’s Calculation) a Course of About 1,200 Miles, diffusing itself
over an immense Tract of Morasses, so as to cease to have any further Claim to the Character
of a River, is Matter of great Disappointment and Mortification to me, having Entertained as I
Conceived the best grounded Hopes that it warnld have Emptied itself, by the Accession of many
Waters, in a Copious River into the Sea on the S.W. Coast of this Continent, and have Marked
the Situation for a future Settlement, Combining Important Local Advantages for Internal
Trade and the Foreign Intercourses of Commerce both with Europe and India. lam enabled,
however, to Add that this Disappointment is in some Decree Compensated by the Discoverv
Made by Mr. Oxley on his Return from the Morasses, Where the Lachlan lost itself.
“In this Detour large Tracts of fertile Soil, Abounding with Lime Stone and good
Timber, and well watered, have been passed over, and an Extensive River running in a Northerly
Direction, which is Ascertained to be the Macquarie River, Much Enlarged, has been fallen in
with . . . - 1 °
6


Station.
Height of
river-bed above
sea level.
Mileage
from source.
Average slope
per mile of bed
between stations.
Feet.
2,800
1,010
Miles.
0
it.
in.
Wyangala
123
14
7
Cowra
905
152
3
8
Forbes
753
253
1
6
Condobolin
603
379
1
2
F.uabalong
519
457
1
i
Hillston
377
616
0
ii
Booligal
288
737
0
9
Oxley
240
890
0
3|-
Murrumbidgee Junction
231
921
0
3i
In July, 1913, a party, led by Mr. Milne, then Railway Superintendent, afterwards Railway
Commissioner, discovered two carved trees marking the Chief’s grave at the spot where.Oxley crossed
the Lachlan near Kiacatoo, and a handsome stone monument has since been erected at this site.
The journals of these early explorers have been quoted at some length to show that the general
conditions on the Lachlan in those earliest days of our knowledge of the river were apparently
very similar to those existing at the present time.
Basin or the Lachlan.
The Lachlan rises in the Cnllarin Range, a short distance from Gunning, at an altitude of
about 2,800 feet, and flows generally in a north-westerly direction to a point midway between Con-
dobolin and Euabalong, when the direction of flow changes to south-westerly to its junction with the
Murrumbidgee River below Oxley,
The basin of the Lachlan above Forbes comprises some 7,500 square miles of mountainous and
hilly country. Below that point the basin is flat and contributes nothing to the flow of the river, except
in periods of extreme rainfall.
The principal tributaries above Wyangala are the Crookwell and Abercrombie Rivers; below
Wyangala the Boorowa and Belubula Rivers, and Milbum, Hovells, Crowther, Mandagery, and Goobang
Creeks. Of these the two principal streams are the Boorowa and Belubula Rivers, both of which, and
particularly the latter, discharge large volumes during flood.
In Appendix “ A ” are given particulars as furnished by the Commonwealth Meteorologist of
the average rainfall over the catchment area above Wyangala; over the catchment areas of the
Boorowa and Belubula Rivers; and at typical stations on the Lachlan River below Wyangala.
From these figures it will be seen that the average rainfall at Crookwell, which has the highest
record on the Wyangala catchment, is about 32 inches per annum, the rainfall diminishing to about
20 inches at Forbes, 17 inches at Condobolin, and 11 inches per annum at Oxley.
IHsiances from source.
The following Table shows the approximate distances from source, and heights of some of the
principal stations on the river.
Geological Formation.
The following particulars have been supplied by Mr. R, H. Carabage, Under Secretary for
Mines, regarding the geological features of the Lachlan Basin: —
“ The subject area may be divided into :
(а) Hilly or contributing area.
(б) Plain or non-contributing area.


(ul Hilly or contributing area.
The watershed of the Lachlan River above the Wyangala Dam includes the Abercrombie
and Crookwell Rivers. The whole of this area is very hilly, being composed of ranges varying
from 3,000 to 4,000 feet in height above sea level, and which represent the remnants of a dissected
plateau. The whole area may be regarded as contributing.
“The formations composing these high lands consist of Palaeozoic rocks such as slate,
sandstone, volcanic ash, and interbedded laval ffows, together with limestone. The limestone
occurs as lenticular beds and as altered calcareous claystone.
“These have been intruded by rocks of granitic type, and they are capped in places by
basaltic lavas of tertiary age. The upper reaches of the main tributary streams are exceedingly
rough, being characterised by rockbound gorges and valleys having very steep sides.
<£ A very high ‘ run-off * may be expected from such country. From the head waters to
Cowra, which is a distance of 70 miles approximately, the fall of the country is steep, amounting
almost to 3,000 feet. The watershed which lies between Wyangala Dam and Cowra is very
variable in form, being rough and high in some places, and merely undulating in others. The
latter divide is composed mainly of granite, and may be regarded also as contributing.
“ Alluvial flats of limited size are developed at a distance approximating to 20 miles below'
the Wyangala Dam, as also in the vicinity of Cowra.
(6) Plain or non-contributing area.
“ The flats mentioned above as existing at Cowra merge gradually into an extensive plain of
alluvium which, below Forbes, is broken only by an occasional rocky outcrop. The fall along this
portion of the river is inconsiderable, being 500 feet approximately only in 100 miles. In areas
such as this the loss due to percolation and other agencies is great, while further still to the west,
evaporation probably constitutes the greatest source of loss.”
Effluent Streams.
The more important effluent streams are shown on Plan No. 1.
The Lachlan is remarkable for the manner in which its volume of flow diminishes as the distance
from its source increases. At Cowra, for example, the level of the highest flood is some 52 feet above
the river bed, and the area of flood is about 62,000 square feet. Cowra Bridge, completed in 1893, at
a cost of over £31,000, has seven truss and six beam spans, with a total length of 1,049 feet.
At Oxley, 738 miles below Cowra, the river is crossed by two small beam bridges with a total
lenght of 180 feet, the area of flood at this place being about 4,420 square feet, or only about 7 per
cent, of that at Cowra.
The reason for this condition of things is that a large proportion of the flow breaks out into a
net work of overflow channels, where it is lost by evaporation and absorption, only a small volume
being returned to the river.
The first breakaway is on the northern side of the Lachlan, about 8 miles above Forbes, the water
flowing in a westerly direction, about a mile from the river, and returning to the river at Forbes
greatly diminished in volume, owing to filling large swamps and depressions en route.
Another and more substantial breakaway is on the south side of the river about 4 miles above
Forbes, where the flood waters from the river pass into numerous swamps and lagoons, which form
the Bundaburrah Creek. These waters uniting with the water backed up through Jemalong Creek,
and the drainage from the creeks heading in the Grenfell District, form the Bundaburrah Cowal, and
convert into a great morass many thousands of acres on the eastern side of the Jemalong Range.
West of Jemalong Range numerous breakaways occur on both sides of the river; those to the
north mingling with the Goobang Creek, and returning to the river near Condobolin; those to the
south flowing south-westerly into Lake Cowal, there to be lost by absorption and evaporation over the
huge exposed water surface.
Of the effluent streams, the most important are the Bumbuggin Creek, which carries a large
proportion of the river flow into the Goobang Creek, returning to the river near Condobolin; the
Island Creek, which takes off from the river near Cadow and diverts a considerable volume into the


Year.
: Forbes flow.
Euabalong
flow.
Loss,
Loss per
cent, of
Forbes flow.
Remarks.
1902
27
00
27
100
Driest year on record.
1903
361
211
150
41
1904
131
41
90
69
1905
331
230
101
31
1906
645
459
186
29
1907
135
56
79
58
1908
163
96
67
41
1909
374 .
253
121
32
1910
171
81
90
53
1911
316
219
97
31
1912
443
342
101
23
1913
148
116
32
22
1914
120
69
51
42
1915
542
451
91
17
1916
1,968
1,592
1,402
376
19
Doubtful, river in high flood.
>> >> >» >>
Lake Oudgellico intake and weir
discharges used.
1917
1,792
488
390
22
1918
461
27
6
1919
36
10
26
72
1920
902
727
175
19
1921
652
552
100
25
>> M 5» >» »»
Means 487.
368
114
23
Willamundry and Wallaroi Creeks by means of a weir, portion of the flow rejoining the river over the
weir, and portion, diminished in volume, eventually reaching the Lachlan near Kiacatoo: the
Booberoi Creek, which takes off at Booberoi Weir and rejoins the river below Lake Cudgcllico;
Willandra Creek, and Marrowie Creek.
The two latter streams never return to the main river, but flow out towards the Darling and
Murray Rivers. In the 1870 flood, the Willandra water is said to have actually reached Lake
Benanee, near Euston, on the Murray.
Measurements of the volumes of water passing Forbes and Euabalong show the following
results;—
Flows Gagged each Year at Forbes and Euabalong Stations.
Period, twenty years, 1902-1921.
Unit=one thousand acre-feet.
Diagrams of River Heights.
In Appendix “ B” is given a list of stations on the Lachlan River and tributaries where a
daily record is kept of the stream level, and where periodic current meter measurements are made of
the volume of flow by the Hydrographic Staff of the Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission.
From this table it will be seen that at several of the stations these observations extend over a
period of about thirty years, embracing seasons of great drought and of high flood, as well as those of
normal rainfall.
At each of the above stations the height of the river or stream is recorded daily by paid readers,
and, except in a few instances, current meter measurements of the flow of the river are made periodically
by officers of the River Gauging Staff of the Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission. From
the data so obtained the discharge of the streams during any period is determined.


Station.
Year.
Height on
present «faujfe.
Reference.
a.
in.
W vaugala
1870
63
7
At Dam Site. Connected to by Mr. Osborn
and said to be very reliable. See Plan
Cat. 137(43. Flood level was 66 ft. 0 in.
above river bed at Dam Site.
Cowra
IS70
52
3
Field Notes by W. Poole’s L.B., No. 3, p. 20.
1885
4)
0
5 5J
"
1831
42
0
7 '
1900
46
8
Readers’ Cards.
1916
50
9
1870
3 4
10
Oranter’s L.B. 57, p. 57.
Reader’s Cards.
1891
34
5
1910
34
22
4
Kuabalong
1870
3
Poole’s L.B. 3.
1891
21
11
...
1916
22
4
Reader’s Cards.
1870
17
6
Old Discharge Register.
1891
16
11
1917
16
8
Reader’s Cards.
Oxley
1870
14
3
Old Discharge Register.
1891
13
6
A graphic representation of the great variations in river height which occur at Euabalong. is
shown in Plan No. 1.
Records of High Floods.
The following show the heights reached by the highest floods of which there are authentic
records:
It will be noted that the 1870 flood, which rose 66 ft. above the river bed at Wyangala, only
reached a little over 14 ft. at Oxley, 767 miles further downstream.
Evaporation Records.
The tank evaporation observations at Young, which lies about 60 miles south of Forbes, over a
period of twenty-sis years show the following results:
Maximum 56*2 inches per annum.
Minimum 35*6 „ ~
Mean 45*3 ,> ~
It is interesting to note that the rate of summer evaporation estimated for Forbes district in a
maximum year, viz 1 :., -270 Inches per day, approximates to the *289 inches per day measured at Yanga
Lake, near Balranald, where measurements of losses in a large body of water, 3,450 acres surface area,
are recorded. The latter figure includes losses by percolation, which, however, are regarded by the
manager of Yanga Station as being negligible. The mean summer temperature at Forbes and Yanga
are probably similar, though the rainfall at Forbes is somewhat higher.


Name.
Locality.
Date of
Construction.
Cost.
1. Booberoi Weir, regulator, and cutting...
31 miles below Condobolin ...
1902
£
7,770
2. Lake Cudgellico Weir, regulator, and
7 miles from Cudgellico town-
1902
35,842
cuttings, &c.
ship.
3. Willandra W eir, regulator, and cutting..
31 miles below LakeCudgeilico
1892
16,669
4. Hillston Weir
lr* miles below Hillston
1919
1,435
5. Boolicral Weir
1907 ’
1,060
i
National and Trust Works,
The following is a list of the National and Trust Works on the Lachlan River and tributaries:—
National Works. —These have been constructed by the State, and are operated and maintained
by the Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission :
1. Booberoi Weir , Regulator, and Cutting. —The weir is a concrete structure with a crest length
of about 336 feet and a maximum height of 15 feet ; capacity about 2,320 acre-feet. Water is held
back about 10 miles. The cutting to the Booberoi Creek takes off immediately above the weir, and
the volume of diversion is controlled by a regulator, operated in accordance with regulations. The
water above the weir forms a useful storage in the river. The water which flows down the Booberoi
Creek, after filling a number of large dams, rejoins the Lachlan about 60 miles below the weir.
2. Lake Cudgellico Weir , Regulator, and Cutting. —The weir is of concrete constructed in a
river bend, the original course of the river being blocked by an earthen dam. The crest length is 261
feet, height above bed 18 feet, and capacity about 6SO acre-feet. Water is held back for about fifteen
(15) miles. A short distance above the weir a cutting has been constructed from the river which
diverts water, via Sheet of Water and Curlew Lake, into Lake Cudgellico, a regulator at the head of
the cutting controlling the flow. Water is released from Lake Cudgellico via Lake Creek, which is also
provided with a regulator.
A description of the scheme for improving the storage is given later.
3. Willandra Weir, Regulator, and Cutting. —The weir is a timber crib structure with a stepped
crest about 200 feet long and a minimum height of about 14 feet above river bed. The capacity is
about 485 acre-feet, and water is held back about 12 miles.
The cutting to Willandra Creek is provided with a regulator at its offtake, operated in accor-
dance with the regulations The water which enters Willandra Creek flows generally in a westerly
direction. The channel is defined to Kiifera Station, a distance of about 100 miles by road, and
probably 300 miles, or over, by creek. None of the flow returns to the Lachlan River. Evidence
was given before the Royal Commission on Water Conservation in 1885 by Mr. C. Eartiere that
during the 1870 flood ‘‘going from Balranald near to Pooncarie I had to swim a strong running
stream which came from the Lachlan.” He was asked, “ Do you consider that the stream which
you crossed was water which had flowed out of the Lachlan through the Willandra River and found
its way down towards the Murray?” His reply was, “Yes. If it had been assisted a little it
would have found its way into the Murray at Lake Go! Gol , . . but being interfered with by
the sand hills it was turned and found its way into Lake Benanee and some into Waldaira Lake.”
There are no records of the Willandra water ever having reached so far since 1870. The furthest
point reached during the 1916 flood was Lake Moornanyah, some 115 land miles from the offtake.
On several other occasions during recent years it has reached Kiifera homestead.
The supply is most useful to landholders on the creek, as it fills a number of dams in a very dry
part of the State. J J


These include :—
Trust and Miscellaneous Works.
Name.
' Locality.
Date of Construction.
Cost.
1. Condobolin West Weir Trust
2. Torriganny, Muggabah, and
Merrimajeel Creeks Trust.
3. Forbes Water Supply Weir...
4 miles below Condobolin
1910
1908
£692.
£344.
1882
Not known.
1901
£634.
About 12miles aboveCon-
1892
£972.
dobolin.
Constituted, but works
Estimated
not constructed.
£3,500.
4. Hillston Weir. —This is a timber weir with crest about 61 feet long and height of 7 feet above
he river bed. The capacity is about 100 acre-feet and water is held back about 7 miles, thus
affording a stock and domestic supply in the Lachlan in the vicinity of Hillston.
5. Booligal Weir. —This is a timber weir with crest about 55 feet long and height of 6 feet
above river bed. The capacity is about 120 acre-feet and water is held back about 9 miles. Ho
water is diverted, but the stored water is very useful for stock and domestic purposes.
1. Condoholin I Vest Weir Trust.— This is a Trust Scheme under the Water Act to provide
water for stock and domestic purposes. The weir is of concrete with a crest length of 44 feet, 6 feet
high above bed, holding back water about 5 miles. Capacity about 60 acre-feet.
2. Torriganny, Muggabah, and Merrimajeel Creeks Trust— The works comprise the grading and
clearing of the creek beds to provide a better supply from the Lachlan River. At a very small cost
great benefit has been conferred on an area of about 170,000 acres lying to the north-west and
south-west of Booligal.
3. Forbes Water Supply Weir. —This is a timber and stone weir with crest length of about
70 feet and height of 0 feet above the river bed. It was carried out by local subscription and
augments the storage from which the town supply is pumped. Water is also used for irrigation.
4. Goobang Creek Weir.—l* situated on Goobang Creek about 1 mile above its junction with
the Lachlan. The structure is of timber and stone, with a crest length of about 171 feet and a
maximum height of 11 feet above bed. Water is stored for the Condobolin town supply and also for
irrigation purposes. Though not on the Lachlan River, the greater part of the stored water is
diverted from the river via Bumbuggan Creek.
5. Island Creek Weir. —Is situated in Island Creek near its lowest junction with the Lachlan.
The structure is an overshot weir, built of concrete and masonry, with a crest length of about 94 feet
and a height of 13 feet above the bed. The weir was constructed by private subscription, assisted by a
Government grant of £250. Its purpose is to divert water into the Wollamundry, Wallaroi, and
other creeks, which water a large area of country and rejoin the Lachlan about 24 miles below
Condobolin. Portion of the water"diverted by Island Creek returns to the river again over the weir.
This is a most useful work and is maintained by a Trust, but not under the provisions of the
Water Act.
6. Marrowie Creek Trust. —The purpose of the Trust is to utilise for stock and domestic purposes
the water which may flow down the channel and streams amongst the several holdings within the
district. It is proposed to reduce the level of the offtake of Merrowie Creek from the Lachlan
River by 5 feet. This will begin to run at about 9 feet on the Hillston gauge. The channel to be
cut is 34 miles long and on it there will be two timber culverts.
At the offtake of Rox Creek from Marrowie Creek about 25 miles downstream there will be two
timber openings to regulate the proportion of flow down each stream also an earth dam to block an
escape of water. The gazetted estimate is £3,500.


Section.
.Number of
licensed pumps.
Maximum capacity of
pumps (approximate only).
Gallons per minute.
No. 1—Above Wyangala Dam Site
i
430
No. 2 —Wyangala to Forbes Water Supply Weir ..
26
29,070
No. 3 — Forbes Water Supply Weir to Cudgellico ...
42
55,150
No. 4 —Below Cudgellico
7
6,250
Total
76
90,900
Section
No. 1.
Section
No. 2.
Section
No. 3.
Section
No. 4.
acres.
Nil.
>>
acres.
966
85
46
74
acres.
614
384
36
8
acres.
15
1,201
1,042
15
National Works under Construction.
In addition to the foregoing there are now under construction the following national works :
Bumbuggan Creek Regulator. —ln order to regulate the flow down Bumbuggan Creek, which
takes off from the rivei above Condobolin, a timber regulator is being constructed at an estimated
cost of about £1,400.
Condobolin Weir. —A contract has been let for a concrete weir across the Lachlan River about J
mile below the road bridge at Condobolin. This structure will have a crest length of 156 feet and will
store Avater to a maximum depth of about 7 feet. The cost is estimated at about £2,500.
Licensed Pumps on Lachlan River,
The following particulars are furnished of pumps licensed under the Water Act on the Lachlan
River, together with the areas irrigated during 1921-1922. For purposes of comparison, the river
has been divided into sections, as under :
The capacity of 90,900 gallons per minute represents a diversion of about 484 acre feet per
day, or 242 cubic feet per second, if all the pumps were working at their maximum capacity during
24 hours, which is of course unlikely. These figures, which are approximate only, include four pumps
in Section No. 2, two pumps in Section 3, and three- pumps in Section 4 which are used for railway
supplies, &c., together with one new application in Section No. 2, and three new applications in
Section No. 3, not yet finally dealt with.
The extent of the irrigation carried out during 1921-1922, according to returns received from
the holders of pump licenses is as follows:
Licensed Weirs and Dams on Lachlan River and Effluent Streams.
In addition to licensed pumps there are a number of works, such as weirs and dams, which
have been constructed by private riparian holders under license. On the Lachlan River between
Forbes and Lake Cudgellico nine (9) overshot weirs have been so constructed, holding water back
distances varying from 11 to 10 miles. Between Lake Cudgellico and Booligal there are no private
weirs or dams, but between Booligal and Oxley there are fourteen (14) earthen dams.


On the System of effluent Creeks taking off the left bank of the Lachlan River, between Forbes
and Condobolin, some twelve (12) weirs have been constructed under license. All these weirs are
used to conserve water, although some of them also act as diversion works.
On the Booberoi Creek, into which water is diverted from the river by means of the Booberoi
Weir, five (5) dams have been constructed under license, to conserve water.
On the Willandra Creek, into which water is diverted from the river by means of the
Willandra Weir, there are eleven (11) dams constructed under license, to conserve water.
On the Marrowie Creek, which is also an effluent of the Lachlan River, some nine (9) dams
have been constructed under license, to conserve water.
Underground W’ateb Supplies.
The following information has been obtained with regard to underground water supplies.
It is recognised that this information covers only portion of the country served by the Lachlan River,
and is not at all complete.
Mr. R. T. McKay, M.lnst.C.E., now Harbour Trust Commissioner, while an Engineer of
the Public Works Department in 1909, furnished the following information as to where underground
fresh water supplies were to be found, the extent of such supplies, and suitability for stock and
domestic purposes.
He reported that as the result of inquiries he formed the opinion that good water can be
obtained within a mile of the river and fair water to within six miles. Beyond that distance the
water may be fresh or saline, a poor supply or a plentiful one, and cannot be depended on for
quality or quantity.
As an instance of the variable quality of the river water on Waroo Station, parish Moora
Moora, county of Gipps, it was ascertained that good water, slightly brackish, was found in two
wells each 40 feet deep, while in another in close proximity and the same depth yielded water too
salt to be of any use.
On Cadow, fresh water was reported in fair quantity to a distance of five miles from the river,
one well yielding 25,000 gallons of water per day. Beyond seven miles from the river tests have been
unsatisfactory, and although a number o :bores were put down, in only one case was fresh water
obtained.
In the parish of Banar, county of Gipps, about thirteen miles south of Condobolin, two wells
Were sunk about 80 yards apart, one 36 feet deep and one 60 feet; in the former, which yielded 6,000
gallons per day, the water was good but slightly sweet; in the latter it was quite salt and unfit for
stock.
On Geeron, wells sunk on the back of the holding showed that stock water, some more or
less brackish, was procurable at 60 feet depth.
In the parish of Kiargarthur, county Cunningham, two wells are reported, one brackish and the
other giving a small supply of fresh water. In the parish of South Gulgo, county Gipps, two wells
40 feet deep, both within 5 miles of the frontage, were found to supply brackish water suitable for
stock, but at date of Mr, McKay's inspection they had not been used for many years.
In the parish of Wardry, county Gipps, four wells 35 feet deep, all within 2 miles of the
river, were reported to yield brackish water which could be used for stock at a pinch. North of
Gunningbland Creek the underground water was reported as salt, nearer the Goobang Creek as slightly
brackish, and between that creek and the Lachlan, Mr. McKay reported “ a fine supply of stock
water, some of the wells being fit for domestic use.”
Speaking generally with regard to the underground supplies, Mr. McKay reported that with
few exceptions the water is suitable for stock purposes.
The area described by Mr. McKay is that between Jemalong and Kiaeatoo, and though he
expressed the opinion that a fair quality of water was procurable up to 6 miles from the river, he
refers to some cases within that distance where the water was decidedly brackish.
A recent report from Mr. R. E. Brooks, caretaker, Cudgellico Weir, deals with the country
from Wardry, opposite Kiaeatoo, where Mr. McKay’s report ended, to Booligal. He describes
thirty-eight wells and two bores from 60 feet to 150 feet deep; nearly all of the former yield good
•supplies of stock water, while some are fit for domestic use. Of the latter, one, 86 feet deep, yields
'good supply of excellent water; the other, 112 feet deep, is choked up.


Boros.
Wells.
Depth,
Distance from river.
Fair to g:ood.
Useless.
...
9
50 ft. to -220 ft.
miles.
7 : 2 to 8
1 : 18
1 : 25
8
i
38
72 ft. to 250 ft.
Up to 15 miles
8
30
Year.
Average Rainfall.
I Approximate percentage of
! Rainfall discharged.
inches.
1895
18-75
4-0 per cent.
1896
27-85
2-7
1897
19-78
1-1
1898
20-64
1-2
1899
23-68-
30
Mr. Barnett, of Wallaby, below Booligal, on left bank of river, describes four bores and two
wells on his property. The former were all failures, while one of the latter was salt, and one yielded
a small supply of stock water. On Corrong, on the right bank of the river, about halfway between
Booligal and Oxley, nine wells and thirty-eight bores were put down, particulars of which are shown
below.—
Although the supplier are in some cases very good, the number of failures shows that under-
ground water is very uncertain.
Mr. J. Tyson, giving evidence before the Royal Commission in 1885, stated that he had sunk
many wells, on the Lachlan River up to 80 feet and that the water was as salt as the sea.
Mr, McFarland supplied information as to five bores on the lower Lachlan; two are useless,
and the other three will only keep stock alive.
In view of the information obtained, it would appear that underground water is most
uncertain both in quantity and quality, and though in some localities, such as Hillston, good water is
readily obtainable, in others it is very uncertain whether even brackish stock water can be obtained
Proposed Wtaxgaia Storage.
The proposed Wyangala Dam site is situated on the Lachlan River: it is about 14 miles west
of Cowra Railway Station, and, by river, it is about 30 miles above Cowra Road Bridge, and
about 6 miles below the junction of the Abercrombie River. At this point the river flows through
a narrow valley with steep, rugged sides. The country rock consists of a coarse acid granite, which
has been examined by Mr. Geological Surveyor L. J, Jones, who reports that “ no trouble should be
experienced from the view point of strong and watertight foundations.”
The catchment above the dam site is 3,200 square miles in area.
Rainfall. —The attached diagram (Plan No. 3) shows the average rainfall over the catchment
from 1894 to 1920 inclusive, and also the percentage of variation in each year above or below the
mean rainfall of 26 inches per annum. From this it will be seen that the most prolonged drought
occurred from 1895 to 1899 inclusive, when the average rainfall and approximate percentage of
rainfall discharged from the catchment was as under :
The discharge figures must be regarded as approximate only as no were taken of the
discharge of the river during th's period, and the figures are deduced from the Cowra gaugings,
using simultaneous discharge da: a obtained at Cowra and Wyangala during recent times.


Year.
Average Rainfall.
Percentage of Rainfall
discharged.
1918
22-35
6" 7 per cent.
1919
17-74
0-5 „
During the drought of 1918-19, when reliable data as to discharge was obtained, the figures
were as under :
It may be noted that with the exception of 1902 (17-54 inches), the rainfall in 1919 was the lowest
during twenty-seven years.
Unlike the Murray and Murrumbidgee,.the Lachlan River is not regularly snow fed during the
winter and spring, and must rely for its water supply upon rainfall, which, as the diagram (Plan No. 3)
shows, varies considerably, while during periods of prolonged drought the percentage which runs off is
very small. As a consequence the flow is “flashy ”in character, and the problem of the most economical
storage to develop the catchment is one requiring very careful consideration. It is true that during
years of high flood, such as 1894, 1900,1916, and 1917, very large volumes of water pass Wyangala,
but the cost of constructing a storage capable of impounding the flows of these flood years would be
enormous, and such a proposition would be economically unsound. It is rather the periods of moderate
rainfall and drought which are the determining factor in deciding upon the capacity of the storage, and
the regulated flow which can be depended upon in the river below the dam.
Bathurst Rainfall. —The longest period for which rainfall returns are available for any station
on the Wyangala Catchment is thirty-eight years, but at Bathurst, which lies about the same
distance back from the coast as Wyangala, records have been kept since 1858. It will be of interest
therefore to study the conditions at Bathurst during the earlier period, 1858 to 1883, and see how
these compare with those for the Wyangala Catchment from 1884 onwards.
Table in Appendix “ C” shows the relative figures, from which it will be seen that there was
a group of years of abnormally low rainfall at Bathurst, viz., 1864 to 1868, much lower than that of
1895 to 1899, which is the lowest cycle of dry years ever recorded on the Wyangala Catchment.
The inference to be drawn from this investigation is that the 1895-1899 drought on the Lachlan
may be repeated in the future in a more intense form than any yet experienced.
Capacity of Storage. —Fortunately daily records of river height are available at the Cowra
Gauging Station for the past 30 years, while gaugings of the river discharge have been made at this
station since its establishment.
Based upon these figures, and after making allowance for the discharge of the Boorowa River
and other streams, which join the Lachlan between Wyangala and Cowra, it is estimated that the
most economical storage dam will be one with a full supply level at 1,246 above mean high-water
level, Sydney, representing a maximum depth of water stored of 160 feet, and a total capacity of
11,922,122,000 cubic feet, or 273,694 acre feet. (An acre foot of water is sufficient to cover an acre to
a uniform depth of 1 foot.) This represents about 3.5 per cent, of the capacity of the Burrinjuck Storage.
Spillway. —A gauging station has been established near the dam site, but the observations at
this station extend over a very limited period, and are insufficient to enable a correct estimate to
be formed of the maximum intensity and discharge of flood which may be expected from the
Wyangala catchment.
A very careful investigation has, however, been made of the high floods at Cowra, and from
these it has been deduced that the Wyangala dam spillway should be able to cope with a flood of
maximum intensity of 165,000 cubic feet per second. This represents a flood of great magnitude, and
the cost of the spillway w-orks must therefore represent a very considerable sum.
Provision has been included in the Estimate for the construction of a concrete spillway wall, about
950 feet in length, in a depression in the hill on the northern side of the river, over which the flood
waters would fall, and would rejoin the river about 1 mile below the dam, thus avoiding any risk of
erosion of the river bed in the vicinity of the wall.
16


Access, —Various schemes have been investigated for transport alternatively by road and railway
traction, and it was finally decided to adopt the proposal to construct a railway from Holmwood to
the site. The total length is 29 miles, and generally the gauge, permanent way, and rolling-stock
will be similar to that operating in the construction of Burrinjuck Dam.
Design. —The dam will be curved, in plan, to a radius of 1,200 feet. The crest of main dam
will be at R.L. 1,260, with the top of parapet walls at R.L. 1,264. The lowest bed-level of tho
river is R.L. 1,084*75. The profile provided for is generally similar, to that of the Burrinjuck
Dam. Wherever practicable, cyclopean concrete will be used, a small quantity of plain concrete
being necessary in facing work and for the coping on crest of wall.
Materials. —Stone for the construction of masonry works will be quarried in the immediate vicinity
of site and conveyed to works by steam tramway.
The sand likewise is to be obtained within easy distance of site, and provision is made for the
construction of a light tramway for the conveyance of this sand to the works.
Tests have been made in respect of granite and sand obtained at site, and so also of concrete
manufactured from such granite and sand, and the results are quite satisfactory.
Preliminary Work. —The site is well adapted to the installation of cableways, and. otherwise,
tho conditions at site are favourable for the diversion of water, installation of powerhouse and other
plant, and the location of a suitable site for township. This latter will bo beyond the influence of
the river flow throughout the progress of the work to completion.
Land Resumption .- —There will be a total of 6,700 acres approximately of land submerged below
the top flood level (R.L. 1258), and the Land Valuer's approximate estimate has been adopted.
Estimated Cost. —The estimated cost, including all charges for resumption and construction,
including the provision of railway, plant, camp, and administration charges, and interest at 5 per
cent, for a construction period of six years, is £1,312,000.
If construction be commenced at such period in the near future as would admit of the transfer of
plant and materials which will be available when Burrinjuck dam is completed, the estimated cost will
be reduced to £1,236,000.
Regulated Flow. —Having determined upon the most economical storage, the next problem is to
decide what quantity of water can safely be released therefrom to supply the river below the dam. In
the case of rivers such as the Murrumbidgee, where, except in exceptional years, the annual inflow
exceeds the capacity of the storage, the problem is much simpler than on the Lachlan, where, as has
l>een shown, the run-off for several consecutive years may be very small, and the storage must be
continuously drawn jzpon.
The question then arises as to whether the estimate of regulated discharge from the dam should
be based upon such flow as would exhaust the storage, or, if not, what reserve of storage should be
allowed for.
It will be readily understood that as the authority operating the storage cannot see what is
ahead in the matter of rainfall and inflow, it is impossible to determine what is the maximum quantity
of water which can be safely released each year.
There can, therefore, be no fixed rule for operating such storages. Naturally supplies would
be reduced during drought periods. It is thought that, having regard to the conditions on the Lachlan,
the following assumptions with regard to the operating of the Wyangala storage might be safely
adopted.
(1) During the non-irrigating period. May to August inclusive, a discharge of 24 cusecs
to be continuously released, or sufficient for riparian requirements for stock and domestic supply
at the rate of 2 acre-feet per month per mile of frontage from Wyangala to Lake Cudgellico.
(2) During the irrigation period, September to April inclusive, a discharge of 250 cusecs
to be continuously released.
(3) During periods of drought these discharges to be reduced as under :
Send two-third supplies when storage is reduced to two-thirds full.
Send one-half supplies when storage is reduced to one-half full.
Natural inflow only when storage is reduced to one-quarter full.
14732—C


Adopting this basis, the following shows what would have happened during drought periods; —
Supplies during Drought Period, August, 1895, to June, 1899, inclusive.
Sept, to April.
250 cusecs.
167 ,,
125 „
No. of Months,
17
7
8
At the end of the drought there would then have remained in the dam 31 per cent, of the
total storage.
Supplies daring Drought Period, September, 1918, to May, 1920, inclusive.
Sept, to April.
250 cusecs.
167 „
125 „
No. of Months.
7
5
4
At the end of the drought there would then have remained in the dam 45 per cent, of the total
storage.
Allowance for evaporation from storage at the rate of 5 feet per annum has been made in the
above calculations.
Having regard to ail the data available it is estimated that 2oocusecs during the eight irrigating
months September to April inclusive, and 24 cnsecs for riparian requirements during the four non-
irrigating months are the most appropriate continuous draft values for the storage of 273,694 acre-
feet adopted, subject to the above modifications during drought period.
In Plan No. 4 is shown in diagrammatic form the improvement that would result in the
monthly natural flow at Cowra during the irrigating season September to April inclusive if the dam
were operated under the above conditions.
This improvement is indicated by the black-filled rectangles on plan, from which it will be seen
that during the pejiod 1893 1894 to 1920-1921 inclusive, there would have been an improvement,
varying in extent up to a maximum of 250 cubic feet per second, in 155 out of 224 irrigating months,
or 69 per cent, of the total period under consideration.
During 118 of these 155 months the flow at Cowra would have reached 250 cubic feet per second,
representing about 3 feet on the Cowra gauge. During the remaining thirty-seven of these months,
which represent periods of drought, the flow would have varied between 125 and 167 cubic feet per
second.
Of the sixty-nine months in which the Cowra flow was not supplemented from the storage the
diagram shows that there was a large percentage when the river was in flood and the discharge was far
in excess of 250 cubic feet per second.
At such times the river would be out of control, and the only effect of the Wyangala Dam would be
to somewhat reduce the highest flood-peahs by reason of the fact that the flood waters would spread
over the reservoir surface and would in consequence, be somewhat retarded before they passed over
1 he spillway wall.
A flow of 250 cubic feet per second for eight months would represent a total delivery of about
115,000 acre-feet during the irrigating season. Portion of this flow would be lost in transit; portion
would be needed for riparian requirements; the balance, if any, would be available for diversion fer
irrigation or other purposes,


Capacity of Storage. —Water
is at present stored to R.L.
518 Water Conservation datum.
The capacity at this level is
as under :—
acre feet.
Sheet of Water
Curlew Water
2,670
Lake Cudgellico
Total
28,643
It is 'proposed to raise the water level 4 feet to R.L. 522, and to increase this storage as under; —
acre feet.
Sheet of Water
Curlew Water
Mclnnes* Basin
Lake Cudgellico
Total
Proposed additional capacity
Lake Cudgellico Storage.
Conjointly with the preparation of the scheme for the Wyangala Storage a proposal has been
nvestigated for increasing the existing storage in Lake Cudgellico.
Historical. —Originally Lake Cudgellico drew its supplies from the Lachlan through Lake Creek
when the river rose 12 feet above summer level, and emptied through the same channel as the river
fell.
About 1885 a dam, 150 feet in length and 14 feet high, was constructed by private enterprise
in Lake Creek, with a view to retaining water in the lake, the bed of which dried out during seasons
of drought. In 1888 Mr. H. (4. McKinney, M.lnst.C.E., reported on the practicability of storing
water in Lake Cudgellico, pointing out that it could be used for irrigation and distribution down the
Lower Lachlan. In 1901, Mr. C. W. Barley, M.lnst C.E., Chief Engineer, in a submission to Mr. E. W.
O’Sullivan, Minister for Public Works, recommended that the full supply level in the lake be fixed
at R. 1.. 518 : “ A large body of water will thus be impounded which will be available for letting
down the river in dry weather to supply some 800 or 1,000 miles which draw from the Lachlan above
the Willandra and Little Billabong Weirs.” He recommended the carrying out of the scheme, and
on the 18th January, 1901, Mr. E. W. O’Sullivan minuted : “ Approved —put in hand as soon as
possible.” These works were completed in 1902. The total capital expenditure on the Lake
Cudgellico works up to the beginning of 1913, when this Commission assumed control, was
£35,841 15s. 7d.
Regulations. —ln accordance with regulations, which have been in force for a number of years,
the stored water is released through Lake Creek on the Ist of November in each year, provided that
the depth of water flowing over the Cudgellico weir does not exceed 3 inches on that date, or, if
over that depth, at such later date as it has fallen to 3 inches. One-third of the flow up to a
maximum of 50 cubic feet per second is diverted down Willandra Creek, the remainder passes down
the Lachlan River for the use of the lower riparian holders.
There are also regulations governing the control of freshets which reach Cudgellico weir.
Works required for increase in Storage.—On Plan No. 5 are shown the existing works at Lake
Cudgellico, and also those required to raise the full supply level 4 feet. The latter comprise :
(а) A Channoine wicket weir to be erected in the cutting upstream of the existing weir.
(б) A new embankment extending from the existing dam in the Lachlan River to the intake
regulator, then in a north-easterly direction for about 1 mile, with the object of prevent-
ing flood waters entering the lakes except through the intake regulator.


(c) Deviation of the stock route north-west of the intake regulator, to avoid the above
embankment.
id) Alterations to the intake regulator and road bridge.
(e) Improvement of the intake cutting.
(/) A new embankment G.H. on the western shore of sheet of water.
(</) The raising of existing embankments A, B, and C, and the construction of a new' bank D-
(/i) New cuttings O.P. and Q.R. to connect Mclnnes’ Basin with Curlew Lake and Lake
Cudgellioo. The existing cutting between Curlew Lake and Lake Cudgellico will then
be no longer required.
(i) The bridges at the northern end of Curlew Water and over the cutting between Curlew-
Water and the lake to be raised, and a new bridge to be constructed over cutting O.P.
(j) A new embankment K.L., about ih miles long, to be constructed, portion of which, about
-J- mile long, will be 20 feet wide, to serve as an approach to the bridge at the northern
end of Curlew Water.
(k) The outlet regulator in Lake Creek to be dismantled and a new bridge and regulator built
The estimated cost of the above scheme is ’£09,000, including land resumptions.
Conflicting Interests. —Under the existing regulations the storage in Lake Cudgellioo is drawn
down in a dry season about 9 feet to R.L. 509’18, and the maximum depth of water remaining in the
lake is about 3 feet at the end of the season.
Recently strong representations have been made by the residents at Lake Cudgellico to have
the stored water retained in the lake with a view' to making it an attractive summer resort for the
district, and also on account of the fishing industry. As against this the riparian holders on the
lower river and Willandra Creek, as represented by the Lower Lachlan River Defence Association,
the Hillston Local Committee of the Graziers’ Association, the Hillston Pastures Protection Board,
the Farmers and Settlers’ Association (Hillston), the Western Lessees’ Association, and others, have
protested against any alteration in the regulations and have asked that the Lake storage be increased.
It is represented that there are about seventy holdings interested, carrying tens of thousands of
sheep, watered at the river and U illandra Creek, and that if the supply of water in these water-
courses were improved, it would mean that the carrying capacity of this country would be increased.
Under existing conditions it is impossible in a dry season to meet the wishes of both parties, and
an investigation is being made to determine what improvement there would be in the conditions at
and below Lake Cudgellico if the storage were increased upon thb above lines.
Allocation of Regulated Flow from Wyangala Dam. —A matter requiring the most careful
consideration, if Wyangala Dam be built, will be the proper allocation of the regulated flow below
Cowra. In this connection a number of gaugings have been made of the river and effluent streams,
with a view to determining wiiat volumes, during periods of low flow, are diverted from the river,
and what proportion of those diversions is again returned to the river lower down. These observations
will be systematically continued, with a view to determining at the proper time this important
matter of allocation of flow.
H. H. DARE, M.Inat. C.E.,
Commissioner.


Station.
Number of Years
of Records up to
end of 1921.
Average Annual
Rainfall.
Station.
Number of Years
of Records up to
end of 1921.
Average Annual
Rainfall.
Rainfall Stations on Wyangala Dam Catchment.
Inches.
Inches.
Abercrombie Caves
22
27-77
Gunning
36
24-90
' 30
22-31
14
23-54
16
25-46
Kempton
19
28-75
23
3017
Reid’s Flat
27
2619
25
28-81
13
27 34
38
32-09
Streamville
26
24-35
Curraweela
25
29-63 ,
TrunkeyCreek ...
32
31-31
23
21-26
Tuena
24
27-93
21
30-49
Wheeo
17
30-65
24
27-11
Woolbrook
29
28-48
Granville
31
19-57
Woodville
19
28-20
Rainfall Stations on Belubula River Catchment.
inches.
inches.
Kangaroo
12
20-09
Errowanbang ....
22
2716
36
29-51
Goolagong
27
23-34
15
35-54
19
29-47
Oanowindra
35
22-54
Millthorpe
23
29-84
27
20-21
Pine Lodge
34
17-73
41
30 03
Towac
10
4103
Cargo
27
25-46
Coombing Park .
7
26-61
Cadia
36
3218
Mt. McDonald ...
35
27-47
Cowra .'
37
23-62
Rainfall Stations on Boorowa River Catchment.
40
22-40
Riverslea
14
23-12
23
22-97
19
25-25
Sunnary
16
26-98
Tangmangaroo ...
19
24-94
Narra Allen
37
26-49
Vine Lodge
21
21 -97
Typical Rainfall Stations below Cowra.
Booberoi
38
14-92
Lake Cudgellico .
39
15-22
Borambil Station..
36
17-06
Oxley
25
11 ’04
31
11-70
41
13-98
41
17-18
Trundle
34
18-29
37
15-73
Thelangerin
45
13-35
46
19-84
Warroo
36
18-31
36
24-90
Willandra
2
11-88
35
14-36
Willanthry
12
14-43
Kilfera
49
1106
APPENDIX “A.”
Lachlan River Investigation.


Rivers.
Station.
| Complete
v - , j Years’
r, . , p , A i Records
Established. to3 oJu,.e,
| 1922.
Remarks.
Lachlan
W y angala
December, 1908
„ 1892
7
29
Not read, 29 October, 1913,
to 28 March, 1919.
; '
January, 1892
March, 1917
30
‘ ’
Jemalong
4
„ 1917
5
Not continuous.
”
January. 1893
October, 1916
29
6
Not continuous.
December, 1892
29
?>
Lake Cndgellico
Weir.
January, 1908
14
5 5
Willandra Weir ...
Willauthry
Middle Billabong
Weir.
„ 1900
February, 1901
„ 1900
1
21
1
Bead 4 months in 1897 and
11 months in 1900.
Read 9 months in 1897 and
11 months in 1900.
5 5
Hillston
December, 1892
March, 1893
29
29
Readings now from telegraphic
reports.
Oxley
„ 1892
February, 1921
November, 1908
4
Discontinued in 1896.
Bclubula
Canowindra
11
Abandoned 29 October, 1913;
restored 1 February, 1916.
February, 1917
„ 1917
J
Not continuous.
>>
Below Willa-
mundry Jet.
5
Willamundry Creek
55 1917
December, 1916
5
6
Rumbuggan Creek ...
Mulguthrie
January, 1917
J
November, 1916
January, 1908
6
Lake Creek
Below Regulator
14
Intake Cutting
Lake Cudgellico...
„ 1908
February, 1907
14
Readings not continuous.
Willandra Creek
Road Bridge
15
> » 5 5
Tocabil
August, 1920
2
Readings continuous.
APPENDIX “B.”
Gauging Stations.
The gauging stations on the Lachlan River, its tributary, and effluent streams, the date of
establishment, and the number of complete years of records, are listed below :


Year.
Bathurst, rainfall
in inches.
Mean depth
of rainfall over
Wyaugala Catch-
ment,
Number of
Stations
Recording.
Remarks.
1858
25-61
1859
24-88
1860
24-59
1861
29-82
1862
16‘87
J863
28-47
1864
22-96-1 0
12-54 i Z
a
1 00
i860
Second worst year but one
on record at Bathurst.
1866
16-44 } --
1867
25-08 -g
1868
12-47J H
Worst year on record at
Bathurst.
18b ! 9
25-65
tsO
&c
1871
3612
1871
22-90
0 x
0 CO
1872
30-63
9 —H
9 —i
1873
26-50
O
» 3
1874
26'53
§ *
1875
22-05
1876
20-52
J a.
S pH
1877
17-72
O
c
■
26-76
£
tz
1879
32-43
1880
19-84
1881
2119
1882
21-88
1883
21-79
1884
19-53
25-21
1
1885
20-88
27-78
i
1886
30-73
32 08
3
1887
33-43
45-60
3
1888
1504
20-65
3
1889
24-26
31 -22
3
1890
34-37
39-38
5
1891
30-95
41-61
7
1892
31-29
31-22
7
1893
31 -46
36 77
6
1894
27 94
39-58 _
12
1895
23-671
28-20 | 0
18-755 «
27-85 2
131
14 i
Group of lowest years o'f
1896
1897
17-48 j- ~
19-78
15 1-
rainfall on Wyangala
1898
18-46 1 75
20-64 | 73
23-28 J 0
36-32 H
16 |
16 J
Catchment.
1899 .
17 26J 0
28-02 H
1900
20
1901
27-17
26-32
20
APPENDIX “C.”
Table showing annual rainfall at Bathurst, and mean depth of rainfall over Wyangala
Catchment each year.


Year.
Bufchurst, rainfall
in inches.
Mean depth
of rainfall over
Wyangala Catch-
ment.
Number of
Stations
Recording
Remarks.
1902
14-86
17-54
19
1903
22-89
28-31
19
1904
19 24
22-95
19
1905
* 20-74
26-38
19
1906
23-33
29-80
19
1907
20*69
23 02
16
1908
16 - i 3
22-50
19
1909
23-13
27-76
14
1910
25-31
26-47
14
1911
26-43
30-38
20 I
1912
17 69
22-34
20
1913
21-07
22 07
19
1914
23-66
24-57
16
1915
19-84
25-53
16
1916
36-67
4210
18
1917
31-12
37-76
14
1918
19 20
22-35
13
1919
14-58
17-74
14
Lowest y urat
for fiftv * t s
1920
28-55
32-39
12
1921
36-39
28-85
13
23-96* '
28-28+
24-28J
Tablk showing annual rainfall at Bathurst, and mean depth of rainfall over Wyangala
Catchment each year— continued.
* Average for 04 years. t Average for 38 years. 1884-1021. X Average for 38 years, 1884-1921.
[■) Diagrams.]
Sydney; John Spence, Acting Government Printer—l 922,
Appendix “ C ” — continued.






Plan M'S
WYANCALA INVESTICATION
Diagram of Rainfall over Wyangaia Catchment , showing
Yearly Rainfall,& Percentage above & below the average
AtOTCS:— Yearly Rainfall fofa/s show thus
Figures in Circles indicate the number of Stations
recording. Commissioner
/9 . to. 22 ,
0 pf
f




