

REPORT
ON THE
STATE OF PRISON DISCIPLINE
IN
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND, &c.
BY CAPTAIN MACONOCHIE.
PRESENTED TO BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT BY COMMAND OF HER MAJESTY.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY W. CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET, FOR HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE.
HOBART TOWN:
REPRINTED BY WILLIAM GORE ELLISTON, COLLINS STREET.
1838.


CONTENTS:
Page
Letter prom Captain Maconochie to the Right Honourable Lord John Russell,
dated 30th September, 1837 • S
Summary of Papers on Convict Discipline, sent Home by Captain Maconochie 5
Appendix -


TO THE RIGHT HON. LORD JOHN RUSSELL, PRINCIPAL
SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT.
T Van Diemen's Land , Hobart Town,
My Lord, 30th September 1837.
Before leaving England a year ago with Sir John Franklin, I was requested
by the Society for the Improvement of Prison Discipline to turn ray attention par
ticularly to the working of the existing Convict System in the Penal Colonies with
a view to corresponding with them regarding it. And, on referrino- this request to
Sir George Grey, I was directed to consider the subject as one on which informa-
tion was much wished, but to correspond directly concerning it only with His
Majesty’s Government. J
Accordingly, a variety of documents respecting it are now transmitted to the
Colonial Office, some from myself, others from the local authorities here ; and I am
induced further to address your Lordship on the occasion, transmitting to you a
summary of the views which I have been led to entertain on this important subject,
partly because the interest you take in it is known to be personal as well official*
and partly because I am persuaded that I shall thus very much facilitate your con-
sideration of them.
In arriving at these views I have had some important advantages. My position
as private secretary to the Lieutenant-Governor has enabled me to see more of the
practical working of all the elements of society together in a short time than could
otherwise have come under my notice, even in a much longer period. A long and
devoted study of political geography has familiarized me with the analysis iof such
working. lam competently versed in the facts and principles of modern penal
science ; and though, previously to my arrival here, I had few or no strongly con-
ceived opinions on the subject of transportation, my bias was certainly in favour of
its existing institutions ; so that in drawing my conclusions I have at least not been
influenced by any previous reasoning or impression against them.
On the other hand, I cannot disguise from myself that these conclusions will
come before your Lordship under some peculiar disadvantages. They are now
strongly opposed to the present system. They are yet in favour of transportation
as a secondary punishment, even for minor offences , an opinion not, I believe,
at present generally entertained. They will appear at first sight to have been taken
up under strong feelings of compassion for the convicts as now sent out; and the
prevalent doctrine, I am aware, is that criminals, once convicted, should be but
little regarded ; or rather, if necessary, should be entirely sacrificed to obtain an
effective example to others. And lastly, the changes I propose would occasion
some trouble, and incur some present expense.
With regard to the first of these objections, however, I would observe, that the
existing convict system is almost fifty years old, and w 7 as organized wdien opinions
and views respecting penal discipline were very different from what they are now.
It cannot be considered improbable, therefore, that its principle should be erroneous.
Ihe second is a matter of opinion, which must depend much on what transportation
really is. At present, involving, as I think it does, in ail cases further deterioration
of character, it seems to me too severe for any offence whatever; but were its details
so organized as at once certainly and proportionately to punish, and in most cases
probably to reform, there seems no good reason why the less criminal at least equally
with, if not rather in preference to, the inveterately hardened, should not be visited
with it; and it would be much better for the penal colonies if they were. The
third objection will fall to the ground when my views are thoroughly examined ;
because it will then be seen that the great end of all my suggestions is to make
punishment certain to all, much more severe than it now is to the really vicious, and
°uly comparatively milder, though still severe, to those who, having committed slight
offences, show a disposition not to repeat them. At present, on the contrary, these
are precisely the persons most severely dealt with ;*for the physical endurance of
convicts is trifling compared to the moral degradation inflicted on them, and it is*
fhe best men who feel this most acutely, and are most deeply injured by it.
3


But it is to the fourth objection that I could wish chiefly to draw your Lord-
ship’s attention, Supposing that my views, on full consideration, were deemed
abstractly correct, I am yet willing to admit, and I am aware that it will be strongly
uro-ed that they should be only carefully and cautiously carried into practical ope-
ration. And on this head, therefore, I would fain be permitted to offer a few
suggestions.
Could not some nobleman or gentleman of high talent, and estimation be
induced to come out for a few years on a mission of so great interest and real
importance ? Could not Mr. Craufurd (who was in America,) or some equally well
informed individual in penal science and practice, be induced to accompany him ?
Could not a commission be thus sent out, to iiifjuiic first, should further inquiry be
considered necessary ; but having inquired, to act also ? References home for every
trifling step requisite would be interminable, and would, moreover, almost certainly
lead to error. But a competent presiding authority on the spot, limited to the
treatment of the convicts, and required to act in concert with the local authorities,
though on this point practically over them, would, in even a short time, accomplish
a sum of good, second, I am certain, to none in the annals of modern improvement.
In my papers I have recommended (instead of sucn a commission as this) the
appointment of a Superintendent-General of convicts, either in each colony sepa-
rately, or having authority in both ; an officer to be selected for his knowledge of
penal science, and who should watch over, and from time to time, as occasion
offers, improve on whatever system may be established, communicating the result
of his experience, proceedings, and the movement of crime generally in these colo-
nies, at stated periods, to the Home Government. And lam convinced that such
an appointment, in due season, would be most interesting and expedient. In con-
ducting the change now required, however (and how much required I really cannot
express, for the moral gangrene of the existing system is frightful,) I fear that,
considering all the obstacles in the way, it would be lO trust too much to the life,
health, talent, temper, and moral influence of only one man, to make him supply
the entire place of the commission suggested. The distance is very great, and the
importance is obvious of carrying through whatever initiatory steps may be taken,
in the same spirit, and that a wise and firm one, to the end.
Of the expense of accomplishing the whole change I shall not presume to speak.
On such an occasion it seems to me an unworthy topic ; and I cannot know to
what extent, if at all, your Lordship may in this differ from me. But I most con-
fidently assert that even at first it would not be great (under £20,000 a year more
than the present expenditure for a very few years,) and the result, for reasons
partly explained in my annexed summary, would be extremely economical. Ihe
amount, therefore, would be in the ratio of the time allotted to the transition , and
such a commision as I have mentioned, by its moral influence in overcoming the
first difficulties, and thereby facilitating that transition, would further, I am per-
suaded, lessen the expense. _ tit
I ouo-ht to make many apologies for presuming thus, and at such length, to tres-
pass Lordship’s attention. But I trust that the importance of the subject
will be deemed sufficient excuse.
I have the honour to be, my Lord,
Your Lordship’s
Most obedient, humble Servant,
A. MACONOCHIE.
4


IN VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
SUMMARY OF PAPERS ON CONVICT DISCIPLINE, SENT HOME
BY CAPTAIN MACONOCHIE, R.N.
These papers are three in number, entituled a Report on Convict Discipline, a
Supplement to this, and a Reply to “ Observations on the Report by Mr. Forster ”
(Chief Police Magistrate of Van Diemen’s Land.) They were written at different
periods, and with different objects : first, to explain the general views entertained •
next, to supply details ; and, lastly, to rectify misapprehensions. They have become
consequently, more voluminous than is, perhaps, in one sense desirable; yet to
such as leisure and inclination to go into the subject deeply, the variety of
aspects in which circumstances have thus led to its being successively represented
will be found advantageous.
The following summary of—l. the representations made, and 11. the suggestions
offered in them, will, however, be found a useful introduction.
I. According to the actual system of transportation prisoners are, on their first
arrival in the penal colonies, assigned to private service, at the will of a Public
Board, which endeavours, as it best can, to distribute them fairly and equally amono'
the settlers, according to certain conventional rules laid down for its guidance. In
the assigned service thus entered on no wages are allowed to be given, nor is any
other moral impulse employed, excepting the remote hope of indulgence after four,
six, or eight years, according to the original sentence. Until these elapse the
labour imposed is strictly coerced , or slave labour; and although accompanied with
a fixed minimum amount of physical maintenance and support, sufficient to place
above want, it is yet subject to all the discomforts and moral degradations incident
to such a condition. The men are lodged in out-houses, six, eight, or more, under
a stable-roof; they sleep here on truckle-bedsteads, generally without undressing ;
the floor is earthen, and often very soft; they cook and eat in the same place or in
one immediately adjoining, always in the roughest manner ; and they are subject
to the most severe regulations, which any master can get enforced on appeal to a
magistrate by equally severe punishments. This is the usual picture in the country
districts ; in the towns there is more comfort (sometimes in the case of a good house-
servant there is even too much, consistently with a state of punishment,) but there
is much more temptation. Not being allowed wages, yet desirous of procuring
indulgences, the prisoners too often steal to obtain means ; and all fly to liquor,
whenever they can obtain it, to drown humiliation and care.
At the end of the several allotted periods each man may ask for, and, according
to the report made of him, may obtain, or be refused, a ticket-of-leave. In this,
however, there is necessarily much uncertainty. The record kept of prisoners'
conduct only embraces offences ; no official notice being taken of good ordinary
behaviour, as diligence, sobriety, obedience, honesty, fidelity, zeal, or the like;
and thus, as only that appears which has drawn down magisterial censure, a care-
less fellow, however good his disposition and intentions, especially if he has had an
indifferent master, may have a long list against him, while a thorough villain, more
happily circumstanced, or, perhaps, from the very power of deception which his
practice in villainy gives him, may have few or none. When the ticket is obtained,
a particular district is assigned in which the recipient must recide. Within it he
may choose his master and residence, and receive wages ; but under a recent Sta-
tute he is not allowed to acquire property. He must attend frequent musters, and
may not change his residence without informing the police. He must also con-
stantly sleep at home, and return thither before eight o’clock every evening. For
very trifling irregularities he is liable to have his ticket suspended, or entirely taken
away ; in either of which cases he is usually sent to hard labour in a road party,
thus falling back on the worst, and not on the best form of previous treatment.
And, practically, very few ticket-of-leave men do escape altogether the interruption
to which they are thus liable, often on very slight occasions, in their a ours an
pursuits, even in this their comparatively free position. ,
As the periods of sentence respectively expire, with or without having o aine
tickets-of-leave, and however abandoned in character (if only they escape an exten-
sion of time under a colonial sentence,) the prisoners become entire y ree, an mix »
as such, with the remainder of society. Of which whole system t*e minu er ea ure
and consequences may be thus classed.
B
5


1. The degree of punishment inflicted by it is in every case quite uncertain. A
bad master may make it fearful; a good or weak one may greatly mitigate it.
Much also depends on the personal character of the convict himself, as will be pre-
sently explained ; but, in general, the amount of suffering is much greater than it
appears to be, or than it is thought in England, or than is at all proportioned to
minor offences.
2. It is on the persons guilty of these, at the same time, and even on the most
innocent of them, that the punishment chiefly falls. For the physical endurance is
trifling compared to the degradation and other moral suffering inflicted ; and it is
the best men who feel these most acutely. The habits of old offenders may, in
most cases, even before their arrival, have inured them to filth, slovenliness, suspi-
cion, contempt, and the habit of submitting to, and commanding their temper under
such treatment ; wdiile a comparatively good man writhes under everything
approaching to indignity, and is unable to conceal or restrain the feelings excited
by it.
3. The very bad are thus little punished, while the less bad, up even to the very
good (of whom there are some,) are punished with intense severity, and almost
universally degraded and demoralized. Every feeling of self-respect is speedily
lost amid the humiliations and inconveniences inflicted ; and irritation, reckless-
ness, insubordination, disgraceful punishment, furious resentment, drunkenness,
theft, and prostitution, complete the sacrifice of many a human being born to better
things, and whom misfortune and imperfect political institutions, more than crime
or original bad disposition, have thus irrecoverably ruined.
4. The evil also does not terminate here. Social, like mechanical, impulses act
reciprocally. The degradation of one class operates injuriously on every other ;
and it is impossible to view the state of society in the penal colonies without being
made most painfully sensible of this fact.
5. The servants being made slaves, the masters are made slave-holders ; and the
peculiar modification of slavery thus introduced is of the worst character. The
servants have not always held the same degraded position ; they have been born,
and for the most part have grown to maturity, in better circumstances ; many have
education, more ability, and the passions of all are easily excited. Ihe masters,
on the other hand, take little interest in soothing or encouraging them. They have
no permanent property in them ; they are perfectly aware of their characters and
feelings ; they do not fear them, because they are Englishmen, are used to them ,
and because the vicissitudes of a bush-life form, at all events, rather an antidote to
fear ; but they dislike them proportionally, and are ready to believe the worst of
them, and on very slight provocation to coerce, punish, and inveigh against
The analysis need not on this point go further. It is plain that the elements of
domestic life are thus full of discord ; and that of moral influence there can be here
little or no exercise.
6. But the results go much further. The disuse of moral influence in domestic
life gives a harsh, peremptory, and overbearing character to the whole intercourse
of society. Every difference of opinion makes a quarrel, and every decision, whe-
ther of the Government or courts of judicature, constitutes a ground of vehement
complaint or political invective.
7. The severe regulations of the prisoner discipline also fosters these feelings.
They are so strict that they are not, and cannot be universally put in force; yet
every now and then even the most minute of them is acted on to the loss and
inconvenience of individual families, by interfering with their domestic servants, and
this is constantly thought to be caused by personal feeling rather than by right or
principle.
8. The disunion in society in the penal colonies is thus complete, and manifests
itself in a depth of suspicion and recklessness of assertion beyond all precedent in
civilized life, but which can, I think, be equally traced to the pervading and demo-
ralizing influence of the existing penal institutions; for the habit of suspicion
and violent invective in private life speedily extends to every other relation.
9. Further; —no official record being kept of the good conduct of the prisoners
(though their characters are frequent matter of inquiry, when considering their
applications for indulgence,) the standard of moral worth is lowered generally, this
being considered proved by mere escape from detection in crime, and consequent
punishment. And the severity with which minute conventional offences against
discipline are currently visited, further tends to warp the judgment in forming
6
REPORT ON THE STATE OF PRISON DISCIPLINE


estimates of moral character ; a breach of regulation being considered criminal, and
carrying the pains, aspect, associations, and other consequences of criminality,
almost as a felony. ,
10. The essential and obvious error in this system then is its total neglect of
moral reasoning and influence, and its exclusive reliance, in every relation°of life,
on mere physical coercion. Law , or rather mere regulation , comes thus to be
looked to in almost all cases rather than principle ; and the wide-spreading mischief
so caused must really be seen to be adequately conceived.
11. Whatever one man can legally take from his neighbour he will take. What-
ever he can hope to wring from the Government by importunity, however unrea-
sonable in itself, he will never cease applying for. What one by any favour or acci-
dent obtains, all immediately claim ; the kindness of indulgence shown to one is
repined at unless extended to every other ; the selfish feelings everywhere predo-
minate ; their expression everywhere ruins riot; and as every one, from the highest
to the lowest, appeals direct to the Governor, the turmoil in which he lives is
incessant.*
12. These inconveniencies are but in a very small degree dependant on the admi-
nistration of the system. It has been usual, it is true, to attribute them to certain
peculiarities in the personal character of the several Governors, all of whom, in
succession, have been thus inveighed against, and charged with political maladmi-
nistration. But the constant recurrence of the same circumstances, with either the
same complaints or totally opposite ones, according as one or other party or class of
individuals may have thought themselves aggrieved, and always accompanied with
the same extremity of censure, sufficiently proves that the cause lies much deeper
than the mere personal character of successive Governors.
13. The evil is due, I think (and as I show 7 in ray papers in detail,) to the union
which the system attempts to make of a state of direct punishment , from which
physical coercion is inseparable, with one of training or probation , of which moral
influence ought undoubtedly to be an ingredient, but it will not and cannot amalga-
mate with the direct restraint. And the confiding both operations to the chance
hands of settler masters completes the injurious effect which this medley is other-
wise calculated to create.
14. Under this system the prisoners are considered to be in a state of punishment
for the past during the whole period of their sentence ; yet are they expected to bo
improved for the future by the treatment which they thus receive. They are first
made slaves to their masters, and then (even in the best case, that of a ticket-of-
leave) equal slaves to the police, as though they could be qualified by any such
means to enjoy, without abusing, their freedom when the turn of a single night
shall totally change their position. The masters, on the other hand, are placed in
* This last evil (which is only at first sight minor to the others, for it involves many more) also
flows direct from the system, and from the large discretionary authority requisite to work it. Ihe
Government of the penal colonies used to give, or refuse, land ; and it still gives, or refuses, labour,
the loan of mechanics , indulgences of every kind, — bread in every shape ; for even the official
patronage of a coercive government must be extensive from the number ot subordinate checks, restraints,
and superintendencies which it must employ to gain its ends. It thus seems invested, in the eyes o
the colonists, with a character of omnipotence; and in its favour or justice a refuge is sought m every
disappointment. The consumption of time and thought thus produced is intolerable ; and, after a , in
most cases the appeal is merely nominal, for its result must generally be the mere echo of the decision
of the subordinate authorities. This is to be presumed at once from the (assumed) pio ity o t ese
authorities, and from the almost impossibility of the Governors arriving, unless in very g anng cases,
at an opposite conclusion from theirs, on documentary evidence of which the gieatei tIK a
which carries most weight, comes from themselves. The practice, therefore, mere y nngs ie ica o
the Government in direct , instead of indirect, collision with the passions and preju ices o e peop e,
occupies most inconveniently his time and thoughts, and confirms an impression, rea i y conceive a a
times, yet pregnant with much evil, that he is in the hands of those under him. . ,
Duringthe present month (September 1837,) 481 applications* for indu gence, 10m prisoner »
have been decided on by the Lieutenant-Governor of Van Diemen s Land. eieve ans
the usual monthly average; yet it may be considered as a specimen of the worse an use .’
for it leads to much practical injustice, imposed by a system of which a ai £T iscre , u
a necessary element. By the arrangement which I subsequently recoramen ct , ere k ,
applications at all; a strict and universally applicable rule would entirely supersete »
that were not approved of, this should be one test by which the merit ot any o er s
* Tickets of leave 2 »g
Pardons
Marriage go
Returned ineligible • * ' ' rf)
Returned for certificates •
Total . .481
7
IN VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.


the most difficult and delicate circumstances -without the slightest preparation for
them, or any strong motive to induce them to study the duties imposed on them.
Being made slave-holders, they are subjected to all the demoralization incident to
such'a position, and to more also. They are charged to punish and reform their
country’s criminals ; and they neither know nor care about either operation, for
naturally and necessarily their dominant object is to make the most of the labour
which thus passes through their hands. They only have their self-esteem
elevated by the superiority of position assigned to them, and their contentious feel-
lings whetted, and their hearts hardened, by the right of harshness, contempt, and
unrestrained invective which it is supposed to give them.
15. Surely there is no science in these arrangements, such as ought, in the
present day, to distinguish the political and penal institutions of a country like
England ; nor humanity, nor any justice, nor much even of that practical wisdom
which seeks at least to derive the utmost selfish advantage from the materials under
its hand. The prisoners are all made bad men, instead of good (it is shown by
the official reports transmitted with ray papers that scarcely any are reformed ;
and human nature does not stand still, if not improved, it gets worse ;) the masters
are made headstrong, overbearing, and dissatisfied, if not otherwise bad subjects.
The punishment inflicted is uncertain, unequal, oppressive chiefly to the best
men, but in almost all cases greater than it appears ; and the example set by it
is, in proportion to all these characteristics, less than the price paid for it ought to
purchase. The convict labour being artificially distributed, is necessarily imper-
fectly distributed. Here it is in excess, there beneath the demand ; and, under the
existing restrictions, even that portion of it which is comparatively free, viz. the
tickets-of-leave, cannot circulate so as to meet the fluctuating demands of commu-
nities already far advanced in luxury and civilization. Being coerced, the pro-
ductive effect of the remainder is half lost resistance ;* yet being appa-
rently gratuitous (though tfigs really expensive,) it is a powerful obstacle in the
w r ay of free labouring immigrants, who, in Van Diemen’s Land at least, where
new fields of enterprise are becoming rare, can only with extreme difficulty obtain
permanent engagements, the masters generally hoping that they may get a prisoner
assigned to them suited to their particular purpose, and that they may thus save
the direct expense of a free servant. Distress and consequent vice and dissipation
are thus comm©n among the free as among the bond. In 1836, the proportion of
crime convicted before the Supreme Court and Quarter Sessions in Van Diemen’s
Land, was as 1 to 105 of the whole population; and of drunkenness, summarily
convicted among the free people alone, was 14 per cent., or lin 7* I* l England,
the first proportion is, I believe, usually about lin 1000; in Scotland lin 1300;
and the second (except in London and one or two other great towns, in which, in
1835, it ranged from 1 to 2 per cent.) is over the mass of the population becoming,
with improved knowledge and institutions, an almost undistinguishable fraction.
11. The evil, then, is crying, and I almost hesitate as I thus sum it up ; for it
seems at first incredible that, being so great, it should not sooner have attracted
notice. But, 1. it has been progressive, and has only of late years become what it
now is. And, 2. it is important to observe that the wide-spreading mischief of a
system like this, of which the principle is vicious, but the administration has been
able, is much less discernible, especially to those long accustomed to contemplate
it, than the injurious consequences of comparatively trifling blemishes on the
surface of otherwise good arrangements. The operation of a principle is uniform ;
everything around it either flows from or is accommodated to it; its effects appeal
necessaryand unavoidable; and their inconveniences, under firm and skilful
superintendence, being remedied in detail by improved apparatus, a thorough
revision long appears unnecessary. But in all cases, lam persuaded, such pallia-
tives will be found eventually to aggravate, rather than mitigate, a real evil. They
disguise some of its rankness ; they thus prolong its duration, and give deeper root
to its injurious results ; they give the ingenuity of administrators a wrong direction,
by leading them to endeavour to suppress the indications of error, rather than
remove error itself; and they ultimately make entire change more difficult, because
a certain amount of apparent good undoubtedly following each supposed improve-
* Among the official papers transmitted will be found a Report by the Director-General of Roads
in Van Diemen’s Land, showing, among much other valuable matter, that the productive effect of 3s.
worth of convict labour, as now worked, is scarcely 15. 3d. ; and that £30,000 a-year is thus lost in
his department alone.
8
REPORT ON THE STATE OF PRISON DISCIPLINE


ment, people are led to believe themselves in the right way when they are reallv
only going further astray, as in the case immediately in question, in which, instead
of seeking to improve the apparatus of physical coercion , the real problem is, how
we may, in whole or in part, advantageously dispense with it.
What, then, is the true remedy ? The previous analysis to a considerable extent
explains my opinions on the subject; but the following details may be useful.
1. The two objects contemplated by transportation, punishment and reform
(sought to be obtained by one process in the existing arrangements,) should be
separated, and each distinctly contemplated and pursued.
2. The government should charge itself, and its own agents, with the processes
which may be deemed suited to the attainment of both ; or in other words, the pri-
soners should be punished for the past , and trained for the future , in Government
employ ; and should only come under the direct authority of the general population
when they have obtained their tickets-of-leave, receive wages, choose their own
masters, and are thus in a position of comparative freedom and equality.
3. These few and simple changes would, of themselves, make punishment
certain and appropriate , training systematic , and abolish that domestic slavery , the
moral injury arising from which is at present beyond calculation. But the full
benefit of them could only be reaped by making the treatment in each stage
as perfect as possible, and as much accommodated as may be to its particular
purpose.
4. The first expense of making the change in the best manner would, no doubt,
be considerable, though less so than may appear immediately probable, for the
additional labour which would for a time be placed in the hands of Government
would be thus much more productive than under the existing circumstances, and
might also be beneficially, and even profitably applied. But eventually the transi-
tion would be a source of direct economy , very nearly in the exact ratio of its
completeness. The expense of the penal colonies is at present enormous, partly
from the pervading system of mere coercion employed in them, partly from the
unproductiveness of every description of labour, under this system,* partly from
the crime which it directly generates, and partly from the large police, and other
public checks and establishments, which the repression and punishment of this
crime render necessary. A system of training, on the contrary, could only be
effective in proportion to its successful adaptation of moral influGncfi to its object;
and any system founded in large measure on moral influence must be less expensive
than one of pure physical restraint, v
5. But even if a permanent addition were to be thus made to the expense of the
penal colonies the object would be worthy of it. (There can be no possibility of this,
but the alternative may be put.) It is a debt due by England to her penal colonies
that their social system shall be as little as possible deteriorated by their being made
the receptacles of her banished criminals. And. when we further consider that the
objects of the proposed arrangements are to give certainty to the administration of
her criminal lav/, bring justice out of injustice, adequate example out of punish-
ment, freedom out of slavery, reform out of hardened guilt, and a smiling prospect
for the future out of the moral gloom which now hangs over the social prospects
of two of her most powerful colonial children, the debt claimed seems due by
England to herself and her own character. It is seed-corn that she is called on to
sow.
6. Government having undertaken both tasks, therefore, punishment and
reform, ought not to perform either in a slovenly manner. It should consider
that there is a science of each ; and that no pains should be spared to bring into
practical operation whatever principles may be established in them. The pecuniary
and moral returns, it may be confidently said, are alike involved in the change, if
made at all, being made effectually.
7. I submit, accordingly, in my papers a variety of suggestions on both heads.
But lam attached to the ends proposed, rather than to the means; and should be
most happy to see the latter improved on. #
8. I recommend punishment for the past to be inflicted in seclusion from the
free population altogether, at stations appointed for the purpose in each penal
colony, and which may be changed from time to time as the spread of population,
the scope, or demand for useful labour, or other circumstances may suggest. The
* See Note, p. 8.
9
IN VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.


punishment itself should consist of hard labour (enforced, if necessary, by physical
means, for in this stage it is desirable that the convicts’ minds should be humbled,)
with instruction, moral, religious, mechanical, and agricultural, so as to fit the pri-
soners for constituting afterwards a good rural population. (I contend that
seclusion when direct punishment is being inflicted is desirable both for free and
bond ; its sight being morally as injurious to the one, as the being indiscriminately
seen when under it is to the other class. And in seclusion instruction would be
better attended to ; and liquor, and other means of evading punishment, would be
more rare.)
9. The moral training , on the other hand, I recommend to be in employment
on the roads and in other public works ; these, however, to be conducted very
differently from what they now are. I would have no direct punishment inflicted
on them nor any physical coercion used ; but the most stringent system of moral
influence that can be devised should be here brought to bear on the prisoners, or
rather, as I would now call them, probationers, to induce them to behave well,
and work out their further liberation, on tickets-of-leave, by inspiring a just
confidence in their future good intentions.
10. For this purpose, I suggest that the men should be brought from the
punishment stations, to this stage of their sentence, in parties (say of six,) who
should choose each other , and agree to run the chances of their future probation
together. Thus, after a man has completed the period which, according to his
original sentence, he must remain under direct punishment , he would still remain
indefinitely longer, until he could persuade other five men, similarly circumstanced,
so far to believe in his good intentions for the future as to be willing to connect
their own fate in probation with his, and to rise or fall, as afterwards explained,
according to his and their own conduct jointly. And I contend that the necessity
which would thus be imposed on all, even in their first stage, to cultivate the good
opinion of their fellows would, of itself alone, produce a great moral effect, and
prepare them for their future trials ; for it would give a value to the social virtues
usually excluded from the receptacles of criminals, and would also prevent favour
or hypocrisy from acquiring undue advantages. Superiors may be partial or
deceived, but not equals.
k. These parties, fhen (of six, more, or fewer, as may be found practically
best,) when entered on their probation, should be reckoned with every evening by
the superintendent under whom they may be employed in the Government works,
and should receive marks in his book to their credit or discredit, according to their
conduct. If they have been orderly, obedient, zealous, attentive, active, industrious,
cleanly in their persons and rooms, civil, temperate under provocation (should such
have been offered,) punctual in their attendance at prayers, school, work, &c.,
or have in any other way deserved commendation, they should be gainers
accordingly ; and if, on the other hand, any one has deserved censure, his party
should suffer in proportion. I am confident that this union of fortunes among
several would have the best possible effect. It is not unknown already in improved
naval and military discipline, and is always found to constitute the strongest
physical and moral restraints.
12. On entering on this course of probation, the restrictions imposed should be
severe j and a fixed number of marks of commendation should be requisite to
procure successive degrees of relaxation. But, in all cases, the rules should be
enforced merely by the gain or loss of marks, —never by summary punishment;
and those parties, of whom one or more of the partners cannot be restrained by this
moral influence and that of their companions over them, should be returned to
punishment, allowed to dissolve their temporary connexion, seek separately other
associates, and so begin again. In no case should a refractory individual be
dropped without thus, in some degree, punishing his companions also ; for only
thus can the utmost exertions of a whole party be insured to reclaim a bad man.
The experience of this, also, would make it more and more difficult for the irre-
claimable, or those who, in existing circumstances, often take a pride in being
considered such, to get away from punishment at all; and as, although I would
make the indispensable period of punishment short, I would make that of probation
depend solely on conduct, and on the fulfilment, in every case, of all that it demands,
the obstinacy, real or pretended, of almost any would, I am persuaded, be over-
come by a system which would thus, as it were, regulate every man’s sentence by
the unimpeachable verdict of a jury of his own selection out of his own class.
10
REPORT ON THE STATE OF PRISON DISCIPLINE


13. I am convinced that the social decorums, virtues, and feelings which would
be thus early and universally elicited would have the most powerful effect in
changing the character of many, even of the very hardened. Vice is selfish • and
a man is half virtuous when he is habituated to study the goodwill and interest of
others as his own. In passing through this course of probation, therefore, I would
expect many evil passions and propensities to be for ever laid aside ; and at the
least considerable powers of self-command , next to principle the greatest preserva-
tive from crime, would be universally called out.
14. Accordingly, when the ticket-of-leave was at length obtained, I would not
clog it wit e e ctions now imposed on it. I think that I would even
banish entirely the summary jurisdiction now exercised by the police over men who
have gained this step. Summary power is a snare both to those who wield and
those who are subject to it. frequent musters are both a snare and interruption.
Men approaching their freedom should be habituated to feel tolerably free, that its
entire acquisition may not intoxicate them; and, at all events, nothing I think
short of a solemn judicial sentence should deprive a man of what, before he reaches
this point under a vigorous system like that here described, he will have most
dearly earned.
15. In my several papers, accordingly, I discuss this and other similar points ;
but neither here nor in them do I attach so much value to these details as to the
fundamental principles of introducing system into the management of convicts by
keeping them during the earlier stages of their sentence under the immediate ma-
nagement of the Government, of thereby rescuing both the free and the bond from
the mischiefs consequent on the present plan of compulsory assignment, of dis-
tinctly contemplating in the treatment of the prisoners, first their punishment for
the past , then their training for the future, and of substituting, in the pursuit of the
latter (as has been already done in the discipline of the army and navy, in schools,
lunatic asylums, and every other place in which masses of human beings are sought
to be guided,) a suitable degree of moral influence for the cold, hard, unwearied
coercion which is now alone employed. Either these principles are right and
ought to be attended to, or all the moral and political science of the day is wrong ;
for they are in accordance with every line of it. | %,
17- I most earnestly recommend the subject, therefore, to the attention of statists
and philanthropists in England. It is worthy of their deepest consideration.
There never was a moral field in which so striking an experiment might be made,
or with a more certain and striking result. A statesman of the highest rank might
be proud to occupy the first, to conduct (even in person) the second, and to crown
himself with the undying honour of the last.
18. The task would not be extremely difficult if undertaken energetically, com-
prehensively, and with the requisite authority. Some obstacles may be anticipated
from the disinclination of th-e existing convict authorities, who have been trained
in the present system, are naturally attached to the discretionary power bestowed
by it (which they doubtless consider that they administer to advantage,) and are
thus unwilling and unprepared to alter it; and as the selfish interests of the set-
tlers may also appear at first sight menaced, some preliminary objections may be
expected from them too. But the existing evils are well known and recognized,
though their derivation is not as yet distinctly understood. And with patience,
temper, discretion, firmness, and indifference to mere clamour, but a sincere desire
to obviate real objections, and discuss the principle of intended changes, the intel-
ligence of all would be soon gained ; for all are alike injured, and would soon see
that they are alike injured, both morally and pecuniarily, by the existing demo-
ralization.
A. MACONOCHIE.
11
IN VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.


APPENDIX.
I annex a series of letters which I have received on the subject, and which all,
more or less directly, confirm my views of it. The following Index will facilitate
reference to them.
1. A letter from Sir Richard Rourke, Governor of New South Wales. The
paragraph specifically referred to is marked at the foot of the second page.
(The previous paragraphs refer to an application which I made some time
ago to Sir Richard Bourke to be entrusted with the command at Port Phillip,
suggesting at the same time a method of treating the natives there, which I
am convinced would prove highly beneficial to all the interests of that young
colony. It is to enrol the most active and influential of these natives as a
sort of Sepoys in our service, officering them extensively with respectable
white serjeants and corporals, distributing them into small parties, keeping
these constantly on the move to gratify their erratic habits, dressing them in a
suitable and convenient uniform to excite in them a love of neatness and
cleanliness, and thus at the same time that we obtain a most effective field
police, civilizing, and ultimately converting the individuals composing it, and
through them their countrymen, by obtaining their obedience on points of
military discipline congenial to their nature. It is remarkable that the
Hindoos are the only black race wffiich has stood its ground against white
invasion; and this, I think, maybe attributed almost exclusively to their
employment in this way, and the consequent association of individuals among
them with their masters. The conquests of the ancients, and of Buonaparte
among themoderns, were cemented and alleviated by the same means. Ihe
principle is almost unconsciously acted on in the formation of native African
regiments. The expense should not be grudged, considering the efficiency
of the force that wmufd be thus gained, and also that the whole colonial land
revenues are obtained by depriving these poor savages of their birth-right.
And the experiment would be at once striking, and most highly interesting,
% whether made in Australia or elsewhere.)
*£, 3, and 4. Successive letters from Messrs. Backhouse and Walker, members of
the Society of Erientb, who have devoted the last five years to a careful examination
of the penal 'colonies, and who in every point concur in my representations of them.
5 and (3. Successive letters from Alfred Stephen, Esq. (late) Attorney-General
of Van Diemen’s Land, who in the offices of Solicitor and Attorney-General has
resided in it above 12 years.
No. I. —From Sir Richard Rourke.
Dear Sir, • Government House, Sydney, July 6, 1837.
Your letter of the 10th June reached me about the middle of the month. The pressure of
convict business has, I am sorry to say, prevented my replying by the first vessel that sailed for Van
Diemen’s Land after its receipt.
I have to express my regret at seeing but little prospect of being able to secure the benefit of your
services to this colony. A very few days before your letter came to my hands I addressed the
Secretary of State upon the subject of an arrangement for the future government and administration
of the law at Port Phillip and the southern districts of New South Wales. I have recommended an
appointment for the government, which would unite the civil and military authority as the most
efficient arrangement, and named a person whom I think likely to carry on the duties with success.
I can assure you it would give me infinite satisfaction to be the means of introducing into those
incipient communities, or to any share in the management of our colonial affairs, a person so qualified
as yourself. I fear I have nothing to offer that would be deserving your acceptance.
I have so far entered into your views respecting the aboriginal natives as to authorize Captain
Lonsdale to employ them in the 1 am inclined to think very well of the mode of
management you propose.
Your paper on the convict system has been once carefully read over. I fully agree in the repre-
sentation you make of the evils which result from that system under its present form. I have not
sufficiently digested what is proposed to supersede it to venture upon an opinion as to its success.
The whole subject is worthy the careful consideration of a statesman and philanthropist. I am glad
to find you have taken it in hand. The uncertainty wdnch prevails as to the intention of his Majesty’s
Government to maintain transportation as a secondary punishment has discouraged attempts for
improvement of its operation in these colonies. I hardly think that convicts can be much longer sent
out to this part of New Holland.
I am, my dear Sir, your well wisher and very faithful servant,
RICHARD ROURKE.
To Captain Maconochie, 11. N.,
fyc. fyc. fyc.
12
APPENDIX TO REPORT ON PRISON DISCIPLINE


No. 2.— From Messrs. Backhouse and Walker.
Hobart Town, 29th of 4th month, 1837.
vr James Backhouse and George W. Walker desire to express their obligation to Captain
Maconochie for allowing them to peruse his manuscript essay on the transportation system and its
influence in the penal colonies, which they have read with intense interest and very great satisfaction •
for, much as they consider the present system of penal discipline pursued in these colonies superior to*
that of the gaol system of England, for reasons which they thought it their duty to specify in their
reports to Colonel Arthur, yet those documents sufficiently convey their strong sense of its many and
radical defects, and they are fully convinced that the plan devised by Captain Maconochie is very far
superior to either. J
This superiority, they conceive, consists, essentially, in the bringing of moral principles to bear
upon the prisoner population for the promotion of their own reform, at the same time that it promises
to act reciprocally upon the moral character and well-being of the free inhabitants by whom these
unhappy men are employed, in removing those cruelties and oppressions that are inseparably connected
with the present system, and which are irreconcilable with Christian principle, and consequently with
sound policy, and in placing both the prisoner and free population in a much more favourable position
than they at present occupy for the reception of religious principle, which in the existing state of things
is rarely to be found among either of those classes.
J. B. and G. W. W. may add, that they see no formidable difficulty in the way of carrying into effect
the plan proposed by Captain Maconochie.
To Captain A. Maconochie,
Private Secretary, fyc.
No. 3.— From Messrs. Backhouse and Walker.
Hobart Town, 19th of Bth month, 1837.
. returning the Supplement to thy Report on the Convict Discipline, along with the answer
to Captain Forster’s objections to that Report, which we have perused with much satisfaction, we are
inclined again to express our conviction of the great benefit that would be likely to accrue, both to the
prisoner population and the public at large, from the adoption of such a system as that projected in
these documents.
This system is simply the application of the principle of moral influence in the place of coercion ;
the same that has been successfully brought into operation in schools, lunatic establishments, &c.; and
which is equally available for the amelioration of the convict population of our penal colonies ; and
would also, reflectively, produce the happiest effects upon the free inhabitants.
In carrying the principle in question into operation, we most fully concur in the opinion, that the
punishment at the projected penal settlements for prisoners on their first arrival in the colony, should
be considered perfectly distinct from the discipline of the probational gangs ; nevertheless, it should be
regarded as the first step in the ladder of reformation, and return to forfeited privileges.
Such a plan as that proposed would render the certainty of punishment much greater than th# at
present in operation; and would have this important recommendation, that whilst the punisHihent
inflicted would at once be seen and felt to be punishment, its nature would obviously be correcupn
rather than vengeance.
The mode of classification projected in thy Supplement is the only satisfactory one that has yet
come under our notice. The separation of prisoners through the selection of superintendents, even
when age, sex, and external character are attended to, is still very defective in regard to moral
operation; but this defectiveness would be remedied by allowing small groups to agree to attempt
ascending the scale of reformation together.
The prisoners who exhibited reformation of character, and were allowed to associate themselves
voluntarily, in a room apart from the rest, at the penal settlement of Macquarie Harbour, furnished
the only practical approximation to this part of thy plan that we have witnessed ; and, though it fell far
short of that now proposed, yet it worked well.
It occurred to us, that should thy system be adopted, which we most sincerely hope may be the case,
more than one penal settlement would be desirable, in order that emulation and a diversity of talent in
the persons who conduct them may be called into exercise, and that the want of ability in any one super-
intendent may not bring discredit on the principle involved.
Were these settlements to be established in such parts of these colonies as are heavily timbered, and
where the soil is good, the prisoners might be advantageously employed in clearing the land and bringing
it into cultivation in small farms : and when this was done to a sufficient extent, the farms might be sold;
and the buildings of the settlements, being originally arranged with this object in view, might form the
rudiments of future towns or villages.
After much consideration, during the course of the last few months, on the practicability of carrying
thy system of penal discipline into effect, we still remain of the judgment, that there is no insuperable
difficulty in the way ;. and we are of the opinion, that it would be much better to try it here, or in New
South Wales, than in a new colony; and that, for such an experiment, Van Diemen’s Land possesses
many advantages over New South Wales; the population of the former country being more condensed,
and in better moral order, and the land more generally located.
We have also conversed with several intelligent settlers in this colony on the principles involved in
the proposed system, and have found many ready to acknowledge their superiority over those of that
now in operation; to the inconveniences of which they are far from being insensible, as is evident from
the very decided conviction that is gaining ground among them, that the labour of ticket-of-leave men
is more advantageous than that of assigned convict servants.
The colonists, generally, we apprehend, are prepared to expect some material changes in the penal
discipline; and the public prints have, within the last few years, favoured the supposition, that the
British Government contemplated even the withdrawal altogether, of convict labour from the colonies.
We remain, very respectfully, thy friends,
JAMES BACKHOUSE.
To Captain A. Maconochic,
Private Secretary.
George Washington Walker.
13
IN VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.


No. 4. —From Messrs. Backhouse and Walker.
Hobart Town, sth of 9th month, 1837,
Having been privileged with the perusal of thy Summary Essay on the Penal Discipline, and
the State of the Population of the Penal Colonies, we think it due to thyself and to the cause of
benevolence, to express our conviction, founded on observations made during very general visits of
upwards of five years to New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land, that the sad picture it developes
of the effects of the system at present in operation is not overdrawn.
The state of discord and selfishness which very generally prevails among the colonists is a subject
that soon forces itself painfully upon the notice of visitors among them, notwithstanding the pleasing
impression that may be produced, especially at first, by the general intelligence and hospitality of the
community.
We have always been disposed to reject the idea of slavery as connected with the assignment of
prisoners, because no property is claimed in their persons; but we must acknowledge the justice of
thy comparison between the bondage of the prisoner in assignment, so long as that bondage continues,
and that of the slave ; and that its parallel effects are distinctly to be traced, both on the servant and
on the master: and with these effects, w T e think, must be identified a large propoition of the evils so
lucidly depicted in thy Report on the Convict Discipline, and in the ouramary.
Such being our matured sentiments, the introduction of a system which, with much show of reason,
proposes to substitute moral influence in the place of physical coercion, in the coirection of criminals,
and the incitements to good conduct which in free communities constitute the connecting links between
masters and servants, instead of arbitrary authority in the one, and abject servility or desperation in
the other, appears to us to claim the best wishes, as well as the hearty co-operation, of every friend of
the human race.
We remain, very respectfully, thy friends,
JAMES BACKHOUSE.
To Captain A. Maconochie, George Washington Walker.
Private Secretary.
No. 5. From A. Stephen, Esc/., (late) Attorney-General, Van Diemens Land.
My Dear Sir, AM August 17, 1837.
I have pevused at different times, with the deepest interest and attention, your valuable papers
on Convict Discipline. t - . c
It would be impossible to "deny, that our police arrangements are admirable ; and that lor most ot
the'objects in reference to whicSt they have been perfected, they are effective. Ihe punishments
inflicted on the unhappy convicts are generally severe ; often, alas ! too much so. The condition of
moSLof them is unenviable; at the best, they are only slaves. It is indeed to be lamented, that their
ro|l state is not known more extensively; for men might be deterred then from committing crime,
wllyiow are tempted to it by the imagined benefits of the change which transportation has been
sup Posed to afford them. But whatever else of good may result, no reflecting person will dispute that,
so far as regards reformation of the criminal, the system of convict discipline has signally failed; or
that, looking to* the higher and better interests of the community, upon which that system has been so
long inflicted, its effects have been eminently disastrous. _ _ ... ....
Your picture of these effects—upon us well our social us political fabric is ? indeed, too highly
coloured; and, in some points, if you will excuse my saying so, inaccurate. More than one of the
evils which you truly state to exist amongst us, may, I think, be traced to another source than that of
the presence of a noxious system of convict discipline. But, however humiliating may be the confession,
you have too truly sketched the main features, to admit of their not being recognized. Yet I would
fain believe that we are not radically demoralized ; and that good feeling and right principle are obscured
only, not destroyed. I would hope that, if the injurious influences of a system which you have described
so well were removed, we might resume our native health and moral vigour.^
The adoption of your grand and philanthropic principle, in whatever shape it may practically be
introduced into that system —the substitution of moral influence for mere physical coercion—will go far
at once to remove those evils ; and I trust that, whether more or less extensively, it may at least be tried.
Reformation, at all events, if that be one object of punishment, is, on the present plan, hopeless: in the
existing state of things, nearly all the tendencies of the plan are the other way. Ihe punishment is,
under it, too long in duration, unequal, undiscriminating, uncertain. A well disposed man becomes
hardened and degraded by it. If careless in his habits, or hasty in temper, he is driven to desperation ,
whilst a worse man, phlegmatic and cautious, by avoiding offences to which the other is most prone,
obtains reward. Upon the whole, transportation is truly a condemnation to slavery ; but, miserable as
for that reason the state of every convict must be considered, it is a state that depends, too generally,
for its alleviations and its aggravations, on the habits and character of the master, not on the conduct or
propensities of the man. With one, a fault is synonymous with a crime ; and our colonial punishments
show, that there is often little attempt, anywhere, at discrimination between them. In short, what is our
great engine of punishment or reform?— assigned service! The two objects, which seldom, if ever,
can be pursued with effect simultaneously, placed at the mercy of an agent, whose only end is
the getting out of his slave as much work as shall be possible. A poor unfortunate, banished, perhaps,
for a first offence, dull, though willing, and unskilful, though comparatively honest, obtains a hard service.
His lot is a wretched one. Punishment succeeds to privation. His fate is sealed. Another fellow',
scarred all over with crime, perhaps an educated burglar, lands from probably the same ship, and
becomes a house servant in some town establishment. He wears a livery, sleeps on a bed of down,
and lives in luxury. Perhaps he has wages equal to that of a London butler; he romps with the maids ;
and writes home by the first vessel, to paint all this happiness to his former companions in loguci}. s
this lottery, where the prizes are generally to the worst, fit for the established system of punishment ot
a great nation? But if the convict offends, what then? He is returned to his master; punished,
indeed, and heavily; but a worse man, probably, than before.
14
APPENDIX TO REPORT ON PRISON DISCIPLINE


What system should be substituted for this ? Precisely that which you propose,—one that shall
separate the two objects of punishment and reform, and begin with the first; that shall make the
earliest impressions of transportation formidable alike to all; that shall, nevertheless, aim at discrimi-
nation and classification between different offenders, in each stage of these processes; that, above all
shall throughout seek to attain its ends by moral, as superior to physical restraints ; that in striving
at these its immediate objects, shall endeavour to form, if it be possible, a united and virtuous people •
that in promoting the true welfare of our mother country, who has so long spawned forth her pestilent
brood upon these shores, shall not forget the real interests of her children, whom now they only con-
taminate ; that shall earnestly be directed to the noble effort, worthy of combined wisdom and benevo-
lence, of tiaining men, almost in spite of themselves, to become industrious and honest members of
society.
. in the details of your plan, there shall be even much that is objectionable, or that may seem
visionary, the leading object which it discloses—the great principle by which it is characterized will
remain still unshaken; and I, for one, deeply impressed with a sense of its value, hope that it may
become, sooner or later, acknowledged and acted on. Its advocacy does equal honour to your heart
and your understanding,—if I may presume to offer such feeble praise to you,—and I heartily wish
you success in it.
I am, dear Sir, very truly yours,
ALFRED STEPHEN.
Captain Maconochie, R. N.,
&jC. BfC,
P. S.—l regret that I have not time to enter as fully into this important subject as I could wish.
Have you ever considered the value, to your case, of the returns of crime which could be procured
by you ? Take one fact, that just now occurs to me. Of the present number of criminals (being free,)
convicted in the Supreme Court and Courts of Quarter Sessions, a very large proportion—l should say
three-fourths—are then free only by servitude.
A. S.
No. 6.— From A. Stephen, Esq., (late) Attorney-General, Van Diemens Land.
Private. ■
My dear Sir, 4 ; . August 30, 1837.
In reference to the P. S. which I this morning added to my letter to you, under date the 17th,
I send you the following Return, prepared from the Launceston and Hobart Town gaol Reports, now
lying before me, for the present week, of men fully committed for'trial.
Launceston. —Total number of Prisoners, 38; of whom there is only, one that came free to the
colony ; there are 22 convicts ; and 16 who have been convicts. But, last week, I indicted 11 rilfre,
who were tried at the quarter sessions. Of these, only one was a convict. The remaining 10 ivere
time-expired convicts. There was not one originally free person amongst them.
Hobart Town. —Total number of prisoners (triable by indictment, or under my jurisdictions
Attorney-General,) 32. Of whom, seven are convicts; five came free to the colony; and 20 jmre
convicts. lijfe
Here, therefore, in this month, (including a period of about two months’ commission of crime by men
prosecutable by the Attorney-General,) of 70 criminals, no less than 46 are time expired, or pardoned
convicts, under prosecution for felonies ! These are as follows:—forgery 1; stabbing 1 ; sheep, or
cattle stealing, 3; burglary, or house-breaking 6; simple larceny, 35.
Yours truly,
ALFRED STEPHEN.
As these gaol lists are curious, I will preserve for you the two now quoted from. A. S.
You are, of course, aware, that no convicts are prosecuted by the Attorney-General, except for crimes
punishable with death : —they being triable, for all lesser crimes, summarily before magistrates ; —so
that, generally, offences committed by convicts do not appear in the returns of crime as published. But
free persons, for whatever crime, are prosecutable by me only.
Captain Maconochie, R. JV.,
fyc. fyc. fyc.
15
IN VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.


London ; Printed by W. Clowes & Sons, Stamford Street,
JFor Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
Hobart Town : Reprinted by WttHiAM Gore Elliston, Collins Street.
