





ABORIGINAL MISSION STATION,
RAMAHYUCK.
REPORT FOR 1885.
»HE Mission work among’ the Aborigines of this country differs
in several respects from that of other Mission fields, for not
only have we to preach the Gospel, and to teach and educate the
children, but we have likewise to give useful and suitable employ-
ment to each of our people according to their several abilities, as
Otherwise, under the peculiar circumstances in connection with
the Aborigines, effectual work would be very difficult and almost
impossible. In giving, therefore, a short sketch of the state and
progress of the work during the past year, attention must bo
directed to these three leading features—
I. Religious ordinances on the Sabbath day are strictly observed j
the services attended by all, who are able to come ; and great at-
tention is paid to the preaching of the Word of God. At the
general services on the Lord’s day, we have not only all our black
people, but likewise a good many of our white neighbours, which
creates a very good feeling in the hearts of the blacks, as they
thereby observe that all can worship the same God and enjoy the
blessings of salvation without respect of persons or colour.
Sunday School is attended by all the children and youths, and
good progress is made with their lessons. Altogether the Sabbath
is kept as a day of rest for the body and enjoyment for heart
and soul. The days when the Lord’s Supper is administered,
special blessings are realised, and many prayers offered to the
Lord for the Christian as well as for those of the blacks who are
not yet converted. The services during week days, both morning
and evening, are also very well attended, and in fact to attend at
the house of God at the beginning of the day, and to be present!
at the conclusion at sunset, belongs to the order of the daily life.
It is also quite in order, that if one is absent without cause, in-
quiry is made for the reason of such absence. Special classes for
instruction to candidates for baptism and preparations for com-
municants are kept whenever it is needed, and great blessings are
experienced with them, which is likewise often the case with those
who' are laid up on the bed of sickness from which often they rise


no more, which happened with several school children during- the
year. Four of the children, from ten to fourteen years, have been
taken away by the Lord. These looked forward with joy to their
being taken home to be with the Lord for ever. We felt the loss,
of these dear children very much, but in spite of all care and due
medical attendance, it pleased the Lord to take them to Himself.
This was also the case with three small children, who had been ill
almost from,the day of their births.
Three little babies have been born during the past year, so that
the increase was smaller than the decrease. None of the adults
died, so that the number remains the same as last year. One be-
sides the infants was added to the church by baptism. Only one
marriage was solemnised during the year. There is every prospect
that the Aboriginal Board will send some more blacks to this
station, who are at present still given to wandering at the Murray
River. We shall be glad if this can be carried out, as we have
accommodation for many more here at the station and everything-
in good order for such desirable settlement.
Religious instruction to all the children is given every day for-
half-an-honr in church, after morning service, by Mr, Beilby, our*
esteemed school teacher, and occasional singing lessons by Miss
Hagenauer.
2. Regarding the teaching of the secular branches nothing has
been changed, as the school is under the Department of Education,,
and good progress has been made with all classes by our excellent-
teacher, Mr. Beilby, and his wife, who has the appointment as
Sewing mistress. In every respect it can be said that the school
is very good, and it is a real pleasure to see the children at
Work in school.
In connection with the school is also our orphan house, under-
the care of the native woman Baibara Arden, who cares very well[
for the children in the house. At present, we found it of great,
benefit to some children, who are wanting special care regarding-
the state of their health, to take them into our own house with
the hope of the restoration of their vigor and strength, I wish,
here to express our best thanks to those friends of the
Who have always kindly assisted in the carrying on of tne orphan*
house as a special branch of our educational work, and we wish,
them the Lord’s blessing for such help. It should be stated here
that all the children, when out of school lessons, are employed,,
according to their strength, in some useful light work, so that:
they may by and bye be able to prove that their education has.
Hot been in vain.
3. The secular work at the station, which really occupies very-
much time for ourselves, is of the greatest importance for the.


people, and although the labor could never be judged according to
white men, still, according to the strength of the blacks, 1 must
say that good progress has been made, as the buildings, the gar-
dens, and fields will show at the strictest inspection.
All the houses are in good repair, and are comfortable, and I
have reason to hope that the Aboriginal Board will supply our
people, ere long, with some suitable furniture, so that they may
have all that is needed. I may mention that all the labor of our
people is paid in cash from the produce of the station, for which,
of course, accounts must be given to the Aboriginal Board, and,
; also, that all outward affairs are under the special care of the In-
spector-General, who regularly visits and inspects the station.
The annual report is, with all the others, laid before Parliament
once a year.
During the past year I have been able to make a long missionary
journey to the wild blacks in North Queensland, to see if there
are open doors for sending the Gospel to these poor degraded
people. A full report on these investigations has already been
sent to the Committee, and likewise another such report to the
Premier the Hon. S. Griffith, at Brisbane. The work at Ramah-
,yuck, during my absence, was carried on as usual. Mr. Beilby
'kindly took the services; my eldest son, the farming and station
work; my eldest daughter the Government part ; of course all
binder the direction ot Mrs. Hagenauer, so that, on my return, I
found all in best working order. To Mr. Beilby, I wish here to
express my very best thanks for his kindness in attending so
faithfully to the work.
I cannot conclude this report without expressing my best thanks
all the ministerial brethren and other kind friends ofthe Mission
Who have visited the station and addressed our people, among whom
I may mention the Rev. A. Hardie, Convener of the Committee,
Rev. Mr. Lewis, from Toorak, the Venerable Archdeacon Allnut,
Revs. Messrs. Carlisle and L. Tait, Dr. Morrison and the Hon. J.
Balfour, who all encouraged our people to follow in the way of
'the Lord, The best thanks are also due for all the kind attention
•of the Aboriginal Board, and the Inspector-General, as likewise
to Drs. Reid and McLean, of Sale, for their assistance to our sick
ipeople.
May the Lord, who has so graciously helped us hitherto, carry on
Tlis work to tne salvation of many souls, and to Him be all
and glory.
F. A. HAGENAUER,


MOTES OF A MISSIONARY JOURNEY
NORTH QUEENSLAND,
1885.
INTRODUCTION
■ NDER the protecting care of our gracious Lord I have suc-
cessfully completed the long desired missionary journey to
the wild tribes of Aborigines in North Queensland, and have now
the pleasure to give you a sketch of ray journey and ideas in con-
nection with needful missionary operations in North-eastern
Queensland. Next to the Aborigines are the spiritually uncared
for Kanakas, who are brought in labor vessels from the islands in
the Pacific Ocean, Then there are the great numbers of Chinese,
Cingalese, and Malays, most of them working under certain labor
contracts in the sugar plantations, but all of them neglected by
the Christian churches and their Christian employers. The reasons
for undertaking this long journey are based on the distinct words
of our Lord Jesus Christ “ to preach the gospel to every creature,’*
and in order to get the required information to do so, regarding
the Aborigines and the country they live in, the Directors of the
Moravian Mission Board in Germany have for several years past
expressed a desire that I should undertake a tour of investigation,
and report to them with the view, if circumstances permit, that a
mission may be commenced among these really very poor and
despised black people. The desire to christianise them and to
ameliorate their condition was greatly strengthened by the wishes
of many of our leading Christian friends in this and other
colonies. These friends, together with every man with feelings of
sympathy and humanity, have been grieved by the continual re-
ports of the barbarous treatment of the poor Aborigines, which
has generally led to cruel murders and the destruction of whole
tribes, which, if continued, can only end in the extermination of
the whole race. The question of the proposed journey having*
been considered by my committee at Melbourne, permission was
at once granted, and the request was made that I should give a


full and clear report on all important points bearing on the subject
of the mission.
After all arrangements had been completed here for carrying on
the work during my absence, I preached my last sermon before
setting out on the 17th of May to a most attentive congregation,
and at the conclusion, exhorted our black friends to be faithful to
the Lord, and to remember me in their prayers, so that in due
time the gospel might be brought to their brethren in Queensland
also as it had been brought to themselves years ago, with all the
comfort an 1 happiness of the salvation of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Many silent tears could be observed on the faces of those who had
been brought up to the knowledge of the truth, and I can honestly
say that the farewell from the people here affected me even more
than that which took place many years ago, when I left my be-
loved home to come as a missionary to the savages of Australia.
The Lord heard the prayers of his people in the days g'one by, and
gave success to his blessed work in the hearts of many poor blacks ;
some of them are still with us, and some of them are with the Lord.
May it not be now, again, as it was before, and may not the poor out-
casts of Queensland be brought to Jesus and live! Is it not
possible that He who has begun a good work in this colony, will
continue the same all over Australia, till all is accomplished to
His honor and glory ? In the prayers which are now offered for
the salvation of the wild heathen tribes, the Christian Aborigines
join with their whole hearts. So they told me when I left Ramah-
.yuck, and so I heard by letters from home, when I was far away
among the blacks near Cooktown. And will not the Lord hear
and answer these prayers in His own time, and according to His
<own good pleasure ?
MELBOURNE TO BRISBANE.
aN my way through Melbourne I was furnished with most im-
portant letters of introduction to the authorities in the places
I should have to visit. My own committee supplied me with an
-'official commission, kindly recommending me to all the brethren.
May and clerical, in the other colonies. The good Bishop of Mel-
bourne recommended me in very kind terms to the Bishop ol
INbrth Queensland, a recommendation which was of great value
*to me when I was at Townsville. The Premier of V ictoria in an
letter, recommended me to His Excellency Major-General


Sir Peter Scratchley, to take me in his ship to New Guinea. His
Excellency Sir Henry Loch, Governor of Victoria, sent me a letter
of introduction to the Governor of Queensland, and other influen-
tial gentlemen supplied me with important documents to the
Premier, Mr. Griffith, and to the Surveyor-General of the same
colony ; and in a circular note from the Austrian Consulate, I was
recommended to the various consuls in Australia and the Pacific
islands. I must confess that I felt a kind of awe coming over me
when I put these letters into my travelling bag, and I could not
conceal the feeling that it would be said, as in the days of old, but
under different circumstances, the letters are weighty and power-
ful, but the bodily presence is weak. Yes, I truly felt much of
that weakness for such an important work, and would have gladly
stayed at home if it had not been very wrong for me to do so.
There has been a custom in the Moravian Mission from its
beginning in 1732, that if possible on all important journeys,
there should either be two missionaries, or that a faithful com-
panion should be joined to the appointed missionary ; but it
seemed quite out of the question that this plan could be carried
out in my case, as far as North Queensland was concerned. It had
been previously arranged that I could travel from Melbourne to
Brisbane in company of my esteemed friend, the Rev. H. Herlitz,
the president of the Lutheran Synod of Victoria, who was to visit
Queensland for a short time; further north, however, I was to
travel alone. A few hours before our departure by train to
Sydney, I received a telegram from Ramahyuck, stating that the
young Moravian brother, A. Wauer, from Germany, who is on a
visit to Australia, wished to accompany me on all my journeys at
his own expense, and would join me after some days at Brisbane,
if it would be agreeable to me. I gladly agreed, and am happy
to say that he has been a most faithful companion to me during
the whole time, and as he at once returns to Germany, will be
able, personally, to supplement my report regarding the Aborigines
before the directors of the Mission Board. After recommending
ourselves to the faithful care and keeping of the Lord, we left
Melbourne by the express train for Sydney. Of that journey
nothing need be said, except that at Glenrowan, my friend Pastor
Herlitz, pointed out to me the place where some years ago the
bushranging of the Kellys came to an end, and that at the crossing
into New South Wales no examination of luggage took place on
account of the freetrade laws of that colony. We spoke of some
dear friends who reside in that neighbourhood, and speedily passed
Wagga Wagga,the former residence of certain “ claimants,” stopped
foo a little while at Goulbourn, and arrived at Sydney at 11 o’clock,
having accomplished the journey in eighteen hours and a few


minutes. We at once took our cabin in the beautiful steamer
Cahors, arranged our things for the voyage, and as we had a few
hours to spare had a look round the city.
It would certainly be presumptuous on my part if I ventured to
give a sketch of the oldest city of Australia; all I wish to say is,
that it gave me very great pleasure for the first time to see as
much as was possible during our short stay. Standing on the hill
near the monument to Captain Cook, and looking down over the
city and its beautiful harbour, I was much pleased to remember
that the first Governor of this colony, and in fact of all Australia,
had been a countryman of mine, and 1 expressed the hope that
England and Germany may become more and more united and
that they will assist one another with men and means fcr the good
of the whole world, and the furtherance of the kingdom of God.
After having had a look towards the locality where the first Aus-
tralian clergyman, the Rev. Mr. Marsden, with the assistance of
Governor Macquarie, had his first missionary trials with the many
Aborigines in this neighborhood, we had a short interview with
several esteemed friends, and returned to our ship, which shortly
afterwards steamed out through the Heads and turned north on
its way towards Brisbane. The sea was quite calm, the weather
delightful and the beautiful ship in best sailing order, so th at we
made very good progress towards the north, and accomplished the
whole passage in about 40 hours. Little did we think that this
beautiful vessel would be wrecked on the Evans reef, near the
Clarence river on her next trip from Sydney to Brisbane, which
news we heard later on at Rockhampton.
BRISBANE.
were very kindly received at Brisbane by the Rev. Mr.
SK Meyer, the learned and amiable clergyman of German
Station and South Brisbane, who took us in his buggy from the
steamer to the venerable Pastor Schiermeister, whose residence
and church are situated on Warwick Terrace, one of the beautiful
hills in the city. This aged servant of the Lord had been for a
number of years a missionary among the Maoris of New Zealand,
but was compelled by failing health to come to Australia, where
he has for the last 28 years faithfully laboured among the Ger-
mans at Brisbane and its neighbourhood. Here again we received
a hearty welcome, and clearly realised the old truth, that it is


good and pleasant to be among brethren. It bad been arranged
that Mr. Herlitz should reside at the house of Pastor Meyer, and
I, with Mr. and Mrs. Schiermeister daring my stay at Brisbane.
After a short rest we proceeded to the tour of the old Observatory,
whence we had a splendid view of the city. We then had a drive
through the principal streets. Pastor Schiermeister accompanied
me at a later hour to the residence of the Rev. Mr. McCulloch, the
venerable patriarch of the Presbyterian church of Queensland. I
was received with great kindness, and after reading my com-
mission, Mr. McCulloch entered into a hearty conversation with :
me regarding the object of my mission, and promised his future
co-operation. On the following’ day I went in company with Mr.
Schiermeister, who is well known, to Government House, where I
was very kindly received by His Excellency Sir Anthony Mus-
grave, to whom I delivered the letter from the Governor of Vic-
toria,
■His Excellency told me that the Premier, the Hon. S. Griffith,
uacl informed him the previous evening of my coming to Queens-
land and the reason for my journey to the north. In an interesting
conversation, His Excellency entered fallv into the particulars of
a mission to the poor Aborigines and was pleased to hear of the-
results of the mission in Victoria, and hoped that my visit might
lead to something like it in Queensland, where it is so very much
needed. We conversed freely ©n the subject of Missions ir»
general, and I was greatly pleased to hear such favourable,
opinions expressed, especially in regard to countries where the
natives had been savages, and where, through the missions, the-
lives of visitors are now quite safe. Encouraged by the condes-
cension of His Excellency, I ventured to refer to the very dis-
tressing question of the Kanaka labour trade, which in reality ig;
nothing else but the old system of slavery in another form, and I
expressed my congratulations on the noble act of the present
Government in sending back to their homes a great number of
kidnapped South Sea Islanders, It would take to much space to,
give even an outline of our conversation, but, from it, I feel sure
that the Governor and his present Ministry endeavour to do full
justice in reference to the labour trade, and are also most anxious
that something should be done to ameliorate the condition of the
really very miserable Aborigines. I shall always remember this,
interview with Sir Anthony Musgrave with great pleasure, and f
trust that he may long be spared to fill his high office of represen-
tative of Her Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria. Before leaving
Government House, we had the pleasure of a friendly conversation
With His Excellency’s nephew, Captain Musgrave, who was ac-
quainted with some of my missionary friends in the West Indian


Islands, and he spoke in very kind terms of their work there. As
Captain Musgrave is to go as far as New Gninea in the ship in
which the kidnapped Kanakas are to be returned, we expressed
the hope of meeting again at Port Moresby. The next visit was to
the Premier, the Hon. S. Griffith, to whom I had to deliver the
important letter which I had received at Melbourne. We were
exceedingly well received, and entered at once on the subject of
my mission, and the present state of the Aborigines. I informed
him of the plan of my journey, and the steps to be taken on my
return, namely, to send him an official report on the results of my
investigations, and to lay the whole matter before the mission
authorities in Germany, and my committee at Melbourne, The
report to Mr. Griffith has been sent already, with the hope of good
success. In the course of conversation, Mr. Griffith stated that it
Was his desire to do away as soon as possible with the native police,
by whom so many cruel acts have been committed. As I had no
power to make any definite proposals, I could not, of course,
receive any distinct promises, but I had the assurance that every
assistance would be granted in case a mission were commenced,
with which I was quite satisfied. My high opinion of Mr. Griffith
has been confirmed through this interview, and was still more so,
when a few days later I received several letters of recommendation
to officers of the Government in the north. The Commissioner of
Railways sent at the same time a free pass for all the lines in
Queensland, so that both Mr. Wauer and myself found everything'
very convenient on our inland journeys, and felt very grateful for
this kindness. On the following Sunday I had the privilege of
being present at a great German missionary festival in Pastor
Meyer’s church in the neighbourhood of the old mission station
close to the railway line from Brisbane to Sandgate.
This mission had been begun in 1838 by missionaries from
Berlin, under the direction of the late Dr. Lang, of Sydney. I
saw several of these venerable old servants of God, and was glad
to hear them speak hopefully of the work which was nearest to
their hearts, for which they had left their fatherland and friends,
and for which also, they had suffered greatly, yet according to
men’s opinion, without success, and I could not help referring to
that beautiful word of the Saviour, u That both he that soweth
and he that reapeth may rejoice together.” Pastor Herlitz
preached a most impressive sermon to a large congregation, and
later on there was a general meeting, when addresses were de-
livered by six or eight different clergymen, and great interest wasi
afterwards expressed in regard to my mission to the Aborigines of'
the north. The next day, another festival took place at Beenleigh,
in the Church of my respected old friend Pastor Hausman, and


here again we could say that the Lord gave His rich blessings to
His people. A few days which we had at onr disposal were de-
voted to visiting Pimparna Island, and inspecting some of the
sugar plantations on the Logan and Albert rivers. At these places
I had the first opportunity of seeing a considerable number of
Kanakas working in the sugar fields; the greater number,
however, of these people are to be found further north at Mary-
borough, Mackay, the Herbert, the Johnston, Cairns, and Port
Douglas, etc. I regretted very much that Dr. Hale, the late
Bisho r of Li*V. *, who was the best friend of the Aborigines,
had left the colony a few months before, otherwise I was sure
that he would have given his whole influence to a new mission*
My friend Mr. "Waner having arrived from Melbourne, we now
waited for a comfortable steamer to sail northward. This we gof
on the following Tuesday for Rockhampton via Maryborough,
Sunday I preached for Pastor Schiermeister several times, and on*
the following day attended a conference of ministers who wished to*,
form themselves into a Synod. At the continuation of this con*,
ference on the next forenoon, the first Lutheran Synod of
land was constituted, and earnest prayers were offered for the
blessings from the Lord upon the German churches in that
From this important assembly we went to the steamer, and shortly-
afterwards sailed down the beautiful Brisbane river, and up More--
ton Bay towards Maryborough.
To ROCKHAMPTON & TOWNSVILLE*
Up? HE Carrijong was a comfortable steamer, but she had one;
||M| weak point —she rolled very much —which with many people
creates a peculiar sensation. A very earnest-looking gentleman*
asked me for my opinion of the rolling of the ship, but he didl
not seem satisfied when I informed him that I considered the,
whole qusstion as a matter belonging to one’s early training in*
childhood. As for myself, I had been accustomed to it from the.
days when, as an infant, I could rest best during the rocking of
the cradle, and was therefore very comfortable during the rolling-
of the ship. After passing out of Moreton Bay into the ocean,,
one observes to the left on the mainland several very peculiar-
looking mountains called “ The Glass-houses,” but I could not
find out the reason for such a name. From here a low chain of'


mountains begins, which, sometimes at a cons’derable distance
from the shore, but at other places quite close to the sea, runs
along the whole coast to the far north, and rises in many places,
especially between Port Douglas and Cooktown, to very lofty
mountain peaks covered with the most beautiful tropical shrubs,
creepers, and trees not to be found in Victoria. The larger and
smaller stretches of land between the sea shore and the moun-
tains, and also on the banks of the rivers, are generally covered
with dense scrub, and are composed of the richest soil that can
be found anywhere in the world. As I shall have to refer to
these mountain ranges, deep gullies, and scrub land again, I shall
not say any more on the subject here. Our ship rolled com-
fortably along until we reached Fraser’s Island, where the sea
became smooth, and cheerfulness returned to the countenances
of all. On this island there had once been a mission station, and
the work carried on by my friend, Mr. Fuller, some fourteen
years ago was very promising, but had to be given up for want
of funds. On steaming up the Mary river, we enjoyed the limited
view of both banks, but after all were very glad when we had
reached the township of Maryborough. We stopped here for more
than a day, and had time enough to look about and get as much
information as was possible during that period. We had a kind
invitation from the Rev. Mr. Kopas, then saw uhe large umig’e
and the public buildings, and met a considerable number of
Kanakas on different places, and also the last remnant of the
Aborigines, mostly old men and women and children. The young
men are away serving in the native police force in the north. We
sailed at the appointed time and had a very fine passage towards
Rockhampton. I should aave been glad if the captain had gone
to Gladstone, as I wouid have called on some friends, wdio some
time ago sent an Aboriginal girl to Ramahyuck in order to get
her trained for useful work, and to receive instruction in religion.
However, there was no time for stopping at that place. Whilst
passing Port Curtis, early in the morning, I could not help re-
membering the time when a great number of Victorian gold
diggers who left Melbourne in 1868 for this port, had to suffer
very much from want of food, as the whole gold affair turned out
to be a swindle. Our passage from Keppel Boy up the Fitzroy
saver to Rockhampton was very interestin ' to us, and when at
last we came near the town, we were very much gratified to
<observe some of our dear friends, waving their handkerchiefs as
*a welcome to their hospitable house and home. At first it was our
•intention to travel by railway as far as Beta, to the west of Rock-
hampton, but after due enquiry we found that the number of
Aborigines in this direction was very small, for which reason we


gave up that plan and arranged to go by next steamer to Mackay,
Bowen and Townsville. Oar stay at Rockhampton was very
interesting to ns, and never will we forget the kindness received
from Mrs. Proudfoot and her daughters, the Rev. Dr. and Mrs.
Hay, and others daring our sojourn with them. Our trip to
Mackay, Bowen and Townsville in the fine steamer Fitzroy, was
very enjoyable, especially as we sailed close to the Percy Islands,
Pentecost Island, and Whit Sunday Passage, of which so much
has been written by travellers, that I cannot venture to give a
description of the beauties of their scenery.
At Bowen, I had the great pleasure of meeting old esteemed
friends of mine, namely, the police magistrate, Mr. P. Macarthur
and his wife, with whom I had resided at Antwerp, in the Wim-
mcra, district, at the beginning of our mission work in Yictoria.
Gladly would I have accepted their kind invitation to stay with
them for a week, but our time was too short to do so, I would
have liked very much to visit the mouth of the Burdekin river in
Bowling Green Bay, but our steamer was so far out at sea that
we could only get a glimpse of the low' lying green cape with its
white painted lighthouse on it. We passed Cape Cleveland late
in the afternoon, and anchored in Cleveland Bay under the shelter
of Magnetic Island, opposite Townsville. As large ships cannot
go up Ross Creek to the town wharf, a small steamer had to take
the passengers late in the evening to the landing place, whence
we were soon directed to very good lodgings. Having to make
some needful inquiries in reference to my mission we at once
made arrangements for a stay of several days.
TOWNSVILLE.
■OWNSYILLB is about 900 miles north of Brisbane, and
travellers from the south, especially from Victoria, need
not be informed that they are in the tropics, for a very warm
feeling has already convinced them of that, in spite of the as-
surance of almost everybody, that it is winter just now. I had
no doubt of that, but it was a kind of winter very much like a
real good warm summer in Gippsland, and perhaps a little
warmer. A young traveller from Melbourne during one of the
hot mornings, asked the waiter to let him have some ice, as he
felt rather hot, but the waiter coolly answered the young gentle-
man, “we do not keep ice here in winter, sir,” so that the


stranger from the south had also to learn that it really was win-
ter. Townsville, although very young, is certainly a most im-
portant town, and must increase rapidly, as it is really the
key to the rich goldfields as well as to large pastoral districts on
the high table-land towards the west. From all the observations
in and around the town, in harmony with the expressed opinions
of many residents in the north, it is self-evident that whenever a
new colony will be formed, Townsville, which has already 9,000
inhabitants, must become the capital. Judging from the activity
observable among the shipping, the numerous shops, the post and
telegraph offices, the railway, the hotels, and in fact everywhere,
a great deal of business must be carried on in this place. The
town is well supplied with public institutions, excellent schools,
otc., but the most pleasing feature to me is, that there are already
seven churches, some very fine ones among them. The most
zealous and self-denying bishop of the Church of England, Dr.
Stanton, has chosen it for the centre of his diocese, and I have
Po doubt that in a religious point of view there is just as much
activity as there is with the others mentioned above. It is, of
■course, the case here, as in all new places, the people have to
struggle hard to get churches built and paid for, ministers’ houses
erected and funds raised for the support of the means of grace ;
but to do much more beyond these requirements seems at present
■out of the question. To raise funds for mission work among the
Aborigines, Kanakas, Chinese, and other heathen people is left
for the future, and if the work is to be done it must be done by
the churches and friends from other places. A most interesting
Subject to me was the study of the many nationalities represented
: at Townsville ; for besides the English-speaking population, and
people from almost every country in Europe, one meets great
numbers of Aborigines, Chinese, Kanakas, Cingalese, Malays and
■others. What fields ot labour are here ready for the messenger
■of the gospel! These fields, it is true, may not be ripe for the
harvest, but they are certainly ready for the sowing of the good
■seed, and for preparation for a plentiful harvest; but alas, there
■are no labourers. At Townsville I had to fix a definite plan as
to how to proceed with my mission, and no one could give me
better information than the bishop, for he has travelled round
? Cape York to Norman ton and Burketown to the north, and over-
land from there south and west and east, through the whole of
North Queensland, as perhaps few others have done, and the
knowledge which he possesses of the country, the high tableland,
the lorest, and the scrub, cannot easily be surpassed. I felt ex-
ceedingly thankful to the Bishop of Melbourne for his kind letter
*of introduction to Bishop Stanton, for not only was I most kindly


received, but in tbe course of conversation I got all the infor-
mation which I needed from a source on which I could rely. The
bishop also supplied me with letters to the Rev. Mr. Wilson at
Charters Towers, and the Rev. Mr. Taylor at Cooktown. Among
the finest churches, built on principles most suited to such a hot
climate, is the new Presbyterian Church, in which the Rev. Mr.
Riddle preaches the blessed gospel of Jesus to a large number of
Presbyterians. Gladly would I have accepted the invitation to
preach for him on the following Sabbath, but as we would then be on
■our voyage again towards Cooktown, I could not comply with his
wish. We enjoyed, however, a deeply interesting conversation,
.and felt ourselves one in Jesus Christ, and fellow workers in the
Master’s vineyard and heirs of glory hereafter.
CHARTERS TOWERS.
■E had been informed that a considerable number of
Aborigines could be found on the Bnrdekin river, and that
not ioug ago Ruouii AoO iiau uoon camping a» one i-oot Oj. one of the
hills beyond Charters Towers. We heard also that these were a
kind of civilized blacks, and that it would be good if we could
see them. After a call at the Land and Survey office in reference
to a reserve of land for the Aborigines in the district, we made
use of our railway passes and went to Charters Towers. As the
line passes to the left of the land reserved for the blacks, I had an
opportunity of seeing as much as it was to observe
through the windows of a railway carriage, from which I got an
idea, however imperfect, of the situation and the quality of the
land. The railway from the sea coast passes in many zig-zags
through the mountain ranges up to the high table-land and goes
already through pastoral lands for about 240 miles as far as the
Hughenden, and it will ultimately be constructed to the Gulf of
Carpentaria. At the Ravenswood and Charters Towers junction,
we met some so-called civilized blacks, and on the Burdekin we
saw a few more, but ascertained at Charters Towers afterwards,
that the large number I had heard of had only passedby on one of
their periodical wanderings, and nobody could inform me if they
had come down the Burdekin from Pelican, or if they were not,
after all, the people we often met near Townsville, which seemed
to me quite reasonable, as they prefer to live along the sea coast
instead of on the high tableland. Charters Towers is the centre


of one of the largest and richest mining districts in Queensland, with:
a population of nearly ?,000 souls. Passing up the main street
towards the Day Dawn mine, we recognise the same feeling
coming over us as that created in days gone by by a first visit to
one of our flourishing mining towns in Victoria, and in speaking
with miners one meets with many of our old Victorian friends,
who work here in the mines with considerable profit. At present
there are only three churches in the town: —The Church of Eng-
land, th" and the TV man CritbrT •*_ but T was told on
my return from the north that the Rev. Mr. Smith, for-
merly Presbyterian minister at Rockhampton, had returned,
and was doing his best to form a congregation. Whilst at Towns-
ville Bishop Stanton informed me that on the first of July a
Church of England congress, or conference, would be held at
Charters Towers, and he would be glad if I could be present on
account of the mission. Papers on the Church and the Heathen
—Kanakas, Chinese, and Aborigines —would be read by the Rev.
C. R. E. Nobbs, of Herberton, formerly of New Norfolk Island,
and Walter Hays, Esq. I should have liked very much to have
been present, but I had to move on, and was at Balobi, among the
wild blacks on the same day. Our stay could only he a very short
one, as we had to return to Townsville in order to be ready on
the arrival of the Alexandra from Brisbane to go with her to
Cooktown.
A RETROSPECT.
VaVSHTLST waiting at Townsville for the arrival of the steamer
from the south, I took a long walk round the bay as far as
the beautiful peninsula called “ Kissing Point,” and, seated on
one of the large stones on the shore, allowed my eyes to wander
across Cleveland Bay towards Magnetic Island, and my imagina-
tion carried me back to the time when Captain Cook for the first
time cast anchor between the island and the mainland, in front ol
the romantic-looking rocks at the foot of which Townsville is
built. I had been informed on several occasions that the compasses
of the good old ship Endeavour would not do service in front of
the island, and that, after investigating the matter, Captain Cook
found that the compasses were right enough, but that the island
opposite created the variation, for which reason he called it u Mag-


netic Island.” Whether this story be according to fact I do not
know, but so much I know that the compasses were affected, and
that the above name was given to the island which I now could
see before my eyes. Judging from the great number of Aborigines
even now to he seen in this locality, one may easily conclude that
in Captain Cook’s days the number of wild savages running from
rock to rock on the island and on the main land, wondering* at
the appearance of the ship, must have been very great. Again
my imagination ran back to the time when my venerable friend,
Captain Pascoe, R.N., as a young officer in the British navy, had
to make the Admiralty survey of the north-east coast of Aus-v
tralia in 1840 and 1841. At the interview I had with Captain
Pascoe a few days before my leaving Melbourne, he related to me
his first acquaintance with the savages on Magnetic Island, and I
believu that the friendly relations established by him between the.
white and the black man in those early days may greatly account
for the good feeling observable among the blacks even to the.
present day. Whilst the man-of-war was anchored in Cleveland!
Bay, for the purpose of the naval su; ~ y, Lieutenant Pascoe was
requested to plant a flag on one of the rocks of Magnetic
This had to be done with the greatest caution, as there were,
several hundred armed savages standing on the rocks with spears,
ready to drive away the intruder as soon as he should set his focti
on the shore. They gave signs of displeasure, and indicated with)
their uplifted hands that no one must come near them. Gradually
the boat drifted nearer to the shore, when the young officer also,
made signs by lifting up both hands to show that he had no,
weapons. Only two men remained at their posts, all the others;
having moved away to another spot. It was a painful moment,,
till at last the officer put a red handkerchief round his head, then*
taking it down again, placed it on the ground and retired to his;
boat, all the while making signs to the blackmen that they should!
fetch it. One of them did so, whilst the other had his spear ready'
in case it should be wanted. The same thing was repeated for the.
Second man, but no permission was given to land that day. At,
last, signs were made for another meeting for next day, whicß
was quite understood by the blacks. Next day, after some further
delay and the giving of a few more presents, the flagstaff could be*,
erected for the accomplishment of the survey, and the friendly-
understanding then established was never violated afterwards..
Having had those facts stated to me by the aged captain himself,
and having the very spot before me at which 45 years ago such
peaceable agreement took place, I naturally felt greatly interested
in the place, and could only wish that the same plan had been,
adopted at other localities by those who made their first acquaint


tance with the wild blacks, whereby many valuable lives of white-
men would have been saved and much misery avoided among the
Aborigines, At the conclusion of my meditations I looked to-
wards the south, and saw a black cloud of smoke over the beautiful
calm water, indicating the arrival of the expected steamer. On my
return, I found a telegram from a friend at Cooktown, informing
me that on arrival of the steamer there, a sailing boat would take
us to the Yilele plantation, on the Bloomfield River.
ON BOARD THE ALEXANDRA.
HE weather was most beautiful and the sea as smooth as %
||k|i mirror, when we took our places for Cooktown on board the
Alexandra, and the whole passage, of about 260 miles, was one of
the best I ever made. All that constitutes a good and pleasant
voyage was to be found. We had “ a very comfortable ship,” and
all that is included in that phrase, splendid weather, very nice
company, and magnificent scenery, both on the main land and on
the various islands which we passed. It was very interesting to
us to travel in company with the Royal Society’s scientific ex-
ploring expedition on their wav to New Guinea under the leader-
ship of Captain Everett, Dr. Harkie, my old friend Dr. Bernhays,
and others, especially as at that time I still intended to visit New
Guinea myself. Passing close to the beautiful Palm Islands, we
were charmed by the tropical vegetation on its various hills and
gullies, so that the artist belonging to the expedition made a num-
ber of sketches to form the first part of his collection on this
journey. Prom a certain point of view, I believe that the beauty
of the coast line from Townsville to Cooktown can scarcely be
surpassed, and as everything was favorable, we could thoroughly
enjoy it. At every new point that we reached, new prospects were
unfolded in the panorama before our eyes, and at last a glorious
sunset over the high mountains on our left, brought this delight-
ful day to a close, but having good moonlight we still gazed over
the silvery waters on the dim outlines of the mountains, which
seemed much higher than they appeared by daylight. In addition
to this, we listened with great enjoyment to the conversations of
pur scientific friends, who were full of expectation of new dis-
covaries to be made in the unknown regions of New Guinea; and
later on in the evening nearly all joined in the singing of Bate-


man’s and Sankey’s hymns, and closed before going to bed with,
the hundredth psalm, Scotch version, and certainly all felt the
power of the words, “ His truth at all times firmly stood, and[
shall from age to age endure.” We passed the Herbert (Card-
well), the Murray, and the Johnston, with all their rich lands and
great sugar plantations, and landed passengers at Cairns. I re-
gretted very much that we had no time to stay a day or two at
this important place, for not only could I have delivered my
Government letter to the resident police magistrate, but I might
also have been able to collect some particulars about the very wild
blacks in this locality, especially up the Bai’on River, as far as the
great waterfall, but previous arrangements prevented my
ing out these wishes. We had a beautiful morning trip to Port;
Douglas, where we stopped a few hours to land both goods and
passengers for this large district, and also for the Herberton
fields on the Wild River, about 80 miles south-west from this port v
From Port Douglas to the neighborhood of Cape Tribulation, the
mountain ranges form a kind of large semi-circle, inside of whicfr
is an immense extent of very rich land, covered with dense tropk.
cal scrub, intersected by several fine rivers flowing from the mounts
ains into tbe Pacific Ocean. I met a number of people from Port
Douglas and the Daintree, who seemed in conversation never ta
finish their stories about the wild, murderous savage blacks, the;
numerous alligators on the banks of the rivers, large serpents and
the great fertility of the soil. We arrived in due time at Cape,
Tribulation, and had pointed out to us the direction towards the,
Coral reef on which the Endeavor, Captain Cook’s celebrated
got injured and was thence brought into the river near Cooktown,
for repairs. We also saw the corner round the cape where the,
great navigator had to punish some of his disobedient and rebelk
ious sailors. Steaming along the rocky coast on which Mount:
Peter Botte presents its interesting form, we had a good look over-
weary Bay and the Bloomfield district, which we wished to visit
as soon as possible. With great satisfaction and thankful hearty
We reached Cooktown on the evening of the second day of
age and had the pleasure of making the acquaintance of several
gentlemen, who gave us a deal of information in reference to th§
wild blacks and the country up to Cape York and across to
Gulf of Carpentaria.
COOKTOWN.
the first morning after our s rrival we ascended Mount
Cook, so named after the great navigator, and had a general


look all round. It was stiff work to climb to the top of it, but
it repaid us for all our trouble, for we could enjoy a splendid view
and breathe in this hot climate some really beautiful fresh air
which came across the sea from the Great Barrier Reef. From
here we saw our good ship Alexandra depart for the north to
Thursday Island, with the little Bonito, the explorers’ steamer in
tow, and we wished our friends every blessing and God’s protect-
ing care, especially during their work of exploration in New
Guinea. They have a most difficult and dangerous task to per-
form, in an unhealthy part of the country along the Aird River,
and among cannibals, where great care, watchfulness, and wisdom
are needed. We too wished to visit New Guinea, which we
could have reached in about 36 hours, as was stated at the begin-
ning. This intention, however, could not be carried out, as
neither tie vessel with General Sir Peter Scratchley sailed under
two months, nor was there any other chance to sail for Port
Moresby for some considerable time, for which reason we had to
that part of our programme. From our high elevation
We could trace westward as far as the eye could reach, the new
tailway line, now under construction as far as May town at the
Palmer goldfields. We could clearly see the mountains along the
sea coast as far as Cape Bedford, and the well-grassed slopes
■down to the Mangrove scrub, bordered by the Endeavor River on
the left, and all that large piece of land called the North Shore,
which is set aside as a reserve for the great number of Aborigines
in the locality. Finally, we saw Cooktown, which is only nine
•or ten years old, but which certainly makes a very fine appear-
ance with all the churcla--, public buildings, the shipping, the
•hotels, and the new railway. On returning by another track to
Oooktown, I collected a quantity of different kinds of seeds, but
was informed that this was labor in vain, for the seeds from the
tropics could only be grown in hothouses, and would therefore be
for the mission garden in Gippland. During the day I
went with my Government letter to the police magistrate, Mr. H.
Millman,but he was absent. I stated the cause of my mission to
the gentleman in charge of the office, who replied that in no case
should we venture alone to the Bloomfield scrub, as the blacks there
: are very dangerous, but that we should get some native police
troopers to accompany us to that district. No one could speak
With more authority or experience than himself, for only a few
.years ago he had been speared by the savages almost in sight of
the office, where we were then holding our conversation. We
left the matter over till next day, when we could see Mr. Millman
•on the subject. We called the same afternoon on the Rev. Mr.
'Taylor, of the Church of England, in order to deliver my


letter from the Bishop of North Queensland, and had a friendly
conversation on the subject of missions to the Aborigines. I
greatly admired his fine little church and parsonage up on the hill
overlooking the town, the railway, and the river far away to the
northwest. We often met during our stay at Cooktown with
Captain Armit,who was educated in a Moravian school in Germany.
He was the former leader of the Argus New Guinea exploration.
We also met with Mr. Blackney, solicitor. Both these gentlemen
have been officers in the black police force for a considerable num-
ber of years in those out-of-the-way regions, where the behaviour
of the wild blacks has been exceedingly bad, and their statements
were of great value to us. I was pleased to observe that both
these gentlemen, as well as many others whom we met, wished
every success to the proposed Christian and philanthropic works
among the poor, miserable wild Aborigines. I also frequently
saw the contractor for the new railway line, who is still suffering
very much from a number of spear wounds received from the
blacks on the new line only a few months ago, in consequence of
which he has still to walk on cratches. From every side we heard
of the treacherous and barbarous practices of the savages, and
there is no doubt that great caution is needed to meet them, for
even those who appear to be friendly turn out often to be the
worst. On the following day I had the pleasure to explain the
reason of my journey to Mr. Millman, in whom I found a friend,
sympathising g’reatly with the proposals made, and I am sure that
he will be a great help in any undertaking, both as a Christian
gentleman and as a Government officer.
The beautiful calm weather, which we so much enjoyed during
our voyage and the first day of our stay at Cooktown, had gradu-
ally changed, and a strong wind from the south blew now with
unabated force for several days, so that our little vessel of 14 tons
register, the “ Wairril,” did not arrive at the expected time, and
when at last she made her appearance, it was only to try our
patience for a few days longer, for wind and weather being
against us, we could not venture to go to sea. During our en-
forced stay we saw a great number of blacks, and conversed with
many of them. They appear to be very pleasant, and will say
“ yes ” to your questions, but anyone acquainted with the char-
acter of the blacks will at once discover that all that soft com-
pliance in peaceful conversations is carried out with an eye to
business, which always concludes by asking for a few “ bob ”or
shillings. It was very interesting to see 62 young black men be-
longing to this tribe returning by steamer from the Mackay sugar
plantations, where they had been employed for some time, thereby
giving proof that if the Government would take the Aboriginal


question in hand in the right spirit, these wandering, thieving,
useless men would become useful members of the laboring
classes in North Queensland, which likewise, to a great extent,
would solve the problem of the Kanaka labour trade.
Cooktown is the most distant sea-port of North Queensland
and is of considerable importance. Here one meets with travellers
from New Guinea, the South Sea Islands, and many other strange
places of this southern and eastern part of the world. As in many
other towns and plantations, one meets with a great number of
Chinese, who, in spite of the poll-tax of £3O sterling, still come
in great numbers to Queensland. They have among their number
many merchants, storekeepers, cabinetmakers, gardeners, cooks,
■and general laborers, and, with their fan-tan shops and joss-houses
«nd good eating and drinking, seem to form a community by them-
selves. That they have feelings of great sympathy for their fellow
'countrymen, was shown by the fact that they collected at Cook-
town, among themselves, and within a few hours, £262 sterling
sbr the sufferers by the recent floods in China. Seeing so many
<of these otherwise educated Celestials under the delusions of
-idolatry, one feels sorry that nothing is done to enlighten them
'Svith the truth of the blessed gospel of Jesus Christ.
“ THE WAIRRIL ”
The wind was still very strong and the sea rough, showing
everywhere by the foaming white tops over the great waves, that
it could not be very pleasant out on the ocean, when Captain
‘Olshausen, a Norwegian seaman, informed us that we should
•come on board of his good little vessel called the Wairril, so that
'we might have a trial. Well, it became a real trial to all of us,
'which will not be forgotten very easily. When passing “The
Raven,” a British man-of-war, one of the officers wished us a
;good day’s sailing and a safe return in the evening. That beau-
tiful calm sea over which we had steamed with so much delight on
f our voyage to Cooktown some days ago, had changed its appear-
ance altogether, and the smooth looking glass-like surface which
had pleased us so much was now a restless foaming mass, rising
: and &lling, as if the whole were an immense ocean of boiling
'Water ; and the wind gradually rose again with such force that we
soon saw it would be vary unwise if we proceeded on our voyage,


so we concluded to ask the captain to return to the port whence
we had sailed in the morning. Instead of going south we had to
go north-east in order to tack about, and thus gain a little against
the wind,hut the combined force of rolling and blowing along the
coast drifted us in reality nearer and nearer to Cape Bedford until
we reached the calm water near the Great Barrier Coral Reef,
where we could take a little “ spell,” turn the ship and return to
Cooktown, which we reached just before evening. The waves
having continually dashed over our little vessel, our clothes had
become quite wet, and we were glad when afterwards we could
change them. There was, however, one good point in the affair,
we did not feel cold, but rather warm, for being about 140 miles north
of the land of the Gulf of Carpentaria, and somewhat to the
north of the farthest islands of the Fiji group, about the 15th
degree south latitude, the weather was warm in spite of wind and
wet. Our friends had been looking out for us with much anxiety,
and were very glad when they saw us return in safety. We had
been so busy looking at the great waves with their foaming white
and greenish bluish rainbowlike caps, and to the little Wairril
dancing like a nutshell up and down, the whole time, that hour
after hour had passed away very quickly in a sort of unenviable
excitement, the only break during the whole day being the short
moment when we sailed in the light green colored water before
the Barrier Coral Reef. During the next few days our little ship had
to go near the same reef again and again at different places and
under more favorable circumstances, so that we then had great
enjoyment by seeing the wonders of the great ocean displayed in
the appearance of this most interesting part of the wonderful
works of God. I had heard and read a good deal on the subject
of the great Barrier Coral Reef, but after having seen i% I must
confess that all descriptions fall very far short of the reality.
Approaching over the light greenish water, which is as clear as
crystal, one observes in almost all the rainbow colors the different
coral formations in all manner of forms like icicles, some standing
up straight like pillars, some leaning and some lying on the
coloured surface of the reef, giving the impression of an ancient
European Burial ground. The surface all along the reef is covered
with various sea slugs, turtles, and different shells of great dimen-
sions. On many places fisheries ai’e established for these slugs,
which are called heche-de-mer, but I believe the proper
name is “Tripang.” The income from these slug is
very considerable, for they are sold from LIOO to Ll4O sterling
the ton. Once on our voyage in the steamer, we passed a beche-
de-mer fishery, but could not see any of the people in their own
dwellings nor observe anything of the mode of the preparation of
this delicacy. The beche-do-mer soup, however, which we en-'


joyed at the table of Mrs. Pool, at Cooktown, convinced us of its
excellence, so that one could understand the reason why such
energy is displaced in procuring the raw material for which such
high prices are paid. Great turtles are also found in large num-
bers on the reef, and often these creatures swim over to the main-
land, where the blacks are always on the look out for them. We
saw a large one passing our vessel, but could not catch it. The
fishermen as well as the blacks, seem to find enjoyment in hunt—
ing or looking out for turtles, and especially when they are near,
to turn them over so that they cannot move away. There seems’
to be a great many more living creatures on these reefs, of which
I wish only to mention the various kinds of lobsters, but espec-
ially the great clams, which live in shells of very large dimen-
sions. I believe the animal is much liked by the blacks, but I
do not know if it would be appreciated by white people. The
blacks, of course, have peculiar tastes, which do not always
prove that what they prefer must, therefore, be really good. The
large clamshells are generally used as a kind of ornament before
the verandahs of rich men’s houses, and some instances I saw
them used as flowerpots. Some of them seem to be very large,
but as I have not seen them, I must leave this point unsettled until
these great things are exhibited in some museum, which it seems
will soon be the case. Had time permitted, we would gladly have
gone over some portions of this wonderful coral reef, but this
could not be done, as the object of our voyage was for quite a
different purpose. But I must come back again to the place
were we really should be, namely at Cooktown.
The wind having moderated during the night after our first
day s sailing, we started again on the following morning, and
alter a voyage of several days were at last successful in reaching
Weary Bay and the Bloomfield River. We saw during our
passage a great number of small fires somewhat up the mountain
in the scrub, which seemed to indicate that human beings must
be near them. They were in reality the camp fires of the savages
who appeared to be very numerous in these localities. Some-
times during the daytime we could observe them moving along
from rock to rock, or later on, running along the sandy beach,
and when on the last day we were in Weary Bay near the Bloom-
field river, I could make signs to some of them to come and meet
us at the landing place up the river, which they seemed to under-
stand at once, putting their canoe into the water and following
us close m shore until we had reached the little jetty. I wished
to be very kind to them, but soon found that they were very
much frightened at meeting us, and when I wished to shake
hands vith them they shook and trembled for fear. I then


showed them the photographs of some of our blacks from Gipps-,
land, which perfectly astonished them, especially when they saw
that their black countrymen in the pictures were dressed as whit©
men, whilst they in these mountains know nothing of clothes in
any shape or form. After a short time, a sort of confidence was
created between us, and when they finally received some bread
from the captain they seemed very much pleased, and retired with
smiling faces to their shelter in the scrub under the mangroves
(Rhizophorum) and various creepers on the banks of the river.
With all the misery experienced at the first part of our voyage,,
the little Wairril proved herself, according to the captain’s de-
claration, a “ good little ship,” but nevertheless we were glad
when at last we could put our foot on solid ground on the beau--
tiful bank of the large Bloomfield river.
THE BLOOMFIELD WATERFALL.
®ERHAPS it is just as well to state here that a few day©
later we were accompanied in the large boat belonging to,
the Vilele estate by some young gentlemen from the plantation©
of Messrs. Bauer and Co., and Messrs. Hislop and Co., to th&
first great waterfall of the Bloomfield about six or eight miles up,
the river from the entrance into Weary Bay. The river is from 800;
to 400 feet wide and in some places very deep. The banks on both
sides are a continuation of mountains rising at some places very-
high and reach at a distance (Mount Peter Botte) the height of
3,300 feet The most charming aspects meet the eye at every turn,
of the river, for the whole ground up to the mountain tops i©
covered with the most beautiful tropical trees, shrubs,and creepers,,
many of them in full bloom. The river seems well supplied with
fish, but the horrible alligator has his habitation there also, and,
is really a terror to man and beast. Not long ago Mr. P. Bauer-
shot a large one dead, through the eye, which seems the only-
spot where a ball can enter. Strange to say, the great animal,
had in the other eye two sharp spear ends from the weapons of
the Aboriginals, thereby showing that the brute had been hunted
before. We saw the heavy skin or hide, likely to be made ready
for some exhibition or museum in a city of the south. The flesh
gave a kind of alligator banquet to the Aborigines, who enjoyed
it very much, for they seem to take great pleasure in feasting-
upon the bodies of their enemies. At one very gloomy looking spot,
several miles up the river, under the overhanging trees, is a great


Stone, on and nnder which a great evil spirit dwells, according to
the statements of the blacks, who are so much frightened that
they will not pass the locality, and if it happens that any of them
are in the large boat belonging to the plantation, they will stoop
down and hide themselves, so that the evil spirit cannot see nor
catch them. I have an idea that once upon a time one of these
alligator monsters had taken down and devoured one of the
Aboriginals near this great stone. The place looks very much
like one where this would occur, and when we touched the stone
and looked into the clear, green, deep water we naturally did so
with great care and caution. iit ' friends told us that the blacks
always cautioned them not to go near the dark stone, and when
afterwards, “ Binny,” the son of the late Balebi chief, heard that
we had been there, he made many gestures of astonishment. We
had a very fine trip up the river, but at the same time were always
on the lookout for an unexpected meeting with the wild black
men, for they are very numerous in this mountainous district,,
especially at places where small rivulets flow into the main
stream. On the following evening, I observed from the top of
one of the hills along the mountains, a number of fires, proving
that the blacks are there, hut near the river we saw none. A
good many tribes on the Yilele side of the river are on friendlv
terms with the white settlers, and are to all appearances quiet,
hut the Amajins and the Tyangatjins, on the opposite side as far
as Mount Peter Botte are, under no circumstances, to he trusted.
It is not many years ago that two miners from the Palmer dig-
gings, on their way to the tin mines at Peter Botte, somewhere
near the great waterfall, disappeared just at the time when many
of these blacks were in the neighborhood, and it was generally
believed that the two travellers had been killed and eaten. Of course,
this horrible act could not be proved, for the wild blacks are still
in the dense scrub as wild as ever, and no white man had seen the
occurrence, hut all conjectures point in the direction indicated.
At a distance of about two miles from the waterfall, the river be-
comes narrower, being hemmed in on both sides by the mountains,
which seem to be much higher here than lower down the river.
The last mile or something like it, we had to walk along the stony
or rocky bank, all the while hearing the thundering noise of the
rushing water, until we came suddenly in sight of the fall itself.
As the river above the fall flows between high mountains until it
tumbles over an almost perpendicular precipice of about 200 feet
from its rocky bed above into a large basin below, it has a most
majestic appearance, and fills the admirer of nature’s beauty with
feelings of solemn awe. I took a seat on a rock under the shade of an
old chestnut tree to enjoy the sight, and silently adore the Lord, who


has made such wonderhil works upon earth to give pleasure to his
people. Mr. Wauer, together with our young companions, climbed
up the mountain side to see the river and its downfall from above.
On their way up they saw a native plum tree, laden with fine
large blue fruit, the size of small fowls’ eggs. Of couse, they
helped themselves to a quantity of the plums, and I brought
several with me to Ramahyuck as a kind of memento of the water-
fall. Our friends, however, had to pay dearly for their pleasure,
for whilst they had been busy with the plums they had come too
near one of the stinging nettles, generally called stir gins* tree
(urtica gig as), and without wishing to touch it, iue_y had to feel
that they had already done so. The burning sensation caused by
a touch with the finger or the hand on this awful urtica gigas y
swells and stiffens the whole arm, inflames the shoulder, and some-
times creates strong pain down the whole side of the body. The
worst of it, however, is that it always increases very much when
the hand is put into cold water, and that the pain returns again,
and again for several months. In order to try the force of the
waterfall, our young friends rolled a cedar log into the stream
above, and it broke into endless splinters during its passage over
the precipice into the gulf below. About three miles higher up is;
another still larger waterfall of about 400 feet deep, but we were
quite satisfied with what we had seen, and returned well pleased
to Balebi landing, and from there by tram cars to the Yilele plan-
tation, where we received a hearty welcome from our hospitable
friends, Mr. and Mrs. Bauer and their kind-hearted and clevep
sons and daughters.
MEETING WITH LARGE NUMBERS
OF SAVAGES.
Hp|o read and speak at a comfortable distance about “ the noble>
pj|| savage,” who reposes under the blue canopy of heaven or-
roams his native forest in full vigour and strength, unfettered by
the forms and fashions of so called civilisation is one thing. It is
what a learned friend of mine would call “ a conglomeration of
fallacious imagination,” but it is quite another thing to go and
meet large numbers of them face to face in their wild state of
nature, to hear their howling voices and to know perfectly well
that in the cruel, treacherous way hitherto pursued by them, they


are always ready to shed blood, and if convenient, to feast upon
the body of their victim. I wonder where the noble savage may
be found ? The bare and stern reality of seeing’ yourself in the
midst of hundreds of such people will soon drive away the roman-
cing idea of “ the noble savage.” We had the privilege of spending
a week at Yilele, and during that time we met every day large
numbers of wild blacks who had come in from the surrounding
mountains, the very people of whom we had been told at Cook-
town, that they were very wild, and that we should not go to that
place to meet them without strong police protection. Setting aside
all fear of danger, but knowing that, in a friendly way, you are
surrounded by one, or two, or three hundred of such poor and
degraded human beings, who have not a shred of clothing about
them, with no hope nor prospect in themselves for the better, but
to live and die in misery like the beast of the field, what Christian
heart will not be filled with intense pity and compassion for these
our fellow men ? Yes, truly one’s heart bleeds for the poor creatues;
you stand in their midst, forgetting all danger, and your thoughts
and wishes, and prayers, ascend to the throne of grace for their
conversion, and your longing desire and earnest petitions for
help go forth to your Christian brothers and sisters in all the
churches, your heart appeals to all who have feelings of humanity
and kindness, saying in Heber’s words,
“ Can we whose souls are lighted
With wisdom from on high,
Can we to men benighted,
The lamp of life deny ? ”
The answer to that question should follow with all the power
which the love of Christ can produce in the believer’s heart, but
alas ! how little is done.
It has often been stated to me that the blacks are a doomed race,
and must die out as our own civilisation advances; that they do not
understand religion and that it is of no use to do anything for them.
It is perfectly correct that they do pass away rapidly, and a more
powerful race takes possession of their inheritance, but who
Would venture to criticise the just and righteous dealings of God’s
providence with this and other aboriginal races ? Neither would
I venture say that the white man’s “ fusel ” or firewater, nor the
White man’s rifle should be taken as synonomous with civilisa-
tion, Of one great thing, however, I am quite certain, and I
speak of what I have been privileged to see during twenty-eight
years of my life among the Aborigines —that in the black man’s
heart are feelings buried, which, when touched by the gospel of
■Jesus, will produce the great change from death to life, and the
humanising and civilising influence of the wonderful gospel will


show at once the most pleasing fruits of righteousness. Having
passed from darkness to light and life, the black man, as well as
the white man, understands and knows the power of the religion
of Jesus, lives according to it, and passes away in faith and full
assurance of life and glory hereafter. To say it is of no use to
do anything for these people because they die, discloses a very
wonderful weakness in those who say or think so. Do we not
show the most tender care to our sick friends though it may be
quite known to all that they cannot live ? And how many poor
and sick people are so well attended in our hospitals, and yet we
know that they die. The fact, however, is that those who
make such difficulties for mission work never spent a penny for
the spread of the gospel. I stated above that we met daily large
numbers of such poor Aborigines as can only be found in the
dense scrub of Northern Queensland ; the same people of whom
police records and newspapers give such bad accounts, which I
have no doubt are perfectly correct. Whilst we were there, one
of the leading papers in the colony asserted in a joking manner
that hitherto the blacks had occasionally feasted on the body of a
Chinaman, but they might for once change their taste, and their
doing so would materially interfere v, ith the benevolent intentions
of the Moravian missionary ; but the fact is that wo did not see
anything of that danger, for we were among concilated people
who had been met by kindness, firmness, and carefulness, I often
wished during these days that some of my scientific, anthro-
pological, and also some of my missionary friends could be with us,
for the former could certainly find a vmy great deal of first-class
and direct reliable information unmixed with any small additions
from white people, but adopted by the blacks elsewhere, and as
to the latter, I am convinced that my impressions stated above
would have become those of all the friends of missions to the
poor heathen. Perhaps it will be well to state here that in these
notes all cannot be recorded which came under our observation,
and that when I speak of having been informed on a subject, I
have most reliable authority for such statements.
In order to make the few remarks on the blacks as clear as
possible, it will be desirable to follow out a certain line of dis-
tinction between the so-called “ civilized,” and the “ brought in,”
and the “wild” aborigines. The first class or half civilized
blacks, is generally met with about townships, roadside public
houses and stations, where they sometimes do a little work, but their
greatest pleasure seems to be to beg, to drink, to smoke bad
tobacco, or opium if they can get it. They mostly have a re-
pulsive-looking appearance in their dirty clothes or rags, diffus-
ing all around a certain aroma, which keeps anyone at a respect-


able distsnce. They know sufficient of the English language to
express a considerable deal that is really bad, and very little that
is good, and in addition to their own vices adopt those of some
white people, and are often considered a very great nuisance.
If occasion rises, they will throw away their dirty clothes, and
in their former wild fashion, join in any kind of wickedness,
practising cruelty among themselves, beating their unfortunate
wives, who are only the carriers of burdens, and the slaves of
their wandering lords. Poor things, law and gospel should be
joined together to put them right, and to ameliorate their condi-
tion before they pass away from the face of the earth. The next
class are those who are generally called the “ wild blacks.” These
are they who have always remained in their original state of sav-
agery, and who have never come out of their secluded covers
under the dense scrub, in the deep valleys and mountain
gorges, and the almost impenetrable districts along the coast and
on Cape York Peninsuala. Their numbers seem to be very great
and they have been increased by those of the same class, who
have been compelled to retire from the high table lands by the
advance of the squatters on the one side and by the settlements
on the fertile locations of the sugar planters and other selectors
on the coast and along the rivers. Living, as they do, in a hot
climate, they need not, and do not, possess the slightest kind of
covering for their bodies, and have perhaps only a light kind of
miamia consisting of a few of the large fan palm leaves, under
Which they camp at night. Of these camps, made of the most
beautiful fan palm leaver, we saw a great many, and one is really
‘disappointed to think that they do not use some of these leaves
•as a covering for themselves as the savages in other countries do.
Then again the scrub is so richly supplied with many kinds of
tropical fruits and roots, besides fish in the rivers and along the
sea shore, and different animals on land, that they have plenty of
food without much labour. Of these wild blacks it is stated that
they are most cruel and treacherous, gliding like serpents through
the scrub and high grass, watching the movements of their
enemies, and always ready to hurl their spears into them, and
&bove all, not only to shed blood, but to practice cannibalism, in
the very act of which some were caught only a few weeks ago by
Inspector White, in the Palmer district. I inquired particularly
;among the Aborigines at Balebi about the custom of eating human
Sesh, and the son of the late chief informed me with evident
pleasure, accompanying his words with all sorts of gestures, that
this was very good, showing at the same time which parts of the
Ijody they liked best, and in the coolest manner answered to my
protest against such practice “ we like boomar (human flesh) and


you like something else.” The stories which we heard on this
subject are simply horrible, and make one shiver to think that
human beings can sink so low in this and in many other respects.
Before I refer to the third class of Aborigines, I wish to make
a few remarks on some of their laws and customs, but of course,
without going into any details as that really is a field for anthro-
pological investigation, and has very little interest for me. It is
a well-known fact the Aborigines have a certain number of laws
among themselves, which they carry out most faithfully, and ac-
cording to which they regulate all their doings, their periodical
wanderings, their marriages, (heir fightings, and all ceremonies
from the day when the child is born, to the burial, or the carry-
ing about of their dead bones. Among- these laws is that of com-
munism, which is really carried out to the fullest extent of its
meaning. I fancy it would be a capital thing for some of these
great French teachers of Communism to spend a few months
among the Aborig-ines of North Queensland to observe how this
law operates if carried out honestly, as it is done there. These
gentlemen would return to their native land very much wiser,
that is to say if they were spared to return it all. Thu strict ful-
filment of this law, however, has led to very serious misunderstand-
ing kj tine*. to r,”.Tul consequences between the black man and
the white settler. The black man, in accordance with his law
takes the white man’s cattle, horses, sheep, and perhaps some
other things for which the thief, according to the white man’s laws,
must be punished. Then follows the treacherous, murderous con-
duct of the black man, and this again has often brought on con-
sequences which, if continued, would certainly lead to a speedy ex-
termination of the Aborigines. Even among the civilized blacks
the consequences of this almost inborn law have often been
noticed. For example, it has been stated that the black people
have no feeling of thankfulness for gifts or presents handed over
to them, and that they esteem these things so little that they give
them away to other blacks. Why should they show thankfulness
for things to which they have a perfect right, and which are
really their own according to that law ? And why should not one
black man have as much right to it as an another ? But to be
without gratitude in this respect does by no means imply that
there is none in other regards, for favors shown to the sick and
dying, or assistance given to one in trouble with others, will by
all be kept in remembrance for good. Having had in days gone
by so much to do with that wonderful, but so much misunder-
stood law of Communism among the Aborigines, I often thought
what a field of study there is here for the political economist, and
for the student of the laws of property among white people, and


how the practice of it runs out to the small end until nothing is
left. And again, what a splendid scope of operations there is for
the admirer of the laws of the blackfellows to get rid of all he
possesses in a very short time. But then again, I believe that even
the greatest admirers would just bring other laws into operation,,
which would simply look to number One first, very much as the
great philosopher did when the cholera appeared in his native
town, and he ran away to keep clear of it.
THE INTRODUCTION TO MANHOOD-
f*T| GLADLY leave the other laws untouched, to which I made
J| reference above, and only mention a few of the customs
carried out among the blacks in the district where we met them,
but which are practised, I believe, all along the north-eastern and
north shores. The thing has really reached perfection from a
blackfellow’s point of view, though it is disgusting and shocking
enough to the eyes of a Christian man. In 1859, when I lived
among the Aborigines in the Wimmera district, I was fortunate
enough to be adopted by old Ngarrowan, known as old Jimmy,
and in consequence of that I was permitted to be present at the
performance of making boys, or rather youths, into men, which
ceremony ends by knocking out the two front teeth. It was a
cruel performance, but by giving the blacks something higher and
better, I could in future stop all such truly heathen customs.
When I came to Gippsland I was glad to find that this part of the
ceremony was not practised, and that it was only known by the
people here as belonging to other blacks. To my no small aston-
ishment, I found in North Queensland that the ceremonies and
performances among the black men there were carried on by three
different degrees, and were far more cruel than they ever had been
in Victoria. Two of the performances have been witnessed by the
gentlemen who gave me the particulars, but one, however, is still
a profound secret, so that I can only give the name and the rsult
of it. The first degree in the Balebi dial ct is called “ the Wom-
bal,” and is performed on boys from eleven to fourteen or fifteen
years of age, who if they can stand all the trials connected with
it, will then receive certain privileges, which I do not wish to
state here. The work for the first blackfellows’ degree begins by
removing all the females from the locality selected, then a trench


is made in the sand by the men, about 20 or 30 feet long*,
two feet wide, and a few feet deep. In this trench all the
candidates for the “ Wombal ” have to sit or crouch, the head bent
down as deep as can be done, and in that position they have to
remain until the old men have danced round them for several
hours every morning for more than fourteen days. After several
days’ performances the imaginary fish-spearing is carried out, the
next after a few days is the imaginary grubbing for turkeys’ -
eggs, Then follows the beehive ceremony, which is succeeded by
the throwing of numerous spears over the boys heads, and the
conclusion of the -"bole affair is the “Tombee” performance.
The immorality of that act is so great that I could not say a single
■word on the subject. I did succeed in procuring a “ Tombee,”
which now hangs in my study, among other things held in great
estimation among the Aborigines. This is of course only the first
step to manhood, and in one or two years after that the youths;
who have attained the first degree have to undergo the second and
much more difficult ceremony of the “ Tarbuljee.” This perfor-
mance or ceremony is connected with the punching of a hole
through the nose, so that in after years a larger or smaller bone
or reed may be inserted as an ornament, or may be, as a sign of
the earned degree. I have seen many reeds, bones, and small sticks
inserted, and many were shown to us during our sojourn at Balebi,
but neither the black people nor our friends would or could tell,
us anything of the mode of getting the hole made, as this is on©
of the great secrets among- the savages. The third performance,
which takes place after the first degrees have been reached is called
the
“NOOMAN TERRIB,” OR " BORA."
■HIS is the well-known ceremony of knocking in or out, on
off, of the front teeth. In the Wimmera and Murray dis-
tricts the old men took a kind of wooden mallet to carry out tha
work. In Queensland the ceremony is something sacred, but at
the same time it is a terrible act or series of acts, whereby many
poor lads lose their lives, and are carried out of the sacred circle
to the camps of the women at a considerable distance, after which
the crying and yelling of the poor things testify to the great sor-
row and grief they feel. My friend, Captain Armit, who was an
officer in the native police force, witnessed this horrible ceremony
from first to last, and from him I have a full description in my
bands, which would fill about six columns of a good sized news-
paper. The sooner these awful ceremonies are done away with


the better it will be for the poor creatures, and every effort should
be made to counteract these practices both for the sake ot humanity
and civilisation. On the last day of our stay at the house of our
esteemed friends at Vilele, we got an invitation to another perfor-
mance a few miles up in the dense scrub under the fig and palm
trees, where a great number of the blacks had their camps. This
was an invitation to a
“CORROBBOREE”
MUST honestly say that I have had enough of that moat
abominable and immoral nightly performance before ever I
came to Gippsland, so far back as 1860, when the late Dr. Oster-
tag of Basle published an account of it from me in his Magazine.
I then declared that with all my power I would work against such
an outrage on civilisation and religion, and I shall continue my
opposition as long as lam able to do so. In company with a
young friend of ours we went and saw even worse than I had wit-
nessed years ago in Victoria. To see these poor nude savages
jumping about trembling in every limb and muscle, to hear their
terrible howling, to see them crawling, hopping, swinging*
stretching and drawing themselves together in the state they are
before you, with the poor women sitting in front, beating the
time on their own bodies—for they have no rugs or skins of
animals —and finally to witness them in the state of exhaustion
produced hy the performance, I feel sure yon have enough of that
kind, and you are amazed when you consider that man can sink to
such a depth of degradation and misery. I have given in these
notes an idea of the life these Aborigines lead in their present
■tate. I mentioned the case of those who are called civilised, and
also that of the wild ones, but I wish to say a few words about
another class, who are wild, but conciliated.
THE WILD BLACKS BROUGHT IN.
3|riHAT there is a possibility of coming to a kind of conciliation
jplig or peaceable understanding as between the white settler and
the wild savage has been quite effectively proved by the fact that
through the wise, kind and firm management of the Vilele sugar


plantation at Bloomfield, hundreds—l believe close upon a
thousand—of the wildest blacks have been gathered in from the
mountain ranges and scrub, and whilst they still adhere to theii*
customs, they are nevertheless friendly and on peaceable terms
with the white settlers and are employed as labourers in the sugar
fields, which employment for payment they rather like and enjoy.
At the commencement of this plantation, the wild blacks, as at
other places, began to spear the cattle and do other mischief, but
always glided away through the high grass and hush so that they
could not be caught. The asssstance of the native police with an
excellent officer was called for, not to drive the wild people away
but to catch some of them, so as to explain the white people’s law
to them and to invite them to come out of their hiding places and
to do some light work for which they would get regular payment
in food and other useful things. It took a little while before many
came in from the scrub, but when they saw that it was really to
their benefit, larger numbers came, until many hundreds have
found a true refuge, and seem to like the arrangement very welh
The plan has hitherto succeeded, and when we visited the planta-
tion we saw the black people at work and at rest, and in convers-
ing with them, one felt convinced that the right means had been
adopted to conciliate them, and that if at other places such modes
of dealing with the savages were carried out, great good would
result both to white and black people. The gentlemen who acted
with such Christian wisdom and determination deserve very great
praise for their activity in the matter, but more should be done for
the blacks by the churches and the Government, so that they might
be instructed in useful things, hut especially in “ the way of life,’*
which is so very much needed,
I was requested to say a little about the language of the Abori-
gines in the north, hut I do not know anything about it except
that I liked its beautiful ringing clear sound, and I only found on©
word which is the same as that of the dialect in the Wimmera
district. Of course all our conversations were carried on through
an interpreter. My plan has always been to teach the natives the
English language, which has been done with very good results,
and by so doing, the blacks are able to converse with anybody,
and are able to enjoy the blessings of English literature.
I was also asked to say something about their weapons, and in
this respect I must confess that my statements must be very brief,
for those we met had only one piece, and that is the murder-
ous spear of a very simple and really primitive kind. Of course,
without instruments of any description except the sharp stone,
it must be very difficult to make even the simple spear. The
original mode of making fire was very interesting to us, as they


still use two pieces of wood, and by »ery quick turning with the
one stick in a little hole in a piece of wood, the fire does appear
very soon. My friend, Mr. Wauer, succeeded in getting such a
fire-making machine for some tobacca, but I suppose he will not
make use of it for making fire as long as he has matches in his
possession. I have also been asked if these blacks are given to
drink fire-water. lam happy to say that no such thing is known
among them at Balebi, and every right thinking man will wish
with me that intoxicating drinks may never come near them.
Before concluding these notes about the poor aborigines, the
kings and queens we have met—these were rather numerous, for
I was introduced to one king, who could niece five queens, all his
wives, before me —I must mention that through kind arrange-
ments made before my arrival, two bales blankets, he-lan-kits in
the black people’s dialect, had been secured and were kept for us
to distribute to all those who wished to take them, and also a piece
of turkish red, which was cut up into small stripes, like ribbons,
and distributed as head ornaments. It was a most cheerful pro-
cession when we, accompanied by some of the young gentlemen
fromYilele,went out to the camps with the blankets and red stripes
and a lot of sweet potatoes, surrounded by a great number of
blacks, until they had formed themselves in tribal order before the
palm leaf mia-mias, when we began to decorate each man, woman
or child with a nice blue u belankit ” and tied the red ribbon
round their flourishing heads. That there are dishonest men
found among all classes of people was proved to us in a remark-
able manner. An old sour-looking man, to whom a ribbon had
been bestowed, made many signs to get another, but knowing
that he had already got his, we wished to discover where he had
secreted it. Now, the man had neither coat or trousers pockets
to put it in, and the mouth was also free; it turned out that he
bad put it carefully under his left arm, from whence itdropped when
we lifted up the arm, which created great merriment among all,
he looked as if he could have speared all of us in his
great disappointment. I cannot describe the pleasure we felt in
seeing the poor things so immensely happy, and to hear the two
"English words repeated over and over again, “ very good, very
good, mamee very good. Ya wohl mein Heir, mamee very good,”
and when we left after n week’s sojourn, and I saw them around
<us in great numbers, I could only say,“ the harvest truly is great,”
for we had representatives of sixteen different tribes before us;
'*• the harvest is great, but there are no laborers, and oh Lord,
*end laborers into the harvest! and Thy kingdom come 1 ”


THE LABOR TRADE.
IM? HE general “ labor question ”of Queensland is of such an
pjip intricate nature, embracing so many different kinds of in-
terests, and involving serious social, political, and commercial com-
plications, that it is almost an impossibility, at a distance, to form
a correct idea how matters really stand. From the press and the
platform in this and other countries, expressions of opinion for and
against the labour business have gone forth with great vigor, and
in well-considered arguments, which generally lead to conclusions
quite in accordance with the given information. In travelling,
however, through the country, hearing the opinion of well-in-
formed men on both sides, and, above all, by making personal
observations on the various points of interest, things appear very
often in a very different light than they originally seemed to do.
It is a matter of great importance to get a little experience of the
tropical climate, to meet the planters and their overseers, to see
the fields upon which the men are engaged, and especially to get
some knowledge about the laborers both during the time of work
and also when they are at rest. The most serious and grievous
part of the whole labor business is certainly the South Sea labour
traffic —the “ blackbirding” of the poor Kanakas until their arrival
at Queensland, and the death rate amongst them whilst they are
employed as laborers. On these points I shall make a few re-
marks in due time, but I will proceed just now with the general
question. It is of course very well known that the industry or
fme labor itself, consists in the cultivation of the sugar cane and
the preparation of the same into sugar.
The plantations or sugar fields are smaller or larger tracts of the
richest land, from a few to many thousands of acres along the
river banks in the coast districts. The plantations had first to be
cleared from the dense scrub and trees which flourished beyond
description in the splendid soil of the tropical regions. After the
clearing, preparation of the ground, planting the cane, and
keeping it in order until it can be brought to the mill, an immense
deal of labor is required and even at the mill itself many handa
are needed to attend to the various duties until the sugar can be
bagged and sent away. In many instances the owners of the plan-
tations reside in other colonies, or in Europe, and the work is
Carried on under able managers and overseers, who are under
great responsibilities and have a very great deal of work to per-
form. Skilled workmen and laborers in the more important parts
of the work under the overseers, are nearly in all instances white
men, and next to them as free laborers, though I believe the
Kanakas or “ boys ” are better workmen, are


THE CHINESE.
very considerable proportion of the labourers on the planta-
g|s|| tions and other places are Chinamen, who. strictly speaking
do not come under the Government regulations of the labour con-
tracts. They are not brought from China in labour vessels at
the expense of the planters, but are free immigrants to the colony.
Their numbers seem to be very great, for they are found in hund-
reds on the plantations, and in towns and country places they
really form a very considerable part of the whole population, and
have a large portion of the trade in their hands. I made enquiry
as to their probable numbers, but did not succeed in getting the
wished for information, though it is certain that in some places
one seems to be surrounded by the various grades, from the
hewer of wood, the carrier of water, the gardener, the miner, the
contractor, to the merchants and doctors of medicine. As the
influx of Chinese into the colony of Queensland at one time
seemed to rise to an alarming degree, the Government in-
troduced a poll-tax of thirty pounds per head, which may have
had some influence in reducing the number of immigrants from
China, but taking it as a whole, the result did not come up to
the general expectation. They still come in large numbers, pay
their tax and go under their own contractors in gangs of 30, 50,
or 100, to clear large tracts of scrub land for new plantations, or
work in the fields almost in the same manner under their Chinese
bosses. The Government put a considerable duty on rice, which
is the main substance of the food of the Mongolian, in order to
keep them out of the country, but it had in reality the opposite
•effect, for the cunning Celestial knew at once how to meet the
•difficulty, namely, by growing a good article of rice himself in
’the colony, and by so doing introduced a new article of produce
■at the same time. I do not wish to make any remarks here about
’their propensities to gambling, opium smoking, idolatry, and
•other evils, nor of their diseases, especially that of leprosy; all
ithat they need is the elevating influence c£ Christianity, with the
regenerating gospel of Jesus Christ.
I have seen great numbers of Chinese in the different towns of
-North Queensland, I have made observations about them during
ithe time of work in the sugar fields, have conversed with them
aii| their encampments, for they always keep by themselves, that
dihey may not be disturbed in their manners nor in their good
•appetites, which is a very important thing with them; I have
■travelled with many of them on board ship, and I found them as
•quiet and as decent as could be expected, perhaps only the boss
showing his dignity by answering your question, which he


evidently did not, understand, with the usual <f me no savee, sir,”
or perhaps the cunning doctor coolly saying in reference to some
kind of illness or complaint, “ all Austlalian too mnchee dlinkee,”
which actually happened to a well-known traveller at Cooktown
last year. As labourers in North Queensland, where the heat is
so great, the Chinese are certainly a very useful class of people,
and I suppose will not get or try to get any political influence for
a long time to come, but as a very considerable fraction in the
total influx of inferior races, they may, with out doubt, contribute
their share to the general lowering of the standard of morals and
civilisation in the colony.
After these statements on the above subject, I wish to say a
few words Asiatic labourers.
ASIATIC LABOURERS.
I come next to deal with this class, who are, in the strictest
sense, brought into the colony under the Government regulations,
and who have to comply with the terms of their contracts, which
they fully understand, sign, and make declaration to keep. Of
course, the contract is binding on the planters or employers as
well as on the laborers, and all should therefore go on well,which,
however, is not always the case. I learned from a conversation
with the Governor on the subject of the labour trade, that as far
as these labourers were concerned, the case differed greatly from
that ot the Kanakas, inasmuch as the people from the islands of
the Pacific were brought over to the colony under the colonial
government regulations only—for no government exists on the
islands—but the Asiatic labourers entered into their contracts
under most carefully considered labour or Coolie laws from their
respective Governments, which fitted on to the laws and regula-
tions of Queensland, so that under these contracts no hardships or
injustice could take place. From this point of view it will easily
be understood that if those islands in the Pacific, which belonged
to nobody, had been annexed by Great Britain, or where British
colonies, this awful labour traffic with its cruelties to the Islanders
could not have taken place. Of course, in order to prevent injus-
tice and cruelty, the Queensland Government might have mono-
polised the whole business of the shipping, and not allowed any
other except Government vessels to have anything to do with the


engagements and carriage of the laborers, but this beautiful idea
falls to pieces as soon as real difficulties present themselves. The
Asiatic nationalities who take up such labor contracts are:—lst.
The coolies from India. These people have been accustomed to
such work and engagements for a considerable time, and can be
found at Mauritius, the West Indies, and in the British Settle-
ments in South America. 1 did not see many of them in Queens-
land, and have no idea what their number may be under contract
with planters. All the information I could get about them was
to the effect that they do not stand high in the list of usefulness
and energy for work. 2. The next are the Cingalese, who ap-
pear in their usual native dress, with their hair carefully
turned back and kept in order with the comb remaining in it, and
of course with the indispensable earrings as ornaments. We saw
them at work and at rest., and conversed with several of them.
From all our observations we came to the conclusion that they are
u the gentlemen ” among the indentured labourers of the colony.
We spent a few hours, at the house of an old neighbor of mine
from the Wimmera district, who possesses a plantation in the
north, on which he 'employs Cingalese only, and is quite satisfied
with them. These men are no doubt of a better class than many
other labourers, for they employ their leisure hours in reading
books, and they keep up regular correspondence with their rela-
tives in Ceylon. 3rd. The third class of Asiatic laborers are the
Malays, who appear to be in considerable numbers in the colony.
Of all the labourers under contract, I was informed that the
Malays are the lowest, and the description we received from a
planter, who had got one hundred of these men under the usual
official engagement, was certainly of a very deplorable nature.
They involved him in great losses, for out of the total number,
only thirty remained in his employ ; the others had all run away.
Those I saw seemed to me to be of a deceitful, treacherous and
untrustworthy character, whom I would not wish to see in great
numbers in this country, neither would I like to have much to do
with them, either in business or as labourers. Large numbers of
them are engaged in the pearl and beche-de-mer fisheries, and
come to Queensland as free men, but generally return with the
same vessels to their native land.
THE KANAKAS.
gigß black labourers from the South Sea Islands, generally
known as “the boys,’’ seem to be the best workers in the


plantations. They are considered reliable, tractable and easily
managed. They work along most cheerfully during the long
tours of the day appointed by their employers. Usually, they
are well supplied with food, and besides their board, bed, clothes,
medical attendance, and free passages from and to their native
islands to which they are entitled by the terms of the labour
regulations for the three years of their engagements, they should
get the sum of £lB, which should be paid in cash, but for which
they often received only a gun and some ammunition. On many
plantations they have not only the Sunday, but also the Saturday
afternoon fn e for rest and recreations of all kinds, which they
thoronghly enjoy among themselves, especially on those estates
where there are from 200 to 300 of their own countrymen from
the islands. The total cost of a labourer is about £3O a year,
which of course, includes all expenditure from first to last. Those
I have seen at work in the sugar fields or conversed with dnring
the time of rest seemed to me quite satisfied with their lot, which
I suppose is in reality often much better than their life on many
of the islands. Many of these labourers, who have served their
time, re-engage themselves for the same work, which may be
taken as a certain proof that they are satisfied with the treat-
ment they receive and the work they have to perform.
Besides those indentured labourers, there are a considerable
number of free “ boys,” who have come to the colony as immi-
grants, but have paid for their own passages themselves, and are
therefore under no obligation to any one, for which reason they
are at liberty to go into any service they like. As general ser-
vants they seem to give great satisfaction to their masters, and
have made the colony their home for good. I met a good many
of these people, and both from their cheerful manner and their
own statements to me I felt convinced that their change from th#
islands has been a good one. These and other circumstances in-
duced me to get more, and above all, real, official information
about these free Kanakas, for which reason I made use of an in-
troduction to the head office at Brisbane, and there I received
most pleasing and interesting particulars about them. On inquiry
as to how much wages these servants generally receive, I was
told that the amounts ranged from ten to twenty-five shillings a
week, according to their ability and the work they perform.
When I asked if they spent their money in the way many of the
Australian natives do, or if they saved anything, I was glad to
hear that many of them put their money into the savings bank at
five per cent, interest on their deposits, and that this banking
institution was kept at the very office where I made the inquiry.
Being curious not only to hear but also to see, I expressed a wish


to see the bank books, if that was not asking too much, and in
a most friendly manner 275 savings bank books, all of course
belonging to free Kanakas, were placed before me, from which I
observed that the deposits amounted from one to four hundred
pounds sterling, and I also heard that several had taken up land
and did very well as free selectors. One of these selectors, Sam
Tadrane, who is often called Samuel Crowther, after the venerable
black bishop in Africa, has been known to me for a number of
years through a letter which I received from him in reference to
the mission work among the Aborigines at Stewart’s Creek, near
Townsville, where he has 35 acres near the Aboriginal reserve,
set aside for the different tribes in that locality. Sam has been a
convert of the Church of England mission on his native island,
and was well acquainted with the late Bishop Patteson, and
speaks of him with the deepest respect. Besides maintaining him-
self by the cultivation of bananas and pine apples on his land, he
finds time for, and pleasure in, keeping a school for Aboriginal
children. He has often had from twenty to thirty such wild
native youngsters in his school, and he does a great deal of good
to them in his cheerful and devoted way, so that the blacks are
really very fond of their black teacher from another country. I
spoke with a good many of these blacks, and they all expressed
themselves greatly pleased with “ Sam’s ” kindness to them, and
his perseverance in his work. As this Kanaka is at present doing
the only mission work in Queensland, I could not omit to mention
his name and speak of his work in connection with the other
pleasing statements regarding the Kanaka “ labour question,” of
which we have heard so much that is really very bad. If nothing
else was known, then all would be good and encouraging, both
for the islanders and their employers, but alas, all is not sunshine,
and the darkness has overshadowed the light to a very largo ex-
Whilst we were staying at Maryborough, the centre of a
flourishing sugar-growing locality, I witnessed the arrival of the
labour vessel Rhoderick Dliu, coming direct from the islands with
a considerable number of Kanakas on board. I saw the men
themselves, and heard their cheerful chattings and yabberings,
according to the various languages in which they were born, and
observed the officers of the Government among them preparing
for disembarkation. I felt certain that everything was done in
the strictest order, and in full compliance with all the regulations
in force for the careful management of those men, but I could not
help letting my mind wander for a little moment across tho ocean
to the islands from which these men had come and thinking of
the parting scenes from those near and dear to them/ Of course,


it is said that it is their own choice, that they are ignorant hea-
then, and have no refined feelings in such matters, but if we only
could witness the distress of parents, who see their boys going
away, perhaps never to return again, of wives, to have to look in
vain for their husbands, and of children to see their fathers going
away with little prospect of meeting them again, I have no doubt
that things would appear in a very different light, I have seen
the tears and heard the lamentations of God’s servants from the
islands in reference to that labour traffic, and besides that, we
may ask, “ who is not acquainted with the reasons of the cruel
murders of such noble men as Bishop Patteson and Commodore
Goodenough ?” We have often heard with sorrow of the so-called
“ blackbirding ” labour trade, which certainly is a very dark spot
on the progress of civilisation in this beautiful southern hemis-
phere.
I have before me the report of the late Royal Commission ap-
pointed bv the Queensland Government, stating clearly how the
kidnapping on at least thirty four islands had been carried on by
a number of vessels in a cruel and deceptive manner, and in short
shewing that on many points this traffic is essentially bad.
Neither the planters, nor the Government, nor the laws of the
colony could be blamed for these actions, and as soon as the facts
had been exposed, the Gover-ment at once acted in a just and
noble manner in returning over four hundred of the poor deluded
Kanakas to their island homes. Everything was done on board
the steamer Victoria to make the return voyage of the islanders
easy, although there were great difficulties with that voyage and
the landing of the men on their respective islands. Personally,
I took a very great interest in the whole matter, for the sake of
the poor fellows, and also as my old esteemed friend, Dr. P.
Smith, formerly medical officer at the Yarra Bend Asylum, had
undertaken the medical attendance on board of that vessel. I
visited the ship about an hour before sailing, and would have
gone myself on that voyage around to the many heathen islands,
especially to the eastern coast of New Guinea, but my time was
too short to do so.
The Government of Queensland has since acted with great
promptitude in regard to the whole question, and has carried a
measure through Parliament curtailing at once the traffic, and
providing for its abolition altogether in about five years’ time.
Truly it may be said in regard to this traffic as it was done in
days of old, but under other circumstances: “ Behold the feet of
them who have buried slavery in other parts of the world are at
the door to bury this also.”
Having thus stated my opinion in reference to the labour traffic


in the islands of the Pacific, I now wish to make a few brief
observations on the subject as it stands in the plantations of
Queensland, which will appear in my next.
THE KANAKAS.
■HERE are from 12,000 to 18,000 Kanakas working in the
sugar fields. They are easily managed, and of a tractable
and kind disposition, but ignorant and superstitious, and, with
few exceptions uncared for in regard to education and evangelisa-
tion or moral training. Of course, the islanders speak many
different languages, and the teacher who wishes to instruct them,
should know them, or otherwise his labour would be in vain.
Christian planters certainly pay attention to the spiritual welfare
of their working men, but they can only do it in the languages
they know, of which we found a noble example at the Vilelo
plantation, where the managers keep regular services on Sunday,
according to the forms of the Church of England and the over-
seer, in turns, according to the forms of the Presbyterian Church
and also Sunday School is kept by the daughters of the planters
in a very able manner. I myself preached in two languages
several times, and baptised three little children at that pleasant
place. But all this cannot reach the labourers, neither those from
Asia or from the islands, imd with even the best intentions on the
part ol the planters, it is almost impossible to attend to the Kana-
kas, Chinese and Asiatics. I asked a young Christian planter of
the South, who had kindly brought us in his buggy from Been-
leigh to a plantation on the Albert river,where we saw a number of
Kanakas working among the sugar cane, what was done for the
spiritual and moral good of these men, and he informed me in
yery clear words,“ Nothing at all! ” This reminded me of the
•days when, more than 150 years ago, the Moravian missionaries
went to the slaves on the West Indian Islands and to Surinam
to preach the gospel of Jesus to these people under much more
•difficult circumstances, and were successful, and why should not
a similar work be carried on in Queensland under much more
favourable conditions ? There are plantations with more than 300
Kanakas employed in the fields,and all of a willing mind, and.yet no-
thing is done. These,as much as the Aborigines, are in need of edu-
cation and religious training that their immortal souls may be raised


and elevated. So great a field, ripe for the harvest, should not he
overlooked by the churches and the missionary societies, as many of
them, perhaps, are not aware of it. There are groundless objec-
tions raised, such as, “ these men are tired after their work, and
need rest.” Of course they do, but have they not the whole of
Sunday ? and an hour or two of instruction would cheer them up
and do them a world of good. “ They are only three years on one
plantation, and that is too short a time for doing real good to
them,” Bat three years is really a good long time to make them
well acquainted with the truth as it is in Jesus, and at the same
time, it is not supposed that the three years shall end their lives.
I consider it a very favourable time for bringing them under the
influence of true religion, and especially as the conversion of the
soul is not a work of time but a work of God’s Holy Spirit. It
is, moreover, said that such teaching would do them no real good,
that it would enlighten them on some points, but at the same
time it would make them rebellious against their surroundings,and
thus turn them into bad workers. I daresay there is a shadow o£truth
in that statement, but only a shadow. That was exactly the state-
ment made by planters in other lands, and yet the progress of
civilization and humanity broke through these barriers and
triumphed. Such objections are not in accordance with the free,
enlightened and glorious spirit of England, nor of progressive,
Australia. Another very much exaggerated objection is raised by
by the statement that “ the missionary Kanakas are no good.”
I have met that objection in the North in the following way:—
Ist. —I suppose that it is among the Kanakas very much the same
as among white Christians people, for they who call themselves;
Christians are not all what their name signifies ; if it were so, then
there wouuld be nobody in prison, and no evil committedamong the
so-called Christian communities. 2nd. Perhaps the missionary
boys are too much enlightened in reference to the quantity of
work required and the proportion it bears to the money paid for
such labor. 3rd. I met a married couple who live a Christian
consistent life, and were highly praised for their good and faith-
ful lives and conduct by their master and mistress ; and Samuel
Tadrane is another which proves the groundlessness of the objec--
tion in this respect. In regard to the difficulty arising from
the numerous languages spoken by the Kanakas I feel sure from
my argument with our missionary brethren in the South Sea, that
my practice among the Aborigines has been the right one, namely,
that there should be classes for youths of both sexes in which the
English language should be taught so that ere long the whole
English literature, including above all God’s Word, would be open
to them. I believe if this plan had been adopted years ago, this


labor trade would have turned out quite differently. There would
be no deceiving these people, as has been done so often. Then there
would be no difficulty in carrying on missions among them in this
Colony, for clergyman and others could do it in the course of their
ministrations. Ministers of religion could even visit the islands
and take occasional part in the ministrations of the gospel, and
the islands themselves could be fields of fair commercial dealings
and peaceable transactions between the different races. I know
all the difficulties connected with it, but still the good of such a
gradual work would have great benefits for the Kanakas. I have
tried the plan and found it most useful and successful among the
Aborigines, and would do so again if I were placed in such cir-
cumstances as those stated above.
COMPLICATIONS.
■§pS|EFOTIE I conclude these remarks on the labor question, I
HIP wish once more to refer to the commercial, political and
social complications which surround the same, and which will b®
very difficult to solve to the satisfaction of all parties. 1. It is
generally admitted that the work in the sugar plantations in th®
tropical climate must be performed by tropical people, and that
the white man cannot endure the pressure of heat for a long
time. To superintend the work is, of course, quite another thing,
but to stand in the sugar fields as if in a hot vapour bath, and do
the work for any length of time seems, for Europeans, out of the
question. 2. The low price realised for the produce will not
permit high wages to be paid to the labourers, and only black men
do the work at a cheaper rate, and can do it for less. I have
heard three very interesting suggestions advanced to meet this
point. The first comes from the labouring classes, especially
trades unions, objecting entirely to the lowering of wages in any
kind of work. The second is that if the growing of cane and the
manufactory of sugar is not sufficient to pay regular wages, then
don’t grow sugar at all, at least not just now until it will pay
better. The next goes beyond my understanding, namely, that
the value of money is rising in general, and hence the fall of
prices in produce and of labour. 3. The political difficulty loom-
ing in the distance, for, if so many of the inferior races as they are
called, come into the colony, many will remain, and in due time
will get votes and will ultimately swamp the white population and


perhaps turn it oat of the country, which is meant to be the her-
itage for us and our children. This may be the extreme views of some
but at the same time it is openly stated, and has already raised
many in the north to desire a separation from the south. Wise
men in the political world may understand that better. I don’t,
and am just as happy in my political ignorance. 4. The last is
the social difficulty, and this I am certain is the most important.
The introduction of large masses of the different races stated
above, will ere long tinge the coming generation with blood of an
inferior class, and so lower the general tone anl morals of the
country. The reply of others to this objection is a very weighty
one, namely, “ whali becomes of our great ideas in regard to the
elevation of those heathen nations and of the great standard of a
common brotherhood of all mankind ? ” But this can be carried
into effect in their own countries with much greater success. 5.
To these four different points I add one suggestion of my own,
namely, “ Why not endeavor to befriend the many thousands of
Aborigines in North Queensland, who live in their own country
an d can be made very useful if the right means are adopted, and
law and gospel be joined together?” It would be a glorious
thing in the sight of God and man, and from the success attained
at Vilele, I feel sure that it can be done. In my official report
to the Premier of the colony of Queensland I pointed out the
same proposition and only hope that it may be adopted.
CONCLUSION.
SN the day of our arrival at the Vilele sugar plantation, in
the Bloomfield district, we were privileged to see the first
work performed by the new and really splendid sugar mill, and I
obtained a sample of the first sugar produced on that fine estate.
It would give me pleasure to give a short account of the sugar
growing and manufacturing of the article from the planting,
cleaning, threshing and cutting of the cane to the crushing of the
same, and the boiling of the juice until it reaches the vacuum,
and at last the centrifugal pans, from which the ready and refined
sugar is bagged off and sent to the market. I would have liked
also to have said a few words about the most beautiful vegation
in the really charming scrub country near Bloomfield and on the
road to Cooktown, where the fan and other varieties, of palm trees
flourish, and where the stately cedar and the venerable Banian tree
(fans religiosa ) are laced and festooned together with gigantic


creepers, covered with the most magnificent flowers over which
flutter beautiful butterflies shining in lovely blue, red, green, and
yellow colors, so that you could fancy you had been transferred
into a fairy land. The finest tropical passion flowers in pink, red
and white wind their way up through the wild bananas, and the
fern, and the fig tree on which fruit dangles in large clusters,
meet your eye on every side, and when you take a seat under the
giant ficus rsligiosa and look up to enjoy the lovely green shade of
the large palm leaves, and you look about you on the ground,
which is covered with all kinds of nuts and beans, you can scarcely
believe that you are in Australia. Taking a relreshing, cool drink
out of the Fritz creek, which flows down hum the high moun-
tains, one gazes about and is really charmed, but whilst you
gather up the figs and the chesnuts, and the beans, you must be
very careful not to come too near the urtica gigas, the nasty sting-
ing tree, or that lovely looking, horrible fanlike creeper called the
lawyer, which will certainly catch hold of your clothes with its
sharp barbed hooks and you will feel, in the midst of fragrant and
charming surroundings, that you are indeed in the grasp of “ the
lawyer.” I collected many kinds of seeds, from the three feet long
Moreton Bay bean to the fragrant nutmeg, and flowers in abun-
dance. I likewise brought home with me some of the lovely
butterflies of that district besides some beautiful birds ofParadise
which had been brought over from Port Moresby, all of which
will make fine additions to my curiosities at Ramahyuck. You
feel sorry to leave the land on which grow the mangoes, the
guavas, the pine apple the custard apple, the ginger, the coffee,
the tea, the sugar, the rice, the banana, the indigo, the nutmeg',
the allspice, the arrowroot, the cinnamon, the citron, etc. ; a land
where you can see the coral tree, the rain tree, the quinine tree,
the horse radish tree, the umbrella tree, and endless other kinds,
such as the iron tree, the blood tree, and the chesnut, but you look
about that wonderful beauty of nature and you join in the words
of Bishop Heber, “ every prospect pleases,” but you must add,
<i but only man is vile,” when yon behold the original inhabitants
of that country. Nature produced wonderfully lovely enjoyments
for the good of man, but nature cannot change the hearts and
lives of man. All that is needed is the grace of God and the
Gospel of Salvation for these poor people, and for that reason, and
that alone, I had to travel in those northern regions, but could at
the same time greatly enjoy all the wonders of God’s beautiful
world both by land and by sea.
Much as I would like to expatiate on these subjects, I must
come to a conclusion, and after a hearty farewell from our dear
friends at the Yilele plantation, my readers will have to follow ua


again on board the little Wairril, and sail, on a beautiful after-
noon, back to Cooktown. Our stay there was only a short one,
but all in connection with my mission could be arranged to our
satisfaction before we left for the south. I shall never forget the
kindness we received from many people, and I wish them all
God’s blessing for it. We took our passage in the steamer Glan-
worth, and sailed in her to Brisbane. Mr.Wauer, having soon to
leave for Europe, left me here, and on my arrival in Melbourne I
found him waiting for me to arrange about a visit to Ramahyuck,
I visited Toowoomba and many other places in the neighbourhood
of Brisbane, addressed many meetings, and received much kind-
ness from both lay and clerical brethren, which was very cheering
to me. The Lord remember them for good ! I again sailed in the
Glanworth to Sydney, and from there I came to Melbourne by
train, where I got a hearty welcome from many of my friends.
At home here in Ramahvuck we had rejoicings, for the Lord had
prospered my journey and brought me back in safety. To Him
be all praise and honor for his goodness and loving kindness
during my long wanderings and journeys by sea and land. I felt
the great importance of my journey when I left, and I feel it still
more now that it is finished, and only hope good results may fol-
low for the salvation of the poor heathen and the extension of
God’s kingdom upon earth. To Him be glory for evermore !
Farewell.
POSTSCRIPT.
|»|j||R Hagenauer has received the following interesting newa
pi||| from Queensland since the above narrative was written :—-
“The Premier, Mr. Griffith, stated in Parliament that it was the
intention of the Government to establish aboriginal reserves at
Bloomfield and at Cooktown, and that the sum of £lOOO had
been granted for that purpose, official notification having already
been sent to the localities.” This is another proof of the prompt
action of the Honorable Mr. Griffith, and it is to be hoped that
the churches will not remain behind.


I— V-
3 1508 002A7491


