

COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING CONTROL BOARD
REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
TO THE
POSTMASTER-GENERAL
APPLICATIONS FOR LICENCES FOR
COMMERCIAL TELEVISION STATIONS
IN THE
SOUTHERN AGRICULTURAL AREA
AND THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL AREA
OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
By Authority:
A. J. Arthur, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
(Printed in Australia)
129/66.




COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING CONTROL BOARD
REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
TO THE
POSTMASTER-GENERAL
APPLICATIONS FOR LICENCES FOR
COMMERCIAL TELEVISION STATIONS
IN THE
SOUTHERN AGRICULTURAL AREA
AND THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL AREA
OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
By Authority:
A. J. Arthur, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra
(Printed in Australia)
129/66.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Part I. —Introductory
Part II. —Particulars of Application
Part 111. —Observations
Part IV.—Recommendation
Appendices—
A. Notice by the Postmaster-General
B. Form of Application
C. Reference by the Postmaster-General


AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING CONTROL BOARD
Report and Recommendation to the Postmaster-General on
Applications for Licences for Commercial Television Stations
in the Southern Agricultural Area and the Central Agricul-
tural Area of Western Australia.
PART 1.-—INTRODUCTORY
1. The Australian Broadcasting Control Board now submits
its report and recommendation on applications received by the
Postmaster-General for the grant of a licence for a commercial
television station in each of the undermentioned areas of Western
Australia: —
Southern Agricultural Area.
Central Agricultural Area.
2. The Broadcasting and Television Act 1942-1965 provides
as follows:
“Section 81.—(1.) The Minister may, subject to this Act, grant to a
person a licence for a commercial broadcasting station or for a commercial
television station upon such conditions, and in accordance with such form,
as the Minister determines.
( I a. ) A licence for a commercial television station shall not be granted
except to a company formed within the limits of the Commonwealth or a
Territory of the Commonwealth and having a share capital.
Section 82.—(1.) Before granting a licence under the last preceding
section, the Minister shall, by notice published in the Gazette , invite
applications for the grant of the licence.
(2.) An application for the grant of a licence shall be in accordance
with a form supplied by the Minister and shall be made in such manner,
and within such time, as the Minister specifies in the notice.
Section 83.—(1.) The Minister shall refer applications made in pur-
suance of the last preceding section to the Board for its recommendation
as to the grant of the licence.
(2.) Before making a recommendation, the Board shall hold an inquiry
in accordance with this Act into the applications.”
The provisions relating to inquiries by the Board are contained in
Division 3 of Part 11. of the Act.
3. Pursuant to Section 82 (1.) of the Act, the Minister, by
notice published in the Gazette dated 26th November, 1964, a copy
of which notice is contained in Appendix A, invited applications
for the grant of licences for commercial television stations in the
Southern Agricultural and Central Agricultural Areas together
with the other areas as set out in Appendix A, namely the Bega-
Cooma, Murray Valley and Spencer Gulf North Areas. (The
applications for the licences for the Bega-Cooma, Murray Valley


and Spencer Gulf North Areas were the subject of a separate
report and recommendations to the Minister by the Board, dated
21st September, 1965.) The notice directed that the applications
should be lodged with the Secretary of the Board not later than Ist
March, 1965. A copy of the form of application supplied to appli-
cants, in accordance with Section 82 (2.) of the Act, is contained
in Appendix B. This was the second occasion on which applications
had been invited for the Southern Agricultural and Central Agricul-
tural Areas. Applications were previously invited in November,
1961, but no applications were received.
4. Seven applications were received in response to the Minister’s
invitation of 26th November, 1964, in respect of the Southern and
Central Agricultural Areas. The applications were as follows: —
Southern Agricultural Area
South Western Telecasters Ltd.
Swan Television Ltd.
TVW Ltd.
TVW Ltd. and Swan Television Ltd., jointly.
Central Agricultural Area
Swan Television Ltd.
TVW Ltd.
TVW Ltd. and Swan Television Ltd., jointly.
5. Pursuant to Section 83 (1.) of the Act, the Minister, by
instrument in writing dated 22nd April, 1965, a copy of which is
contained in Appendix C, referred the above applications to the
Board for its recommendation as to the exercise by him of the
powers conferred by sub-section (1.) of Section 81 of the Act. Sub-
sequently, all applications, with the exception of the application
by South Western Telecasters Ltd. for the Southern Agricultural
Area licence, were withdrawn. The Board, in accordance with
the requirements of Section 20 of the Act, gave notice of the time
and place of the commencement of the inquiry into the applica-
tion of South Western Telecasters Ltd. for the Southern Agri-
cultural Area, by letter to the applicant, and also by public notice


published in newspapers circulating in the area concerned. The
Board held the inquiry on 24th November, 1965, at the Board’s
office at 373 Elizabeth-street, Melbourne. Mr. Richard Searby
appeared to assist the Board at the inquiry; Mr. H. N. Wardle
appeared for the applicant. An official transcript of the proceedings
was made by the Commonwealth Reporting Branch.
PART I!.—PARTICULARS OF APPLICATION
Constitution
6. South Western Telecasters Ltd. has an authorized capital of
£500,000, comprised of 2,000,000 shares of ss. each. In its appli-
cation for the Bunbury licence the company stated that, if granted
the licence, it would issue a total of 900,000 shares. On 7th
September, 1965, approval was given by the Minister for the
company to reduce its proposed issue from 900,000 to 720,000
shares because of a reduction in capital needs arising from shar-
ing arrangements with the national station and favorable terms
from equipment suppliers. The 720,000 shares, excluding 18,000
shares reserved for employees, have been allotted as follows: —
* Australian & International Insurances Ltd. . . 41,000
& Insurance Ltd. . . . . 41,000
Harris, Scarfe & Sandovers Ltd. . , . . 35,000
Nicholsons Broadcasting Services Pty. Ltd. . . 35,000
Goldfields Pictures Ltd. . . . . 18,000
Sunny West Co-operative Dairies Ltd. . . 18,000
Others (original sponsors, residents of view-
ing area and other W.A. residents) . . 514,000
If the application for the licence for the Southern Agricultural
Area is successful, it is proposed to issue an additional 300,000
shares, with preference being given to residents of the Southern
Agricultural Area.
* Underwriters.


The directors of the company are—
H. R. Golding (Chair-
man)
Farmer, Waterloo, via Bun-
bury.
A. G. Abbott
Medical Practitioner, Bun-
bury.
W. R. Clemenger
Managing Director of Gold-
fields Pictures Ltd.; Director
of several other companies,
principally motion picture
theatre operators.
Managing Director of Bon
Marche Emporium, Bun-
bury.
Craddock
F
F
L
J.
B. Craig
Flanagan
Farmer, Dardanup.
Motor Vehicle Distributor,
Bunbury. Director of South
West Printing and Publish-
ing Co. Ltd. (a wholly -
owned subsidiary of West
Australian Newspapers
Ltd.).
Norton
Farmer, Benger. Chairman of
Directors of Sunny West Co-
operative Dairies Ltd., Bun-
bury. Deputy Chairman of
the Australian Dairy Pro-
duce Board.
Sandover
Chairman and Managing
Director of Harris, Scarfe
and Sandovers Ltd. Chair-
man of Directors or Direc-
tor of a number of other
companies, including Swan
Portland Cement Ltd., West
Australian Trustee, Execu-
tor & Agency Co. Ltd.
and Vickers Hoskins Pty.
Ltd. Local Director of the
National Mutual Life
Association of Australia
Ltd.
Stodart
Director of Nicholsons Broad-
casting Services Pty. Ltd.
and Nicholsons Proper-
ties Ltd.


Details of Principal Shareholders
7. Australian & International Insurances Ltd. con-
ducts all classes of general insurance, except life insurance. It has
an issued and paid capital of £309,067, comprising 618,134
ordinary shares of 10s. each. Approximately 30 per cent, of the
shares are held in equal holdings by three overseas interests. Sir
Arthur Warner and family hold 38,600 (6.2 per cent.) of the issued
shares.
Underwriting & Insurance Ltd., a company writing all
classes of insurance, has a paid-up capital of £102,200 in £1
shares. Principal shareholders are Australian and International
Insurances Ltd. (24,603), The Ethel Warner Trust (16,870),
Consolidated Insurances of Australia Ltd. (14,603), Pye Indus-
tries Ltd. (10,743) and Riunione Adriatica di Sicurta Societe
per Azioni, Italy (10,000). Consolidated Insurances of Aus-
tralia Ltd. has a paid-up capital of £103,274, the principal share-
holders being Riunione Adriatica di Sicurta Societe per Azioni,
Italy (180,000), A. & I. Insurances Ltd. (120,000) and Peter
R. Warner (45,000). The position seems to be that 34 per cent,
of the capital in Underwriting & Insurance Ltd. is controlled
overseas.
Harris, Scarfe and Sandovers Ltd., an engineering and
retail hardware company with branches in Perth and provincial
cities in Western Australia and in Darwin, is a wholly-owned
subsidiary of Electronic Industries Ltd. which has an issued
capital of £6,518,705 comprised of 1,905,399 “A” ordinary
shares of 10s. each, 7,843,577 “ B ” ordinary shares of 10s. each,
1,423,962 6i per cent, cumulative preference shares of £1 each
and 220,255 6 per cent, cumulative preference shares of £1 each
held by some 14,000 shareholders. Only the “ A ” ordinary shares
have full voting rights; Pye Ltd., of England, is in a position to
exercise 45 per cent, of the voting rights. The principal share-
holders of Electronic Industries Ltd. are as follows: —
A ” Ord.
(10s.)
“ B ” Ord.
61 % Pref.
(£1)
No. Held
6% Pref.
(£1)
No. Held
(10s.)
No. Held
No. Held
(in £s.)
445,144
Pye Ltd., England
869,788
20,500
Australian Mutual Provident
Society
28,943
322,205
14,606
351,283
Mutual Life and Citizens
Assurance Co. Ltd.
15,388
213,384
14,250
235,328
National Mutual Life Associa-
tion of Australia Ltd.
990 106,724
,484 10,400
695 285,682
111 41,151
123,218
26,166
203,241
170,442
143,188
Warner Family
330,484
A.N.Z. Nominees Ltd.
A. & I. Insurances Ltd.
61,378
82,092
7


In addition to the proposed interest of 5 per cent, of Harris, Scarfe
and Sandovers Ltd. in the applicant company, Electronic Indus-
tries Ltd. has the following interests in commercial television
stations: —14.9 per cent, in SES South East Area (South Aus-
tralia); 1 per cent, in WBQ Wide Bay Area (Queensland), a
proposed 5 per cent, interest in BKN Broken Hill and a proposed
14.6 per cent, interest in Spencer Gulf Telecasters Ltd., the com-
pany to which the licence for the Spencer Gulf North Area is to
be granted.
Nicholsons Broadcasting Services Pty. Ltd., a wholly-
owned subsidiary of Victorian Broadcasting Network Ltd., is the
licensee of commercial broadcasting stations 6PR Perth, 6CI
Collie and 6TZ Bunbury. Victorian Broadcasting Network Ltd.
has interests in a number of commercial television stations, namely,
GLV Latrobe Valley (97 per cent.), BTV Ballarat (5 per cent.),
BCV Bendigo (12.6 per cent.), STV Mildura (5 per cent.) and
TNT North Eastern Tasmania (2.4 per cent.).
Financial Proposals
8. The estimated cost of establishment of the station, on the
basis of the relay of programmes from commercial television station
BTW Bunbury was £167,000, including £8,500 pre-operational
expenses.
for each of the
The estimated income and costs of
first three years were—
operation
First Year
Second Year
Third Year
37,500
52,800
49,000
53,800
63,000
56,600
Income
Costs
Profit
Loss
6,400
15,300
4,800
It is estimated that it will be necessary to issue additional capital
of £75,000 to finance the establishment of the Southern Agricul-
tural Area station; equipment is to be obtained on terms and a bank
overdraft will be available.


The estimated income and costs for the combined operation
of the Bunbury and Southern Agricultural Area stations for the
first three years of operation were:—
Second Year
Third Year
First Year
Income
Costs
165,100
171,500
194,200
181,000
226,600
193,600
13,200
33,000
Profit
Loss
6,400
Programme Proposals
9. It was proposed that the weekly hours of transmission for
the first year would be 25 hours 30 minutes, rising to 30 hours in
the second year and to 35 hours in the third year. As it is proposed
that the programmes will be received on relay from commercial
station BTW Bunbury, the programmes will be identical with those
of station BTW except that it was proposed that some local news
and advertising would be transmitted separately from the Southern
Agricultural Area station.
Technical Proposals
10. It was proposed that a transmitter of 50 kW e.r.p. would
be co-sited with the national station on Mt. Barker, and that trans-
mitter equipment, the transmitter building and mast would be
shared with the national station. The applicant estimated a popula-
tion coverage of some 33,000 in the Southern Agricultural Area.
PART lII.—OBSERVATIONS
11. A feature of the application by South Western Telecasters
Ltd. is that the Southern Agricultural Area adjoins the Bun-
bury Area in respect of which area South Western Telecasters Ltd.
has already been authorized to provide a commercial television
service. The Bunbury station has not, however, yet commenced
operation and it is proposed that, if the company is successful in
this application, both stations will commence operations at about
the same time, with the Southern Agricultural Area station relaying
its programmes from the Bunbury station. The additional coverage
of some 32,000 people in the Southern Agricultural Area would
give a total population coverage in the two areas of approximately
95,000 which, it is expected, would enable the company to earn


adequate revenue from the combined operation. Figures sub-
mitted by the applicant, following a request by the Board at the
inquiry, concerning the estimated financial results of the com-
bined operation of the B unbury and Southern Agricultural Area
stations, indicate that the combined operation of the two stations by
South Western Telecasters Ltd. would be likely to be far more
successful than the operation of the Bunbury station alone. From
the Board’s examination of the matter, it is clear that the most
effective way of providing a commercial service to both the
Bunbury and Southern Agricultural Areas is by the joint opera-
tion of the two stations.
12. The Board had previously examined the extent of overseas
interests in the shareholdings of South Western Telecasters Ltd. in
connection with the grant to that company of the licence for the
Bunbury Area. It was clear that the grant of the licence to South
Western Telecasters Ltd. would not result in a contravention of
the provisions of Section 92d of the Broadcasting and Television
Act 1942-1965 which provides, in effect, that shares representing
not less than 80 per cent, of the issued capital of a licensee com-
pany shall be owned by residents of Australia or by companies
controlled by residents of Australia, and that shares representing
more than 15 per cent, of the issued capital of a licensee company
shall not be owned by a non-resident person or a company con-
trolled by non-resident persons. The grant of a licence to South
Western Telecasters Ltd. in respect of the Southern Agricultural
Area will also not result in any contravention of the Act.
PART IV.—RECOMMENDATION
13. The Board recommends that a licence for a commercial
television station in the Southern Agricultural Area be granted
to South Western Telecasters Ltd., subject to the allotment of the
additional capital of £75,000 being to the Minister’s satisfaction.
Dated this First day of February, 1966.
R. G. OSBORNE, Chairman.
J. M. DONOVAN']
D. MCDONALD
T. H. E. HEYES J
J. A. McNamara, Secretary


APPENDIX A
Commonwealth of Australia
Broadcasting and Television Act 1942-1964
NOTICE BY THE POSTMASTER-GENERAL
In pursuance of Section 82 of the Broadcasting and Television Act
1942-1964, I, Alan Shallcross Hulme, the Postmaster-General of the
Commonwealth of Australia, hereby invite applications for the grant of
a licence for a commercial television station in each of the areas specified
below: —
Bega-Cooma Area—New South Wales.
Murray Valley Area—Victoria,
Spencer Gulf North Area—South Australia.
Southern Agricultural Area—Western Australia.
Central Agricultural Area —Western Australia.
Applications for the licences shall be made in accordance with the
form supplied by me and obtainable from the Secretary, Australian Broad-
casting Control Board, 373 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne, C.l.
Applications shall be lodged with the Secretary of the Board not
later than the first day of March, 1965.
Dated this sixteenth day of November, 1964.
ALAN S. HULME,
Postmaster-General.
APPENDIX B
Commonwealth of Australia
Broadcasting and Television Act 1942-1964
APPLICATION FOR GRANT OF A LICENCE FOR A
COMMERCIAL TELEVISION STATION
The Secretary,
Australian Broadcasting Control Board,
373 Elizabeth Street,
Melbourne.
In pursuance of the provisions of the Broadcasting and Television Act
1942-1964, application is hereby made for the grant of a licence for a
commercial television station for the
area.
The particulars and information required by the form of application
supplied by the Minister are attached.
Name of Applicant.
Address
Signature ,
Dated this day of ....19....


Commonwealth of Australia
Broadcasting and Television Act 1942-1964
Application for the Grant of a Licence for a Commercial Television Station.
Particulars to be supplied by Applicant
An applicant for a licence shall supply the particulars or information
required by the following paragraphs. Such particulars and information
should be set out in separate numbered schedules of which eight copies
should be supplied—
1. State whether the application is made by a company or on behalf of
a company to be formed.
2. If the application is made by a company, state the name of the
company, the date and place of incorporation, and the address of the
registered office, and furnish—
(a) a copy of the memorandum and articles of association;
(b) if applicable, a copy of the prospectus or statement in lieu of
prospectus;
(c) details of the financial position of the company, including a
copy of the last balance sheet and a copy of the profit and
loss account and of the profit and loss appropriation
account for each of the last five years;
(d) a list of shareholders including the address and occupation
of each, the number and class of shares held, and the
amount paid up on each share. In any case where shares
are held on behalf of some other person, similar details
with respect to that person are also to be furnished;
(e) the names, places of residence and occupations of the directors
and principal officers of the company;
(f) details of the association of any director or principal officer
of the company with —
(i) any commercial television station;
(ii) any person, firm or company carrying on any
business;
(g) details similar to those required by the preceding sub-
paragraph (d) in respect of any company which is—
(i) the beneficial owner of five per cent, or more of the
shares in the applicant company; or
(ii) in a position to exercise control of five per cent.
or more of the voting rights in that company;
(h) a list of the directors of any company referred to in the pre-
ceding subparagraph (g);
(i) details of the association (either directly or indirectly through
other companies) of the applicant company or any share-
holder holding more than five per cent, of the shares in the
applicant company with —
(i) any commercial television station;
(ii) any person, firm or company carrying on any
business;


(iii) any other company, or company to be formed,
which is, or proposes to be, an applicant for a
licence for a commercial television station;
(j) the name (and details where not elsewhere supplied in the
application) of any person or company who, either alone
or by virtue of any association or arrangement would be
deemed to exercise control of the licence within the
meaning of Section 92a. and Section 92b. of the Act, if
the licence were granted to the applicant company;
(k) details of any shares in the applicant company which are
beneficially owned by persons who are not residents of
Australia or by companies controlled within the meaning
of Section 92b. of the Act by persons who are not residents
of Australia; and
(1) details of any proposed increase of the issued capital beyond
that issued at the date of the application, including details
of the proposed additional capital and shareholding together
with details of any changes which may result in relation
to the information provided under the preceding sub-
paragraphs.
If the application is made on behalf of a company to be formed, state
the proposed name of the company, and where it is to be incor-
porated, and furnish—
(a) a copy of the proposed memorandum and articles of
association;
(b) a copy of the proposed prospectus or statement in lieu of
prospectus;
(c) details of the proposed issued capital;
(d) a list of the proposed shareholders and other details similar
to those required under sub-paragraph (d) of paragraph
2; and
(e) all information relevant to the company proposed to be
formed, including details similar to those required under
sub-paragraphs (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j) and (k) of
paragraph 2.
Furnish details of —
(a) any documents, instruments, contracts, trusts, arrangements
or understandings relating to the ownership, operation or
control of the station or its facilities or any right or interest
therein; and
(b) any network arrangement entered into or proposed to be
entered into.
Furnish estimated costs, and the basis on which the costs are com-
puted, of the establishment of the station under the headings of—
(a) technical equipment;
(b) radiating structure;


(c) land and ancillary facilities;
(d) buildings;
(e) p re-operational expenses.
6. Furnish estimates and details of the basis on which the estimates are
made, of the income and cost of operation of the station for each
of the first three years.
7. Furnish details, supported by documentary evidence, of the capital
or funds available to meet the cost of—
(a) the establishment of the station; and
(b) the operation of the station for the first three years,
8. Furnish details of any proposals for recruiting and training staff,
together with particulars of the estimated staff required.
9. Furnish details of the proposed hours of service in the first three years
after the commencement of operations.
10. Furnish details of the proposed composition of programmes for the
first three years after the commencement of operations. (As far as
practicable, information under this heading should be supplied with
respect to such matters as —
(a) likely programme schedules;
(b) the manner in which programmes will be provided by the
station, i.e., whether by means of films, telerecordings,
video tape recordings, live programmes, programmes
received by the station on relay, or otherwise.)
Details should also be supplied as to the extent to which it is likely
that programmes produced in Australia will be used. In addition,
full information should be given as to the sources from which the
above-mentioned programmes will be obtained.
11. Furnish particulars of the technical facilities to be provided, covering—
(a) type and power of transmitter;
(b) height and gain of aerial system;
(c) studios;
(d) type and number of cameras; and
(e) telecine and/or video tape equipment.
12. Specify the proposed location of the transmitter and studios and the
estimated coverage of the station on the basis of the technical
equipment proposed.


APPENDIX C
BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION ACT 1942-1964
Reference by the Postmaster-General
In pursuance of the above Act, I, Alan Shallcross Hulme, Postmaster-
General, hereby refer to the Australian Broadcasting Control Board, for its
recommendation as to the exercise by me of the powers conferred by
sub-section (1.) of section 81 of the Broadcasting and Television Act
1942-1964, the following applications made in pursuance of the Notice
published by me in the Gazette dated 26th November, 1964, for licences
for commercial television stations in the undermentioned areas:—
Bega-Cooma Area —New South Wales
Canberra Television Ltd.
Television Wollongong Transmissions Ltd.
Southern United Telecasters.
Murray Valley Area —Victoria
Sunraysia Television Ltd.
Bendigo & Central Victoria Telecasters Ltd.
B. F. and P. F. O’Halloran, on behalf of a company to be formed.
Spencer Gulf North Area —South Australia
H. B. Welch and F. R. Smith, on behalf of Spencer Gulf Tele-
casters Ltd. (a company to be formed).
Southern Agricultural Area —Western Australia
South Western Telecasters Ltd.
TVW Ltd.
Swan Television Ltd.
TVW Ltd. and Swan Television Ltd., jointly,
Central Agricultural Area —Western Australia
TVW Ltd.
Swan Television Ltd.
TVW Ltd. and Swan Television Ltd., jointly.
Dated this 22nd day of April, 1965.
ALAN S. HULME,
Postmaster-General.
By Authority: A. J. Arthur, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.


3 1508 01624066 0


17


-
■
/
