

Pmv,
. J
REPORT ON WOLLONGONG HARBOUR,
By SIR JOHN GOODE.
Westminster Chambers, 9 Victoria-street, London, S. W.,
13 January, 1891.
The Chairman, Wollongong Harbour Trust, —
Sir,
In accordance with the intimation conveyed in my cablegram of 16th
ultimo, I beg to submit my Report with illustrative drawings, showing the works which
appear to me to be necessary in order to provide such shelter and berthage accommoda-
tion at Wollongong as will not only ensure the safety, at all times, of vessels employed
in the coal trade there, but will enable the loading of all classes of shipping to be carried
on with the utmost despatch, and without interruption from sea or other disturbances.
Drawings.
This Report is accompanied by three drawings, numbered 1,2, and 3 respectively.
No. 1 is a plan of the Bay of Wollongong, at a scale of 200 feet to the inch, whereon are
indicated by red colour and red crossed lines, respectively, the works of improvement to
which I shall refer in detail hereinafter.
No. 2 has been prepared from a coast survey in the Hydrographer’s Department,
with the use of which I have been favoured. It is intended to show the configuration
of the seaboard, more particularly to the northward of Wollongong, and the extent to
which shelter is afforded from that quarter by the Bellambi Great Reef.
No. 3 is a copy of the quantity drawing prepared here, upon which the estimates
given in this Report have been based. It shows the general character of the protective
works recommended for execution, subject, of course, to such modifications as may
appear desirable when preparing the working drawings and specification, after the
approval of the project. Ample information is, however, afforded on this sheet for the
clear understanding of the character of the proposed sheltering arms.
It is due to Mr. Coyle, M. Inst. C.E., who prepared the plans and documents
forwarded from the Colony, that I should here allude to the admirable manner in which
he performed this service, more especially in regard to the clear and concise memorandum
conveying particulars of the site and the general conditions appertaining thereto. These
particulars have considerably facilitated my grasp of the material points of the case.
Importance of Wollongong as a coaling centre.
The detailed information as to the great extent of the surrounding coal-field,
covering an area of upwards of 200 square miles, and of which the Bulli seam is esti-
mated to yield 768,000,000 tons of round marketable coal, the fine quality of the coal
generally as adapted for steam purposes, and the favourable position of the outcrop with
regard to seadevel, are prominently before me, having been obtained partly through the
kindness of Mr. John Biggar and others when I was in the Colony in 1885, and partly
from documents which your Board has caused to be transmitted to me.
Conditions under which the Coal Shipments of the District are now carried on.
Mr. Coyle states that of the ten collieries working in the district, the coal from
one is sent by rail to Sydney, seven ship from jetties run out into the sea, and two
ship at the Port of Wollongong. The nine collieries from which coal is shipped are
subject to vexatious delays and great loss during boisterous weather, in consequence of
the difficulty, and sometimes impossibility, of shipping coal from the imperfectly-protected
harbour at Wollongong or the unsheltered jetties along the coast.
9c 14—95-6


Up to the present time the output has been limited in consequence of this imper-
fect provision, which admits of the employment of small vessels only during fine weather.
It is anticipated that with a safe harbour at Wollongong, suitable for large class
and ocean steamers, the present output of the ten collieries referred to, viz., 702,000 tons
per annum, would be doubled in two years, and this w r ould appear to be a very low
estimate of increase.
The several collieries are connected with Wollongong, and with the shipping
jetties above referred to, by private railways. Excepting in one instance, all these private
lines cross the Government railway, which runs through the district for a length of nearly
40 miles, at distances varying from 10 chains to 4 miles from the coal outcrop along the
mountain side. Reference is made to this point to show that short connections only are
required between the private railways and the Government line, in order to place the
collieries in question in direct communication with the Port of Wollongong.
Feeling as I do that Wollongong is certainly destined to become the coal-shipping
port for the Southern Coal-field of New South Wales, as Newcastle is already for the
Northern field, and having regard therefore to what I consider must unquestionably be
the magnitude and importance of the coal trade to be ultimately carried on at this port
when proper facilities are provided, I have most carefully considered the several modes
of meeting the requirements which have suggested themselves in working out the design,
both as regards the outer sheltering works, and also the internal arrangements best
adapted for the readiest and most economical shipment of the coal.
The output of coal from the Newcastle field for the year 1889 is stated to have
been 2,624,328 tons, being an increase of 557,305 tons on the preceding year, and there
would appear to be no reason to doubt that with a good harbour at Wollongong the out-
put from that port would, within the next ten years, closely approximate to that from
Newcastle.
Other Mineral Resources.
Mr. Coyle remarks that, of the other mineral resources of the Illawarra district,
and their influence on the trade of the port of Wollongong in the future, the exten-
sive ironstone deposits only need be referred to. This matter has, I understand, been
taken up by a powerful British Syndicate, and is being investigated with a view to the
establishment of ironworks in the district.
JFave Force and Fxposure.
The worst weather experienced at Wollongong comes from south and south-
east. South-east gales bring the heaviest direct sea. The waves caused by southerly
gales are partially broken by the projecting headlands, and do not affect the port to the
same extent as those from south-east. Waves from south and south-east curl around
the promontory and its outlying rocks, and would thus strike the main sheltering, or
eastern breakwater, nearly broadside on.
Mr. Coyle observes that “ southerly gales are the most prevalent, but only about
once a year, in February or May, do they raise a heavy sea. South-easterly gales bring
in a high sea about twice a year between February and September. From the end of
August to the middle of April north-easterly winds prevail. On only two occasions,
however, during the past nineteen years have winds from this quarter caused heavy
waves, but in no instance have these been equal in magnitude to those from the south,
south-east, or east.”
There can be no question that any works which may be constructed at Wollon-
gong to provide shelter from southerly and south-easterly seas will be exposed to a
heavy and trying wave-stroke, and although these trials may not be of such frequent
occurrence as at some other ports, nevertheless an ample margin of strength and
stability must be provided to meet these emergencies when they arise.
The effect of waves falling on to the existing breakwater, sheltered as it is, and
in shoal water, cannot, as pointed out by Mr. Coyle, be taken, even in a limited degree,
as an exact measure of what would occur in the case of an outer protective arm, having
regard to the much more exposed position of the latter, and the considerably increased
depth in which it would be founded. Noth withstanding the favourable angle at which
seas strike the existing mole, and the fact that, in consequence of shoal ground, the
waves break before they reach that work, the loose concrete blocks of 23 tons each on
the seaward slope have occasionally been moved perceptibly during gales, although
beyond this movement the mole has been proved to possess sufficient stability.


In connection with this subject it has been suggested that a mole of the same cha-
racter as that which has withstood the effects of the sea at Port Victor would be suitable
for Wollongong. I am well acquainted with the first-named port, having reported on the
work there in 1877, and have since visited it. There can, I take it, be no question that
a breakwater at Wollongong, constructed in the position required to afford the necessary
shelter, would be exposed to a very much heavier and damaging wave-stroke than is the
Port Victor mole. The seas during south and south-west winds which prevail during
eight months of the year impinge on the latter at a very favourable angle ; moreover,
considerable protection is afforded by the outlying Seal Rock and the Spit which runs to
the landward of it. It would, therefore, in my opinion, be very delusive to rely on a
mole of the Port Victor character, and with its slopes, to successfully resist the more
severe trials to which such a work would be exposed at Wollongong.
Whilst unhesitatingly expressing the above opinion, I may be permitted to
add that it would be quite feasible to carry out a breakwater, constructed a pierres
perdues, to meet the requirements as far as shelter and stability are concerned ; in fact,
at Portland and at Table Bay I have executed large works of this class, exposed to ex-
ceptionally trying conditions. For reasons given above, and those to be referred to here-
after, I consider, notwithstanding the admirable material available, that this mode of
construction is not the proper one to adopt at Wollongong.
PROPOSED SHELTERING WORKS.
Conditions which determined the General Character of the Designs
The primary conditions which govern the size and configuration of the proposed
harbour and the positions of the sheltering arms are :
First:—The utilisation to the fullest extent of the protection afforded by Flagstaff
Point.
Second :—The provision of a work to afford thorough shelter from southerly
around to easterly seas.
Third: —The magnitude of the trade that will be eventually carried on, which
renders it most important to make the enclosed area as large as possible, the limit in this
case being determined by Fairy Reef, a large patch of rock which has only 2J fathoms
over it at low water.
Fourth : —The placing of the entrance so that, whilst allowing free ingress and
egress for the largest class of steamers in all weathers, it should be sufficiently sheltered
to exclude the heavy southerly and south-easterly seas; and
Fifth : —The arranging of the arms so that, by the prolongation of either or both,
the extent of overlap or shelter for the entrance, as well as its width—both highly im-
portant points—shall be regulated hereafter as experience may show to be necessary and
desirable when the works draw near completion
All these matters have been carefully considered from every point of view, and
the results are embodied in the design for the harbour and the two sheltering break-
waters which are indicated upon the accompanying Drawing No. 1.
East Breakwater.
By reference to the drawing it will be observed that the Main or East Breakwater
would commence near the north-east salient angle of Flagstaff Point, and extend there-
from in a northerly direction, and in a straight line, for a length of 2,400 feet,
terminating in about 7 fathoms at low water.
The mode of construction to be adopted is indicated on Drawing No. 3. The
base of the work, where beyond the rock, would consist of rubble stone from Bombo or
other approved quarry, deposited from steam-hopper barges, and brought up as nearly as
practicable to the level of 24 feet below low water. After due consolidation, say at the
interval of twelve months, or thereabouts, from the time of deposit, the superstructure
of the breakwater would be laid thereon. It would consist throughout, whether founded
on the rubble base or on rock at the shore end, of Portland cement, concrete blocks, the
largest being 35 tons in weight, set with sloping bond longitudinally and carefully
joggled and bonded transversely, so as to form a solid and monolithic structure of 34
feet in width, the finished top level of the roadway being 9 feet above high water of
spring tides. A sheltering parapet would be provided throughout the entire length of
the breakwater, and at its outer end a substantial head would be formed carrying a
suitable lighthouse.


The work would be furnished with mooring bollards and three flights of boatsteps,
the latter in the positions shown. It is not intended to adapt the harbour side tor
berthage, seeing that it could not be so utilised during gales and heavy weather, and,
moreover, it could not be so adapted unless at considerable additional expense in
excavating and trimming the rubble berm along the footings of masonry on the harbour
side. If deemed desirable hereafter, and worth the further outlay, this addition to the
quayage could be provided, but it would only then be suitable for vessels waiting to be
loaded, and not for the actual loading of ships with coal, which could not be expedi-
tiously or economically conducted on a quay of this width, having regard to the lines
required for the ready conveyance to the vessel’s side of loaded waggons, and the
subsequent removal of empties.
To protect the footings of the breakwater on the seaward side, I propose to form,
from the rock at the shore end to the commencement of the head, a wave-breaker of the
largest basaltic rough blocks which can be obtained, arranged as shown on the cross-
section, drawing No. 3. From the northward termination of this wave-breaker around
the head, and returning on the harbour side thereof, up to its junction with the break-
water proper, the surface of the berm would be coated with bags of concrete arranged so
as to prevent disturbance of the rubble by seas running around the head, and at the
same time avoid offering any obstruction to the free passage of vessels.
I have put forward this form of construction (Ist) as being more suitable than
that of a rubble mound, either of the Port Victor or ordinary pierre perdue class, (2nd)
as being capable of more expeditious execution, and (3rd) as being an absolutely per-
manent work, and one not requiring almost constant attention for a considerable period
after execution until the mound has assumed what are believed to be its normal slopes,
which latter may be subject to derangement by a gale, or gales, of exceptional severity
occurring at a considerable time after completion, and when the plant has been disposed
of or removed. Again, having regard to the comparatively limited area available and the
necessity for utilizing it to the fullest extent for shelter, so large a space could not be
spared as would be occupied by a mound, if substituted for the concrete and rubble
structure recommended.
As an instance of the rapidity with which a work of the character proposed can
be executed, I may observe that at the breakwater of Colombo, which was carried out
under my direction, 590 feet lineal of the structure were set during the period of the
north-east monsoon, which extends over six months, and this on the occasion of two
successive seasons. The structure proposed for Wollongong would be generally similar
to that at Colombo, adopting such minor improvements as experience has shown to be
necessary, which improvements can be incorporated into the working drawings and
specification.
North Breakwater.
The north breakwater would commence at a point on the area-front of Stuart
Park, just southward of the Para Creek, and proceed therefrom for a length of 2,550 feet
in an east-south-east direction, passing over the crest of Fairy Reef, and terminating
400 feet to the westward of the outer portion of the east breakwater, thereby forming an
entrance to the harbour of that width.
This work throughout would be constructed of Portland cement concrete, the
foundations immediately over the rock surface consisting of bags of concrete of sufficient
thickness only to form level benchings to receive the lowest course of blocks. The thin
skin of small rubble immediately over the bags, required to produce a true bed for the
blocks, would be fixed in position by cement grout applied in a special manner to effect
the required object, which constitutes an important detail, and unless properly performed
might give rise to subsequent trouble.
The blocks generally in this north breakwater would be of 15 tons weight, laid
with horizontal bond, the structure at the top being 27 ft. in width over all. It would
be furnished with a parapet, head, lighthouse, boatsteps, mooring bollards, &c., and,
for a length of 700 feet, as described on drawing No. 3, the harbour face would be
fendered and made suitable for the berthage ot vessels waiting to be loaded oi being
overhauled. In this connection I may observe that the two small points of rock,
standing above the bottom, as shown on the plans forwarded from the Colony, would be
removed.
The structure would be solid throughout, and the blocks laid in position, as
would also those in the east breakwater, by means of a suitable “ Titan” crane,
travelling on the work, and advancing therewith.


Looking at the diminished wave-stroke on the northern work, as compared with
that on the eastern arm, a mole on the line selected could be substantially constructed
with rubble, capped by heavy basaltic blocks, but, having regard to the fact that the
space occupied by the seat of such a mound would be much greater than that of the
concrete section, and also that the head and outer portion over the seaward slope of Fairy
Reef must necessarily be of masonry, I have no hesitation in putting forward for
adoption the mode of construction shown on Drawing No. 3, and the more so as the first
cost of a work of that character will not greatly exceed that of a rubble mound, whereas
there can be no question as lo its superiority over the latter type to fulfil the objects in
view, and certainly as regards the diminished cost of maintenance.
Proposed Harbour.
The harbour enclosed by the two arms which I have described would be perfectly
sheltered in all weathers, would be easy of access, and possess ample depth in the
entrance, viz,, from 6 to 7 fathoms at low water, and it. may be relied upon to remain
free from deposits or accumulations over its bed, except those slight accretions of mud
which are inseparable from close harbours and docks, and where extensive coal shipments
are carried on.
The area enclosed within the breakwaters would be as follows, exclusive of the
spaces proposed to be occupied by the reclamations and the jetties projecting therefrom,
to which reference will be presently made :
acres.
Area at low water ... ... ... ... ... ... 107
Area having a depth of 1 fathom and upwards at low water... 91
Area, 2 fathoms and upwards ... ... ... ... ... 81
Area, 3 fathoms and upwards ... ... ... ... ... 69
Area, 4 fathoms and upwards ... ... ... ... ... 48
Area, 5 fathoms and upwards ... ... ... ... ... 23
Estimates.
I estimate the cost of the works above recommended as follows :
East Breakwater, 2,400 ft. in length ... ... ... £315,500
North Breakwater, 2,550 ft. in length ... ... ... 191,600
£537,100
Say £537,000.
These amounts include contingencies, engineering, and local supervision, also the
provision of plant of all kinds.
The cost of the works if constructed with rubble and basaltic blocks would be
£524,000. I mention this only for comparison with the cost of the concrete structures,
which latter possess numerous and undeniable advantages over the rubble moles, as pre-
viously explained.
Partial Execution.
It may be considered that sufficient shelter would be provided to meet the re
quirements for some time to come by the construction of the cast breakwater only in the
first instance, leaving the execution of the northern work to remain in abeyance for the
present Beyond question very considerable shelter would be afforded by the eastern
arm alone, probably to a sufficient extent to enable coaling to be done under all, or
almost all, conditions of weather, at one and possibly at two of the proposed jetties
northward of Flagstaff Point. Seeing, however, that north-east winds prevail from
August until the middle of April, or for nearly eight months in the year, and that there
is a continuous, although not strong, set of the littoral current to the south, hugging Flag-
staff Point, there would be reason to apprehend, in the absence of the northern work,
a deposit and growth of sand over the area between the east breakwater and the western
shore of the bay. The proper and only satisfactory mode of procedure in all respects
would be to carry on both works simultaneously, or at all events that the commencement
of the northern arm should soon follow upon that of the eastern work.
As to the Execution of the TEorks Departmentally or by Contract.
There are two courses open to the consideration of your Board as to the mode of
procedure which should be adopted for giving practical effect to the foregoing recommen-
dations, viz., the execution of the works Departmentally by a competent staff directly


responsible to the Board, the special plant required being prepared in England to the
Board’s order, or, as an alternative, the letting of a contract to a competent person, or
firm, experienced in such works, he or they providing such plant as may be deemed
necessary, and being held responsible for the same.
The interests of the Board would not, in my opinion, be promoted—in fact,
serious complications might possibly be produced were the Board to supply the contractor
with the plant required for the works. On the other hand, should it be decided to
proceed Departmentally, a series of smaller contracts might be let for quarrying, block-
making, &c., &c.
Each of the foregoing systems has its advantages, but with the information now
before me I do not feel justified in advising the Board as to which of them they should
adopt. At Colombo the works were carried out Departmentally in a very satisfactory
manner, and at an expenditure considerably within my estimate.
INTERNAL WORKS
General Remarks with Regard to Internal Works.
It will now be requisite to consider the question as to how the sheltered area
within the proposed harbour can be best laid out for the convenient and expeditious
berthing and loading of ships. Having regard to the configuration of the area, and the
depth of water available, I unhesitatingly express the opinion that the requisite berthage
should be formed by the provision of jetties, in accordance with the general design
shown on Drawing No. 1, rather than by the erection of wharfs and quays fronting a
reclamation or reclamations. The latter system affords a too limited extent of berthage
for the proper utilisation of the site, or for complying with the requirements of the trade.
I have indicated on Drawing No. 1 by red colour and red crossed lines, respectively,
two proposed reclamations, each having three jetties projecting therefrom. One of these
coal-shipping depbts would be to the northward of Flagstaff Point, and of the existing
breakwater; the other would be placed seaward of Stuart Park and of the land imme-
diately to the southward thereof. The information now available is not sufficient to
enable me to advise as to which of these sites would prove the more advantageous in the
first instance. I have no doubt that eventually both will be utilised in the manner
suggested, and possibly it may be considered that each should be proceeded with,
adopting one jetty as a commencement, and extending from time to time, as may be
required to keep pace with the growth of the trade. I would suggest that evidence
should be taken on the foregoing important matters, after which the question should be
again remitted to me in the sense referred to in your letter of 10th June. As you
therein intimate, it is not necessary that the wharfage should be proceeded with for some
time, so that no disadvantage would arise from the postponement ot a definite decision
with regard thereto. Moreover, before the details of the projects could be worked out
here, the data —viz., sections, borings. &c., referred to in the accompanying memorandum
and drawing should be procured. Upon receipt of this information, coupled with a
statement of the evidence as to the relative importance of the two sites as above suggested,
I should be in a position to submit to the Board a definite recommendation with respect
to these internal works.
It will be well, however, that I should here describe in general terms the nature
and extent of the proposed reclamations and jetties, as shown on the plan, in order that
the rapidity and convenience with which coal shipments may be made thereat may be
properly realised. In laying out these jetties they have been specially arranged for the
effective employment of hydraulic appliances of the most recent type, which, in this case,
would take the form of portable hydraulic cranes, each capable of lifting and discharging
into the hold the contents of a laden truck of the largest type, replacing the empty
vehicle on the line in a period not exceeding two minutes per truck. In fact, the limit
of rapidity with which coal may be shipped under the proposed arrangements would be
the trimming thereof in the hold, and not the actual tipping therein. The cranes would
stand on the edge of the jetty, and would be designed to span an ordinary line of rails,
thereby enabling the jetty space to be fully utilised, and not blocked by the crane pedestal,
as until recently has been the case.
Reclamation and Jetties north of Flagstaff Joint (South-Eastern Group).
The reclamation and jetties north of Flagstaff Point are shown by red colour on
Drawing No. 1. The area proposed to be reclaimed is 7 acres; its northern face would
consist of a rubble slope pitched above low-water level. The material for this reclamation


would be obtained by removing that portion of Flagstaff Point above the level of the
platform of the breakwater and jetties, thereby rendering available a fine space for the
laying of “gridiron” standage lines for full and empty trucks, in the absence of which it
would be impossible to convey the coal to the ships with sufficient rapidity, or to return
the empties without conflicting with the loaded waggons.
From the face of the reclamation I propose to construct three jetties, each of 600
feet in length, and s 'o feet in width. Each would be adapted for th« berthage of four
steamers, and would be furnished with not less than four portable hydraulic cranes of
the type proposed, two on either face; six lines of rails being laid along each jetty—four
for full and two for empty trucks.
The jetties would be 200 feet apart in the clear, so that steamers having
completed their loading at the inner berths could readily pass those being loaded outside.
It should be observed that with portable cranes of the character suggested two cranes
might, if desired, be used simultaneously for coaling two hatches of one ship when
exceptional rapidity is required, and the quantity to be loaded would justify the use of
such means.
The jetties would be of an open character —that is, they would either consist of
timber piling, or of piers of concrete and rubble masonry, carrying a deck, this form of
structure being preferable to a solid work, as allowing any slight undulation which
might be present in the harbour during gales to circulate without causing an
inconvenient range alongside the jetties.
The memorandum describing the further information required in connection with
the internal improvements stipulates for full particulars relative to the practicability, or
otherwise, of obtaining suitable Colonial wood to resist the action of marine worms, and
also as to the level and character of the rock upon which the structure would have to be
erected.
The depths alongside the jetties are generally from 4 to 5 fathoms at low
water.
Reclamation and Jetties Seaward of Stuart Park (North-Western Group).
The reclamation and jetties at Stuart Park are shown on Drawing No. 1 by red
crossed lines, as previously intimated. They would partake of the same general
character, with regard to construction, as the corresponding works just referred to
northward of Flagstaff Point. ' The depths, however, alongside the jetties at the Stuart
Park depot would be somewhat less than at Flagstaff Point, varying from 2-| to
fathoms at low water.
Special facilities would be afforded at this depot for the standage of coal. To
provide for this, and for the ready transference of the loaded trucks to the jetties, a
gridiron standage, consisting of twelve full lines and four empty ones, or sixteen lines
in all, would be formed immediately at the back of each jetty, so that in connection
with jetties 4,5, and 6 there would be forty-eight lines of railway, arranged in three
series, and coupled directly with the railway shown on the plan as communicating with
the Mount Pleasant mine. Each gridiron would measure 650 feet in length on the
straight, and would therefore afford ample space for the standage of full and complete
trains of loaded or empty trucks, as the case may be, so that 3,000 tons of coal would be
stored in each gridiron ready for immediate running on to the jetty as required, thereby
ensuring great rapidity of despatch in loading vessels.
With regard to the depths alongside these jetties, it is possible that an investiga-
tion of the site may show that sufficient material overlies the rock-bed to admit of the
depth above referred to being increased somewhat if desired.
With reference to the quantity of coal which may be shipped at the six jetties
shown on the plan, it may be observed that they would, collectively, afford berthage for,
say, twenty-four steamers simultaneously. Assuming half these vessels to be loading
at the same time (which is a moderate estimate), and that the rate at which coal could
be put on board would equal 120 tons per hour (which is also an exceedingly low
estimate, seeing that 300 tons per hour have been placed on board with modern
appliances in some of the coal-ports in this country), then the total quantity of coal
which might be shipped at these jetties per annum would be four and half million tons,
assuming that they are being worked at half po.ver only—that is to say, that one-half
the vessels alongside only are receiving coal, and that one crane alone is employed at
each vessel.


Future Extensions,
From the last-named statement it will be evident that by the accommodation
which would be afforded by the works contemplated and described, adequate facilities
would be provided to meet all possible requirements for a very considerable period.
Nevertheless, it may be well to refer here to the direction which future extensions of
the berthage accommodation might take, which, without doubt, should be in the form of
internal dock accommodation, the outer harbour being regarded as the permanent sea
entrance to the entire series.
Whether it would be preferable to provide such extension in the first instance at
Tom Thumb Lagoon, or on the block of land lying to the south-west of the present
harbour, to which reference has been made by Mr. Coyle in his memorandum, it will
not be requisite now to consider, although in the appropriation of this land, and of the
track contemplated for the proposed canal leading to Tom Thumb Lagoon, it will
certainly be well to bear in mind that at some possibly remote date dock accommodation
will have to be provided, either at one or, it may be, at both of these sites, seeing that
it is impossible now to predict the extent to which shipping accommodation may be
required hereafter at Wollongong, bearing in mind the enormous quantity of coal and
the unbounded mineral resources in this locality.
I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
JNO. COODE.
Westminster Chambers, 9 Victoria-street, London, S.W.,
17th June, 1891.
The Chairman, Wollongong Harbour Trust, —
Sir,
As I have previously intimated, I received a cablegram from you on 7th
April, which reads as follows : —“ Assuming Coyle’s information correct, telegraph cost
approximately per jetty Eastern and Western, including rails, arranged as you propose.
Telegraph estimates timber piling and concrete piers separately, and cost each crane.”
I should have preferred, before framing a design for the internal arrangements in
the proposed harbour at Wollongong, to have been furnished with (he special information
and data bearing on the subject, to which reference was made in my Report of January
last, and of which a descriptive memorandum was supplied with that Report. I infer,
however, from the cablegram (hat the immediate urgency of the matter does not admit
of the delay which would necessarily arise from procuring the information for which I
asked, and therefore I have endeavoured, in order to meet the wishes of the Trust, to
prepare a scheme for the internal works and hydraulic appliances based on the informa-
tion previously supplied; and whilst, looking at the careful study and consideration
which has been given to this design, it may be regarded as substantially correct, I
desire to point out'that some’modifications in detail may appear desirable hereafter,
when I have been furnished with the full particulars, which are, of course, necessary for
the preparation of the working drawings and specifications.
General Opinion as to Jetties and Hydraulic Appliances.
Soon after the receipt of your cablegram I arranged for inspections of the most
recent appliances at the principal coal-shipping ports here, so that in framing the project
for Wollongong jetties and machinery advantage might be taken of the most recent
improvements.
Subsequently, upon proceeding to prepare a design for these internal works, it
became evident that some modifications in the dimensions and arrangement of the jetties
formerly proposed would be necessary. It will be remembered that these jetties were
put forward in order to show the general scope and character of the berthage that would
be available in the proposed harbour, and were stated to be subject to revision and
modification when framing the special design for (hese works, which has now been
done.
A reconsideration of the whole question has shown that the system which is best
suited for the western coal-shipping depot in front of Stuart Park is not equally applic-
able to the proposed southern depot northward of Fagstaff Point. For the first-named
reclamation and jetties, fixed coaling hoists, with loaded lines gravitating to and empty
lines gravitating away from the same, will form the most suitable system At the
southern depbt and jetties, however, portable hydraulic cranes with feeding and empty
lines, laid on the level, should be adopted.
8


The first-named arrangements are admirably adapted to the western site, and to
economical and rapid working, especially for the smaller class of colliers —whilst the
portable cranes, which cannot be worked with gravitation lines, will be more suited to
the southern site, where vessels of deeper draught may be expected, and where, in conse-
quence of the portability of the cranes, two of them could be used to coal one steamer on
those occasions when exceptional rapidity of despatch may be necessary.
Again, the space at the western depot is sufficient for three jetties, worked on
the gravitation system, whereas at Flagstaff Point reclamation room would be available
for two gravitation jetties only; but by the adoption of portable cranes, as proposed,
and the narrower jetties associated therewith, three such jetties, affording berthage for
twelve large steamers, could be provided.
In my Report of January last I dealt fully with the quantity of coal which could
be shipped per annum under the new arrangements.
Accompanying Drawing.
The accompanying drawing shows, by red colour, the works which appear to be
best adapted to meet the requirements of the port, and to utilise to the fullest extent the
advantages of the site. It will be observed that the configuration and extent of the
western and southern reclamations are practically identical with those shown on the
plans which accompanied my Report of January last. As previously intimated, however,
it has become desirable, in working out the details of the project, and in further consider-
ing the hydraulic appliances, to modify the dimensions and arrangement of the jetties,
and they are therefore shown accordingly on the accompanying plan.
Southern Coaling Depot.
The southern coaling depot, near Flagstaff Point, would consist of a reclamation
and three jetties, the latter being marked on the Drawings I, 2, and 3 respectively.
Each jetty would be 680 feet in length and 115 feet in width. The innermost 80 feet
would consist of two bays of open iron piling and girderwork, carrying a suitable deck,
but the remainder of the jetty would be formed with quay walls of concrete and masonry,
filled in solid with rubble, debris, &c., and formed to a level corresponding with that of
the surface of the reclamation.
The object of the open portion at the landward end of each jetty is to enable
“scend,” or undulation, to circulate and disperse, thereby ensuring the more comfortable
berthage of vessels lying alongside than would be the case were the jetties made solid
throughout their entire length.
Upon considering the best and most economical form of construction to be adopted
for these jetties, I find that, having regard to the great weight of the cranes to be carried,
structures of timber piling would be entirely impracticable. Again, looking at the great
width of the works (which is imperative, in order that the full and empty waggons may
be got freely to and away from the cranes}, an open structure, consisting of concrete piers
supporting an iron or other suitable deck, would cost considerably more than a work
formed of external walls of concrete and rubble masonry, backed solid with rubble and
debris in the manner proposed.
The jetties should be constructed in the order of their numbers on the plan, that
is to say, No. 1 should be executed in the first instance, together with that portion of the
reclamation which is required in connection therewith, to be followed by No. 2, and sub-
sequently by No. 3, as may be necessary to meet the requirements of the port.
There would be eight lines of railway with the necessary cross-over roads on each
jetty, and gridiron “standage” lines—each of which would be of sufficient length to
accommodate a complete train of trucks, whether full or empty —would be provided on
the reclamation and the levelled area of Flagstaff Point, in the manner and to the extent
indicated on the plan. It will be observed that, in order to afford space for the standage
lines in connection with No. 3 jetty, it will be requisite to fill in the eastern portion of
the existing Belmore Basin, as shown by crossed red lines.
Each jetty would befitted with four 25-ton portable hydraulic cranes, two on each
quay face, together with capstans, fairleads, hydrants, pressure and return pipes, &c., as
may be requisite for the full utilisation of the plant. As previously intimated, two cranes
might, when required, be used for the rapid coaling of one steamer, and each when fully
supplied with trucks w r ould be capable of placing on board 300 tons of coal per hour. It
should be observed in this connection that the rate of loading, both with the cranes and
the hoists, will be determined by the speed with which the coal can be trimmed on board,


seeing that experience shows that, under proper arrangements, and when well served with
trucks, appliances of either type can place the coal on board faster than it can be trimmed.
Nevertheless, to allow for contingencies and for breaks in the continuity of the flow of
trucks toward the machines. I would not recommend that less powerful or perfect appli-
ances than those in contemplation be adopted.
One important advantage in the portable crane system lies in the opportunity
which is afforded thereby of loading the different hatchways of a vessel without moving
the ship, and also the practipability, under ordinary conditions, of coaling two hatchways
with once moving the crane.
Each dep6t would be furnished with a separate installation of engines, boilers,
and accumulator for the hydraulic machinery, this mode of procedure being preferable to
the provision of one establishment for both depots. The positions of the engine and
accumulator houses will have to be determined hereafter, when fuller information is
available. The power of each engine would be proportioned to the work to be done at
each jetty, so that on the provision of a new jetty a duplicate engine with the other
hydraulic appliances would be required.
It will be seen from the plan that when all three jetties are available berthage
will be afforded for twelve large steamers in depths varying from 4 to 6 fathoms at
low water of spring tides, this depth being further increased to the extent of 4 ft. 9 in.
at high water of those tides.
Western Coaling Depot.
This depot would consist of a reclamation of -6 acres, having three jetties
extending from the eastern face thereof, on lines parallel to the proposed north break-
water of the outer sheltering works, and affording berthage for twelve steamers or
other craft.
Each jetty would be shaped as shown on the plan, the landward portion being
190 feet and the outer portion 130 feet in width, these dimensions being necessary for the
reception of the lines required to keep the hoists fully occupied. Each face would be
adapted for the berthage of two steamers, or other craft requiring to be loaded, the pro-
jection of the quay face along the inner port ion beyond that of the outer length admitting
of the vessel at the inside berth overlapping that at the outer hoist when required,
in order to bring the respective hatchways into position underneath the shoot to
receive cargo.
The jetties would be solid throughout, the external walls consisting of concrete
and rubble masonry, back with rubble and debris. The top of each jetty and of the
surface of the reclamation would be inclined, so that full trucks would gravitate from the
gridiron standage directly to the hoists without assistance from locomotive or capstans.
Similarly, trucks after being discharged would run back by gravitation into the lines
appropriated for them in each gridiron.
The length of each jetty from face of reclamation to the extreme end, measured
along the centre line, would be 810 feet, the depths at the berths alongside varying from
2 to fathoms at low water.
There would be a separate set of standage lines for each jetty, arranged to be fed
by a distinct line or lines running out of the existing railway, in order to provide for the
through traffic to the southern depot, which could thus be conducted without restriction
consequent upon the existence of the contemplated lines of standage.
The hydraulic machinery for each jetty would consist of four fixed coaling hoists
of 20 tons power, with cradles, iron framing, and shoots. On the occasion of one of
the inspections, to which reference was made in the early portion of this Report, it was
observed that with hoists similar to those proposed for Wollongong, three waggons, each
of 10 tons capacity, or 30 tons of coal, were tipped on board in minutes, and this
under normal conditions and without special effort. With the gravitation system, as
proposed, the feeding of the hoists and the conveying away of the empties will be easily
effected, and the arrangements contemplated may be relied upon absolutely to produce
highly satisfactory results, not only with regard to rapidity, but also as to economy of
working.
Capstans near the hoists will be required to work the turntables. Provision has
been made accordingly, and also for the pressure and return pipes, and for engines,
boiler, and accumulator similar to those for the southern depot.
The information available here is not sufficient to enable me to judge as to the
best means of connecting the western depbt with the Government railway, which will be
necessary hereafter, in view of the junction of the colliery lines with that railway, which


Mr. Coyle states is all that is required in order to bring those collieries into direct
communication with the port of Wollongong. I gather that the line from Mount Keira
coal-mine to Wollongong, which leads directly on to the standage of the southern dep6t,
is already connected with the Government railways.
I should observe that anti-breaking arrangements for the coal could, if required,
be furnished with the hydraulic appliances, provided such were deemed necessary. If
the coal of the Illawarra field is soft and resembles Welsh coal, some special provision
of this character will be desirable, in order to minimise the breaking of the coal when
first put on board.
Ballast Wharf.
I have indicated on the plan a ballast wharf which, when fully completed, would
be 1,300 feet in length, the face having a quay wall throughout, placed at a distance of
160 feet from the inner edge of the north breakwater, the intervening area being filled
solid, and made available for wharfage. This wharf and quay might be utilised for trade
other than that associated with coal shipment, and, if necessary, in connection therewith
sheds might be erected on the wide area proposed to be formed.
In the early stages of the works, and before the full completion of the reclamation,
ballast might be deposited therein. A suitable site will, however, be required hereafter
where the ballast, due to the extensive trade which it is assumed will be carried on at
the Port, can be utilized in levelling-up low ground, or otherwise.
Deepening at Fairy Beef.
I have shown on the plan, by red crossed lines, the area over which it would be
necessary to deepen Fairy Reef disorder to afford at least 24 feet thereon at low water
of spring tides, so that an uninterrupted approach may be afforded to Mo. 4 jetty, and
also that berthage may be available along the entire length of the proposed ballast
quay.
Mr. Coyle states in his memorandum that the reef consists of hard shaly sand-
stone. It is difficult to estimate the cost of this deepening, which will be altogether
governed by the precise character of the rock, and the extent of blasting winch may be
required in connection therewith. I may, however, observe that my estimate is based
on an average cost of 20s per cubic yard of rock removed, measuring the excavation in
the solid. It may be upon opening out the rock, and by the provision of proper appli-
ances for lifting the debris , that a less sum than this will suffice for the work, although,
having regard to existing data, I deem it prudent to calculate upon the rate I have
named.
ESTIMATES.
I estimate the cost of the internal works hereinbefore described as follows :
Southern Coaling Depot.
Formation of reclamation, 7 acres in extent, including
slope along northern face and at west end, and also the
levelling of Flagstaff Point ... ... ... ... £32,300
For each jetty, consisting of external walls filled in solid
between the same, and with opening at the inner end,
spanned by iron girders and a suitable deck ... ... 102,500
For the lines of railway for each jetty complete, and for
the set of standage lines on the reclamation and levelled
area in connection therewith ... ... ... ... 15,200
For the hydraulic machinery for each jetty, consisting of
engine, boilers, accumulator, four 25-ton portable coal-
ing cranes, capstans, fairleads, hydrants, pressure and
return pipes, erected complete at Wollongong, including
buildings ... ... ... ... ... ... 34,500
Western Coaling Depot ,
Formation of reclamation, 26 acres in extent, including
slope along Eastern and Southern faces
For each jetty, consisting of external walls, filled in solid
bewteen the same, and with high level incline, and via-
duct for gravitation system
73,000
120,000


For the lines of railway for each jetty complete, and for
the set of standage lines on the reclamation, and on a
portion of Stuart Park in connection therewith ... 11,200
For the hydraulic machinery for each jetty, consisting of
engines, boilers, accumulator, four 20-ton.coaling hoists,
capstans, fairleads, hydrants, pressure and return pipes,
erected complete at Wollongong, including buildings ... 20,800
Ballast Quay.
For the ballast quay complete, when executed to the full
extent of 1,300 ft. shown on the drawing ... ... 78,600
Fairy Beef.
For the partial removal of Fairy Reef, in order to afford a
depth of 24 ft. at low water of spring tides over the
area crossed by red lines on the plan ... ... ... 19,800
The above estimates have been based upon liberal rates, and will, I have no
doubt, prove to be ample for the efficient execution of the works in question. An ade-
quate allowance has been made for contingencies, engineering, and local supervision.
Order of Procedure.
I have already intimated that the jetties should be carried out in the order of
their number, viz., No. 1 jetty should be first constructed in connection with the
southern dep6t, and No. 4 at the western dep6t, the latter on the understanding that
the ballast quay and the removal of Fairy Reef are carried on simultaneously there-
with. By the execution of No. 5 jetty of the western series in the first instance the
necessity for the partial removal of Fairy Reef at an early period would not arise, as
sufficient clearance would be afforded between the jetty and the reef to admit of the
berthage of vessels, in which case the ballast wharf could not be extended beyond the
4-fathom contour line.
Seeing that the time will undoubtedly arise when No. 4 jetty and the ballast quay,
together with the lowering of the reef, will have to be taken in hand on the lines recom-
mended, the Trust may consider it expedient to proceed with No. 4 jetty, the ballast
wharf, and the rock removal in the first instance, to be followed by No. 5 jetty, when
desired to meet the growth of the trade. The point is, however, one which must be
governed by the extent of the funds available
Before either the breakwaters or jetties are commenced, careful designs, in detail,
should be prepared and specifications framed so that the projects may be considered after
being worked out, and previous to their practical execution. This will prove in the end
the most expeditious and satisfactory course to the Trust.
With regard to my own connection with the undertaking, I desire here to state,
in justice to myself, as well as in the best interests of the Trust, that if I am to be
regarded as in any way responsible for its success, 1 must, at all events, either prepare
the detail drawings and the specifications here, or be permitted to make such modifica-
tions therein, if prepared locally, as may appear to me to be requisite, and, moreover,
that I should have such control over the works during progress as is usually associated
with the position of consulting engineer.
In all engineering undertakings, and especially in sea works, success is so largely
associated with the mode of carrying out the designs that no engineer of experience
would be justified in assuming responsibility for the success of his projects unless he
were allied with their execution throughout.
Extent of Accommodation.
As will be seen from the plan, when the internal works have been fully completed,
berthage accommodation will be available for coaling twenty-four large steamers simul-
taneously, added to which there would be a wharf 1,300 feet in length suitable for
discharging ballast from ships, and for carrying on the miscellaneous trade of the port.
The total length of quayage within the proposed harbour on the full completion of the
project will amount to upwards of 9,000 lineal feet, which would be equal to the quayage
afforded by a dock of about 35 acres area.
Ample space will also be available on the reclaimed area and the ballast wharf
for the erection of sheds, offices, and such other structures as may be required in connec-
tion with the extensive trade which will doubtless be carried on in the future.
I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
JOHN GOODE.
Sydney: Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lB9s.
12
