

COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTU
REPORT
OF THE
RESOLUTIONS, PROCEEDINGS, AND DEBATES
OF THE
CONFERENCE OF COMMONWEALTH
AND STATE MINISTERS
HELD AT MELBOURNE 22nd~2Tth JANUARY, 1919.
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth; of Australia by Albert J. Molleit.
Government Printer for the State of Victoria.
C. 1144.




CONTENTS.
Page
Resolutions agreed to by the Conference .. .. .. .. .. ~ ~ ~ v
Report of Sub-Conference regarding Repatriation .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ vi-vii
Agenda Paper .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. viii
Minutes of Proceedings .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. ix-xii
Report of Debates .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1-99
General Index to Debates .. .. ... .. .. .. ... .. .. ~ 100
Index to principal Speeches .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. 100




CONFERENCE OF COMMONWEALTH AND STATE MINISTERS.
MELBOURNE, JANUARY, 1919.
RESOLUTIONS AGREED TO BY THE CONFERENCE.
REPATRIATION,
(a) Works Programmes of Commonwealth and State Governments.
(fc) Soldier Land Settlement.
Resolved —That the question of soldier land settlement, the public works programmes of the
States calculated to facilitate the employment or settlement of soldiers, and the financial
problems associated therewith, be referred for consideration and report to a Sub-Conference
of the Commonwealth Ministers for Repatriation and Works and the State Ministers for
Lands and Works. (Page 36.)
Resolved— That any form of relief to be granted by the Commonwealth to the States to recoup
loss should be distributed during the first five years of the loan, (Pages 84-86.)
Resolvep —That in order to partially recoup the States for losses necessarily incurred in connexion
with land repatriation, the Commonwealth shall, during the first five years, pay to each State
a subsidy at the rate of £27,500 per annum for each £1,000,000 advanced. (Pages 88-91.)
WHEAT FINANCE, INCLUDING QUESTION OF COMMONWEALTH AND STATE
LEGISLATION COVERING ADVANCES AND OVERDRAFTS.
Resolved — The Commonwealth Government and the Governments of the four wheat-growing
States, namely, New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, and Western Australia, agree
that action be taken as follows ;
1. The Commonwealth to immediately pass a Regulation authorizing the Prime
Minister to —
(o) enter into an agreement with the banks in relation to wheat finance;
(6) give to the banks a guarantee that each State Government will repay’ advances ;
(c) arrange with representatives of the States for the undertaking by the
Commonwealth of a proportion of the liability in respect of advances made
by the banks.
2. The States of New South Wales and South Australia to pass legislation authorizing
the State Government to arrange for guaranteeing repayment of advances.
3. The States of Victoria and Western Australia to forthwith enter into a formal
agreement to repay to the Commonwealth any moneys paid by it on behalf of the States
in respect of wheat, and.the States of New South Wales and South Australia to undertake
they will enter into such a formal agreement as soon as legally empowered to do so.
(Page 52.)
THE WAR—COMMONWEALTH INDEMNITY.
Resolved —That, in the opinion of the Premiers and Ministers now sitting in Conference, the
Commonwealth is justly entitled to be indemnified by the enemy countries the monetary
costs the people of Australia have to bear by reason of the war. (Page 76.)


SCHEDULE 1.— REQUIREMENTS OF STATES FOR LAND SETTLEMENT
THERETO.
AND WORKS INCIDENTAL
»
New South
Wales.
Victoria.
Queensland'.
South
Australia.
Western
Australia.
Tasmania.
Total.
Total holdings of all kinds
7,500
6,000
18,101
1,400
2,000
500
35,501
Cost of resumption
£884,000
£6,750,000
£270,316
£626,000
£250,000
£360,000
£9,139,316
Number of holdings to be made available
as a result of that expenditure
2,550
4,500
434
300
300
300
8,384
Amount required for works incidental to
£1,800,000
Nil
£1,591,000
£1,190,000
£450,000
Nil
£5,031,000
opening up fresh holdings
Number of holdings which will result in
3,000
# ,
17,667
1,000
2,000
Nil
23,667
consequence of that expenditure
Number of holdings which can be made
1,950
1,500
. .
100
1,700
200
5,450
available from Crown lands
Amount required for advances to settlers..
£5,280,000
£3,000,000
Plus e:
£9,050,500
rtra amount
£700,000
required to in
£1,000,000
crease advan
£250,000
ce to £625 ..
£19,280,500
£4,820,125
Average cost per settler
£1,263
£1,625
£600
£1,795
£850
Advances for men already settled
£550,000
£350,000
£164,500
£100,500
£128,000
£1,293,000
1. Amount required by States for all purposes
£14,170,316
2. Advances for men already settled .,
.
, ,
. • .a
1,293,000
3. Advances (£626) for future settlement
••
.
••
..
24,100,625
Grand Total for aU_Stales
I
..
£39,563,941
REPORT OF SUB-CONFERENCE OF COMMONWEALTH REPATRIA-
TION AND WORKS AND RAILWAYS MINISTERS AND STATE
LANDS AND WORKS MINISTERS. (See pages 79-80.)
REPATRIATION.
(a) Works Programmes of Commonwealth and State Governments.
(b) Soldier Land Settlement.
In accordance with the terms of the motion passed at the Conference, the Sub-Conference
of Commonwealth Repatriation and Works and Railways Ministers and State Lands and Works
Ministers met at ten a.m. on Friday, 24th January, 1919, and the next day, and the following are
the resolutions passed during its sittings ;
1. “ That upon all moneys advanced by the Commonwealth to the States for the
purpose of land settlement and the construction of works specially to aid in
repatriation, the Commonwealth should charge the States on the moneys
advanced a rate of interest 1 )ser cent, less than that paid by the Commonwealth
in raising the moneys.”
2. “ That the total amount to be advanced by the Commonwealth to the States to be
provided as advances to soldier settlers shall not exceed an average of £625
per settler.”
3. “ That preference to returned soldiers suitable for the work be granted upon all
undertakings to be constructed in aid of repatriation.”
4. “ That the Commonwealth be asked to make available for each State the amount
of money necessary for advances for soldiers’ settlements, and the necessary
public works in aid of land repatriation, on the basis of the quota of men enlisted
from each State, leaving for further consideration the question of the Com-
monwealth advancing further assistance should it become apparent that the
quota in any State will be exceeded.”
5. “ That this Sub-Conference recommends the acceptance of the offer contained in
the letter of 2nd December, 1918, by the Acting Prime Minister to the State
Premiers regarding advances to local authorities, subject to satisfactory terms
being arranged, and that the State Governments be requested to undertake to
facilitate any necessary action in this direction.”
6. “ That the following two schedules of requirements be attached to the report to
be submitted to the Conference.”


SCHEDULE 2.—REQUIREMENTS OF STATES FOR PUBLIC WORKS OUTSIDE OF LAND SETTLEMENT
FOR NEXT THREE YEARS.
Tasmania. —Nothing, if land request granted.*
Western Australia. —Two and a half millions will provide employment for three years for 3,500.
Queensland. —Fourteen million four hundred and fifty thousand pounds—three years.
South Australia. —Two millions per year.
Victoria and New South Wales. —Will provide themselves.
Summary.
£
2,500,000
14,450,000
6,000,000
Total .. .. 22,950,000
Average per year £7,650,000
* Under a Schedule subsequently presented by the Premier of Tasmania, the requirements of that State for Public Works outside of Land Settlement for
the next three years are £2,310,000.


AGENDA PAPER.
1. REPATRIATION—.
(a) Works programmes of Commonwealth and State Governments.
( b) Soldier land settlement.
2. SETTLEMENT OF BRITISH SOLDIERS.
3. WHEAT FINANCE, including question of Commonwealth and State legislation covering
advances and overdrafts.
4. COMMONWEALTH SURPLUS REVENUE ACT 1910.
5. CO-ORDINATION OF COMMONWEALTH, STATE, AND OTHER PUBLIC BORROWING.
6. ELIMINATION OF SAVINGS BANKS’ COMPETITION.
7. UNIFORM COMMONWEALTH AND STATE TAXATION LAWS and/or collection by
one authority.
8. RAILWAY CONCESSIONS TO MEMBERS OF THE A.I.F. ON FURLOUGH IN
AUSTRALIA.
9. OVERLAPPING SERVICES. (See Report of Treasurers’ Conference of July last.)
10. CO-ORDINATION OF COMMONWEALTH AND STATE POWERS with respect to
quarantinable and other diseases.
11. COMPARATIVE SALARIES PAID BY COMMONWEALTH AND STATES TO CIVIL
. SERVANTS.
12. MURRAY RIVER AGREEMENT —Proposed enlargement of powers of Commission.


MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS.
FIRST DAY.
WEDNESDAY, 22ND JANUARY, 1919.
1. The Conference mot in the House of Representatives Chamber, Parliament House, Melbourne, at half-past two
o’clock p.ra.
Present :
COMMONWEALTH.
The Honorable W. A. Watt, M.P., Treasurer and Acting Prime Minister (in the Chair).
Senator the Honorable E. D. Millen, Minister for Repatriation.
The Honorable L. E. Groom, M.P., Minister for Works and Railways and Acting Attorney-General.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Honorable W. A. Holman, M.L.A., Premier.
The Honorable R. T. Ball, M.L.A., Secretary for Public Works and Minister for Railways.
The Honorable U. R. Hall, M.L.A., Attorney-General.
The Honorable W. G. Ashford, M.L.A., Secretary for Lands and Minister for Forests.
The Honorable J. C. L. Fitzpatrick, M.L.A., Colonial Treasurer and Secretary for Mines.
VICTORIA. ' "
The Honorable H. S. W. Lawson, M.L.A., Premier, Attorney-General, and Minister of Labour.
The Honorable W. M. McPherson, M.L.A., Treasurer.
The Honorable F. G. Clarke, M.L.C., President of the Board of Land and Works, Commissioner of Crown
Lands and Survey, and Minister of Water Supply.
The Honorable A. Robinson, M.L.C., Solicitor-General and Commissioner of Public Works.
QUEENSLAND.
The Honorable E. G. Theodore, M.L.A., Treasurer, Secretary for Public Works, and Acting Premier.
The Honorable J. H. Coyne, M.L.A., Secretary for Public Lands.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The Honorable A. H. Peake, M.H.A., Premier, Chief Secretary, and Attorney-General.
The Honorable Sir Richard Butler, Kt., M.H.A., Treasurer and Minister of Railways.
The Honorable J. G. Bice, M.L.C., Commissioner of Public Works and Minister of Mines and of Marine.
The Honorable E. A. Anstey; M.H.A., Commissioner of Crown Lands and Minister for Agriculture and
Repatriation.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
The Honorable Sir Henry Lefroy, K.C.M.G., M.L.A., Premier and Minister for Lands and Agriculture,
The Honorable W. J. George, Minister of Works, Trading Concerns, and for Water Supply.
The Honorable J. Gardiner, M.L.A., Colonial Treasurer.
TASMANIA.
The Honorable W. H. Lee, M.H.A., Premier, Chief Secretary, and Minister for Education.
The Honorable Sir Elliott Lewis, K.C.M.G., M.H.A., Treasurer and Minister for Mines.
The Honorable J. B. Hayes, M.H.A., Minister of Lands and Works and Agriculture.
2. Appointment of Officers. —At the suggestion of the Chairman, Mr. Jas. R. Collins, Secretary to the Commonwealth
Treasury, was appointed Secretary to the Conference, and Mr. H. J. Sheehan, of the Commonwealth Treasury,
Assistant Secretary.
3. Admission of the Press.— Resolved, on the motion of Mr. Theodore, That the proceedings of the Conference be
open to the Press, except when the Conference goes into Committee.
4. Reporting the Proceedings.— The Chairman informed the Conference that its public discussions and so much of
its Committee proceedings as the Conference wished recorded, would be reported by the Commonwealth
Parliamentary Reporting Staff.
5. Preliminary Address. — The Chairman explained the main reasons for summoning the Conference.
6. Repatriation— •
(a) Works programmes of Commonwealth and State Governments.
(h) Soldier land settlement.
Senator the Honorable E. D. Millen opened the debate on this subject.
After discussion, further consideration of the question was deferred until the next day of sitting.
7. Settlement of British Soldiers. — THe Conference went into Committee to hear a statement by the Chairman
on this subject.
8. Wheat Finance, including question of Commonwealth and State legislation covering advances and overdrafts.
This question was discussed in Committee.
9. At twenty minutes to six o’clock p.m. the Conference adjourned until ten o’clock a.m. on Thursday, 23rd January,
1919.
W. A. WATT,
JAS. R. COLLINS,
Chairman.
Secretary to the Conference.
C 1144. —b


SECOND DAY.
THURSDAY, 23RD JANUARY, 1919.
Present ;
All the Ministers who attended the Conference on the first day were again present the second day.
1. The Conference assembled at ten o’clock a.m.
2. Commonwealth Surplus Revenue Act 1910. —The Chairman outlined the proposals of the Commonwealth
Government in relation to the surplus revenue payments to the States. The debate on this question was then
adjourned.
3. Co-ordination of Commonwealth, State, and other Public Borrowing. —The Chairman explained the
Commonwealth Government’s proposals in regard to the co-ordination of borrowing, and set out particulars of a
scheme for an Empire War Debt Commission. The debate on this question was then adjourned.
4. Repatriation—
(а) Works programmes of Commonwealth and State Governments.
(б) Soldier land settlement.
The Honorable W. A. Holman resumed the debate on this question.
After debate the following resolution was agreed to :
' That the question of soldier land settlement, the public works programmes of the States calculated to
facilitate the employment or settlement of soldiers, and the financial problems associated therewith, be referred
for consideration and report to a Sub-Conference of the Commonwealth Ministers for Repatriation ancl Works
and the State Ministers for Lands and Works. *
5. Elimination of Savings-Banks’ Competition. —The Conference sat in Committee to hear a statement by the
Chairman concerning the elimination of Savings Banks’ competition. With the consent of the Conference the
Chairman subsequently directed that the scheme presented by him in Committee be included in the report of
the debates of the Conference.
6. At five minutes to six o’clock p.m., the Conference adjourned until ten o’clock a.m. on Friday, 24th January, 1919.
JAS. R. COLLINS,
W. A. WATT,
Secretary to the Conference.
Chairman.
THIRD DAY.
FRIDAY, 24TH JANUARY, 1919.
Present:
All the Ministers who attended the Conference on the first day were again present on the third day.
1. The Conference assembled at ten o’clock a.m.
2. Elimination of Savings Banks’ Competition ; Commonwealth Surplus Revenue Act 1910; Co-ordination
of Commonwealth, State, and other Public Borrowing. —Ministers of each of the States addressed the
Conference in relation to these subjects. After debate, consideration of the questions was adjourned.
3 Wheat Finance, including question of Commonwealth*and State Legislation covering Advances and
Overdrafts. —On the motion of the Honorable D. R. Hall, seconded by the Honorable A. H. Peake, the following
resolution was agreed to :
The Commonwealth Government' and the Governments of the four wheat-growing States, namely,
New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, and Western Australia agree that action be taken as follows :
1. The Commonwealth to immediately pass a Regulation authorizing the Prime Minister to—
(a) enter into an agreement with the banks in relation to wheat finance ;
(b) give to the banks a guarantee that each State Government will repay advances ;
(c) arrange with representatives of the States for the undertaking by the Commonwealth
of a proportion of the liability in respect of advances made by the banks.
2. The States of New South Wales and South Australia to pass legislation authorizing the State
Government to arrange for guaranteeing repayment of advances.
3. The States of Victoria and Western Australia to forthwith enter into a formal agreement to repay
to the Commonwealth any moneys paid by it on behalf of the States in respect of wheat, and the
States of New South Wales and'South Australia to undertake they will enter into such a
formal agreement as soon as legally empowered to do so.
4. At eighteen minutes to seven o’clock p.m. the Conference adjourned until ten o’clock a.m. on Saturday 25th January
1919. •
JAS. R. COLLINS
W. A. WATT,
Secretary to (he Conference.
—)
Chairman.


FOURTH DAY.
SATURDAY, 25TH JANUARY, 1919.
Present:
With the exception of the Ministers representing New South Wales, all the Ministers who attended the
Conference on the first day were again present on the fourth day.
1. The Conference assembled at ten o’clock a.m.
2. Repatriation—
(а) Works programmes of Commonwealth and State Governments.
(б) Soldier land settlement.
After discussion it was decided that, though the New South Wales Ministers were absent, the Sub-Conference
appointed in connexion with Repatriation should continue its work.
3. Uniform Commonwealth and State Taxation Laws and/or Collection by one Authority.—The Honorable
E. G. Theodore read a Report drawn up as the result of consultations between the Honorable W. A. Holman
and himself.
After discussion, the Report was received.
4. Co-ordination of Commonwealth, State, and other Public Borrowing.—Further discussion took place regarding
this subject.
5. Co-ordination of Commonwealth and State Powers with respect to Quarantinable and other Diseases.—
The Chairman read to the Conference a Report on this matter submitted to the Commonwealth Government by
the Director of Quarantine.
The Chairman stated that the Commonwealth Government would consider the proposals, and if agreeable to the
substance of the memorandum by the Director of Quarantine, would forward a definite proposition to the State
Governments for their consideration.
6. The War—Commonwealth Indemnity.—On the motion of the Honorable A. H. Peake, seconded by the Honorable
W. H. Lee, the following resolution was agreed to :
That, in the opinion of the Premiers and Ministers now sitting in Conference, the Commonwealth is justly
entitled to be indemnified by the enemy countries the monetary costs the people of Australia have to bear by
reason of the War.
7. Repatriation—
(a) Works programmes of Commonwealth and State Governments.
(b) Soldier land settlement.
The Report of the Sub-Conference of Commonwealth Repatriation and Works and Railways Ministers and State
Lands and Works Ministers was presented to the Conference. After debate, consideration of the Report was
deferred.
8. Returned Soldiers —Preference in Employment.—The Chairman referred to a letter received by him from a
New South Wales member of the House of Representatives, covering a proposal from the Secretary of the Temora
Branch of the Returned Soldiers’ Preference Association. The Chairman undertook to have copies of the letter
sent to the Premiers of the several States for consideration.
9. At a quarter to one o’clock p.m. the Conference adjourned until ten o’clock a.m. on Monday the 27th January, 1919.
JAS. R. COLLINS,
W. A. WATT,
Secretary to the Conference.
Chairman.
FIFTH HAY.
MONDAY, 27TH JANUARY, 1919.
Present:
With the exception of the Ministers representing New South Wales, and the Honorable A. H. Peake, the
Honorable Sir Richard Butler, and the Honorable J. C. Bice, of South Australia, all the Ministers
who attended the Conference on the first day were again present on the fifth day.
1. The Conference assembled at ten o’clock a.m.
2. Repatriation—
(а) Works programmes of Commonwealth and State Governments.
(б) Soldier land settlement.
The Report of the Sub-Conference of Commonwealth Ministers of Repatriation and Works and Railways and State
Lands and Works Ministers was further considered by the Conference.
On the motion of the Honorable E. G. Theodore, seconded by the Honorable J. Gardiner, the following resolution
was agreed to :
That any form of relief to bo granted by the Commonwealth to the States to recoup loss shall be distributed
during the first five years of the loan.


After further debate, the following resolution, moved by the Honorable E. G, Theodore, was agreed to :
That, in order to partially recoup the States for losses necessarily incurred in connexion with land
repatriation, the Commonwealth shall, during the first five years, pay to each State a subsidy at the rate of
£27,500 per annum for each £1,000,000 advanced.
The Honorable W. H. Lee moved—
That the subsidy of £27,500 for each £1,000,000 be left in the hands of the Commonwealth in the form of
a Trust Fund for the benefit of the several States as an insurance against loss.
After debate this motion lapsed.
The Honorable E. A. Anstey moved—
That at least 1 per cent, of the 2| per cent, concession be passed on by the States in the form of reduced
interest to soldiers.
After debate this motion was withdrawn.
Discussion took place regarding the number of soldiers likely to require land in the various States. No motion
was submitted, but it was generally accepted that the number of soldiers to be provided for will be about 20,000.
'3. Settlement of British Soldiers.—This matter was further discussed by the Conference.
4. Co-ordination of Commonwealth, State, and other Public Borrowing.—Further discussion took place
regarding this question.
5. Special Allowance to Western Australia and Tasmania.—The Chairman arranged to discuss this question
with the Honorable J. Gardiner and the Honorable Sir Elliott Lewis after the Conference.
6. Murray River Agreement.—The Chairman stated that it had not been possible to put certain propositions
regarding this matter before the representatives of the States concerned, but that he would like the opportunity
of considering them as early as possible, and he would accordingly communicate with the Premier of New South
Wales.
•
7. Railway Concessions to Members of the A.I.F. on Furlough in Australia.—lt was arranged that the State
Ministers concerned in this matter would meet the Commonwealth Minister for Works and Railways at eleven
a.m. on the following day—Tuesday, the 28th January, 1919.
8. Valedictory.—The Chairman thanked members of the Conference for their attendance.
On the motion of the Honorable H. S. W. Lawson, seconded by the Honorable E. G. Theodore, the following
resolution was agreed to ;
That the Conference, expresses its gratitude to the Chairman for the able way in which he has conducted
its proceedings.
The Chairman thanked the members of the Conference.
The Conference then, at a quarter to two o’clock p.m., terminated.
JAS. R. COLLINS,
W. A. WATT,
Secretary to the Conference.
Chairman.


CONFERENCE OF COMMONWEALTH AND STATE MINISTERS.
REPORT OF DEBATES.
FIRST DAY--WEDNESDAY, 22nd JANUARY, 1919.
The Hon. W. A. WATT, Acting Prime Minister of
tho Commonwealth, in the chair.
At th© suggestion of the Chairman, Mr. J. R. Col-
lins, Secretary to the Commonwealth Treasury, was
appointed Secretary to tho Conference, and Mr. H. J.
Sheehan, Commonwealth Treasury, Assistant Secretary.
It was resolved, on motion of Mr. Theodore —
“ That the proceedings of th© Conference be,
open to the press, except when the Conference goes
into Committee.”
The CHAIRMAN informed the Conference that its
public discussions and so much of its Committee pro-
ceedings as the Conference wished recorded, would be
reported by the Commonwealth Parliamentary Report-
ing Staff.
PRELIMINARY ADDRESSES.
REPATRIATION: (a) WORKS PROGRAMME OF
COMMONWEALTH AND STATE GOVERNMENTS;
(6) SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
The CHAIRMAN.—You are aware, gentlemen, from
your perusal of the agenda paper, a copy of which was
sent to you as early as practicable, that most-of the
subjects listed by the Commonwealth Government for
consideration deal with repatriation or finance. The
Commonwealth Government has thought it advisable to
summon you to this Conference earlier -in th© New
Year, perhaps, than you might have met of your own
volition, because of th© change which has occurred in
connexion with th© war. The repatriation which the
Commonwealth inaugurated under Statute has been
proceeding during the war at the pace w© thought ad-
visable. But, when hostilities terminated, new ques-
tions presented themselves for consideration and settle-
ment. It is our desire, and, lam sure, th© desire of
the people, that those who have served with th©
colours abroad shall be returned to their native land
as rapidly as that can be done. But without proper
co-ordination of the forces of Government in Aus-
tralia, their rapid return may bring about unemploy-
ment, and increase the difficulties of land settlement.
W© have therefore thought it advisable to ask the State
Governments to 00-operate with us in a study of works
programmes, to see how these may be designed to pre-
vent unemployment, and how financial difficulties aris-
ing from an acceleration of the programmes may be
met by th© Commonwealth and th© States. It is with-
in our knowledge, and particularly within the know-
ledge of th© Commonwealth Treasury, that th© borrow-
ings, disbursements, and revenue commitments of the
States are limited by th© recommendations made by
State Ministers to their several Parliaments. State
Ministers could not indulge in any vast expansion of
works, should that be necessary, without some financial
strength being given to them in addition to that which
they at present possess. After a study of tho pro-
posals of the State Governments, I hope to be .able to
C 1144—1
effect an agreement between th© Commonwealth and
th© States which will provide for a wider system of
works construction throughout Australia, if and when
it may become necessary in the year 1919. The re-
patriation problem will be most acute probably twelve
months after the signing of peace, and it is for that
particular time that w© desire to prepare in a way that
will meet th© wishes of the people. I observe that
in some parts of th© Commonwealth there is talk of
unemployment. With that subject it is not my inten-
tion to deal as a Commonwealth problem, though I
think that the duty of finding occupation, providing
training, and offering land for productive purposes for
those of our soldiers who may need these things, is the
prime obligation of th© people of Australia, for whom
the Commonwealth authority is th© spokesman; and
that authority must be linked up with Hi© several State
authorities if the task is to be accomplished successfully.
I would suggest that, after a general discussion of the
repatriation outlook as it presents itself to both the
Commonwealth and th© States, th© matter might 'better
be pursued in detail in Committee. It is for you to
say whether th© discussion shall be in public or in Com-
mittee. Commonwealth Ministers are agreeable to
either course.
I do not think that I need refer at this stage to
the financial questions—the raising of loans, revenue
relationships for the future, and banking competition;
the consideration of those matters had better be, post-
poned until we come to them in going through the
agenda paper, when each can be dealt with in turn on
its merits. The Minister for Repatriation, Senator
Milieu, is prepared to make to the Conference a state-
ment of his views concerning repatriation. Which
course, Mr. Holman, do you think State Ministers
would prefer: that th© Commonwealth Government
should outline its proposals more fully, or that State
Ministers should make their views known to th© Con-
ference ?
Mr. HOLMAN.—I think that ©very one of us would
desire to hear first what Senator Millen has to say.
The CHAIRMAN.—What is your view, Mr. Law-
son ? %
Mr. LAWSON.—I agree with Mr. Holman.
Senator MILLEN.—I shall endeavour to put before
the Conference the land side of repatriation as I see if.
It consists in ascertaining, so far as may be possible,
what provision has been made for such returned men as
may desire to go on the land, and what steps have .been
taken towards meeting the need.. At th© commence-
ment, I would stress the point that land settlement is
a problem that would confront us even had there been
no war. Th© efforts now necessary are not wholly the
result of our desire to repatriate returned soldiers.
Were there no returned soldiers, th© States would still
have to consider a policy for the settlement of tho
land. At the present time some 70,000 of our soldiers
have returned. There are 30,000 of them now on the
water, and 167,000 not yet embarked, or 197,000 yet
to return to Australia. It is impossible to say how


many of these men will desire to settle on the land.
Some 5,000, or, approximately, 7 per cent., of those
who have returned, have sought to become land settlers.
All of our returned soldiers, so far, are men who have
been declared medically unfit; and it is reasonable to
assume that a much larger percentage of the main
army, which will consist of physically fit men, will
seek to take advantage of the opportunities for land
selection. As 7 per cent, of the invalided men have
applied for land, it would be unsafe to assume that
fewer than 10 per cent, of the main body of returned
soldiers will submit applications for holdings. But the
actual number of applications will vary with the
attractiveness of the propositions put before the men.
If the conditions are attractive, obviously the number
of applications for holdings will increase. But, in my
judgment, 10 per cent, of the returned men is the
minimum number for which it is safe to provide. We
have a great opportunity now, -should it be possible to
adjust our circumstances in such a manner that we
may seize it, of giving effect to what has been the public
policy of this country for many years, namely, the
stimulation of rural settlement and production. Much
will depend on the result of our deliberations here, and
the activities of the individual States, whether land
can be offered on terms and conditions attractive to the
returning men. If 10 per cent, of a body of 200,000
men apply for land, we must provide 20,000 holdings,
a problem of great magnitude, judged by the settle-
ment figures of the past. It is no easy task to provide
20,000 holdings within the limited space of time avail-
able. The bulk of the men may return within twelve
months. Therefore, we must make 20,000 holdings
available within one, or perhaps two, years. But,
although the task is a formidable one, it will be seen
by a perusal of the proceedings of a Conference which
met in 1916, -that it has been judged not impossible.
At that Conference, estimates of what could be done
were given on behalf of the various States; and it was
thought competent to make available 27,000 holdings
by the 30th June of this year.
Mr. THEODORE.—Subject to the States being
financed.
Senator MILLEN.—I was about to add that, in the
case of two of the States, the proposals were conditional
upon money being made available, and other conditions
were stipulated for; but the figures (I have given
exclude the New South Wales estimate.
Mr. HOLMAN.—What’ New South Wales could do
would be in addition to those figures.
Senator MILLEN.—The members of the Conference
thought it possible, subject to various conditions, to
make available 27,000 holdings within the period I
have mentioned. That being so, it should not be
impossible to make available 20,000 holdings within
twelve months or two years. At a Conference held a
few months ago, when the Lands Ministers of the
States were good enough to discuss the problem with
me, I briefly outlined the matters that I l*ve mentioned
to-day, and they promised to place before me on their
return to their States .their proposals for meeting
the deficiency in the number of holdings required. This
they have done. I do not intend to say anything regard-
ing those proposals. They appear to me, as might
have been anticipated, to rest entirely upon the finan-
cial position being made easier than it is at the present
time. I would like, however, to stress one point in re-
gard to the figures supplied. It is impossible that Aus-
tralia can continue indefinitely on its present lines of
land settlement. The cost to-day per settler is so great
that, although we have hitherto been able to provide
holdings at the rate at which they have been applied
for, we shall find the financial obligation mount up
tremendously when the number of holdings required
comes to be considerably multiplied. I cannot say
definitely what it costs to put settlers on the land; but,
taking the value of the land into account, and the
financial assistance extended, not less than £1,500 is
spent per settler in giving a very dubious start. That
sum, multiplied by 20,000, amounts to £30,000,000.
I do not say that it is beyond the power of Australia
to provide such an amount for land settlement; but the
figures are so big that we are under an obligation to see
whether it is-not possible to devise some form of rural
settlement for which a smaller sum would suffice, and
whether with a smaller sum we cannot give our settlers
a better start than is possible under existing c<*nditions.
Lands Ministers who were present at the Lands Con-
ference will recollect that on that occasion I invited
them to give some thought to the suggestion that Aus-
tralia was entirely ripe for. new rural industries. Ido
not wish to take up the attitude of a critic, or to be
considered guilty of egotism, but I certainly believe
that public thought hitherto has been running too much
along the beaten tracks. In wheat centres, for in-
stance, land settlement is thought of in terms of wheat,
and in other centres the people think only of land
settlement in the terms of that form of settlement
with whifh they are familiar But if Australia is to
develop on the rural side—and I do not see, how it can
hope to develop permanently unless it does expand on
' tfiat side—w© must consider whether it is not time now
to start new rural industries. There is never any ques-
tion as to the wisdom of starting a new town industry.
We are now under an obligation to see if it is not pos-
sible to start new rural industries, and the suggestion
that I had to submit to State Ministers, with the con-
currence of the Cabinet, was that they should endeavour
to make land available for some of these new indus-
tries. I said that w© recognised that in connexion with
new rural industries settlers would b© exposed to the
risks incidental to all experiments, and in order to
insure them in that regard the Commonwealth Govern-
ment would, so far as soldier settlers were concerned,
provide a minimum price for the products raised in
these new’ industries, and would, if necessary, erect
central factories or works requisite to the handling of
that produce. I indicated hog raising as one of the
new industries for which Australia, in my opinion, is
ripe. It is an industry that is productive of millions
of wealth in other countries, and one that has never
been attempted here on the lines followed so success-
fully and profitably in America. I do not propose
to elaborate that proposition. I merely refer to it as
one of those new industries which I feel convinced,
with some encouragement from the Government, and
some'organization, would enable us to place large num-
bers of men upon the soil with less capital than is now
requisite, and would give them a return much more
rapid than they could get to-day from ordinary forms
of occupation, and would involve a much shorter period
of training than is required in respect of many other
industries. So far as Australia is concerned, this
would be an entirely new industry. At the Lands
Conference, other special industries were mentioned,
particularly in the case of Tasmania; but the plan I
have outlined for stimulating these industries can be
mad© applicable to many other forms of additional
rural production.
I pass from'that to another aspect of this question.
In connexion with all land settlement problems it is
obvious that one of the greatest difficulties will be that
of maintaining the men during the period in which
their holdings are being brought to the revenue produc-
ing point. That fact presents itself to the Repatriation
Department, and with regard to many holdings repre-
sents a very considerable additional obligation. In the
case of orchard lands v I think I am safe in saying it
means the maintenance of the men in some way or other
for a period of three years and upwards.' The average
period possibly would be four years. Even in the case
of whedt farming, it is conceivable that many men may


have no hope of obtaining any revenue at all until the
lapse of the second year. Many of the men will enter
upon these undertakings with seme means, but, so far
as. I have been able to judge, the bulk of them will
have very little money compared with the financial
requirements of the enterprises which tney take up.
Our experience, supported by representations made
through State Departments and Local Committees, is
that men entering upon such enterprises all ask
that some provision should be made to sustain them
during the unproductive period*of their holdings. The
maintenance of the men during that period represents
a very considerable additional financial obligation. I
have been thinking whether it would not be possible
by a conjunction of works and land settlement policies
to place' these men in a position to maintain themselves
by giving them some share in the public works which, •
as a result of this Conference, might be agreed to. Let
us assume that the construction of a railway is under-
taken to open up certain lands for settlement. In such
a case it would not require very much organization to
arrange that the men who were to settle on the lands to
be opened up in that way should be employed inter-
mittently upon the railway construction works. They
might be employed in that way for two or three months,
and asked at the end .of that period to devote some
time to what I would call the dead work on their own
blocks. If by working on their own blocks during the
interregnum, they gave evidence of a desire to become
Vona fide settlers, they should be assured of a further
period of employment on the railway or other public
works being carried out in their district. By some such
means we could not only place these men in a position
td earn* the money necessary to sustain them in the
unproductive period of their holdings, but on the com-
pletion of the work they would have brought their
holdings very much nearer the revenue-producing point
than would be the case if they were required to start
under existing conditions. I shall not elaborate this
point; I merely throw it out as a suggestion, which I
hope, and feel sure, will be considered by the Con-
ference.
•
At the Conference held at the end of last year 1
intimated, with the concurrence of Cabinet, that in all
these projects the Commonwealth would recognise the
Repatriation Department’s share of responsibility.
In making these submissions for the consideration of
the Conference, I said we fully recognised the Com-
monwealth’s responsibility, and that where finance stood
in the way the Commonwealth Government were pre-
pared to discuss in a generous manner any propositions
submitted by the States to enable them to finance land
operations. I do not profess to have given more than
a mere skeleton outline of what is in my mind. I shall
be glad to elaborate any of these points in the discussion
which follows. My object has been to state in as few
words as possible the problem as it presents itself to me.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Before we enter upon a general
discussion of this question, it seems to me that there is
one aspect of the repatriation problem that yet remains
to be mentioned. The problem, in my view, divides
itself into three separate elements. The first of
these is the settlement of a certain number of
men on the land. I do not know why it should
be placed first in the list, but I put it first because
Senator Millen haa done so. The second is the return
of as many soldiers as possible to the occupations which
they followed before they went to the war, while the
third is the handling of the residuum, who are not pro-
vided for either by returning them to their former
occupations or by settling them on the land, and who
will be the unemployed residuum unless special steps
are. taken to deal with them. The Minister for Re-
patriation thinks that we should assist them by pro-
viding for their employment on public works. Looking
at the matter from the point of view of numbers, it
seems to me that the second group —the group that
should be restored to their original occupations—will
be by far the largest of the three. It is suggested that
they will represent 70 per cent, of the whole, and allow-
ing a minimum of 10 per cent, to be settled on the land,
we have a balance of 20 per cent, to be handled by the
State Governments.
The CHAIRMAN. —Senator Millen did not attempt
to outline the whole project of repatriation.
Mr. HOLMAN.—CouId he not do that?
The CHAIRMAN.—He could, but what he has said
to-day is that he regards repatriation as primarily the
task of his Department.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Clearly, what the States have to do
is to pick up the pieces that have been dropped by the
Repatriation Department, and until we know what in-
dications the Repatriation Department have of the suc-
cess that has so far attended the effort to return 70 per
cent, of our soldiers to their former employment we
can form no estimate of the magnitude of the task
before us. •
The CHAIRMAN.—I am assuming that what I may
describe as the re-occupation of the great bulk of our
soldiers is the especial duty of the Repatriation Depart-
ment. •
Mr. HOLMAN.—Undoubtedly.
The CHAIRMAN.—Just as a number of other
functions, which have not been alluded to at all, are
the duty of the Department and are being discharged
with more or less success. There is, for instance, the
duty of pensioning; but the two problems which the
States and the Commonwealth have to face are those, of
land settlement—and I place land settlement first, not
because of the magnitude of the problem, but because
it is the meat difficult—and the provision of public
works for taking up the slack and absorbing the un-
absorbed to whom sMr. Holman referred as “ group
three.” All that we have brought before the States in
conference to-day is what may be regarded as the joint
problem, and it was to that joint problem that Senator
Millen addressed himself.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I quite agree with that, and I find
no fault Senator Millen has said. But, until
we can form some idea of the success that is attending,
and will attend, the efforts of the Repatriation Depart-
ment in respect to the problems which are not joint, we
can form no estimate of the magnitude, of the joint
problems.
The CHAIRMAN.—Senator Millen can base his
calculation only on the experience, more or less reliable,
of the last two years, or upon conjectural data as to the
success so far attending the work of re-absorption. It
is doubtful whether that would be a reliable guide as to
the same degree of success attending the efforts to deal
with the rapid return of 197,000 men. Senator Millen
might perhaps give us some figures on the point.
Senator MILLEN. —I do not quite follow the argu-
ment which Mr. Holman has addressed to the Con-
ference. As I said at the outset, the purpose of my
remarks was to endeavour to ascertain what number of
holdings, would be requisite to provide for those of our
soldiers who might desire to go on the land. I did not
know that I was required to come to this Conference
prepared to give the figures relating, for instance, to
the work we have done in respect of vocational training
or other absorption work. I have given an estimate of
the number of men that we anticipate will desire to be-
come land settlers. The Lands Ministers are probably
more competent than I am to' form estimates on the
subject, but some estimates must be obtained to justify
the preparation which the States will have to make, and
I say that 20,000 holdings will probably be required.
I anticipated that the States would have put forward


suggestions for meeting that need; but if Mr. Holman
desires it, I have no objection to tell the Conference
what is being don© by the Department and what is con-
templated. It seems to me, however, to be very like
putting the cart before the hors© to suggest that we
should say first of all how many men we have provided
for and then invite the States to look after the resi-
duum. It appeared to me that the Conference would
desire to discuss what provision should be made for the
groups of men who will wish to become land settlers.
The figures I am about to give must be regarded as
merely approximate. I shall speak only from memory.
At the end of October, when oar books were made up,
nearer 70,000 men than 60,000 ‘men had returned.
Every returned soldier, whether he is hale or ill, is en-
titled to come to us for sustenance until he is in em-
ployment, granted at a rate which brings any pension
he may be receiving up to a fixed scale, starting at
£2 2s. for a single man without dependants, and rising
according to the number of dependants. It is fair
to assume that, when men knew they were entitled to
that sum of money, and that there was no suggestion
of charity about it, provisiop having been mad© for it
by the Parliament of the country, the majority of the
men who were not placed would be upon our books
drawing that sustenance. At the end of the period I
have mentioned, only .1,700 men awaiting employment
were drawing sustenance out of a total of nearly 70,000
who had returned, or less than 3 per cent. That was an
accomplishment which need cause ho sense of disappoint-
ment to any one associated with this movement. It is
impossible for me to say whether we can place men in
that same percentage as they return. I do not think we
can without some special provision being made for
them, and it was part of the object of this Conference
to see how far some provision could be made for that
interregnum, which will inevitably occur if the men
come tumbling back in these numbers, between their
arrival here and their gradual absorption in their pre-
vious avocations. I assumed that w© would first at
this Conference endeavour to see what provision could
be made for that temporary interregnum, and after
that to supplement it with other efforts for which the
Commonwealth Government would be alone responsible.
1 cannot tell Mr. Holman at present anything about
any residuum, although I am looking into that matter
as well as into others. I consider that there is
a special group of 20,000 men to provide with
land. We know from our experience so far that we
may hop© to place a considerable npmber of men in the
ordinary callings of the country, but that percentage
will rise or fall as the country is industrially active or
otherwise. That is a moot point on which I am not
prepared to dogmatize. Undoubtedly the biggest em-
ployers of labour in Australia are the Governments of
Australia, and the first question is what provision can
be mad© by those Governments, jointly or severally, to
meet the needs of those men if w© are not able to ab-
sorb them in the ordinary citizen life of the country.
I can give no figures, on that point. I had hoped,
and hop© still, that the Conference will, before it ter-
minates, arrive at such conclusions and agree to such
proposals that I shall have before me the fact that
reserve work is ready for so many thousand men, if
w© should not be able to place them as w© would other-
wise wish to. If the Conference wants definite details
as to the work, such as vocational training, or the pro-
vision being made for other returned men, I should
prefer to be allowed to furnish that information at a
later period, with the" accurate figures which I cannot
pretend at this moment to give from memory. To
attempt to deal ( with the matter otherwise would bo
misleading bo the Conference and unsatisfactory to my-
self.
Mr; LAWSON.—I may say on behalf of Victoria
that we agree very largely with what Senator Millen
has said. We have come prepared with details in re-
gard to land settlement and public works, but these
are matters which the Victorian delegates think could
be more properly discussed, first of all, by the Lands
Ministers, possibly in conjunction with the Works Min-
isters. After they have conferred, they can submit a
report. We will then know what financial obligations
would be involved in giving effect to their recommenda-
tions, and, I presume, you, Mr. Chairman, would be in
a position to tell us in what way the Commonwealth
would be prepared to l%nd the States financial assist-
ance.
The CHAIRMAN. —Yes, we are ready to tell you
that.
Mr. LAWSON. —Then it is all a question of arrange-
ment. We can all talk about our duty and the way we
ought to co-operate. We realize what the plain obliga-
tion is, and ,the delimitations of authority and power,
and where the-responsibility lies, but, no matter what
the constitutional position may be, all Governments
and all public men have to carry a share of responsi-
bility in regard to the question of repatriation. We,
on our part, are anxious to co-operate and assist, and
we can best arrive at definite conclusions if we have
data first from the Lands Ministers. We can say gene-
rally with regard to Victoria that we have the Mallee
lands, and we have the Murray Valley, which might
be developed, but the big slab of land settlement that
might be effected by Victoria, contiguous to its
will be made possible if New South Wales will, in a
brotherly way, help in the matter of the border rail-
ways and develop the Riverina. That is a stretch of
country which is available and suitable for closer settle-
ment, and that would take a big number of soldiers in
community settlements.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Which part of Victoria do you
mean ?
Mr. LAWSON.—I am referring to the Riverina, in
New South Wales, and to those border railways which
were projected and were the subject of agreement be-
tween the present Acting Prime Minister (Mr. Watt)
when he was Premier of Victoria, and Mr. Holman
himself. I understand that Mr. Holman introduced
legislation into the New South Wales Parliament re-
garding them, and had it indorsed by the Assembly,
but rejected by the Council. Ido not want to intro-
duce in Conference these matters of detail, which can
be threshed out elsewhere, but there is a big prospect
in the district I have named for successful land settle-
ment if we can come to an agreement. That, as I say,
can be discussed by the Lands Ministers, who can be
supplied with the prepared programme of works, in-
cluding those -provided for in our ordinary Estimates,
and other works propositions of a sound and repro-
ductive character which we could undertake if more
money was made available. In the repatriation
problem the only definite responsibility with which the
States are charged is that of laud settlement, and a
conference of Lands Ministers would expedite a
decision.
Mr. HALL.—Would you mind saying how those
border railways would assist Victorian land settlement?
Mr. LAWSON.—They would open up the Riverina.
That would be, of course, New South Wales land settle-
ment, but you would find Victorian soldiers taking up
land there. It may be said that that is showing a fine
Federal or Australian spirit, but we are concerned with
giving the men good land in good positions, with a
reasonable chance of success. If the land is better and
cheaper across the border, we are prepared to help them
to take it up. We know that certain advantages would
naturally flow to Victoria from the better development
of those areas.


The CHAIRMAN. —The suggestion that the detailed
problem of land settlement forms a fitting subject for
immediate consideration by tbe Lands Ministers is
quite a wise one, and if it is linked up, as 1 think it
is in most, if not all, the States, inseparably with the
problem of developmental works such as Mr. Lawson
has referred to, the Ministers for Works might col-
laborate with them. But before we do that, X think
tbe correct idea for the Conference to follow will be to
affirm in some definite way the desire of the States and
tbe Commonwealth to co-operate, in view of the press-
ing needs of the immediate future, in the settlement
of these problems. Then the Ministers referred to could
be instructed to prepare the details, and come back with
reports to the main Conference.
Mr. HOLMAN.—WhiIe I do not wish to oppose what
Mr. Lawson has said, T must put this view strongly
to the Conference: So far as we are concerned, and I
understand it is true of practically every other State,
we are in a position to lay upon the table, by to-morrow
morning at latest, a detailed statement of the public
works of New South Wales as they stand at present,
showing that, with the programme we have launched
going forward without any modification, we can in
twelve months’ time settle so many thousand soldiers,
that with certain extensions of our programme of public
works, which will cost so much, we can settle an extra
thousand, and, with certain further extensions, another
2.000, 3,000, or 4,000, and that is about the limit.
We can show a programme which will range from,
say, 5,000 men at the minimum, to something like
8.500 at the maximum, according to the amount of
finance available to extend the programme of public
works, which will make further lands available. There
is no necessity to have a Conference of Lands Ministers
to get that information. I understand, as a matter of
fact, that Senator Milieu has a copy of it.
Senator MILLEN.—Yes.
The CHAIRMAN.—Does it include a statement of
what it will involve in the way of extra money to New
South Wales? I have not got that information.
Mr. HOLMAN.—If Senator Millen has not had it,
it is available, because it has been worked out in that
way.
Mr. ASHFORD.—I think that information is' in the
figures.
Senator MILLEN.—I think the bulk figures are
there, in the case of New South Wales.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I do not know how it affects the
other States, but in our State that question does not
really affect more than the fringe of the problem. The
total number we can settle in that way will be con-
siderably less than 10 per cent, cf the total number of
soldiers returning to New South Wales. The real
problem that will beset us as a State Government—and
the Commonwealth Government as responsible for the
general well-being of soldiers in New South Wales—
will depend upon how many of the balance can be
restored to their original occupation, because then we
have to deal with the residuum. Suppose, for example,
that 100.000 men are coming back to New South Wales,
and we can settle 10,000 on the land. That leaves
90.000. Then the real question is, out of that 90,000,
are 50.000, or 60,000, or 70,000, or 80,000, going back
to their original work ? Upon that will depend the
remaining problem. What are we going to do to
absorb the residuum ?
The CHAIRMAN.—No one can tell you that. It
is perfectly plain to us, as practical politicians, that
there will inevitably be, as our experience teaches, 10,
20, or 30 per cent, not rapidly absorbed. It will take
them some time to get back to their old, or fresh,
occupations.
Mr. HOLMAN. —I quite recognise that; but I think
an undue insistence upon the land gettlepient aspect
of the problem is concentrating the thoughts and
energies of the community upon the least profitable line
of advance. We can exhaust ourselves in effort now
to raise the total number that we can settle on the land
in our State—say, from 8,500 to 9,500. That addi-
tional 1,000 would probably cost as much as the first
8,000 cost, because they would have to be put on the
land at greater and greater expense per man, seeing
that you go on to more expensive land, involving more
expensive public works, and so on. The amount of
time and energy expended in getting another 2,000
men settled on our land in New South Wales could be
spent to very much better advantage in seeing whether
we could get 20,000 men restored to their original occu-
pations, if we could devise any method of doing so.
That would give us ten times the amount of relief in
diminishing the size of the problem.
Senator MlLLEN.—Anything you do with what
you call the residuum does not in any way redeem the
implied promise to the men that those who wanted
land would be absorbed.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I do not shut my eyes to that
promise.
Mr. FITZPATRICK.—AIways provided that they are
competent, and that it will be advantageous to the
community at large, and to them individually, to put
them on the land.
The CHAIRMAN.—It is true that if you knew
how many men would have no difficulty in getting back
to their former occupations, our problem would be
more exact. We cannot tell you that; and you cannot
.tell us.
Mr. GARDINER.—Do you mean in relation to the
men who have already returned ? Would that be any
guide?
The CHAIRMAN.—The Minister for Repatriation,
with certain reservations, thinks it would be; but the
number of the men who have returned physically unfit
is greater, in proportion, than will be the case regard-
ing those who are still to come home. *
Mr. COYNE.—And, as a consequence, a greater pro,-
portion of those who are still to return will be requir-
ing land.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is so. We may speculate
as to how many of the 197,000 men —as in-
dicated by the Minister —will present difficulties to
us. either in the matter of land settlement, or with
resnect to their immediate absorption in former occu-
pations. It is plain that, at the start, there will be
a large number for whom we must make special provi-
sion, and, if we successfully attack that problem, that
large number will diminish until general absorption
will have become common throughout the States.
What we have to do is to consider the magnitude of
the problem, and the best way to tackle it as between
the Commonwealth and the States. We realize that
the projects from which the various States have been
deterred during the war may now be faced—whether
they be in respect to land settlement, or concerning
public works—with the assistance of the Common-
wealth. We are meeting in that spirit for the first
time, because the problem is now closing in rapidly
about us.
Mr. McPHEßSON.—Concerning those men to whom
Mr. Holman has referred, and for whom positions
await them, there should be no difficulty whatever.
For instance, in the Victorian Railways, we will take
back every man, and there are about 3,200 of them.
That is, of course, if they are fit to do the work in
which they were previously engaged. In all private
firms with 'which I have at all come into contact, the
billets of the mep who went away are ready for them
so soon as they can return to fill them. I have in mind
one typical firm, among whose employees fifty-two went
to. the war. Evety man will find his billet open for
him, if he can take the work, upon his return. Among
those who are now back in Australia, a proportion are


physically incapable; but, in regard to the large total
who are still to return—and most of them will be
physically fit—there should be no difficulty- whatever.
I do not know if a record was taken, at the time of
the enlistment of the men, as to whether their billets
would be waiting for them upon their return from the
war.
Mr. HALL.—Has any statement been secured, or
figures ascertained from private employers, as to the
numbers which various firms are prepared to take back 1
We have in New South Wales about 8,000 Government
employees who have enlisted. Every man of those
8.000 will have no trouble in returning to his former
position if he is fit to occupy it. An important point
also is that, among the great number of men still to
return, probably almost all will be fit to go back to
their former occupations.
Senator MlLLEN.—Unfortunately, outside of two
or three big public activities, although systematic efforts
were made, it was impossible to get a definite state-
ment from the many various firms regarding the num-
ber of men whom they would be prepared to reinstate.
The experience of the Repatriation Department justifies
the belief, however, that, with practically few excep-
tions, the employers are standing up to their obligations.
Mr. PEAKE.—Even if we solved the question of the
men who went away to fight, we have not got rid of the
difficulties surrounding their re-employment. As for
the men who left positions in various branches of the
South Australian Government, we are prepared to take
back practically the whole of that number. About
2.000 in all went from onr Railway Department. But
what about those'who have been doing the work of the
men who have been away at the Front? It will mean
lack of employment for them when all the fit fighting
men have returned and have been placed in their
former occupations. Unquestionably, the war has
created many obligations of this character. It may be
said that in many cases women are now filling positions
occupied by our fighting men. That is so, and are those
women to be told that they must get out to make
room for returned soldiers? But in this particular line
again, the war has created great difficulties regarding
the economic position of women. Thousands to-day
have lost their prospects in life owing, to the war; and,
instead of being able to look forward to occupying
homes of their own, they will now be forced to seek
employment which otherwise they would not have been
required to do. It will be hard on many women who
have suffered greatly during the war that we should
have to say to them now, “ You must retire in order to
make room for soldiers.” The very reason for their
seeking to earn their own living is that the war
forced the situation upon them. Therefore, the whole
subject is not confined merely to the repatriation of
soldiers. Economically, the whole Commonwealth is
affected.
In speaking to some of the points raised by Senator
Millen, generally, except for the war, I do not
assume that Australia—even with her soldiers returned
home—will be over-populated. It is because of the dis-
location created by the war that we are meeting with
these difficulties; and it is because of the stoppage of
public works in a way which every State has felt owing
to the difficulty in obtaining money. The normal ex-
penditure of South Australia on public works prior to
the war was about £4,000,000 per annum. It has now
been reduced to about -£2,000,000 per annum. We
have several works for proceeding with which Parlia-
mentary authority has already been given so soon as
the Government can secure the money. Along those
lines Senator Millen may see some of his difficulties re-
moved. The question of finance is the great difficulty.
If we can get finance going we can get public works
going.
I agree with Senator Millen as to the need for open-
ing up new industries. To push on with the cultivation
of wheat must be a matter of normal growth rather
than of extiaordiuary effort; and if we can devise means
for the establishment of fresh industries, which will take
much less capital to start them than is required in the
wheat-growing industry, there will be in sight, by
means of such projects, a solution of our difficulties —
even from the financial view-point. Big wheat-pro-
ducing areas require much money to be laid out upon
them. In South Australia we have been seeking to
find land for the returned soldier, but we have now
pretty well come to the end of our tether; that is, in
buying existing fanners out so as to settle soldiers in
their places. Clearly, however, that procedure is not
one which can help production in any country. To
take away a man who knows every acre of his land and
how best to work it, and to replace him with an in-
experienced returned soldier, can scarcely do otherwise
than retard production generally. Senator Millen’s
idea of establishing new rural industries opens up a
very fine field for consideration, because in that project
there is contained the idea of the production of greater
wealth, and it is to that source that we must look for
means to provide for the heavier burdens placed upon
us by reason of the war. I do not personally know
the possibilities of hog-raising—an industry which has
been specifically mentioned. But, just before coming
over to this Conference, I travelled up the Murray with
a colleague to view the possibilities for South Aus-
tralia in that direction. I have returned more than
ever convinced that if we can conserve the waters of
the Murray and use them more and more for irrigation,
the problem of finding land for settlement, so far as
our State is concerned, will have been largely solved.
We were able to visualize the placing of fully 1,000
men on the banks of the Murray.
Senator MILLEN. —In a group?
Mr. PEAKE.—No. One settlement would take at
least 400 men, and another would do the same with
regard to an equal number, if not more. . That indi-
cates the vast importance of pushing on with the con-
servation of the Murray waters. It is a matter which
will supply the three States directly concerned with a
field for the occupation of a large number of men. It
will involve considerable employment in conserving
the waters and in clearing the land and generally pre-
paring it for occupation. The holdings would be
small, and the initial expense in putting men on to the
blocks would ‘be comparatively light.
In reckoning the numbers of men returning, and
who will be wanting land, I do not know whether
Sector Millen has considered that a great number
went from their own holdings, and will be returning
to them. Their blocks have been kept going for them
by friends and relatives. I do not know whether that
factor would amount to a substantial diminution in the
number of men who will be seeking help in going on
the land.
Senator MILLEN.—I do not think the number is ap-
preciable, judging from the experience of the Depart-
ment.
Mr. PEAKE.—In the solution of our difficulties we
should, look largely for help from the Commonwealth in
regard to finance. But one of the most important
problems, and one which we must settle at the earliest
possible moment, is to do everything possible to reduce
the cost of living. If the high cost is not going to be
reduced, the high present standard of wages will be
maintained. Thus, it will not pay the various States
to launch out with public works. For example, a
work calculated upon a basis of 4 per cent, will not pay
if 6 per cent, has to be paid for’money to finance it,
and if the rate of wages is to remain upon the present
war basis. The only way to look for a reduction in
wages is to bring about a reduction in the cost of living,
for that is largely what has caused increased wages.


No doubt, an effort will be made to keep wages up to
war rates, but that will not 'be justifiable if the cost
of living can be considerably reduced. Many public
works at present in contemplation can be undertaken
on a normal wage basis, whereas they cannot be success-
fully launched if wages upon construction work are to
be abnormal. It would never pay the States to under-
take works in such circumstances.
Mr. FITZPATRICK.—"Works would bo possible if
wages were at a normal rate.
Mr. PEAKE.—Yes. These are the only points that
strike me at present. I have no doubt that as the dis-
cussion goes on, and when reports are brought before us
by the Committees, as suggested, we shall be able to deal
with the matter further, and shall find that there has
been ample justification for the calling of this Con-
ference, which wo all recognise as one of the most im-
portant that has ever been hole} in Australia, dealing as
it will with subjects which will tax all the ingenuity
and ability of the delegates.
Mr. THEODORE.—I am entirely in agreement with
what Mr. Peake has said. The problem confronting
us concerns not merely the land settlement of soldiers,
but the community as a whole. Indeed, it seems to me
that even so far as the men themselves are concerned,
other things than land settlement need to be considered.
In regard to land settlement, suppose that 17,000 or
•20,000 was the total number to be ,settled on the land
from amongst those who are returned to Australia, it
cannot be assumed that they will all be settled within
the next two years, and meanwhile they will have to
be provided for. Senator Millen has thrown out a sug-
gestion that in pursuing our public works policy in
relation to the repatriation scheme, temporary employ-
ment might be provided for returned soldiers pending
their settlement on the land. "But this problem of land.
settlement is not the only one that should be considered.
There is the question of returning men going back to
their ordinary avocations. They will not all go back
immediately, and if they do, they will, as Mr. Peake has
pointed out, displace others to a considerable extent, and
so the difficulties will be added to. The Conference must
consider the effect of the absorption of returned soldiers
into the ordinary industries of the country. This matter
bears a close relation to that of repatriation. The sug-
gestion made by Mr. Holman that the Conference should
laydown some outline of policy, and then, if necessary,
submit it to a special Committee of the Ministers con-
cerned, for the settlement of details, is a wise one. I
gather that Senator Millen thinks that the schemes
submitted to the first Conference were somewhat
ambitious, and that possibly they will require
to be considerably modified. So far as Queens-
land is concerned, I do not think the land settlement
scheme will require much modification. The
put forward at that time, subject, of course, to the con-
dition that the money was forthcoming, was for the
construction of certain works—including railways,
roads, and water conservation —necessary to make land
settlement successful. It involved the expenditure of
a considerable sum of money, and {he settlement of
millions of acres of land, divided into about 18,000
separate holdings.
Senator MULLEN. —An expenditure of £10,000,000.
Mr. THEODORE. —That expenditure, of course,
included the amount to be advanced to the returned
soldiers by the State Governments. If this were in-
creased, the total amount to be expended would
be increased also. Mr. Coyne, our State Minister
for Lands, has all the details of the proposal, which
was not merely an imaginative scheme, but an actual
concrete proposition.
The CHAIRMAN.—It was a definite scheme.
Mr. THEODORE.—Yes. The whole of the land
proposed to be made available was definitely located.
All this information can be communicated to the Con-
ference, if it so desires. In many cases the land has
teen actually surveyed, and its capabilities tested.
Queensland has no desire to monopolize returned
soldiers in land settlement proposals, but we could
easily settle all the men that Senator Millen has been
talking about as likely to go upon the land. But the
Queensland scheme could not be put into operation
within twelve months, because the land would not be
ready. In some cases the construction of railways,
would take two or three years, and perhaps to that
extent the original proposal will have to be modified.
We were asked to formulate our scheme of land settle-
ment on the assumption that it could be put into
operation within two years after the declaration of
peace, and it may he necessary to extend that time.
If all our men come back within twelve months, or
between now and the end of next year, there will un-
doubtedly be a lot of dislocation in employment, even if.
the soldiers return to their original avocations.
Mr. PEAKE.—By the displacement of men already
employed. s
Mr. THEODORE.—Yes; thid displacement will cer-
tainly cause serious difficulties.
Mr. McPHERSON.—We do not anticipate displac-
ing any men in this way.
Mr. THEODORE.—I do not know then how the
Victorian Government will absorb returning soldiers in
their original avocations unless, of course, the State
service has been under-staffed, and men are being paid
overtime.
The CHAIRMAN.—It must be remembered, how-
ever, that many activities have been slowing down dur-
ing the war period, owing to the difficulty of getting
material.
Mr. THEODORE.—Yes; and against that there are
other industries which will undoubtedly steady down as
the-result of the stoppage of the war. In some indus-
tries the approach of peace has been regarded as the sub-
ject for a scare. Those concerned spoke of the signing
of the peace treaty as “ the outbreak of peace ”; and
when the armistice was signed, it was referred to as a
peace scare. Several Queensland interests—l refer to
the mining industry—have been affected in this way
by the signing of the armistice, but no doubt their
troubles will be temporary, and will be solved in the
course of two or three years. The Conference will have
to look at this problem, not as it affects the returned
soldier only, but as it affects the whole community. If
in our land settlement scheme, the Commonwealth ties
us down to the use of that money only for the repatria-
tion of soldiers, and the employment of returned
soldiers, then our difficulties will be added to, because
the State Government must view the question as it
affects the whole community. The Queensland Govern-
ment are vitally concerned in the efficient employment
of the 38,000 men who will return to our State, and
our public works policy will have to be shaped with this
end in view. Senator Millen has referred to the neces-
sity of securing the return of our soldiers as rapidly as
possible, not only in their own interests, but in the
interests of Australia; and it has been suggested that
the States might endeavour to expedite their public
works policy in order to provide a greater amount of
employment. In Queensland, we have a definite pro-
gramme of works outlined, but it cannot be put in
hand until financial resources are available. The works
could not be put in hand until such time as the State
Government considered it most profitable to do so. If
we are called upon to carry out this programme in
order to create employment-—and that is a laudable
object—the State Government will be faced with a
loss. Is the Commonwealth Government prepared to
look at the matter in this light, and assist the State


Government if it becomes involved in a loss through the
launching of the vigorous public works policy which
ordinarily would be extended over a period of some
years? For every £l,ooo,ooo^we expend, we have to
find another £50,000 to meet the interest bill. If we
hurry our works programme, commencing with, say
£4.000,000 per annum, to cover the transition period
of the next two or three years, we must find each year
an additional £200,000 out of revenue to meet the
interest bill. Is the Commonwealth Government pre-
pared to assist us during the transition period?
The CHAIRMAN.—We are prepared to consider
that problem in relation to particular works; that is.
works that we consider to be essential.
Mr. THEODORE.—I am in the same position as
Mr. Holman in that regard. I am prepared to
lay on the table a complete scheme of works and develop-
ment, and a complete programme of what we can do
in the way of repatriation—that is, land settlement,
vocational training, and other matters,
• Mr. HOLMAN. —I suggest that we should adjourn
the discussion of this matter until to-morrow morning,
when, after consultation with my colleagues, I might
be permitted to resume it with a brief outline of tho
New South Wales position, so far as land policy is
concerned, and the extent to which that policy is con-
tingent on the construction of works, together with <i
statement of what we can do in the construction of
other works to afford additional employment during the
transition period. Possibly, each of the other Premiers
may be prepared, in turn, to take the same course. I
understand that the Lands Ministers, generally, are
ready with the : r statements. After such a discussion,
we should be in a position to make progress. Now,
each speaker is addressing himself more particularly
to the matters that are interesting him individually,
and we are not getting forward. I hope to make, to-
morrow morning, a short statement on behalf of the
New South Wales Cabinet.
The CHAIRMAN. —Do you not think it advisable.
Mr. Hfffinqn, to ask the Lands and Works Ministers
to compile the sum of the responsibilities, and an
estimate of the Commonwealth assistance required ?
That seems to me the pext step.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Probably that would be the next
step. So far as the New South Wales Government is
concerned, we can, in a very little time, give all the
information needed-
MV. PEAKE- —The Commonwealth Government
■would want to know the total reouirements.
Mr. HOLMAN. —It is essential to get all the Min-
isters concerned together for a few minutes to secure
some measure of uniformitv.
The CHAIRMAN.—That h? so. Mr. Theodore’s
ideas, for example, differ from tho®e of some of the
other members of the Conference. I am more particu-
larly concerned with projects for providing employ-
ment for returned soldiers, and other provision for
their welfare. I should like to know how much of the
reouisitions of the States cover matters other than
those. If the, facts can he made plain in onen con-
ference. well and good. The details might he left to a
subordinate conference to hp worked ont, and the results
submitted to the full Conference later.
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—Can you, Mr. Chairman,
say at the present moment to what extent money will he
available to the States?
The CHAIRMAN". —I can only sav that I t-hipk
money should he made available to the States at
that is, at the rate of interest charged to the Common-
wealth, plus the expanses of raising the loans.
Mr. GARDINER.—That would mean money at 51
per cent.
The CHAIRMAN.I—At 1 —At about that rate: certainly at
a rate not lower than 5J per cent. Should the market
rate oi interest decline, tlie States would get tlie ad-
vantage of tlie decline. 1 do not wish to make any
profit for the Commonwealth, nor to incur any loss
except assigned loss.
Mr. THEODORE.—It is the States that will make
the losses.
The CHAIRMAN. —Suppose, for example, that a
railway is constructed in Queensland, which the State
Government says is not likely to pay for five years
after construction, and the Commonwealth is asked to
hear some assigned proportion of that loss; that is
what I moan by assigned loss. I suggest that after the
objectives, resources, difficulties, and intentions of the
various State Governments have been set out by their
respective leaders, detailed statements shall be compiled
by Ministers selected for that task for the consideration
of the Conference.
Mr. GARDINER. —There may be works that each
State would like to construct, but for the construction
of which there would be no justification on a 7 per
cent, interest basis.
The CHAIRMAN. —I take the view of Mr. Peake
that there are projects which both the Commonwealth
and State Governments would carry out on a 4 per cent,
interest basis, but which a 6 per cent, rate of interest
would prohibit.
■Sir RICKARD BUTLER.—Is the Commonwealth
Government prepared to finance all expenditure on re-
patriation, the settlement of soldiers on the land, and
the providing of homes for them, and to recoup the
States for money alrea'dy expended on what is really
Federal work?
The CHAIRMAN. —I should not like to reply in
the affirmative jo that question, because the arrange-
ment between the Commonwealth and the States was on
a partnership basis. .
Mr. THEODORE. —Each of those schemes involved
advances by the Commonwealth.
The CHAIRMAN.—I think that the States should
outline their schemes, so that we may know what they
are.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—If you will recoup
South Australia for the money she has spent in provid-
ing homes and land for soldiers, and take responsibility
for that work in the future, we can finance our ordinary
public works.
The CHAIRMAN.—ShouId we not have a statement
of what is required, so that the Commonwealth may
know the general attitude of the States ? Do the mem-
bers of the Conference agree broadly to the proposition
of Mr. Holman that we now postpone the further con-
sideration of this matter so that the leaders of the
State Governments may to-morrow state their positions,
when, should it be thought advisable, the task of ex-
amining these in detail, and making a compilation of
what is required, may he assigned to the Ministers of
Lands and "Works?
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—I wish to know exactly
what is suggested. Is it your idea, Mr. Holman, that
we should, place before Mr. Watt exactly what our re-
quirements are?
Mr. HOLMAN.—I would pot use the word “re-
quirements.” What T shall aim at doing is to show
how many men we can settle on the lanjJ—for how
many men we can make provision.
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—There is something beyond
settling men qn the land. Only a small percentage of
the soldiers who return will wish to become land settlers.
We have therefore to make arrangements for the em-
ployment of the men in the industries of the country.
Works incidental to land settlement will absorb a large
number of returned men. It is for us to set out what
those works are. What we need to do is to increase,
our production.


The CHAIRMAN. —There is no desire on the part
of the Commonwealth to overstate the case for land
settlement. I want Mr.- Holman in particular to re
cognise that. We know that only a small proportion
of the whole number of men who will return will be-
come permanent land settlers, but the making of pro-
vision for them is a more important matter than the
making of provision for any other 10 per cent, of our
soldiers. It is in the settlement of that problem, and
in connexion with the incidental works that have been
referred to, coming generally under the classification of
public works, that the Commonwealth is prepared to
assist the States financially in a more generous way than
we have hitherto felt justified in doing. I suggest
that to-morrow morning we focus our attention on these
problems cf repatriation, referring details to a Commit-
tee of special Ministers. That, I think, is the proposal
of Mr. Holman.
Mr. PEAKE. —You are prepared to undertake the
stimulating of new production ?
The CHAIRMAN.—That is the desire of this Go-
vernment and of Senator Millen, particularly rural
production.
Mr. ROBINSON. I think that the Conference
somewhat overlooks the fact that there must of neces-
sity be a great increase of industry in Australia in the
near future, one reason being the disappearance to a
great extent of the disparity between the labour condi-
tions of the Old Country and Australia that has hither-
to prevailed. Within the last three or four weeks I
have received from sources which I regard as authorita-
tive information concerning the manufacture of a metal
product largely used throughout the world that the
labour cost would be practically the same in Australia
as in Great Britain, whereas prior to the war there
would have been a difference of 30 or 40 per cent. The
same change of conditions must apply to manufactures
generally. Many great developments are possible in
the woollen and other industries, some of which' are
already taking place. Every man who returns to this
country increases the possibilities of our industries.
Hence we must regard the labour market as a con-
stantly expanding one. In connexion with the woollen
industry I know of a possible expenditure within the next
couple of years of capital amounting to £500,000, and
many other similar enterprises will come about. These
will help to absorb all available labour. Public works
programmes for the giving of employment must be
makeshifts. The country cannot be prosperous if every
one lives on the Government. The question that we
have to consider is: Are the Commonwealth and State
Governments going to pursue a policy which will en-
courage the investment of British and other capital
in Australia and foster industries here? This will not
be done unless capitalists are made to feel that they
will have the same security in Australia as they can
get in other parts of the world. No doubt the various
Governments are prepared to guarantee this security.
We should realise, therefore, that, apart from land
settlement, public works projects must be regarded as
stop-gaps.
The CHAIRMAN. —I quite agree with you, Mr.
Robinson. I recently announced, with the full autho-
rity of the Cabinet, that the Government would, by
every means within its power, stimulate new industries
and encourage the introduction of capital, from suitable
countries abroad, in connexion with either rural or
secondary industries. We fully realize that in en-
deavouring to stimulate, for the time being, a public
works programme on the part of the States and the
Commonwealth, jve are dealing only with ephemeral
phases of the question. I am not veVy much concerned
about the dislocation problem, except that it pro-
duces a situation that must be attacked, but if the
Governments of Australia lead on the people by proper
encouragement and by providing proper conditions in
industries, both town and country, there will arise in
the Commonwealth a position that was impossible before
the war. This will be largely because of the attention
that has been directed to this great undeveloped con-
tinent of ours and because of the approximate equaliza-
tion of labour conditions which have hitherto debarred,
hindered, or prevented such expansions as many in-
dustrialists and politicians had in their mind. As Mr.
Theodore has said, the problem of the next year or two
is that which we have to face. That is our job. We,
as politicians, are all birds of passage—in administra-
tion, here to-day and gone to-morrow —and we have to
tackle the job that lies nearest to us. This is our job,
and if wo tackle it properly—in a spirit of amity as
between the Commonwealth and State Governments —
and override, as far as possible, those constitutional
difficulties which have hitherto prevented co-ordination
between the Commonwealth and the States, we shall
have done our job, our soldiers will be satisfied, and
the Commonwealth will be benefited. . That is the
spirit in which I ask the Conference now to get to work.
Mr. BALL.-—There is one matter to which I should
like to make some reference, and that is the very im-
portant question cf housing accommodation to which
Senator Millen has not alluded.
Senator MILLEN.—Do you mean on broad acres or
do vou refer to homes?
Mr. BALL.—I am referring tp homes. The problem
is a verv important one in our State at the present
time. Mr. Robinson has just referred to the smarting
of new industries. A large number of new industries
have already been started in the Newcastle district,
possibly as a result of the establishment of the steel
works there, and the great problem at the present
moment is to provide housing accommodation for the
men. That difficulty exists not only in Newcastle, but
in and around Sydney, and, indeed, throughout the
Slate. The question might well be seriously considered
in connexion with repatriation.
Senator MILLEN.—Are you aware of the terms of
the Homes for Soldiers Bill just passed by the Federal
Parliament ?
Mr. BALL.—No. We ought to take the matter into
consideration, and if the Commonwealth Government
has such a scheme it should be outlined.
The CHAIRMAN.—I thought that all the members
of the Conference were aware of it. The Commonwealth
Government considered it to be its special duty to
provide homes immediately for returned soldiers, and
towards the end of last year we put through Parliament
a very elaborate and business-like proposition, which is
now beginning to take shape and to live. That is
what we regard as our phase' of this problem. I do
net know whether Mr, Ball means that, in addition'to
that, we should consider the problem of housing accom-
modation generally for the people. Does he suggest
that that matter, which has hitherto remained with the
States, should become a joint question ?
Mr. BALL.—We, in New South Wales, have con-
ceived it to be our duty to provide housing accommoda-'
tion for the workers, apart altogether from returned
soldiers, and it involves a large expenditure of money.
It is a very important factor associated with the
problem of repatriation.
Mr. LEE.—If the object of the meeting of State
Mhrsters, which is to discuss this question, is to arrive
at what is actually being done, and can be done, by
the States, in order to submit a statement to the Con-
ference. I think that the proposal is a very wise one.
It must be clearly understood that the States have
undertaken a good deal of responsibility in connexion
with land settlement, and in respect of advances to
men on the land. There are other avenues along which
the States can work, and materially assist in the
problem of repatriation. While it may be a great
advantage to the Conference to know exactly what has
been done by the individual States up to the present


in regard to the settlement of returned soldiers on the
land, and other forms of repatriation, as well as to
learn what can be done by the States in the immediate
future to grapple with the situation which you, Mr.
Chairman, have just pointed cut, is our immediate
task, I think, at the same time, it would be most
interesting and useful to the Conference if Senator
Milieu would supply us with some very definite infor-
mation as to what the Commonwealth Government is
actually doing, apart altogether from the financial
assistance which it is rendering to the States, iii the
direction of repatriation. It must be borne in mind
that Iknd settlement is a very definite work that has
been undertaken by the States. It is true that we are
borrowing money from the Commonwealth, but the
States have to carry the full burden and responsibility,
and we are spending a good deal of our own money.
Take, for instance, the purchase of land in Tasmania.
It may seem a small matter, but still, proportionately,
it affects us to a very considerable extent. We can
settle men on the land in Tasmania only by the resump-
tion of privately-owned estates. We have only a small
area of Crown lands, and on the purchase of estates we
have, so far, expended £190,000. That is our responsi-
bility, and we have to carry the burden. We are now
asked, in addition, to consider how far we should go
in the development of a public works scheme for the
employment of returned men. That is a very laudable
project: but, as Mr. Peake rightly pointed out, we have
to consider whether these works can be undertaken on
a basis that will insure the development of each State
along right lines, and at a cost that will not place an
undue burden upon the people in days to come. We
cannot undertake public works solely for the purpose of
finding employment. No State would he justified in
undertaking other than reproductive works.
The CHAIRMAN. —I do not suggest anything to
the contrary.
Mr. LEE.—I am sure that you do not; hut it is
one of the points we have to consider. I dare say the
representatives of Tasmania will indicate to the Con-
ference some public works that it can undertake.
Everything, however, will depend upon the rate of
interest we shall have to pay. and T am very pleased to
hear that the Commonwealth Government is prepared
to consider that phase of the matter. The States can
carry only a limited responsibility, and I should like
to learn what the Commonwealth Government has
actually done in regard to repatriation—the number
of men it has dealt with apart from those dealt with
by the States, and the number that it considers it will
be able to deal with in the future. If we learn from
the Commonwealth Government what they have done
and what they propose to do, quite independently of
the States, we shall then know what is the exact re-
sponsibility of the Commonwealth and- the States in
regard to this matter.
The CHAIRMAN. —I agree with portion of the
remarks made by Mr. Lee, but, if h© will allow me
to say so, I fail to see the bearing of other remarks
made by him upon this question. There are many
phases of repatriation that we have not brought to
the Conference, because we recognise that repatriation
is our special job. Senator Millen could have dealt
with quite half-a-dbzon different functions, including
that of housing and others which have been referred
to, but to do so would have been to complicate the
issue. Our object has been to bring forward the two
matters in respect of which a Commonwealth and State
partnership exists or can exist to the mutual satisfac-
tion of the Commonwealth and the States, leaving the
main burden of repatriation proper upon the Common-
wealth, where it should continue to rest. It is by
narrowing the issue in that way that I hope we shall
come to an understanding of each other’s necessities
and requirements and provide for them as far as the
Commonwealth can do so. That, I think, is what is
in Mr. Holman’s mind. He will be prepared to-morrow
to say what has been done by his State, what can be
done, and what that “ can be done” will involve on the
part of his Government. If Ministers focus their atten-
tion on those points 1 think they will come to a satis-
factory agreement.
Mr. LEE.—I quite agree with you, but I fail to see
how the issue would be complicated if, in addition, we
were supplied with the further information of what the
Commonwealth has done in this matter.
The CHAIRMAN. —I have no objection, and am
sure that Senator Millen will not object to explain any
phase of repatriation.. At a suitable time no doubt
Senator Millen will supply the Conference with the in-
formation.
Further consideration of the question deferred until
next day of sitting.
SETTLEMENT OF BRITISH SOLDIERS.
The CHAIRMAN.—Before we disperse I propose,
since the subject is intimately related to the matter on
which Ministers intend to deliberate to-morrow, to give
the Conference some information relating to the pro-
posed British soldier settlement in Australia. I think
that information would help the Conference in its
deliberations, but I prefer to give it in Committee, since
it will be necessary for me to refer to certain cable-
grams which I do not care to make public.
The Conference sat in Committee; report suspended.
WHEAT FINANCE.
The Conference considered this question in Com-
mittee; report suspended.
The Conference , at SJ/op.m., adjourned until 10a.m.
on Thursday.


SECOND DAY—THURSDAY, 23rd JANUARY, 1919.
COMMONWEALTH SURPLUS REVENUE ACT 1910.
The CHAIRMAN. —It seemed to be the wish of the
Conference yesterday that, before we proceeded to the
further consideration of repatriation, State Ministers
should be informed of the proposals of the Common-
wealth regarding two important financial matters;
namely, revenue finance and the relations of the Com-
monwealth and the States in regard to it, and loans.
I am prepared now to outline briefly the proposals of
the Commonwealth regarding the surplus revenue pay-
ments to the States. At the outset, I wish to refresh
the minds of Ministers concerning the historical facts
relating to the revenue payments by the Common-
wealth to the States since Federation. It was pro-
vided in the Constitution that for ten years after the
establishment of Federation, and thereafter until Par-
liament otherwise provided, at least three-fourths of the
Customs and Excise revenue of Australia should be paid
to the States. Under that provision the payments to the
States varied from £2 2s. 4d. per head of population
in 1902-3 to £1 15s. lOd. in 1904-5. The States re-
ceived the following sums in excess of three-fourths of
the Customs and Excise revenue.
1901 (half-year ending June) .. £577,844
1901- .. .. .. 888,741
1902- .. .. .. 1,145,234
1903- .. .. .. 745,332
1904- .. .. .. 735,286
1905- .. .. .. 829,910
1906- .. .. .. 806,001
1907- .. .. .. 330,740
Total .. .. £6,059,088
Nothing in excess of the three-fourths required to be
paid by the Constitution was given to the States dur-
ing the remaining years of the arrangement. By pass-
ing the Surplus Revenue Act in 1910 the Common-
wealth Parliament created a new arrangement, under
which each State is entitled to receive from the Com-
monwealth annually 255. per head of its population.
Section 5 of the Act provides for additional payments
to Western Australia over a period of ten years,
beginning on the Ist July, 1910, and thereafter until
Parliament otherwise provides. The sum to be paid
in the first year was £250,000, and the payment was
to diminish progressively each subsequent year by
£lO,OOO. Half of this- payment is borne by the Com-
monwealth, and the other half charged to all the States
on a population basis. The special contribution to
Western Australia for the year 1918-19 amounts to
£170,000. The Surplus Revenue Act also requires the
Commonwealth to pay to the .States, in proportion to
the number of their people, all surplus revenue re-
maining at the close of each financial year; but the
Commonwealth, acting on a decision of the High
Court, has transferred to Trust Funds, for future use,
such amounts as would otherwise have become payable
to the States as surplus revenue, and consequently the
States have not received anything (beyond the per
capita contribution. Then, in 1912 and 1913, the
Commonwealth provided for the granting of financial
assistance, to Tasmania amounting to £900,000.
Mr. HOLMAN.—In what year was the transferring
of surplus revenue to Trust Funds begun?
The CHAIRMAN.—In the financial year 1908-9.
Mr. ROBINSON.—Was 'not the transfer made be-
fore the High Court gave its decision ?
The CHAIRMAN. —I believe that to be so. The pay-
ment to Tasmania is being made at the rate of £90,000
per annum, but the final payment in the year 1921-22
will be £85,000. Only a small proportion of tbe
revenue of the States lias been obtained from tbe Com-
monwealth, as is disclosed by the following figures,
which relate to the financial year 1916-17 —
Revenue from Revenue from T . , u
State State 80urt ' e3 Commonwealth 1 h ' d f
SL,t< ' per head of per head of
• population. population. p 1
£ s. d. £ s. d. £ 8 . d.
New South Wales .. 910 5 .. 147 .. 11 10
Victoria .. .. 742.. 147.. 889
Queensland .. .. 10 10 10 .. 14 6 .. 11 15 4
South Australia .. 10 12.. 147 .. 1159
Western Australia .. 12 19 0 .. 1 10 11 .. 14 16 5
Tasmania .. .. 5 3 5 .. 1 13 7 6 17 0
All States .. 9.1 9.. 158.. 10 95
It will thus be seen that the Commonwealth contri-
bution to the States has amounted to only 12 per cent,
of their total revenue. The amounts received by the
States vary because of the payments made to Western.
Australia, to which the States contribute, and because of
the payments to Tasmania. The time is now approach-
ing when the present arrangement may be altered, and
it has become necessary to consider ■whether a reduction
in the rate of payment should not be made. Since the
determination that the Commonwealth should pay to
the States 255. per head of population, great changes
have taken place, and the Commonwealth is saddled with
an increasing liability for interest on war loans and re-
patriation loans, for war pensions, and for invalid and
old-age pensions. In 1910-11, the first year in which
the States were entitled to the 255. per capita payment,
the old-age pensions cost £1,868,648, but this year
it is estimated that they will cost £3,925,000, an in-
crease of £2,056,352', or more than double the cost in
1910-11.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—The increase is not ac-
counted for only by the increase in population.
The CHAIRMAN.—No: it is accounted for by the
increase in the rate of pensions from 10s. to 12s. 6d.,
and by the increase in the number of applicants. In
the earlier years of the pension svstem. it was found by
the State authorities, and subsequently, by the Com-
monwealth authorities, that a considerable number of
persons who were entitled to old-aare pensions did not
claim them; hut the prejudice against the acceptance
of these pensions appears to have worn down.
Mr. GARDINER.—As with the maternity bonus.
The CHAIRMAN.—A shade over 99 per cent, of
those entitled to the maternity bonus apply for it.
During the current financial year the payments for
interest and sinking fund on war loans will amount to
£13.031,000, while war pensions will absorb £5.000,000,
making a total recurring war expenditure of £18.031,000.
These heavy burdens are being borne by the Common-
wealth out of the proceeds of increased taxation; but
the rates imposed, in many cases, are approaching the
possible limit. Not only is the margin available for
Commonwealth taxation getting smaller, but sooner or
later it is probable that higher protective duties will
cause a diminution of Customs revenue. It is inevit-
able also that land-tax revenue will diminish, and that
the war-time profits taxation, estimated to yield this
vear £1.800.000, will disappear altogether. Although
the Federal probate duties, the Federal income tax,
and the two additional Federal land taxes were im-
posed as war taxes, it is clear that they must continue to
operate for an indefinite time. The financial outlook
for the Commonwealth'is thus serious enough. Much
expenditure of an unknown amount has yet to be made
on the Australian army until its disbandment, as well


as for repatriation and demobilization purposes. It is
quite impossible to estimate the cost of repatriation,
but it cannot be less than many scores of millions
sterling. This expenditure has to be borne, as the Com-
monwealth Government recently announced, partly out
of revenue and partly out of loan. For these reasons the
suqdus revenue now being paid to the States must be
reduced, and I propose to recommend that the Com-
monwealth Parliament shall be asked to diminish the
payments progressively by 2s. 6d. per ,bead of the
population in each year until the total payment to the
States is 10s. per cnjiitn. That payment will continue
definitely for five years, subject to alteration, at the
end of that period, as Parliament determines. This
means that starting at the end of the .period during
which the present Act guarantees the payment of 255.
per head, namely, pn Ist July, 1920, we shall have six
2s. 6d. reductions over a corresponding number of years
until the 255. per capita payment will have been reduced
in 1925-1926 to 10s. per head.
Mr. HOLMAN.—What will be the bulk diminution?
The CHAIRMAN- —1 am about to show the gain to
the Commonwealth by that procedure, and relatively the
loss to the States in the aggregate. I have not worked
put the figures for each particular State, but cap have
that done if Conference desires it. We propose no re-
duction in respect of the present financial year, nor do
we propose to make any reduction in respect of the
next financial year, since, although the load is heavy
and increasing monthly, we are anxious to keep com-
plete faith with the States up to the 30th June, 1920.
For the financial year 1020-1921, when the first 2s. 6d,
reduction will be made, basing the payment on the esti-
mate of population, which our Statist has.given, and
which is founded upon an experience that is reliable,
the gain to the Commonwealth and the loss to the
States as a whole will be £683,891. Allowing for the
population progressing at the rate estimated by the
Statist, in the following year, 1921-22, the loss fo the
States will be £1,406,840, and in 1922-23 it will be
£2,170,518. In each case the logs stated is compared
with the amount which the States would have received
had the 255. rate been continued. In 1923-24 the loss
to the States will be £2,976,662 ; in 1924-25, £3,827,078;
and in 1925-26, £4,723,632. That means, gentlemen,
that the payment in 1925-26 to the States as a whole
will be £3,149,088.
Mr. GARDINER.—Are you allowing for the increase
of population ?
The CHAIRMAN.-—Yes; that will be the payment
on the per capita basis, after allowing for the pro-
gressive increases of population.
It is a subject for regret that this course is necessary,
but I feel that it is absolutely imperative. It is better
that the States should raise the money for themselves
in the difficult circumstances operating than that the
Commonwealth should attempt to raise it for them.
Sooner or later the States may have to do without any
help whatever from the Commonwealth. As against
that, however, the business concerns of the States are
very valuable assets which must prove fruitful sources
of revenue. Almost certainly in the near future, there
will be a great increase In population, particularly if,
by combined governmental activities, we reach out
for it; while the large expenditure on soldier
settlement must increase production, and create
additional revenue in various ways. The railways
ai\d other producing assets will, for instance, be
benefited, and I 'do not anticipate that the
States will be greatly embarrassed by the gradual
reduction in' the payments made to them. The pro-
posal that the amount payable shall be reduced
gradually is, of course, made in order that the States
may have time to set their finances in order. Some
may claim, as Mr. Hall, by quiet interjection, has just
done, that it is not proper at this stage to talk of
reducing the payments to the States until it has been
ascertained whether the war indemnity will help the
Commonwealth. 1 say at once that the largest payment
that may be expected" from the enemy is not likely to
place the Commonwealth in easy circumstances. What-
ever may become due to the Commonwealth will no
doubt be made in annual payments spread over a great
many years, and will not give any early or substantial
reduction of the huge interest and pension bills that
the Commonwealth has to meet.
Before closing, I ought to reflect with you on certain
other phases of this matter. The question of economy
was discussed at considerable length by the last Con-
ference of Treasurers, and ,Ministers then arrived at
a theoretical self-denying ordinance when they unani-
mously determined that, during tfye progress of the’
war, the ordinary costs of government should not he
allowed to rise in the States.
Mr. HOLMAN.—And in the Commonwealth.
The CHAIRMAN.—And in the Commonwealth. My
modesty induces me always to put the Commonwealth
last. I have consistently operated that agreement with
the States in the preparation of the financial state-
ment relating to the current financial year by making
as drastic a cutting as war conditions would allow the
Commonwealth to indulge in. The Government Rave
since then appointed three of the best men we can
gather for the task of investigating every phase of
Commonwealth expenditure, with the object qf stopping
leakages and preventing improper or unnecessary ex-
penditure. I expect that before the task of preparing
for the next financial year is before us, we shall Uave
an opportunity to consider the advice of these gentle-
men, and shall be able to make a substantial reduction.
We are at the present time taking steps to bring back
to a peace footing, ns early as we can, the ordinary
Defence expenditure, which necessarily was swollen by
war operations. Some of our ablest administrative and
military minds will be especially applied to that task in
the course of the next month or so.
In addition to the ordinary savings that we have
been endeavouring to make, however unpopular they
may be, we are at the present time steadily shedding
all the extra war functions that have grown around our
Government. My friend Mr. Peake spoke yesterday
about reducing the cost of living. I felt almost im-
pishly inclined to ask how that was to be done. We
have been trying to do it, with more or less success,
during the last two years, and have succeeded probably
in preventing startling rises, although not able to bear
down the cost to the average man and woman as we
should have liked to do. All that work, however, may
be described as purely war functions assumed under the
War Precautions Act, and we realize, as the States do,
that we cannot continue it. We are, therefore, shedding
all the machinery and the expense involved in connexion
with it. That may mean that the States will take up
the work. The function will automatically revert to
them at the conclusion of the peace operations.
Complaints have been made that we have made no
attempt to reduce certain expenditure which was pre-
ventable, and one of the most fashionable illustrations
of this class of expenditure is the maternity bonus.
That bonus was deliberately agreed upon as an act of
policy by the Federal Parliament. I did not approve
of it, and I do not approve of it now; but I do not think
that the people of the Commonwealth are ripe for its
total abolition. The Government, however, are de-
termined that, in the next financial statement, a drastic
alteration in the payment of the bonus shall be pro-
posed. All that I care to say, or ought to say, now, is
that the alteration will be in the direction of giving
the bonus only to those who need it.


Mr. HOLMAN”.—WiII it take the direction of co-
operating with the existing State organizations?
The CHAIRMAN.—I think we can also do that.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I think it would give an enormously
better result.
The CHAIRMAN.—I quite agree with you that, by
means of co-operation with those State institutions that
have done such splendid hospital work of various kinds,
we ought to be able to save a lot of money, and to give
a better service. lam prepared to confer with those
States which have suitable arrangements, in order to
determine how far it is possible to dovetail their systems
in with our own proposal. The main consideration,
however, is that those who do not need the maternity
bonus should not get it in future.
I wish you to understand, gentlemen, that I speak as
one who operated with you as a State Treasurer for
five or six years, and therefore know something of the
burdens which faced you then and confront you now.
Speaking with that knowledge, and with the added ex-
perience of responsibility in the Federal arena, I say,
quite plainly, that the Commonwealth is determined to
effect all the economies possible in order to bring back
to a proper footing the taxation that it is necessary to
impose at the present time. I assume that the States
will do the same; but, even allowing for that determina-
tion on our part —which can only be made operative by
the decision of the Federal Parliament—l say it is not
possible to do anything better for the States than the
per capita reduction which I have outlined.
Mr. ROBINSON. —Have you any figures as to the
proportion which the amount received by the States
from the Commonwealth bears to the total taxation
raised ?
The CHAIRMAN.—I have them, but I have not
brought them here. lam taking the total revenue,
and, just in rugged outline, showing how much comes
from your own sources and how much from the Com-
monwealth Treasury. What I have stated represents
the carefully-considered judgment of the Common-
wealth Government, and I submit it for your con-
sideration in the hope that, after you have analyzed
it, you will be prepared to debate it in a similarly
frank spirit to the way in which I have presented it to
you.
Sir ELLIOTT LEWIS. —The per capita payment is
to be gradually reduced to 10s. What is to happen
after that?
The CHAIRMAN.—It is to rest for five years de-
finitely at 10s., and then to be subject to the provision
of the .Federal Parliament, as the 255. payment was at
the expiration of a given time. That gives a total of
ten years, dating from the Ist July, 1020.
Mr. GARDINER. —Sir Elliott Lewis and myself
are interested in special grants.
The CHAIRMAN.—I always understood that
Western Australia objected to the use of .the word
“ grant.”
Mr. GARDINER.—I do not know what we object
to, but the money is there. What you call it does not
interest us.
The CHAIRMAN. —Tasmania and Western Aus-
tralia do not stand on a precisely similar footing as to
the guarantee or duration of those payments. The
Western Australian payment is linked up with the 255.
per capita arrangement, under which the Common-
wealth undertook to pay half the extra amount, and
the States to share the burden of the other moiety pro
raid of population, and is reviewable when the 255.
per head payment becomes reviewable by the Common-
wealth. That is the condition at this stage. Tas-
mania, on the other hand, was granted £90,000 per
year for ten years. Ido not propose to disturb that
so far as Tasmania is concerned. But if the States, as
they formerly did, in considering this matter and re-
viewing the special circumstances of Western Australia,
are prepared to make any proposition to bear their
share, as they did before, in relation to that State, I am
prepared to consider it. Beyond that I do not want at
this stage to pledge either myself or the Commonwealth
Government.
Sir ELLIOTT LEWIS.—And Tasmania?
The CHAIRMAN. —Tasmania is on a different foot-
ing, and Western Australia at the present time doubt-
less envies it.
Mr. PEAKE.—CouId you not give the States, which
have not had a grant so far, their turn now?
The CHAIRMAN. I presume you mean on the
principle of us all subsisting by taking in one an-
other’s washing ? I do not think that would be a
sane proposal. If delegates desire to pursue this
matter now, or to postpone its consideration, I will
take a motion.
Mr. FITZPATRICK. —Were you not going on with
the other question ?
The CHAIRMAN. This must be regarded as a
separate subject.
Mr. FITZPATRICK.—But is it not your intention
to go on with the next question ?
The CHAIRMAN.—As the next item on the busi-
ness paper, yes.
Debate (on motion by Mr. Fitzpatrick) adjourned.
CO-ORDINATION OF COMMONWEALTH, STATE,
AND OTHER PUBLIC BORROWING: EMPIRE
WAR DEBT COMMISSION.
The CHAIRMAN.—In accordance with the under-
standing, and at the request of the State Ministers, the
Conference will now take the fifth item on the agenda
paper; “Co-ordination of Commonwealth, State, and
other public borrowing.”
Here we must go back a little in order to be quite
sure that the recollection of all those round the table
is clear on one or two important points. When the
people of Australia entered the Federal Union they
believed an immense saving would soon result from the
taking over by the Commonwealth of their public debts.
Eighteen years have gone by since that time, and little
has been done towards realizing those expected econo-
mies, while the total debts of Australia have increased
from £201,000,000 to £720,000,000. In the meantime
the difficulties of the situation have increased, because
the Commonwealth itself has become a large borrower,
and the reserves which otherwise would have been avail-
able for sinking funds have been tapped for interest op
heavy new loans. Interest rates have risen, and the
outlook for conversion operations is at the present
moment not cheerful. On the 4th September last I
addressed to the Premiers of the States a letter on this
matter, arising out of the deliberations at a former
Conference, as follows:
The Commonwealth Government is at present re-
sponsible for securing money overseas for public
works of five of the States, but the States them-
selves obtain money within Australia for the same
purposes.
The conversion loans of the States, both in Aus-
tralia and in London, are arranged by the respec-
tive State Governments.
The New South Wales Government raises its
own loans in London, as well as in Australia, for
all its requirements.
Municipalities and like bodies borrow separately.
In several recent instances these operations have
reached substantial proportions.
One sanction recently given by the Treasury for a
local governing body of great importance was for a


loan of £1,000,000 to complete or extend some large and
important public undertaking.
The weakness of the present position is that
while the Commonwealth Government is carrying
on a huge loan business one State is entirely out-
side new loan arrangements, every State attends
to its own redemptions, and municipalities are
more or less independent. Clashing inevitably re-
sults. and will become more noticeable as time goes
on.
The total State loans to be redeemed within the
next ten years amount to something like
£200,000,000. War loans already floated and
being floated in Australia represent about
£190,000,000, and those, too, must be redeemed
within the same period—a grand total of
£390,000,000 which requires to be almost wholly
provided for by the flotation of renewal loans.
Adding to this great Sum the further large loans
required for war —
This being written in September last—
for repatriation, and for State public works, it will
be seen that a Herculean financial task is ahead.
When peace comes, much money will be needed
for the restoration of devastated provinces and for
the rehabilitation of the world’s suspended in-
dustries. These requirements, following the
severe drain upon the monetary resources of the
nations for war, will so far deplete available funds
that there will probably be little opportunity for
Australia to get new loans overseas for years to
come. The States must therefore depend more
than hitherto upon Australian money. After the
heavy demands already made much difficulty must
be expected in getting the necessary loans in Aus-
tralia, and care will have to be taken not to divert
all available funds to the Governments, because
money will be required for the development of in-
dustries.
In view of the present and future difficulties, the
Governments of Australia should, it is considered,
now make such preparation as will enable the best
methods to be operated. There can be no doubt
that Australia will suffer great loss if the existing
rivalry continues. What is needed is one autho-
rity aware of, and able to provide for, the obliga-
tions of all.
It is therefore proposed that the State Govern-
ments shall give the Commonwealth full control of
all State and local government borrowing for the
three years ending 31st December, 1921, the ar-
rangement to apply both to new loans and renewal
loans.
In the three years referred to, conversion opera-
tions in London, and new loans there, if any, can
well be managed by the Commonwealth Govern-
ment. The necessary transactions in Australia
could be conducted by the Commonwealth and
States acting in harmony, that is to say, when new
money is required, or when a renewal has to be
undertaken, the Commonwealth and the State con-
cerned would confer, and the loan would be raised
by that Government which could more readily and
satisfactorily attend to it. As a general rule, bor-
rowings from State Savings Banks and other insti-
tutions w r ould be left to the State to deal with, while
any approach to the market would be made by the
Commonwealth.
For 'many years, Australian Treasurers have
been unable to move in London without the aid of
certain financiers, who have exacted heavy toll. At
the time when the world’s financial arrangements
are in the melting-pot, efforts should be made to
obtain free finances. Action taken by one bor-
rower is likely to be more successful than indivi-
dual attempts made by seven applicants.
I would urge that the Commonwealth, pledging
the security of Australia, could get somewhat better
terms than any State could. The chief advantage
of placing all the loans under one management lies,
not so much, however, in that direction as in the
avoidance of great losses which would result from
the competition of seven borrowers.
The Commonwealth is the only authority which
can put all the requirements in line for a study of
the possibilities; the Commonwealth alone can co-
ordinate the loan business and make arrangement*
which will be satisfactory to all interests. The
Commonwealth Government, therefore, ask that
the management of your loans be given to it for
the three years above referred to.
Mr. PEAKE. —Is that both in and out of Australia?
The CHAIRMAN. —It means the whole thing; all
the operations in Loudon being conducted, after confer-
ence with the State concerned, exclusively by the Com-
monwealth. When a local operation, new or renewal,
has to be done with the Savings Banks, then, after con-
ference, and putting it on the list, if it is found that
the State Government can do it best, the State Govern-
ment will do it. New operations on the market, for
one or more States here, would be managed by the Com-
monwealth. Our proposal ■ would give the complete
co-ordination needed, and sufficient elasticity to secure
the advantages of local knowledge and local control,
and avoid the disadvantages of competition and
collision.
Various answers were received from the States to
that letter. The attitude of the States generally was
not encouraging. South Australia and Western Aus-
tralia have not favoured me at all with their views in
reply.
' Mr. HOLMAN.—Their letters are probably still on
the road.
The CHAIRMAN.'—I regard that interjection as an
unintentional affront to the postal system of the Com-
monwealth. Victoria and Queensland expressed a
desire to discuss the matter at a "Premiers’ Conference.
We have discussed it, of course, before. Tasmania
agreed to the suggestions in broad outline, with some
reservations; and New South Wales intimated that the
proposal was not acceptable.
I now once more press this matter upon the notice of
the State Ministers. Ido not think it is necessary for
me to advance arguments in addition to those set out
in the letter, but, in my opinion, a huge saving is pos-
sible by a combination of effort, and by amalgamation
of credit. I admit that the great relief to the taxpayer
is not demonstrable by reference to precedent or ex-
perience, because there has been no actual experience
to guide us; but I am convinced that benefits may be
obtained, and expenditure, otherwise inevitable, may be
avoided. The proposition made to the States was for
a temporary arrangement which, in my opinion,
should be at once entered into. Thus, time would be
afforded for the consideration of a permanent scheme,
based upon experience throughout the period in ques-
tion. I will leave that matter now for consideration,
,as far as it goes, with Ministers, who may discuss it at
a time deemed appropriate.
Mr. PEAKE.—Is there such a thing as a free
market in England in which to borrow to-day, even if
we all came in to borrow as a Commonwealth?
Mr. CHAIRMAN.— Yes, there is, for the Common-
wealth, as one great nation with a national debt of over
£700,000,000. There is far greater scope than there
would be for seven individual authorities to colne in


as borrowers bf smaller amounts. I feel confident of
that, and speak subject to the experience of other
gentlemen around this table who have closely studied
the matter for themselves.
Before the Conference proceeds to discuss the pro-
posals -which have been made in respect of these State
debts, I think I should give the outline of a scheme
formulated by the Commonwealth Government for the
pooling of war debts.
Mr. THEODORE. —In considering this scheme
would you be asking the States to formulate their pro-
]>osals for borrowing, and then endeavour to meet
them without restriction; or would you be requiring
any supervision in respect to the matters upon which
the States might be seeking to borrow?
The CHAIRMAN.—No. You are asking, in other
words, whether or not the requisitions of the States
should be operated automatically.
Mr. THEODORE.—Does the Commonwealth pro-
pose to operate simply as a borrowing agent?
The CHAIRMAN.—Of course, it could not do so
without some control.
Mr. GARDINER.—Do you think there would be a
saving in underwriting by the Commonwealth solely
operating?
The CHAIRMAN.—Without doubt. If you accept
the proposition which I propose to make to-day with re-
spect to the Savings Banks—involving, as it will, sub-
stantial structural alterations to the Commonwealth
Bank —that agency will he able to save the States a
very large amount by the proposed, new system of
working-in London. I propose to ask you, gentlemen,
to consider the whole question in a new light, because
of the war having ended; and which fact, therefore,
has made this subject more important or less im-
portant, as the case may be. I may add, however,
that the proposition was formulated in the full belief
that the war would continue. I am confident that the
■conditions to follow the early post-war period will
justify consideration of this whole matter in a totally
new light.
Mr. GARDINER.—If we knew that it was the
expectation and the intention to save underwriting
charges, that would assist us in our consideration.
The CHAIRMAN. We can save a substantial
amount, including underwriting, and such matters as
advertising and registration, for example.
Mr. PEAKE.—What makes you think that the
British Government would be walling to forego the
registration charge?
The CHAIRMAN.—I would remind you that Aus-
tralia, speaking with one voice, has got much from the
British Government, and would be able to address
itself to that authority with more weight than would
■seven lesser individuals.
Mr. McPiHERSON.—WouId the Commonwealth
wish to control the borrowings of the States?
The CHAIRMAN.—I do not want you to take up
the matter in that way. The idea is to see exactly what
the different States are doing and proposing, and to
ascertain just how far conditions to be imported into a
scheme of this kind would he fair to both parties.
Mr. COYNE.—Does not your suggestion mean that
the Commonwealth would decide how the States should
devote their various loans? If you were to Nay, “We
cannot lend you money for,such and such a purpose,”
would that not be interfering with the development of
the States according to their own ideals ?
The CHAIRMAN. —If we did so, that would conflict
with the views generally held regarding government to-
day. The point is that you have these two conditions
before you : Either that the States have the power under
a system such as outlined to place their requisitions upon
the table of the Commonwealth Treasury, and to have
them instantly operating—that is, a matter of complete
freedom with no cheek; or, on the other hand, there
would be a condition wherein the Commonwealth Trea-
sury would be the absolute judge as to the propriety of
all the requisitions. These are the two proposals. In
between them, there is a path down which I think we
can walk.
Mr. THEODORE.—It is possible that the States
might reach a proposal to allow the Commonwealth
to exercise supervision in limiting definitely the maxi-
mum which a State might use, but that the question
of how a State desired to expend the money raised by
the Commonwealth should be left to its discretion.
The CHAIRMAN. I Usk you not to discuss that
phase now. It is important, but it can be postponed;
and, when you have had another opportunity of con-
sidering the proposals of the Commoiiwealth, it can
then be reviewed, in all its phases.
At this stage, I desire to describe to you a proposi-
tion which was recently considered at length by the
Commonwealth authorities. We have decided to sub-
mit a scheme in connexion with the matter to the
British Government, and to the Governments of all
the associated Dominions within the Empire. The war
has established very close relationships with our kin
overseas, and I believe that a pooling of financial efforts
is now as practicable as it is desirable with respect to
our war debt. Indeed, one may say that it is the
duty of the several parts of the Empire to carry to-
gether the financial load resulting from the struggle
just as they united in the effort of actual war. Such
a combination would be powerful beyond anything
which has hitherto existed in the financial world, and
would save millions of money both to the people of
Great Britain, and throughout the British Possessions.
The scheme to be suggested by the Commonwealth
Government is, in its particular outline, as follows;
(«) That an Empire War Debt Commission be
created.
( h ) The Commission to take over the war debts of
, the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia,
New Zealand, India, South Africa, and the
various other portions of the Empire.
(r) Each Government to have representation on
the Commission upon' an assigned basis—
that is, either upon the basis of the war
debt per capita, or upon la basis of popula-
tion, or upon something which may be
agreeable to all parties.
(i d ) All debts at 31st December, 1919, to be so
taken over, and all sinking funds and re-
demption funds then existing to be vested
in the Commission.
(e) Interest and principal moneys falling due
after the date named to be paid by the Com-
’ mission.
(/) The debts to be converted into one large Stock
as and when they mature, the Commission
to have discretion to establish more than one
common stock, and to convert loans before
maturity.
(*/) All the terms and .conditions of issues of the
common stock or stocks to be determined by
the Commission.
(A) Each Government to pay to the Commission a
fixed annuity, equal to the yearly amount
payable by the Government at 31st Decem-
ber, 1919, in respect of interest, expenses of
paying interest, and contributions towards
redemption of debt. The annuity will
be paid in such instalments as may be de-
sired by the Commission, and will run un-
til the debts handed over, including debts
converted into common stock, have been
discharged by repayment to the public
creditors.


(») If at any time the annuity is not sufficient to
cover ss. on every £IOO of debt taken over in
addition to the interest and expenses then
actually payable on such debt, including
debt converted into common stock, the Go-
vernment concerned to make good the de-
ficiency by a payment to the Commission
in addition to the annuity.
(j) The amount of payments made by a Govern-
ment to the Commission in excess of what is
paid by the Commission for interest and ex-
penses on the debts taken over from that
Government, including debts converted into
common stock, to be treated as payments
towards redemption of principal.
( k ) The Commission to keep account of the obliga-
tions of each Government, charging and
discharging it both in respect of principal
and interest. For this purpose the Com-
mission to have power to decide how much
cf the common stock or stocks is chargeable
to each Government, and how much of the
earnings of general investments is to be
credited to each.
(l) Additional loans necessary in consequence of
the war to be raised by the Commission.
Shortly stated, full control of all war debts and their
conversion into common stock or stocks will be under-
taken by the Commission, which, out of moneys to be
paid to it by the Governments, will in the course of
time fully pay off the debts. As the scheme contem-
plates the provision of a sinking fund of at least one-
quarter of 1 per cent, per annum, the whole debt will
he paid off in seventy-two years from this time at the
latest, on the assumption that funds will earn an aver-
age of 4 per cent, per annum. In some cases the rate
of sinking fund contributions will be more than ss. for
each £IOO. The considerable reduction of interest
which it is probable will be effected by the Commis-
sion will also go towards repayment of principal, so
that the extinction of the debt will occur much before
the expiration of the period of seventy-two years.
It is, of course, well to keep in view the possibility
that interest rates may increase for a time. My own
opinion is that we have already reached something
like a maximum in that direction. It is for this rea-
son that payments to the Commission are proposed in
addition to the annuity, if necessary.
The Commission will have discretion to raise redemp-
tion leans in foreign countries as well as in Great Bri-
tain and the Dominions. In this way the field for
borrowing will be enlarged, and money will be obtained
always in the cheapest market.
The scheme aims at securing for the Dominions a
share in the greater borrowing power of Great Britain
and the low rates of interest thereby obtainable. Some
may object that the Dominions are asking for an ad-
vantage at the expense of the United Kingdom, but
I think that the Mother Country herself would gain
by joining in a great Empire effort.
A continuing appropriation of revenues for the
moneys to be paid to the Commission would have to be
passed by each Government, and, as an additional
safeguard, the several Dominion laws might be forti-
fied by enactments of the Parliament of the United
Kingdom, if that should be necessary.
The Government propose to take an early oppor-
tunity of making the necessary representations to the
Government of the United Kingdom and the other
Governments concerned upon the question. And I
submit it now for your knowledge rather than for your
consent at this stage, because, as far as I have deve-
loped it, it is only a proposal relating to war debts.
If the scheme proves acceptable to the responsible
authorities from the various parts of the Empire, how-
ever, it is capable of incorporating some, if not all, of
the pre-existing debts—that is, of debts prior to the
war. 1 refer to Australia, and to some or all of her
public debts. And, if in consideration of any pro-
position of this kind, the States of the Commonwealth
desired to be included in such a proposal, they would
require to make their representations through the Com-
monwealth Government to the other Dominions. I,
therefore, place the whole proposition before you for
consideration, first, as citizens possessing large respon-
sibilities and considerable experience. And, if you
think it is capable of being applied to your particular
problems as well as to ours, tell us so quite plainly, and
let us work it out together.
That is all I have to say at this stage on
the loan problems, either in respect of the pro-
posals made last year, or in respect of the new ones
which we have been thinking about to meet the oncom-
ing difficulties of our increasing load of debt in the
Commonwealth.
Debate (on motion by Mr. Ball) adjourned.
REPATRIATION: (a) WORKS PROGRAMMES OF
COMMONWEALTH AND STATE GOVERNMENTS;
(. b ) SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
The CHAIRMAN. —In accordance with the under-
standing arrived at yesterday on the proposition, I
believe, of Mr. Holman, I think it would be wise now
if the Conference dealt with item No. 1 on the agenda-
paper, so that those Ministers who desire to make a
general or special statement as to the work in their par-
ticular States, as well as the difficulties and probabili-
ties of the future, may do so. After which, the other
suggestion that the Lands Ministers should confer on
the actual details might be operative.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Whether, after we have a short open
discussion, it will Ibe necessary to refer this matter to
a sub-'Conference or not, I express no opinion
at this stage. I am inclined to think that that
course might not be wholly necessary; but, if it is, I
am perfectly willing to meet the views of the Lands
Ministers. I should like, in a brief statement, to put
before Conference the aspects of repatriation as they
affect primarily those States in which land settlement
has begun; but, before doing so, I wish to refer to a
letter which we received from Senator Millen in Novem-
ber of last year, and in which he made a series of
calculations as to the holdings that would probably be
necessary for land settlement of our returned soldiers.
In that letter, it was estimated that the holdings re-
quired in New South Wales would be 7,077. The
figures for the other States were in a corresponding
proportion, the total being 17,000 holdings, which Sena-
tor Millen estimated would be required to meet the
requirements of soldiers returning from the Front.
I realize that my brother delegates may not be so much
interested in the details.as they concern New South
Wales, but I want, if I can, to bring before the Con-
ference the nature of the special difficulties which beset
us in dealing with the large number of soldier settlers
who are to be rather suddenly thrust upon us, because
those difficulties do not readily present themselves to
everybody. Steps have already been taken by Mr. Ash-
ford in the direction of settling soldiers on the laud in
New South Wales. The figures show that, up to the end
of last year, we had already established 1,000 returned
soldiers on land; and, in the opening part of this year,
another 100, so that to-day we have at least 1,100 men
settled on the land in New South Wales.
Senator MILLEN.—In two and a half years.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Yes; but I would like to make it
clear at once that I mean settlement of soldiers on liv-
ing areas, and 1 think that, before we enter into the
discussion On the general subject, we ought to agree


upon the point that the settlement of a soldier on either
a large or small allotment, with the need still for seek-
ing employment elsewhere, is not settlement in the
truest sense of the word. I take it the Repatriation
Department means when a soldier is settled on the land,
that he is taken off the labour market and is able to
support himself by his own efforts. Now, Mr. Ashford
has provided for that so far in 1,100 cases, and it is
estimated that we can settle 800 more returned soldiers
on Crown lands in our State this year. That is
apart from the western division, where we can settle
another 50, and 500 more on the Yanco irrigation area.
Under our Closer Settlement Act we can settle still an-
other 200, and under the Closer Settlement Promotion
Act 400, a total of 1,950 in all. These can be settled
by the carrying out of the public works programme
for which we have already provided, taking no account
of an extension of rural industries which was resolved
upon as the result of conferences between Air. Ashford
and Senator Alillen. Aly figures relate to the calendar
and not to the financial year. If these men are to
have an advance of £SOO a man, the sum of £975,000
will be needed; but Air. Ashford is strongly of opinion
(hat an advance of £750 a man will ultimately be re-
quired. Arrangements have been made for the estab-
lishment of 100 men on comparatively small allot-
ments; the necessary land has been obtained, and the
'scheme may be regarded as in hand, but the Lands
Department contemplates the purchasing during this
year of further estates which have been investigated
to ascertain their suitability for smaller industries.
This land will provide for the settlement of 1,450 men,
which, taking account of the 100 I have just men-
tioned, makes 1,550 provided for under a system of
closer settlement for intense cultivation. Adding this
1,550 to the 1,950 already mentioned, we get 3,500
returned men provided for without any addition to the
public works policy that we have already initiated and
financed. A special difficulty has arisen in connexion
with the new rural industries; which I mention as
some of the State Governments may not have encoun-
tered it yet. The small industries that have been
agreed to as suitable are poultry farming, the growing
of tropical fruits, the raising of hogs, viticulture,
market gardening, and the growing of fruit for drying.
We have discovered, however, that there is a limit
to the expansion of settlement on these lines over and
above the financial limit. This limit is caused by the
fact that the stock necesshry for the starting of in-
dustries is not available in unlimited quantities. Take,
for example, the growing of plums for prune-making.
Air. Ashford contemplates the planting of - 200,000
trees this year, to obtain which he has more than ex-
hausted the resources of the State. Had it not be?n
for special arrangements with nurserymen for the bud-
ding of stock which would ordinarily have been used
for other purposes, it would have been out of the
■question to do what is proposed. Similarly there is
not an unlimited quantity of hogs available for stock-
ing new farms. Probably there would be no trouble in
obtaining the seeds and plants necessary for the
market gardening that is proposed, but in regard to
poultry farming it is to be remembered that the sale
of the produce cannot be guaranteed if the industry
is stimulated too rapidly. The market must be organ-
ized so that the demand may keep pace with the ex-
pansion of the supplies. Our experience is that con-
siderable caution must be exercised in making an
estimate of the number of men that can be settled
on these lines, and we feel that we have gone pretty
iwell to the utmost limit in providing for the settle-
ment of 1,450 during the present year. These 1,450
wpuld be employed as follows: —In poultry farming,
C. 1144.—2
,350; in tropical fruit-growing, chiefly bananas, I
understand, 250; in bog-raising, 250; in viticulture,
200; in market gardening, 150; in fruit-growing, 250.
Air. ANSTE Y. —How is it proposed to maintain
•the men engaged iu fruit-growing during tbe period
when they will get nti returns?
Mr. HOLMAN. —That question relates to the finan-
cial difficulty, which 1 propose to discuss later.
The CHAIRMAN.—What are the 100 men of whom
you have spoken engaged in ?
Air. lIOLAIAN. —In industries such as I have men-
tioned. We propose to spend £524,000 on the re-
sumption of land for these industries and £1,735,000
in advances to aid the men engaging in them. This
money would not necessarily be spent in one year; the
expenditure may be spread over two or three years.
Senator AIILLEN.—Are the advances referred to
those which the Commonwealth has undertaken to pro-
vide ?
Mr. HOLMAN. —The sum I have mentioned covers
much more than that; it provides for an average ad-
vance of £l,lOO per man. The Commonwealth esti-
mates that £SOO ,per man will be sufficient for the ordi-
nary settler, though Air. Ashford thinks that £750 will
bo needed; for this special kind of settlement we shall
need £l,lOO per man. The fruit-grower, for example,
must wait five or six years for a return. During the
year 1919 we shall have to commit ourselves to an ex-
penditure of £2,710,000 in advances, and £554,000 for
laud resumption; a total of £3,264,000. That, how-
ever, provides for only 3,500 men. We have had a
conference of the district surveyors of the State, and
they recommend the completion of certain railway lines
on which work has been stopped because of the financial
difficulties of the last three or four years. These lines
could be completed for an expenditure of £980,000 or,
say, roughly £1,000,000, and their completion would
make provision for the further settlement upon Crown
lands of 1,500 ordinary settlers, which would involve an
advance of £750,000 at £SOO a man.
The CHAIRMAN.—How long would it be before
those lines became effective?
Air. HOLAIAN.—I do not assume that they would
give any result this year. The proposal is to com-
mence the work at once, so that the lines may come
into operation next year. They are lines that have
been selected because they could do that.
The CHAIRAIAN.—And their construction would
afford employment for certain returned men ?
Mr. HOLAlAN.—Undoubtedly. It is recommended
that a line be built from Yanco to Griffith, across the
irrigable area. Its construction would cost £200,000,
and would make available another 1,000 irrigated
holdings which cannot be used until the line has been
constructed. The establishment of 1,000 settlers on
those holdings would mean another £500,000 in ad-
vances to them, at the rate of £SOO per man. These
two proposals make provision for the establishment of
an additional 2,500 men in 1920.
The CHAIRMAN.—That brings you up to 6,000
within two ye'ars.
Air. HOLM AN.We go beyond that. I have other
figures to give. During next year, Mr. Ashford and
his officers can provide for another 1,000 settlers by an
extension of minor industries. They cannot provide
for more than 1,450 settlers this year, but they can
provide for an additional 1,000 next year. Then there
is a second and less favorably situated group of public
works which have been recommended by the surveyor?,
probably involving an expenditure of £600,000, which
would make available 500 fiarms. These farms could
bo made available by the continuation of railways which
are in hand, of have' beeh authorized. Assuming lhaX.
these works are carried out, we shall be able during


New South Wales—Funds Required up to
31st December, 1920, for Settlement of Soldiers.
Particulars.
Number of Settlors.
Advances.
■Resumptions.
Public Works.
Totals.
£
£
£
£
Already Established
1,100
650,000 (a)
, ,
650,000
1,100
•
1919.
Crown Lands
800
Western Division
50
Yanoo Irrigation Area
600 •
Closer Settlement Act
200
Closer Settlement Promotion Act ..
400
1,950
975,000 (a)
Minor Industries for Intensive Farming
100
110,000
30,000
1,450
1,625,000
524,000
1,550
Totals for 1919
3,500
2,710,000
554,000
••
3,264,000
1920.
•
New Lines Recommended by Surveyors
1,500
760,000 (a)
, ,
1,000,000
Line at Yanco ..
1,000
500,000 (a)
, ,
200,000
2,500
Farther Minor Industries (say) .. .. ..
1,000
1,070,000
330,000
Farther Public Works (say)
500
250,000 (a)
600,000
1,500
(approx.)
Totals for 1920
4,000
.2,570,p00
330,000
1,800,000
4,700,000
Grand Totals ..
■ 8,600
5,830,000
884,000
1,800,000
8,514,000
Add 50 per cent, to totals of advances marked (o)
1,512,500
••
1,512,500
7,342,500
<
10,026,500
next year to provide for 4,000 settlers, or 7,500 in addi-
tion to the 1,100 that we have already, which more
than meets the requisition contained in Senator Millen’s
letter. The lines that I speak of have not been investi-
gated in every case by the Public Works Committee,
and therefore their construction is open to further in-
quiry. Assuming that they will be proceeded with,
we shall want, by 1920, £1,800,000 for public works,
and £884,000 for land resumptions, because in the
establishment of minor industries, we have to buy the
land straight out, paying cash for it. For advances cf
every kind £5,830,000 will be needed. That makes
provision for an advance of £SOO to each ordinary
settler, and for an advance of £l,lOO to settlers engaged
in small industries.
Senator MILLEN.—£I,IOO in addition to the land?
Mr. HOLMAN.—Yes; altogether about £1,400 a
man. This makes provision, I take it, for sustaining
the settlers over a period of two or three years. If the
advance to ordinary settlers bo increased from £SOO to
£750, which I think we shall have to contemplate, the
total sum required will be £10,026,500. This does not
include cost of administration, supervision, and in-
struction.
Senator MILLEN. —Are you contemplating anything
further?
Mr. HOLMAN. —I said that we could settle, this
year, 200 under the Closer Settlement Act, and 400
under the Closer Settlement Promotion Act.
Mr. ASHFORD.—This is provided for practically
by means of debentures.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Yes; it is all arranged under the
State Government’s own financing. The following
table summarizes the figures that I have given:—
I should like to put to the Conference generally the
fact that, by means of the large advances to men who
are being started in the minor and newer industries,
and a certain development of our public works in New
South Wales, we can add something like 3,500 men per
annum to our total number of settlers during the next
two years. In New South Wales, we finance our own
public works; and, while I do not wish to forestall any
discussion that may take place on the point, I may say
at once that we have not come here contemplating any
change in that system. With regard to the advances
to be made, either to the soldier settlers —who are
settled upon ordinary Crown lands or irrigation areas,
and receive £SOO each —or to those settled under the
new and special circumstances which we are creating
now, and who will get a somewhat larger sum, the ques-
tion arises as to the manner in which they should be
arranged. I should like to put it very clearly to the
Governments represented here that the present arrange-
ment, to my mind, is from many points of view
eminently unsatisfactory. The Commonwealth finds
the money, hands it to the State, and takes the State’s
bond. The State in turn deals with the soldier. If
there is to he any failure—if a soldier settler turns out
to be incompetent or unfortunate—the State alone will
lose. If, at a later stage, default is made, and pressure
has to be employed to recover the money advanced, that
work will have to be done by the State. I confess that
Ido not like it. I feel that if we are to have a Com-
monwealth advance to the soldier settler, the job of re-
extracting that advance from the soldier settler in years
to come should be undertaken by the Commonwealth. I
feel no pleasure in the prospect of the Commonwealth
playing the part of the benevolent uncle, giving the
soldier settler £SOO when he lands on our shores, and
the State having to do the work of a Shylock. Why
should the States have to deal with all the sordid de-
tails of exacting repayment?
The CHAIRMAN.—If the States were, as they are,
conducting ordinary laud settlement, they would
have to find all the substance. The difference,
in this case, is that the Commonwealth feels
that it has a very special obligation in respect of the
• returned men, and it asks the States, which have at their
disposal all the experience and machinery necessary


for the work of settlement, whether they are prepared
to accept these men as settlers. The Commonwealth
says to the States, “ In the case of the soldier settler,
we will find the money, upon a certain basis.” Whether
the arrangement made is wide or liberal enough is a
‘matter that I am not now discussing. The point that
1 wish to make is that wo are financing the States in
respect of those soldier settlers; whereas, if they were
ordinary settlers, the States would have to provide for
advances to them out of their own funds, and if default
were made, would have to take steps to recover, and, if
necessary, evict.
Mr. HOLMAN. —1 do not wish to strike an in-
harmonious note; but I would prefer the States to
finance these men as settlors where they* have in opera-
tion a system that could be applied to them. It would
not, after all, involve very much. The actual amount
which, in the case of our State, would have to be made
available by way of advances, is about £6,000,000.
That amount would be spread over three years. A por-
tion of it would be spread over four or five years, but
there would certainly be a considerable expenditure in
the third year. So far as New South Wales is con-
cerned, with the restoration of anything like normal
conditions the provision of that amount would not un-
duly harass us. The New South Wales Government
would be prepared to undertake that burden for our-
selves. I confess that I strongly dislike the present
arrangement under which we are, as it were, acting as
agents for another Government, which accepts a special
responsibility for these men, but leaves to us the busi-
ness of seeing that the advances made are ultimately
repaid.
Senator MILLEN.—May I remind you why the
agreement was shaped in that way ?
Mr. HOLMAN.—The agreement was m'ade at a
Conference at which I was not present.
Senator MULLEN.—It was shaped in that way, I
understand, to meet the express desire of the States
that they should be left with a perfectly free hand to
control their own operations.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I still feel that there is no reason
why the Commonwealth should not make its advance
directly to the soldier settler, saying to him, “ You
have been approved by the State as a settler. Here is
an advance of £SOO, which you must repay to us.”
Why should the Commonwealth ask the State to do
that work? Let the Commonwealth retain direct con-
tact with the soldier settler.
The CHAIRMAN.—I should like to kno*v what is
really at the back of my friend’s mind.
Mr. HOLMAN.—There is nothing more than the
objection that I have to the State having to play the
role of a sheriff’s officer for the extraction of the debt
due by the soldier settler to the Commonwealth Govern-
ment. That is a division of functions which is far too
often suggested where we have joint operation.
The CHAIRMAN. —May I point out very briefly
how the scheme which you have in your mind would
operate? We find the money, you select the settler,
put him on the land, and supervise his operations, if
it was obviously a case where a man could not suc-
ceed, what would happen? The money that we had
advanced would have gone in ground improvements
which would revert to the State. There may be defects
in the present system, but I do not think your proposal
would improve it.
Mr. HALL.j—If the man were .a failure, it would
be because his assets were no good.
The CHAIRMAN—Not necessarily. The assets
might be all right, but the personnel all wrong.
Mr. HOLMAN.—At all events, I should like the
Lands Ministers to consider whether some better ar-
rangement could not be arrived at. If we could not
get a belter system, I would rather that each individual
State should Hake the responsibility of making these
advances out of its own funds. There is no special
reason why the Commonwealth should make these
advances to men who are coming here as settlers. It is
merely a question as to the particular channel through
which the money is to come.
The CHAIRMAN.—I have not had an opportunity
to consult my colleague, the Minister for Repatriation,
and therefore I speak without prejudice; but it seems
to me that if the States feel that the machinery devised
is not calculated to meet the situation, or that the
terms struck between the Commonwealth and the States
as to liability for losses, or in respect of duties to be
discharged, are not satisfactory, it would be advis-
able for the States to say straight out that the Common-
wealth is not accepting enough responsibility, and put
up *a proposition that we should bear a larger share.
I could understand that being done, but I* cannot
understand a proposal for any other system except that
either the States should attend to the work of settle-
ment as they are doing or that the Commonwealth
should do so—and, speaking quite plainly, the Common;
wealth is not able to do the work as well as the States
can. if they put their minds to it »
Mr. HOLMAN.—The Commonwealth cannot do it.
The CHAIRMAN.—No. The work must be con-
tinued by the States. If the States think the burden
imposed upon them is wrong, why not frankly say so?
Mr. HOLMAN.—That is what lam doing. The
Commonwealth has made a proposition which upon its
face appears to be very attractive, but actually what
it means is that the Commonwealth is to take the
States’ guarantee. The States are to take the responsi-
bility for the advance made, and the re-obtaining of it
from the soldier settlers. The Commonwealth is abso-
lutely on velvet.
Mr. LAWSON.—The Commonwealth’s share is an
infinitesimal loss of interest until the rate of interest on
the £SOO advanced comes up to the rate which the Com-
monwealth had to pay for the money. The interest
charged by the Commonwealth is to start at 3 per
cent., and will gradually increase.
The CHAIRMAN.—As a matter of history, that pro-
position, as far as I remember, was made by the States.
Mr. HOLMAN.—That is so. The matter was dis-
cussed at a conference at which I was not present, and
I was not aware until a comparatively recent date of
the exact nature of the agreement arrived at. Now
that the question has been raised, I bring forward the
agreement as a matter which the Lands Ministers
should consider and if possible alter, as I think there
is, in respect of one point, room for considerable im-
provement. *
There are two other points with which I wish to deal.
The first of these has to do with repatriation generally.
This matter was discussed at the Premiers' Conference
held at Adelaide in 1916. Senator Pearce was then
Acting Prime Minister, and he attended that Confer-
ence, made a statement to us, and entered into certain
undertakings. We made two proposals to him. In
the first place we proposed the preparation of
a vocational list showing ’ the vocations of all
these men, their places of origin, and last place
of employment, together with any other details
that might he of value. This list, we said, should
be distributed amongst the State Governments and
opportunities given us forthwith to set inquiries on foot
as to how many returned men would, immediately upon
their return, find their old places of employment, or cor-
responding employment, awaiting them. It was also
suggested that a statement should be prepared showing
the measure of displacement that this would involve.
Mr. Theodore and Mr. Peake referred yesterday to that


point—the displacement of men temporarily employed
to do the work carried out by soldiers before they went
to the war. Senator Pearce gave us an undertaking
that such a list would be prepared, and said that, as a
matter of fact, it was actually under way.
Mr. LAWSON.—T think Mr. Watson was making
special inquiries at that time.
Mr. HOLMAN.—At the same Conference it was
mooted that a Committee consisting of a Minister re-
presenting each State Government, and a Minister
from the Commonwealth Government, should he ap-
pointed, and it was suggested that this body should
meet once a month to deal with the preliminary stages
of repatriation, and the information as it came in
from the men at the Front, so that we should see where
we stood. That was agreed to, the Committee was ap-
pointed, and one meeting was held. The Committee
•then apparently fell into desuetude. Mr. Hughes re-
sumed, and took over the management of Common-
Vealth affairs, and the whole system was abandoned.
There were great difficulties, as we had the great up-
heaval in connexion with the first conscription referen-
dum, and many other matters at the time occupied ’a
great deal <jf attention. At any rate, that movement all
to nothing.
What I want to put to the Conference and to the
Federal Government is this; It is of no use to say that
'certain parts of this problem are the special and sole
responsibility of either Government, and that other
parts are joint. If there is any distinction possible
along that line it is that land settlement is the special
and undivided responsibility of the States, but nobody
has urged, that view. The need of joint and co-opera-
tive effort in regard to land settlement has never been
disputed. I wish most earnestly to stress that the
(work of getting men back to their original occupation
|is work in which the Commonwealth must have the
co-operation of the State Governments if it is going to
make a success of it. We have immense responsibili-
ties as State Governments in that matter. For in-
stance, an employer, “ Jones,” has two men who went
•from his workshop to fight at the Front. .In June
next those two men will be back in Australia. The
question is: Will Jones replace them in his workshop
or will be not? The Commonwealth Government will
try to get him to do so, and will use whatever methods
it can command for that purpose. But, if it fails, who
is going to carry the baby? Not the Common-
wealth Government. We have two unemployed
citizens in the State,' and those two, in which-
ever State they live, will knock at the door of
State Ministers and for employment. It
is not the business of the Commonwealth Go-
vernment to find employment, or to regulate the
ordinary conditions of employment in a State; It is
a State responsibility, and clearly we are as much con-
certed as the Commonwealth is in seeing that Mr.
Jones restores those two men to his employ. In my judg-
ment, we are very much more concerned because the re-
sults of any failure vfill rest permanently, with us, and
not with the Commonwealth. I, therefore, most strongly
urge that that joint committee, to which Senator
Pearce consented, or some similar machinery, should
be started, with a view to taking the most effective
and vigorous steps possible to secure the reinstate-
ment of all returned men who went away from em-
ployment to the Front.
The CHAIRMAN. —Are you forgetting the resolu-
tion of the Conference that assembled in Melbourne
in December, 1916, and adjourned, and re-assembled
in Melbourne in January, 1917? It dealt with this
question, and arrived unanimously at the following
resolution regarding the treatment of soldiers and
sailors who return:—
Resolved: That with the exception of land
settlement and advances to he made against im-
provements and for other purposes under the laws
regulating State institutions, the entire question
of the re-establishment of discharged soldiers and
sailors, and the care of dependants of soldiers and
sailors generally be made the concern of a Com-
monwealth authority.
Mr. HOLMAN.— I remember that.
' The CHAIRMAN. —It was the decision of the
States, apparently after mature deliberation, at what
is generally known as the Melbourne Conference,
which finished in 1917.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Was that not a Conference of
Lands Ministers?
The CHAIRMAN.—Of Premiers and ex-Ministers
of Lands.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I think that is the very Conference
at which the arrangement we have been discussing to-
day was drawn up.
Mr. ASHFORD.-s-That motion was not carried
unanimously, although I admit it was carried at that
Conference.
The CHAIRMAN.—I was under the impression that
it was.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Whatever responsibility rests upon
us as a State Government in the way of preparing land
for settlement we will accept gladly and do our utmost
to discharge. We are doing it now. We have already
prepared plans and are executing them, which .more
than fulfil the requisitions of the Repatriation Depart-
ment.
For men who are not provided for, either by settle-
ment on the land or by being returned to their original
employment, we as a State Government are bound to
accept the full responsibility of seeing that they are
not left unemployed. I have already said so in a
speech in Sydney. I have the entire support of my
colleagues in Cabinet, and of the vast majority of the
House, in saying that in no circumstances will we allow
the idea to be accepted of a returned soldier not able
to find employment.
Mr. THEODORE.—Supposing 50,000 men are de-
mobilized by the Commonwealth in New South Wales
in four months?
Mr. HOLMAN. —Those are the very things about
which we want to confer with the Commonwealth.
The CHAIRMAN. —Shipping difficulties make that
impossible.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Our responsibility does not end
with seeing that a certain fraction are settled on the
land, and that the residuum, whatever it may be, is found
some sort of work. In the interval between those two
things there is the question of getting men back to their
original work, in which we as a State Government have
no voice at all. .
Mr. PEAKE. —There is the further question of the
displacement 'of the men who may be filling their posi-
tions.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Undoubtedly. That is a very
serious moral responsibility, but 1 do not feel that it
is so vital as our responsibility to the soldiers. No Go-
vernment wants to see a large body of unemployed in
its State, but there is a special definite personal re-
sponsibility to the soldier, who was told, “ When you
come back there will be something for you to do.” The
man in the street has not been told that. He has the
rights only of the ordinary citizen. The soldier has a
special claim.
Mr. ANSTEY.—There is the question of the provi-
sion of sustenance until we find him work.


Mr. HOLMAN.—Yes. # Is it proposed to continue the
payment of sustenance? 1 am sure none of us want to
see a large number of men living on a sustenance hllow-
anee. I feel that with more united effort on the part
of the Commonwealth and State Governments a great
deal can be done to secure the fullest possible re-estab-
lishment of men in their original employments. The
State Governments are very large employers. They will
all put their men back as soon as they return, setting
an example to other employers individually, and using
their influence with other employers for that purpose
if necessary. But surely the-Conference feels that the
thing is too important and too likely to be harassing
for us merely to take the role of passive spectators of
whatever is done or left undone. I assure Senator
Millen that I am not saying this with the slightest de-
gree of lack of confidence in his energy and capacity.
I think the management of the Repatriation Depart-
ment since it has been in Senator’s Milieu’s hands has
been a model of what this work should have been, We
have worked with him with the utmost satisfaction in
New South Wales, and it is not in any spirit of per-
sonal criticism towards him that I am compelled to
say these things. I simply say that we feel so keenly
in New South Wales the enormous dimensions of the
problem that confronts us, and the great magnitude of
the possible disaster which may occur if it is not
coped with fully, that we should like—being the parties
upon whom the disaster will ultimately devolve if it
does occur—to be in a position to be satisfied that
nothing has been left undone. I am making sugges-
tions for the purpose of helping, and certainly feel
that the arrangement agreed upon at the Conference of
1917, that this matter should be left wholly to the Com-
monwealth Repatriation Department, might, at this
stage, be amended in the direction I have indicated.
To re-state my views briefly;—
(1) The position in New South Wales with regard
to the financing of public works is, perhaps,
unlike that of the other States; and, there-
fore, I need not discuss it with the other
States. We propose at present to finance
our own public works.
(2) With regard to advances to men settled on the
land, some better arrangement should be
made; and I suggest that the States should
accept the responsibility for making those
advances, if an entirely satisfactory footing
cannot otherwise be found.
Mr. LEE.—Would you confine them to fixed improve-
ments ?
Mr. HOLMAN.—I would include every form of ad-
vance already recognised.
(3) The work of re-establishing men in their for-
mer employment should be carried on
jointly by the two Governments—State and
Commonwealth—in each State, by ma-
chinery set up for the purpose, and the
fullest energies of the State Governments
should be invited by the Commonwealth Go-
vernment to be bent upon this problem with-
■ in the next few months, as the result of some
scheme of co-operation to be agreed upon
now.
If that is done, the State Governments must accept
the final responsibility of carrying on public works of
sufficient magnitude to absorb any unemployed soldiers
who may be left. As far ,as our State is concerned, I
some months ago pressed my Ministers to accept that
responsibility and undertake that task.
Mr. LAWSON. —Victoria would not oppose such a
Committee as has been suggested by Mr. Holman, if it
were agreeable to the Commonwealth authorities, and
to the representatives of the various States. But we
adhere to the spirit of the original resolution, that the
primary responsibility for repatriation lies with' the
Federal authorities, that land settlement is distinctly a
State function, and that, therefore, the State should
take that responsibility, assisted by the Commonwealth
in such ways as may be suggested. Our own State em-
ployment is, of course, also definitely a State responsi-
bility. It is our obligation to find places for the civil
servants or railway servants who have returned. That
will be done, I do not doubt, by all State Governments.
Senator MILLED.—You are doing it.
Mr. LAWSON”. —Yes; and we shall see that real and
substantial preference in Government employment is
given to those who have seen service abroad. Generally,
we are prepared to co-operate with the Commonwealth
in every possible way, in order that the promises which
have been made to men who enlisted may be redeemed.
We are prepared to put State agencies at the disposal
of the Repatriation Department for the furtherance of
this work. That has been done in Victoria, and, I
understand, in other States, in regard to the vocational
training scheme. State technical schools are being used
for the purpose, and money is being advanced under the
agreement by the Federal authorities. . A State agency
is being employed in that matter, £nd the general spirit
and .disposition of the State authorities here is to co-
operate with the Commonwealth in every possible way.
It is true, as Mr. Holman says, that no public body
can escape responsibility. We all have to help, and we
all will help, I have no doubt; but the two main ques-
tions seem to be those of land settlement, and of the
suitable employment .of our soldiers.
With regard to land settlement, I have figures sup-
plied by my colleague; the Minister for Lands, which
I understand that Ministers desire to hear in open Con-
ference, though I think the matter is one that could
be more expeditiously dealt with in committee. The
number of returned Victorian soldiers up to 31st
December, 1918, was 27,930. The number of soldiers
discharged to that date was 22,910. The subsequent
figures.which I shall give indicate that the 10 per cent,
estimate of Senator Millen is, approximately, correct,
so far, at any rate, as Victoria is concerned. Before
a man can get land, he must possess a qualification
certificate. A committee considers,'whether he is a
suitable applicant, so far as hig knowledge goes in
regard to the land, and to agriculture generally. The
number of soldiers who have applied for the qualifica-
tion certificates is ; and 2,170 of such applica-
tions have been, granted.
Mr. HAYES.—Have the whole of those 3,574 men
been examined?
Mr. LAWSON.—Yes; and certificates have been
granted to 2,170 among that number. The number
of applicants who haVe followed up the gaining of their
certificates by putting in applications to secure land
totals 1,238.
The CHAIRMAN. —What has become of the
balance
Mr. LAWSON- —They have not applied. They
hold their qualification certificates, but numbers of
them, probably, have been absorbed in other avenues
of employment.
Senator MILLEN.—Are not some of them waiting
to make application for land?
Mr. LAWSON. —No doubt, thev are.
The CHAIRMAN- —Something like 50 per cent, of
those who have been granted qualification certificates
have not yet taken further steps to secure land ?
Mr. LAWSON.—The total is less than 50 per cent,
The soldiers who have not yet applied for land, among
those who hold certificates, number 932. The soldiers
who have actually been settled on the land amount to
903.


Mr. HOLMAN. —All upon living areas?
Mr. LAWSON.—MostIy so. Here and there, there
may, be blocks which are not living areas; .but the
desire of the Lands Department has been to give them
all living areas. I have mentioned that the number
actually settled is 903. The number of allotments
available, dr being made available, is 994; so that the
total number of blocks provided to date is 1,897. The
Department has experienced difficulty with the soldiers
in that there is a strong sentiment in favour of local
repatriation. There is a keen desire to provide
soldiers from a specific locality with land in their own
neighbourhood, where they may be near their people
and their friends, and may be in a position to obtain
assistance from them. In many cases, that haS meant
the displacing of one settler by a soldier. It has
involved buying out a ready-made farmer and putting
a soldier in his place. We have had to' operate a
section of our Closer Settlement Act in order to do
that; and there is a distinct disinclination, in many
cases, for soldiers to branch out into fresh fields, thus
leaving the locality in which they formerly resided.
We estimate that we can provide 1,000 further allot-
ments of Crown lands.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Without resumption?
Mr. LAWSON.—Those are Crown lands, chiefly
Mallee and Murray Valley country. •
Mr. COYNE.—Were those separate farms which
were repurchased from settlers ? .
Mr. LAWSON. —In many cases, yes. In some in-
stances, we bought a larger holding, and put, say,
three soldiers upon it..
Now and again, by the way, there has been an
attempt to sell to soldiers land which is deemed by the
Board unsuitable. Certain agents have been very ac-
tive. and there is some displeasure occasioned to the
soldier applicant when the Board says, in his own in-
terests, “ We will not ratify this bargain.” Many
complaints heard both at meetings of returned soldiers
and in the press are due to the fact that the soldier has
been satisfied that a certain block is the block for him,
but upon an independent investigation and valuation,
that block has been deemed unsuitable, and the proposal
has been turned down.
Senator MILLEN.—You displease him in trying to
protect his interests.
Mr. LAWSON.—The object is to protect the soldier
against going on to a holding which does not present
a possibility of his success upon it; and often, because
he does not get the holding he has set his heart upon,
there is a suspicion in the mind of the soldier that the
Board is harsh and unsympathetic.*
Mr. ASHFORD.—That same circumstance is not
unknown in other States.
Mr. LAWSON.—We have three railway lines in
course of construction. I have before me data which,
being in detail, may not be deejned appropriate for
placing before the Conference in general.
The CHAIRMAN.—Having followed Mr. Holman’s
very interesting statement, and your supplementary
account, from the Victorian point of view, I might say,
without desiring to comment upon the appropriate pro-
cedure during this debate, that a lot of the detail which
might be ordinarily given at this stage would be better
presented to a sub-conference.
Mr. LAWSON.—That is my own view, and I ex-
pressed it yesterday.
The CHAIRMAN.—It is illustrative matter; but
if you follow your own judgment, no doubt the time of
the Conference may be saved.
Mr. LAWSON.—I agree that if each State gives all
these details in open Conference, it will absorb time
which could be more profitably spent. I shall not go
into too great detail at the present stage. However,
what the Commonwealth is doing is advancing £SOO
for improvements, purchase of stock and implements.
That is the extent of the Commonwealth assistance
to-day, so far as Victoria is concerned.
Senator MILLEN. —Plus some amount of sus-
tenance.
Mr. LAWSON.—As for sustenance payments, it has
never been contended, of course, that that is a State
obligation. But we have received from the Common-
wealth up to £SOO ger settler. We have borrowed that
money from the Commonwealth, and are liable for it.
Mr. THEODORE.—You have actually got the
money from the Commonwealth;
Mr. LAWSON.—We have received that sum, and
have made the advance. It is a reasonable proposition
that the Commonwealth should share with the States a
larger measure of the possible loss entailed. All that
the Commonwealth does at present is to give to the
States a concession in interest. The money is advanced
at 34 per cent., going up by gradation to the rate of
interest which the money has cost; and the loss of
interest entailed is home half-and-half by the States
and the Commonwealth. Probably the Commonwealth
may see its way to share a larger 'measure of the loss ;
not only loss of interest, but in cases where complete
losses of advances have occurred. There should be
partnership so far as that loss is concerned. With
regard to the concession given to soldiers in respect of
payment of interest, Victoria stands at present to lose
a million of money.- For three years the soldier settler
goes upon the land, and pays no rent and no interest.
The CHAIRMAN.—Do you give such concessions to
ordinary settlers now?
Mr. LAWSON.—We do not give them any conces-
sions by way of interest. They are granted deferred
payments extending over a period of thirty-one and a
half years, and in some cases longer; hut such settlers
pay their interest and instalments of principal from the
beginning, or it is put on at the end. In the case of
settling soldiers, however, there is an absolute gift on the
part of the State Government in respect to the interest
payments for the first three years. There is no conces-
sion as to the‘purchase money. That is paid over a
period of years.
The CHAIRMAN.—In other words, the capital is
deferred over the three years, while the interest is for-
•given ?
Mr. LAWSON.—Yes.
Mr. HALL.—And that applies to repurchased estates
as well as to Crown lands?
Mr. LAWSON.—Yes, and the concession represents
to Victoria a sum of £1,000.000. So far as the losses
are concerned, there should be some partnership. The
Commonwealth should assist the States. The conces-
sion of £1,000,000 is a purely soldier concession and a
repatriation gift from the State of Victoria; and, as the
Commonwealth recognises its primary obligation in
the matter, it is only reasonable that they should share
this loss with the States.
In regard .to public works, I have details before me
as to works already provided, involving an expenditure
of nearly £2,000,000. That is on our ordinary loan
authority. We could probably obtain further loan
moneys and expend them upon works of public utility,
which would add to production and stimulate industry,
if that were necessary; But, in regard to employment
upon such public works, we have found a disinclination
on the part of returned soldiers to take on pick-and-
shovel work. The bulk of the money expended upon
public works is absorbed, of course, in the payment of
wages for unskilled labour,‘apart from the outlay on
machinery and the like.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Our own experience as to the dis-
inclination of soldiers agrees with yours. But it
should not he forgotten that the men we have been so


far dealing with have been largely drawn from in-
valided returned soldiers, and in many cases they have
not been competent to do pick-and-shovel work. The
same experience may not apply to the bulk of the men
still to return.
Mr. LAWSON".—That is so, but it is possible that
there will be still the disinclination to go in for that
kind of work, and the men may well look for something
better.
The CHAIRMAN". —That is probable, and natural,
too.
Mr. LAWSON". —It is, and the opportunities pro-
vided by the Repatriation Department for vocational
training may be largely availed of.
The CHAIRMAN. That appropriation of
£2,000,000 for public works generally would be ex-
pended upon railway construction, water supply works,
and roads?
Mr. LAWSON. —Yes, and forests. We see .possibili-
ties of land settlement in the Murray Valley, not only
on this side of the river, but in the Riverina District
also; but our advice is that if large numbers of men
were put on to work “at the upper storage at Mitta it
could not be completed in less than from three to five
years —probably the latter term would be a reasonable
estimate—and that settlement could safely not be under-
taken until more water is available. We have alreadv
settled a number of returned soldiers at Merbein, and
we recognise that we have taken some risk there, in the
event of the recurrence of a drought such as was ex-
perienced in 1914.
Mr. HOLMAN.—You mean that you could, not get
any additional settlement in the Murray Valley within
from three to five years?
The CHAIRMAN.—It is not quite safe to say that
there would be no additional settlement. The pre-
paratory work might be followed by effective planting
when water was secured.
Mr. HALL.—Yes, if you knew the water was avaib
able.
Mr. LAWSON. —When the Tumbarumba weir is
constructed the position will be greatly relieved.
The CHAIRMAN.—In regard to the water supply ?
Mr. LAWSON. —Yes, the construction of the weir
will make some land available, and we could proceed
with settlement to some extent, but we are advised
that the job should be finished before we could expect
settlement on anything like an extensive scale.
The CHAIRMAN.—If South Australia is able to
complete the Lake Victoria storage, that will relieve the
situation on the lower stream, and that relief should
gradually creep up as the locks are constructed, even
allowing that the upper stream storage works were not
completed for five years. ,
Mr. LAWSON.—In Victoria we are looking hope-
fully to the completion of this work, and we are urging
it strongly as one of the public works which might be
put in hand to absorb a large number of men and lead
to greater development in future.
I might now mention that in the Mallee we propose
to make certain areas available, to absorb 350 settlers.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I presume they will be occupied in
wheat-growing,
Mr. LAWSON.—Yes, but it will be a couple of years
before they can expect a return, railways,
and waterworks must proceed simultaneously with the
preparation of the blocks. The scheme aims at pro-
viding the soldier settlers with employment, and the
-amount they would receive would finally be added to
the cost of the land,
Mr. HOLMAN.—Roughly speaking, is that the total
amount of settlement you can readily provide from
Crown lands in Victoria?
Mr. LAWSON.—We can make provision there for
350 settlers, and the Lands Minister informs me that
within the next twelve months we could make provision
for about 1,000 settlers on our Crown lands. In the
Mallee scheme the men will not be getting any returns
from their blocks for some time, but they will be pro-
vided with employment, and whether we deducted the
amount paid to them from the amount advanced or
add it to the price of the block the result, in the long
run, will be the same.
But while we are prepared to provide employment in
public works as far as possible, we are looking to the
general industrial advancement of Victoria, and the
expansion of rural industries, as the best way in which
men can be absorbed into profitable employment. We
think that this is more important than the initiation
of public works merely for the purpose of finding work.
The works which we propose putting in hand are
largely road-making, which will lead, of course, to
increased production, and stimulate country indus-
tries. So far as rural industries are concerned, we
are helping, as far as possible, all co-operative enter-
prises. For instance, we are helping fruit-growers to
erect cool stores aifd canning factories. We have also
given guarantees to the banks to enable producers to
erect freezing works; and we have under consideration
a scheme for the development of the brown coal
deposits at Mbrwell.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Those enterprises, of course, have
no special connexion with the settlement of returned
soldiers, but are generally for the purpose of providing
employment, and to increase production.
Mr, LAWSON.—Some factories have already been
built. That, in our opinion, is the best way to
encourage rural industry. In some cases, the Govern-
ment have built these factories and cool stores.
Wherever a co-operative group of growers can be got
together, and put a proposal to the Government, we
have endeavoured to finance the scheme, providing for
repayments over a long term of years. In that way,
I think, we can expect to stimulate production, and
profitable employment will follow as a natural, conse-
quence. Ido not think that I need go into any further
details at the present time. So far as our public works
programme is concerned, it is possible that we shall
have to review the position if we are faced with a sub-
stantial reduction in the per capita amount returned
from the Commonwealth.
The CHAIRMAN.—That will not operate until
after 1920.
Mr. LAWSON.—Our figures have been based upon
the expectation of getting the Commonwealth return
of 255. per head of population. On the question of
economy, I point out that our annual votes provide
only for the annual services, and that, so far as Vic-
toria is concerned, there is no extravagance. We have
reduced our estimates of expenditure to a minimum.
This policy, of course, means that we shall have to
find money somewhere else, or the public will have to
go without the services which they have been accus-
tomed to expect, and which have been so beneficial to
the community.
Mr. THEODORE.—I can briefly outline the policy
of the Queensland Government in regard to the settle-
ment of soldiers and repatriation generally; but I am
more concerned with hearing what the Commonwealth
are prepared to do to assist the State Government to
create additional employment in order to relieve the
situation that is likely to arise within the next two
years in consequence of the refprn from the Front of
a great number of our men. Following the example
set by Mr. Holman and Mr. Lawson, I shall briefly,
and without going into details, state what we have
accomplished, so far, in regard to the settlement of
soldiers. The total number actually settled on the
land under our repatriation scheme is 513; but pro-
vision has been made for the settlement immediately,
if the men are desirous of taking up land, of an addi-
tional 1,760. The land has not only been surveyed, but


is actually available for selection, so soon as men make
application, and have been approved. In addition to
that, we have made some special provision for the
building of homes. This is quite apart from the
land settlement scheme. It is designed for town
dwellers —men who have secured employment in
various directions. Under this scheme we have re-
ceived 394 applications involving an expenditure of
£138,000. Loans have been approved to the amount
of £120,000.
The CHAIRMAN.—AII for soldiers?
"Mr. THEODORE.—In some cases soldiers’
widows are among the applicants. We have also ad-
vanced money in connexion with land settlement pur-
poses for what are regarded as living areas, which seems
to he a matter to which the New South Wales delegates
attach some significance.
Senator MILLEN-—The Housing Bill, which has
been adopted by the Commonwealth Parliament, would
apply to those intermediate classes —men who want
something more than a home and something less than
a farm.
Mr. THEODORE. —In addition to the amount ad-
vanced for the building of homes, we have advanced
for land settlement purposes, outside the group settle-
ments, £51,000, and to those settled within the group
area £98,000. Altogether we have advanced for land
settlement and homes £338,000, and although we think
we have some claim on the Commonwealth to be re-
couped for some portion of this expenditure, up to the
present we have not received one penny piece.
■Senator MILLEN.—Do you know the reason?
Mr. THEODORE.—I have discussed this question
with ■Senator Milieu on several and he pro-
mised to visit Queensland and go fully into all the
circumstances to see if some agreement could he
arrived at between the Queensland Government and
the Commonwealth.
Senator MILLEN.—Your Government stood out of
an agreement of its own accord. I have frequently
invited them to come in.
Mr. THEODORE. —We stood out of the general
arrangement which provided that the land settlement
policy should he under the control of the Board, hut
I understand that part of the agreement has never been
put into operation. I do not know that there has been
one meeting of the Inter-State Board.
Senator MILLEN.—I have had two sittings, and I
think Mr. Coyne was present at the last meeting.
Mr. THEODORE.) —If we were represented, it was
in regard to the repatriation policy. If the Common-
wealth Government say that we shall observe and sub-
scribe to the rigid policy outlined in 1917, under which
the Board would control land settlement policy before
w'e obtained anything from the Commonwealth by way
of advance, the position will be a difficult one, hut I
understand that a hard-and-fast rule has not been
adopted up to the present.
The CHAIRMAN. — I think there has been some
misunderstanding in regard to that matter.
Mr. THEODORE.—It would considerably assist us
in developing our scheme if the Commonwealth would
share some proportion of the loss, I agree with Mr.
Holman’s suggestion that it is time we revised the
relations of the Commonwealth and the States
in the matter of advances to soldiers, and the sharing
of the inevitable loss that will accrue under this scheme.
This deficit will not be limited to Joss of interest. If
we pay 54 per cent., or more, for money, and advance
it to the soldiers for the first year at 3J per cent.; the
second year at 4 per cent.; and the third year at 4£ per
cent-; and so on until the interest reaches 5 per cent., we
must add to the loss of interest the further losses due to
failures. A borrower might not be able to meet his
obligations. It might be through no fault of his own,
but due entirely to adverse seasons, or other reasons,
which cannot be foreseen. In the aggregate, these
losses will amount to a considerable sum, and I think
they might fairly be shared between the Commonwealth
and the States. I hope that before the Conference
closes, we shall be able to formulate some proposal that
will be acceptable.
Now, in regard to the future, I think the
Conference is more concerned with what we propose
to do than with what we have already' accom-
plished. In our State, we have under consideration 'a
gigantic scheme which we will he entirely unable to
carry out without some co-operation by the Common-
wealth—co-operation in the way of raising money,
and, in some cases, of sharing part of the loss which
the State will inour in the earlier yetars. at all events,
of the development of the programme. This deficit
may be regarded as an assigned loss extended over the
next four or five years. In Queensland, we could defin-
nitely lay down a plan if the Commonwealth are agree-
able to come in, and share the loss. In some of its
particulars this plan has not been advanced to a definite
point, but it is in its entirety quite practicable. We can
make available for soldier settlement 3,199,000 acres.
Mr. HOLMAN.—You are speaking of Crown land?
Mr. THEODORE. —That, for the most part, is
Crown land. The number of settlers that can he pro-
vided for on that area is 18,000. The estimated cost,
of resumptions and railway and road construction is
about £2,000,000, and the advances, at £SOO per soldier,
would amount to about £8,000,000, or a total of
about £10.000.000. Most of the land, as I have said,
is Crown land, hut we have resumed Cecil Plains, on
the Darling Downs, where 40,000 acres are reserved for
sold’er settlement, the cost of the resumption being
£BI,OOO, and under a scheme which was the outcome of
a conference between Senator Millen and Mr. Hunter,
then Minister for Lands, we are resuming at Atherton,
at a cost of £IBO.OOO, an area of 15.000 acres, to he
devoted to hog raising. That land is already served
with railway and road facilities, hut bacon factories
must be provided. There are no other resumptions in-
volved in the scheme, over 3.000,000 acres of the area
to which I have referred being Crown land. All of
this land is suited to agriculture, fruit growing, viti-
culture, poultry raising, mixed farming, dairying, and
grazing on small areas, and practically all of it is suit-
able for closer settlement. The hulk of it could he
divided into holdings not exceeding 250 acres, and
much of -it into holdings not exceeding 30 or 40 acres,
while, of course, for poultry raising even smaller sub-
divisions would do. It will depend on how soon we
can carry out the necessary developmental works when
that land will he available for settlement. To make
some of the areas available, railway and road con-
struction and the conservation of water are necessary.
If we were nof restricted financially, the whole of it
could he made available within the next four or five
years. In addition to making provision for the ad-
vance o f £SOO to every soldier settler by way of a loan
extending over forty years, without interest payments
for the first three years, Queensland makes available
£7OO. to he repaid within a term of twenty-five years,
hut this advance is made only where there is a sufficient
margin of security, such as is required by the Savings
Banks in making their ordinary advances. Undar our
pernetual leasehold system, a soldier can acquire land
without capital expenditure, and without any payments
at all for the first three years. He can obtain an ad-
vance of £SOO under the repatriation scheme, and an
advance of an additional £7OO under the provisions of
our Agricultural Settlement Act, so that he can have
£1,200 to spend upon improvements, paying nothing for
the land, exc' pt in one or two cases in which there ha


been resumptions. That, I think, is a fair outline of
the proposals of the Queensland Government.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Does the scheme that has-been out-
lined provide only for returned soldiers that have gone
from Queensland?
Mr. THEODORE.—No. We do not expert that
18,000 of the men who went to the war from Queens-
land will return to settle on the lands of the State. We
anticipate that only about 38,000 of the soldiers who
went from Queensland will return to the State.
Mr. PEAKE.—Part of the scheme is to provide for
settlement in the ordinary way?
Mr. THEODORE. —Yes. None of those schemes
are exclusively for soldier settlement. We have thought
it desirable to provide for ordinary settlement as well
as for soldier settlement, but the soldier settlers will
have special concessions, such as the advance of £SOO,
that will not he enjoyed by the ordinary settler. We
expect that returned soldiers will come to Queensland
from some of the other States.
Senator MILLEN.—You would give them the same
advantages as the Queensland returned men?
Mr. THEODORE.—ExactIy. I am informed by
Mr. Coyne that, although Ve do not provide exclu-
sively for soldier settlement, we have enough land
available to settle 18,000 returned men. There is also
provision, such as has been made in the other States,
for the extension, of the advantages of the soldier
settlement scheme to soldiers from other parts of the
British Empire. A thing that I regard as of the most
immediate importance is the finding of employment
for men who are not desirous of going on the land, or
who are not ready to do so, which will be the position
of a* large percentage of the returned men. We have
formulated a scheme of works that could be put in
hand, if the necessity arose, to give such employment.
I do not say that all these works are of such outstand-
ing urgency that they must be put in hand within the
time stated, but they are works that could be put in
hand. With regard to local authority works, such as
harbor construction, the completion of the sewerage
scheme now in operation in Brisbane, road construc-
tion, street formation, drainage, and so on —works
that have to be financed through the State Govern-
ment —the repair of cyclone damage, the erection of
bridges, &c., we could set in hand undertakings involv-
ing the expenditure of £750,000 in 1919, the expendi-
ture of £900,000 in 1920, and the expenditure of
£1,000,000 in 1921. On Government schemes of water
conservation we could spend £150,000 in 1919, £300,000
in 1920, and £500,000 in 1921. The Government is
developing a number of coal-bearing areas, and an
Act%has recently been passed which contemplates the
re-starting of copper and silver-lead smelting in the
Chillagoe district. For these undertakings we shall
need £200,000 in 1919, £IOO,OOO in 1920, and £IOO,OOO
in 1921. On permanent Government buildings, such
as hospitals for the insane, State schools, cold stores,
and other buildings, w T e could spend £300,000 during
the present year, £400,000 next year, and £500,000 in
1921. On railway construction, not particularly con-
nected with the soldier settlement to which I have re-
ferred, there could be expended £1,750,000 this year,
£3,000,000 next year, and £4,000,000 in 1921. We
have decided to establish State ironworks. For that
parliamentary authority has been obtained, and a
general manager has been appointed. This will make
provision for an expenditure of £l5O, 000 this year,
£IOO,OOO next year, and £50,000 in 1921. On can-
neries and other State enterprises £IOO,OOO could be
expended this year, £200,000 in 1920, and £300,000
in 1921. The items that I have mentioned
cover an expenditure of £3,400,000 for this year,
£5,000,000 for next year, and £6,450,000 for 1921. In
addition, we shall require under the repatriation pro-
posal that 1 have outlined £2,170,000 this year,
£3,600,000 next year, and £5,060,000 in 1921. Those
figures include the advances to soldien settlers.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is about £26,000,000 for
a three-years’ programme.
Mr. THEODORE. —I have said that it is not
essential that we should proceed with all the works
outlined, although it would he profitable to put them
in hand, and ultimately they will be put in hand. In
an ordinary works programme the expenditure upon
them would be extended over a number of years, the
term depending on the facilities for raising money. In
the Chairman's opening remarks there was a note of
anxiety concerning the finding of employment for re-
' turned men during the next year or two. The pro-
gramme which I have outlined would provide suitable
and profitable employment, and would lead not only to
the development of Queensland, but to the permanent
prosperity of the State and of the Commonwealth at
large. There may be some difference of opinion regard-
ing one or two of our State enterprises, but the cost of
these does not amount to much in the aggregate. The
scheme at large involves chiefly public works develop-
ment, such as is being proceeded with in all the Statee.
The railways and roads that would be constructed
would increase the population and the production of
the State, and this would benefit the Commonwealth.
It would not affect adversely any other State, or inter-
fere with its policy. I ask the Commonwealth to assist
us in raising the money that we need, and to consider
whether they should not bear part of the interest
charge for the first few years in which the works will
he unreproductive. We cannot wait until a favorable
opportunity occurs in London for raising a loan to
carry out the programme that I have underlined. If we
borrowed in London, months would be spent on pre-
liminary arrangements, but if our scheme were favoured
by the Commonwealth, there are many works that could
bo put in hand within a few weeks. The plans, sec-
tions, and working surveys of many railway projects are
complete, .and the work could be started directly engi-
neers and men could be sent to the job. Personally, 1
think that we shall have to commence a vigorous policy
of works construction in Queensland, even if that is not
necessary in the other States. A Victorian Minister
said yesterday that he thought that the demand for
labour in new industries in his State would ease the
labour market. But that will not apply in Queens-
land. ,
The CHAIRMAN.—I do not think that he was
speaking of the immediate future. What he had in
mind was the natural evolution of enterprise during the
course of a few years.
Mr. THEODORE.—It might be said that we should
not ask the Commonwealth to bear any portion of our
expenditure, because it will so tremendously benefit
the State. The same thing may be said of repatriation
expenditure. But although for every £IOO,OOO ex-
pended on the repatriation of soldiers the State will get
an increase of revenue, it must not be forgotten that
the State’s liabilities will increase also, because it will
have to provide schools, railways, training colleges, ex-
perimental farms, and make other provision for the
welfare of the settlers. Every State will benefit by the
expenditure on repatriation which takes place within
its boundaries, but it will also be obliged to incur a
large expenditure by reason of the repatriation. Even
had there been no war, Queensland would have had a
great deal to do in the way of development. But now
for some years to come the settling of the country must
be concerned largely with returned soldiers, who may


not, on the whole, make as suitable settlers as the
farmers’ sons and others who would, in the ordinary
way, be applicants for land, and whose knowledge of
rural pursuits would give them a better chance of suc-
cess. So far, the returned men have shaped very well.
Senator MILLEN.—Every civilian settler has not
been a success.
Mr. THEODORE.—That is so, though probably
there would be a greater percentage of successful men
among the ordinary applicants for land than among
the returned soldiers, because of their knowledge of
rural pursuits. The chief concern of Queensland is the
financing of these undertakings to meet the immediate
situation. Our land settlement policy cannot be put
into full operation within less than four or five years.
Meanwhile, thousands, and perhaps scores of thousands,
of returned soldiers have to be provided with employ-
ment. It will be bad for the community if returned
men are left too long on the sustenance fund. But even
New South Wales, notwithstanding the great activity
in many of her industries, will be faced with much the
same difficulties as we shall have in Queensland if large
numbers of returned soldiers are demobilized within a
short space of time.
The CHAIRMAN.—Is it the desire of the Premiers
who have not yet spoken that this discussion shall be
continued, or that we should refer the question to a
sub-conference of special Ministers?
Mr. PEAKE.—I think it might reasonably be
expected of ns that we should follow the order that
has been laid down. We must all realize that repatria-
tion, with which land settlement is closely involved, is
the great and prime question with which we have to
deal. We realize this more especially because we recog-
nise it to be our duty to carry out everything in the
nature of a promise that was given to our soldiers when
they wore asked to enlist, and because a first duty, and
a duty of gratitude that we owe to these men, is to do
our best to repatriate them in the broadest sense of the
term. We desire not merely to return them to posi-
tions as good as those occupied by them before the war,
but to place them, if possible, in even better situations.
Land settlement such as we have been discussing this
morning is eminently desirable in any circumstances,
and its desirableness is accentuated by the require-
ments of the present position. One of the main points
that we have to consider is whether the States should
undertake all the liability in connexion with the
venture of soldier settlement, or whether the Common-
wealth Government is not bound to regard it as partly
its duty, and to be prepared to bear part of the loss
that must inevitably occur during the lapse of a certain
number of yedrs. There can be no question that any-
thing like dual control would lead to very great dif-
ferences of opinion as to the most successful methods
to pursue. I think the scheme could be safely left
to the States to administer, more especially since—as
you, Mr. Chairman, have said—the States are
ultimately to reap the 'benefit of it. As an experi-
ment, however, it will undoubtedly result in great
loss; and our concern is to ascertain whether the
Commonwealth Government, in the realization of its
duty, is prepared to bear, and to what extent, the
loss attending whatever scheme may be decided upon.
The scheme of soldier settlement that we are dis-
cussing differs materially from any other system of land
settlement hitherto tried in the States, and when we
recognise that fact, we see at once what kind of
liability we are entering upon. These soldier settle-
ment schemes are to be initiated - and carried on with
Government moneys. In that respect, returned soldiers
who. go on the land will not be expected to do what
was required of our pioneers, who had to start out
ill-equipped, and were able to add to their implements
and machinery only by depriving themselves of many
other urgent wants. Our pioneers did not increase
their plant until they could afford to pay for it. In
this case,, however, we are proposing to advance to
every soldier settler £730. Very few of our original
pioneer farmers started out with anything like that
financial backing, and as business men we know that it
is most likely that many returned men will be induced
to enter upon farming pursuits without thought of the
ultimate result, beeause this advance of £750 will
seem to them to offer a big start.
I do not propose to elaborate this question, but I
shall presently submit to the Conference a statement
of what South Australia has done, and proposes to do —
a statement which, by the way, I feel inclined- to
return for revision, after hearing of Queensland’s
expansive schemes. Our proposals, however, are in
keeping with the general reputation of our State for
modesty and prudence. We have endeavoured to fol-
low on those lines in framing our proposals. Mr.
Holman has spoken of the time which must necessarily
elapse before the fruits of this scheme will be gathered
in. Unquestionably' some time must elapse before
those who devote their attention exclusively to prune-
growing—or to the production of other fruits that may
be dried or desiccated—will be able to count on any
return. Mr. Holman spoke especially of prune-grow-
ing, fftid said that already areas had been planted and
houses erected for soldier settlement purposes. Not
only prunes, but peaches, apricots, apples, and grapes
can be reduced by drying or desiccation. We have to
consider how the men who enter upon that industry are
to be maintained until their orchards are in full produc-
tion. It would be a wasteful procedure to encourage
our men to be content to subsist on the Commonwealth
allowances to returned soldiers. Anything of the
kind would be a waste of man-power, and should be
done away with as quickly as possible. In the schemes
that we have projected for soldier settlement in South
Australia we have recognised that there are industries
other than fruit-growing, which possibly might be
combined with fruit-growing, that returned soldiers
should be induced to enter upon, and from which re-
turns could almost immediately be secured. On the
irrigated lands on - the Murray, for instance, lucerne
can be grown most successfully. Dairying could be
carried on there, and by the manufacture of butter and
cheese in exportable quantities to cater for a market
where our produce almost invariably com-
mands high prices, good returns could be secured.
Then again, there is the hog-raising industry to which
Senator Millen has referred, and which could be com-
bined with dairying. It hinges very largely upon the
success of dairying, and might lie regarded as an ad-
junct to that industry.
Senator MILLEN.—It is no mere adjunct to the
dairying industry in America.
Mr. PEAKE.—Quite so; but at the outset we
would not be likely to establish the industry on the
scale of magnitude adopted in America. We shall
commence on a smaller scale, and our stocks will have
to be raised and increased. Mr. Holman’s scheme in
regard to market gardening would carry soldier settlers
a considerable wav on the road to success in the initial
stages of their industry. Potatoes and onions, for in-
stance, are always marketable products, and the pro-
duction of them on a small scale in the early stages
of settlement would return a man a few shillings a
week, which would help to maintain him until he had
brought his holding to a stage at which it would pro-
vide him with a better living.
My statement of what South Australia has done in
the way of soldier settlement—what she has expended,
and what she thinks she can do in that direction—is
not so elaborate as some that have been put before the
Conference. Already we have received from returned


soldiers 901 applications for land. Of these, 861 have
been approved, while 40 have not been approved.
Of the 861, 329 soldiers have been allotted blocks, and
are settled thereon; 121 soldiers have been approved
for training, and are now on training farms; 260 sol-
diers have been approved for blocks, but not yet
settled; 33 have been approved for blocks, but
their applications have subsequently been withdrawn;
100 have left training farms without being allotted
blocks, and eighteen who were allotted blocks have sub-
sequently surrendered or cancelled them. This gives
us the total of 861. We have .already purchased for
the settlement of returned soldiers 179,121 acres at a
cost of £764,161. As I mentioned yesterday, we in
South Australia are finding, as all the States no doubt
sooner or later will discover, that the possibilities in
regard to the repurchase of land are limited, and must
necessarily be so unless we are to disturb men who are
already carrying on their farms very successfully. Even
now we are looking forward to the time when possibly
we shall not be able to carry that policy much further,
and will have to seek for new fields of settlement. The
estimated, provision that can be made in South Aus-
tralia up to June, 1920, is as follows: —By means of
wheat farms and large estates purchased or to be pur-
chased—and when I speak of large estates I have not
in mind what we used to regard as big holdings, hut
estates capable of settling three, four, or five men —we
can provide for 250 soldiers. On Crown lands which
are not yet fully developed and cannot be successfully
occupied until supplied with railways and with water,
100 men. On small blocks to be purchased for dairying
we expect to put 50 men, and on blocks in irrigation
areas for dairying, fruit-growing, &c., 1,000 men, or a
total of 1,400, by those methods. The above estimate,
particularly as regards the last item, is subject to funds
being provided, labour difficulties being overcome, and
pumping and other plant being procurable. About 500
men will be required to get the irrigation blocks ready,
and soldiers can be employed at that work. The esti-
mated amount required to enable the above provision to
be made is £2,500,000. It will be seen from that
statement that the field we are looking to more than to
any other to enable us to settle men coming back to
South Australia is on the banks of the Murrgy, and that
links up the question with the conservation of the
waters of that river. Unless we can secure beyond
human possibility of failure a supply of water for
these blocks it will mean putting men there with a very
serious chance of a drought every year or two, during
which the water supply to keep their orchards and vine-
yards going would fail, with inevitable failure of the
settlers as a consequence. We therefore insist that, so
far as South Australia is concerned, the question of
settling returned soldiers, as well as any civilians who
wish to go out into these places, is intimately hound up
with the conservation and storage works on the Murray.
I understand that there is shortly to be a meeting of
Ministers or Commissioners on that matter. I know
that aspect of the question will be urged by other
Ministers from South »Australia as a matter of the very
first importance. Mr. Theodore indicated that the
Queensland policy was not exclusively for soldiers, and
that civilians would probably take part in what might
generally be called soldier settlements. There is no
question that that is a very wise policy. When we are
settling our soldiers, their settlements should not be re-
garded exclusively as soldier settlements. If we can get
other men, who have had great experience in the class
of work, intermingled with the soldiers, it will be a vast
help to those who go there with limited experience of
the working of the land in regard to dairying, fruit-
growing, or anything else. It will have also this greater
benefit, that it will prevent the growth of a feeling that
the soldier is an exclusive part of the community, which
is a very important consideration. We cannot afford
to have our soldiers regarded as a section apart from
the ordinary civil life of the people. If we can inter-
mix soldiers and civilians we ought to be able to expect
a great amount of satisfaction, as well as of success.
The foregoing estimate, particularly as regards the
irrigation areas, is subject to the provision of funds, the
.undertaking being considerably outside what can be
regarded as the normal powers of any State situated as
South Australia is. We take it. Mr. Chairman, that
your Government will be prepared to pay for the build-
ing of soldiers’ homes as well as to provide advances for
the settlement of the men and the working of their
land by suitable plant and equipment. But we are,
and shall be, averse to the Commonwealth Government
coming in and taking any part in the control of the
settler. If there are to be divided responsibilities and
divided orders and control, we can see nothing but
failure ahead of us. The Government of any one
State is just as much concerned in the proper carrying-
out of any such undertaking as the Government of the
Commonwealth can be. Its machinery is at hand, and
its interests will be very much concerned in the final
success or failure of the movement. We are asking you
to take up a certain share in the probable loss—l am
not going to define whether it should be a half share or
not—but that will still leave to the States the possibility
of great losses, and for that reason you may depend
upon it that every State Government will feel that its
clear duty is to make a success of the movement. The
Commonwealth Government should not be expected to
establish a Department for the control of soldier
settlers in any State. It should recognise that this
is-a matter in which it can trust the States, and in
which the States can do better work without Common-
wealth intervention.. At any rate, I think so.
With regard to advances for soldiers’ homes, apart
from farms, during the fifteen months the Act has been
in operation, we have established 822 returned soldiers
in homes, and widows and mothers of deceased
soldiers in homes. That is a very good record. The
fact that that number of returned soldiers has been
so settled with the assistance of the Government is a
reason for believing that possibly we are exnecting
and making provision for more settlement of soldiers on
the land than the facts will ultimately justify. This
total of 1,039 soldiers’ homes has been established, and
people settled in them at a cost of approximately
£572,000, or an average of £551 per home.
Mr. GROOM.—House and land ?
Mr. PEAKE.—Yes. That may seem a tolerably
large average, but when you take into account that
most of those homes are in the vicinity of Adelaide
the figure does not appear so large as if it represented
an average throughout the State. We anticipate that
during the next eighteen months £1.000,000 will be
required for this purpose. It is estimated that the
loan requirement for public works not directly con-
nected with soldier settlement is £2,000,000 per year
for the next two years as a minimum. We have works
authorized, and such undertakings as Mr. Theodore
referred to in the way of school buildings, road-mak-
ing, bridges, and matters of that kind with which we
have not been able to push on, because of the want of
funds for the purpose. The matter, after all, re-
solves itself into a Question of finding money with
which to carry on admittedly necessary works. To
summarize the position, the amount required in South
Australia during the next eighteen months or two
years is estimated as under:
Purchasing and preparing land for settle-
ment ... ... ... ... £2,500.000
Advance for soldiers’ homes ... 1,000,000
Other public works (which for the most
part are matters of State policy apart
from soldier settlement) ... ... 4,000,000
Total ... ... ... £7,500,000
spread over two years.


Is it the intention of the Minister for Repatriation
to establish a Soldiers Homes Department in each
State? ,
Senator MILLEN.-—lf yon refer to housing, neces-
sarily machinery will be established in each State.
Mr. PEAKE.—The machinery is there now in most
cases.
. Senator MILLEN.—The Act enables us, with the
concurrence of those who control that machinery, to
utilize it instead of creating new and special ma-
chinery.
Mr. PEAKE.—I hope the Minister will make every
effort to utilize existing local machinery. We have
been carrying on a similar system of advances for
homes for a good many years by means of the State
Bank, which has a very efficient staff, and has done
excellent work. There is no reason why, with an en-
largampnt of the administrative machinery, it should
not be ab'e to carry out that work just as efficiently
for the Commonwealth as it has done for the State.
Senator MILLEN. Do you propose to continue
your present rates and terms with regard to advances
for soldiers’ homes?
Sir RICHARD BUTLER. —They are more liberal
than yours.
Senator MILLEN.—If you continue those, it is no
good our starting business.
Mr. PEAKE.—At the present time the local Act
is doing all that is necessary in that regard, but it
cannot raise sufficient funds for the purpose. I re-
gard the problem of repatriation as arising very largely
out of the dislocation of labour and other conditions.
We do not expect back from the Avar nearly so many
men as went away to it. • Unfortunately the records
show that 55,000 men by reason of death will not re-
turn to Australia. Has the Minister taken that factor
fully into account?
Senator MILLEN.—Yes.
Mr. PEAKE.—In addition, there are a number of
men who unfortunately will not be able to return to
hard work again, and some who cannot return to any
work. They will be a load which the community gene-
rally will have to carry—l mean this in no disrespect-
ful sense to them—because, instead of being producers,
they must be pensioners and cared for by the State in
every possible way. A total of 55,000 is a very big
deduction to make from the number who went away.
It means more than 10 per cent, for which we shall
not have to make provision. South Australia’s pro-
portion of that number is 5,000. Our difficulty would
be greater if we had to find employment for the full
total of between 400,000 and 500,000 men whom Aus-
tralia as a whole sent away. As it is, we shall have
great difficulty, but we must take into account the
fact that the 55,000 men who have fallen in battle
have not to be provided for.
Mr. HOLMAN.—And Senator Millen told us that
about 70,000 men had already returned.
Mr. PEAKE. —I am dealing with the whole number
of those who will return. The difficulty is lessened
by that deduction, but it is emphasized by the prospect
of so many coming back at once before the process
of absorption can be fully carried out. I do
not think we need unduly emphasize the want of
employment that will occur during the next two years,
or possibly three. With the restoration of tonnage a
vast amount of employment will be found in the load-
ing of wheat on British ships. That work will absorb
a great amount of labour—much more in some States
than In others, and a large amount of labour which
might otherwise be unemployed. We are actually
looking rather to the difficulty bf getting sufficient men
to carry on this work of loading wheat than of having
too many available. That, briefly, is the case in respect
of South Australia.
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—First, I thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for calling this Conference together. It is a
very important one. We in Western Australia felt the
need of it, perhaps more than the other States, owing
to our great distance from the seat of the Common-
wealth Government. I conclude that the Common-
wealth Government is primarily responsible for the
settlement of our returned men. At the same time,
my Government considers—and the people of Western
Australia are with us —that the States should assist in
this great work. The object of the Conference, I take
it, is to endeavour to co-ordinate the efforts of the
Commonwealth Government with those of the Govern-
ments of the States—the Commonwealth Government
being our financial agent. In Western Australia, we
are, perhaps, in a more peculiar position than that of
any of the other States, because we have to depend
almost entirely on our primary industries. We have few
secondary industries, although I am pleased to state
that secondary industries of importance are establish-
ing themselves. We are primarily dependent on min-
ing, on the pastoral industry, timber, and agriculture,
including other forms of production from the land such
as horticulture and viticulture. ■We have suffered
possibly more owing to the war than any of the States.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Hear' hear! You recruited better
than any of the States: and you carried conscription.
Sir HENRY LEFROY. —We sent away proportion-
ately more of our able-bodied men, and we have had
very little war expenditure such as has taken place
in certain, of the larger States. Consequently, we have
been at a standstill. Prior to the war, the State had
entered upon large developmental schemes, but the
outbreak of the war largely caused them to cease. In
order to return our men to civilian life, it is now neces-
sary that we should go on with those developmental
works, which must go hand-in-hand with settlement.
But for that we want money. We have the machinery
necessary, and we have the land. The great thing is
money. I am always brought to a standstill with re-
spect to many of our proposals, which we know would
be of great advantage, owing to the fact that money
is not available. We do not want to enter on any wild-
cat scheme, but upon such undertakings as the people
will be willing to help in the launching of. There are
great possibilities in our mining industry—greater,
possibly, than many people in the eastern States
realize. We have an enormous extent of auriferous
country, and there is buried within the bowels of the
earth great riches which we have not yet been able
to develop. We desire to afford every possible advan-
tage for the development of the mining industry,
while at the same time assisting in agricultural expan-
sion. We know of what great advantage the mining
industry has been in developing the country generally.
It has been a prime developmental factor, too, in the
history of all the States;-and we in Western Australia
desire to see still further development along the same
lines. The successful development of mining in the
west cannot help but be of advantage to the eastern
States. We know how Victoria and South Australia,
in particular, benefited by the discovery of gold in
Western Australia. We have placed on our loan Esti-
mates this year a sum of X 60,000 to encourage pros-
pecting. It may not seem large, but it is something.
A number of returned soldiers have been given assis-
tance in that direction. These have been men with
previous experience on the gold-flelds. We have helped
them to proceed on prospecting work, and we are hope-
ful of good results. Primarily, we are anxious to see
our returned men successfully settled in civil life. At
the same time, we would like to see every fit and will-
ing man placed <sh the land, because production is the
keynote of success. Every man going on the land finds
work indirectly for numbers outside of his industry.


I regret, however, that we will not have the number
of men offering themselves that we would like to see
prepared to settle. I do not believe that the 10 per
cent, estimate of Senator Milieu will hold good for
Western Australia. So far, at any rate, that has not
been our experience. We do not expect more than that
percentage, at any rate, to apply to settle on the land.
Mr. HOLMAN.—'According to Senator Milieu’s esti-
mate, Western Australia’s proportion would be 1,064
men. You do not regard that as an over-estimate 1
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—I estimate that we will pro-
hably want to settle 2,000 on the land. We have sent
about 35,000 men to the Front. Some 6,000 have re-
turned, and about 5,000 have lost their lives, bringing
the number of those who are still to be returned to some-
thing like 24,000. 1 am hopeful that about 2,000 will
be settled on the land.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Were any considerable number of
the men who went away from Western Australia
miners ?
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—Yes, a great many. Many
of the mines had to close down. Our industries have
suffered because they are industries which have been
more affected by the war than many of those in other
parts of the Commonwealth. Mining has suffered very
considerably owing to the’ war, not from the fact that
the value of gold has decreased, or that it has not been
easy to ship the gold, but because everything required
for mining has increased in cost to an enormous extent.
Mr. PEAKE.—That refers especially to machinery.
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—Yes.
Mr. FITZPATRICK.—And, added to that, there
has been the shortage of labour?
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—That is so, and the ex-
perience has been that it is always the best men who
have gone to the Front. Western Australia has felt
thal strongly. Out of about 90,000 able-bodied men
engaged in the various industries of our State, some
35,000 went away, leaving us with only 55,000. Wes-
tern Australia, therefore, has suffered very considerably
on that account. Again, our timber industry was com-
pletely crippled. Timber getting is a very important
industry in Western Australia, but we are hopeful that
immediately upon the declaration of peace, and
with the release of further shipping, there will
be a great revival of it. I hope to see a large number
of men absorbed in that occupation. Considerable
attention has been given to pastoral development in
Western Australia, and we have already assisted some
returned soldiers to engage in that pursuit. A number
of these men have been settled on areas of from 50,000
to 100,000 acres. They went from the district
in which they are now located, and have been helped
considerably by their former employers. It is an
industry that returned soldiers like to take, up, and
I think it probable that many of them will prove very
successful. I do not,think it is necessary that I should
enter into the details of land settlement. That must
be left to the individual State authorities. Those who
are administering the affairs of the several States
know best what lines of policy are most advisable. It
is not our place to dictate to one another what shall
be done in that respect. All we want is the confidence
of the Commonwealth Government, and financial
assistance in carrying out the objects of the Repatria-
tion Department in regard to land settlement, and in
order to give employment to those who return to the
various States, whilst at the same time developing the
country and encouraging production. In Western
Australia I am laughed at sometimes, but good-
humouredly, because I have given out as my motto —
“ Produce, produce, produce.” I say that is what we
want in Australia. If only we can produce, every-
thing else that is good will follow. Senator Millen
has told us that perhaps we can establish the industry
of pig-raising. Every fanner, in my judgment,
should be a pig-raiser. In Western Australia we have
offered assistance, £1 for £l, in the establishment of
bacon factories where they may he required.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—We are guaranteeing
the price irr South Australia.
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—Every farmer should be a
mixed farmer. lie does not wan,t to carry all his eggs
in one basket. He wants to mix his farming just as
a painter mixes his paints—with brains. If he does
that, and keeps sheep and pigs with his wheat, then
if he is any good at all, and the country at all produc-
tive, he is bound to succeed.
Senator MILLEN.—Does not the character of the
land determine the nature of the occupation to be
carried on ?
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—I think pigs can be kept on
pretty well any country. In all our wheat and fruit-
growing areas producers can carry on mixed farming.
The Chairman desires to know from us what
our financial requirements are likely to be in
the near future, not only for the settlement of returned
soldiers, but also to provide work. • We have settled
about 10 per cent, of returned soldiers on land in
Western Australia, and though I do not know that
it is necessary to enter into details, I think it may be
of interest to compare notes on a matter such as this.
The great difficulty we have experienced with returned
men is that, up to the present, they have not been
physically fitted for the hard life of pioneer farming.
Senator MILLEN. —Because you have been dealing
only with men who have been returned invalided.
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—They have been returned as
unfit for war service. I think that all the States have
experienced some difficulty in settling such men on the
land, because they do not care to 'take up the rough
work of pioneer farming if they can get improved
farms. In Western Australia, where we have an
abundance of Crown lands available, we have been
obliged to purchase certain properties to meet the
requirements of returned soldiers. Clearing is one of
the great difficulties before land settlement in Western
Australia. The country, particularly in the South-
west division, is very heavily timbered, so that the
expense of clearing is enormous. But this timber con-
stitutes a valuable asset to the whole of, Australia, and
we do not desire to sacrifice our forests, even for agri-
cultural purposes, at the present time. ,We have
entered upon a scheme of forestry protection, and I
hope that in the development of the proposal we will
be able to provide employment for a number' of re-
turned men. Western Australia desires to be modest
in her requests to the Federal Government with regard
to this matter. We feel that we shall have to provide
land settlement for 2,000 men, and we believe that £SOO
a man is not sufficient. In the past, many men
have gone on the land with nothing, but they were able-
bodied men with special qualifications, and men who
were prepared to work extra hard for three months in
the year in order to obtain money to put int 6 their
holdings. I have known men who have taken up land
with nothing at all, and who are now in a prosperous
position. Those cases, however, are exceptions, and
those are not the cases that we are likely to deal with
under the repatriation scheme. Ido not think that we
can do with less than £750 per man. The times are
different from what they were many years ago. People
nowadays are not prepared to go out and live in a little
log hut as the pioneers were forced to do, and put up ‘
with many of the inconveniences which were then
endured. Many settlers nowadays are married men,
and naturally they want a comfortable home. I say


that if we are going to have the lands of this country
occupied, the conditions must be made attractive. We
must, if possible, give settlers the modern conveniences
of life, and in order to do that, we must provide, I
think, a sum of not less than £750 per man. Indeed, I
think that perhaps £I,OOO will be required in order to
insure success.
Senator MILLEN.—You are, of course, referring
to men without resources of their own.
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—Yes, I am speaking of men
with absolutely no resources. I have gone into this
matter very carefully, and I know from practical
experience a man is capable of doing, and also
what he requires. lie must have modern conveniences
and machinery to carry out his work successfully.
When first I went into the country, all we required was
a sickle or scythe, and a single-furrowed plough. The
position is very different to-day. If a man desires to
start as a wheat-grower, he must have a harvester,
which will cost 100 guineas, as well as other modern
machinery. Consequently, although much more is to
be made off the land than formerly, and although a
man is able to work a larger area, it is necessary that
he should do so, because in these days it costs him
much more to live and to work his farm than was the
case forty years ago. A man has now to get about
three or four times as much out of his land, and there-
fore it is necessary, not only that he should have more
land, but also that he should be well equipped with
a modern plant. We in Western Australia shall
want £1,500,000, and, possibly, £2,000,000, for the
settlement of soldiers on the land. Then there are cer-
tain public works, such as railway construction, water
conservation, harbor improvements, and road-making,
many of which have been authorized for the last six or
seven years, which ought to be carried out to provide
profitable employment for our people, and to develop
the country. Although a very large sum could advan-
tageously be spent on such works, it would not be
judicious to spend on them, at the present time, a
larger sum than the people could bear. Consequently
I ask the Commonwealth Government to assist us by
advancing something over £3,000,000 for •public works,
to be expended during the next two or three years.
We shall need also £250,000 for land resumption. It
may seem strange that I should talk of resuming land
in Western Australia, where there is so large an area
of vacant Crown land, but in certain districts, particu-
larly in,the south-west, a great deal of ring-barking
has been done, and it would be cheaper to punffiaso
land which has thus been in a measure prepared loi
use than to clear land elsewhere. Consequently, -it
would be wise to buy back such laud where it could be
obtained at a reasonable price. I have impressed it on
the people of the State that, in offering land to the
Government, they must put upon it prices on which
settlers,could'afford to pay interest.
Senator MILLEN. —Do I understand that if the
sums asked for are made available, you can see your
way to provide 2,000 holdings 1
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—Yes; we require £3,075,000
for developmental work, and I should like to ask for
£2,000,000 for the settlement of returned soldiers.
Senator MILLEN.—That is in addition ?
Sir HENRY LEFROY,— Yes. 1 think that is the
amount which would be required. We cannot settle
the men properly for a smaller sum. I ask also for
£250,000 for ■ the purchasing of land. The Chair-
man has told us that the Commonwealth Govern-
ment considers itself primarily responsible for
the settlement of returned soldiers. That being so, it
should be prepared to advance money to the States for
the work at a lower rate of interest than that at which
the money is borrowed. If the Commonwealth borrows
at 5£ per cent., the States might well get the money at
-4j per cent. The Commonwealth Government adminis-
ters the affairs of the whole of Australia, and it is Aus-
tralia as a whole that should bear *hc cost of repatria-
tion.
Mr. COYNE.—No corner of Australia should be
forced to bear any special burden in this regard.
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—No. A great deal of the
wealth of Australia is in and around the large cities,
and these cities should bear some of the burden in-
curred in settling men on the land whence their wealth
is procured. The States must face a loss, and there
should be some compensation for that loss. All those
whom we put on the land will not succeed, and when
a man is unsuccessful, it will be difficult to get some
one to replace him, because others will be inclined to
say, “ So-and-So did not make a ‘do ’ of it, and I
do not suppose that'l could do so.” The Common-
wealth Government should, therefore, see that Aus-
tralia, as a whole, is made to bear pari of the loss
which would otherwise fall on individual States. It is
not necessary for me to enlarge further on this sub-
ject; the details of the scheme that I have outlined will,
no doubt, be discussed later. The problems of j>eace,
so far as Australia is concerned, will be greater than
the problems of the war. In Australia, we did not
feel the war; that is, the people who had not those
near and dear to them in the firing line did not feel it.
The community was never gayer than during the past
four years. I hope that, in dealing with our peace
problems, we may satisfy the soldiers who have fought
for us. Everything that can be done is being done now
to provide a wise solution of our difficulties. Nowhere
is there any lack of sympathy with the returned men.
I hop© that the Commonwealth Government may assist
us in giving practical effect to this sympathy, so that
our soldiers on returning to civilian life may be so
placed that they can benefit themselves and the country
which they have so bravely defended.
Mr. LEE.—I rise with some diffidence to address my-
self to the subject, and hope that in any remarks I may
have to make I shall be able to taper down gracefully
some of the requests that have been made in regard to
the financing of the repatriation proposals. The real
object and intention of this Conference, I assume, is to
take into consideration the treatment of the men with
whom we shall have to deal in the immediate future.
In order that we may arrive at a satisfactory conclusion,
it has been necessary for us, as individual States, to
review what has been accomplished during the last two
or three years and to take into consideration what we
shall have to face in the immediate future in order to
deal successfully with our men, who will be returning
in greater numbers than heretofore. lam glad to
observe—and, subject to some slight dissent, the point
has been emphasized in this Conference to-day —that
we are generally agreed that the resolution carried at
the December Conference of last year, namely, that,
apart from the question of land settlement, the Com-
monwealth is primarily responsibly for the repatriation
of our men—still holds good. We, of the Island State,
in dealing with the question of repatriation, have kept
that resolution very clearly before us. The State Go-
vernment is endeavouring to carry out its part of the
contract, not only by the settlement of returned soldiers
on the land, but by dealing with them as far as possible
in other branches of the State’s activities.
It has occurred to me, in looking at this question
from, a general point of view, that while the Common-
wealth and the States have been trying to the best of
their ability to solve the very difficult problem of re-
patriation, there have been occasions for complaint on
the part of returned soldiers that, as between the Com-
menwealth and the States, from time to time they have
been missed and have not received the attention which
they consider they deserve. I was hopeful that one of
the results of this Conference would be to eliminate


some of tlie difficulties under which returned soldiers
claim they have had to labour, and that we should
more clearly and definitely determine our respective
positions so that, in dealing with the increasingly large
number of men who will be returning immediately, we
shall have no further cause for any complaint of the
kind. Tasmania has sent to the war between 12,000
and 13,000 men. So far, roughly shaking, 3,500 have
returned, and about 6,900 have yet to be dealt with.
We can justly claim that we have done very well with
our soldier settlement scheme. In Tasmania, un-
fortunately, the area of Crown lands available is very
small. Such Crown lands as we have are remote from
railway facilities, and are so heavily timbered that it
would be cruel to send our returned men into such
country. We have been, perforce, compelled, there-
fore, to resort to the repurchase of estates in order to
carry out our soldier settlement scheme. A few men
have been placed on Crown lands, but the number is
very small. Up to 31st December last wo had re-
purchased estates involving an expenditure of about
£190,000, and advances had been made for stock, seed,
implements, and improvements to the extent of £31,000.
This latter amount was advanced by the Common-
wealth, but we have to take the responsibility for it,
and although the Commonwealth has undertaken to ad-
vance the money, I am not sure that my Treasurer has
yet received it.
Senator MILLEN.—Every claim properly sent in,
and accompanied by the auditor’s certificate, has been
paid.
Sir ELLIOTT LEWIS. —Our claim has not yet been
settled.
Senator MlLLEN.—Anticipating that this’ point
would be raised, I made inquiries from my officers this
morning, and was informed that every claim supported
by a correct voucher had been paid.
Mr. LEE.—Our Treasurer will be glad to know that
if our claim has not yet been paid it will be met almost
directly. So far, we have received 459 applications for
land settlement, and of those 265 applications have been
approved, while 256 men have been allotted blocks and
assisted financially. Of the 459 returned soldiers who
have registered for land settlement, a fairly large per-
centage have not gone on with their applications, hav-
ing found employment in other directions. In view
of the fact that the population of Tasmania is only
about l-25th of the population of the Commonwealth,
I think it will be recognised that the work we have
done in the direction of soldier settlement is satisfac-
tory. Certain difficulties have been raised to-day as
to the treatment of the men who are going on the land.
Something has been said, for instance, with regard to
the question of control. It seems to me that the States
whose primary duty it is to undertake this form of'
settlement, should be responsible for the advances
made. We willingly take the responsibility for the
advances made in respect of the land itself, and we
should take the responsibility for the fixed improve-
ments. I am inclined to think it would be more satis-
factory if the Commonwealth assumed responsibility
for the advances made in respect of seed, stock and
implements purchased by soldier settlers, leaving the
responsibility for the land and fixed improvements rest-
ing upon the States. That suggestion has already
been made, and I regard it as essentially sound. It
has been estimated that about 7 per cent, of the men
already returned have expressed a desire to go on the
land, and the fact that we in Tasmania have
practically settled one-third of those likely to
desire to go on the land, speaks well, I think, for the
island State. My responsible Minister assures me that
the remaining two-thirds can be settled within the next
eighteen months or two years on the lines already fol-
lowed. Tasmania, therefore, will have settled its pro-
portion within the next two years, so that we can
rightly claim to have carried out our part of the under-
taking.
Wo come now to the question of finance. We have
a lively recollection of a Conference which you, Mr.
Chairman, called some time ago, to take into considera-
tion the 'policy of economy. In accordance with the
decision then arrived at, wc cut to* the bone our loan
expenditure, keeping in mind, of course, the provision
to be made for soldier settlement, and the big hydro-
electric undertaking to which we, as a State, are com-
mitted, and which must be financed and carried out in
order that we, as a Government, may fulfil contracts
into which we have entered with, various big com-
panies. If we are to enlarge our soldier-settlement
policy during the next twelve months to deal more
rapidly with the men whom we expected to deal with
over a period of two years, and if at the same time we
are to carry out our hydro-electric undertakings, my
Treasurer will be confronted with a very serious posi-
tion. We shall probably have to reconsider what
request we should make. Instead of coming along
with a very modest demand, such as we expected to do,
it seems to me, after hearing Sir Henry Lefroy’s re-
quest for £3,000,000, and Mr. Theodore’s request for
£26,000,000, that Tasmania will have to ask for at
least £2,000,000. If Western Australia requires
£3,000,000 I think that a request on our part for
£2,000,000 would be a very modest one. Ido not put
that request seriously at this stage. I shall have to
confer with my Treasurer to ascertain exactly what we
shall require. We are prepared, as we always have
been, to do our very best for our returned soldiers, and
to bring about the greatest possible measure of land
settlement. The Minister who has control of this
Department in Tasmania has won the commendation
of the Tasmanian Returned Soldiers Association.
They have expressed their approval of the way in which
he has dealt with the subject; and I feel sure that we
shall continue along the same lines.
The CHAIRMAN.—Who is the fortunate gentleman
who has earned this commendation?
Mr. LEE. —Mr. Hayes.
The CHAIRMAN.—I offer him the combined con-
gratulations of the Conference.
Mr. LEE. —Another activity connected with the re-
patriation of our soldiers which the States have to
take into consideration is the provision we can make
for employment by means of public works. There are
three ways in which, it seems to me, the States can
deal with repatriation. The first of- these is land
settlement, the second is a public works policy pro-
ductive of • employment, and the third is the
taking back into the Public Service of those
who have enlisted and have served their coun-
try. The amount that we had available from
loan fufids for public works on the 15th of this
month was £346,425; while the votes authorized by Par-
liament for roads, bridges, j’etties, tracks, buildings,
harbors, railways, tramways, and miscellaneous, run
into £256,000. Of that amount, the Minister has
authorized an expenditure of £89,000. We have been
limiting our expenditure to about £20,000 per month in
order to conform to the wishes of the recent Conference
that loan expenditure should be cut down to the lowest
possible minimum. We could, of course, accelerate
the carrying out of our public works, and increase the
expenditure in this respect to £40,000 per month, if it
were thought desirable to do so, and if the labour were
available. In addition to the amounts I have men-
tioned, we have voted something like £150;000 for
carrying out hydro-electric works. Thus, if the labour
at present available in our State is absorbed by the


expenditure of £20,000 per month on public works, we
have available a sum sufficient to keep all labour fully
employed for twelve months, and to provide a surplus
of £lO,OOO per month for the employment of those of
our returned soldiers who may be suitable for work on
the construction of roads, bridges, &c. If there is a
greater number of men available to take on this labour,
we can spend a greater amount of money, because we
have the provision made for it. But the difficulty in
Tasmania is that a very small proportion of these men
is prepared to take on pick-and-shovel jobs on public
works. What will be the value of the States saying
that they are going to pass public works proposals for
the expenditure of so many millions, if the men who
are coming back are not fitted, or are not willing, to
take on that particular form of labour? There
will still be a big proportion of the returning
men left out of employment. That being so,
that is where our difficulties and troubles are likely to
commence. What are we going to do with the men
who are not fitted to go on the laud ? We are given
to understand that only 7 per cent, are likely to do
so. We can expect to place only a small percentage
in pick-and-shovel work in Government employment
on public works construction, or in private employment
of the same class. What, then, is to be done with the
remainder who are able and willing to undertake
various other kinds of work ? It may be said that it
is the duty of the State to provide for their employ-
ment in the Public Service and various Departments
of State activity. I recognise that it is clearly and
unmistakably our duty to do that as far as we can.
( We have passed legislation that preference is to be
given to returned soldiers and sailors in all forms of
Government employment. We are absorbing in our
State service all the men that we can possibly take in,
but ours is a small service, and we cannot take very
many. Of the men who have gone away, about 350
who were in some branch of the Public Service of the
State are likely to return. They will naturally go back
into the positions they formerly occupied, and as other
vacancies occur, we are putting returned soldiers in as
far as we can. But after we have done, as States, all
that we can in that direction, and in the way of
settlement on the land, and in providing em-
ployment on public works, there will still be a
very large proportion of men for whom no
provision is made. How are they to be dealt with?
That is the serious problem we have to face. If the
Commonwealth Government is prepared to assist the
States as far as practicable, as you, Mr. Chairman,' have
indicated, the situation may be relieved to a certain ex-
tent; but the State Repatriation Boards will have a
very arduous task to accomplish in placing these other'
men. I wonder —and I do not say this in any carping
spirit—whether the Boards urider the control and juris-
"diction of the Commonwealth Repatriation Department
are achieving all that they might do in dealing with
those men who are not dealt with by the States. We
hear a great many complaints. A great number of.
them, I believe, are groundless. I believe there is a
tendency to exaggerate the difficulties in regard to
many of these men, but the fact remains that there is
a very large proportion who complain that there Is
absolutely nothing fer them to do, and no provision
made for them, because they are not fit to go on the
land, and the State Governments cannot take them into
their Public Services. 1 sometimes wonder whether we
have not started somewhat on the wrong lines, and
been a little too eager to talk about land settlement.
Take the case of two men who go away from
Australia to become soldiers. One has been potter-
ing about a farm, doing a little shearing,
or following - the chaff-cutter or thrashing machine,
or doing a bit of gorse-cutting, but he has
no real knowledge of farming as a business. The
other man is a skilled artisan who has been earning
between £3 and £4 per week. They come back in
due course. The one goes to the Soldiers’ Settlement
Board and says, “ I have been a land-worker all my
life. I have a wife and family and want a farm.”
If he can put up a decent case he is put on the land
at a cost of about £2,000. A farm is bought for him,
and £5OO is advanced to set him up in a reasonable
way. The other man goes to the Repatriation De-
partment and asks what can be done for him. He is
told that the Department will find him a job, or put
him back at his old employment if he is able to do
the work. They will probably give him a sustenance
allowance also f6r a little while, but that is the best
that can be done to put him back into civil life. He
has to start where he left off. There is a tendency on
the part of a lot of these fellows to put up a story.
They say to themselves, ‘‘We want to start out in
style as a gentleman farmer.” Too many of them
have been attracted to the land, when they have not
the necessary qualifications or experience to make a
success of it. lam afraid, notwithstanding the care
exercised by the Soldiers’ Settlement Boards, which 1
believe are in the main very careful, that there will
be a large percentage of .failures. The point is, “Is
the treatment meted out to those two men on a right-
basis?” lam incliired to think not, and we must,
as Commonwealth and State Ministers, reconsider the
whole position in an endeavour to find what is the best
thing to be done to meet the needs of the men return-
ing in the immediate future. We must ascertain
clearly, and definitely how many men the States can
deal with during the next twelve months or two years,
under the three headings which I have already indi-
cated.
The first is land settlement; the second is the pro-
vision ,of work by means of public works proposals.
Here I would say that it would be unadvisable to
launch out so far as our State is concerned into a
big public works scheme simply for the sake of provid-
ing employment. We must be guided by the con-
sideration, “ Will the undertaking be reproductive ?”
because unfortunately we have in our island State too
many projects which are being run at a loss. We have
to meet the interest and the cost to the taxpayers of
Tasmania of these unproductive undertakings. This is
becoming so heavy that we- cannot lightly enter upon
projects of that kind and face still heavier losses. At
the same time, any legitimate undertaking should be
taken in hand by the State, to provide em-
ployment in the way I have indicated. The third
point is: How many men can we take into our State
Service over arid above those who were in the Service
when they went away? If we are to follow the
decision of the previous Conference, it becomes the
duty of the Commonwealth authorities to say how they
propose to deal with the balance of the men. I hope
I have not misunderstood or misstated the position.
W r e all realize our relative duties and powers as Cbm-
mon wealth and State Ministers in our respective
spheres. If there has been any lack of co-operation,
or insufficient machinery to bring about effective co-
operation,‘it is “up to” us at this Conference to de-
vise means by which all difficulties shall be removed,
so that, working together as Commonwealth and States,
we may be able to make proper provision for that big
body of men who are not provided for in the specific
ways I have already enumerated. If we do that, this
Conference will not have been held in vain. We shall
have earned the gratitude of the returned soldiers and
accomplished our plain duty, which is to do the very
best we can for the returned men, to help them over
any difficulties under which they may be labouring,
and to give them every reasonable chance of being
reinstated in the civil life they left, in the easiest and


bast of circumstances, so that they may not have cause
to say that they came back to a country that was un-
grateful for the services they rendered or unmindful of
their necessities. In that regard my Government is
prepared to co-o|>erate with the Commonwealth in
pvery way possible. Vocational training furnishes an
instance. We have undertaken to place our Technical
Education Department at the disposal of the Common-
wealth. It is true that we have only just launched out
into a properly co-ordinated scheme of technical educa-
tion in Tasmania, and that the Department is only in a
very small way, but so far as it is capable of doing
anything we are prepared to put our staff and buildings
and the whole of our machinery at the disposal of the
Commonwealth in order to give the returned men
vocational training to fit them to take up trades or
callings in which they can earn their own livelihood.
In any other way that can be suggested by the Com-
monwealth authorities we shall be only too happy to co-
operate in providing facilities to make the lot of those
men as easy as possible.
Senator MILLEN. —I wish to deal, first of all, with
a matter which was raised by the representatives of
Tasmania. A statement was made to the effect that
the Repatriation Department had not responded with
sufficient promptness to a request for a refund of certain
moneys. I should not have mentioned the matter now
had it not been brought forward by the delegates from
that State. The records of the Department show that
Tasmania, in September last, forwarded a letter inti-
mating that it was furnishing a return upon which the
claim in question was based. No return was received,
however, and it was assumed that it would come to
hand subsequently. Later, a communication was sent
to Tasmania pointing out that the return had not been
enclosed. And it has not yet come to hand.
Sir ELLIOTT LEWIS.—I have a copy of it with me.
Senator MILLEN.—The trouble is that the original,
or another copy of it, did not come with your letter.
That Ixplains, I hope, the reason why the Department
has not dealt with the matter.
The debate has served to illustrate very clearly that
not only is repatriation a big problem, but that it is
very complex, both in principle and in the variety of
its detail. Following the various speakers very closely,
I have discovered five main points which have been
raised, and concerning most of which there is practical
unanimity. It is clear, from the discussion, that the
number of men who have been so far settled is in-
significant compared with those yet to be provided for.
Mr. ASHFORD.—We do not admit that, at any
rate.
Senator MILLEN.—The fact remains that, so far as
New South Wales is concerned, very few, if any, over
and above the 3,000 men whom I indicated have been
settled.
Mr. ASHFORD.—That is a wrong basis to work
upon. At the first Conference it was laid down defi-
nitely that there was to be a certain number of settlers
dealt with by each State. Take the proportions,
for example, which were applicable to New South Wales
and to Victoria. The estimate for Victoria was only
2,800, and for New South Wales 5,000. But Senator
Pearce laid ft down that we must give as much con-
sideration to the last man to be repatriated as to the
first; and I maintain that on the quota of men re-
turned New Sputfi Wales has carried out her obliga-
tion and her promise made at the first Conference.
Senator MlLLEN.—Nevertheless, that number does
not amount to 4,000, and I think it is nearer 3,000.
My point is, however, that that number in two and
a-half years is very small compared with the numbers
now to be dealt with in a shorter period. It is very
small indeed in comparison with the' number to be
handled upon the return of all the men ,to Australia.
C. 1144.—3
Mr. ASHFORD.—In that two and a-half years it
should be remembered that every State has been work-
ing upon the point laid down that we were asked to do
a certain work up to a period two years after the war
was over; and each State could have done a little more
if it had chosen.
Senator MULLEN. —It is possible that the States
could have gone on more rapidly than they have cfone,
I readily admit.
Another point on which there is general agreement is
that it will be possible for the States to make pro-
vision ‘for the numbers which I have estimated, but tbe
capacity to do so will depend upon two things. That
is, it will depepd first upon works essential to the em-
ployment of the men; and it will depend upon those
works, in turn, being mad© available by finance.
Since I have not the responsibility of finance, I may
be pardoned, I hope, if I view that matter with a
little less seriousness than do you, Mr. Chairman, at
presept, no d ou bt. Listening to many of the pro-
posals which have been put forward, I might say that,
although the amounts are big, what ought to fie
the dominant factor is the soundness and the wisdom
of the schemes themselves. Given sound projects, with
reasonable prospect of their attaining their objectives
—hard though it may be to get money—finance should
be regarded ps secondary to the carrying out of any
sound practical scheme.
I desire now to bqttpess my estimate of 20,000 men.
Sir tiepry Lefroy stressed the point that all men ape
not suitable for land settlement. That is obvious; no
one is proposing to put all the men op the land, or
any pf the men who may be unsuitable. But I ask
the Conference to consider that, if 200,0Q0 are yet to
return, will it be unreasonable to estimate fhaf 10 per
cent, will desire' to go upon the land? Would it be un-
reasonable to assume that, if you were ordering their
affairs, you would make provision for at least 10 per
cent, to become primary producers?
Mr. ANSTEY. —I think the estimate is slightly
under the probabilities.
Senator MILLEN. —The estimate <will rise or fall
as the-States make land settlement attractive or other-
wise. Suppose that my estimate of 20,000 men is
fopnd to be in excess of the needs of the soldiers’ re-
turning. There will be no harm done to Australia if
there are a. few thousand holdings in sight which are
not immediately required for the placing of returned
soldiers. Ordinary citizen settlers themselves, no
doubt, would shortly absorb the number over and above
the holdings taken by the soldiers. I have made no
reference to the possibility of newcomers from abroad
desiring to be placed on boo land; but it would be per-
fectly safe to provide for 20,000 of pur returned soldiers
even—as I have pointed out —though not all of the
holdings made available might be immediately required
for them. The only risk would be that there might
be a few holdings left on the hands of the various
Governments until ordinary citizen settlers or men from
overseas had absorbed them.
The point raised first by Mr. Holman, and ac-
centuated by every State Premier who spoke subse-
quently, was that the Commonwealth was under some
obligation to share with the States any loss incurred
in carrying out land settlement. The only variation of
opinion expressed was that the Premier of Western Aus-
tralia preferred that assistance should he given in the
form of a reduction of the interest which the Common-
wealth is paying for the money which it is lending to
the States. I need only remind the Conference that
you, Mr. Chairman, have intimated your willingness to
consider propositions based on that principle, but I
urge for consideration whether, if the Commonwealth
is to share tlfis- loss, the question doe* not then arise
as to the Commonwealth being consulted. I do not say


that that consultation should be in regard to details
of settlement; but I ask whether it would not be en-
titled to be consulted as to the main principles upon
which the land settlement is to proceed. If such con-
sultation is not granted, this position might arise:
Mr. Lawson has correctly stated that, owing to the
special concessions by Victoria, the Treasurer of that
State has practically handed over a gift to repatriation
amounting to £1,000,000. If an arrangement was in
existence under which the Commonwealth shared the
loss upon a basis, say, of 50 per cent., that would mean
that the Commonwealth would be paying £500,000 of
that gift. That being so, surely the Commonwealth
should be consulted before any special concessions of
the kind granted by Victoria were made. Otherwise,
it might be conceivable that —in any other country
than Australia, of course, and possibly upon the eve
of an election—certain special concessions might be
afforded which, while the Government making those
concessions would gain the whole political benefit
thereby, it would be required to shoulder only half of
the financial loss, the other half falling upon some
authority having nothing to do with the initiation of
the concessions, and gaining nothing as an outcome
therefrom. *•>
Mr. LEE.—That would be quite unworkable.
Senator MILLEN.—I am not suggesting that the
Commonwealth should even ask to be consulted as to
details of settlement in any way. But, upon the broad
principles of the terms to be given to settlers, if the
Commonwealth is likely to be involved in a loss it
surely should be in a position, and have the right, to
be consulted regarding the basis and principle upon
which that loss is to occur. I strongly ask for con-
sideration of that point.
Mr. LEE.—I hope that it will not be pressed.
Senator MILLEN.—There is another matter upon
which we should be consulted if we are to carry a large
share of responsibility. The Department of Repatria-
tion provides certain sustenance for men going on the
land. If the States set out upon a policy o£ estab-
lishing men on holdings which may not become pro-
ductive over a long initial period, surely before the
Commonwealth is to be asked to share the losses thus
involved, we should be consulted as to principles.
Otherwise, the Commonwealth would be put in a posi-
tion which would be resented by all who subscribe to the
principle that responsibility cannot be dissociated from
any Government which provides money for a given
national purpose.
Mr. CLARKE.—I would like you to elaborate the
definition of what you mean by “ consultation.”
Senator MILLEN.—I am merely suggesting that the
Commonwealth has the right, if it is to share the loss.
It has a right, I am not saying of veto, but to have
its views expressed and considered, and possibly even
to go further. If you ask the Commonwealth Govern-
ment to share a portion of your.losses, I hold that you
should give the Commonwealth some say as to your
methods of procedure.
Mr. CLARKE.—It is all a question of degree.
Senator MILLEN.—It is, and it is not a matter on
which 1 should care to suggest a scheme now. How-
ever, that central thought has occurred to me.
The CHAIRMAN. —An additional reason, surely, in
justification of that is, that that is the only way by
which you can approximate to uniformity with respect
to the concessions to be given throughout the different
States.
Mr. CLARKE. — I do not think you will achieve that
Uniformity.
The CHAIRMAN. —No, but you would avoid the
objection that a Queenslander, for example, is being
given less concessions than a returned soldier settler
in Victoria, and vice versa. Approximation to uni-
formity is eminently desirable, if obtainable.
Mr. ANSTEY.—Conditions vary considerably with
the different States.
Senator MILLEN.—That is so. Take the case
cited by Mr. Lawson. Victoria has made certain con-
cessions to soldier settlers. Certainly, it is all State
money which is involved, and everything is
done under State authority. But, if the Common-
wealth Government were finding half of that
£1,000,000 gift, if it were making a present of £500,000
to the soldiers, every soldier in every other State might
say to the Commonwealth Government, “ As you have
given such an amount by way of bonus to the settlers
in Victoria, why should you not also give similar
bonuses;to soldier settlers in South Australia and
Queensland, and in all the other States?” Similarly,
the South Australian Government might make a dis-
tinct and different concession, and if we were to share
the loss with respect to that also, a Victorian soldier
settler might well say, “ You are providing the South
Australian settlers with another concession by way of
your Commonwealth contribution to the loss being suf-
fered in that State; we want to share in a similar con-
cession here.” Thus we might have to deal with all
sorts of concessions in the different States, and confer
the same favours everywhere. At present, I have in
mind no cut-and-dried scheme, but those matters which
would affect the financial responsibility of the Com-
monwealth, as distinct from ordinary land settlement
rules and regulations.
I remind the Conference that a considerable demand
has arisen in recent months that the Commonwealth
Government should take control of the settlement of
returned soldiers. That demand is by no means
nebulous, not has it been isolated. We know, how-
ever, the extreme difficulty—in fact, the impossi-
bility—of the Commonwealth handling that subject. At
the same time, the demand is there. It would be im-
possible to ask the Federal Parliament to make avail-
able sums of money for any length of time, unless it
knew beforehand, by some arrangement with the
States, on the lines I have indicated, how the money
was to be spent, and the extent to which the Federal
authority might thus become liable for some unknown
period.
Mr. COYNE.—You do not question the fact that
there, will be losses. What do you think of the view
put forward that money may be loaned to the States
at a lower rate of interest than you are paying for
it? That, I think, would be sufficient uniformity for
the whole of the States.
Senator MILLEN.—That would, of course, meet
that immediate difficulty, but I am not dealing with
the financial method by which it may be possible for
the Commonwealth to share, in some degree, the losses
which the States will probably have to carry.
Another matter which was stressed very much, and,
I may say, to my surprise, was the view which seemed
to indicate a desire on the part of State Ministers to
come in and share with the Commonwealth the trouble,
labour, vexations, and responsibilities of handling re-
patriation problems outside of land settlement. You,
Mr. Chairman, have already reminded the Conference
of the agreement arrived at clearly defining the spheres
of action of the Commonwealth Government. Let me
read the resolution—
That it be the business of the Central Common-
wealth authority to devise a substantially uniform


system of dealing with returned soldiers and
sailors, and the dependants of soldiers and sailors
on service, or of soldiers and sailors who have died
as a result of service in re-'jlect of—
-1 shall now refer merely to the headlines of the reso-
lution—
(a) Immediate amelioration.
That has been done.
(h) Care of the totally incapacitated.
That has been done.
(c) Training of the partially disabled for a useful
avocation.
That has been done.
(d) Employment generally.
It was specially set out in the resolution that employ-
ment was to be the particular business of the Com-
monwealth central administration. The next item re
ferrod to in the resolution was —
(c) Assistance towards permanent re-establishment
by—
(i) Sustenance during the initial period
of settlement on the land, or
establishment in other vocations;
(ii) Small businesses where such deemed
a desirable form of provision;
(iii) Grants for tools of trade;
Civ) Assistance towards house establish-
ment — (a) Loans for house-
building or purchase (to include
the conversion of existing mort-
gages where terms onerous);
( b) Grants for furniture to a
prescribed amount.
(/) Care of dependants — (a) Of men who died;
( b ) Of men on service.
That is being done.
. (p) The co-ordination of governmental and private
efforts for the expansion of existing,' and
•the promotion of new, industries to meet
the demand for general and ( special em-
ployment.
You have already referred, Mr. Chairman, to the
offer made by the Commonwealth Government to
favorably entertain any proposal which may be sub-
mitted by those disposed to extend existing industries
or in the creation of new industries. The ether re-
solution was—
(h) The assembling and administration of funds.
It was on the strength of that resolution that the whole
policy of the Repatriation Department has been
shaped. We were to be charged solely with the re-
sponsibility for those matters and matters incidental
to them, and because of that belief I did not think it
necessary or consider that I was under any obligation
to bring them before this Conference.
If there is a general desire on the part of the States
to fake an active part in this responsibility, or if there
is any desire on the part of other public or private
bodies,to do so, I can only say that I will very cor-
dially welcome such assistance.
Mr. THEODORE.—You recognise that we cannot
ignore our responsibility with regard to placing re-
turned soldiers on the land. That is our responsi-
bility.
Senator MILLEN.—There are many factors that we
cannot ignore. lam not saying that the States are
not concerned in this matter. lam only expressing
my surprise at the desire of the States to share re-
sponsibilities of the Commonwealth Government in
the matters referred to. Our scheme has been based
upon the resolutions which I have just read.
But there is another aspect of this matter which,
I think, should receive careful consideration. It will
be a fatal, and, I think, an indefensible, mistake to
duplicate machinery. That has been recognised
in regard to land agreements, and it is being observed,
or is attempted to be observed, in connexion with the
housing scheme under which the Commissioner is given
power to create his own organization, or where there is
existing machinery in the States, to arrange with those
who control the Savings Banks, and other financial
institutions to act as his agents in order to avoid the
creation of duplicate machinery. If it is in the minds
of the State Ministers to offer any practical suggestion
by which they can co-operate with the Commonwealth
Government, 1 am .perfectly certain," Mr. Chairman,
that you will indorse what 1 am about to say, namely,
#thal we are prepared to accept help on any practical
lines if we can achieve our objects without creating
additional machinery, because additional machinery
means added cost to the tax-payer.
1 want now to refer to another point, and then I
shall conclude. The Federal Government, as the Act-
ing Prime Minister has pointed out, fully recognises
its responsibility, even with regard to returned soldiers
going upon the land; but the States have control of
lands and lands jurisdiction, and have well trained
officials capable of discharging the duties of settling
these men Because it is not indifferent to the develop-
ment of rural production, the Commonwealth Govern-
ment has, through you, Mr. Chairman, intimated its
willingness to entertain proposals by which effective
, help may be . given in promoting this section of the
repatriation scheme. But so 1 much has been said about
what the States are doing that it seems to me almost'
necessary to remind Ministers that what they are doing
in this respect cannot be regarded as altogether re-
patriation effort only. Before the Avar, before one man
had donned khaki—the States were carrying out a
■policy' of land settlement on an extensive scale, and I
am unable to accept the view that, because returned
soldiers are put upon land worth £2,000, this constitutes
a definite repatriation effort. Before the 'war, the
States were doing the same thing for civilian settlers,
even to the extent of settling men on blocks worth
£2,500.
Mr. COYNE.—But we were not repurchasing estates
for that purpose. x >
Senator MILLEN. —Queensland may not have been
doing that; but some of the other States were. The
point I want to stress is that I am unable quite to re-
gard the effort in the light referred to. All that the
States can claim to be doing for returned soldiers is
the difference between the terms now given to soldiers
and the terms given to civilian settlers before the war.
Mr. ASHFORD.—But there are other differences
also. In ordinary circumstances, this policy would not
be pursued with the present price of materials, such
as galvanized iron and other articles.
Senator MILLEN.—I admit all that; but can it be
said that if there had been no war, land settlement
would have ceased altogether? You would not say
that. I affirm that the efforts which the States are
making on behalf of repatriation is the difference
between what was being done before the war and what
has been done for the returned soldiers. And in this
connexion I would like to remind the Conference of
the efforts made by the States prior to the war. I have
this informatior. except in the case of New South
- Wales. Although 1 made an effort to get the figures
from that State, the New South Wales Government,
with the utmost courtesy, of course, omitted to supply
the information; but, rightly or wrongly, I have
formed my own conclusions as to what their figures
would show. The figures for Victoria show that, in


the year 1912-13, the Government settled 1,700 persons
on new holdings; in the following year, 1,600; and, in
1915-16, 1,601. This year the figures are 752. I
doubt very much whether, if no war had occurred, Vic-
toria would have settled a much less number of people
than are shown by these figures, which are indicative of
the position in all the other States.
Mr. HALL.—But those figures would include small
holdings of 2 and 3 acres.
Senator MILLEN.—I cannot say whether they do
or not, but as the figures are all from one source, I may
assume that if they include small holdings in the
later period they also include the small holdings in the
earlier years, and that the drop from 1,600 holdings in
1912-13 to 752 is inclusive of all holdings. When I
take the Queensland figures, I find that the results are
very much the same. In 1912-13, new holdings created
totalled 8,730, and the average holdings for the
soldiers, as far as I am able to get the figures, is 230
holdings per year.
Mr. THEODORE. —That is a very unfair average.
Senator MILLEN.—I remind Mr. Theodore that all
figures which seem perturbing are regarded as more
or less unfair.
Mr. THEODORE.—If you look at the matter in
that narrow way, you will certainly arrive at a false
conclusion. The fact is that, practically in one year,
we settled what returned soldiers have been settled on
the land; and at the present time we have 1,700 vacant,
holdings awaiting applications from returned soldiers.
Senator MILLEN.—I am not so much concerned
as tp whether the actual figures are right or not. 1
will double or treble the figures for Queensland if you
like, and they will still show a diminution of effort
at land settlement compared with what took place prior
to the war. I shall refer, now, to the position in South
Australia. In 1911-12, the new holdings created num-
bered 896, and the latest figures with regard to returned
soldiers are in the neighbourhood of 320. Mr. Anstey
will correct me if I am not quite correct.
Mr. ANSTEY.—The number is 329.
Senator MlLLEN.—Tasmanian figures are nearly
on the level, but still show a slight diminution. In
19J1-12, the new holdings created totalled 679; in
1912-13, the figures were 520; and in 1913-14, 510.
The returned soldiers’ blocks allotted were, I think,
about 200.
Mr. HAYES.—But you are missing the point. The
best of our men have gone to the war.
Senator MILLEN.—I am not saying that the States
are not doing something. I am merely showing that
the amount of effort put forward now is not in addition
to the efforts made before the war. I do not want
to place any false interpretation upon these figures;
but I say that when gentlemen speak of having put
200, or 300, or 1,000, settlers on the land, that cannot
be regarded as an additional effort, and consequent
entirely upon repatriation, because some of that effort
would have been made without the war, and some of the
holdings would have been allotted in any case.
Mr. ANSTEY.—But there is this difference: We
have put those men on the land under certain condi-
tions. Previously, settlers went on the land.
Senator MILLEN. —But, prior to the war, yon.
made land available. I can speak more intimately of
New South Wales and of Queensland; and I know that
land has been offered at less than market conditions,
and that public departments have been maintained for
the express purpose of encouraging land settlement.
The .CHAlRMAN.—Speaking from memory, the
Victorian Government spent over £4,000,000 in four
years in providing land and money for the stimulation
of settlement under normal conditions.
Mr. CLARKE.—The settling of 1,600 men on the
lands of Victoria in 1914 was ordinary Crown lands
settlement, because the Closer Settlement Board bought
no estates in that year. Every year a certain number
of applications are made.
Senator MILLEN.—I do not say that the figures of
five years ago are comparable with those of to-day.
My purpose is to show that, war or no war, the States
would have incurred some expense to give effect to land
settlement.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—In South Australia, on
the west coast, we have reserved 250,000 acres of land
for the assistance of returned soldiers.
Senator MILLEN.—I am not finding fault, or criti-
cising, but, as there was no want of frankness on the
part of those who addressed the Conference earlier in
the day, I trust that similar frankness on my part will
not be objected to. The proposals of Mr. Theodore in-
volve not soldier settlement exclusively, but general
settlement, and a complication may arise in connexion
with such proposals.
Mr. THEODORE. —Ordinary settlers will not have
the same advantages as soldier settlers. They will not
get the same concession.
Senator MILLEN.—That will depend on the condi-
tions ; hut if schemes for the settlement of persons other
than returned soldiers are considered, it will be neces-
sary to go into them in some detail. I draw attention
to the matter so that if the question is mooted in the
Sub-Conference, Lands Ministers will know what is in
my mind.
Mr. COYNE.—Before the Sub-Conference is ap-
pointed, I think we should know what is the intention
of the Commonwealth in regard to the length of time
that the benefits to returned soldiers shall be kept open.
How long after the arrival in Australia of the last batch
of soldiers are the concessions that are being considered
to be available?
The CHAIRMAN.—That is a matter which might
well be considered by the Sub-Conference, of which two
of the Commonwealth Ministers who are best informed
upon it will be members. As the leaders of the various
State Governments have now told us what those Govern-
ments have done, what they think ought to, and can, bo
done, and how they propose to link up their efforts with
those of the Commonwealth Government, we might,
with great propriety, refer to Ministers who are
specialists the consideration in detail of the schemes
outlined, and I suggest, therefore, the passing of the
following motion:—
That the question of soldier land settlement, the
public works programmes of the States calculated
to facilitate the employment or settlement of sol-
diers, and the financial'problems associated there-
with, be referred for consideration and report to a
Sub-Conference of the Commonwealth Ministers for
Repatriation and Works and the State Ministers
for Lands and Works.
Agreed to, on motion by Mr. ANSTEY, seconded by
Mr. LAWSON.
ELIMINATION OF SAVINGS BANK COMPETITION.
The CHAIRMAN.—When the Commonwealth Bank
was established, with authority to conduct a Savings
Bank Branch, the States had well-conducted and most
useful Savings Banks of their own. As soon as the
Commonwealth institution opened its doors, clashing
began.


The chief disadvantage of the dual Savings Bank
system has heen seen, up to the present, in the large addi-
tional expenditure imposed upon the States for the pro-
tection of their business, and the expenditure of money
by the Commonwealth Bank for carrying on business.
Further harm might occur owing to more active
competition in interest rates; hut, happily, that state of
affairs has so far been averted. The possibility of such
injurious rivalry must, however, be kept always in view.
Though efforts have been made from time to time
to bring about a more satisfactory state of affairs, there
has been little success. With the exception of the Go-
vernment Savings Bank of Tasmania, now part of the
Commonwealth Savings Bank, all the State institutions
still exist.
Here I should like to point out the success which
has been attained by the Commonwealth Savings Bank,
whose deposits to-day total something like £16,000,000.
This has come about in the short period of about six
years, and is evidence of the popularity of the Bank.
All this money has flowed in, notwithstanding the fact
that the rate of interest has never exceeded 3 per cent.,
while the rates paid by the State Savings Banks are con-
siderably higher.
The Commonwealth Government, being desirous of
removing the disadvantages to which I have referred, as
well as of establishing closer relationships with the States
in such an important enterprise, has lately given the
matter reconsideration, and has decided to ask the
States to agree to the amalgamation of the competing
Commonwealth and State Savings Banks.
As showing the volume of the business conducted
by the States, the following figures, as at 30th -Tune,
1918, may be given:—
Government bonds .. .. £57,067,294
Mortgages .. .. .. 8.976,262
Municipal securities .. .. 5,460,427
Bank fixed deposits .. .. 8,887,381
£80,391,364
Deposits with Government and amounts due,
and debentures matured, but now payable
at the option of the Government .. 6,006,494
Bank premises .. .. .. .. 1,170,186
Gold reserves .. .. . .. 200,000
Interest accrued, and sundry otliB 1 items .. 441,712
Bank balances and cash .. .. 5,613,960
Advance Department bonds .. .. 5,873,897
Credit Fonoier debentures .. .. 2,862,209
Total funds .. £102,559,822
My Government believe that the reluctance of the
States to join with the Commonwealth in this business
has heen influenced, to some extent, by the fact that
schemes previously put forward did not provide for
any consultation or control by the States, or for an
abiding arrangement. I am, therefore, authorized to
say that we are willing to submit to the Federal Par-
. liament an amendment of the Bank Act to provide for
amalgamation, of which one of the features will he an
Advisory Board. consisting of the Treasurers for the
time being of the several States; this Board to advise in
relation to Savings Bank business only.
The Advisory Board would advise in relation to
such matters as— • *
' (a) Rates of interest payable to depositors.
(6) Maximum amount on which interest shall be
paid by the Bank to depositors.
(c) Nature of investments and terms and conditions
of classes of loans to be made by the Bank.
The amalgamation would he conditioned by an
agreement between the Commonwealth and the States,
subsequently covered by statutory enactments, for a
period of at least twenty-five years.
Much debate in the past has had relation to the
amount of savings bank money to which the States
should be entitled, and the proposal now put forward is
that 70 per cent, of the increase in depositors’ balances
shall be handed over to the respective States quarterly,
the States to have, in addition, the right to renewal of
existing bonds as they mature. The proportion of 70
per cent, is based upon the recent experience of the
increases in Savings Bank deposits. Of the total
increase in the aggregate Savings Bank deposits in Aus-
tralia since 30th June, 1915, the States have provided
about 70 per cent, and the Commonwealth Bank has
secured, approximately, 30 per cent.
The States would he asked to hand to the Com-
monwealth Bank their bonds, with a currency not ex-
ceeding twenty-five years, as security for the 70 per
cent, referred to and for the renewal of existing bonds.
Such new bonds would bear interest at current rates,
but not more than 1 per cent, above the rate of interest
being paid by the Bank to Savings Bank depositors.
A matter for discussion is the provision of a
Sinking Fund in respect of all old or new Government
bonds. It is suggested that the rate be fixed at | or
1 per cent, per annum.
If the Savings Bank business is to he amalga-
mated, as suggested, there should be co-operation be-
tween the Commonwealth and the States in relation to
the whole of the business of banking. I therefore put
forward the proposal that all the State Banking busi-
ness in Australia and abroad, and the flotation of State
loans, as well as payment of interest and repayment of
principal, should be intrusted to the Commonwealth
Bank.
The Commonwealth Government is prepared to
agree to the merging of the business of each Savings
Bank as a going concern, undertaking all the liabilities
and recognising the assets at their book value.
The State Governments would, of course, he
asked to guarantee the payment of principal and interest
on all securities transferred to the Commonwealth
• Bank.
On the question bf the Advance and Credit Fon-
der Departments, I shall be glad to hear the views of
the State Ministers. It would suit us that the States
should keep them and provide for such activities out bf
the proportion of increase assigned to the States under
the agreement, or. alternatively, that the Common-
wealth Bank, under satisfactory conditions, should
carry them on.
Another important provision which has not
hitherto been brought forward, is that a separate ac-
count would be kept for each State and each State
would share equally with the Commonwealth Bank in
the profit or the loss of the Savings Bank business in
that State.
Satisfactory arrangements would be made in re-
lation to the staffs of the Savings Banks and to their
Boards of Trustees.
It will be necessary that the Commonwealth and
State Governments should pass legislation to give effect
Juo the amalgamation on the conditions finally agreed to.
The Conference, at 5.55 p.m., adjourned until 10
a.m. on Friday.


THIRD DAY—FRIDAY, 24th JANUARY, 1919.
ELIMINATION OF SAVINGS BANKS COMPETITION:
COMMONWEALTH SURPLUS REVENUE ACT 1910:
CO-ORDINATION OF COMMONWEALTH, STATE,
AND OTHER PUBLIC BORROWING.
T,ho CHAIRMAN. —It is, I understand, the wish of
the Conference that we should now debate the financial
proposals in the order in which they stand on the paper.
Should honorable members, in speaking of the per
capita proposals of the Commonwealth, think it ad-
visable to deal with the subject of loans, and the - pro-
posed arrangement respecting the Savings Banks, 1
shall abstain from interfering, as I think the field of
discussion must be left to the discretion of representa-
tives themselves.
Hr. HOLMAN.—My colleague, the New South
Wales Treasurer, would naturally speak on behalf of
the New South Wales Government on the subjects now
open for discussion, but he feels that, having come into
the consideration of several of the points involved only
at a comparatively recent stage, it might be necessary,
were he to speak, for me to supplement his remarks,
and that, therefore, the time of the Conference might
be saved were I to make a short statement on his behalf,
being personally more familiar, in the earlier stages,
with the matters in controversy.
I shall endeavour to put the views of my Government
as briefly as 1 can. Subject to any correction which
Mr. Fitzpatrick may have to make in regard to recent
happenings since I left the New South Wales Treasury,
what I shall say will finish our contribution to the de-
bate. I make that announcement lest members might
be alarmed at the prospect of two speeches from repre-
sentatives of New South Wales.
I propose to adopt your suggestion, Mr. Chairman,
in regard to the discussion, in one speech, of the three
subjects that you have named. That seems to be the
most useful course to follow, and I shall begin by say-
ing a few words about the Savings Banks proposal,
preluding what I have to' say with a short historical re-
trospect modelled upon, or justified by, one which you
gave to the Conference yesterday.
I put it for your consideration, and that of the Con-
ference, that the chief cause of trouble between the’
Commonwealth and State Governments since Federa-
tion was established has been, if I may say so without
appearing to criticise the Commonwealth Parliament,
the tendency of many members of that Parliament to
deal with questions which the Constitution —ostensibly,
at all events —left in the hands of the States; and I ask
members to pay attention to the few illustrations of
that tendency which I propose to give. You, Mr.
Chairman, no doubt recollect, as T do, the efforts that
were made to deal in a general way, by Commonwealth
legislation, with the industrial situation of Australia.
We had not only the Commonwealth industrial arbitra-
tion legislation, but we had also the Commonwealth
New Protection scheme, and the Commonwealth Union
Trade Marks Bill. Two of these measures were de-
clared by the High Court to he unconstitutional; that
is, the interference of the Commonwealth Parliament
in the matters with which they dealt was not permitted
by law. The third, in the form in which it was ulti-
mately passed, and with the extension subsequently
given to it, the Arbitration Act, was held by the High
Court to be constitutional; if I may say so, in its full-
ness, rather to the surprise, at the time, of many law-
yers. But all three measures, whether constitutionally
permissible or not, were efforts to deal in a general
way with problems which every one believed had been
left to the States. Similarly, the maternity bonus was
an irruption into the health domain of State activity.
Lately, we have had bonuses given for research into
venereal disease and other matters, the giving of which
is an attempt'by the Commonwealth Parliament to deal
with a domestic problem, as if that Parliament were
a domestic Parliament. Still more recently, we have
had the Bureau of Scientific Research proposal, rather
a thorny subject; and there are afoot suggestions for
the subsidizing of several forms of higher education.
The CHAIRMAN.—So far as I know, they have
emanated from the States.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Then they do not serve my case.
These few examples illustrate the tendency of which 1
have spoken. In some eases the Commonwealth inter-
ference has been successful, in others it has been checked
by the High Court. The tendency of the Common-
wealth Parliament to interfere in matters outside its
scope is a natural one, because its members, when mem-
bers of State Parliaments, become interested in certain
questions, and try to deal with them in their capacity
of Federal members, disregarding the special and unique
character of the Federal Parliament, and looking upon
that body as concerned with the same domestic problems
as concern the State Parliaments. I make this general
observation because 1 regard the establishment of the
Commonwealth Savings Bank as a striking, and, in
many respects, a crowning example of the tendency of
which I speak, illustrating it in its most objectionable
and mischievous form. From that opinion I have never
wavered. While banking as a subject of legislation is
hande4 over by the Constitution to the Commonwealth,
a special exemption is made of State banking, which is
not subject to Commonwealth legislation. The only
form of State banking which was in existence when the
Constitution was drafted was the State Savings Banks.
Every State had a Savings Bank, and the Convention
which drafted the Federal Constitution reserved that in-
stitution from the legislative interference of the Com-
monwealth Parliament.
Mr. GARDINER. —On more than one occasion at the
Convention that stated.
Mr. HOLMAN.-—No doubt. I say, without the
slightest fear of contradiction, that when the Conven-
tion met no one had the slightest idea that the Common-
wealth, either by legislation or by administration, would
dabble in savings bank projects, and right up to and
beyond the'Commonwealth parliamentary elections in
1910, after which Mr. Fisher first came into power, the
establishment of a Commonwealth Savings Bank had
never been mooted. I cannot, of course, know what
was said on every platform throughout Australia during
that electoral campaign, but I can speak for New South
Wales, where the proposal to establish a Commonwealth
Savings Bank was never mentioned by any candidate
supporting Mr. Fisher. I was not myself a candidate,
but I took an active part in the campaign, and Mr. Hall
was a candidate supporting Mr. Fisher. He and I
remember the circumstances well, and are ip a position
to say that, whatever may have been whispered in some
hole or corner, and never reached the public ear, the
campaign was fought by Mr. Fisher on the proposal to
establish a Commonwealth trading bank of deposit and
issue, and there was no proposal to establish a Common-
wealth Savings Bank. During the campaign I spoke
on twenty or thirty platforms in New South Wales. I
reminded several Ministers of these facts at the recent
Conference; but they may be new to some sitting round


this board to-day. I supported Mr. Fisher, speaking
in favour of the establishment of a Commonwealth
Bank, as did every other supporter, but not one of us
suggested the establishment of a Commonwealth
Savings Bank. The proposed bank was to be of the
trading type. No one imagined that it was to be a bank
which would fight the already established Savings Banks
of the States. When, a year later, or thereabouts, Mr.
Fisher announced that his mandate from the electors
was to establish a Commonwealth Bank, every one ap-
proved; but when he said that he interpreted that man-
date to cover the establishment of a Commonwealth
Savings Bank, all who had any concern in the adminis-
tration of the affairs of the States were amazed, and a
protest was made by the whole of the State Govern-
ments, based upon the Constitution and the electoral
programme of the Fisher Administration. You, Mr.
Chairman, as Premier of Victoria, joined in that pro-
test. The position has never altered. The intrusion of
the Commonwealth into the realm of savings banking
has been anomalous, mischievous, and a curse from that
moment to this, and should be ended by the frank ack-
nowledgement of the present Commonwealth Govern-
ment that it was a grievous error, and the announcement
that, now that the Commonwealth Bank is on its feet,
the Commonwealth Savings Bank will be dispensed
with, and savings banking left to illegitimate adminis-
trators. The Commonwealth Savings Bank has no
justification, either in the Constitution or in the man-
date of the people. It was the outcome of an adminis-
trative intrigue between Mr. Fisher and Mr. Denison
Miller, an intrigue which was carried through with the
most wicked disregard of the possible effect on the safety
and prosperity of the groat State institutions, which
have been managed with the utmost satisfaction and
perfection of control. Personally, I feel that a self-
respecting Commonwealth Government should not bar-
gain over this matter, and offer suggestions such as you,
Mr. Chairman, made yesterday. It should be prepared
to end what is an anomaly and an aggression; an
anomaly because the Commonwealth Parliament has
nothing to do with savings banking, and an aggression
because the whole field was covered by the State insti-
tutions at the time when the Commonwealth Savings
Bank was established. I regret to have to speak
strongly; but as you, sir, know, we have in the past
seen this matter from the same point of view, and my
own feelings in regard to it are unchanged. I have
always Resented the intrusion of the Commonwealth into
this arena as an example of that Punic faith, which
I am bound to say entered into the relations between
the Commonwealth and the States, and which, un-
happily, has persisted to a more or less extent ever
since. I do not wish now to say any more than that,
so far as I am concerned, I feel that it is the duty of
the Commonwealth Government to take the necessary
action, if it desires to remove the feeling of dissatis-
faction which has arisen, to remove the cause which
has interfered with the happy and fraternal relations
existing between us in regard to this particular matter.
The CHAIRMAN.—Does your statement mean that
■New South Wales rejects the proposition?
Mr. HOLMAN.—i think we must say that. We
cannot at present accept it. The duplication of activi-
ties for which the Commonwealth Government is alone
responsible should, in my judgment, be ended.
Now, I pass on to the question of borrowing, and on
this subject; I feel I can express, not only my own views,
but the views of my colleagues in the New South Wales
Cabinet. I also had the advantage of a brief discus-
sion with my brother Treasurer and the Premiers of
the other States last night; and, while I can only speak
for myself, I wish to place briefly before the Confer-
ence the position as it strikes me. No scheme which
we might agree upon would, in my judgment, be entirely
free from some measure of supervision by the Com-
monwealth as a borrowing agent. Some measure of
control must be exercised by the Commonwealth under
such a scheme —some measure of judgment of the pro-
priety or impropriety of a State proposal. You have
said that there are two extremes —the extreme, on the
one hand, of a complete and unfettered freedom of
action on the part of the States; and, on the other hand,
the extreme of continuous supervision by the Com-
monwealth as the borrowing agent—and you suggest
that a satisfactory method may be found between the'
two. In my judgment, any method which is approved
between the two extremes will necessarily involve some
surrender of that freedom of action at present enjoyed
by the States.
Mr. PEAKE.—But is it not a question of advantage
that might accrue? Would not the controlling factor,
after all, be—is the advantage an adequate recom-
pense?
Mr. HOLMAN.—I see the point which Mr. Peake
has raised, and I hope to reach it in a moment. The
disadvantage, in my judgment, lies in the fact that
under this scheme the State borrowing policy must be
sat in judgment upon, not necessarily by the Common-
wealth Government, but perhaps by a Conference such
as this, and my own view is unless the people by
some constitutional method resolve to deprive the State
Governments of their existing right of independent ac-
tion—unless by a deliberate act they resolve to amend
the Constitution in this respect—the maintenance of
complete freedom for the States is so vital that it will
be a profound error to abandon it unless some substantial
compensating advantage can be demonstrated as likely
to result. I quite realize that in some quarters there
is a feeling that the States ought to be kept on a leash.
Ido not deny that. It is conceivable that at the present
moment—though I do not say such is the case —a
majority of the people of Australia would say that the
States ought to be kept on a leash. That may be so.
It is a matter of speculation as to whether there is or
is not a majority of this opinion. But I say, if
there is a majority, that majority should be given
an opportunity of expressing an opinion on the pro-
priety of a constitutional amendment. If such an
amendment to the Constitution were carried, I should
still regard it as a misfortune; but, of course, I would
accept it. Until it is carried the States are guaranteed
absolute independence, of action in this, sphere of
Federal activity. I venture to say, further, that only
the people themselves can judge in this matter. Only
the people of New South Wales, for instance, can decide,
through their parliamentary representatives, whether
the loan operations in one particular year shall be
£5,000,000 or £10,000,000. We meet here so frequently
in conference, and we exchange views with so much
freedom, that the illusion arises that we have a complete
understanding of each other’s affairs. But we do not.
I can form no judgment on the situation in Western
Australia. I should be very sorry, indeed, profoundly
as I respect my friend Mr. Gardiner, to have to submit
my judgment in opposition to his concerning the finan-
cial requirements of his State, which is separated geo-
graphically from New South Wales by a gulf of 2,000
miles. Even the River Murray may be regarded as a
chasm, making it almost impossible for Victorian
friends to understand New South Wales’ requirements,
as is illustrated by a very able article in the Age of this
morning. These domestic problems, in my humble judg-
ment —I speak subject to a Constitutional amendment
which may be carried in years to come—can better be
managed by domestic authorities. It is no more possible
for us, sitting here in Melbourne, to determine what is
necessary for Queensland*than for a council sitting in,


say, Lisbon or Madrid, to determine what is necessary
for the people of Poland or of Ireland at the present
time. The distances are about the same. Any general
surrender of independence in the borrowing policy of
any State would be a misfortune, and unfess the people
approve of an amendment of the Constitution, I shall
personally resist it. As against the disadvantages, let
us consider what are the advantages. The advantages,
which have been suggested by you, Mr. Chairman, are,
in my opinion, if I may say so, wholly theoretical, and,
So far as the evidence goes, wholly chimerical. We
have had the test of experience within the past four and
a half years in our State—four and half years of ex-
ceedingly anxious administration in abnormal cir-
cumstances. During that term we managed all our
borrowing for ourselves alongside the borrowing opera-
tions for the five other States by the Commonwealth,
and we have not lost one penny, either in interest or
flotation expenses, which would have been saved if we
had been inside, instead of outside, the group. As a
matter of fact—but I lay no stress upon this, because I
believe it was wholly accidental—our flotation expenses
on some occasions were lower in the case of Hew South
Wales than they were in the case of the group operating
through the Commonwealth. Our experience has
shown, if I may be permitted to say so, that there will
bo no financial advantage by the union of forces which
you, Mr. Chairman, have suggested. The credit of thn
individual States is perfect. The credit of the Com-
monwealth is perfect no less. There is nothing to
choose between them. It is not a question of a nation
like Turkey being reinforced by the credit of the Ger-
man Empire; nor is it a question of the credit of some
tottering financial institution being supported by the
guarantee of some solvent community. It is a ques-
tion of one perfect credit being set against another.
We are all on the same footing in Groat Britain. We
all have equal access to trustee funds, and the machinery
of borrowing available to the Commonwealth is avail-
able also to the States. I imagine that you, Mr. Chair-
man, have in your mind the idea of a pooling of funds,
with the object of an attack in force upon the entrenched
battalions of the money market in London, and that the
proposal appeals to your fighting spirit. You imagine, I
have no doubt, that in the years to come a single Trea-
surer, speaking for the whole of Australia, and bor-
rowing for Australia as a whole, will be able to break
down the monopoly, or the apparent monopoly, which
exists in the flotation of Australian loans to-day, and
that this course will probably place the States in a more
favorable position. But while, of course, that is a
prospect which may be peculiarly attractive* and ap-
peals to your fighting instincts, I am bound to say that
the whole of the evidence which we in Hew South Wales
have indicates that no marked improvement may be
expected. I point out that the Canadian Government
borrows in London. The Canadian railways also bor-
row in London. The Australian §tates do their borrow-
ing in London; and perhaps I may be permitted tq say
that we in Hew South Wales have a considerably larger
experience behind us than have any of the other States,
and, therefore, we can speak with some expert authority
on the subject of continuing investigations both by
Ministers and by Agents-General.
Mr. PEAKE.—You have had almost superlative ex-
perience.
The CHAIRMAH. —I think you will have to dip
your colours to Mr. Theodore shortly.
Mr. HOLMAH.—Our investigations by Ministers
and by Agents-General lead us to a different conclusion
from that which you arrived at in submitting the pro-
position. We recognise, of course, that the views of
Agents-General are to be diAounted, because they are
to some extent biased witnesses, and naturally do not
wish to see important functions passing out of their
bands. Perhaps it may be said also that State Ministers
are biased. I make all allowance for that. We
realize the difficulties which you have mentioned, and
the possibility of collision between borrowers controlled
by Sir John Hivison and other financial agents in-Lon-
don; but we think that these things make no difference
ultimately. As to the abandoning of underwriting
charges, I can only say that we have no hope that we
shall ever be able to accomplish that.
Mr. PEAKE. —The supreme test of the Chairman’s
proposition must be—will it abolish the cost of under-
writing?
Mr. HOLMAH.—I do not think there is any possi-
bility of that. We made investigations for four or five
years as to the possibility of placing stock with stock-
brokers to be taken up over the counter, and after a
good deal of very close inquiry by my colleague (Mr.
Carmichael), who certainly had no prejudice in favour
of the existing system, we arrived at the conclusion that
it was not practicable.
The CHAIRMAH. —Ho one would suggest selling
over the counter.
Mr. HOLMAH.—Perhaps that was not the best
phrase to use. I perhaps, have spoken of plac-
ing it in the hands of the stockbrokers as an ordinary
stook. I believe I may say for the whole of iffy col-
leagues who were present at last night’s meeting, that
we all feel that a' repatriation loan might be floated in
Australia with very considerable advantage by the
Commonwealth Government. I am prepared, at all
events, to admit that it is quite possible there would be
an advantage in the flotation of such a loan by the
Commonwealth. An appeal could be made by it to
patriotic sentiment, and it would be a continuance of
the Commonwealth’s efforts to secure money for war
purposes. In order to secure some measure of un-
formity in our actions, I am personally prepared to
withdraw to that extent any objection I have felt to
the placing of loan operations under the control of the
Commonwealth.
The CHAIRMAH. —Only to the extent of allowing
a loan to be floated in Australia by the Commonwealth
Government ?
Mr. HOLMAH.—Yes.
The CHAIRMAH.—Do you think you could float
such a loan in Australia?
Mr. HOLMAH.—Yes.
The CHAIRMAH.—Try it, and see how you would
fare. The banks, outside the Savings Banks, could not
give you any money.
Mr. HOLMAH.—The position may have changed
within the last few months. We might, however, evolve
a united scheme by which whatever amount is finally
agreed upon by the sub-Conference now sitting as neces-
sary for repatriation purposes should be handed over
to the Commonwealth for flotation.
The CHAIRMAH.—That does not bear on the
main question. You can make up your minds that
whatever is decided as to the main question of borrow-
ing, the States cannot float any substantial loan in Aus-
tralia to-day.
Mr. PEAKE.—But in view of the advantage to
which Mr. Holman refers as likely to be secured we
need not necessarily bind ourselves to the/floating of
such a loan in Australia. The Commonwealth might
be able to float a repatriation loan in London on better
terms than the-States could do.
The CHAIRMAH. —I would not attempt it. You
will have to find your own repatriation money in Aus-
tralia.
Mr. PEAKE.—Is that the position we have reached ?


The CHAIRMAN". —That is where We actually are
at the present moment. If my friends do not recognise
that the situation is as stated by me, they will, upon
investigation, discover that I am correct.
Mr. HOLMAN.—I am not in a position to say what
is the situation of the banks at the present moment. I
do not know what our prospects would be, but if the
position is as stated by the Chairman, things have
altered during the last twelve months. Twelve months
ago we had very little doubt as to our capacity to float
a loan in New South Wales.
The CHAIRMAN. —Since then we have mopped
up more than £100,000,000 in connexion with our
primary products finance, and two special loans. We
raised £86,000,000 in seven months.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Whether our proposal carries us
any further than we were *
The CHAIRMAN. —It does not carry us forward an
inch. That is where we were before we came to this
Conference.
Mr. McPHERSON.—It gets repatriation out of the
road.
The CHAIRMAN.—Not at all.
Mr. HOLMAN.—If that is so —if the repatriation
and final expenditure in connexion with the war are in
hand, what is the object of the Commonwealth Govern-
ment in seeking to continue further the control of State
borrowing?. The system was initiated as a war mea-
sure, partly because of the difficulty felt by the States in
raising money at all during the war, and afterwards,
because of the necessity of restricting State borrowing
in order td clear the ground for Commonwealth
operations. ' >
The CHAIRMAN.—I take the view to-day that I
held when I was a State Treasurer, and argued with
my brother State Treasurers the advantages of consoli-
dated borrowing in London and Australia by the one
authority. I then propounded a scheme which was
rejected, as every scheme in that direction since that
first propounded by Sir George Turner has been re-
jected. Now, apparently, this present proposal is re-
jected, and every other proposition of the kind will be
turned down until certain things force you where you
do not want to go.
Mr. HOLMAN.—If you base your proposal on the
ground of the general advantages of a united approach
to the London market, I can only say again most re-
spectfully that those advantages have never been made
apparent to me. This matter has been the subject of
controversy for upwards of eight years, and the sup-
posed advantages are certainly not apparent to me.
There is no evidence of them. The utmost that has
been alleged is that the Commonwealth might ulti-
mately be able to borrow at \ per cent, better than the
State. That, after all, was a mere speculation by the
late Lord Forrest, and so far as I could ascertain was
not backed up .by evidence. Our experience and the
evidence we have gathered is to the contrary. The whole
of the inquiries we have been able to make lead us to
believe that nothing would be gained by changing the
existing system. There might be small losses, but these
would ultimately adjust themselves. There are, for in-
stance, people who are familiar .with Victorian stock,
and buy and sell it, while others are familiar with New
South Wales stock, and deal in it. No doubt those
sections of the investing public would be educated up
to the idea of a Commonwealth stock, but on the other
hand there are no gains to w'hich the experts can point
as likely to follow upon consolidated borrowing. ,
I have no more to say in criticism of the Chairman’s
savings bank and loan proposals. I wish now to direct
my attention to the proposed reduction in the per capita
payments to the States. The question can be debated
from the point of view of the necessities of the States,
or from the point of view of the principle underlying
the proposed change. I do not wish to unduly dilate
upon the question from the point of view of the interests
of the States, because one or two Treasurers of other
States will be compelled by the necessities of their own
position to deal with it from that stand-point. They will
bo able to deal with it from that point of view with
more urgency than I feel at present, so that I may well
leave it to them. I shall not say, Mr. Chairman, that
you have put the position in q misleading light, but to
some extent, if I may say so, you have disguised the
essential facts of the position by quoting the proportion
which the total share of Customs revenue bears to the
total revenue of each State. JThe total revenue of each
State includes, of course, in every case a very large pro-
portion of revenue obtained from services, and the re-
venue obtained from services cannot be indefinitely
increased. An increase of revenue from such a source
would involve an increase of working expenses, so that
the loss of Customs revenue would have to be made
up, if at all, by an increase in revenue obtained not
from services but from taxation.
The CHAIRMAN.—Or by a decrease of service ex-
penditures.
Air. HOLMAN.—Yes. In the case of New South
Wales, to illustrate what I mean, the proportion of the
Customs revenue to the taxation raised within our State
is something like 60 as agaiflst 100.
The CHAIRMAN.—Six-sixteenths.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Exactly. I leave for later con-
sideration the question of economy. If we maintain
the same bulk of expenditure after losing six-sixteenths
of our revenue in this way, we shall have to increase
our existing StSte taxation by a little more than 60
per cent, in order to make up that loss.
The CHAIRMAN.—You will lose 60 in 160.
Air. HOLMAN.—And we shall have to raise the 100
to 160, which would mean increasing the existing taxa-
tion by 60 per cent, to make good the loss of Customs
revenue. There is no other resource. As practical ad-
ministrators, we know that the State Departments are
so run that no substantial economies can be effected.
We could save perhaps £500,000 in New South Wales
by a ruinous sacrifice of the efficiency of all the Depart-
ments; by cutting down the votes for hospitals and
schools, by reducing the number of our police force and
the number of our Judges—allowing litigation to get
into arrears, as it was some ten years ago-—and by
starving the roads vote and reducing the subsidies to
local governing bodies. By all these methods we could
perhaps in the course of a year save, let me say, one-
fourth of what will be lost to the State as the result
of this reduction in the per capita payment. By ruinous
economies of that character, by starving a number of
ships for a ha’p’orth of tar, we could save, perhaps, one-
quarter of the loss. But even if we adopted that system
of economy, which I would not advocate —I would never
advocate spoiling a number of ships for a ha’p’orth of
tar —the remaining three-quarters would.- have to be
met by an increase in taxation which would mean, even
on that assumption, an increase of 45 per cent, upon the
existing taxes. Actually, however, it would never be
possible to get through with a 45 per cent, increase.
The economies which could be effected by any Govern-
ment would be far less than one-fourth of the total
loss which has been suggested. The things Which are
enumerated in the newspapers as striking and dramatic
illustrations of Governmental waste, the sending Of a
Alinister on a trip to Europe—which Applies to your
Government, Mr. Chairman, as well -as to ray own—
the buying of a new carpet for Parliament House—
which is one of the sins of which my Government has
been guilty within the last twelve months—or having


too many telephones in Government offices, are mere
bagatelles. We know that these things do not count —
that the saving that would be effected if we were to
do without these conveniences and get rid of all these
small administrative advantages would not touch the
real problem. They bulk well in a leading article, but
do not bulk at all in a statement of accounts. There
are no savings to be effected save those which would
be actually ruinous to the efficiency of the services con-
cerned.
The CHAIRMAN. —Do you say, Mr. Holman, that
in your State, with a revenue of £20,000,000, you could
only save, with the most rigid economy, 2 J per cent. ?
Mr. HOLMAN.—Yes. You have to realize that out
of that revenue of £20,000,000, probably £13,000,000 is
derived from State business' enterprises, which are
already under the most careful and economic manage-
ment.
The CHAIRMAN. —I wish some of the enterprises
of the Commonwealth were managed with such abso-
lute perfection as Mr. Holman imagines the enterprises
of the States are. I happen to know differently in a
Aumber of cases.
Mr. HOLMAN.—AII that one can do with a thing
like the railway management, or the Harbor Trust of
Sydney, is to appoint the very ablest men we can find,
solely on their business capacity, give them an abso-
lutely free hand, protect them by Statute from all poli-
tical interference, and let them go. Under that
management the railways of New South Wales are
showing results to-day which compare quite favorably
with those of any privately conducted business. As a
matter of fact, our railways have shown a loss for the
last few years solely because the Commissioners, at the
request of the Government, have refrained from rais-
ing rates. They made every effort by economy to meet
the loss of revenue without raising rates. They failed,
and this year they have been compelled to raise them-.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER. —And, in the meantime,
the expenditure keeps going up.
Mr. HOLMAN. —The increase in wages has been
enormous in the last four years. The cost of living
has gone up tremendously, the workmen have gone to
the Arbitration Court in an endeavour to get increased
wages to equalize the conditions, and the Court has
granted increases.
I do not suggest, in the case of New South Wales,
that the effect of the reduction of the per capita pay-
ment as outlined yesterday by the Chairman will be
ruinous. It will not plunge us into the bankruptcy
which I notice a leading Melbourne newspaper regards
this morning as imminent in our State. One has to
go abroad to hear news, and I read with alarm this
morning that, since my leaving Sydney, things have
taken such a turn that the Insolvency Court is now our
only resource.
Mr. FITZPATRICK. —If that has happened when
we have been away only two days, it would be interest-
ing to calculate what would happen if we were away
two weeks. ,
Mr. HOLMAN.—Yes, or if we were detained here
by a health embargo on Inter-State traffic. I am not
putting my objection on the ground that this proposal
will bring about the bankruptcy of New South Wales.
It will not do so. I simply say that it would be the
cause of very large financial inconvenience. It would
mean the annual recasting of the taxation scheme of
the State, with every year a certain increase, until
ultimately the present rate of direct taxation is in-
creased, at the lowest, by something like 45 per cent.:
and I should say, with every reasonable economy, prob-
ably by something like from 55 to 60 per cent. That
would be so even if drastic economy not of an abso-
lutely destructive character were resorted to. That is
the position looking at it from the point of view of the
effect upon the State’s finances; but I desire to ask
your consideration, Mr. Chairman, and that of the
Conference, of the principle involved. I venture to
suggest that that is a matter which should have recon-
sideration. The principle involved is this: The Com-
monwealth Government, in the exercise of one of its
undoubtedly legitimate functions —the function of
carrying on the operations of the community in war
time —is compelled largely to increase its expenditure
in the shape of interest on war loans and soldiers’ pen-
sions. As the result of this greatly increased expendi-
ture, which is a perfectly legitimate and proper thing,
forced upon the Commonwealth in the discharge of its
true duty, that is, the management of the war finances
of Australia, new taxation is unavoidable. The taxation
of to-day is not equal to the increased expenditure.
New taxation has to be imposed, and the Common-
wealth Government proposes that, having itself in the
discharge of its own functions incurred new expendi-
ture, it should then pass on to the States the task of
imposing the new taxation. That is a fundamental
error governmental principles.
The CHAIRMAN.—There you are doing what you
accused me of having done —disguising the issue. We
have already almost doubled the taxation of the Com-
monwealth to meet the war expenditure.
Mr. HOLMAN”.—And evidently, from your own
statement, it will bo necessary ultimately to treble it.
There is still a big amount of expenditure not provided
for.
Mr. GARDlNEß.—Apparently we will have to. take
up the burden of the other third.
Mr. HOLMAN.—That is the position, and I sub-
mit that it is fundamentally wrong from the point of
view of statesmanship. The Government which in-
creases the expenditure is the Government that ought
to impose the taxation. We do not increase the ex-
penditure. I am not suggesting that the Common-
wealth should do anything else than incur that expen-
diture. It rightly and properly incurred it, and I
supported it in that, and will support it in anything
that is necessary now. But, if I may say so, this is
the same weak and mischievous principle that I pro-
tested against yesterday in connexion with the advances
to soldiers. The Commonwealth makes the advances in
name, and leaves to another Government the task of
collecting the money. Here the Commonwealth pays
the soldiers’ pensions. It is going to pay £5,000,000
or £6,000,000 a year in soldiers’ pensions, which is a
very proper thing, but another Government has to im-
pose the taxation out of which the pensions are to be
paid, because that is what it amounts to. 'The addi-
tional taxation, which is absolutely accessary and jus-
tifiable by the existence of soldier pensioners and of
their claims, is under the Chairman’s proposal to be
imposed by State Governments. That seems to me to
he an essentially wrong conception of the correlated
duties of Governments. The Government that has the
duty of spending, and no other, is the Government
that has the responsibility of raising the money.
Mr. GARDlNEß.—Remember that you are taxing
always the same people.
Mr. HOLMAN.— that, and quite accept the
Chairman’s proposition that the finances of the States
and the finances of the Commonwealth must be dealt
with as a single problem. They are interwoven here,
because we are all taxing the same people, and the
money all comes out of the pockets of the same tax-
payers; but clearly there is no justification for saying,
because the Commonwealth has incurred additional
expenditure in the discharge of its proper duties, that
another Government should impose the additional taxa-
tion. The Government that incurs the expenditure


thereby incurs the responsibility of finding the neces-
sary revenue. I strongly urge that it will be the death
of all sense of responsibility, both in Parliaments and
amongst citizens, if we enter upon a system by which
proposals can be put before Legislatures like the Com-
monwealth Parliament, or before the citizens at a gene-
ral election, to this effect: “ Shall we now vote on this
project—Yes or No; and shall we then rofrajn from
making the necessary financial provision ?’’ Everybody
will say “Yes” to the project; and everybody will say,
also, “You need not bother about the financial pro-
vision ; it can be arranged in some other way.” Clearly
the one check that there is upon a Legislature in launch-
ing out into soldiers’ pensions, maternity bonuses, or
any other scheme of that kind, is the necessity for find-
ing the money. The Legislature which enters upon
those systems must be the Legislature which raises the
revenue to sarry them through. If we introduce into
Australia a* system by which one Legislature can have
the genuine and patriotic satisfaction, which I do not be-
grudge them, of finding liberal pensions for all the men
who fought at the war, while another Legislature has
the misery and anxiety of raising the necessary money,
then there is an end to all parliamentary responsibility,
so far as finance constitutes a check upon rash legis-
lative effort. Finance is the real check, the necessary
check, the natural check, and the salutary check; but
this proposal gets rid of that cheek altogether. . I there-
fore feel that it is a mistaken principle, and, personally,
would be very glad if the matter could be allowed to
stand over for further consideration.
I would put to you, Mr. Chairman, this suggestion,
because this is a point upon which your in-
formation is better than mine: I feel, person-
ally, and find the feeling is shared by some
of my brother representatives of other States,
that, at the present moment, the full position has
not manifested itself, so far as the Commonwealth is
concerned. We all recognise the wisdom of your course
in bringing forward at once the question of what is to
occur when the ten-year period already provided for
has expired. We all admit that you have acted judi-
ciously in bringing the matter before us immediately;
but we feel that, at this stage, neither you nor we are in
the position to determine finally upon it. I speak, of
course, subject to your own better knowledge of the
situation; but we feel that we, at least, are not to-day in
that position. We feel that, to begin with, the full
effect of your proposal upon the State finances is not
yet realized by any of us. We have had it before us
for twenty-four hours, and have talked it over, and I
am far from pretending that I fully realize its effect
upon my own State. New South Wales can, at a pinch,
bear it with extreme inconvenience, but some of the
Treasurers from the other States are inclined to assert
to-day that they cannot bear it. On the other hand, wo
are all disposed to think that perhaps the position of
the Common-wealth is not yet finalized. You will have
another war loan, and there will be another interest bill
to add to your annual finances. That will be an addi-
tion to your difficulties. On the other hand, while lam
personally disposed to share your own view, as expressed
yesterday, that no real hope must be based on any sug-
gestion of war indemnities, still war indemnities are
being talked about, and, in some weeks’ time, we shall
probably be in a position to know whether there will be
indemnities coming to Australia or not.
Mr. PEAKE.—Surely there should be?
Mr. HOLMAN.—That is a point which it is" of no
use for us to discuss here. We can only receive the
accomplished fact when it is accomplished one way or
the other.
Mr. PEAKE.—Don’t you think that we might do
even more than that —that is, express the opinion
strongly that a large part, if not the whole of the'Aus-
tralian expenditure on war, should be indemnified?
Mr. HOLMAN.—That is a separate point.
Mr. PEAKE.—-This is a great opportunity.
Mr. HOLMAN. —It is a point, also, about which
there may be some difference of opinion. Personally, I
should be sorry to speak upon the question at this
moment. I should certainly like to hear the opinion
of the Acting Prime Minister before we took any action.
The CHAIRMAN. —If indemnities are obtainable,
then, apparently for the first time in your political life,
you would be averse to receiving some of the money.
Mr'. HOLMAN. —Taking a thing when offered, and
going and asking for it, are two very different proposi-
tions.
Mr. PEAKE.—Surely Germany must pay the costs of
the war if she can ?
Mr. HOLMAN.—The first claim upon any assets
Germany 4ias is the claim of the devastated countries.
After that has been satisfied, if there is anything left
to pay military costs, well and good. But will there be?
I do not think the reimbursement of military expendi-
ture ought to be ranked with the restoration of de-
vastated areas.
The CHAIRMAN.—I share that view, with certain
reservations. , '
Mr. HOLMAN.—No doubt reservations have to be
made; but that is a point on which you know very much
more than we do. I only offer that as the view of a
private citizen.
Mr. PEAKE.—You are not giving up the principle,
then, when you say that there may be a difference of
opinion as to the immediate distribution?
Mr. HOLMAN.—That can be discussed later.
The CHAIRMAN.—There are three positions to be
considered as to the shape which a payment of this kind
may take. Mr. Holman has mentioned two of them —
the accepting of an offer when made, and the demand-
ing of payment before the offer is made; but there is a
third. I know of no better body in all the Common-
wealth to pronounce upon this question than the body of
men around this table, charged as they are with all the
responsibilities of government for the time being.
I would welcome a resolution properly framed to avoid
any possible expression of opinion which might falsify
the position of Australia, even in respect to our con-
sideration of the matter. I would not welcome the idea
of a demand at all, but would prefer the middle course
of submitting for consideration the claims of Australia.
Mr. HOLMAN.—If that would help, I do not think
you would find any hesitation on the part pf delegates
present in assisting to so frame a resolution.
The CHAIRMAN. —I think it well then that, per-
haps, the senior delegates might confer upon the appro-
priate phraseology of such a request for consideration,
before we rise. But I accentuate, again, that if an in-
demnity does come the v ay of Australia, it cannot come
in so swift a form or in such a lump as to render such
arrangements as I have suggested unnecessary.
Mr. PEAKE. —It might come in the way, first, of
our being secured interest rather than principal; in-
terest upon our claim. 1
The CHAIRMAN. —That would be a state of in-
security. "What we are after is principal, of course,
just as France, Belgium, and Servia are after restora-
tion money. The lump sums contained in the indemnity
would probably go towards making good the devasta-
tion. The tribute, or toll, should go to those who have
placed their peoples under an extremely irksome burden
in the fight for freedom.


Mr. HOLMAN. —This has been a most interesting
parenthesis raised by the interjection of Mr. Peake. We
may be able to do something that would be helpful to
you before we break up, and we would be very glad to
do so.. But, in conclusion of my remarks in chief, I
emphasize that my own strong feeling is that there will
be everything to be gained and nothing to be lost by
some reasonable period of delay.
The CHAIRMAN.—To the Commonwealth, yes;
but to the States, the reverse.
Mr. HOLMAN.—How so?
The CHAIRMAN.—I do not think that such good
terms could be secured in the future as may be obtained
to-day. I have seen the same kind of thing operating
before, in respect to the States, and on more than one
occasion.
Mr. HOLMAN. —There may be difficulties —although
not, perhaps, such as those I feel so strongly about —in
the cases of some of the other Ministers. Possibly,
however, some of the other States might be ex-
ceedingly embarrassed by the acceptance of this
proposal. That is the present feeling of their
representatives, at all events, I feel sure; and I know
that they do not see their way at present to formulating
or presenting any counter-proposal, or of offering such
an amendment to your proposal as could be advanced
for discussion here. Whereas, with some measure of
delay, something might be done along those lines—that
is, in the manner of a counter-proposal which would be
helpful. I do not wish to discuss any counter-proposal
at this moment, or to put anything forward. I have
merely indicated my bald objections to the course you,
Mr. Chairman, have suggested. I admit that my re-
marks are of the character of purely negative criticism.
My objection is, first, that your proposal will greatly
disturb the financing of the six State Governments, and
as to which an annual sum of over £50,000,000 is in-
volved, merely to secure some measure of relief for the
financing of one Government dealing with annual re-
quirements of less than £30,000,000. And my other
objection is that it is wrong in principle.
. The CHAIRMAN. —As to your reference to the an-
nual requirements of the Commonwealth Government,
the annual expenditure for this particular year, under
two heads only, is over £18,000,000. Without any addi-
tional imposts coming to us, we are £18,000,000 odd
above what we were prior to the outbreak of the war;
and that is upon only two matters, namely, interest and
sinking funds on war loans, and war pensions.
Mr. HOLMAN. —My second difficulty is with re-
spect to the matter of the principle itself. It is, in
my judgment, a fatal departure from sound principle
to meet the special requirements of the Commonwealth
Government by putting the ultimate task of raising
taxation upon the States; and I must add that the im-
poeitiou of such taxation will be just as inevitable
under your scheme as though the Commonwealth in-
augurated the taxation itself. The taxpayer will be
taxed eventually, whoever may be the taxing authority.
1 have confined myself to these few bald criticisms
which, I confess, are not helpful. Ultimately, I be-
lieve that some measure of help might be given. Coun-
ter-proposals could be formulated which might, perhaps,
be acceptable.
The CHAIRMAN. —You are making a distinction in
your arguments and in your comparisons between Com-
monwealth and States, between revenue from services
and revenue from taxation.
Mr. HOLMAN. —I am not making that distinction.
The CHAIRMAN. —You must do so. I point out
that we have no services. The total of the States’ re-
venue from taxation is under £9,000,000 sterling. It
will be very much more than that under either one of
our taxation systems. In other words, talking of re-
venue raised as distinct from services, the Common-
wealth requirements are immensely heavier than those
of the States.
Mr. HOLMAN.—You cannot make that distinction
for this purpose. I have only made the distinction
because I say that your proposal is a withdrawal of re-
venue raised hy one form of taxation which can only
be made up by other forms of taxation. But I hold
that the bulk financing of the States, amounting to
about £54,000,000 a year, must be taken in the light of
its total.
The CHAIRMAN. —The proper way to make com-
parisons must be to eliminate revenue from services on
both aides.
Mr. HOLMAN.—When I was dealing with the pro-
posal as to the allocation of Customs taxation I com-
pared that with the total body of State taxation; and
I did so rightly, I hold. When I am. pealing with
the total bulk of revenues and the financing of the
States and the Commonwealth, I take the bulk total
in each case, and not merely with respect to taxation
matters alone.
The CHAIRMAN.—You cannot have it both ways.
Mr. HOLMAN.—This is an academic point which
we are now discussing, and I assert that we can have
it both ways. When you deal with taxation you can
compare the taxation of one authority with that of
another, and you can also compare the revenue of one
Government with that of another.
The CHAIRMAN. This is a question of how a
diminution of receipts can be made up, and then it
becomes a question of taxation. You say, yourself,
that you cannot get the difference from extra yields by
way of services.
Mr. HOLMAN. The comparison which I have
made is perfectly fair. You propose to throw into
disturbance the financial operations of the six States,
which bulk together, £54,000,000, in order to give a
measure of ease to one Government whose total opera-
tions do not amount to anything like that figure. I
may have been in error in quoting a sum of not more
than £30,000,000, but it is certainly very much less
than the £54,000,000 of the States- combined. I
suggest that, with some time to talk this matter over,
and for an opportunity to be given to the individual
Treasurers to ascertain how they will be affected,
counter-proposals can no doubt be formulated, and an
acceptable via media discovered.' But it is practically
impossible to expect that, in my own case,-at any rate,.
I could take the responsibility of saying that I agreed
to this proposal and that it is, on the whole, fair and
satisfactory. And other Treasurers may he even more
affected than I am. Therefore, I urge that your pro-
posal he remitted from the Conference to the various
State Cabinets for close consideration and an indication
of their views with respect to some counter-proposal.
The CHAIRMAN.—I do not see much, if any, hope
in such a case as you propose; because your speech,
courteous and eloquent as it was, consists of a fiat re-
jection of the three propositions which I have made.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Not entirely so, in respect to the
last one.
The CHAIRMAN.—You pointed out how utterly
improper it was, in your view. You have thrown hack
upon the Commonwealth the responsibility for making
good the national losses, in carrying the burden arising
from the war. You have said, in effect, that that is our
job. That is about as fundamental a set of negatives
to any proposals as I can well conceive. And, that
being "the attitude of the Premier of the senior State
regarding the three propositions set forth by the Com-
monwealth Government generally, I think that the time
to be occupied by the Conference might well be
shortened.


Mr. THEODORE.—Mr. Holman made it clear that
he was not speaking except as a representative of Hew
South Wales, and he has no authority to speak on this
matter for all or any of the other States.
The CHAIRMAN. —I say quite plainly that a pro-
posal to send the Commonwealth’s propositions on to
the State Governments for Cabinet consideration, thus
involving delay and producing at the very least modi-
fications, is not at all encouraging. I am certainly not
encouraged when the Leader of the,Government of the
premier State rejects the whole of the throe, financial
propositions of the Government.
Mr. THEODORE. —If you mean that we cannot
make any progress towards a settlement of any or all
of those three propositions because Hew South Wales
objects to them, if will be far better, surely, to hold a
conference between New South Wales and the Common-
wealth.
The CHAIRMAN.—No! Please do not take up that
attitude. I quite realize that the attitude of others of
the States may differ entirely from that of New South
Wales.
Mr. FITZPATRICK. —It was agreed last night—l
think I am correct in saying—that Mr. Holman should
put this proposition before you.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is, for delay and recon-
sideration ?
Mr. FITZPATRICK—Yes.
Mr. LEE.—You do not expect us to say forthwith
what might be our attitude with regard to the last of
your three propositions.
The CHAIRMAN.—No, I think it necessary that
you should have a day or so to consider and study the
whole matter microscopically. But you agree, ap-
parently, that these three propositions are not neces-
sarily advantageous from the view-point of the State
Governments. And, if the spirit now is to knock out
these three items seriatim, I can only say that I see no
good in submitting this last particular one tq the State
Cabinets for consideration.
Mr. HOLMAN.—To make myself perfectly clear, I
emphatically oppose proposals one and two. I do not
know whether I have them in my mind in
their correct order, but I refer to those having
to do with the savings banks, and to
the pooling and control of loans. Upon the third
point I do not say that this particular scheme which
you have suggested appeals to me in its entirety, hut I
have expressed the view that if the proposition is re-
ferred to the various State Cabinets they may decide
to look upon the matter from the stand-point of the
Commonwealth’s necessities.
• The CHAIRMAN. —I hope that you also realize that
the expectation among a considerable section of the
public was that the proposition to be put forward by
the Commonwealth Government would have been much
more drastic, both in respect to the point of time and
as to the amount. I declined to propose that there
should be any change in the present system of payment
to the States before the end of the due period. The
proposition has been so framed, indeed, as that, both
in respect to time and the amount of the advance itself,
the modification shall be made as easy as possible to the
States.
Mr. PEAKE.—With respect to your bigger proposal
—the biggest of all —dealing with very high finance so
far as the Commonwealth is concerned, I was struck
with the view that it is one which may possibly contain
some very great advantage to Australia generally, both
to the States and to the Commonwealth. But you would
not expect that the States should pronounce—nor
would we be capable of pronouncing—fully and finally
upon such a proposal until we had before us a great
deal more information. It would he necessary that the
matter should be removed as far as possible from the
nebulous region and placed before us in a manner which
would show definitely what good might be expected.
The making of the Commonwealth the borrowing
agepey for the States has conceivably great advantages.
But we must know whether this is practicable and
likely to be brought about; and that can be ascertained
only by a very close inquiry. I think that the finan-
cial ring in London is not likely to be broken down
merely because Australia goes on to the market as one
borrower. South Australia tried to break down that
ring, and got through it to a point; but afterwards
the bank which had practically agreed to float a loan
for so many millions independently of the ordinary
financial agents, was induced to withdraw its offer.
You may be able to tell us later, Mr. Chairman, what
are your reasons for thinking that we can break through
this ring. You know that the finance of the world
is practically allotted by the financiers according to a
' scheme. There is the Australian market, which is
managed by a certain gentleman, of whose conduct I
do not complain; I merely draw attention to the fact
that the control is exercised by comparatively few men.
The CHAIRMAN. —The world’s financial barriers
Lave been burned away in the past few years.
Mr. PEAKE.—Certain men are still possessed of
very great powers in the world of finance, as we shall
have to admit. I do not think that cheap money is
within sight. When we speak of money, we speak of
something representing substantial things. The war
has consumed a great part of the substance of the
peoples of the world, and a great deal of capital will
be required to build up again the areas that have been
devastated. What chance is there of money in the near
future being cheap to the people of Australia? I do
not regard the prospect as attractive. The matter is
one on which not only those gt this table, but the people
generally, would like you to express your views when
propounding your scheme. The people will ask what
reasonable expectation have you of giving to us what
we desire, that is, cheaper money, by,doing away with
underwriting charges, in making Australia go on to
the market as one big borrower. If you can show" that
that will be the effect of the scheme, you will greatly
help it forward. What I take to be the supreme test
of the scheme is contained in this question, “ Can you
give us reason for entertaining the hope that, by its
adoption, underwriting charges will be done gway
with ?”
The CHAIRMAN.—I do not regard that as the
supreme or only test. The abolition of underwriting
charges is merely an important feature of the scheme.
Mr. PEAKE.—WiII Australia, by borrowing as a
whole, be in a better position to break into the financial
field, and save herself the very heavy underwriting
charges which now have to be paid?
The CHAIRMAN. —If there were to be no saving
at all in underwriting, I would still advocate this
scheme.
Mr. PEAKE.—There may be advantages in it beyond
the saving of underwriting charges, but it would be
more attractive if you could give us reason to believe
that these underwriting charges, which are very heavy,
and, in my opinion, quite without justification, could
be got rid of. I look upon what you said about war
indemnities as the outline of a scheme which might
be very helpful and advantageous to the Commonwealth
and the States. We are staggering under the burden
of debt that has been cast upon us by the war, and our
load is likely to be further increased before matters
are finally settled. Australia, as part of the British
Empire, has a right to expect that bier war expenditure


will be recouped in some form and at some time. I
am pleased that the Prime Minister is emphasizing
that view at the present moment. Is it not reasonable
that we, who have suffered from the action of a nation
which set the world ablaze, should send in our bills of
costs and damages? The British Empire will be justi-
fied in asking each of the Dominions to do this, and in
promising to act as broker for them by getting the
best terms it can in the collection of capital, or, if
that is not possible at the present time, in the collec-
tion of interest.
The CHAIRMAN". —Our full account has been
made up and lodged.
Mr. PEAKE. —I am glad to hear it. That is one
step towards obtaining payment. It would be of great
advantage to Australia to press it upon the British
Government that we expect to be paid. "Why should wc
stagger under a debt of millions if there is an expecta-
tion of collecting an indemnity from those who brought
about all the trouble? Our burdens are great, and
press more and more heavily on Commonwealth and
States alike. Our taxable area is being limited by
the floating of war loans. When a loan of £40,000,000
is floated, the field of income taxation is contracted,
and the difficulties of government are increased. Each
State feels that the area of taxation is growing smaller,
and the burdens are being concentrated on fewer and
fewer taxpayers. I shall not, Mr. Chairman, dismiss
your proposal hurriedly, as containing nothing worthy
of consideration or agreement by the States, hut I
say that an immediate question upon which this is a
very competent body to arrive at a resolution to be
sent on to the Prime Minister is our claim, as part
of the Empire, to be reimbursed our war expenditure.
We might well send on that claim with the suggestion
that Great Britain should act as broker for us, lodging
that claim and doing the best that she can to collect
the capital due to us, of, if that is not now possible,
to collect interest in the meantime.
Mr. McPHERSON.—I take it, Mr. Chairman, that
you would prefer that the three financial questions
under discussion should be dealt with in the order
adopted by Mr. Holman, and I shall, therefore, speak
first about the Savings Banks. We were all highly
interested in, and delighted with, Mr. Holman’s review
of the subject. I cannot add much to what he has
said regarding it, because I have been in politics only
about five years: but as a private citizen I was most
indignant at the starting of the Commonwealth Sav-
ings Bank, because I felt that Australia was being
saddled thereby with unnecessary ex])ense. I remember
well that you, Mr. Chairman, in a very able speech in
the Melbourne Town Hall, showed how wrong this
■action was on the part of the Commonwealth. You
spoke of it as amounting almost to a crime.
The CHAIRMAN".—I do not take back one word of
what was then said.
Mr. McPIIERSON.—The extra expense to which
the country has been put by the establishment of the
Commonwealth Savings Bank may be gauged by the
fact that it cost Victoria no less than £20,000 in in-
creased salaries, which it became necessary to pay in
order to retain the business of its Savings Banks.
The CHAIRMAN.—In addition, there was the out-
lay on the establishment of a large number of new
branches
Mr. McPHERSON.-—Yes. We had to open new
offices in all the country districts. It is farcical to see
at .places like Mornington a Commonwealth and State
Savings Bank in competition. The State Savings
Banks have adequately met the requirements of the
people of Australia. When the Commonwealth Sav-
ings Bank was opened—that is, in 1911—there were in
the State Savings Banks 1,552,000 accounts, which had
to their credit £60,000,000, and there are now in those
banks 2,331,000 accounts, with a credit of over
£102,000,000; while in the Commonwealth Savings
Bank there are 407,000 accounts, with a credit of about
£16,000,000.
■Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—And the competition is
not on equal terms.
Mr. McPHERSON. —I realize that. There is a
complete co-operation between the State Savings
Banks of the different States. The Vic-
torian State Savings Bank has been increasing
deposits at the rate of £2,500,000 per annum,
as against an increase by the Commonwealth Savings
Bank in Victoria of £500,600 per annum. It will bo,
seen, therefore, that the State Savings Bank business is
progressing. The work is being well done, and to the
complete satisfaction of its clientele. I also remind
you, Mr. Chairman, of an argument which you used
on a former occasion. You said then, and I think quite
properly, that the people were entitled to see that money
obtained in a State was spent in that State. I remem-
ber you saying that if .the Government got money from
the State Savings Bank in Victoria, why should it be
spent unon a railway in the Northern Territory? That,
in my opinion, was a very good argument. And that
is how I feel on this subject. It is an argument which,
I think, is unanswerable. I want to know what benefit
is to be gained from having two institutions? You, sir,
say that you have not changed your views, but that we
should deal with circumstances as we find them. You
propose to make a change. I say we ought to get back
to what you thought then, and what we think now,
namely, that there should be no Commonwealth Savings
Bank in operation. It is an easy proposition. You have
intimated that if we amalgamate the State Savings
Bank with the Commonwealth, the Commonwealth
would care for all officers employed by the State bank-
ing institutions, and all the Commissioners. All we ask
is that you discontinue your own Savings Bank business,
and look after the men or women who may be put out
of employment. It is not a very big proposition. "While
I would welcome anything that would afford relief to
the taxpayers of this country, I cannot recommend to
my Government that the State Savings Bank of Vic-
toria be disbanded. In any arrangement that might
be suggested, I think we could arrange that the money
should remain in the hands of the Commonwealth. Now,
with regard to public borrowing, you will recollect that,
in July last, we had a conference in your office and you
asked if we were prepared to hand over our borrowing
arrangements to the Commonwealth during war time.
The CHAIRMAN.—You did not do that.'
Mr. McPHERSON.—We did, as far as possible. I
prefaced my remarks at that time by saying that, in
peace time, I was of the opinion that the State Govern-
ments were the proper authorities to handle their own
financial affairs. But before we were able to give con-
sideration to your proposal, we had news of the signing
of the armistice, and that completely altered the posi-
tion so far as I was concerned. Your letter asked that
we should hand over all our borrowing powers to the
Commonwealth for a period of three years. What I
am concerned with is, what advantage would accrue to
the States by this course ? It is all a question of
pounds, shillings, and pence. When the consolidation
of the debts was talked about by the late Lord Forrest
(who was then Commonwealth Treasurer) and Sir Wil-
liam Irvine, they did not anticipate that an immediate
advantage would accrue to the States. They said that
probably within ten or twelve years perhaps some slight
advantage might accrue, but no one said that an im-
mediate advantage would be apparent, and if your


proposals to hand over State borrowing powers were
accepted, 1 cannot see any immediate advantage.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Even if that advantage were to be
gained, it would not be manifested within three years.
Mr. McPHERSON.—It would probably be ten or
twelve years.
Mr. FITZPATRICK.—And the fact that it was not
manifest within three years would be justification for
the Commonwealth asking that the period be extended.
Mr. McPHERSON.—On the question of the
method of getting money, it will be remembered that
at the Conference of 1914 you,'Mr. Chairman, drew at-
tention to the fact that if the proposed Commission
were elected you would have to go to precisely the same
people for the money that you go to now, and, as far
as I know London finance, that statement is correct.
The CHAIRMAN. —But the position has altered
entirely. The discussion on this subject does not seem
to recognise that there has been a war, resulting in a
gigantic financial change. The Commonwealth and
State debts have more than doubled since then.
Mr. McPHERSON. —iWe all know that rates in-
fluence market operations, but the aggregation of debts
does not necessarily mean that if we approach the
London money market in that way we shall get
money at a lower rate of interest. Probably the con-
verse will be the result; that for larger amounts re-
quired fewer people will offer, and probably we shall
have to pay more for them.
The CHAIRMAN.—Then you say that the more
competition the better?
Mr. McPHERSON. —In my opinion the smaller
flotations would be more advantageous, more expedi-
tious, and probably less expensive. Then there is
another factor. You know that some of the States are
credited with conducting their affairs more economically
than others. Whether that is so or not I am not going
to argue at this table. But if it is so—and I think it
can be said of some of the States —they would lose what-
ever good reputation they had on the London money
market by dropping into the pool, because they would
have to pay the same rates as other States which were
not so economical in their administration. Personally,
I do not think this would be fair to those States which,
as-1 have said, might be conducting their affairs more
economically. Recently we found it necessary to cable
to London to have a notification inserted in the English
press that Victoria was not asking for any variation
of the terms that we had put up in the first place as to
sinking fund. Now, in regard to the expected saving
of money, I think that is the test which should be ap-
plied to any such proposition. Let us see what the
Commonwealth has done and compare it with what we
have done ourselves. I am not going to say anything
about the interest or the price paid for the money. I
am simply taking the flotation expenses of all loans. In
1913-14 we floated two Victorian loans at a cost of
£2 Bs. and £2 9s. 3d. respectively. In 1916-17 three
Commonwealth loans cost £2 15s. 5d., £2 13s. Bd., and
£2 15s. 2d. The average expenses for the two Victorian
loans was £2 Bs. Bd., and the average for the three Com-
monwealth loans £2 14s. Bd.
The CHAIRMAN. —But you are comparing the
terms under pre-war conditions on the London market.
Mr. McPHERSON. —I am not saying anything
about the rate of interest.
The CHAIRMAN. —No, but you are referring to the
conditions.
Mr. McPHERSON. —The conditions would not alter
the expenses attached to the loan. You are paying the
same underwriting charges as previously.
The CHAIRMAN. —The conditions have altered the
expenses of the loan —underwriting charges, composi-
tion duties, and other charges.
Mr. McPHERSON. —1 cannot dissect the figures re-
lating to the Commonwealth loans, but the difference in
the costs of the loans referred to is about 6s. per £lOO,
equivalent to about £3,000 on £1,000,000; and on a
£12,000,000 loan, in expenses alone, leaving out interest,
it would be £36,000. I refer to £12,000,000, because
that is the amount we shall have to handle
within the next twelve months. I feel that
if the whole of these transactions were handed
over to the Commonwealth, the Commonwealth
Government would be compelled very largely to carry
out the suggestion ’ made by the late Lord Forrest
when he put the proposal to us in 1914. His view
was that a new Department to be attached to the Trea-
sury should be set up by the Commonwealth to deal
with this business aud that a financial expert should
be engaged and sent to London to co-operate with the
High Commissioner in the flotation of loans. We all
know as administrators that once a new Department
is set up it is practically impossible to knock it down
again. It remains practically for all time, and a
thousand and one reasons are advanced in support of
its continuance, so that if this arrangement were made
I believe that it would be for all time and not for
three years as the Chairman now suggests.
The CHAIRMAN.—I do not agree with the pro-
posal to set up a new Department. Ido not say that
it is necessary.
Mr. McPHERSON.—As to the debts question,
where the States were properly represented it would be
quite a different matter, but in the circumstances I
could not recommend my Cabinet to agree to the pro-
posal to turn over to the Commonwealth the whole of
our borrowing operations while we remain a Sovereign
State.
Coming to the per capita payments to the States
and the reduction proposed by the Commonwealth, I
am sure that Ministers generally attending this Con-
ference are not unappreciative of the difficulties that
confront the Commonwealth Treasurer. We realize
also that in making this proposition, he is absolutely
master of the situation. If the Commonwealth Par-
liament is prepared to indorse his proposal by passing
an Act the Government will be able to do exactly what
it pleases. We do not lose sight of that fact, but I
am confident also* that you, Mr. Chairman, have no
desire to be unreasonable or to do any injury to the
States. I feel, therefore, that you will be glad to
hear exactly how your proposition would affect the
States. In the short time at my disposal since your
proposition was submitted I have been able to collect a
few figures which may bring home to your mind the
adverse effect which the proposed reduction would have
upon the State of Victoria. If we are able to satisfy
you that the finances of the State Governments as a
whole are going to be dislocated, I hope we shall be
able to indu.ee you to arrive at the conclusion that it
would be better in the interests of the whole of the
people of Australia for the Commonwealth to take
the burden upon its own shoulders, to make its own
financial arrangements, and to leave the States in this
regard alone. The States in raising revenue are
limited to direct taxation. The Commonwealth, on
the other hand, has the power to impose indirect taxa-
tion which can be applied without the drastic conse-
quences attending the imposition of heavy direct taxa-
tion. I feel that it is possible for the Commonwealth
to raise more revenue by means of indirect taxation.
Mr. FITZPATRICK. The Age ' suggests this
morning that all that is necessary to make Australia
comfortable and happy is to impose a high Tariff.
The CHA.IRMAN.—That is an entirely original dis-
covery published now for the first time.


Mr. McPHERSON. —Apart altogether from the de-
mands which the war has made upon the finances of
the Commonwealth, I am sure that you, Mr. Chair-
man, are able to appreciate our feelings in regard to
this proposal. You shared our view as a State Trea-
surer when the Commonwealth Government some years
ago entered the domain of direct taxation. We had
all believed that that field was to be left to the States.
It was, however, invaded by the Commonwealth, and
as you said yesterday the Commonwealth Government
feels that, even in the matter of direct taxation, it has
now almost reached the end of its tether. It feels that
it cannot do much more in that direction. I would
emphasize the point that Victoria has tried, as far as
possible, to economize. I have - had very little time
to look into this question, but I shall be able to put
before the Conference a few - figures showing exactly the
loss which Victoria will suffer as the result of the pro-
posed reduction in the per capita payments. In the
first year of the operation of the system of reduced
payments, Victoria would lose £200,000; and in the
last year—l 926 —she w - ould lose £1,350,000. Over the
six years’ period, she would suffer a loss of £4,500,000.
A State of the size of Victoria cannot possibly afford
to lose so much revenue if the loss can possibly be
avoided. If it were possible for us so to increase our
taxation as to make good this loss, it would be neces-
sary for us in the first year to increase our direct
taxation by 8 per cent.; in the second year, by 15 per
cent.; and in the third year, by 23 per cent.; in the
fourth year, by 31 per cent.; in the fifth year, by 39
per cent.; and in the closing year, by 46 per cent. I
think you, Mr. Holman, said that New South Wales
would have to increase her taxation by 60 per cent.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Yes; that is to say, on the figures
as far as I have seen them.
Mr. McPHERSON.—The Increases in taxation to
make good this loss, if spread over the whole of the
States, would be as follow's:—ln 1920-21, 6 per cent;
1921-22, 12 per cent.; 1922-23, 18 per cent.; 1923-24,
25 per cent.; 1924-25, 31 per cent.; and 1925-26, 37
per cent. That is the increase in direct taxation which
would have to be made in respect of the whole of the
States. When the operation of the Braddon section
expired, and the new arrangement was entered into,
the altered payments made practically no difference to
Victoria, because, although there was a reduction in
the per capita payment made to us, the Commonwealth,
at the same time, took over our old-age pensions
system.
The CHAIRMAN.—It made a difference of over
£400,000 to us in one cut, and I, as Treasurer of Vic-
toria, had to propose a State land tax.
Mr. McPHERSON. —At all events, the Common-
wealth, by taking over the old-age pensions system, re-
lieved Victoria to the extent of £400,000. It must not
be forgotten that we in Victoria have contracted an
obligation in respect of loans free of interest for three
years to our soldier settlers, which, as the Premier said
yesterday, amounts to £1,000,000. Allowing for th'at
obligation, and the loss in respect of the per capita
payments which we will suffer during this three years’
period, we shall have a shortage of £740,000 per annum.
I do not include in this estimated loss any provision
for the increased rate of interest that we will have to
pay when we go on the market with our conversion
loans and loans for public works. I need not refer
to the point which was emphasized by Mr. Holman,
and with which you, Mr. Chairman, finally agreed, I
think, after an academic discussion, as to the loss
being equal, as you put it, to. 12 per cent, of our revenue.
It really represents 44 per cent, of our taxation.
The CHAIRMAN. —Mr. Holman and I have not yet
threshed out the question. The revenue of the States
from taxation is, roughly, £9,000,000; and the Com-
monwealth revenue from taxation is between
£29,000,000 and £30,000,000. Our taxation system,
therefore, is between three and four times as great as
that of the States as a whole.
Mr. GARDINER.—But does not a good portion of
the Commonwealth revenue come from Customs and
Excise?
The CHAlRMAN.—Undoubtedly; otherwise wo
could not live.
Mr. McPHERSON. —The Chairman said yesterday
that the Commonwealth Government was going to shed
a lot of its war expenditure, to considerably reduce the
maternity bonus, and to cifect savings wherever pos-
sible. I would stress the point that I think it absolutely
certain that the Commonwealth, during the next three
or four years, will derive a much larger Customs and
Excise revenue than it has ever had before. There
are at the present time in England and America ship-
loads of goods awaiting transport to this country, and
upon which duty will be paid.
The CHAIRMAN.—That depends on what we do
with our Customs Tariff.
Mr. McPHERSON. Independent of the Customs
Tariff.
• The CHAIRMAN. —It will not be independent of
it.
Mr. McPHERSON.—I am sure that the goods will
come because they are all bought by the Australian
people, and will come here unless you say you will im-
pose a Tariff that will prevent them. Even if you
increase the Tariff, I venture to say that they will still
come, because many of them are not obtainable in Aus-
tralia.
The CHAIRMAN.—The question of the anticipated
Customs yield depends on the Customs Tariff.
Mr. McPHERSON.—With all deference, I feel that
it will be wise, if you can see a way to hold the matter
over, to allow the States to see what it really means to
them. These figures have been got out in, perhaps,
a couple of hours, and we have not had, time to have
more than a look at the proposal. It would bs fair
to the States to let them ascertain its real effect. So
far as I can see now, I feel that it is going to be a
most serious thing for Victoria. While we will try as
far as possible to cut down our expenditure it seems
to me that the people of Victoria will have to go short
of a good many services. I feel, for instance, that we
cannot go on with railway development. There is an
increasing demand for educational institutions, and
for our charities. The hospital nurses are all appeal-
ing for an eight-hours’ day. If that is granted, we
shall have to give very much larger subsidies to those
institutions. Other expenses are increasing by leaps
and bounds. Ido not see how we can stop the in-
crease. There are the annual increments to the public
servants. Wo cannot stop them unless we are forced
to.
Mr. HOLMAN.—One interesting point, as the out-
come of war time, has been the enormous increase in the
lunacy returns in New South Wales. Ido not know
whether the same effect has been observed in Victoria.
These people cannot be left without proper provision.
If yon have 4,000 in your asylums in .one year and
5,000 in the next year you cannot carry on at the
same rate.
Mr. McPHERSON.—That is so. The price of liv-
ing has also advanced considerably. At the inaugura-
tion of Federation, the Age., commenting on the pay-
ment to the States by the Commonwealth of a fixed
amount, said—
Such a guarantee must be maintained, or else
the Federal Constitution would leave the colonies
mere hangers-on of the Federation, dependent on
the nation month by month for their solvency.


It is also said that the dropping of such a guarantee
would mean—
That the Treasurers of the various States would
be left to the mercies of a dominant assembly,
over which they would have no control, for their
revenue. •
That is as true to-day as it was when it was written.
Mr. PEAKE.—I have an impression that a certain
gentleman once objected to what he called “ unification
by strangulation.”
The CHAIRMAN. I think I can detect the
phrases of the Age in the quotation. While some of
you gentlemen have apparently not learnt much in the
way of finance by the war, that paper, I think, has
done so, notwithstanding all its faults.
Mr. McPHERSON.—My personal feeling—and here
I am not expressing the opinion of the Cabinet—is
that the Chairman’s scheme should be considered. Of
course, if they wish to do so, the Commonwealth
authorities will make the alteration ■without consulting
the States. If the interests of the States are to be
conserved, I should feel that the Commonwealth Trea-
surer wds trying to meet the States if he proposed a
reduction in the per capita payment of £250,000 a
year, for, say, five years, which would be really at the
rate of Is. per capita, and would bring the payment
down to £1 per head, and then allowed it to remain
at £1 for ten years. That would give us a feeling of
some security, for, say, fifteen years in all, and we
could make our arrangements to fit in with such a pro-
posal. However, the Commonwealth authorities are
masters of the situation, and whatever they do we shall
have to make our arrangements fit in with it, but I am
sure the Federal Parliament does not want to do any-
thing that will cripple the States financially. If this
scheme is put into force, then, so far gs I can see during
the little time I have had review' it, we in Victoria
are going to be very seriously hampered financially.
I therefore support Mr. Holman in asking that the
matter should be held over for a while and further con-
sidered. I am sure that the States will be pleased in
the meantime to furnish the Commonwealth with de-
tailed information, showing exactly how this proposal
will affect their finances.
The CHAIRMAN- —Mr. McPherson’s speech would
have been a good pre-war speech. He pre-supposes that
I do not understand that this is going to hamper the
States. I said I knew it would, and you cannot avoid
it. I do not think you will get anything like as good
terms next year, if you prefer to wait till then. On the
question of hampering the finances, let me present you
with one fact which I have not yet given you in this
discussion. The total revenue of this Commonwealth
in the first year of war was £22,000,000. The total war
charge that has to be borne out of revenue this year is
£21,000,000. If you can invent for me a system by
which the Commonwealth and the States can be free
from financial embarrassment when that sort of thing
is happening, I should like to hear it.
Mr. THEODORE.—Mr. Holman’s statement, that
notwithstanding these heavy burdens of the Common-
wealth some one had to find the money, is irrefutable.
It was also pointed out that the effect of the per capita
proposals will be to make the States find the money,
unless the Commonwealth Treasurer can show the
States how they can cut down their expenditure by
millions. ' Personally, I was not going to raise any
serious objection to the Commonwealth proposal on that
point. I realize that there is involved in the altera-
tion of the per capita payment a question of principle.
That is the question whether the Commonwealth should
pass on to the States the obligation of financing the
war and the outcome of the war, such as interest and
sinking funds *on war loans, and the cost of pensions.
C. 1144—4
Undoubtedly, this is entirely a Commonwealth obliga-
tion. If there had been no war at all, the financial
agreement expires in 1920, and would the Common-
wealth have now been making a proposal to diminish
„ the per capita payments, or knock them on the head
altogether ? If there had been no war, they would
have got no public support for a proposal to reduce the
present payment of 255. per head. If that is correct,
then the proposition to reduce the per capita payment
arises from the extra obligations incurred through the
war, and the Chairman’s proposal indicates a desire to
pass on to the States a part of that obligation. It
has been suggested, as a sort of straw to which we
might cling, that the Commonwealth might secure in-
demnities from Germany, but the majority of opinion
seems to be that there is not much hope in the imme-
diate future of any relief from that quarter. It does
not seem to me that the Allies can get blood out of a
stone. When Germany has made full provision for all
the payments to the devastated countries, there will
■ be very little left.
There are two subjects, however, on which I differ
in, the main from the rest of the State representatives—
the question of the .proposed amalgamation of the
Savings Banks and the question of the Commonwealth
control of the raising of loans. It seems to me that
the Savings Bank proposition should be discussed with
the desire to arrive at an agreement, if possible, be-
tween the States and the Commonwealth. I do not
say that the scheme which you, Mr. Chairman, have-
formulated should be, or oould be, accepted in its en-
tirety. At the same time, it is a big advance upon
any proposal previously considered. It meets more
fully the necessities of the States than any previous
proposal of its kind. There are three main points that
have to be satisfactorily settled before the States can
undertake any suoh agreement. One is the question of
dealing with the Savings Bank money that is now in-
vested in State securities in the various States. There
will have to be some satisfactory arrangement regarding
those investments. Another is the accumulated de-
posits now in the Savings Banks and not invested in
State securities; and the third concerns future excess
deposits year by year. If those three points can be
satisfactorily arranged there is no reason why the States
should not agree to the amalgamation. It does not
matter whether it is a State or Commonwealth Bank
that is actually operating. The States naturally regard
the matter as of importance, because they get a tremen-
dous advantage out of their connexion with the
Savings Banks. They have the use of the funds. Mr.
McPherson’s whole point is that the States may he
hampered in their development or in their expenditure
or in their policy generally if those funds are not made
available to them. That is a point to be discussed in
the scheme you have put forward. If Mr. McPherson,
could be assured that he would get control over the
same amount of funds year by year as he gets now from
his own State Savings Bank, why should he worry
whether the bank is a Commonwealth or a State one?
The main consideration is financial.
Mr. McPHERSON.—In other countries the State
Savings Banks are dissociated from the trading bank.
A bank that looks after the savings of the people only
is quite different from a trading bank with large trans-
actions. '
Mr. THEODORE. —This institution will be still
more or less separated from the trading hank, because
the Commonwealth has always recognised the neces-
sity of such separation. The fact that it is associated
in some remote way with a trading bank is no reason
why we should turn down the Chairman’s proposal.
The hostility to the scheme is simply because we fear
that in the future we may be denied access to the


moneys placed on deposit in the Savings Banks. So
long as that point can be satisfactorily settled, I am
sure the Queensland Government will have no objec-
tion to the proposed amalgamation. The proposed
advisory board consisting of the State Treasurers is
a good idea, not that it would have much actual effect
on the policy of the hank, but it may possibly have
some effect in making more money available to the
State Treasurers, or in enabling the State Treasurers
to watch the development of Commonwealth policy in
regard to the future control of the bank, and to advise
the State Governments accordingly. I am prepared to
discuss the matter fully with you, Mr. Chairman, with
a view to arriving at a scheme for amalgamation. You
said yesterday that you did not think it would be of
any use to consider any scheme unless the States were
unanimous. If that is your attitude, it is, of course,
absolutely hopeless, because it is not possible to get
unanimity, from what we have heard from the repre-
sentatives of the two principal States. But, if there
any advantage in having individual arrangements
with the States, 1 am prepared to discuss the proposal
further with ycm. '
The proposal for the Commonwealth control of the
borrowing of all the States is one on which, too, satis-
factory arrangements can be made. It is a matter of
hitting on a medium between the two extremes men-
tioned by Mr. Holman. With common sense on both
sides, that medium can be arrived at. We, as a State,
do not desire to submit our loan proposals or works
programme to the Commonwealth for control or super-
vision in any way, but we are prepared to consider and
discuss with the Commonwealth the total amount to be
expended from loan funds in any year, or year by year.
I see no difficulty about that.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Does not that involve the other to
a large extent?
Mr. THEODORE.—No. I do not believe that the
Commonwealth would, under any scheme, want us to
submit detailed proposals to them so that they could
say, “ We will advance you money for this class of pro-
posal, but not for that class.” I do not think that any
scheme of supervision of that nature would be accept-
able to any one in any circumstances.
Sir ELLIOTT LEWIS.—They may propose to re-
duce the amount asked for.
Mr. THEODORE.—Yes; they may say, “The
aggregate works proposals of all the States amount to
£39,000,000. Erom advices we have received there
will be no difficulty in raising £30,000,000. Can you
modify your programme to that extent?” That is a
matter for discussion and agreement, as it has been for
the last three years.
The CHAIRMAN.—You will take it from financiers
in London, but you will not take it from the Common-
wealth.’
Mr. THEODORE.—So long as the control is left un-
touched and there is no attempt to interfere with the
domestic politics of the individual States, it appears to
me that there are distinct advantages in the Common-
wealth proposal. As long as the Commonwealth does
not desire to interfere with the States in regard to
their works programmes and upon the question generally
of how they are to apply the moneys loaned, I can see
.many advantages in the scheme which you have ad-
vanced. There requires to be a very liberal spirit
adopted by the parties to the agreement; but there
must be advantages accruing from a scheme which
would mean that there would be one borrowing
agency on the London market, or wherever the
market may be. But any comparison that is ad-
vanced now of the experience of the Commonwealth with
that of the States before the war, would he practi-
cally worthless. The very markets themselves have
altered and expanded. New markets have grown, and
no doubt will continue to present themselves throughout
the world. It is recognised that to have one borrowing
authority for the -whole of Australia exploiting those
markets, to the mutual advantage of the Common-
wealth and all of the States, would be far better than
to have seven competitive bodies seeking loans from the
same markets and cutting one another’s throats in the
course of such competition. There are all kinds of in-
fluences controlling the amount of money which we may
borrow or spend. The mere additional factor of the
Commonwealth Government coming into the business
as borrowing agent makes very little difference so
long as the States have good enough programmes
and are progressive enough in their policies. 1
am prepared, for one, at any rate, to enter into
a suitable arrangement with the Commonwealth to-
morrow, if necessary, on behalf of my State. Of course,
if we had a three years’ agreement, it must be obvious
that we would have to decide upon a definite amount
to be loaned during that term. It may be made more
or less elastic, however, as to the amounts to be expended
during each of the years covered by the whole term.
But the question of the full amount is one which could
bo settled, Npractically, I dare say, at this Conference.
We know that we could shape our works programmes to
absorb a certain sum of money, covering a certain field
of work for each year. That sums up my attitude as
to the proposals relating to the Savings Banks and the
control of loans.
As to the per capita payments to the States, it may
be as well that no definite decision be given upon it for
a few months. The Commonwealth Government should
bear in mind that they have not much justification
for passing on to the States any part of the war obliga-
tions of Australia. If that had the effect of saving
money by enforcing economy, there might be something
to be said for it. But there is nothing to be advanced in
favour of forcing it upon the States. The full amount
has to be provided by the general taxpayer, and the
Commonwealth ought to raise it.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—I recognise that these
three very important financial questions which you have
placed before the Conference with your usual lucidity,
Mr. Chairman, require much longer time for considera-
tion than we have had an opportunity of giving to them.
But 1 am sure you will not mind my saying that, with
reference to all these questions, there is a very strong
drift towards weakening State responsibility and State
powers, and transferring them to the Commonwealth. I
have always been a pronounced advocate of State
rights—of home rule. It would be a greater disaster
to the Commonwealth even than the war itself —apart
altogether from the sacrifice of human life—if we
were to force a system of government on Australia
which would be absolutely unworkable. No one Go-
vernment could properly control the affairs of so large
a continent with such diversities of problems in every
direction; it would necessitate a sitting of the Parlia-
ment all the year round, and, even then, the Parlia-
ment would be unable to cope with the necessary
work. There is much logic in the statement
that the closer the government is to the people the
purer and more economical will that government be.
It was my privilege, with the Premier of Western Aus-
tralia, to attend the first Conference fifteen years ago,
when some of these questions which we are now dis-
cussing were raised. Sir George Turner was then
Treasurer of Victoria; and it would have given me
great pleasure at this Conference —not that I would
wish, sir, to deprive you of the position which you are
now filling so ably—if you were upon the side of the
States instead of the Commonwealth in bringing your
mind to the consideration of these questions.


With reference to the matter of amalgamation be-
tween the various banks, that opens up a very difficult
question in South Australia. Under our legislation we
have not the control of our Savings Bank, such as.thcixy
is in either Victoria or New South Wales. When the
State Bank of South Australia was brought into being
by the late Sir Frederick Holder, an attempt was made
to give to that bank the whole of the powers of a bank-
ing institution, and to bring in the Savings Bank with
it, thus having one strong institution. That project
was defeated, however, and the State Bank to-day is
merely a bank for lending money on the Credit Foncier
system, and for administering such Acts of Parliament
as the Advances for Homes Act, and work of that
character, which has been done admirably. We have,
therefore, three banks in South Australia; —the State
Bank, the Commonwealth Bank, and the State Savings
Bank. The latter is under the authority of a Board
which is practically independent of the Government,
and which can lend its money even to so spendthrift
a State as New South Wales. If they can get better
terms in New South Wales than we in South Australia
can offer, there is nothing to prevent the South Austra-
lian money in the State Savings Bank from going to
’New South Whiles rather than remaining to assist our
own affairs.
’ Mr. FITZPATRICK.—Vour reference to New South
Wales, I presume, is only “spoke sarcastic.”
Sir RICHARD BUTLER. —Of course; and,
having listened to the remarks of Mr. Holman
at this Conference, one can only conclude
that the reputation of New South Wales in
the direction which I remarked, is unfair. We
can promise only to give the closest consideration to
the proposals placed before us at this Conference, with
a view, if possible, to improve the conditions under
which we are working at present-in South Australia.
Now, as to the Commonwealth taking the
whole control of borrowing for the States, 'that was
brought before the Conference in 1903; and the decision
which I personally arrived at then I hold to-day. It
was that, so far as local borrowing is concerned, it
would be a very great mistake for South Australia, at
any rate, to give up the right of obtaining money
■ locally, over the counter, and at an average rate of
interest better even than the Commonwealth has been,
able to secure money for. In the South Australian Trea-
sury at present we are almost every day taking money
in and paying money out, and we make our terms ac-
cording to the period for which the money is to be
deposited. During the last year or two we have done
the bulk of our financing by that means.
Mr. FITZPATRICK.—That is the fourth hank that
you have in South Australia, then?
Sir RICHARD BUTLER. You may call it
that if you like. It is a Treasury hank where
we have a large amount of money on de-
posit, varying in interest according to the terms
■upon which the sums were deposited. ' -South Aus-
tralia would not give up the right to obtain what money
it could locally. Indeed, I do not see how we could
do so.
As for the Commonwealth borrowing for the
States in the markets of the world, we agreed to
that in war time; but I have not been able to see from
the figures and the money paid in interest that we have
been very much better off than .if tbe States had gone
into the markets for themselves. In February, 1914,
five months before this terrible war began, South Aus-
tralia, which is not the wealthiest State of Australia,
but, by those who are able to judge, is looked upon as
the most economical, made the best bargain on the Lon-
don market that has been made for a long time, secur-
ing a loan of £2,000,000 at 4 per cent, at par, which is
evidence that it is not the wealthiest State that always
makes the best terms. About that time both New South
Wales and Victoria paid considerably more.
The CHAIRMAN'. —That was a sheer matter of luck.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER. —1 regard it as evidence
of the appreciation of the good management displayed
in the administration of the affairs of South Australia.
During the last four years our money has cost us less
than has been paid by any State of the Commonwealth,
and, I think, less than the Commonwealth Government
has paid. Our position is this: If the Commonwealth
Government will recognise that it is its duty to raise
the money required for all repatriation purposes, irres-
pective altogether of the. question of risk, and will re-
fund the money that South Australia has raised to
provide homes for soldiers and land—between £1,250,000
and £1,500,000 —if the Commonwealth will refund that
money, we shall ht. in a pretty easy position for the next
eighteen months. At the present time the Common-
wealth owes us something like £350,000. I was very
moderate in my demands yesterday when I said that,
apart from repatriation, we could get along with about
£240,000 in addition to the money that we have not
drawn under previous agreements regarding loans
floated in London. With that £240,000, and £IOI,OOO
still due to us under 1 these agreements, we should have
about £350,000. We must go on the London market
for redemption purposes in connexion with a loan
which we temporarily paid off last year, and, by doing
so, saved a considerable sum. But with this provision
made, South Australia, during the next eighteen months,
need not compete with the Commonwealth Government
at all, nor go on the London market. During that
period there will be ample opportunity for considering
how far the adoption of the proposals of the Common-
wealth would assist in bringing down the rate'of interest
and creating better borrowing conditions. If, as Mr.
Theodore suggests, we are to have a new order of things,
and all these charges are not to be made in the future —
I have a list of them here, amounting to £IIO,OOO on a
£4,000,000 loan, exclusive of discount —and better terms
can be secured in the money markets of the world, the
South Australian Government will not stand in the
way; but it has not been proved that better terms can
be secured.
The CHAIRMAN.—That, is not demonstrable; just
as the facts concerning Federation could not be known
in advance.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—The most enlightened
public men in South Australia who advocated Federa-
tion put the cost to the State at about £30,000 a year.
The CHAIRMAN.—That was the statement of a
South Australian Treasurer, the late Sir Frederick
Holder.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—Sir Josiah Symon, Sir
Richard Baker, and all the leading men told us the same
thing.
The CHAIRMAN.--In New South Wales, Mr. R.
B. Wise demonstrated beyond doubt that the cost of
Federation per head of population would be less than
the cost of keeping a dog, yvhich, I believe, is 2s. 6d. per
year in that State.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—We know what the cost
of Federation has been, apart from the expenditure in-
curred in connexion with the war.
The CHAIRMAN. —Without Federation, could Aus-
tralia have stood up in this war?
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—My reason for voting
for Federation was that it would secure Free Trade


betweep the States and put our Military and Naval
Forces under one control. Those, with most persons,
were the main objects of Federation. But Federation,
not unification, was desired. South Australia at her
present rate of expenditure can finance herself for
eighteen months, providing that the money required for
repatriation is found by the Commonwealth Govern-
ment. We can rub along fairly comfortably without
going on the money market or asking the Common-
wealth Government to borrow for us, spending at the
rate of about £2,000,000 a year. We have authority
for the carrying out of four or five big water conserva-
tion schemes, railways, and the like, involving an ex-
penditure pf at least £12,000,000. We have loan autho-
rity for £9,000,000, which we have not yet used. Six
million pounds has been provided by the Com-
monwealth Government, and we have authority for
borrowing £3,000,000 more, in addition to our redemp-
tion loan. Therefore, South Australia is ready to con-
sider the proposal to have only one borrower on behalf
of Australia, so long as that is confined to
borrowing outside Australia. Personally—l am not
speaking for my colleagues now —I am much more in-
clined to accept that arrangement than to place the
State borrowing entirely under the Commonwealth
control. There is one other matter. With regard to
the proposed reduction of the per capita payments to
the States, it must not be forgotten that, although the
Commonwealth has had to borrow large \sums for
carrying on the war, and is liable for the interest on
the money borrowed, the States, too, have had burdens
placed upon them by the war, by reason of the
shrinkage of their revenue and the increase of
their expenditure. South Australia had to re-
borrow £5,000,000 at 6 per cent, to replace
a loan of that amount at 4' per cent. The
war has cost us at least £300,000 because of the increase
in interest rates, and that sum has to be found out of
revenue, which is a heavy *burden for a State with a
comparatively small population and not too wealthy.
Then the making up of the difference between the
military and the civil pay of public servants who en-
listed to serve under the colours, will cost us another
£300,000. Our revenue from railways, from the
Barrier, and from harbors, has decreased by
about £300,000. We have imposed an amuse-
ments tax and an income tax, which will make
good £300,000 of this increased liability of
£900,000 imposed by the war. To-day, there is a tax
of 2s. in the £1 on the larger South Australian incomes.
That, taken in conjunction with the Commonwealth in-
come tax, is a pretty heavy impost. I do not see in
what direction we could provide, by direct taxation, for
the loss which will he occasioned by the re-
duction of the per capita payment of the Commonwealth
Government. In six years’ time, it will mean the loss
of £300,000 a year. Seeing that the States have these
extra burdens to bear, and that the Commonwealth has
entered into competition with us in every avenue of
taxation, I aSk the Chairman whether his pro-
posal is a fair one. Owing to the war, we shall have
to increase our taxation about 16s. per head of popula-
tion, and we have increased railway rates and fares by
about £300,000 a year. We are trying to pay our way,
but we shall have great difficulty in doing so, despite
our increased taxation. In this matter, we are entirely
in the hands of the Commonwealth. I do not say that,
under ordinary circumstances, I would consider the
proposals of the Chairman drastic. In many
respects they are moderate; but I do not see any
prospect of the State revenues increasing largely,
although it is probable that the Commonwealth revenue
will increase considerably during the next two or three
years by reason of the increase in Customs revenue.
With an economical Treasurer like the Chairman,
and a big reduction in the expenditure on maternity
bonuses
* The CHAIRMAN—They cost less than £600,000
in an expenditure of £40,000,000.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER. —Three-fourths of that
amount could be saved.
The CHAIRMAN. —Possibly one-third or one-half
might be saved.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER. —Ho doubt, many persons
who are not in political life think that they could put
the State and Commonwealth finances right, if they
were given the opportunity; and in South Australia we
have invited the help of financial experts.
The CHAIRMAN". —We have done so, too.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER. —The other day, a gentle-
man asked me if I would meet some of those experts,
and I replied that I should be delighted to do so, though
I felt that they would go away from the interview
sadder, if wiser, men. Extra demands are continually
being made on the public purse. We are not able to
do anything like what the Department of Education is
asking us to do. Our roads are out of order, although
wo could advantageously spend a large sum of money
in repairing and improving them. If we were to com-
ply with the demands of our Public Service, it would
mean an expenditure of £500,000 a year, and we should
have great pleasure in spending the money if we had
it; but it will require the greatest care to close our
accounts without a deficit. It is not wise to use loan
money borrowed for the development of the country to
make up the difference between revenue and expendi-
ture. We have a debit balance of £1,300,000 created
by our predecessors which is so jnuch dead capital.
If the extra expenditure indicated by the Chairman
were thrown on us at once, instead of six years hence,
I do not see how it would be possible to close ouf ac-
counts next year without a further deficit; and, in my
opinion, it is not possible to carry any large measure
of taxation through the two Houses. That is the
position of South Australia. We are anxious to work
with the Commonwealth Government in any way that
will advance the interests of Australia and benefit its
people.
WHEAT FINANCE.
Mr. HALL. —On the subject of wheat legislation, I
may say that two of the States—Victoria and Western
Australia —have already passed the necessary legisla-
tion enabling them to enter into an agreement with the
Commonwealth, and with banks, for advancing money
on wheat. South Australia requires a slight alteration
in her Act, and, subject to the approval of South Aus-
tralian legal advisers, we have decided on what should
be agreed upon. Hew South Wales has passed no
legislation whatever on the subject. We have been
carrying on the Wheat Pool without authority. I
could explain how that happened. We had legislated
upon the subject of wheat the year before, and there
was some doubt as to whether we would be able to get
more legislation through, so we went ahead and did the
work of pooling the wheat. I move —
The Commonwealth Government and the Governments
of the four ■ wheat-growing States, namely, New South
Wales, Victoria, South Australia, and Western Australia,
agree that action be taken as follows :
1. The Commonwealth to immediately pass a Regulation
authorizing the Prime Minister to—
(a) enter into an agreement with the banks in relation
to wheat finance;
(b) give to the banks a guarantee that each State
Government will repay advances;


(c) arrange with representatives' of the States for the
undertaking by the Commonwealth of a pro-
portion of the liability in respect of advances
made by the banks.
2. The States of New South Wales and South Australia
to pass legislation authorizing the State Government to
arrange for guaranteeing repayment of advances.
3. The States of Victoria and Western Australia to forth-
with enter into a formal agreement to repay to the Com-
monwealth any moneys paid by it on behalf of the States
in respect of wheat, and the States of New South Wales
and South Australia to undertake they will enter into such
a formal agreement as soon as legally empowered to do so.
Mr. PEAKE.—I second the motion.
The CHAIRMAN".—T may say that the terms of the
motion arc in complete accord with tlig general desire,
and satisfy the conditions, from the Commonwealth
point of view.
Motion agreed to.
The CHAIRMAN.—On behalf of the Common-
wealth, I am much obliged to Mr. Hall for devoting
himself to this work, which was quite pressing, and had
to be done to the complete satisfacton of all the
interests Concerned.
ELIMINATION OF SAVINGS BANKS COMPETITION:
. COMMONWEALTH SURPLUS REVENUE ACT 1910:
CO-ORDINATION OF COMMONWEALTH, STATE,'
AND OTHER PUBLIC BORROWING.
Mr. GARDINER.—In approaching the discussion
of this subject, one cannot help being struck with the
fact that the man who has submitted the proposition
has a pretty hard row to hoe. Criticism is easy, and
whilst we might agree or disagree with the suggestions
made, I think our personal and collective view is that
we want to express appreciation of the immense amount
of consideration which you, Mr. Chairman, have given
to these proposals, which have been placed before us in
such a concise manner.
Now, dealing with the Savings Banks, I am reminded
that Mr. Holman has given us the constitutional aspect
of that problem, and to some extent his views have been
supported by Mr. McPherson. As a careful student of
events at the time the Commonwealth Convention was
sitting, I must say that this matter was particularly
referred to, and it was clearly understood that there
should be no invasion. But, like the man in the stocks,
you, Mr. Chairman, as representing the Common-
wealth, are there. We do not think you ought to be
there, but there you are, and consequently it is up to us
to say what we think of the present position. I would
like to see Mr. McPherson’s suggestion adopted, and
the Commonwealth Savings Bank "business abolished
altogether. The Commonwealth could retain its
£16,000,000 of deposits. I am afraid, however, that
would not meet with your concurrence, so the next best
thing is to see what arrangement can be arrived at. I
would hesitate strongly to turn down your proposition
without a good deal more consideration than has been
given to it in the few hours that have been at our dis-
posal. You have given us matured opinions, the result
probably of many consultations with the brightest in-
tellects you have gathered around you in Common-
wealth administration, and it is very difficult indeed for
ns in twenty-four hours to absorb all those ideas and
come to a clear decision. Under these circumstances,
and speaking especially for Western Australia, I would
he prepared to fellow the lead given by Mr. Theodore,
of Queensland. If you require absolute unanimity on
this question, and seeing that New South Wales, Vic-
toria, and South Australia cannot agree to it, we get
no " forrader.” But if you are prepared to deal indi-
vidually with the States, as you have dealt with Tas-
mania, T say, for Western Australia, that I am perfectly
willing to consider the proposition.
The CHAIRMAN. —You moan in connexion with
banking?
Mr. GARDINER. —I refer to the Savings Bank pro-
position. When Mr. Scaddan was Premier he called
me in to consider a similar proposition advanced at that
time by the Commonwealth Bank authorities, and I
urged him to turn it down. But since then many of
the objectionable features of the proposal have been
eliminated, and so I am now prepared to consider it in
relation to Western Australia, more especially when I
consider the relative figures with regard to Savings
Bank business in that State. During the past six years
the State Savings Bank deposits have increased by only
£213,000, and for the same period the increase of Com-
monwealth Savings Bank deposits over withdrawals is
no less than £1,315,000. You can easily understand,
therefore, seeing that you have the money and we have
not, that the proposal might be acceptable to my State.
We want to see how we»can get a fair measure of con-
trol and use some of that money which is provided by
•the .people of Western Australia for the benefit of that
State. In our Savings Bank business we suffer dis-
advantage by reason of the fact that all our
stations are also post-offices, and consequently agencies
for the Commonwealth Savings Bank. Bv this competi-
tion both Commonwealth and States are losing. Surely
common sense dictates some rectification of the position.
If we are wise we will eliminate this extravagance and
get down to business on a sound basis. As a matter of
fact, the Commonwealth Bank has £376.000 of our
money on deposit, for which we cannot get full interest.
We bank with the Commonwealth Bank of Western
Australia. In our Savings Bank affairs we have bad
to incur coats to get business as against the Common-
wealth Bank, and 1 do not like that.
The CHAIRMAN.—Before you pass from that sub-
ject, Mr. Gardiner, may I say that in bringing this
matter before the Conference I was anxious not to
repeat the error which the Commonwealth made on
former occasions of playing one State against another.
You suggest now, failing unanimity, which apparently
is impossible, that the Commonwealth might submit
the proposition to the two States that are willing to
enter into an agreement.
Mr. GARDINER.—I am quite willing to do so.
The CHAIRMAN.—I shall consider that proposal
at once.
• Mr. GARDINER.—You can easily understand that,
from our stand-point, we will be acting wisely in so
doing.
, The CHAIRMAN.—Ves, as' to costs and holding.
Mr. GARDINER.—When the last Commonwealth
loan was floated you took £170,000 out of the Savings
Banks in Western Australia in ten days. From our
point of view the position is not at all satisfactory.
Now, on the question of raising loans, the circular
which you issued invites the States to place all loans
under Commonwealth control for the period of three
years, and intimately associated with that suggestion
was one that came by telegram that we should meet you
in regard to repatriation proposals. It will look a
little inconsistent, therefore, if, while we are not pre-
pared to trust you with regard to financial arrangements
generally, we submit proposals embodying our financial
-requirements in connexion with repatriation.
Loan money, although expended on public works with
the object of assisting repatriation, will yet be of benefit
to the State concerned. These works are such as we
would carry out in the ordinary course, even if there
was no question of repatriation to be considered. Mr.
Holman, however, has not included such works in his
statement. He says that his State is prepared to
finance its own ordinary works. Victoria is not pre-
pared to go so far; but the Treasurers of South Aus-
tralia, Queensland, and Tasmania have said, as I say,


that these are the class of works that we practically
require to carry out during the next three years. The
inference is that we have to that extent complied with
the request of the Commonwealth Government that it
should be allowed to undertake the borrowing of tho
money required for these works during a three-years’
period. That is how the position presents itself to me.
May I put it candidly and straightforwardly to you,
Mr. Chairman, that there is at the back of the minds
of the State Treasurers the fear that, although the
proposal is that this control should he exercised for
only three years, there is behind it the suggestion that
it should be interminable? The States have a right to
say, as they do, that they have established in London
agencies which have dealt peculiarly and particularly
with their own loans. The question of the consolida-
tion of State debts was a fad of mine, and at the first
Treasurers’ Conference that I attended I brought for-
ward a scheme to provide for. it. When in London
some time ago, I was not a State Treasurer, but T made
inquiries on the subject. It is true, as Mr. Holman
says, that when a man visits London and makes in-
quiries as the Treasurer of a State, the opinions that
he obtains are to a great extent biased. Tn making
my inquiries at Home, T was not in that position. I
was not even in politics, but I had taken a good deal
of interest in the question of the consolidation of the
State debts, and, through the instrumentality of persons
high in authority, I was brought into touch with some
of the leading men on the London Stock Exchange. I
asked these gentlemen whether, if the Commonwealth
took over the State debts, the terms obtained would be
better than those which the States individually could
secure. The reply I received was, in effect, “ No.
In London, there are ‘individual channels open to the
several States, just as there are certain members of the
Exchange who deal exclusively in certain stocks. The
man who invests in New South Wales stock does not
touch Western Australian,stock, and the man who in-
vests in Victorian stock does not touch South Aus-
tralian stock. Each State has its clientele. That is
the position.” At the back of the heads of the State
Treasurers, in considering this proposition, was the
idea that if the Commonwealth were to take control for
three years, it might wish to retain the power for all
time; and that if at the end of the three-years’ period
we’were dissatisfied, the borrowing channels that we
had created for ourselves would have disappeared, and
would have to be re-created. Western Australia is
peculiarly circumstanced. It is the one State that has
a sinking fund in respect of every one of its stocks.
The reason why we have a certain clientele who always
take Western Australian stocks is that included in our
sinking fund we have something like £500,000 a year
which we send to the trustees in London for invest-
ment, and which they can use in maintaining a live
market for our stocks. Investors know, therefore, that
they can go into the London market at-any time, and
sell Western Australian stocks; they know that there is
a sinking fund in the hands of the trustees which can
be used for the purchase of such stocks. It is rather
strange that the fact that we have made provision for
a sinking fund in each case has made no difference in
the cost of flotation, and the rates we have had to pay.
The CHAIRMAN.—You cannot say that it has
made no difference in the rates.
Mr. GARDINER. —I do not think it has made the
slightest difference.
The CHAIRMAN. —We may think it has not, but
we cannot speak positively on the point.
Mr. GARDINER.—Quite so. Sir Richard Butler
said that he could get better terms for South Australian
loans than the Commonwealth could get. Tn the ease to
which he referred, however, it was simply a question
of “striking the market.”
Mr. PEAKE. —We struck it at the top.
Mr. GARDINER. —Yes. It is possibly within the
memory of the Treasurers present that on one occasion
when money seemed to be tight there was a sudden
drop, and two States went into the market and got
what they wanted at practically par.
Mr. PEAKE. —We are all practically in the hands
of half-a-dozen men in London. If they say to our
clientele, “ This is good enough to take up,” their
word is accepted and acted upon.
Mr. GARDINER,—ExactIy.
The CHAIRMAN. —Speaking more plainly, you are
in the hands of one man.
Mr. GARDINER.—Quite so. Western Australian
stocks are a little more favoured than other State stocks
because of the presence of a purchasing power up to
half-a-million a year to keep the market alive.
The CHAIRMAN. As to the effect of sinking
funds, varying views are held by equally competent
authorities. I found when at Home that the bulk of
the opinion was that it would be unwise to depart from
the sinking fund principle.
Mr. GARDINER.—Even the Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer was good enough to send us a note on the
point. I do not believe that New South Wales can
borrow more cheaply than Western Australia can do.
That she did so on one occasion was merely due to the
fact that she happened to strike the market —it was a
fluke.
Mr. THEODORE. And Victoria cannot borrow
more cheaply than Queensland can do.
Mr. GARDINER. No; even with its policy of
economy Victoria cannot borrow on better terms than
Queensland.
The CHAIRMAN.—Is not the position summed uj
in the saying, “ There is no bad beer, but some beer'is
better than others.”
Mr. GARDlNEß.—Undoubtedly. At the last
Conference you, Mr. Chairman, impressed it upon us
that your advices were that it would be impossible to
raise any more money on the English market after the
close of 1919.
The CHAIRMAN.—During the war.
Mr. GARDINER. —Yes, if the war continued. I
went back to my State, told my Cabinet what you had
advised, and so‘trimmed ray finances that, with the
assistance of £250,000 and £95,000 which we are to get
from you, 1 can finance our requirements up to the end
of 1919. We then received your intimation that you
desired us to take into consideration the question of re-
patriation work. This repatriation work opens up for
our State an entirely different outlook. No sane Trea-
surer would, at the present time, enter upon some of
the projected works, having regard to the rate of in-
terest that he must pay for his loan money. The
position we took up, however, was that if these works
would assist the Commonwealth in its repatriation
efforts, then the Commonwealth to some extent would
have to bear a share of responsibility and help us.
We have suggested a series of works to be spread over
a period of three years. I honestly say that if there
were no question of repatriation to be considered, I
would not think of providing for them at the present
time, and that, if left in straitened circumstances so
far as loan moneys were concerned, we would not think
of entering upon them. Unless the Commonwealth
can give us special terms we cannot enter upon them
now. The day after to-morrow is posterity in Aus-
tralia, and before we,know where we are, so to speak,
we shall have to bear the interest charges and losses on
these concerns. If after the Conference has concluded
its deliberations you, Mr. Chairman, say to us, ‘‘The


Commonwealth is willing to undertake to raise for
Western Australia X 3,000,000,” we shall be prepared
to accept that offer. You have to raise X 1,000,000
for repatriation in respect of the advance of XSOO per
head. That is your job. We must have another
half-a-million, because we are giving the men £250,000
more than the Commonwealth is allowing. That is
our job. We have also to make provision for the re-
purchase of estates. Discriminating between the re-
patriation and the public works policies, if you say to
us after the Conference is over, “ We are prepared to
raise this loan money for you on the best possible
terms,” then Western Australia is prepared to give you
that right for the three years’ period. The giving of
that power to the Commonwealth, however, must be
conditional upon your taking into consideration the
question of interest and intimating what proportion of
loss you are prepared to bear.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is a separate matter, to
be dealt with on the report of the sub-Conference, as to
the share or risk of loss to be borne. It is different
altogether from the loan proposition over the three
years’ period.
Mr. GARDINER.—At all events that is the position
which Western Australia will take up. I do not say
that my fellow State Treasurers are wrong in the stand
they have adopted. Circumstances must alter cases,
and, except in regard to certain things of which we are
proud, we are the poor son of the Australian family.
Mr. PEAKE.—Are you putting it that no other
State Treasurer would be in favour of the Common-
wealth being given authority to raise this money sub-
ject to the limitations you have mentioned?
Mr. GARDINER.—Other State Treasurers have
not intimated what limitations they would impose. Mr.
Holman was right when he said we have no desire to
criticise each other’s proposals as to developmental
works, because each State has power and responsibility
in respect of them. We are prepared, however, to do
what I have said, and if, at the end of the three years’
period, when the disruption of finance, which must be
occasioned even as the result of peace, shall have dis-
appeared, we may say that we will go on our old way
again.
The CHAIRMAN.—I wish to understand your pro-
position. You say that your minimum requirement is
£3,000,000 in respect of a certain period, and that if
the Commonwealth can raise that money for you you
are prepared to let it do so?
Mr. GARDINER.—Yes.
The CHAIRMAN.—You say to us, “ If you will get
our State what we regard as our irreducible minimum
you can act as our agents for three years?”
' Mr. GARDINER.—That is what I say. Conversion
loans are not worrying us.
The CHAIRMAN. —I am leaving aside the question
of conversion loans and trying to get at the new loan
proposition. Your irreducible minimum is £3,000,000
covering a three years’ period.
Mr. GARDINER. —Yes, outside of repatriation.
The CHAIRMAN. —And you say that if we can get
this £3,000,000 you will give us authority to raise it for
you on your behalf?
Mr. GARDINER.—Yes.
The CHAlßMAN.—Queensland ‘says practically the
same. Mr. Theodore says that they want anything be-
tween £24,000,000 and £26,000,000, and that if the
Commonwealth would raise that amount for them
Mr. THEODORE. —I did not go quite so far as that.
I said we could discuss later what amount we could
reasonably ask for.
The CHAIRMAN.—But the Commonwealth could
not allow the States under any system of arrangement
to put their requisitions on the Commonwealth table,
and have them automatically operative. The Com-
monwealth must be able to say whether it is possible
or wise to raise the amount that the States requisition
for.
Mr. GARDINER.—I would be perfectly willing to
recognise that.
The CHAIRMAN. —Mr. Theodore recognised that
position when he said that, so long as the Common-
wealth did not want to put the microscope over the
public works projects of the States, he could give his
assent so far as Queensland, was concerned, the only
limiting condition being the amount of money which
the Comrponwealth knew that it.should or could raise
in the year. Is that your position ?
Mr. GARDINER.—That is so.
The CHAIRMAN.—Is that Mr. Peake’s position?
. Mr. PEAKE.—I should be quite ready to agree to
that over a three-year period.
The CHAIRMAN.—JThen the strange thing to me
is that, although I put that proposition up, with that
gate wide open, not one of the whole six of you has
passed through it.
■ Mr. THEODORE.—I made it perfectly clear that
I was prepared to accede to it.
The CHAIRMAN.—That was at this Conference,
but not in answer to my letter.
Mr. THEODORE.—We received your letter in
October. We knew that a Conference was to take
place at an early date, and that was the place at
which to discuss the matter, and endeavour to come
to an agreement. It would be almost impossible for
five or six States to arrive at an agreement by corre-'
spondence on a matter of that kind.
The CHAIRMAN.—On the other hand, the repre-
sentatives of New South Wales and Victoria joined
in saving. “ Nothing doing on these lines,” and those
are the two most numerously populated and wealthy
States. .
Mr. GARDINER.—Mr. Holman saia that if it was
for repatriation purposes, he was willing to consider
it.
The CHAIRMAN.—Of course; but there is
nothing in that. We have to get the repatriation
money, anyhow. If the desire is to eliminate com-
petition, and we only eliminate a portion, a very
small advantage will be likely to result. It will be
worse than the position which has occurred since
1917, with Mr. Holman outside the arrangement, and
all the other five States in it, so that we are still
in competition. But if there are two or three States
outside, and the Commonwealth is raising loans onlv
for the remaining States, we shall have the full
force of the competition of* four or five borrowers.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—What I said was that,
inside the Commonwealth, we did not want any in-
terference, and that, outside, we did not think we
should want any money, apart from the repatriation
money. If we did, I said, we were prepared to con-
tinue to allow the Commonwealth to raise it.
The CHAIRMAN.—You cannot raise a loan of
any substantial amount with advantage inside Aus-
tralia. You may borrow from the State Savings
Banks some of their accruing increases, but I tell you
that not one State can go on the local market and
raise aibig loan now. 1
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—We take loan money
over the counter every day of the week.
The CHAIRMAN.—Nobody tries to stop you sell-
ing stock over the counter.
Sir ELLIOTT LEWIS.—It has never been put to
us before that you have no objection to sales over the
counter.


The CHAIRMAN'.—If you read my letter of Sep-
tember lust, you will see that purely local and internal
arrangements are to be left in an elastic and fluid con-
dition. If New South Wales or Victoria wanted to
pick up a quarter or half-a-million by arrangements
with’ their Savings Banks, an intimation to the Com-
monwealth that that operation was in contemplation
would he quite sufficient.
Mr. GARDINER.—Suppose, for the sakg of argu-
ment, that my Savings Bank had £lOO,OOO accumulated,
and I say I can use that for State purposes; you would
not stop me using it?
The CHAIRMAN.—No; hut in order that the Com-
monwealth should know the lump sum of the financial
transactions taking place, I should expect the Treasurer
of that State to say to me, “We propose to do this; is
there any objection?” In the ordinary course, there
would be none.
Mr. GARDINER.—If we took that money, it ought
to be a reduction of the other amount.
The CHAIRMAN.—Quite so. Sir Richard Butler,
as the oldest Treasurer present, knows very well that
there was no attempt to harness or impede the States
in connexion with any land 'fide local borrowing,
except market operations.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—If we desired to make an
arrangement for a seven-years’ loan from any financial
institution in Adelaide, such as the Savings Bank, could
that be done?
The CHAIRMAN.—If it did not interfere with the
general financial arrangements for the benefit of Aus-
tralia as a whole, there would be no objection. If you
went on to the market in competition, it would be a
different thing.
Sir RICHARD have never done so.
Mr. GARDINER.—It is a strange thing that,
although Western Australia is the poorest State of the
lot, conversion has loss terrors for us than for any
other State. For the three years during which you
want control, all our conversions will probably amount
to only about t 500,000, eliminating the £650,000 for
the sinking fund, which I can easily arrange for. You
would, perhaps, not be aware, Mr. Chairman, that
certain of those obligations of ours are renewable, being
money borrowed from our Savings Bank.
The CHAIRMAN. —What would be the amount of
your conversions in ten years?
Mr. GARDINER.—I have not those figures; but
against our first big loan of £2,500,000, maturing in
1927, we already hold £1,735,000 worth of bonds.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is the year when we shall
probably have to convert £65,000,000.
’ Mr. GARDINER.—We shall he in the position I in-
dicate if wo keep paying into the sinking fund at the
same rate. Unless the discounts are more then than
now, we shall probably bo able, not only to redeem that
loan in 1927, but to have a couple of hundred thousand
pounds over, because our sinking fund for that par-
ticular loan is 3 per cent.
The CHAIRMAN.—No wonder you will have some-
thing over, with a- sinking fund of 3 per cent.!
Mr. GARDINER.—It must be remembered that we
have been buying that stock as low as 68.
The CHAIRMAN.—In the next ten years there are
minimum conversion operations of £390,000,000 to be
conducted by State and Commonwealth.
Mr. GARDINER. —At the end of the three-year
period the war loans that we have been getting from
the Commonwealth begin to mature.
The CHAIRMAN.—Judging by the speeches of the
leaders of the other delegations to-day there is evidently
a desire to get back to the pre-war conditions of State
borrowing in London as soon as they can. Do not
Ministers think that in the great reconstruction era that
is about to dawn, in finance as well as in other things,
it will be a mistake for the States to try to wallow back
to the old system of competitive borrowing overseas?
Mr. GARDINER. —if you read the report of the
Paris convention you will see the big things that the
nations propose to do collectively. They evidently
anticipate an era of collective finance. I took the
trouble to send for a report of that conference, and
gather from it that there is going to be a centralization
of financial authority. There is no disguising the
fact. ' I am certain the other Treasurers will agree to
your proposal if we can see that it is a cheaper and
better method. Whether it is going to bo cheaper or
bettor has yet to be proven, and probably will be proven
in the three years’ period. If we can see that it is going
to be a cheaper method, we will be insane not to it,
especially if we can abolish competition, still leaving
Mr. Holman’s ground quite free. If it is not going to
mean a close scrutiny by the Commonwealth of our pro-
posals for expenditure, the mere fact that loans are
being floated through a central authority cannot be an
objection. You, Mr. Chairman, assume that you can
break down certain old practices, but this I very much
question. For instance, I do not think you can ever
break down underwriting.
Mr. HOLMAN. —If in one year a State wants
and the central authority says it can have
only £7,000,000, and, as a result, certain works are de-
layed for five years, what is the result? If you save
f per cent, on the £7,000,000 and lose 5 per cent, or
more through not being able to go on with develop-
mental works where you want them, where Is the profit?
The CHAIRMAN.—If you state a case like that,
there is only one answer.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Nobody can possibly answer that
question except the State Government concerned.
Mr. THEODORE.—It has to be decided here or in
some similar gathering.
Mr. HOLMAN.—No, it has to be decided in the
State Parliament.
Mr. GARDINER.—You are not going to put a
£10,000,000 loan on the London market at any one
time.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Supposing we want £10,000,000 in
the course of a year?
Mr. GARDINER. —Would it not do if they said
they would give you £3,000,000 this year, £3,000,000
next year, and so on?
The CHAIRMAN. —When the effort is a consoli-
dated one the result is likely to be both better and
cheaper. Mr. Gardiner has been directing his mind
to the Coming age of organization. That is the
direction in which every financial intellect of the
modern world is turning. Surely every one must see
that an organized system of borrowing is better than
a disorganized and competitive one.
Mr. GARDINER. —With this new organization, as
with all new things, there will be the fear that you
could not do the work as cheaply as the States could,
because their channels have been in operation for
twenty or thirty years.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is the fear that influences
the prehistoric type of mind.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Then on your showing we had bet-
ter unite with the other Dominions. Why should we
compete with Canada or New Zealand ?
The CHAIRMAN. I urged you to consider that
view yesterday, and you have paid no attention to it.
Mr. HOLMAN.—WhiIe I agree with a great deal
of what you say about consolidating old debts, I do
not think it will come about in the near future.


The CHAIRMAN.—What is concerning you is that
you will be limited in some of the objectives that you
have sketched out for yourself. lam thinking of the
general good of Australia;
Mr. HOLMAN.—The general good of Australia will
be best secured by letting each State work out its own
salvation, not necessarily “ in fear and trembling.”
Mr. GARDINER.—The proposed centralized autho-
rity may do good in another way. Supposing Sir
Richard Butler borrowed a million, and I borrowed a
million, and neither of us wanted it straight away.
Might it not be possible, with a centralized authority,
for me to say, ” I want only £500,000 at once, and
another State that needs money can have the other
£500,000 until it is wanted!” That could be ar-
ranged by a central authority. Those are the things
that make economy possible. I happen to talking
this time of something that I know something about.
Times without number we have,, through our Agents-
General, put mopey with another Government merely
because we did not want it for. the time, and it suited
them to take it from us. Having been nearly as dog-
matic as you are, Mr. Chairman, on some subjects
The CHAIRMAN.—I was filled with admiration,
until you made that remark, at the subtlety of your
reproof to your brother Treasurers when you said you
happened to be talking about something that you
knew something about.
Mr. GARDINER—You stressed the necessity for
economy. At the meetings of our Cabinet, we have a
special chair reserved for “ necessity.”
Mr. FITZPATRICK.—On the principle that neces-
sity knows no law ?
The CHAIRMAN.—With the Commonwealth,
“ necessity ” does not sit down at our board. He
has work to do. He is on his feet all the time.
Mr GARDINER.—However great your necessities,
I point out that you have power to overcome them to
a far greater extent than has any State.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is the first recognition of
it that I have heard so far.
Mr. GARDINER.—Every Treasurer has met with
your fine courtesy, sir; and it was an expression of
your fine courtesy when you said that it is better for
the States to raise the revenue than for the Common-
wealth to do so. We all appreciate that courtesy,
but disagree with the action.
The CHAIRMAN.—You wanted the liberty to get
your own money.
Mr. GARDINER.—But not for you to take our
money first, and for us to get it how and from whom
we could.
The CHAIRMAN. —This money is not yours. At
the end of 1920, it is for the Commonwealth Parlia-
ment to determine what shall be done with the money
that has been going to you.
Mr. GARDINER. —When any historian comes to
write the history of the Surplus Revenue Act of the
Commonwealth, he will need to do so with a handker-
chief in one haftd and a tin of disinfectant in the
other.
The CHAIRMAN. —The disinfectant for the States.
Mr. GARDINER.—For the Commonwealth, cer-
tainly. You said, “If any one will show me I
am to get over that £21,000,000, I will consider it,
and will he glad to be shown.” If you can suggest to
me how different taxable incomes, including those from
companies, totalling £10,500,000 sterling, and incomes
between £2Ol and £5OO, totalling £4,000,000, can be
taxed to make up this loss, I shall also be obliged.
The CHAIRMAN. —I will make a suggestion to
you at the proper time, but not now, in case It might
be thought that I am endeavouring to bribe you into
the proposition.
Mr. GARDINER.—WouId you mind suggesting to
us what channels of taxation you have left unexplored,
or purpose to leave?
The CHAIRMAN. —I propose to circulate a graph
for the education of State Treasurers upon it.
Mr. GARDINER.—I admit that your education as
’a State Treasurer has'been complete.
Sir ELLIOTT LEWIS. —We have received such a
graph already.
Mr. GARDINER.—It must be clearly understood
that if you are going to take away this sum from the
States, there must be some avenues of taxation left
clearly available for the States, because, otherwise, the
States would be merely imposing a super-tax upon your
taxation.
The CHAIRMAN.—Let me put the converse of
that. Unless some such arrangement as I have pro-
posed is adopted, how is it possible for the Common-
wealth to take off the heavy war imposts which,have
made an intrusion on direct taxation in a way never
formerly contemplated ?
Mr. GARDINER.,—You have been a State Trea-
surer for years. I have never known a State Trea-
surer to look round for an excuse to take off any tax-.
The CHAIRMAN. —Some of the imposts have
been put on because of the war, and they cannot be
taken off at once, while the huge war debt rests upon
us. We wish to take them off as soon as reasonable, but
ca.nnot do so>if you put up your backs, and say, “We
must have this money.”
Mr. GARDINER.—In the American Budget, they
have withdrawn their taxation proposals, and made a
reduction of £400,000,000, for the reason that the war
has ceased.
The CHAIRMAN.—The American Treasury had
been overflowing for a score of years prior to the war;
and the profits made by America for the two and a-half
years of the war before the entry of that country have
added enormously to its wealth.
Mr. GARDINER.—But during the war term, they
had added drastically to their taxation.
Thte CHAIRMAN. —That was put on in anticipa-
tion of a lengthy war. It was imposed in a precau-
tionary sense. A study of American finance will show
you that.
.'Mr. GARDINER.—Behind our minds is this, that
with all your ability and foresight, this Conference has
been called at a time when things are mixed rather than
when they can be said to be definite. Neither you nor
any Treasurer in Australia can have a clear outlook
upon the next twelve months. That is why I concur
with the views expressed by the other Ministers upon
this question. . There is a feeling, rightly or wrongly,
that your Federal income will be considerably higher
than you have anticipated. In the States, unfortu-
nately, we are faced with the proposition that our in-
come is likely to be less than expected.
The CHAIRMAN.—How so?
Mr. GARDINER.-—For the reason that we may not
be placed so that manufactures can be fostered or in-
augurated. In our own State, we shall have to re-
establish all our revenue-producing interests as the
result of the war. I am not looking forward further
than this, that with the re-establishment of normal
shipping, our timber trade will tend to increase again.
But our gold-mining will not. It has been ruined.
The Commonwealth Government, instead of giving us
an opportunity to exploit our baser metals when they
ruled at the high prices which the war brought about,
stopped us, through the medium of war-profits taxation,
from getting a fair start with those baser metals.
The CHAIRMAN.—What baser metals?


Mr. GARDINER. —Tin, copper, lead, and those
kinds of things. Lead, of course, got on a little better;
but they were all new companies, started during the
war. However, they all “got it in the neck.” You
can look forward to an increase in your revenue; but
our State cannot.
The CHAIRMAN.—Do not lose sight of the fact
that if any increase comes through the accidental re-
lease, and the elasticity, of tonnage, our expenditure
will increase more than in proportion.
Mr. GARDINER.—Do you think so?
The CHAIRMAN.—I am sure of it.
Mr. GARDINER.—Why?
The CHAIRMAN. —Because we have not finished
with anything like the assessment of war pensions, or
with our interest bill. In the matter of repatriation
alone, we may have to face an interest bill of
£2,000,000, £3,000,000, or even £4,000,000.
Mr. THEODORE. —But that will all come back out
of the States.
The CHAIRMAN. —It may or may hot. But there
is a vast amount of repatriation money to be spent that
will not be by way of advances for land settlement.
We have been speaking of a cost of from £80,000,000
to £100,000,000, but no one can guess just what the
total cost may be. Undoubtedly it will amount to
scores of millions. Yet the States are going to lift
the expenditure of the Commonwealth per annum by
several millions for every year you go on as you are
doing.
Mr. GARDINER. —You have generously expressed
the opinion that Western Australia has a hard row to
hoe.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is so.
Mr. GARDINER. Then, if you take this money
away, it means that, taking an average of six years
from next year, I would lose even —upon that average
—something like £720,000, without £160,000 special
grant. I cannot ask the Treasurers of the various
States, taking into consideration their own particular
hardships, to continue to pay half of that grant. But
Ido not think that applies to the Commonwealth. No
State has made a bigger sacrifice for the Empire than
Western Australia. Therefore, not as an act of
charity, but as an act of justice, is it not a fair thing
for the Commonwealth to take into consideration the
payment of a certain subsidy for that very appreciable
loss which we have been compelled to make. Even
if the States said, “ No, we will stand out altogether ”
—which they would be justified in doing—it seems to
me that since we have sent such a large proportion of
our men away, and have at the same time received so
little of the Commonwealth funds compared with what
has been advanced to certain other States, the Com-
monwealth should take our case into consideration.
The CHAIRMAN. —I indicated the view that pri-
mary consideration, among the smaller States, should
be given to Western Australia, and that Tasmania
should come next.
Mr. GARDINER. —You advanced a certain argu-
ment to Mr. Holman to day, and it is advanced
against every Treasurer, It may be said, “ Western
Australia has a revenue of £4,883,000. Surely that
is sufficient.” I have my own system of running my
accounts. I take my debits and credits and say, “ I
have so much cash to deal with.” My revenue of
£4,883,000, brought down to cash, means that I have
£2,846,000 to run the State with. Out of that I have
got to pay an interest bill and sinking fund bill
amounting to £1,972,000. Under our Constitution Act
we have to pay £2,089,000. The total amount for the
general administration of Western Australia is thus
£1,392,000. The sum of £841,000 is for domestic
legislation.
The CHAIRMAN. What do you call' domestic
legislation ?
Mr. GARDlNEß.—Aborigines, gaols, lunacy and in-
ebriates, medical and public health, charities, State
children, police, and education. While the States are
discharging the obligation of education, that is ac-
tually undertaken for the Commonwealth, and not for
any individual State.
The CHAIRMAN.—So is everything that is done
in Australia.
Mr. GARDINER.—That is so. You know that
one thing that is standing out at present in Great Bri-
tain is the sum which is being spent upon education.
It is the duty of a nation, as a nation, to advance educa-
tion. That duty is being discharged by the States,
and the Commonwealth is accepting no responsibility.
The CHAIRMAN.—It was a function reserved for
*the States. Mr. Holman would regard it as an in-
trusion, or an invasion, if we sought to' enter the field
of education. He implied so this morning.
Mr. GARDINER. —But there ought to be no de-
crease of the Commonwealth payments to the States,
because we are discharging a Commonwealth function
in regard to education. The protection of our own
State by police, and looking after our sick, are domes-
tic matters. We cannot do away with our education
bill.
Let me put another course. Do not forget that if
this proposed big plan of campaign is carried out, the
States themselves are no small contributors to your
Customs and Excise —your Customs, especially. You
collect your duty from us, and it is a very big cheque.
So, really, the Commonwealth is only paying back to
the States a certain amount of what it has already
received from them.
The CHAIRMAN.—I suppose that that argument
means that anything for the benefit of Western Aus-
tralia is incidentally a benefit to Australia, and that
the Commonwealth should bear some of the burden in-
curred.
Mr. GARDINER.—No, not in some things. Some
matters are distinctly the obligation of the State.
The CHAIRMAN.—PoIice?
Mr. GARDINER.—Yes.
The CHAIRMAN. The preservation of law and
order is important to the Commonwealth.
Mr. GARDINER.—Yes, of course. We have had
to undertake prosecutions under your War Precautions
Act. There were three men dealt with, and each was
fined £25. One decided to take the option of six
months in gaol. That became our obligation;
but you took the £25 from each of the other
two men. All the taxes come , from the one
people, but the Coinmonwealth proposes to take the
money collected, and throw the onus of collection on
the States. That is my objection to the Chairman’s
scheme, and I agree with what Mr. Holman has said
on the subject. Western Australia can raise little or
nothing more by taxation. Of course, if the Com-
monwealth authority says that we must do without
the assistance that we have hithferto received, we shall
probably have to do without it. I made you a promise,
sir, that I would cut down my estimates, and that pro-
mise I have kept. This year my deficit will be
£IOO,OOO less than last year. Of that deficit of
£600,000, £314,000 is in sinking funds, so that we are
practically £286,000 to the bad. If by reducing the
per capita payments you are going to take away the
£150,000 subsidy that we have been getting, I shall
hand over the position of Treasurer of the State to
some one else. Should the States be put into such a
position that they must come to the Commonwealth on
their knees for the funds that they need, it will not be
long before the Commonwealth authority will have to
take over the management of the whole of the public


affairs of Australia, and the administration of these
affairs by the Commonwealth authority alone will cost
more than it costs at the present time. ‘
The CHAIRMAN.—I realize, Mr. Gardiner, that
you have imposed heavy direct taxation. If you look
at the table that I circulated yesterday, you will see
that in 1916-17 Western Australia was £3 15s. 9d. per
capita in revenue above the average per capita revenue
of the whole of the States, showing that you have made
an earnest endeavour to keep your ledger square. The
war has injured you chiefly in the loss you have sus-
tained because of the conspicuously gallant manner in
which your manhood went to the Front, and because
the timber trade, on which the railways largely relied
for traffic, was killed by it. It was because' of those
two effects of the war, chiefly, that the arrangements
for extra payments were made. I have admitted as
much on every occasion when I have met you in Con-
ference. In dealing with Western Australia, I have
not been influenced merely by general considerations.
Mr. GARDINER.—When our soldiers come back,
we anticipate we should get again some of the money
that has been deducted from the State in their absence.
The States have had something like £506,000 a year
taken from them during the war.
The CHAIRMAN.—When our soldiers return, the
States will get again the per capita payments in regard
to them which have not been given in their absence,
and will also benefit by the expenditure of £13,000,000
of deferred pay, which will undoubtedly be spent in
a way that will give employment and aid trade and
industry.
Mr. GARDINER.—I hope that you may not take
exception to the warmth with which I have expressed
my views. I have a hard row to hoe. Nearly every
person in the State is ready to say how its affairs should
be managed, although comparatively, few persons have
enough business knowledge to run a lolly shop. I
cannot subscribe to the proposal that has been made to
us'without consulting my own people, because it means
so much to us. There is no method that we could
adopt to make things good. Already, we have
£3,187,000 of what Sir Richard Butler has described
as dead capital, on which we must pay interest. This
year my interest bill went up £97,000. During the war
we have had two bad harvests. Last year I had to
find £500,000 to keep our farmers on the land because
of the bad harvest. If you take account of the bigness
of the area that we have to govern, and of the fact that,
as a self-governing country,' we are only twenty-five ,
years old, you will realize how hard our position is.
Sir ELLIOTT LEWIS. —The proposal of the Com-
monwealth in regard to the savings banks does not much
affect Tasmania, because, in 1913 —whether wisely or
unwisely it is not for me to say at this time—the sav-
ings bank business of the State was transferred to the
Commonwealth, and there is no thoilght of reviving the
State Savings Bank. I merely ask that, should more
favorable terms be given to any State in regard to the
transference of its saving bank business to the Com-
monwealth than Tasmania received, a favorable modifi-
cation of Tasmania’s agreement with the Common-
wealth may be made. * _ .
The CHAIRMAN. —I think that I can promise that.
Sir ELLIOTT LEWIS—I come now to the proposal
that the Commonwealth should act for the States* in
regard to the floating of conversion and • new loans.
Tasmania has a loan of £300,000 maturing during next
year, which we have placed in the hands of the Com-
monwealth Treasurer for renewal. With regard to
local borrowings, I appear to have misunderstood what
you, Mr. Chairman, said in your letter of September
last, when you informed me that, as a general rule,
borrowing from State Savings Banks, and other insti-
tutions, would be left to the States, and any approach
to the money market would be made by the Common-
wealth. Tasmania does not go bn the market for
money in the ordinary sense of the term. We do not
float loans locally, though we accept money over the
counter. We have not a State Savings Bank from which
to borrow, but each quarter a proportion of the surplus
deposits of the Commonwealth Savings Bank is in-
vested in our local inscribed stock. If the words, “ other
institutions ” cover this borrowing over the counter, all
the differences between the State of Tasmania and the
Commonwealth in respect of borrowing are practically
removed. Many persons like to invest over the counter
in our local inscribed stock. The loans are short dated,
having a currency generally of three or five years, and
the interest on them is paid quarterly. It would be an
inconvenience to the public if this opportunity for in-
vestment were withdrawn.
The CHAIRMAN.—I have no wish to interfere with
that form of investment. Loans are public operations
of some magnitude in regard to which collision may
take place between the Commonwealth and the States.
No such collision can take place in respect of the bor-
rowing of which you speak. What we should like is in-
formation as to what you are doing in that way. /
Sir ELLIOTT LEWIS.—I can, of course, let you
know what we have done, though we do not know from
month to month what will come to us. • As a .rule, we
get sufficient for our purpose. We have done what you
requested us to do in cutting down our borrowing to the
bone, and have curtailed our public works expenditure
to the minimum. We are carrying out only absolutely
necessary public works, such as will keep the unemploy-
ment difficulty avray from our doors, and if the Com-
monwealth will make available to us the money we re-
quire for repatriation purposes, and make good what
we have already expended on repatriation work, out of
ordinary loan moneys, we can carry on for the next year,
and, possibly, two, although, as I pointed out in my letter
to the Chairman, there may he an exceptional demand
upon us in connexion with hydro-electric works. I be-
lieve, however, that we can complete those works with
the moneys that we have in hand, and the moneys that
we have yet to receive from the Commonwealth Govern-
ment in respect of the current year. Although we are
in this favorable position, it is only because we have
greatly curtailed our public works expenditure, and
that curtailment is to be continued. I consider that it
is wise for a small State like Tasmania to place itself
under the aegis of the Commonwealth in regard to the
raising of loans. As far as Tasmania is con-
cerned, I can say that we shall not go on< the English
market during the next three years, and at the expira-
tion of that time the question of having one borrowing
authority for the Commonwealth and the States may be
determined in the light of a fuller knowledge as to its
probable advantages and disadvantages. With these
qualifications, and my statement of the position, I leave
the second question for the time being.
Turning now to a matter of vital importance to Tas-
mania—the question of a reduction in the per capita
contribution from the Commonwealth to the States—l,
like my brother Treasurers, have only been able to take
a cursory and birds-eye view of the effect it will have
upon my State. I have only been able to gather, so
far, what the diminution of income will be during each
of the years up till 1925-26, and I must say that I view
it with very considerable alarm, especially when I re-
member that in 1921-22 the special grant' of £90,000
per annum from the Commonwealth to Tasmania will
cease. In our State' we have imposed direct taxation to
a greater extent than any other State in the Common-
wealth, with the exception of, perhaps, Queensland. It


may surprise delegates when I tell them that in direct
taxation the people of Tasmania are called upon to pay
£4 per head.
Mr. HOLMAN.—"What is the State proportion of
that?
Sir ELLIOTT LEWIS.—The figures for 1910-17
and these were the figures given by the Chairman —
show that the people of Tasmania paid in direct taxa-
tion 435. lid. to the State and 30s. 7d. to the Common-
wealth. Yon mentioned, Mr. Chairman, that yon pro-
posed to have prepared and distributed a graph, show-
ing what each State is contributing in direct taxation
and other forms of taxation to the revenue. I have
had prepared graphs comparing the position of Tas-
mania. They show that Tasmania is contributing
very much more per capita than any other State in the
Common I wealth. Moreover, our expenditure has been
reduced to a minimum. It represents £7 14s. per head,
as against £ll 4s. per head in New South Wales, £8 Bs.
per head in Victoria, £l2 3s. per head in Queensland,
£ll 19s. per head in South Australia, and £l7 19s. per
head in Western Australia. In every respect we are
very much below the expenditure in the other States.
Our expenses on our public services and administration
generally are much lower; but we really cannot keep
down to the present level. We must go on with our
education system. The demand is imperative that the
expenditure on country schools, our high school system,
and our technical and commercial education, shall be in-
creased.
Mr. PEAKE. —Does the wages question trouble you
very much?
Sir ELLIOTT LEWIS. —We have to recognise that
the increased cost of living necessitates some increase of
pay to our employees, especially in view of the salaries
and wages paid by the Commonwealth, which sets the
pace.
Mr. HOLMAN. —The Commonwealth struck out on
an all-round increase just after the last Conference.
The CHAIRMAN. —That is not correct.
Mr. HOLMAN.—It must be, because of the arbitra-
tion award.
The CHAIRMAN. —Those cases were pending at the
time the Conference was held.
Sir ELLIOTT LEWIS. —In connexion with our rail-
ways, which are a small undertaking compared with
those controlled by some other members of the Confer-
ence, we have established an Appeal Board, and claims
which have been put forward will, if accepted, mean
an increased expenditure of over £70,000. That money
will have to be raised in some way. We shall have to
meet increases in interest on loans floated for public
w>orks, and we shall have to do the fair thing by our
civil servants in all Departments. We have tried,
and I think with some success, to give effect to the
request made by the Commonwealth Treasurer at the
last Conference. We have tried to keep down our ex-
penditure, and if the total expenditure shows an in-
crease, that is due to a natural expansion of our activi-
ties. We have endeavoured to effect all the economies
that were then asked for. ITow the reduction in the
per capita payments of the Commonwealth will affect
the finances of the States I, with my brother Treasurers,
have not -yet had time or opportunity to thoroughly
inquire. I agree with them that further time will
be necessary for us to really get a full grip of the
situation. Whether that can bo done before we ad-
journ, I am not quite sure. Possibly during the
week end. I could obtain some idea as to how the pro-
posal will affect my State. In the meantime I am
hardly in a position to fully deal with the question.
If this proposal represents the best the Commonwealth
can do, we shall have to review the position in the
light of a statement to that effect; but a very heavy
burden will be placed on our people if they are called
upon to pay, out of direct taxation, the difference be-
tween what we now receive from the Commonwealth
and what it is proposed to give us. Just at present I
do not sco how it is to be done. The position, so far as
Tasmania is concerned, cannot be met by tbe reduction
of expenditure. It must be met by increased taxation,
and 1 think I have indicated sufficiently that taxation
cannot be increased without heaping undue burdens
upon an already overtaxed community.
The CHAIRMAN.—I think that all the States have
given their views upon the three proposals that I have
laid before tbe Conference, and that, broadly speaking,
there is little or no prospect of agreement. The two
more populous States have rejected the loans proposi-
tion, and the State of South Australia has joined in
their opposition to it. I take it that the States of
Queensland, Western Australia, and Tasmania, subject
to certain further discussions, might be disposed to ac-
cept the proposition for a three years’ arrangement with
the Commonwealth. If I am wrong, I should like to
be corrected.
Mr. PEAKE.—When speaking, I had in mind your
bigger scheme, which appeared to me to aim at a
permanent situation.
The CHAIRMAN.—I made it clear that what I was
proposing was what I proposed in September last.
As I said then, it was a proposal for a three years ar-
rangement, during which experience would ascertain the
effect of consolidated operations. You were, perhaps,
slightly misled, Mr. Peake, by the further proposi-
tion I made with regard to the larger scheme on which
the Commonwealth proposes to ask other parts of the
Empire to embark with it.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—Does your scheme ex-
clude all redemptions?
The CHAIRMAN.—•-Everything is set out care-
fully in the proposition.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—We have never been re-
stricted as to redemptions.
The CHAIRMAN.—I am speaking not of restric-
tions, but of a joint arrangement as originally proposed
by myself to the State Governments last year, outlined
more completely in my September letter, and amplified
still further on Wednesday last. It is a proposal re-
lating to the whole of the loan operations of the States,
with -reservation with regard to internal borrowing. Sir
Richard Butler may consider that a restriction, but I
cannot imagine the application of the term to such a
proposal. There can be no restriction of conversion
operations; they have all to be carried out. It is a
matter of judgment as to when and how you should get
the money, but the money has to be found. As the
loans mature, if you have not the money to pay, then
you have to meet your creditors with renewal loans.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—But you did not ask for
any power on the last occasion.
The CHAIRMAN.—I am not asking for any power
now. lam merely trying to induce the Conference to
recognise that this is a proposal for joint borrowing.
Mi\ THEODORE.—It would seem that there are
four States in agreement as to the desirableness of some
such arrangement.
The CHAIRMAN.—I thought that was the position
judging by , Mr. Peake’s observation, but Sir Richard
Butler now seems to take up a different attitude.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—One of our loans fell
due last May. We have paid it off. We have to renew
£600,000 or £700,000 of it, the rest w T e have obtained,
and we feel that we have a right to finish the negotia-
tions.


The CHAIRMAN.—The question of how operations
partially completed are to be dealt with is a matter for
further discussion. I am speaking of operations,
whether old or new, that would come within the pro-
posed arrangement. I can imagine a Government
taking the view, as Mr. Holman evidently does, that
any such partnership arrangement might restrict new
operations, but it is obvious that, if we are going to
protect the credit of the country, there can be no re-
striction in respect of old operations which mean the
payment of a public creditor by means of an arrange-
ment with another public • creditor. Why a Steße
should fight for the redemption loans to be left out
of the arrangement, and for new loans to be included
in it is difficult to understand. It seems to me to be
putting the’ wropg end up.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—Why were they excluded
before ?
The CHAIRMAN.—They were not. I drew atten-
tion to the anomaly in my September letter, and in
this new proposition have endeavoured to rectify it.
1 do not know whether you have read that letter.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—I have.
The CHAIRMAN.—Then perhaps you will be good
enough to read it again. In that letter the anomalies
are all sketched. Some States did certain things, and
others did not. All that would be rectified if the
States agreed to the new proposition as framed by me.
It is clear, however, that New South Wales and Vic-
toria reject all forms of that proposition. Queensland,
Western Australia, and Tasmania agree that it is
worthy of consideration to determine the terms, and
I should like to know where to place South Australia.
I do not quite gather from Sir Richard Butler’s state-
ment what is the attitude of South Australia.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER. —My only trouble is in
regard to the loan that we have partly arranged for.
We want to complete the arrangement for ourselves,
and with that exception we shall have no conversion-
loans during the three years’ period.
The CHAIRMAN. —There can be no trouble in re-
gard to operations partly accomplished. I should not
attempt to interfere with them. Indeed, it would be
bad business to take a partly completed transaction
from one man and to hand it to another. If there
are no other conversions required by South Australia
in the period sketched, there should be no trouble.
Except in that regard, does Sir Richard Butler say
that South Australia would be ready to s£and with
the other three States.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—Yes, in regard to new
loans for the three years’ period.
The CHAIRMAN.—My proposition is general. I
shall consider with the representatives of Queensland,
Western Australia, and Tasmania, and also with the
representatives of South Australia, if they desire it,
as a separate proposition, how far it would be advan-
tageous for them to join together in dealing with the
matter; but I am afraid that a considerable portion of
the advantage that I think would be obtainable from a
universal arrangement will be lost if the two principal
States stand aloof.
As to the savings banks, I think I know the State
point of view as well as do the representatives of
the States themselves. I have not modified my atti-
tude as to the origin of the trouble, nor as to where
the blame or fault lies, but sitting, as I do, in the
Commonwealth Treasurer’s chair, I do not need at this
stage to enlarge on the subject. I have never modified
any cl the arguments I used as a member of a State
Administration in opposition to the campaign of com-
petition, but I am trying to view the matter as it
now is, apart from its history, and apart from the
question of responsibility and blame for the origina-
tion of the trouble. It is our duty, I take it, to do
that. I am astounded that the liberal arrangement
suggested has not been unanimously accepted by the
States. There is no danger to them. On the con-
trary, the arrangement suggested offers to them every
advantage. All the objections I raised in the early
days have been modified in the proposition I have made.
Mr. Holman’s solution that the Commonwealth should
renounce its Savings Bank institution, which has
spread everywhere throughout Australia, evidences on
his part a desire not to recognise any of the prime facts
of to-day, but to hark back to what happened six years
ago, regardless of all the history of the last si? years.
I cannot, and will not, do that.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Why should we disregard the his-
tory of our Savings Banks, extending over the last
thirty years? »
The CHAIRMAN.—Keep it in view; but do not
. look conservatively at another institution which could,
perhaps, improve your own and cut off the agencies
which are in opposition to it. All the post-offices
are under the control of the Commonwealth. If you
combine your branches and the other Savings Bank
agencies' with our post-offices id one deposit-collecting
agency, you will have a strength which competing in-
stitutions could not enjoy. The whole question is not
whether this or that power should renounce certain
activities. It is rather a question of whether there
cannot be a beneficial blending, to the advantage
of both parties. The consideration of whether
there is a benefit or a mutual advantage to be
gained brings you to the question whether the
proposal for an agreement extending over twenty-five
years .is satisfactory in point of time. Is the proposal
for the appointment of an Advisory Board sufficiently
ample to safeguard the agreement f Sir Richard Butler
says it would ,be if confirmatory enactments were passed
by the Commonwealth and State Parliaments.
Mr. HOLMAN.—We recall another arrangement
between the Commonwealth and the States for the
return to the States of 75 per cent, of the Customs and
Excise revenue, 25 per- cent, being retained by the
Commonwealth. That was to hold good over a certain
statutory period, but it was revised.
The CHAIRMAN.—It was not revised until the
statutory period had expired.
Mr. HOLMAN. —The Commonwealth is going to
revise it again, and that being so, this proposal in
regard to a twenty-five years’ period does not present
to us a very alluring prospect.'
The CHAIRMAN.—In the case to which you refer,
the Commonwealth did what it had to do at the end of
the period fixed. The question we have to consider is
not whether what would happen in this case at the end
of the twenty-five years’ period would be .similar to
what happened in connexion with the Braddon section,
but whether the twenty-five years’ period proposed is
sufficiently long to give security to the Slate enterprise.
I am not holding hard-and-fast to the i twenty-five years’
period; I proposed it as stretching beyond the period
of responsibility of any man now sitting at this taßle.
If you gentlemen think the twenty-five years’ period is
not long enough, say so. If you think that
the powers and functions proposed to be vested in
the Advisory Board are not wide enough, say so.. If
the allocation of new business between the Com-
monwealth and the States is not satisfactory, say so.
I am not going, however, to deal any further with the
’ States in this matter if they say that they Will not con-
sider any proposal for amalgamation in order to elimi-
nate all this costly and unnecessary competition.


Mr. McPHERSON.—We do not say that we will
not consider any proposal for amalgamation. What
we say is that the Commonwealth should forgo its
Savings Bank business.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is a proposal, not for
amalgamation, but that we should “get off the grass.”
Mr. McPHERSON.—That is what you are saying
to the States.
The CHAIRMAN.—Not at all. 1 .am asking the
States to join in a partnership.
Mr. HOLMAN.—For a period of twenty-five years,
with the right of revision at the end of that time.
The CHAIRMAN. —The point is whether the
twenty-five year period is insufficient.
Mr. HOLMAN.—No matter what the period pro-
posed may be, the question is, why should we put bur
heads into the lion’s mouth?
The CHAlßMAN.—Apparently, the objections of
such States as Victoria and New South Wales to this
proposition are fundamental. Those States are against
any proposition of the kind.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Against any proposition which
means ultimately handing over to the Commonwealth
an important State instrumentality.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is not proposed.
Mr. HOLMAN.—It is not proposed, but it is in-
volved, and that is what will happen if we accept your
suggestion. >
The CHAIRMAN.—The fear of what will happen
in the next generation is a fundamental objection which
you have to my scheme. It is not an objection to any
fundamental feature of the proposal; and the cure sug-
gested by two of the States is that the Commonwealth
should renounce this activity.
Mr. HOLMAN. —I think that is so.
The CHAIRMAN.—Then I say, at once, that the
Commonwealth will not renounce it. I am seeking to
tread a middle path; and if you gentlemen, notwith-
standing your accumulated experience and large re-
sponsibilities, are unable to join in an agreement of
this kind, I think the people will be profoundly disap-
pointed. I shall leave the matter there. I am pre-
pared to discuss it with those States that are ready to
consider it, although I do not like the idea of making
a separate agreement with individual States. If it
is agreeable to the representatives of Queensland and
Western Australia, I shall have individual discussions
with them as to the Savings Bank proposition.
As to the per capita arrangement, 1 say, without the
slightest hesitation, that it is not at all likely that the
States will have as advantageous an offer made to them
later on. I think lam sufficiently acquainted with the
facts of the Commonwealth, and its outstanding and
oncoming liabilities, to warrant me in believing that no
man facing the responsibilities of the next year or the
year after is likely to take a more sanguine view than I
am taking at this moment. In surveying the prospects
I arh not losing sight of the probability, either before or
after any revision of the Commonwealth Tariff, of some
increase in Commonwealth revenue through the restora-
tion of the natural flow of trade overseas. But the
Commonwealth knows a good deal more of the difficul-
ties of shipping arrangements and the prospects of any
immediate establishment of pre-war conditions than the
States do. It will take a long while before the balance
of trade works to the advantage of the Commonwealth.
Substantial imports that are already bought, as Mr.
McPherson says, will be brought in, possibly whatever
the Tariff provides. But there will also be an inevitable
dip or drop in revenue if the Commonwealth Parlia-
ment determines to still further increase the protective
incidence of the Tariff. I have taken all these things
into account, as far as one can, in consultation with the
men best qualified to judge. I say plainly that you
may believe that this is your money, but the Constitu-
tion leaves it to the Commonwealth Parliament to de-
termine what shall be paid to the States. In
view of the enormous responsibilities resting on the
Commonwealth, because of its unproductive war debt, I
should not feel justified in recommending any variation
of this proposal. 1 appreciate the fact that the Trea-
surers who have had this matter thrust upon them ought
not to be expected .to pronounce upon it in a given
twenty-four hours. If the whole of the Treasurers had
said, “ We want time to consider this thing,’’ I should
have said that that was an amicable arrangement. But
some say, “ No, we arc not going to accept this reduc-
tion. It is true that the Commonwealth Parliament
lias power to make it, but we will not take it, because
the responsibility is the Commonwealth’s.” That is
altogether an unreasonable attitude, and I cannot be a
party to it. It seems, therefore, that from the stand-
point of unanimity this Conference has failed in regard
to the financial arrangements.
Mr. HOLMAN. —I would not say that finally about
the 255. proposal. I think it is right to say that we all
ask for further time for consideration. I do not think
you need take it that any one Premier or Treasurer
takes the attitude that something of the kind ought not
to be considered.
The CHAIRMAN. —I am taking your own utterance
and the utterance of Mr. McPherson, noted down here
word for word, that you threw back on the Common-
wealth the duty of finding the requisite revenue to meet
these obligations, leaving the State receipts undisturbed.
Mr. McPHERSON. —I did not intend to convey
that view. I pointed out the effect the proposal would
have on our State, and what 1 asked you to consider
was, whether you could give the States sufficient time
to work it out with their officers, take it to their Cabi-
nets, and decide later what could be done.
The CHAIRMAN.—You did at one stage talk of
further time.
Mr. McPIIERSON. —Never did I say, nor did 1 in-
tend to say, that the offer was rejected, because I pre-
faced my remarks by saying that the Federal Parlia-
ment had the whole thing in its hands.
Mr. PEAKE.—That is, until the people of the
States could put the position of the States before their
Federal representatives.
Mr. McPHERSON.—I pointed out that if the
Federal Parliament, in June, 1920, passed an Act, that
would be the law on the subject. The Federal Parlia-
ment can Ro what it likes in this matter.
The CHAIRMAN. —Constitutionally, the Federal
Parliament is competent to do anything it likes in the
matter. Politically, however, no Parliament can
endure if it does not do what the people . think
righteous and proper. If the Treasurers representing
the two more populous States say to me that they do
not desire to turn the offer down, but want time for
consideration, that is a reasonable proposition, and I
am prepared to leave the matter there. But I would
urge that before Ministers depart from this Conference
they should give some more definite idea than they
have yet felt themselves competent to give as to what
the attitude of their States or Cabinets is likely to be.
To go away to conduct correspondence about it, would
be the least satisfactory form of negotiation, because
the States might make different propositions. It will
be difficult for them to meet again, and there will be no
possibility of the reconciliation or harmonization of
schemes.
Mr. HOLMAN.—After hearing the statements of
the Treasurers of Tasmania and Western Australia,
I feel that there is something to be gained by the
further consideration of the project, 1 certainly took


it that those two gentlemen were going to tell us that
they could not carry on under the new scheme. I do
not understand either Mr. Gardiner or Sir Elliott
Lewis to go quite so far as that now. Both ask for
time to further state their views.
Mr. McPHERSON.—Both those gentlemen are
going to ask for special consideration, and everything
depends upon what that consideration will be.
Mr. HOLMAN”.—This proposal falls with unequal
weight upon the different States. Some—speaking
subject to a large measure of correction—will be more
or less ruined outright; others will be very seriously
embarrassed. The measure of embarrassment which
each State ought to be prepared to put up with is open
for discussion, but no State Treasurer can be expected
to contemplate a proposition which, in his opinion,
would bring about the insolvency of his State. If,
however, that will not happen, even with the more
necessitous States, the matter may be reconsidered.
The CHAIRMAN.—-If you put that view, I suggest
that the gentlemen who conferred last night should
take an opportunity of conferring again, because. I
fear that the dispersal of the Conference without
more consideration will mean no further Conference,
and no possibility of agreement. I was a member of
many Conferences that considered the approaching
close of the Braddon period. We tried to work out
either a proportionate scheme of allotment of the Cus-
toms and Excise revenue, or a fixed per capita pay-
ment, and the matter was settled eventually by agree-
ment. A difference of opinion arose as to whether
the agreement then signed should be embodied in
the Constitution, or only in a Statute of the
Federal Parliament. The constitutional proposal
was put to the people by means of a referendum
and defeated, and then the Parliament put into
operation for ten years the agreement which the
States had hoped would be permanently embodied
in the Constitution. It would be far better to deal
with this matter now by agreement than wholly.by the
legislation of the Federal Parliament. If you want
further time for consideration, I ask the representatives
of some of the States to remember that in this case time
is not necessarily money, as it is in many other in-
stances.
Mr. LEE. So far as Tasmania is concerned, we
quite expected that at this Conference there would be
some alteration in the per capita payments sug-
gested, but we did not expect to have to decide so
quickly whether we would accept or reject the Com-
monwealth proposal. It will take us some little time
to work out how it will affect us. The special pay-
ment to Tasmania of £90,000 per year will cease in
1921-22, and the per capita payment also will be
gradually reduced. This is going to hit us very badly,
in view of the fact that our direct taxation amounts
to 435. lid. per head. Western Australia, which is
admittedly m a very bad position, has imposed direct
taxation to the extent of only 265. Id. per head.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is not so now.
Mr. LEE.—I am speaking of the year 1916-17, the
latest for which I have the figures.
The CHAIRMAN.—Mr. Gardiner has been at the
Treasury' since, and the taxation of Western Aus-
tralia per head is the highest of that of the States at
the present moment.
Mr. LEE. —We are also faced with a very serious in-
crease in the cost of administration, as Sir Elliott Lewis
has pointed out. We have in addition a heavy initial
expenditure on our hydro-electric undertakings, which
fer a few years will not return us very much. _ With-
in, say, from five to ten years, however, I think that
Tasmania, going along on the lines that we have been
following, will practically be able to stand on her own
feet. But, until then, I feel sure that we shall have
very respectfully to ask you for some special considera-
tion, even if not to the extent of the consideration you
are giving us now.
The CHAIRMAN. —Mr. Lee has made an admission
which all the members of the Conference could just as
truthfully have made, because I am sure they all ex-
pected a reduction. I expected the two States which
have the greatest difficulties to object most strenu-
ously. Those States are Western Australia and Tas-
mania. I did not expect the wealthier and more_ re-
sourceful States to take so emphatic a stand against
the reduction wKile practical acceptance was notified
by the two smaller and more necessitous States. That
has been the surprise of the Conference to me.
Mr. HOLMAN.—We ought not to take their atti-
tude as acceptance. Sir Elliott Lewis’ speech did not
indicate acceptance. It was merely a suggestion that
if time could be given he would formulate his position
more accurately than he could at present.
The CHAIRMAN.—Perhaps I was wrong in using
• the word “acceptance,” because that is unreserved, but
less opposition came from Western Australia and Tas-
mania than from the wealthier States of Victoria and
New South Wales.
Mr. McPHERSON. —We only pointed out the dif-
ficulties that we were all confronted with. I think
you will readily admit that, as it may have taken you
weeks or months to prepare this scheme, it is not quite
reasonable to ask for a decision on it straightway.
The CHAIRMAN.—I am not asking for that.
Mr. McPHERSON.—AII we have done is to ask fox
time.
The CHAIRMAN.—You have done more. I know
you have difficulties, and must have time to analyze
the proposal, in view of your responsibility to your
Parliament and people; but when you say this is alto-
gether an improper use of the Commonwealth power —
to boil down an argument that was used at this table—
that the war has been the responsibility of the Common-
wealth, and that it is the duty of the Commonwealth
to find the money, and not to take it from the States,
such an attitude is emphatic resistance.
Mr. appears to be a true principle
that each Government should find, by its own taxation,
the necessary money for its own enterprises, whether
of war or of peace.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is begging the question
with regard to this particular portion of revenue that
has hitherto been collected by one authority and distri-
buted more or less generously to others, according to
the provisions of the Constitution or the Surplus Re-
venue Act. Unquestionably, the money becomes the
property of the Commonwealth Parliament at a given
time. The Treasurers, as business men, or semi-
business men, have to meet and say what is a fair and
square bargain in the way of a re-adjustment at the end
of the ten-year period. You are assuming that the
money belongs to the States. I can equally assume
that it belongs to the Commonwealth.
Mr. HOLMAN.—Where the responsibility of im-
posing the new taxation falls, there does the burden of
the expenditure fall.
The CHAIRMAN. —Quite so.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Your proposal is to put the re-
sponsibility of new taxation upon the State Govern-
ments.
The CHAIRMAN.—No.
Mr. HOLMAN. —Undoubtedly! We cannot meet it
by the sheer exer'eise of economy, but only by new
taxation. You are putting the responsibility of war
expenditure upon the State Governments. You are
imposing the responsibility of new taxation for a


Federal enterprise on the State Governments, which
is inherently wrong.
The CHAIRMAN.—I join issue with you if you
assume that we are imposing upon you exclusively such
a responsibility. Wo have imposed an income tax which
is yielding so much. We have imposed additional
duties, additional land taxation, extra postal duties,
and amusement taxes.
Mr. HOLMAN. —You are like the man who owed
£IOO, and said, “Now, I have paid off £7O of it. It
is up to you, George, to find the other £30.”
The CHAIRMAN.—It is, actually, a matter of
sharing. There has been a war. You cannot live
your lives as though there had been no war, and no
war costs.
Mr. LEE. —I endeavoured to make it clear that, so
far as Tasmania was concerned, I was sure that what-
ever the new arrangements might be, if we were to
stand- on our feet wo would require some additional
assistance.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is so; and Mr. Gardiner
was equally plain in putting the case for his State.
But he did not demand consideration of that case as
an important factor in the public life of his State.
Mr. GARDINER. —Is there any fair chance of our
receiving consideration at all?
The CHAIRMAN. —That, at any rate, is a per-
fectly legitimate question. Without further consulta-
tion with the Cabinet, however, I cannot make a pledge
that special consideration will be afforded. I am pre-
pared to state that, with regard to yourself and Sir
Elliott Lewis and his colleagues, the peculiar circum-
stances with which you will be faced, if the proposed
operation comes to pass, will certainly receive con-
sideration and investigation. That would be as a sup-
plementary part of the scheme itself. But I want
to make it clear that I am not seeking to bribe the two
States, and have not attempted to do so. I want you
all primarily to consider the matter as States; and, if
there are one or two States whose circumstances differ
from those of their sister States, it will be for us
to consider those circumstances. But we must con-
sider the whole aspect primarily as in relation to
States. I do not want to sever two of you from the
remainder of the States. May we conclude the discussion
by saying, with regard to the per capita proposal, that,
if State Ministers consider that they should have more
time to think it over, an attempt will be made by
them to deliberate amongst themselves regarding it be-
fore the Conference disperses. My experience is that
when matters are left undecided by a Conference, it is
extremely difficult to secure uniformity of opinion by
correspondence. I am anxious to avoid having the.
Commonwealth left in the position of being required
to dedde this matter itself. Although it is the senior
partner, I think that we should exhaust every attempt
to secure an agreement with the States before exercis-
ing our statutory powers lam willing at this stage
to let the matter stand over to, permit State Minis-
ters to come to some uniform opinion, from which
an agreement with the Commonwealth may result.
Mr. PEAKE.—You are practically asking us, Mr.
Chairman, to say definitely that we agre.e to surrender
so much revenue. That imposes on State Ministers the
responsibility of going back to their States, and saying,
“ We have agreed to an arrangement under which we
must impose so much additional direct taxation.”
Although you dislike the idea of coming to the deci-
sion yourself, or of having it imposed on you, the
responsibility, after all, is yours. You have been gooct
enough to consult us, but the responsibility of saving
that the present agreement shall cease at the end of
its term is yours. Speaking for South Australia, it
would be more agreeable to us that you should say
that, than ihat we should agree to a surrender to the
Commonwealth. This is a political as well as a finan-
cial question.
The Oil AIRMAN.—Thou you would sooner not
come to an agreement with the Common wealth, but
would put the responsibility of decision entirely on
us. That has not hitherto been the attitude of the
States.
Mr. HOLM.AN.—I think that some of the Premiers
would not like to commit their States without con-
sulting their Cabinets.
Mr LEE.—That is the real difficulty.
Mr. HOLMAN.—There are some here who would
rather be able to say, “ We have agreed to nothing,
and I think that we are more likely to come to an
agreement "by giving an opportunity for further con-
sultation. It is, as the Chairman has said, impossible
to secure unanimity by means of correspondence; but
I am inclined to think that there will be no final
agreement until some of us have had an opportunity
to consult our Cabinefs. Having so many of my col-
leagues with me, I can, of course, get the sense of
my Cabinet on the spot, but that is not the position
of some other Premiers.
Mr. GARDINER.—It is more awkward for the re-
presentatives of Western Australia than possibly for
other representatives, because we did not think that
this matter would be dealt with so quickly, and the
Government agreed to discuss it with the Opposition,
feeling that, although to-day it is our concern, to-mor-
row it may be theirs. We agreed that wo would
quietly talk it over with them.
The CHAIRMAN.—I quite understand that the
leader of a Government might want to get the sense
■of his Cabinet, and, in exceptional circumstances, of
his Parliament, but I cannot understand a State Ad-
ministration that had been afforded the opportunity to
do that being afraid to share responsibility with other
Governments for whatever decision might be come to.
Mr. HOLMAN. —I .take it that Mr. Peake is not
now prepared to come to a decision; that he would
rather return to his State, and say, " The Federal
Government are going to do this,” than say, “ I have
agreed to do this.”
Mr. PEAKE. —That is what I mean by political diffi-
culty.
The CHAIRMAN. —Then I do not know that we
can advance the matter much further now.
Mr. GARDINER. —Could not we decide now to send
you, Mr. Chairman, a definite “ Yes ” or “ No ”?
The CHAIRMAN. —Some of the States might reply
“ Yes ” and others “ No.”
‘Mr. HOLMAN. —Could you, Mr. Gardiner, attend
another Conference in a few weeks’ time?
Mr. GARDINER. —I have undertaken a great deal
of Ministerial work, but this matter is so vital that I
would cheerfully come. If I attended a second Confer-
ence, it would be with the full authority of the Cabinet
and after a discussion with the Opposition, so that I
should be able to say “ Yes ” or “ No.” We cannot, by
telegram, put before our colleagues the views that have
been expressed here.
The CHAIRMAN. —Then you want to go back to
your States and have time for consideration, which is
quite reasonable. The question then is, “ What after
that ”? Mr. Holman asks if there could not be another
Conference. I am not anxious for that.
Mr. GARDINER.—The representatives of the States
could meet, and then come to see you.
The CHAIRMAN.—The difficulty is to find time.
Mr. HOLMAN.—These Conferences are a great
nuisance to everyone. Mr. Gardiner is the man most
to be considered, because of the distance that he has to
travel from his State. If the Conference sits over to-
morrow, State representatives may find an opportunity


of talking the matter over among themselves with a
view to coming to an agreement. That might forward
matters; but it seems to me impossible to obtain a final
agreement at this_ sitting. Several of us must have an
opportunity to discuss the proposals with our absent
colleagues. As 1 have said, that is not my position, nor
is it that of the Victorian Ministers.
Mr. GARDINER.—I have not yet had an oppor-
tunity to discuss the matter even with the Western Aus-
tralian Minister for Works.
Mr. HOLMAN.—We all realize your difficulty. The
point is: Will it tax you too much to chine to a second
Conference ?
Mr. GARDINER.—The matter is so vital that I
shall have to come.
The CHAIRMAN.—If there were a failure of the
States to agree, Mr. Gardiner, and possibly Mr. Lee,
would have to put the special case for their States,
Mr. GARDINER.—It is humiliating to have to ask
for special consideration, but our circumstances require
us to do so.
The CHAIRMAN. —Suppose we let the matter stand
in this way: Mr. Holman, as the Chief Executive Officer
for the State Ministers, will, if possible, arrange for the
further discussion of the subject by the State repre-
sentatives. I accept the understanding that it is not
possible to arrive at finality at this Conference, but I
suggest that the States should harmonize their views, so
that an agreement may be arrived at during a short
Conference some time between now and May.
Mr. HOLMAN. —That is a satisfactory interim ar-
rangement which I think would suit State Ministers,
and I shall charge myself with the task of keeping
every one up to the mark and pushing matters forward
as fast as possible. • •
The CHAIRMAN. There are two problems
which are well worthy of your consideration, gentle-
men. The Savings Bank difficulty is solvable. I do
not pretend that I view the question from your outlook.
It is more than four years since I withdrew from State
politics, though I have since kept abreast with State
affairs, as far as one could, by the study of records.
The Savings Bank difficulty is solvable if the States do
not say to the Commonwealth, “ Get out of the busi-
ness.” If the proposition which I have put before you
is not acceptable there may be some alternative; but do
not merely reject it.
Mr. FITZPATRICK.—You tell us that the States
must not say to the Commonwealth, “ Get out of the
business.” Will you consider a proposition that does
not mean that the States must get out of the business?
The CHAIRMAN.—I am not saying to the States
that they must get out of the business. Here are two
sets of institutions in competition. The question is,
How can we merge them to the mutual advantage of the
parties interested?
Mr. GARDINER. —It is questionable whether we
are making a profit.
The CHAIRMAN.— The position is different with
big institutions, such as the Savings Bank of New
South Wales, in which the deposits probably amount to
£44,000,000.
Mr. McPHERSON—If one or other of the two
parties concerned does not get out of the business, how
can a saving be effected ?
The CHAIRMAN.—We might arrange a merger on
some equitable basis which would not mean the re-
nunciation or retirement from business of either party.
Mr. HOLMAN—A council of control in proportion
to the interests involved in the various States might be
appointed. •
The CHAIRMAN.— That is a possible scheme.
C. 1144.-5
Mr. McPHERSON. —Only with regard to tbe
Savings Bank part of the Commonwealth Bank’s
business ?
The CHAIRMAN.—I would be prepared to sug-
gest a severance of the Savings Bank section of the
business to the extent that the States would get credit
for their profits which are an ascertainable amount.
The question of a Board of Control is* one of the
things that I have had in my mind.
Mr. THEODORE.—At the expiration of a term of,
say, thirty years, if the States had fair representation,
the question of renewal might be satisfactorily
arranged.
Thb CHAIRMAN.—I think that a term of twenty-
five. years would be long enough. If any apprehension
exists as to what may take place during the operation
of the agreement, it ought to be stated. That is a
feature I have not supplied in the scheme. If you
say that the Board of Advice, or Control, has not
sufficiently wide functions, this matter might receive
consideration. The controlling authority would deter-
mine the amount of money on which interest should be
paid, the interest rates to be paid, as well as the char*
acter of the investment and the rates of loan. These
are all essential principles in the active life of a
Savings Bank. Our Act in Victoria—l am-speaking
from memory—lays down, I think, the minimum pro-
portion of money that must be kept as till-money, as
well as the amount which may be lent out on mortgage.
These are the basic principles that operate in the
handling *of depositors’ investments. >
Mr. THEODORE.—I think an agreement is prac-
ticable, so long as a fair spirit is shown by both
parties. . . . * -
* The CHAIRMAN.—I am urging acceptance of this
proposal for a special reason. I remind, Mr. Peake,-who
is an old hand at Conferences,"that we have had many
gatherings since the advent of Federation, and each
year they are becoming more difficult to handle. If dele-
gates can go back to their various States and say,“ We
have done this,” these Conferences between the States
and Commonwealth Ministers will become a veiy fine
extra-constitutional instrumentality. But during the
last few years, we have not made any progress.
Mr. FITZPATRICK.—That is because the States
have felt that they are fighting with their backs against
the wall.
The CHAIRMAN,—I am anxious to bring about a
better state of affairs while there is an opportunity.
Other men may arise “who know not Joseph,” and who
will not look at this matter from an Australian stand-
point. . I want, if possible, to get this thing into line.
Mr, HOLMAN.— I think we all realize what you
have said, and personally, I think we have had more
consideration at your hands than at the hands of any
other Prime Minister of the Commonwealth. I say
that unhesitatingly. .
Mr. MoPHERSON. —Personally I will give the mat-
ter most careful apd serious thought, and if I pan see
my way towards the consummation of your wishes, Mr.
Cnairman, I shall be glad to assist, because I think
this competition ought to be eliminated:
The CHAIRMAN.—If I can aid in any way I shall
do so. If. during the interregnum between this and
another Conference, the matter will be helped by a dis-
cussion of the details between our Treasury officials and
State officers, or State Savings Bank Commissioners, I
think I can arrange that, just to see how the thing
would work on a business basis.
Mr. THEODORE.—I am afraid you will find there
is not the slightest possibility of a settlement between
the Commissioners of the State Savings Banks and the
Commonwealth Commissioners.


The CHAIRMAN.—It might be of advantage to
have some details of the. scheme explained by Mr. Den-
ison Miller.
Mr. PEAKE.—The objection, of course, is to the
duplicated cost of management. What objection have
you to raise against the proposal that the Common-
wealth Government should keep the money deposited in
Commonwealth Savings Banks up to now, and go out
of the business ?
The CHAIRMAN.—The objection is that there is a
feeling throughout Australia that there is a need for
a Commonwealth Savings Bank. This is shown by
the amount of the deposits. When we discussed the
matter in 1914 with Mr. Cook, the deposits were
£6,000,000, and 1 did not expect then that they
would increase as they have done. 1 know the war
has helped a great deal, but there is a feeling that
the work now being done by the Commonwealth Sav-
ings Banks in all the States supplies a need, and I
do not think that the Commonwealth Parliament would
agree to a proposal to prohibit this activity.
Mr. PEAKE.—Speaking for South Australia, 1
have never heard any objection to the management of
the Savings Banks of the States. It is agreed that
they are well managed.
The CHAIRMAN.—I think Mr. Peake will realize,
when he examines the scheme which I have propounded,
that it is not proposed to hand the State Banks over
to the Commonwealth. What the scheme says is,
“ Let us merge these institutions.” You can call them
anything you like. My object is to prevent that com-
petition, and save the loss which is involved by two
separate institutions doing the same kind of work; and
by merging, proceed in the big task that is ahead of
the people of Australia.
Mr. HOLMAN.—ReaIIy, thenJ your main difficulty
is that you shrink from asking the Federal Parliament
to admit that a mistake has been made.
The CHAIRMAN.—I do not shrink at all. I do
not think that I would be justified, as a comparatively
new member of the Commonwealth Parliament, in
saying, “ Clear up all these old Statutes.”
Mr. THEODORE. —If some method of joint control
can be suggested, an arrangement might be arrived at.
The CHAIRMAN. —There would be joint control in
due proportion.
Mr. McPHERSON.—And, probably, arrangements
could be made so that money obtained in one State
would be spent in that State.
The CHAIRMAN.—That „ principle might be
observed. At present, there is nothing to prevent Mr.
Denison Miller saying that the £16,000,000 lying at
the credit of the Commonwealth Savings Bank, and to
which all the States have contributed, may be diverted
to works in any particular State. If the assigned pro-
portions were stated, the States would, of course, be
safeguarded in this respect. I would point out, also,
that the Commonwealth Bank has obtained its deposits
on a 3 per cent, basis. That is a wonderful achieve-
ment, because it is at least one-half per cent, lower than
is being paid by State institutions.
Mr. PEAKE.—Our trustees are paying 4 per cent.
The CHAIRMAN.—If Mr. Denison Miller raised
his deposit rate to 34 per cent., the State Savings Banks
deposits would shrink substantially. I was disap-
pointed with the character of the utterances against the
proposal, which I strongly commend for acceptance by
the States.
Mr. PEAKE. —We cannot. ,
The CHAIRMAN. —Then I urge you, gentlemen,
to renew consideration of the matter, taking the pro-
position back with you to the States.
Mr. THEODORE. —The position would be much
better if we could go back to the States with some-
thing more definite. For instance, your skeleton
scheme proposes an Advisory Board, which would be
practically under the control of the Governor of the
Bank.
The CHAIRMAN.—But safeguarded by the agree-
ment.
Mr. THEODORE.—The position would Be improved
if we could come to some arrangement now as to the
question of joint control —as to the appointment of an
Advisory Board on which the States and the Com-
monwealth would have joint representation.
The CHAIRMAN. —You have my scheme, gentle-
men; if it is not satisfactory in any of its features, pro-
vide me with ao alternative.
Mr. McPHERSON. —If we felt that the States were
to bo partners in the concern for all time, and not
for a certain period, after which they were to be
kicked out, the position would be different.
Mr. HOLMAN.—You, Mr. Chairman, have spoken
of .a merger, but with a merger there is first of all
joint proprietorship, and, secondly, joint authority.
The scheme, as you outlined it to us, puts the whole
proprietorship into one hand, and gives the whole
authority into that hand.
The CHAIRMAN.—In one way only.
Mr. HOLMAN.—The States are merely to be the
favoured customers.
The CHAIRMAN.—In some business cases, mergers
give management to one section to safeguard the
interests of another section. My scheme gives
management to the Commonwealth Government, with
a Council of Advice representing the State mind.
Mr. HOLMAN.—It also gives proprietorship to the
Commonwealth, because at the end of the 25 years’
period the matter would be unreservedly, in the hands
of the Commonwealth to deal with as it thought fit.
The States might then find themselves divested of pro-
prietory rights in the Bank, and if the Commonwealth
imposed unreasonable terms the States could not re-
start competition.
The CHAIRMAN.—I have seen several big ship-
ping mergers with control and management passing
into one hand. You would have proprietorial interests
in your profits and losses as well as guaranteed assign-
ments of income and so forth.
Mr. HOLMAN. —The position is very like that of
the keeper of a restaurant to whom a man says,
“ Hand over your business to me, and you shall have
a seat at a certain table and the attention of a par-
ticular waiter for the next ten years. At the end of
that time we shall see what happens.”
The CHAIRMAN.—But your Savings Bank is not a
financial restaurant. You draw food from it, so to
speak, but you make no profit out of your Savings
Banks. You pay into reserves certain sums over and
above working expenses.
Mr. THEODORE. —We could provide for the ap-
propriation of some of the profits, and pay them into
the Consolidated Revenue if we thought fit.
The CHAIRMAN. —I thought you had done every-
thing you could do in that way in Queensland. If you
have that power it is marvellous that you have not
exercised it.
Mr. PEAKE.—You are asking us really to con-
sider the advantages of an arrangement for a 25 years’
period, and to take the risk of being able to start again
for ourselves if we desired to do so at the termination
of that period. When you close up a business it is
difficult to make a fresh start.
The CHAIRMAN.—Can you or any member of the
Conference devise a means —under sealed agreement or
by Statute, or by both—of dealing with the continuing
rights of both parties to the merger at the termination
of the given period ? If so, I should like to hear of it.
Mr. PEAKE.—L cannot; but I think I have cor-
rectly stated what we are asked to put before our
people.
Mr. HOLMAN. —That, to my mind, is the insuper-
able difficulty.


The CHAIRMAN.—I thought the fixing of the 25
years’ period would give security for a generation.
Mr. HOLMAN.— We discussed this very point five
or six years ago. The feeling of the States was then
against the naming of any term, since the filing of
a term offered an invitation to the Federal Parlia-
ment to upset the arrangements at the expiration of it.
The CHAIRMAN.—CouId you not, as a statesman
and a lawyer, draw a series of clauses providing for
what should take place at the expiration of the period
fixed ?
Mr. HOLMAN.—If something of that kind could
be done, then my main objection would disappear.
My concern is as to what may happen at the end of
the 25 years’ period. . V
Thg CHAIRMAN.—The Conference can accept my
assurance that the Commonwealth Treasurer is not out
to thieve the money of the States or to steal the good-
will of their business. If you accept that assurance, I
think you can apply your minds to the machinery gaps
in my scheme. My proposition is not a hard-and-fast
one. It is jointed up well, hut there are points at
which you could insert other machinery. I have
drafted a scheme which could be criticised, and if you
can remedy the defects in it, by all means do so.
Mr. HOLMAN.—If after consultation with my legal
colleagues, I can find any way of getting over the diffi-
culty, I shall advise you.
The CHAIRMAN. —If you gentlemen have an op-
portunity to do that before we disperse, I hope y°u
will avail yourselves of it.
The Conference, at 6.Jf2 p.m., adjourned until 10 a.m.
on Saturday.
FOURTH DAY—SATURDAY, 25th JANUARY, 1919.
REPATRIATION.—(a) WORKS PROGRAMMES OF
COMMONWEALTH AND STATE GOVERNMENTS;
(b) SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
The CHAIRMAN.—The New South Wales Min-
isters are absent, but the Ministers for the other States
are still here, and if the Conference desires to go on,
as I think it should, at least until the repatriation
problems have been settled, I shall ask Senator Millen
and the members of the sub-Conference to complete the
task on which they have been engaged during the past
two days.
Mr. PEAKE.—There' is a prior question.- We
should decide how long the Conference will coivtinue,
in the absence of the representatives of the senior State.
It is useless to disguise the fact that some Ministers
would like to get away. We appreciate the Common-
wealth hospitality that we are enjoying; but there is
the possibility, which people outside are recognising
and acting upon, of our being detained here indefinitely.
Some of us would like to get away this afternoon.
These facts must determine the length of time that we
can devote to any one question. I think that we
should finish the repatriation question, if possible.
The CHAIRMAN. —I do not desire the dislocation
of the State Governments, nor their embarrassment by
the detention of State Ministers in Melbourne. These
Ministers are bound to study the interests of their
States. I say, candidly, that Ido not think that any
jrood could be obtained by prolonging the consideration
of our financial proposals. In my view, all prospect of
an agreement regarding them has disappeared, at least
for the time being.
Mr. COYNE.—Are not the financial proposals of the
Commonwealth closely interwoven with repatriation ?
The CHAIRMAN.—No. I think that we should
make a strong endeavour to come to an agreement re-
garding repatriation. That was the main purpose of
the Conference, and it will be a grievous mistake, _ I
think, if the special Ministers who are now considering
the details of a scheme do not bring to the Conference
a report upon which we can arrive at a conclusion. If
that were done, we might finish our deliberations to-
day, leaving over the settlement of a number of ques-
tions that we fondly imagined might be dealt with.
Mr. HAYES.—The sub-Conference should finish its
work in an* hour.
The CHAIRMAN. —Then it would be well to ask
Senator Millen and his colleagues to proceed with their
task.
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—It is most important that
we should arrive at finality in regard to repatriation.
You, Mr. Chairman, in inviting State Ministers to the
Conference, emphasized the necessity for that, and I
should be sorry to return to Western Australia without
anything having been done, because our visit would
then have been futile. The sub-Conference yesterday
arrived at certain conclusions, and I hope that we may
be able to place them before the Conference in such a
form that they may be dealt with. - ■
The CHAIRMAN.—Then I ask the sub-Conference
to attack their task afresh, and to bring to the Confer-
ence as soon as possible the result of their deliberations.
UNIFORM COMMONWEALTH AND STATE TAXA-
TION LAWS, AND/OR COLLECTION BY ONE
AUTHORITY.
The CHAIRMAN. —I think that the Conference
might now proceed with one or two other matters. At
the last Conference of Treasurers we discussed the
collection of taxation under a uniform method, and Mr.
Holman and Mr. Theodore were intrusted with the task
of considering an alternative proposition. I have not
heal’d whether any scheme was determined upon during
their Consultations.
Mr. THEODORE.—The report that was drawn up
as the result of the consultations between Mr. Holman
and myself has been circulated among the State Go-
vernments, but no further consultation has taken place,
nor do I know of any correspondence on the subject.
This report presents certain alternative proposals, hut
Mr. Holman and I did not come to complete agreement
as to the methods for bringing about uniformity. We
were agreed on certain points, but differed on other
important ones. I understand that the Commonwealth
Government and the State Governments have received
a copy of the report of which I speak.
The CHAIRMAN. —The Commonwealth did not re-
ceive a copy of it. We might have been allowed one as
an act of grace.
Mr. THEODORE.—I cannot understand why the
Commonwealth has not received a copy of it. The
matter was left in Mr. Holman’s hands. He acts as
correspondent with the States in these matters. The
final draft of our report was approved by me, and Mr.
Holman undertook to circulate it. ' I am surprised that
a copy has not been sent to the Commonwealth.
The CHAIRMAN.—I have not received a copy.


Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—A copy of the report
was sent to South Australia, but we saw no advantage
in the proposals, and replied to that effect.
Mr. THEODORE.—it seems to me that the matter
with which the report deals cannot be advanced very far
now, because of its difficulties, but this is the text of the
report: — (
The propositions to which we have been able to re-
duce our views on the question of joint control of in-
come tax matters may be stated as follows:
(1) The whole business of assessing and col-
lecting income tax for the Commonwealth and
States should be undertaken by an amalgamated
Department.
(2) In States where a land tax operates, land
taxation should also be placed under the control of
the same Department.
(3) The formation of such Department need iu
no way restrict the right of the Commonwealth or
States to rescind or amend their taxation laws.
(4) At the same time, a further approach to
uniformity in the Acts must be made, chiefly in
connexion with the deductions and allowances
made under the Commonwealth and States Income
Tax Acts, if any advantage is to be derived from
the amalgamation. ' '
(5) The joint administration of two Acts widely
divergent upon these points, though practicable,
would really amount to nothing more than the
housing of the two existing stalls in one office, as
each return would probably have to be dealt with
by the two sets of officers. Very little, if any,
economy would result from this.
(6) Mr.- Theodore has presented the following
list of principal differences between the Common-
wealth Act and the Act of Queensland. These dif-
ferences relate to —
(a) Exemptions.
( b ) Deductions, which are of great import-
ance. Also to—
(c) Method of estimating stock-in-trade.
( d ) Interest payable outside the State.
(e) Method of taxing foreign corporations.
(/) Method of taxing bank and insurance
companies.
(g) Taxation at source.
(7) The principal differences between the Com-
monwealth Act and the Act of New South Wales
are as follow:
(«) Exemptions.
(i) Deductions.
(c) Method of estimating value of live stock
on hand.
( d ) Certain cases of interest payable outside
of the States.
(») Method of taxing foreign persons or cor-
porations.
(/) Method of taxing insurance and mining
companies.
( g ) Taxation at source.
(h) Taxation of value of private residences.
(») Taxation of profits arising from isolated
transactions in land, leases, shares, &c.
0) Objections and appeals against assess-
ments.
(fc) Penalties for breaches of the Act and re-
gulations.
(I) Rates of tax.
(8) Our present opinion is that if some working
approach to uniformity were made upon points
(a) and (i), adequately ■ trained assessors could
deal with each taxpayer’s return for both State and
Commonwealth purposes in spite of the diver-
gencies on the other heads.
(D) Our proposal, therefore, is to establish a
bureau -with such assessors in each capital, and to
secure the passage of the necessary legislation by
all the Parliaments, to obtain the necessary addi-
tional measure of uniformity.
(10) So far we are iu agreement; but with re-
gard to the control of such a bureau two alterna-
tive proposals have been put forward.
(11) Mr. Theodore has put forward his pro-
posal in the following words: —
(a) The Taxation Department to be con-
trolled by a bureau consisting of two
Commonwealth Ministers and three
State Ministers. One of the Common-
wealth Ministers to be Chairman, and
to have a deliberative as well as a cast-
ing vote.
( I) The bureau shall control the staff, and be
responsible for the appointment, or
suspension, or dismissal, as provided
by law, of thg Chief Commissioner of
Taxation.
(c) The bureau shall also be responsible for
the appointment, promotion, transfer,
and dismissal of Deputy Commis-
sioners and members of the staff in all
States.
( d) The Chief Commissioner of Taxation shall
be solely responsible /or the administra-
tion of the various Acts of the Com-
monwealth and State Parliaments re-
lating to income taxes and land taxes,
and shall, subject to the decisions of the
Courts of competent jurisdiction, act
within his own discretion in adminis-
tration of the said Act.
(e) The Commonwealth Government or any
State Government shall, on the request
of the Treasurer of any such Govern-
ment, be furnished by the Chief Com-
missioner or the Deputy Commissioner,
as the case may be, with such informa-
tion and statistics as may be in posses-
sion of the Department relating to tax-
payers or taxes under any law of the
authority concerned, either generally
or in reference to any particular in-
dustry or business.
(/) Such Government shall also, on request,
be furnished with reports from the
Chief Commissioner or Deputy Com-
missioner on valuations of land, stock,
or improvements; incidences or effect
of taxes; nature and effect of deduc-
tions and exemptions; extent or nature
of evasions; or generally upon the
working of the taxation legislation of
the authority requesting such informa-
tion.
( g ) The Commonwealth Government or any
State Government may appoint an
officer to represent them in the Taxa-
tion Department. Such officer to have
access to all information relating to
State taxes, and to decide what Statis-
tics are necessary to be kept in order
to compile or supply returns required
by States or Commonwealth; and to
make recommendations to the Deputy
Commissioner for increasing the staff
if, in his opinion, the interests of his
Government are being neglected
through lack of sufficient inspections,
unsatisfactory assessments, or any


other cause attributed to the inade-
quacy of the staff. Should the State
officer’s recommendations be not ap-
proved by the Deputy Commissioner,
the matter to be referred to the Taxa-
tion Bureau for final decision.
(h) Further, such Government shall have the
right, on the authority of its Treasurer,
to consult with any officer of the Taxa-
tion Department on any subject relating
to taxation.
(12) My own proposal can be stated as fol-
lows :
(a) The present State Commissioner and Act-
ing Commissioner for the Common-
wealth in each State to he brother Com-
missioners heading a Department.
( b ) The individual taxpayer to prepare a re- .
turn to contain all inforihation required
for both Federal and State purposes.
( c ) Assessors to be trained to estimate the
amount of Federal and State tax pay-
able upon the facts disclosed. (Mr.
Whiddon thinks this is quite* possible.)
(d) The taxpayer to be informed forthwith
of the amounts payable for both Federal
and State tax,, but—
(e) Taxes to be payable at different dates.
(/) The staff of Income Tax Bureau in each
State to be chosen from amongst the
existing permanent officers of both'
State and Federal staffs.
( g ) All questions of appointment, promotion,
remuneration, to "be decided by the two
Commissioners acting together.
( h ) In the event of irreconcilable difference
of opinion on any such question, matter
to be made the subject of a Conference
between Federal and State Treasurers,
and if still incapable of settlement,
matter to be referred for arbitration
to the Chairman of the Public Service
Board, or Public Service Commissioner
of State affected. (The Chairman of
the Public Service Board is generally
a person of judicial temperament. He
would be on the spot, and this system
would give a better settlement of a local
dispute than by reference to Mel-
bourne.)
(t) Differences in practice (other than those
arising out of actual divergencies of
the Statutes) to be as far as possible
eliminated by agreement between the
joint Commissioners in each State.
(/) Where this is impossible, or where new
differences arise, such to be referred to
a Central Committee.
(Jr) Such Committee to consist of two State
and two Commonwealth representatives,
meeting under the presidency of the
Commonwealth Treasurer; State re-
presentatives to be the Treasurers or
the Under-Secretaries of two of the
States (for choice, South Australia and
New South Wales), the Federal repre-
sentatives to bo the Under-Secretary and
Chief Commissioner for Taxation.
(I) This Committee to meet ohce a month, if
required, to eliminate outstanding dif-
ferences of practice.
(m) The State Commissioner in each State to
report directly to, and be amenable to
•the authority of, the State Treasurer
or his Under-Secretary. The Federal
Commissioner in each State to report
directly to, and be amenable to, the
authority of the Federal Treasurer, his
Under-Secretary, or the Chief Com-
missioner.
(13) The ’advantages of this proposal are, it
would appear, obvious. It would secure for each
of the seven Governments direct control to run its
ov/n taxation operations upon the spot, i.e., with-
out the necessity of appeal to Melbourne (except
in the one case of an irreconcilable difference of
opinion between the two Commissioners of any
State as to practice, whioh would be settled by the
Central Committee). At the same time, it would
preserve to the Federal Government the measure
of centralization in control (under a Chief Com-
missioner) which exists to-day.
(14) As against this it is to be urged that the
existence in each State of a bureau under the
direction of two joint chiefs, representing and
obeying different authorities, is an element of awk-
wardness. Some measure of such administrative
symmetry seems to me to be inevitable in any
attempt to reconcile the claims of the two Govern-
ments without destroying or subordinating either.
It will be seen that Mr. Theodore’s alternative
scheme is not entirely free from it.
(15) On the other hand, I feel that the ap-
parent difficulty emerging from the proposed
double control can easily be greatly overstated.
In New South Wales (and I suppose elsewhere)
we are accustomed to the Idea of the police acting
for both State and Commonwealth authorities—
for the Military and for the Electoral Depart-
ments. No seipous administrative difficulty has
ever been experienced. .
Similarly, too, in many cases, Railway officers
have acted under the instructions of the Savings
Bank Commissioners, and Justice officers under
those of the Electoral Department.
(16) While freely admitting that the proposal
as outlined by Mr. Theodore Is a practicable and,
in many respects, an attractive one, it appears
to mo to be open to several criticisms.
(17) It seems to, me that it aims too much at
an external symmetry, which is obtained, so far as
it is obtained at all (about which see paragraph
92), by sacrificing the necessary duality of control.
Mr. Theodore’s scheme appears to me as an effort
rather to unify control. It assumes almost a com-
plete identity of interest amongst the States, and
practically deprives them of all individual direc-
tion of their own taxation organization and per-
sonnel.
(18) Although the control is nominally in the
hands of the Central Council, it would be actually
in that of. the Chief Commissioner. This officer,
who would presumably be a Commonwealth •
nominee, would not only determine, subject to the
authority of the Central Council, differences affect-
ing the practice of the Departments (which is a
point common to both schemes), but would deter-
mine the appointment, dismissal, or removal of
all the Commissioners In charge of the work in the
individual States. Thus it might happen that an
active and successful State Commissioner trained
in State “ A ” could be removed from that State
and put in charge of State “ B,” where matters


were not going on satisfactorily, against tie
wishes of the Government of State “ A,” and with-
out their having any effectual means of protecting
themselves.
(19) Only three of the States would actually he
represented on the Central Council. They would,
under Mr. Theodore’s scheme, settle matters, not
only for the States they represent, hut for the
other three States as well, with the assistance of
two Commonwealth representatives.
(20) Although the scheme provides that States
representatives should have the actual majority
upon the Central Council, experience shows that in
a great many matters States are often antirely
indifferent as to the maintenance of control, and
give' a ready acceptance to proposals emanating
from Commonwealth authority. In the event of
one of the States representatives taking this atti-
tude, the whole of the remaining States in the
Commonwealth would be quite helpless, and the
Council would really he the mouthpiece of the
Commonwealth Government. It is impossible, in
the light of bygone experience, to close one’s eyes
to the extreme possibility of this occurring.
(21) Mr. Theodore’s scheme thus appears to me
to be one which, while it has the advantage of a
great deal of external symmetry, merely paves the
way for the adoption of ultimate control by the
Commonwealth Government. The possible suc-
ceeding steps can be readily imagined—
1. That the new Department should become
a Federal organization in nature as
well as in fact, and that the Common-
wealth should become the only collector
of income taxes;,
2. That, in order to procure uniformity, the
Commonwealth should be the only
authority legislating upon the subject.
3. That there should be a single income tax
throughout Australia, of which, at
first, the States should receive a cer-
tain proportion (as they used to do in
the case of the Customs) ; and
4. Finally, that that proportion should
steadily diminish, and ultimately dis-
appear altogether.
(22) At the same time it must be pointed out
that the appearance of uniformity and symmetry
which Mr. Theodore’s scheme presents is to some
extent illusory. He feels the • necessity for inde-
pendent cheeking officers, and has made provision
for them. Their existence would, it seems to me,
restore to some extent the duality which I regard
as essential. But, so far as it did so, it would also
involve the same departure from symmetry and
‘ two headedness ’ of authority, which I realize
can be charged against my proposal.”
That is the report.
The CHAIRMAN.—What does it all mean?
Mr. THEODORE.—You will observe that we set
out by agreeing that certain difficulties had to be over-
come before we could have* an amalgamated Depart-
ment —difficulties arising from divergencies in the
Statutes, and in the practice set up by the Common-
wealth and the several State Departments. We recog-
nised also the necessity for some common authority
to properly control the staff, a matter in which both
the State and Commonwealth Governments are in-
terested to/some degree. In order to have an effective
and economic Department, we must have control of the
staff by some recognised authority, and my suggestion
is that the ultimate authority controlling the staff should
be a Board of Ministers representing the States and
the Commonwealth. Practically, my scheme means
that, although the decisions upon practice, and the
appointment of Commissioners, should rest in the hands
of this Board, all other matters should be controlled
by the Chief Commissioner where the State Commis-
sioners are unable to agree. Mr. Holman does not agree
with, that proposition. He wants a scheme under which
the State Government would have, for all time, some
distinct authority over the responsible taxing officer
in his particular State. He, therefore, proposes a dual
scheme, under which there would be two Commissioners
with equal power, the one answerable to the Common-
wealth, and the other to the States. That is a brief
outline of our proposals. I confess that neither scheme
is perfect; but, in my opinion, Mr. Holman’s scheme
is not at all practicable. It would not provide for any
economy by reduction of staff or for an easy working
Department; but some such scheme as that outlined
by myself—a dbherae for an amalgamated Department,
neither Commonwealth nor State, but under the joint
control of a Board of Ministers —rmight be practicable.
The only other way of removing the difficulty is to
adopt the definitions and the practice of the Common-
wealth, and to agree that the several Commissioners
throughout the Commonwealth should be entitled to
work along those lines.
The CHAIRMAN.—I thought that Mr. Theodore
and Mr. Holman had volunteered to do the impossible,
and I am convinced that if you two gentlemen could
not do what was suggested, it cannot be done. I pre-
dicted, some time ago, that there was only one way of
simplifying and economizing the procedure in regard
to the collection of direct taxation, and that- was to
empower the Commonwealth to collect such taxation
for the States, with some suitable guarantee that the
maximum cost should not exceed, say, your present
cost. That guarantee could be provided by Statute.
The more you study the matter, the more I am sure
you will be convinced that anything short of what I
have suggested would lead to confusion or additjpnal
expense. I suggest that we receive the report tendered
by Mr. Theodore, and that we be afforded an oppor-
tunity to study it. It deals with another of the pro-
posed arrangements upon which we find it impossible
to arrive at an agreement, and the consideration of
which circumstances will force us to defer.
Mr. GARDINER. —I think that we could thresh out
this matter for ourselves. There are one or two points
in both Mr. Theodore’s and Mr. Holman’s schemes of
which we could approve; but we desire to do what you,
Mr. Chairman, have tried to do, in order to bring about
some practicable scheme. The report read by Mr.
Theodore may not be acceptable, but if we could dis-
cuss it, we might arrive at a decision as to what should
be done.
The CHAIRMAN.—We cannot discuss it now. This
is the first I have heard of the report.
Mr. McPHERSON. —Our Government takes the
view that differences in the form of the schedules, and
in regard to deductions, could be put aside, and that
we could set up a bureau to collect the whole of the
direct taxation of the States and the Commonwealth.
We are not in accord with the schemes proposed by Mr.
Holman and Mr. Theodore, although we are prepared
to go with Mr. Holman to the extent of saying that, in
each case, the present State Commissioner should be an
Acting Commissioner for the Commonwealth, and that
there should be a Commissioner at the head of the whole
Department. Mr. Holman’s proposal in regard to


the determination of questions of promotion and re-
muneration would give to the Commonwealth the final
decision. Jam quite prepared to give the Common-
wealth the final voice in such matters, but I do not
think that Mr. Holman’s scheme for doing so is the
best. I should prefer to have a Commissioner ap-
pointed by the Commonwealth in addition to the States’
Taxation Commissioners, and to have a controlling autho-
rity, consisting of one representative of the Common-
wealth and one representative of the six States, the re-
presentative of the Commonwealth to have a casting and
a deliberative vote. That, in my opinion, would get
over the difficulty. Ido not favour Mr. Theodore’s
proposal, which would really introduce the political
aspect. The collection of taxatioft should be taken out
of the region of politics.
Mr. THEODORE.—In what respect does my scheme
introduce the political aspect?
Mr. McPHERSOX.—You spoke of a Board con-
sisting of two Commonwealth Ministers and two State
Ministers, one of the Commonwealth Ministers to have
a deliberative and casting vote.
Mr. THEODORE.—But every Department of Taxa-
tion is under Ministerial control.
Mr. McPHERSOX.—The bureau which I suggest
would he practically independent. :
Mr. THEODORE.—It would not he independent of
Parliament.*
Mr. McPHERSOX.—The bureau would be charged
with purely administrative duties.
Mr. THEODORE.—But there must he some Minis-
terial responsibility. If, for instance, it were thought
that the Commissioners were not sufficiently active in
preventing evasions, do you mean to say that no Govern-
ment should have the right to control such a situation?
Mr. .McPHERSOX.—The two Commissioners sug-
gested by me would certainly be subject to the control
of Parliament.
Mr. THEODORE.—But not of any Government. ■
Mr. McPHERSOX.—Yes; but it would have to be
shown that they were not properly discharging their
functions. The Commonwealth Bank, for instance, is
in a measure subject to the control of the Common-
wealth Government, but the Governor of the Bank has
very wide powers.
Mr. THEODORE.—The Commissioners, in this case,
would be charged with the duty of carrying out, from
time to time, a varying Government policy, whereas
the policy of the Commonwealth Bank is provided for
in the Act which created it. <
Mr. McPHERSOX. —All these varying taxation
policies are set out in Statutes, and if we set up a bureau
we would direct it to administer those Acts as it found
them. The Victorian Government would be prepared
to fall in with some such arrangement, but we are not
prepared as a State to lose our identity as an authority
capable of imposing taxation. Ido not wish -to make
any reference to the cost of collection incurred by the
Commonwealth, but I propose to draw attention to the
great differences that sometimes exist in the cost of col-
lecting income tax in the different States. Let me take
an actual illustration —State A and State B. In State
A the cost of collecting income tax is 1.3 of the amount
collected, and in State B the cost is 1.7 of the amount
collected. On that basis it would appear that the cost
of collection in State B is considerably higher than is
the cost in State A, but we find that the cost of collec-
tion per schedule or taxpayer in State A is 10s. 3d.,
whereas in State B it is only 4s. lOd.
The CHAIRMAX. —Everything depends on the
character of the Acts.
Mr. McPHERSOX.—The Acts of the two States
from which I have drawn this illustration do not differ
very materially. To go further, we find that, in State
A, the number of schedules dealt with per officer in the
Department is 437, while in State B it is 915.
Mr. THEODORE.—There, again, much depends on
the character of the Act. Where taxation is collected at
the source of income, many schedules would require very
little examination, but some States have a complicated
method of assessing and taxing companies.
Mr. McPHERSOX. —That is as far as we have been
able to go. We have not discussed in detail all the differ-
ences that might be adjusted. If a proper body were
set up, I think the differences could be adjusted, and
even if they could not, the authority I have suggested
could administer the different State Acts with their
varying policies. I think we ought to agree to have ope
body to effect the collection of taxation throughout the
Commonwealth.
Mr. THEODORE.—I canppt quite follow your ob-
jection, Mr. Chairman, to my scheme for the appoint-
ment of a bureau, which would be neither a Common-
wealth nor a State Department. You say that the'only
satisfactory system is that of a Commonwealth De-
partment collecting for the State and the Common-
wealth.
Mr. CHAIRMAX.—One authority, not a dual ar-
rangement. •
Mr. THEODORE.—An authority collecting for two
different Governments must be of a dual character.
The CHAIRMAX.—I do not think so.
Mr. THEODORE.—The revenue collected is to be
under difal authority.
The CHAIRMAX. —It is to be divided afterwards,
if that is what you mean. You might as well say that
in the early days of Federation the Customs revenue
was under dual authority because we were handing
over to the States 15s. in the £l. ’ ,
Mr. THEODORE.—If you want to bring about, in
relation to income tax, the same position as existed in
regard to Customs duties—-the Commonwealth having
the. sole right to impose the tax and apportion to each
State the share to which it is entitled—that is a pro-
position which no State can consider.
The CHAIRMAX.—Xobody is proposing that.
Mr. THEODORE.—In this case the States have a
field in which they have certain paramount rights that
you cannot expect them to surrender for the sake of
convenience to the taxpayer or economy in collection.
At the same time, it may be possible to set up a joint
authority,’not necessarily dual, for the purpose of col-
lecting and distributing money in accordance with the
Acts as they are passed.
Mr. McPHERSOX. —An instance occurred quite re-
cently, in which Victoria appreciated very greatly the
confidence placed in it by the Commonwealth. I refer
to the provision in the Commonwealth Act dealing
with the housing of returned soldiers, by which the
State Savings Bank is empowered to undertake certain
work in co-operation with the Commonwealth’s people.
That was the first instance of a genuine attempt to
use existing' machinery without establishing other
machinery to do certain good work.
The CHAIRMAX.—'That is the most* recent in-
stance; there have been hundreds of others.
Mr. McPHERSOX.—At any rate, it is the out-
standing instance. It relates to the administration of
a fund that null, I understand, run into £50,000,D00,
so it is a question of great importance, and we appre-
ciate the confidence placed in the State. If it appealed
to the Commonwealth to intrust to Victoria the col-
lection of taxation in this State on its behalf, we should


endeavour to do it just as well as we shall try to do
the housing work intrusted to us in connexion with
repatriation. We are prepared at any time to submit
proposals to the Commonwealth Treasurer in that
direction.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—Mr. Holman sent us a
copy of the report read by the Acting Premier of
Queensland. We replied that wc did not see that it
would be any improvement whatever in smooth work-
ing or economy in expenditure, and that the dual con-
trol suggested by Mr. Holman was more likely to lead
to confusion than anything else. At the same time,
the South Australian Government have not yet been
able to see that there will bo any real economy in hand-
ing over to the Commonwealth Department the collec-
tion of the State taxation. Our late Commissioner
(Mr. Russell), who had, I suppose, more experience
in taxation matters than any other man in Australia,
and who virtually built up our taxation Department
since 1884, held the opinion very .strongly that no two
Departments should be kept so distinctly apart as the
taxation Departments of the State and Commonwealth.
Each State has to consider its own requirements every
year. In South Australia we are continually altering
our exemptions and deductions, especially the exemp-
tions, according to the needs of the State; and I do not
see how it would be possible to have the same exemp-
tions in State and Commonwealth taxation.
The CHAIRMAN.—Nobody is suggesting that.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—That is one of Mr. Hol-
man’s points.
Mr. THEODORE. —Wc agreed that we must always
make provision for differences in exemptions, and de-
ductions.
■Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—Is that so? We feel
that we could not possibly have in our Department
officers of both Departments. Eigures supplied to me
before I left, but which I have-not with me, show that
our cost of collection per head of taxpayer is lower than
that of either the Commonwealth or New South Wales.
It is about 6s. 9d. per taxpayer in the case of income
tax. We have no exemptions in our land tax, and
about 170,000 accounts sent out altogether, while the
Commonwealth has very few land taxpayers, and an
exemption of £5,000. Up to the present I have not been
able to see, nor do I think my colleagues have, any
saving worth considering in the collection of the tax
by one authority.
The CHAIRMAN. —Notwithstanding the offer the
Commonwealth made to collect your tax for you at one
third of the present cost? »
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—Yes.
Mr. THEODORE. —One-third of the cost you have
worked out yourself, which is wrong.
The CHAIRMAN.—We said that we would collect
it for you for one-third of what it cost you to collect it
to-day, and yet you say there is no saving. I cannot
understand that attitude.
Mr. THEODORE.—You may collect it at that figure
for two or three years, and then say that you are losing
too much and that you must charge us more.
The CHAIRMAN.—There is always some hidden
fear of that’kind.
;Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—You would not consider
the suggestion that the old, trained, and more experi-
enced Department, consisting of men who have been
doing the work for thirty years, should take over the
work for the two?
The CHAIRMAN. —We did consider that, and could
not accept it. The Commonwealth must have some
central Department to deal with the business that is
common to two or more States. Men who do not re-
cognise that fact arc not familiar with the elementary
principles of taxation.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER. —At any rate, we can see
no advantage in either of these proposals, and are still
as firm as ever in the opinion that we had better retain
the control of our Taxation Department.
Mr. PEAKE. —You said, Mr. Chairman, that you
offered to collect the tax for the States for one-third of
what it is costing them now. Will that make any appre-
ciable difference in the cost to the taxpayer?
The OH AIRMAIL —We say, “ Yes.”
Mr. PEAKE.—I cannot see how there is going to
be any saving to. thet taxpayer, although there may be
a saving to the State.
The CHAIRMAN. —To the taxpayer ns a whole.
Mr. THEODORE.—'And a loss to the Common-
wealth.
The CHAIRMAN.—There would be no loss to the
Commonwealth, or we would not undertake it.
Mr. PEAKE.—You may have some scheme which
will work out more cheaply to the taxpayer, but unless
you have I do not see how the taxpayer is going to get
any benefit simply because you pay and we do not.
The CHAIRMAN.—There is an enormous duplica-
tion. and even multiplication, of work with a number of
staffs not working at the same degree of pressure all the
year. That aspect has been most carefully studied by
the Commonwealth authorities. They are not willing
to undertake any loss in the scheme, hut they know they
would be well within the margin of safety in offering to
do the work for the States at one-third of what it costs
them at the present time, giving the States the advan-
tage of two-thirds of the present cost to them of collect-
ing their direct taxation.
Mr. THEODORE.—Mr. Holman and I found in
our inquiries that nearly all the Commissioners were
unanimous that it would take just as long to examine
and assess individual returns for the two authorities
even if it were done bv one Department. They said
they could not do it with half a staff, and that it would
take one man just as long to assess the same return for
the two authorities as it would take two men assessing
the same returns separately. Consequently, there would
be no saving, and there would be a possibility of con-
fusion and a greater percentage of errors.
The CHAIRMAN. —The Commissioners may have
their own views. I am telling you .what we can do. but
you stand outside, either because you fear something
will be done later, or because you fear that there will be
no saving to the taxpayer generally—a concern which
is really not yours, but ours.
Mr. THEODORE. —"With due deference to your as-
sertion that wo have turned yohr offer down. I would
noint out that I have suggested control by an Australian
Board practically under the domination of the Com-
monwealth Government.
The CHAIRMAN. —Two Commonwealth Ministers
could not officiate on a body of that kind.
Mr. THEODORE. —That is only one element of the
scheme, and can be modified if it does not meet the
wishes of the Commonwealth.
The CHAIRMAN. —I should want to studv your
proposal. I have only heard you read it for the first
time this morning; but any scheme that is dual in
element or substance, although less dual in vour case
than in Mr. Holman’s case, would be liable to be
chaotic and unsatisfactory.
Mr. McPHERSON. —Anything short of that would
riot suit Victoria, because we are not prepared to lose
our identity as a taxing authority.


The CHAIRMAN.—I do not propose to push the
matter. I had it on the list because I- saw in the
press that Mr. .Holman and Mr. Theodore had de-
liberated and prepared a scheme. I understand that
they did not get any result. Circumstances, however,
will cure that.
Mr. GARDINER.—I understood you to say that
there would be no discussion on this question, and, un-
foitunately, my papers are not here. The position we
take is that there are three things that must be con-
sidered; first, the reduction in the cost; second, the
inconvenience to the public; and, third, ,the fear,
which is not so much at the back of my mind as it is
in the case of some of the other Ministers present, that
the Commonwealth may desire to collect its own taxes
first, and leave the others to be collected afterwards.
That, however, is not a strong fear with me. I have
worked out details to trv to avoid dual control, and
I think it can be done. lam just as optimistic on this
scheme as you are in your assertion that the Common-
wealth can do it for pne-third of thp money ,it costs
the States. I very much doubt whether you can. We
should require from you, just as you require from us
in other pmGers, some clear statement as to hqw it
can be done, because it seems rather an exaggerated
view to take of the saving.
The CHAIRMAN.—I am making the offer. The rest
is our copcern, not yours.
Mr. GARDINER.—You may make the offer, and
it may not mean a general saving to the whole of
the community, as Mr. Peake pointed out. Wo
have a right to consider the whole community, seeing"
that they are being dealt ■ with by both taxing
authorities.
The CHAIRMAN.—The Commonwealth takes the
Australian view, and the States must take their own
views as States.
Mr, GARDINER. —I do not think that is a fair
position to urge. You practically say, “ There is the
Commonwealth proposition - ; it must of necessity be all
good and that of the States must be all bad.”
The CHAIRMAN. —I was referring, to the question
of the States claiming to deal with the ’ Australian
view. I say that is pur job, and your job is to take
the States’ view.
Mr. GARDINER. —That may or may not be
right. It is only reducing the question to a mere
pounds, shillings, and .pence saving. We may have
to consider that the people you are taxing are our
people as well as yours, and they may not be as much
benefited as you suggest. You cannot bo dogmatic on
a principle like this. Your view maj be right, or ours
mav b© right, or there may be a medium way where
both are right. I do not like it to be thought that
we came her© with the desire to jam our views down
vour throat all the time. At the same time Ido not
like the contrary suggestion.
Mr. McPHERSON.—I do not like it to be thought
that you, Mr. Chairman, put forward an offer and that
we rejected it. ‘ I am prepared to offer that Victoria
will collect your taxation, in Victoria, at half what
it is costing you at the present time, subject to calcu-
lation by anv well-known auditor in the city. We will
do that, and bear the loss, if any.
The CHAIRMAN.—We have Australian, and not
only Victorian, taxation to consider, ft is not a ques-
tion of loss, but of whether you can do it.
Mr. McPHERSON.—Tt is an offer which you might
think over.
The CHAIRMAN. —I have thought it over, and I
rejected it for reasons which I explained to the House
of Representatives.
Report received.
CO-ORDINATION# OF COMMONWEALTH, STATE,
AND OTHER PUBLIC BORROWING.
The CHAIRMAN. —There are certain other matters
listed for consideration, but I do not know whether we
can, with profit, deal with them.
Mr.' THEODORE.—Before proceeding to a further-
subject it is quite evident that unanimity will not be
arrived at upon the question of the Commonwealth
borrowing all the States. Are you prepared to
consider at this Conference the possibility of coming to
an arrangement whereby the Commonwealth should
borrow for 'such of the States as are willing to come
into the scheme? Apparently there are four of these.
The CHAIRMAN.—‘Tt will be largely a matter for
consideration as to whether it would be worth while.
What I wanted to secure was the elimination of compe-
tition. But if there are two of the States to stand opt—
and two of the largest users oil money—and four to come
in, that would mean a prospective competition between
three authorities instead of seven. Some few advant-
ages, probably, would be obtainable by such a reduc-
tion of competition. It could not be altogether denied
that there would be some advantage arising out of
such a partial combination. However, it is a matter
for consideration between the Commonwealth and the
States as they become individually poncerned.
Mr. THEODORE.—Can the situation be advanced
anv further than it is now?
The CHAIRMAN.—I do not think so, seeing that
the proposition has been turned down by the Represen-
tatives of the two most populous States.
Sir ELLIOTT LEWIS.—We have put a proposition
before the Federal Government that it should renew a
loan falling due with us within the next twelve months.
If that is not undertaken by the Commonwealth I
trust that we shall be given an early intimation so that
we may have the fullest opportunity available of mak-
ing our own arrangements for the renewal.'- i
The CHAIRMAN. —We have accepted that obliga-
tion. I have already pointed out that anything we
have undertaken we shall carry out, just as we shall do
with the obligations entered into in July last with'all
the States, except New South Wales, to secure money
for them. I am referring now to those commitments
which were made at the Conference in July, 1918.
Mr. LEE.—The matter to which Sir Elliott Lewis
has referred is another item altogether. Have you
accented that ?
> The CHAIRMAN. —Yes; since you made the re-
quest we shall attend to it, just aa we shall attend to
the commitments which we voluntarily entered into at
the Julv Conference. 1
Mr„ THEODORE.—There no actual agreement
resulting from the discussion at that Conference, al-
though there was a ‘definite understanding that cer-
tain amounts were to be raised for the five States. But,
if we go on with that undertaking, how will it affect
those States in relation to any further ‘operations?
Queensland, under the arrangement in question, was
entitled to a sum of £1,350,000 for the coming year.
It was an undertaking entered into during the war;
and, ip all probability, it will continue during 1919.
But how does the situation affect us in regard to fur-
ther restrictions? Does it mean that we must not go
elsewhere for loans during the coming year? That
would be a restriction which was quite unforeseen at
the time when the agreement was entered into.
The CHAIRMAN. —I thought you understood then
that the Commonwealth had accepted that burden for
the five States concerned. ' I think I announced it
plainly, and I communicated the responsibility to the
Federal Cabinet. We fully intend to keep that obliga-
tion, therefore. If, as a result of the war having


practically ended, we found ourselves unable to make
arrangements to enter into another and a larger
arrangement, I should still keep to the obligation
entered into. But it would be only upon one condition,
attachable to the States, and that is that, if we were
unable to arrange terms, say, with Queensland, to bor-
row for that State for the next three years, we
should naturally want to know all about their inde-
pendent actions, so as to avoid, as far as possible, the
evil consequences arising from such competitive opera-
tions. The same would apply to Tasmania, and to the
other States involved.
Mr. GARDINER.—Are we to understand that, be-
cause New South Wales and Victoria will not agree to
your suggestion regarding the control of borrowing
for the next three years, the other States can make no
arrangements in that direction at all?
The CHAIRMAN.—I (lid not say that, and did not
mean it. What I meant was that the fullness of the
scheme would not be felt unless all the States stepped
into line with the Commonwealth. Therefore, any ad-
vantages which I thought might be Obtainable by the
complete elimination of competition, through Australia
as a Commonwealth going into the markets of the
world, would be limited by the magnitude of the efforts
made competitively.
Mr. GARDINER.—There were five of the six States
concerned in the previous arrangement, and now, ap-
parently, there are four of us. If those four States
said, “We are willing, for the next three years, that
the Commonwealth should borrow for us,” would you
feel that that was sufficient for you to go on with the
scheme ?
The CHAIRMAN.—I do not think there will be any
great advantages, such as those that I predicted under
a scheme of there being only one borrower, if there are
to be only four of the States coming in. That is par-
ticularly so, in view of the fact that the chief users of
money would be likely to be,those standing out. But
it is a matter for consideration as to whether it would
be worth while going on between the Commonwealth
and the four States; and I propose to give you the
results of the Commonwealth Government’s considera-
tion of that. This Conference, however, can hardly
discuss it. It seems to me that it will be advantageous
in future for the Commonwealth to consider such a
matter as this individually with the States concerned.
I may say that this is the third Conference at which I
have attended within eight or nine months, and no
decision of any consequence has been arrived at at any
one of them. These Conferences occupy a lot of time,
and they are hardly worth while.
Mr. McPHERSON.—S-The trouble is to know where
the fault lies.
Mr. GARDINER.—You came’ to us with three big
propositions; and I maintain thaT you yourself would
not like to arrive at a final decision upon any one of
them without having very carefully thought the matter
out. -
The CHAIRMAN.—One of those propositions has
been the subject of constant discussion for fifteen
years, at all the Premiers’ Conferences; and, here, they
are called “ fresh ” schemes.
Mr. GARDINER. —At the first Conference at which
we attended, jve fixed the taking over of transferred pro-
perties. The matter was actually and definitely fixed at
that Conference, but it took seven years to come to
finality upon that subject.
Mr. PEAKE.—And there has been no cash yet.
Mj. GARDINER. —The scheme was one which was
suggested by myself. That was, that we should be
given bonds, and for those bonds to be held to go to-
wards the redemption of the first maturing loan. We
said, in effect, that if you could borrow more cheaply
than we could, it would be a good scheme for us to take
those bonds, and for them to be held in trust and used
for the redemption of the first maturing loan. That
was practically the scheme which was accepted then,
and yet it was not until seven years after that we ar-
rived at a decision. As a matter of fact, we have had
none to this day.
The CHAIRMAN.—Do you mean that such a pro-
posal was accepted on behalf of the Commonwealth?
Mr. GARDINER.—Yes, it was, in effect, by Sir
George Turner.
The CHAIRMAN.—There was no commitment of
the Commonwealth to that extent.
Mr. GARDINER.—That is so; but we were all
agreed upon it, and it was our proposition. It was felt
to be a safe one at the time.
The CHAIRMAN. — That is, the States agreed.
Mr. GARDINER.—Sir George Turner certainly
favoured it, although I must admit that Sir John
Forrest did not like it. Sir George Turner considered
that there was every chance of its being carried into
effect.
The CHAIRMAN.—My advice upon that subject
is that the Commonwealth was unpledged. It did not
accept the proposition.
Mr. GARDINER.—'Sir George Turner rather ex-
pressed himself in favour of it, and that was the closest
that we got to anything in connexion with the whole
matter.
The CHAIRMAN.—The terms of the Constitution
place that and all such matters in the hands of the.
Commonwealth authorities.
Mr. GARDINER.—I am aware of the terms of the
Constitution in that regard. The idea was that those
powers should be used as between children of the one
family.
The CHAIRMAN. —The Federal Convention de-
liberately decided that the mode of payments should he
a matter for the Australian Parliament. That is, in
effect, the phraseology of the Australian Constitution.
Mr. GARDINER. —It is pretty hard, if four of the
States come here with a desire to effect economies, and
to work harmoniously together, if matters should break
down because unanimity cannot be arrived at.
The CHAIRMAN. —I have said that I would con-
sider the matter,, and deal with the States individually.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—If South Australia re-
quires to go into the London market, I take it that, we
will approach you, even although we have not come to
an agreement beforehand to do so, and that you will
arrange, if possible, to act for us.
The CHAIRMAN. —Those States that wish the
Commonwealth to borrow for them must look upon it as
a matter for consideration and negotiation between us.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—If we wanted to go on
to the London market, is it the position that we should
approach you for that purpose?
The CHAIRMAN. —It is not a question of indi-
vidual loans, hut of agreement, if the States wish to
enter into such agreement with the Commonwealth.
Mr. THEODORE. —It might be as well if the four
States should make up their minds now to meet you in
separate conference, and endeavour to arrive at an
agreement practically to secure similar terms for those
four States, instead of negotiating with you individu-
ally. We might come to an agreement thus which
would apply to all the four States, and be the more valu-
able by securing that amount of uniformity.
Mr. GARDINER.—That is what I thought. The
Commonwealth might say, “ I do not think we could
raise the amount of money required now. You must
take a less proportion.” If we agree to do so, would the


Commonwealth do as it did over the war loans ? Am I
to understand that that would be the action of the Com-
monwealth authorities?
The CHAIRMAN.—I suggested yesterday that it
was impossible to agree that the six States should ask
the Commonwealth to raise their money for them, and
I added that 1 was prepared to consider with the States
which were willing their circumstances, and to endeavour
to come to an agreement with them individually.
Mr. GARDINER.—I prefer, personally, that some
agreement should be arranged with the four States
jointly as against individual negotiations.
The CHAIRMAN.—If you agree to negotiate as be-
tween the four States, so as to bring about uniform pro-
visions, I shall be prepared to entertain that.
Sir ELLIOTT LEWIS.—I do not know whether we
could gain anything in that way.
Mr. LEE.—The trouble is that the two biggest bor-
rowing States would be" outside the combination.
The CHAIRMAN.—Yes; and would be in the-
nature of competitive factors. The only thing is that
the other States might secure more money by way of
Commonwealth action than would the two outstanding
States in entering the markets individually.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—We have an arrange-
ment to get £350,000. Will that be available?
The CJIAIRMAN.—''The agreement of July last will
be observed by the Commonwealth Government.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—WiII it be available at
any time?
The CHAlßMAN.—Whatever the agreement was it
will be kept.
Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—There is no date fixed
as to when the money will be available.
The CHAIRMAN.—Of course, you cannot be ex-
pected to receive £350,000 at a day’s notice. If you
have commitments maturing I presume you will com-
municate with the Federal Government, so that we may
make the necessary arrangements. You can see the
difficulty plainly. We do not want to go to the London
market, because we do not think it would be fair to take
money that should be available for Great Britain’s
needs out of the Mother Country at the present time,
when at least throe-fourths of the war load is being
borne by her people. Therefore, we shall have to find
the money in Australia.
CO-ORDINATION OF COMMONWEALTH AND STATE
POWERS WITH RESPECT TO QUARANTINABLE
AND OTHER DISEASES.
The CHAIRMAN.—There is one other matter upon
which I would like the opinion of the Conference, and
that is the co-ordination of Commonwealth and State
powers with respect to quarantlnable diseases. I do
not know whether you wish to have the matter men-
tioned now, but I think the Australian people are rather
interested in the subject at the present time. It involves
a proposition made by the Commonwealth Quarantine
authorities to the Commonwealth Government for con-
sideration. I have not yet placed it before the Com-
monwealth Government for finalization, but it involves
the widening of the sphere of activity of the Quaran-
tine authorities in relation to certain diseases.
Mr. McPHERSON.—With regard to the subject
generally, there is an agreement, so far as the
epidemic that is prevalent at the present time is con-
cerned. In the spirit of it, Victoria is quite prepared to
meet the Commonwealth and co-operate in any system
of quarantine.
The CHAIRMAN.—Have you any desire to see the
activities of the Commonwealth Government broadened
in relation to certain important diseases in Australia ?
Mr. THEODORE. —Infectious and quarantlnable
diseases ?
The CHAIRMAN. — They are quarautinable
diseases. In one, I think, your own State is particularly
interested, Mr. Theodore.
Mr. THEODORE.—We are willing to agree to a
scheme to widen Commonwealth powers in order to
make quarantine regulations work more effectively.
The CHAIRMAN.—If members of the Conference
care to hear the views of the Quarantine authorities of
the Commonwealth in relation to their proposal, I shall
be glad to read a memorandum prepared by them;
but I have not yet had time to get it printed, and I am
not pronouncing upon it. Nor am I putting it forward
as the view of the Commonwealth Government. If you
care to hear what it is, I shall be glad to read it, and,
perhaps, there can be agreement as to how far the
powers of the State and Commonwealth may be co-
ordinated.
Mr. McPHERSON.—Might I suggest, Mr. Chair-
man, that your Government consider it, and if they
approve of it, submit it to the States?
The CHAIRMAN. —I do not propose at this
stage to pronounce upon it as part of the Government
policy. I propose to give it to the States for considera-
tion.
Mr. McPHERSON.—But suppose we come to an
agreement upon it? We might find afterwards that
your Cabinet does not agree with it.
The CHAIRMAN. —You will have to take that risk,
of course. .
Mr. McPHERSON.—Then with due deference to
you, Mr. Chairman, I think the Commonwealth Go-
vernment ought to agree upon the scheme before it is
submitted to the States.
The CHAIRMAN. —Very well. If that is the view
of the Conference, I shall not submit the proposal.
Mr. LEE.—But I should like to know, Mr. Chair-
man, exactly what is in your mind. So far as our State
is concerned, we view the subject as a very serious one,
and we are disposed to co-operate in any reasonable
way in order to bring about co-ordination of Common-
wealth and States powers with regard to quarantine. I
was under the impression that you had some scheme to
submit in which the States would be asked to co-operate.
The CHAIRMAN.—Our advice is that the condi-
tion of Australia- during the last two or three years has
been serious from the stand-point of health generally.
Cholera is raging in Eastern Asia, and the return of
our armies, the prospect of immigration, and of business
travel will, unless we exert the greatest prevision, pos-
sibly land on our shores a number of diseases that have
from time to time devastated countries where people
have been herded together in insanitary conditions. The
Commonwealth Government have considered the matter
with the aid of their best advisers, and we are advised
that it will not be possible to do all that may be neces-
sary, under our present quarantine laws, and to deal
also with preventable diseases that are exacting* their
toll weekly and monthly in every State. It is a ques-
tion of public health, associated with quarantine. If
it is the wish of the States, I can give the views of the
Quarantine authorities on the subject.
Mr. THEODORE.—No doubt it will be useful for
the States to have those views, but I see the difficulty
which Mr. McPherson has raised. We may be in a
position to agree to certain general principles, but find
out afterwards that they do not meet with the approval
of the Commonwealth Government.
The CHAIRMAN. —There is not much likelihood of
that, though there is the risk. But the Commonwealth
Government does not want to find itself in the position


it has been placed in so often at previous Conferences,
namely, of having given careful and mature considera-
tion to subjects, only to find its proposals incontinently
rejected by the States.
Air. LEE.—We are somewhat at a disadvantage in
handling subjects at a Conference like this. You, Mr.
Chairman, on behalf of your Government, submit ques-
tions for consideration involving the position in the
States, and we are expected to give a reply practically
around the Conference table. • it seems to me it would
be better if, when matters had been submitted to
the Premiers and Ministers of the States, they were
given an opportunity to meet together to see whether
they could accept the Commonwealth proposals. Pos-
sibly by that means there could be acceptance or,
perhaps, modification of the schemes. It is likely that
we might then reach definite conclusions. lam afraid
that very often we do not reach finality because we are
expected to come to a decision at the Conference table.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is probably true, but re-
member please, that with regard to one matter sub-
mitted to this Conference, you had an opportunity of
conferring amongst yourselves, and there was still a
rejection of the proposal, without any alternative pro-
position.
Mr. LEE.—That, I think, was because of the limited
opportunity given, and the fact that all the Ministers
were not present.
The*CHAIRMAN. —That was not my fault. You
asked if you might consult together, and I raised no
objection.
THE WAR.
COMMONWEALTH INDEMNITY.
Mr. PEAKE.—I mentioned yesterday, in the course
of a speech on another subject, that 1 thought this
would be a favorable opportunity, and this Conference
a competent body, to express an opinion as to the claim
which the. Commonwealth of Australia should make for
indemnification in regard to tbe .expenses of the war.
I think, there can be no objection to this course, and I
now move— '
That, in the opinion of the Premiers and Minis-
ters now sitting in Conference, the Commonwealth
is justly entitled to be indemnified by the enemy
countries the monetary costs the people of Aus-
tralia have to bear by reason of the war.
I was very glad to read, a few days ago, that the Prime
Minister (Mr. Hughes) was putting this view before the
Imperial authorities, and I think, if we can strengthen
his hands in any way, it is our duty to do so. I can-
not conceive for a moment that any one sitting at this
Conference should hold the opinion that we, in Aus-
tralia, should bear the cost which the war has entailed,
and that we should not put in our claim to be re-
imbursed, in the same manner as other parts of the
world are putting forward their claims at the present
moment. Ido not suppose that Germany, Austria, and
other gnemy countries will be able to meet in hard cash
the demands made upon them at the present time, but
I do think we may look forward to the time when Ger-
many will regain a good deal of her trading power, and
be able, out of her resources, to meet claims, or
some parts of them, for the re-imbursbment of
the expenditure which the war has imposed upon
us. We know that France recovered herself in
a wonderful manner after the war of 1870, and
we may expect Germany to display a like recupera-
tive power. Australia should not be expected to
carry this load without some relief from the enemy
countries. I think we should send our claim to Great
Britain, and ask her to act as our broker, to arrange
for the best terms'obtainable. If there be no prospect
of our claims to indemnity being substantially met in
the immediate future, an arrangement should be made
under which our interest burden may be met. That
would give some relief. Wo cannot be expected to
stagger under our load of debt without advancing a
claim for indemnity which we regard as just. I cannot
conceive of any body more competent than this Con-
ference, consisting as it does of Commonwealth and
State Ministers, to assert the claim of Australia to in-
demnity. We should seize this opportunity to make our
claim, and thus aid the Prime Minister in what he is
doing. A resolution by the Conference in the terms
proposed should materially assist him.
Mr. LEE.—I second the motion, with which I am
personally very- much in sympathy. The least we can
expect in the settlement of peace terms is that our claim
to indemnity shall be taken into consideration. Aus-
tralia freely and willingly did her part in the war, not
for any gain that she expected, ,; but in the interests of
civilization, and for the maintenance of that freedom
which her people have so long been permitted to enjoy.
Mr. PEAKE.—There was no expectation of getting
anything. The war on our part was. purely defensive.
Mr. LEE. —Yes. Our interests were at stake, and
had we not risen to the occasion, the result might have
been very serious. Our men have proved themselves to
be among the best fighters in the world, and, according
to those able to judge, have played no small part in
bringing about the victory. But the conduct of the
war has involved us ip very serious responsibilities,
and now that we have won, it is too much to expect us
to bear the whole financial burden of it. Germany, so
far as she is able to do so after meeting the demands
of those countries that she has ravaged and devastated,
should be required to pay us compensation for our
losses. I am very pleased that the Prime Minister has
put up a fight on this matter. There are many subjects
on which I do not agree with him. At certain stages he
may have gone a little too far, but I think Australia
owes him a debt of gratitude for the dominant note of
Imperialism he has struck, and for his advocacy of
payment by Germany of indemnity for the damage that
she has done, and of her punishment for her crimes.
I am hopeful, though in your communication to me,
you, Mr. Chairman, have not given me much cause, that
should Australia obtain indemnity from Germany, the
States may receive consideration from the Common-
wealth in regard to the expenditure which they have
had to incur by reason of the war.
Mr. McPHERSON. —It will not be safe to shape the
State finances on that.
Mr. LEE.—I am not doing so, particularly after the
communication that I have received from the Acting
Prime Minister; but if Australia were indemnified, the
Commonwealth might fairly take into consideration the
special burdens which the war has placed upon the
State Governments.
The CHAIRMAN.—I thoroughly approve of the
motion that has been moved by Mr. Peake, and seconded
by Mr. Lee. The Prime Minister, with the full'con-
currence of the Commonwealth Government, has, in
the British War Cabinet and with the Allied statesmen
with whom he has been privileged to meet, pronounced
upon this matter in perfectly definite terms, so that
Australia’s claim may be put in the proper place.
What is the proper place none of us at this table can
determine. The mere restoration of damaged provinces,
and the repairing of war damages, will not, it seems to
me, exhaust the capacity of the German people, who
should take some part of the load which they have
placed on such civilized countries as Australia, which,
fortunately, have been beyond the zone of fire. It is a


perfectly sound thing to make this claim, because we
entered the war without hope of gaining territory,
or getting any other advantage, and merely for the
protection of the privileges of self-government that
we have enjoyed. If our war burden is not taken off
our shoulders in some such way as is proposed, we
shall have to pass it on to future generations. That
Germany should indemnify us is a fair claim, and the
unanimous adoption of the motion will fortify the
Prime Minister in his advocacy of it.
Motion agreed to.
CO-ORDINATION OF COMMONWEALTH AND STATE
POWERS WITH RESPECT TO dUARANTINABLE
AND OTHER DISEASES.
The CHAIRMAN.—The Director of Quarantine has
addressed to the Commonwealth Government, through
the ordinary official channels, the following report:
The question of public health is at the present
time of the greatest importance. Not only is
there the quite real danger of importation of
disease consequent upon the resumption of inter-
national trade, hut there is also the supreme neces-
sity for raising the standard of health throughout
the community to the highest practicable level and
maintaining it at that level.
2. At present, the health of the public is not
the subject of exact study by governments, but, if
it were considered from the stand-point of national
economy by governments, it could easily be shown
that merely on a financial basis the expenditure of
money along intelligently-directed lines would be
a profitable investment. It would be possible to
make an annual report showing the loss and profit
to the Commonwealth each year by death and dis-
ease, and* by their prevention.
3. It is merely a truism to say that the increase
in human capital and human efficiency is of
supreme importance to the Commonwealth at the
present time.
4. The reports of the Committee appointed by
the Commonwealth Government reveal possibilities
in these directions in respect of several diseases,
and they also reveal in a very striking manner the
necessity for systematic investigation into the im-
mediate and remote causes of disease and death
in Australia.
Examples may be cited as follow:
In the Army there has been an appreciable
number of eases of typhoid fever, diphtheria,
or similar preventable diseases. The methods
of control in the Army are, with modifica-
tions, applicable to civil conditions, and a
concerted attempt can be mad© towards the
eradication of such diseases in the Common-
wealth with the prospect of very profitable
results in preventing death and improving
efficiency. In Victoria alone, during the
first nine months of 1918, 6,500 cases of
diptheria were reported, some of which will
almost certainly become a charge on the In-
valid Pension Vote.
There is every reason why a serious attempt
should be made to discover by field and
laboratory investigation why this disease
persists, and this could be followed by a
concerted attempt towards its.reduction.
There are indications that tuberculosis in Aus-
tralia follows definite lines which differ
somewhat both in age and distribution, and
in tibe character of the bacillus from tuber-
culosis as seen in other countries. Investiga-
tion of this disease, is required, and a defi-
nite attempt to reduce its prevalence by the
application of measures proven successful
in other countries ought to be made.
A very large number of deaths occur every
year from diseases due to high blood pres-
sure. Many of these can be prevented, but
it is first necessary to ascertain by con-
certed investigation what are the local Aus-
tralian causes of these diseases, and what
are the means necessary to prevent them.
The campaign against venereal disease has
been launched in Australia by five of the
States, with the guarantee of financial sub-
sidy from the Commonwealth. This venereal
legislation "is a social experiment, in which
all the world has shown marked interest, and
it should be vigorously and energetically
pushed. Hitherto it has been rather halt-
ingly conducted, whereas it should be ready
to deal not only with local cases, but also
the 55,000 men enlisted in the Austra-
lian Imperial - Force who have had venereal
disease, and who will presently be dis-
charged.
With these diseases, especially with regard to
the investigation and attempts at their
control, State boundaries cannot be con-
sidered. For example, the investigation of
tuberculosis amongst miners should include
a comparison between the conditions at Kal-
goorlie, Broken Hill, Bendigo, Mount Lyell,
and Newcastle.
Typhoid fever cannot be adequately studied
unless the conditions in several States at the
same time be compared.
Hook worm is known to be prevalent in
Queensland; but, though it is suspected at
Newcastle, Bendigo, and other places, no
investigation at these places has yet been
made. This is a disease which, if not eradi-
cated, will effectively prevent the successful
development of tropical coastal Australia by
Europeans? It is already sufficiently preva-
lent to justify this statement.
Much more might be said, but already sufficient
indication has been given of the necessity
for organized research and effort of a
national kind towards the investigation and
attempted control of disease in Australia.
5. Disease knows no State boundaries, and the
efforts of one State may be nullified by the neglect
of another. Human health controls the defence
capabilities of the Commonwealth, it determines
the working efficiency, and, therefore, the national
wealth of the Commonwealth, and as, in the final
test, all national emergencies are matters for the
Commonwealth as a whole, the human population,
which determines the capability of the Common-
wealth to meet these emergencies, should surely be
a matter for the earnest attention of the Common-
wealth Government.
6. Already the Commonwealth Government has
become committed to certain matters of public
health within the Commonwealth. Its principal
constitutional function in preventive medicine is
maritime quarantine. The application of quaran-
tine has, however, by the expressed desire of the
State Governments, become extended, so that the
Commonwealth has become responsible for the con-
trol of certain diseases which threaten to spread
from State to State.


7. Under the Invalid Pensions Act, payments
are made to persons suffering from disabling condi-
tions. The system is unbusinesslike in that pay-
ments are made for many conditions due to pre-
ventable diseases, and actually to many persons
suffering from transmissible disease m an in-
fectious form, without any attempt to prevent new
cases arising, or to control the spread of infection
hy the infectious pensioners. Some State Govern-
ments have already made representations on this
aspect.
8. The maternity bonus system is, moreover, an
uneconomical attempt at a measure of public
health. The amount of money expended is suffi-
cient to provide a system of national care for
women before, during, and after confinement, which
would very greatly improve the health of the child-
bearing women of the community, would prevent
many deaths, would insure healthier children, would
prevent many women from suffering for years from
chronic ill-health. This would be done by estab-
lishing and maintaining a system of ante-natal
clinics and lying-in wards throughout the settled
portions of Australia, and competent visiting nurses
in the country districts.
9. The Commonwealth Government, impelled by
the revelations of venereal disease during the war,
actively interested itself in the campaign against
these diseases, and is now definitely committed to
the policy of assisting State efforts in these
directions.
10. Similarly, the ravages of hook-worm have
been shown to be of so great a national importance
that the Commonwealth, recognising it cannot per-
mit the present conditions to continue, has offered
to become an active participant in the campaign
against this disease.
11. The Commonwealth Government has also
offered to the State of Victoria to undertake a joint
campaign of investigation and control into tuber-
culosis at Bendigo, with the expressed intention of
providing for all Australia accurate information
concerning this disease, andffits methods of spread
and control.
12. The return of troops from abroad, and their
repatriation, will open up a large number of ques-
tions of public health, in respect of which the re-
sponsibility of the Commonwealth cannot he
ignored.
There are a large number of cases of tuberculosis,
a very large number of cases of venereal disease,
many carriers of dysentery and typhoid, cases of
bilharziosis, and other parasitic diseases.
Already representations are being made by State
officials and Ministers that the responsibility for
the proper care of these cases rests with the Com-
monwealth.
13. Many problems of a public health kind are
bound to arise in the future in connexion with the
settlement and occupation of returned soldiers. An
illustration is afforded by the danger of settling
soldiers who have had malaria in some of the irri-
gation districts, where the proper species of mos-
quito abound.
14. There appears to be some possibility that
the territorial responsibilities of the Commonwealth
will be increased in the near future. If this occurs,
many new dangers and problems in preventive
medicine will be presented.
15. All of the above points strongly to the neces-
sity for a cohesive policy, under the direction of a
Minister, to prepare for the difficulties before they
arise, and it is submitted that the present is now an
opportune time for consideration of the manifest
responsibility of the Commonwealth in respect of
public health.
16. Two' alternative policies have been sug-
gested :
(a) That the Commonwealth should assume
control of the Public Health functions
throughout Australia. This would in-
volve the transfer of the necessary
powers by the States to the Common-
wealth.
This would not involve extensive or
radical changes. It might he dealt
with either hy a dual system of general
control hy the Commonwealth, and
powers of local administration by the
State Governments. This system is
very liable to prove unworkable.
On the other hand, a completely unified
system would he possible, and could be
worked on the same administrative sys-
tem as the Defence Department, with
a' deputy administering each State, and
each State subdivided into administra-
tive districts, placing upon every regis-
tered medical practitioner definite
duties and responsibilities in connexion
with the prevention of disease, and on
each local governing body responsibili-
ties for municipal sanitation.
(h) The other system —which is the
American system —would be one in
which the Commonwealth Department
of Public Health would, in addition to
its quarantine functions, concern it-
self with the investigation of causes of,
disease and death, methods of preven-
tion of disease, collection of sanitary
data, education of the public in matters
of public health.
In addition to this, the Commonwealth Govern-
ment could subsidize any well directed effort made
by any State towards the eradication or control of
any disease, could conduct campaigns of preven-
tion in which more than one State was interested,
and could generally, as is done in the United
States, inspire and co-ordinate Public Health
measures generally without infringement or trans-
fer of the sovereign powers of States.
The failure of 'preventive medicine under the
present system in Australia to achieve results
which are easily possible, and, in particular, dis-
couraging slowness in instituting effective venereal
disease measures, indicates strongly the need for
more earnest attention being given to preventive
medicine in Australia.
Dr. Cumpston then goes on to point out that the two
Commonwealth Laboratories —the Serum Institute at
Melbourne and the Institute of Tropical Diseases at
Townsville —constitute twn great and efficient centres
at which research work can be effectively carried out —
work that will be inevitable and vitally necessary in the
event of any epidemic occurring in the Commonwealth.
He alludes in other memoranda to the fact that ever
since the termination of hostilities he has been making
preparations against the introduction of some of the
■diseases that are prevalent in Europe and Asia. He
predicted an outbreak of cholera, which has since
occurred in Eastern Asia and has ravaged Bombay. He
warns and urges the Commonwealth authorities—to


whom he owes primary, if not sole, responsibility—of
the necessity of getting ready, first of all, from the
purely quarantine point ot view, and, secondly, from
the point of view of the co-operation of the States, to
pi event the spread of any of these diseases that may
enter our gates. He warns us to get ready to prevent
the devastation which such epidemics have caused in
other countries. Without any definite proposition from
3011, gentlemen, at this stage, I think it advisable that
you should consider with the Commonwealth the very
important matters which have been brought before us
by our Chief Medical Adviser.
Mr. LEE.—We must all agree that the paper pre-
pared by Dr. Cumpston, and just read to the Confer-
ence by you, Mr. Chairman, is a very interesting one,
dealing with very vital questions. It emphasizes the
point that 1 raised earlier to-day as to the impossibility
of dealing offhand, in a Conference of this kind, with
a lar-reaching proposal. The report will, of course, he
printed, and the respective State Governments will have
it before them for consideration. Later on it may be
necessary for the States to jointly consider whether
they can evolve some scheme mutually acceptable to the
Commonwealth and the States, either for a transfer
of power to the Commonwealth or to provide for the
co-ordinated system to which reference has been made.
It seems to me that some action along these lines will
be imperative in the near future. I shall be very
pleased, on behalf of my Government, to give careful
consideration to the questions covered by the paper. I
hope that, within the near future, we shall be able to
come to some understanding with your Government, in
regard either to the surrender of certain powers or
some joint arrangement by which the respective powers
of the Commonwealth and the States in dealing with
these matters may be guaranteed. I agree that it will
bo absolutely necessary, in the very near- future, to do
something on a fairly large scale to cope with the big
questions covered by Dr. Cumpston’s report. Ido not
know that we can do anything further to-day, but the
subject is one to which each State Government will have
to give serious consideration, after which we shall pro-
bably be able, later on, to come to some understanding.
Mr. PEAKE.—I agree with Mr. Lee that Dr.
Cumpston’s paper is a very valuable one, but we can-
not advance very far with its consideration to-day,
since we know that the report of the sub-Conference on
repatriation is awaiting our attention. Speaking as
Chief Secretary and Minister for Public Health in
South Australia, I can say that we realize that as a
result of the war we are confronted with a greatly-
increased risk of big invasions of disease. lam pre-
pared, on behalf of my Government, to give Dr.
Cumpston’s paper very earnest consideration as soon
as we receive a copy of it. I realize that the functions
of the Commonwealth Government with regard to the
prevention of diseases have become very much wider
than they were, and that we shall have to shape our
course accordingly.
The CHAIRMAN.—As we are anxious to facilitate
the consideration of the recommendations of the sub-
Conference on repatriation, I shall, if you, gentlemen,
approve, adopt this procedure: Encouraged by your
recognition of the seriousness of this matter, I shall ask
the Commonwealth Government to deliberate on this
matter, and, if agreeable to the substance of Dr. Cump-
ston’s memorandum, to forward to the State Govern-
ments a definite proposition for their consideration.
Thus, when you return to your States, you will be
able to confer with your health experts, and possibly,
at the invitation of the Commonwealth, or by arrange-
ment amongst yourselves, unite later on at a special
Health Conference. When our . men commence to re-
turn in large numbers, it may then be too late to do
many of the things which Dr. Cumpston now warns us
very prudently it is advisable to deal with at once. If
this suggestion meets with your concurrence, I shall
give effect to it.
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—I quite agree with you,
sir, as to the importance of the questions raised in Dr.
Cumpston’s memorandum. My Government will be
very pleased to consider it, with the object of determin-
ing upon a course of action that may be of advantage
to my own State, and the Commonwealth generally.
The question is of great importance to Western Aus-
tralia, since Fremantle is the first port of call for so
iinany of these vessels, and you may be sure that it will
receive careful consideration at the hands of the
Colonial Secretary, and the health authorities of
Western Australia.
Mr. THEODORE. —As a matter of fact, we have
already agreed upon a course of action in reference to
hookworm. We have authorized thd expenditure of
£36,000 over a certain period; and I understand that
the consequent arrangements for dealing with the evil
will shortly be in actual operation.
The CHAIRMAN'.—As an old Victorian Minister, I
can speak in regard to the campaign against tuberculosis
in this State. Up to the time of which I speak, there
was no disease with which we were acquainted that,
as shown by the statistics, so rapidly responded to treat-
ment. We felt, as a small State—and doubtless the
authorities of this State to-day still feel —some diffi-
culty in the matter, since there was no co-operation on
the part of neighbouring States on similar lines of
policy. It is useless to sweep your own doorstep if
your neighbour allows his doorstep to remain dirty.
I think I am justified in saying, after consultation with
our authorities, that this is one case in which co-opera-
tion is eminently desirable, and can be easily arranged.
REPATRIATION.—(a) WORKS PROGRAMMES OF
COMMONWEALTH AND STATE GOVERNMENTS;
(b) SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
Senator MILLEN.—I am authorized by the sub-
committee to present the following report: —
In accordance with the terms of the motion
passed at the Conference, the Sub-Conference of
Commonwealth Repatriation and Works and
Railways Ministers and State Lands and Works
Ministers met at 10 a.m. on Friday, 24th January,
1919, and the next day,, and the following are the
resolutions passed during its sittings:—
1. “ That upon all moneys advanced by the
Commonwealth to the States for the
purpose of land settlement and the con-
struction of works specially to aid in
repatriation, the Commonwealth should
charge the States on the moneys ad-
vanced a rate of interest 1 per cent,
less than that paid by the Common-
wealth in raising the moneys.”
2. “ That the total amount to be advanced by
the Commonwealth to the States to be
provided as advances to soldier settlers
shall not exceed an average of £625 per
settler.”
3. “ That preference to returned soldiers suit-
able for the work be granted upon all
undertakings to be constructed in aid
of repatriation.”
4. “ That ' the Commonwealth be asked to
make available for each State the
amount of money necessary for ad-
vances for soldiers’ settlements, and
the necessary public works in aid of


SoHKDtji,* I. REQUIREMENTS
OF STATES
FOE LAND SETTLEMENT AND WORKS INCIDENTAL THERETO.
—
New South
Wales.
■Victoria.
Queensland.
South
Australia.
Western
Australia
Tasmania
Total.
Total holdings of all kinds ...
7,500
6,000
18,101
1,400
2,000
500
35,501
.Cost of resumption
£881,000
£6,750,000
£270,316
£625,000
£250,000
£360,000
£9,139,316
dumber of holdings to be made avail-
2,550
4,500'
434
300
300
300
8,384
able as a result of that expenditure
Amount required for works incidental
to opening up fresh holdings
£1,800,000
Nil
£1,501,000
£1,190,000
450,000
Ail
£5,031,000
Kumber of holdings which will result
3,000
17,667
1,000
2,000
Nil
23,667
in consequence of that expenditure
Number of holdings which can be
made available from Crown lands
1,950
1,500
100
1,700
200
5,450
Amount required for advances to
£5,280,000
£3,000,000
£9,050,500
£100,000
£1,000,000
£250,000
£19,280,500
settlers
Plus extra amount required to increase advance to £625 ...
£4,820,125
Average cost per settler
£1,263
£1,625
£600
£1,795
£850
...
Advances for men already settled ...
£550,000
£330,000
•
. ...
£164,600
£100,500
128,000
£1,293,000
1. Amount required by States for all purposes
£14,170,316
1,893,000
2. Advances for men already settled
3. Advances (£625) for future settlement
24,100,625
Grsnd Total for all States ...
£39,563,941
land repatriation, on the basis of the
quota of men enlisted from each State,
leaving for further consideration the
question of the Commonwealth ad-
vancing further assistance should it
become apparent that the quota in any
State will be exceeded.”
5. “ That this Sub-Conference recommends
the acceptance of the offer contained in
the letter of 2nd December, 1918, by
the Acting Plrime Minister to the
State Premiers regarding advances to
local authorities, subject to satisfactory
terms being arranged, and that the
State Governments be requested to un-
dertake to facilitate any necessary
action in this, direction.”
6. “ That the following two schedules of re-
quirements be attached to the report to
he submitted to the Conference.”
Schedule 2.
Requirements of States for Public Works outside of
Land Settlement for next Three Years.
Tasmania.—Nothing, if land request granted/'
Western Australia. —Two and a half millions
will provide employment for three years for
3,500. ,
Queensland.—Fourteen million four hundred
and fifty thousand pounds—three years.
South Australia.—Two millions per year.
Victoria and New South Wales. —Will provide
themselves.
Summary:
£
2,500,000
14,450,000
6,000,000
Total 22,950,000
Average per year —■ £7,650,000.
• Under a Schedule subsequently presented by the Premier of Tasmania,
the requirements of that State for’Publlc Works outside of Land Settlement
for the next three years are £2,310,000.
The first schedule discloses that the total amount re-
quired by the States for all purposes as distinct from
the advances to settlers, is £14,170,316; the advances
for men already settled, in respect of which the Com-
monwealth is already committed, £1,293,000; and the
advances for future settlement, on the basis of the
£6?5 per head now recommended, £24,100,625 —a total
of £39,563,941.
Mr. CLARKE. —That is not on the full complement.
Senator MILLED.—That is on the total number of
35,501 holdings, for which these proposals make pro-
vision. Those were the requests submitted by the
States. Speaking generally, the States have made pro-
vision for their estimated quota, with the exception of
Queensland, which-has put in a scheme estimated to
provide 18,101 holdings. The schedule of works outside
of land settlement cannot be stated in simple totals.
New South Wales and Victoria intimate that they are
not looking for Commonwealth assistance in regard to
such work. Tasmania intimates that if the amount re-
quisitioned in connexion with land settlement is made
available, it also will be able to attend to its own public
works. Western Australia requires £2,500,000 in three
years, and anticipates that that will provide for 3,500
men. Queensland asks for £14,450,000 in three years;
and South Australia for £2,000,000 per year. t The
total, leaving the two larger States out, is £22,950,000
for three years, or an average of £7,650,000 per year.
Although that is the average, the requirements of the
first year will he less, and th'o later ones correspond-
ingly higher.
. Sir RICHARD BUTLER.—That is outside re-
patriation ?
Senator MILLEN. —Yes; that is for works which
the States can carry out if money is available, but
which have no direct bearing on the question of land
settlement for soldiers.
The CHAIRMAN.—They may provide employment ?
Senator MILLEN.—Yes.
The CHAIRMAN.—And are capable , of being
started .early? \
Senator MILLEN.—I am not in a position to speak
definitely on that point, hut I am under the impression
that in regard to these works, spread over three years,


it was in the minds of those who submitted these re-
quests that they could at any rate make a beginning
this year.
The CHAIRMAN.—I presume, gentlemen, that you
listened very carefully to what Senator Millen has re-
ported. Xdo not suppose you are any more in a
position at this stage to make up your minds whether
this is a feasible and fair scheme than I am myself.
But as the largest responsibility of finding the money
for these projects in whole or in part would necessarily
rest upon my colleagues or myself, I should, of course,
require time to investigate them. It seems to me, with-
out any desire to reflect upon what Senator Millen
and his colleagues have so laboriously done, that I might
want much more detail than is supplied here. Whether
such detail is in Senator Milieu’s possession or in that
of the sub-Committee or not, I do not know.
The sum of £39,563,941 under the first schedule,
“ Requirements of States for land settlement and works
incidental thereto,” I presume for three years, is a very
big one, but I have been expecting, in connexion with
this important phase of settlement and employment,
that very large requests would be made by the Repatria-
tion Department.
Mr. PEAKE.—I think, in Senator Milieu’s first
great speech on his Bill, he indicated something like
£80,000,000.
Senator MILLEN.—I never gave any estimate. The
.£80,000,000 was based on the assumption that certain
things, including land settlement, were carried out on
present lines.
Mr. PEAKE.—In any case the cost would be much
more than indicated in that schedule.
The CHAIRMAN.—When making the finance state-
ment a few days ago I indicated the utter inability of
the Commonwealth Government to estimate at this
stage the eventual cost of repatriation, and I used the
word “ cost ” to include the provision of money which,
unlike some devoted to other forms of expenditure,
would eventually bo returned according to the success
attending the settlement or work. At any rate, regard-
ing the amount of money Australia might be expected
to find, what I have kept at the back of my head,
with the conjectural data we have, is something
between £80,000,000 and £100,000,000, if the scheme
gets full fruit, with the wise and generous co-
operation of the States. That is not an estimate,
but some sort of prevision of what we may have to
face. Broadly, if the Minister for Repatriation, on
more careful examination, and after supplying the Go-
vernment with details, is prepared to back this requisi-
tion for £39,563,941 for three years for that particular
phase of repatriation, I shall be prepared to finance it,
if it is within our power. That refers only to the land
settlement schedule. Among the details which I should
like, for very obvious reasons, are the character of all
the works. I do not mean microscopic detail, but
generally, where the men are to be settled, and a few
facts of that kind, just to see whether the States
themselves are finding employment and settlement for
their own men, or whether there is the problem of a
spill-over from the already thickly-populated States to
those more sparsely populated. It is obvious that
Queensland and Western Australia, with vast un-
alienated territories, are likely to be able to provide
with greater ease, and possibly greater success, for their
men and for others than States like Tasmania and
Victoria, that have almost entirely to resume land.
That is a phase of the problem which I should, of
course, want to discuss with Senator Millen.
C. 1144.—6
The second schedule gives the requirements df thh
States for public works, outside of land settlement, foy
the next three years. These have been prepared ill
programme form by the States at the invitation of the
Commonwealth Government, in case they should be
‘needed to provide employment for our returning met!,'
or for labour dislocated by their replacement. As I
anticipated, Queensland asks for the lion’s share —•
£14,450,000.
Mr. THEODORE.—If it cannot be agreed to under
this scheme, it must be provided for in some other
way.
The CHAIRMAN.—I quite understand that it is
part of your governmental policy.
Mr. LEE.—Is Queensland still set down for
£26,000,000 out of the £39,563,941 in the. first
schedule ?
The CHAIRMAN.—No. In the first schedule
Queensland asks for £10,911,816 out of the £39,563,941,
but it asks for £14,450,000 out of a total of £22,950,000
in the second schedule. Victoria and New South
Wales propose to do their own work under schedule 2,
independently. This schedule is necessarily involved
in the question of borrowing, and of how far the Com-
monwealth is to act for the States in that matter. It
may be necessary for the four States to signify their
willingness to reconsider the matter.
Now, speaking upon resolution No. 1, the Common-
wealth realizes, of course, that we cannot undertake land
settlement as well as the States can, if they make up
their minds to it. Therefore, in that regard, we do
not want to meddle with them. But our responsibility
with you in control must be suitably arranged finan-
cially. My idea was that we would be asked to bear
a greater load for the next two or three years in con-
nexion with your repatriation works and schemes of
land settlement. That would cover the time when the
States would be losing most money. Instead of that,
however, you have, apparently, preferred to have it
spread over the whole course of the loans. I want to
see whether the remission for a year or two of the total
interest may be greater or less than the proposition to
advance you the money at a rate of interest' 1 per
cent, less than that paid by us for it. I cannot
commit the Federal Treasury at this stage, but I
shall try to arrange, either on the terms of your re-
commendation, or of something equivalent to it. This
looks to me to be a capitalization proposition, and may
be in the region of £7,800,000.
I accept the principle of resolution No. 1, on behalf
of the Federal Government.
Mr. CLARKE.—It is understood, of course, that
Victoria and New South Wales are dissenting parties
to that.
\
The CHAIRMAN.—We accept the principle of a
share in the risk; and the representatives of the States
in agreement with the resolution will give the Federal
authorities an opportunity of showing how that is likely
to work out.
With regard to resolution No. 2, wherein the Com-
monwealth is asked, to make available for each State
the amount of money necessary for advances for soldier
settlers, and for public works in aid of land repatria-
tion, I had expected that a reasonable demand on the
part of, the States would culminate in something of
this nature, that is, that we would be asked to furnish
a higher sum than £SOO. The larger schemes of settle-
ment which were certain to emanate from several of


the States seemed to make it inevitable that such a re-
quest would be forthcoming. I hope, however, that
the State Governments will keep very vividly in front
of them the idea which Senator Millen presented, in
conducting bis original exposition before you, namely,
the encouragement of newer and smaller industries
by the States—a course which will, of itself, neces-
sarily reduce the amount required in bulk for land
settlement.
Resolution No. 3 expresses the views of all the Go-
vernments on the subject of preference to soldiers in
all these works.
With regard to resolution No. 4; It refers to ad-
vances being furnished pii the basis of the quota of
men enlisted from each State. 1 suppose that is the
only basis which could be taken.
Mr. THEODORE.—That should be a good basis
so far as the minimum amount to be furnished is con-
cerned; but it should not prevent a State which is
affording special facilities from securing a larger and
fully adequate sum.
The CHAIRMAN.—With regard to the resolution
referring to advances to local authorities, I do
not know what the Conference as a whole may
feel upon it; but—as it indicates—an offer was
made to the State Premiers after the armistice had
been declared concerning advances to local authorities
subject to satisfactory terms being arranged. And the
State Governments were requested to undertake to
facilitate action in this direction. I do not recall just
now the nature of the answers. But, if the require-
ments of those bodies are going to run into many mil-
lions of pounds, we should necessarily require to be
furnished with the information.
Mr. THEODORE.—Those requirements are in-
cluded in our works programme. All these matters are
lumped in our schedule.
The CHAIRMAN.—Senator Millen reminds me of
one vital feature of that proposition. It is that, not
merely should a request come from the State Govern-
ments concerned for money to be supplied for the needs
of local governing bodies, but that the repatriation
authorities would require to be satisfied by the States
that the local governing authority was in a position to
properly and fully employ the’ advance made to it in
dealing with the requirements of returned soldiers. All
such advances would have to obtain the acquiescence
of the Repatriation Department, and it would have
to be fully shown that all such advances were to
meet the need of employing men in the localities con-
cerned. I think the thanks of the Conference ought to
be expressed to those members of it who have collabor-
ated in the preparation of this report, and, on behalf of
the Conference, I thank Senator Millen and State Min-
isters who have compiled the series of recommenda-
tions. There is one other matter. The housing of
soldiers was discussed in the sub-Conference, and I think
this is an appropriate place to register our views upon
the subject. The Housing Bill which we passed provides
for returning soldiers. Under that measure the Common-
wealth Government may make arrangements with the
administration of the State Savings Banks to do cer-
tain work. Senator Millen informs me that in some
of the States amendments of the State Acts will be
necessary to enable them to co-operate in this way,
which is a purely business undertaking with the Com-
monwealth Repatriation Department. The Common-
wealth Government will not force any State Savings
Bank to do this work, but .where the bank autho-
rities are agreeable, and the Commonwealth Govern-
ment desires them to undertake the work, they should
have the enabling power to enter into a mutually satis-
factory arrangement.
Mr. ROBINSON. —Victoria has made the necessary
amendments to the Victorian Soldiers Act.
Sir ELLIOTT LEWIS.—We have no State Savings
Bank in Tasmania. Shall we be debarred?
The CHAIRMAN. —No; the work will be carried
out. Under the Act the Minister is empowered to enter
into arrangements with Savings Bank institutions to
undertake the whole of the work in a State. There is
to be provision for land, erection of houses, and all that
sort of thing.
Mr. PEAKE,—Do you mean to take the administra-
tion out of the hands of the State authorities?
The CHAIRMAN. —No, but we accept it as our
responsibility, and we want to see how best we can dis-
charge it. In many of the States there are competent
organizations that have been doing home-building, and
the Minister for Repatriation ought to have power to
make satisfactory arrangements with those institutions.
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—I have asked Senator
Millen to place the proposition before me, and I shall
give an undertaking to facilitate the arrangement in
every way.
Mr. PEAKE. —In South Australia we are doing this
work through the State Bank, and we have already
dealt with over 1,000 cases for the Commonwealth Go-
vernment. The arrangement has proved very satisfac-
tory to the State, and we are quite prepared to go on
with it.
The CHAIRMAN. —These undertakings bring all
the States into line, and are exceedingly satisfactory.
Senator MILLEN. —Except that I have been in-
formed that the Queensland Act does nOt require amend-
ment. While I am not a lawyer, I would like Mr.
Theodore to look into the position to see if the Act
gives the Government authority to enter into such an
arrangement.
Mr. THEODORE. —The Act might not, hut the
schedule gives authority for Orders.in Council. These
are sufficient.
The CHAIRMAN. —You are agreeable to do it?
Mr. THEODORE.—Yes.
RETURNED SOLDIERS: PREFERENCE IN
EMPLOYMENT.
The CHAIRMAN. —I am reminded that at a gather-
ing like this the Secretary or President receives a great
deal of correspondence from a number of people who
think that the Conference is interested in their parti-
cular projects. It has always been my experience that
the presiding genius exercises his discretion as to whe-
ther he brings these before the Conference or not. I
have received, from a respected New South Wales mem-
ber of the House of Representatives, a proposal from
the secretary of the Temora branch of the Returned
Soldiers’ Preference Association. The letter emphasizes
the desirability of bringing before the Conference the
question of having preference to returned' soldiers
placed on the statute-books of Federal and all
State Parliaments. It states that statutory pro-
vision, giving preference in employment, would
overcome the difficulty of placing the large num-
ber of sound men shortly returning, in civil em-
ployment, and that as the heads of many Govern-
ment departments have been instructed, wherever prac-
ticable, to give preference to returned men, it is good
policy to instruct, by statutory enactment, private em-
ployers to do likewise. That is the substance of the
letter, of which I shall have copies sent to the heads of
the delegation, so that they may consider the matter.
The Conference, at 12. p.m., adjourned until 10
a.m. on Monday.


FIFTH DAY—MONDAY, 27th JANUARY, 1919.
REPATRIATION.—(a) WORKS PROGRAMMES OF
COMMONWEALTH AND STATE GOVERNMENTS;
(b) SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
The CHAIRMAN.—I suggest that we should deal
now with the recommendations of the sub-Conference
on repatriation. I do not know what considerations
operated with the members. of the sub-Conference to
cause them to recommend the form of concession em-
bodied in clause 1. I do not hesitate to eay that the
Commonwealth Government thinks that it should share
more largely than was originally contemplated any
losses in the settlement of Crown lands, resumptions, or
the construction of public works connected with re-
patriation. What we have now to consider is, there-
fore, the framing of a business arrangement which will
be equitable to all parties. To my mind, the proposal
that the Commonwealth should concede to the States a
reduction of 1 per cent, in interest on the money it
borrows and passes on to them is too indefinite. Our'
experience in Australia is that the first two to five years
are the most critical in land settlement, and that the
loss on public works constructed for the advancing of
such settlement is most heavy in that period. Tt
is when projects arc in their infancy that the losses
connected with them are greatest. The States will
know within three to five years’ time which of the
.soldiers who have taken up land will succeed. A rail-
way does not pay instanter, but gradually creeps into a
paying condition as a result of the productivity of the
settlement along its route. My idea is that we should
frame an alternative to the recommendation contained
in clause 1 of the report of the sub-Conference. Per-
haps it will be best to determine, first of all, the prin-
ciple to be adopted : whether the concession to be given
by the Commonwealth should be for the early years of
repatriation, or .should continue for the whole period,
being larger in the earlier than in the later years.
Mr. HAYES. —Since the recommendations of the
sub-Conference were framed, some of us have discussed
the matter together, and it seems to me now that your
suggestion is better than the recommendation that you
have referred to. If the States obtained from the Com-
monwealth the remission of 1 per cent, of the interest
on the money advanced to them, they would not be
helped in any way, although the soldier settlers would
benefit, because the States would have to pass the.
advantage on to them. On the other hand, if the
States were allowed to have money without interest for
one, two, or three years, they would have an oppor-
tunity of ascertaining what number of soldiers were
going to succeed; and if after they had gained that
knowledge they made a loss on their undertakings, it
would be their own fault.
The CHAIRMAN.—You could make a reserve in
connexion with the interest.
Mr. HAYES.—As a matter of practical politics, it
is doubtful whether that could be done. Whatever
allowance is given to the States must be retrospective,
and cover all soldier settlements. Tasmania has actu-
ally settled one-third of the soldiers she is likely to
have to settle, and will probably complete her work in
this respect within from eighteen months to two years.
To allow the States to have money free of interest for
a period of two or three years would, in the long run,
be the cheapest policy for the Commonwealth to adopt,
because it-would give the States the assistance that they
need, and would allow the soldier settlers to get ahead.
The CHAIRMAN. —In suggesting that considera-
tion should be retrospective, you refer to interest, not
to capital ?
Mr. HAYES;—To interest. We have spent prac-
tically £200,000 on land. . .
Mr. THEODORE. —Do you mean, Mr. Chairman,
that the Commonwealth should not recoup the States
for the expenditure they have already incurred in con-
nexion with advances? •
The CHAIRMAN.—I am thinking of resumptions.
It would be a very big thing if we had to cover resump-
tions as well as advances. ‘ I might then have to take,
up a lot of State bonds. New South Wales has re-
sumed large areas, and issued State bonds for them.
It is not in my mind in connexion with this scheme'
that we should lift those bonds, superseding them with
Commonwealth bonds., ,< b ; ..... .
Mr. HAYES.—No; but I take it that if you were
going to remit interest, the remission would apply tc
interest on those bonds. v
The CHAIRMAN. —If we were going fo remit in-
terest, I agree with you that we might with propriety
and safety make the concession apply to money that
had been expended as well as £o money that is to be
expended. ■; ' ,
Mr. HAYES.—And it would not matter to you as
Commonwealth Treasurer whether the State payments
had been made in cash or with bonds?
The CHAIRMAN.—Not a bit.
Mr. ANSTEY.—Might I suggest, Mr. Chairman,
that you should outline your proposal, so that it might
be discussed in connexion with the recommendation of
the sub-Conference? H c
The CHAIRMAN. —I have not a hard-and-fast
scheme to propose, but,’having discussed the matter
with the Treasury officials, I have come to the conclu-
sion that we could cover all the risks which the States
must run through the non-success of settlement and
non-payment of public works, by the Commonwealth
finding the money required on some such scale as is
stated in Schedule 1., where £39,563,941 is mentioned,
and charging the States only half interest for a period
of three years. d
Mr. HAYES.—That would not help the States, be-
cause the public would expect the concession to be
handed on to the soldier settlers.
The CHAIRMAN, The concession might be
treated as an insurance fund, to insure the States
against the non-success of settlement, or the unprofit-
ableness of public works designed to serve that settle-
ment. '
Mr. HAYES.—A better thing would be to advance
the money free of interest for one year, and then taper
down the concession.
Mr. THEODORE.—The result would be the same.
The CHAIRMAN.—If the Commonwealth ad-
vanced money to the States free of interest for the first
year they, bn Mr. Hayes’ argument, would have to pass
that concession on to the soldier settlers. Can he show
me a way in which a fair business arrangement can be
made under which an insurance fund would be created
to cover the contingencies that we have in view ? I am
willing to consider any such proposal.
Mr. THEODORE. What do you propose shall
happen after three years?
The CHAIRMAN.—My proposal is a concession of
half the interest for three years.
Mr. THEODORE. —In the fourth year the States
would have to pay the full rate of interest ?


The CHAIRMAN. —Yes. If Ministers think that
three years is not a long enough period, I am willing
that the matter should be debated.
Mr. HAYES. —It would be better to advance money
to the States free of interest for a shorter period. Their
only insurance against loss is the careful administra-
tion of their Department.
The CHAIRMAN. Suppose we gave you free
money for one year.
Mr. HAYES.—That would not come to anything
like what we have asked for.
The CHAIRMAN.—But if I did that, you would
have to pass on the concession to the soldier settlers.
It seems to me that every alternative is open to the ob-
jection that Mr. Hayes has taken.
Mr. THEODORE. —That objection could be met by
the Commonwealth charging the full rate of interest,
but recouping the States an amount equal to half the
rate of interest for a given period, say, £25,000 on
every £1,000,000 advanced. Under that arrangement
the States would ostensibly pay the full rate of interest,
but would get a rebate from the Commonwealth to cover
contingent losses. Under the proposal of the Chair-
man, the States, assuming the rate of interest to be 5
per cent., would get a concession of £25,000 each year
for three years, or £75,000 altogether, which, in my
opinion, is hardly enough, because the total loss which
they will have to meet will be more than £150,000 on
every £1,000,000 expended.
The CHAIRMAN. —Would it not be best to decide
first the principle to be followed-
Mr. THEODORE.—To put the matter definitely be-
fore the Conference, I move—
That any form of relief to be granted by the
Commonwealth to the States to recoup loss should
be distributed during the first five years of the
loan. *
Mr. GARDINER.—I second that motion.
Mr. CLARKE.—I think it is desirable that I should
place on record the reasons why, at the sub-Conference.
I, on behalf of Victoria, voted against this proposed re-
duction. Any concession that we may obtain will, of
course, be grateful and comforting to us. We do not
object to obtaining cheap money, but I, personally, feel
very strongly that considerable danger must attend the
beginning of this system of the Commonwealth advanc-
ing to the States, at a lower rate of interest than it has
to pay, money with which to carry out what are very
nearly ordinary general State purposes. I do not know
how the English bond-holder and the money-lender
generally is likely to view the proposition that the Com-
monwealth shall borrow money at, say, 5 per cent, and
pass it on to the State at 4 per cent. Every citizen of
Australia, whether he is the representative of a State
or not, should be prepared to support the Common-
wealth in dealing with financial difficulties greater than
we have ever before experienced. We are all taxpayers
of the Commonwealth as well as State taxpayers, and
when you, Mr. Chairman, state, on behalf of the Com-
monwealth, that it is absolutely necessary that the per
capita payment must be reduced from 255. to 10s., and
next day tell the Conference that the Commonwealth
is prepared to remit a sum of at least £200,000 per an-
num, extending over several years, in connexion with
this repatriation work, it does seem to me that you are
taking out of your left-hand pocket what you are put-
ting into your right-hand pocket.
The CHAIRMAN.—But the Commonwealth has
already established this principle. At an earlier Con-
ference we said that we realized clearly that we were
asking the States to do something that was really a
Commonwealth job, but that we asked them to do it be-
cause they had the necessary experience and machinery.
We said, further, that if they made losses in carrying it
out we should be prepared to share those losses with
them. That was the basic arrangement.
Mr. CLARKE. —You will remember that the Com-
monwealth at that time was inclined to take up soldier
settlement as well as other forms of repatriation, and
that the States fought very hard for the right to them-
selves control land settlement. Having gained that
point, I, as the representative of a State, have some
diffidence in now saying that the Commonwealth must
assist us in this soldier settlement scheme. I should
resent the Commonwealth asking the States to contri-
bute to the cost of other forms of repatriation.
The CHAIRMAN.—This is such an unusual atti-
tude on the part of a State representative that you will
pardon my being a little bewildered.
Mr. CLARKE.—I cannot, of course, speak for New
South Wales, whose representatives are absent, but, at
the sub-Conference, they also expressed an opinion
against the proposed reduction of interest in favour of
tfie States. ) ‘s.‘
Senator MILLEN. —I was about to ask whether New
South Wales did not fall into line with you at the sub-
Conference.
Mr. CLARKE.—I cannot speak for New South
Wales; but its representatives voted as the representa-
tives of Victoria did.
Mr. ANSTEY.—That is so; but the New South
Wales Minister for Lands distinctly stated that he was
prepared to give notice of a further motion.
The CHAIRMAN.—I do not think the question of
sound finance is involved in this particular matter. It
appears to me to be a perfectly defensible and under-
standable public transaction. We say that the States
are best qualified to do this work, and they have under-
taken to do it. We know that they have made losses in
connexion with ordinary civilian settlement, and that
the losses in connexion with soldier settlement will pro-
bably be much heavier. The States will have to make
larger resumption commitments than in connexion with
ordinary civilian settlement, because of the pressing
urgency of this undertaking, and also a much larger
expenditure on public works. It seems to me, there-
fore, that the authority that is responsible,' on its
promises and legislation, for the repatriation of our
men, having said to the States, “You are the best
qualified instrumentality to do this work for us,” must
be prepared to share with the States the inevitable
losses. Whether it is loan or revenue money, the
transaction must be a perfectly sound one. Apart
from this question of soldier settlement, repatriation
will cost the Commonwealth vast sums, and the tax-
payer and loan-giver, in my opinion, will have cheer-
fully to face that expenditure.
Mr. CLARKE. —Do you take the view that the con-
cessions to soldiers put forward by Australia are net
sufficient, and that it is reasonable to ask the taxpayer
to make considerably further concessions?
The CHAIRMAN. —A study of the present condi-
tions of land settlement for ordinary civilians and for
returned men does not satisfy me that a wide pre-
ferential disparity has been made in favour of the
latter. You are giving ordinary settlers very much
the same as it is proposed to give returned soldiers who
have fought for us.
Mr. CLARKE.—I combat that view, so far as Vic-
toria is concerned.
The CHAIRMAN.—I am speaking of Australia as
a whole. We are quite entitled to give these men
who have risked so much for us more than we have so
far given. That is my view.
Mr. THEODORE.—The treatment should be as
liberal as possible.


Mr. GARDINER.—Yes. In carrying out this
soldier settlement, we realize that we shall make a loss.
The failures alone will involve losses, and the Com-
monwealth says that it is prepared to share those losses
with us.
Mr. CLARKE.—Why should the Commonwealth
taxpayer, as against the State taxpayer, bear the
burden of that loss? The proposition of the States as
a whole is that any loss which an individual State
suffers in connexion with soldier settlement shall be
borne by the Commonwealth taxpayer.
Senator MTLLEN.—One answer to that is that re-
patriation is primarily a Commonwealth concern.
Mr. CLARKE.—Not land repatriation.
Senator MILLEN. is a Common-
wealth concern; and although the States are controlling
land settlement, the Commonwealth- cannot be indif-
ferent to the stens that are being taken by them to
meet the demands of soldiers for land. Outside of
repatriation, the States would not proceed with land
settlement at the rate proposed. We are asking vou
to speed un vour operations, and compliance with that
request will involve greater cost than if vou proceeded
along the ordinary beaten track. It is that extra cost
which I have in mind in discussing this question—the
extra cost incidental to pushing ahead projects which
in the ordinary course would not* have been under-
taken. <
Mr. CLARKE.—The request made bv the Common-
wealth is mere’v that the States should carry out the
contract which thev demanded the right to carry out.
The CHAlRMAN.—Queensland has made no such
demand. She has said. "We will settle these men for
you ; but if you want us to do that work, these are the
onlv conditions upon which we can carry it out.”
Mr. CLARKE.—I speak with diffidence of the posi-
tion of other States. Queensland is asking for the
whole of the money which she will require for opening
up new country by building new railways, and so forth.
How is she going to pass on to these soldier settled
the cost of those railways? Ido not think she can.
The CHAIRMAN. —Queensland has an obligation
to settle some 3.000 men, hut she says to us. “ We can
settle over 18.000 if you desire us to do so.” She is
in a better position than any other State to do this
work for us, and is willing to do it. The attitude of
the Commonwealth, as yon have noted during the last
few Conferences, is one of repulsion to the States’ de-
mands in many cases. That inevitable attitude.
This is the first time that the Commonwealth’s hand
has been held out with something for the States, and
a State has put its own hands behind its back. Let
me assure you that there will be no forcing of this
concession upon anv reluctant State.
Mr. MoPHERSON.—There will be no reluctant
State.
The ■ CHAIRMAN. —You speak as Treasurer of
Victoria..
Mr. CLARKE. —It is urged that the Commonwealth
accepted joint responsibility with the States in regard
to soldier settlement by proposing an advance of £5OO,
which is now to be £625. for improvements, and it made
at the same time an offer to share the loss incidental
to the provision of money at the reduced rate, which
started at 3jl per cent. Since the Commonwealth is
assuming responsibility along that line, T think it
would have been more attractive to Victoria if it had
assumed the whole responsibility for losses on these
advances inasmuch thev will he losses made really by
the Commonwealth, and are a Commonwealth concern.
The CHAIRMAN. —That is an extraordinary view
on the part of a State that does not want any part of
its loss in this regard to be made good. The position
is the same whether the loss is made in connexion with
advances for improvements or for the purchase of land.
Mr. CLARKE.—I have explained why I object to
taking this cheap money from the Commonwealth. It
would be less objectionable if you followed the course
I have suggested, but if you are bent upon doing
this
The CHAIRMAN.—I am not bent upon it. The
two States which apparently have not joined in this
recommendation —New South Wales and Victoria—
are better able to sustain their burden than the other
States, but even if it were ethically right or economi-
cally sound that they should not obtain this concession
—even if they did not desire it—l would still say that
the Commonwealth should not ask the other four States
to do this work without considering their position,
Mr. LAWSON.—On what I may describe as the
second-reading debate upon this question, I pointed out
that the Commonwealth by way of a concession to the
States was bearing half the loss in respect of reduced
interest on the £5OO advance made in every case. I in-
dicated that we had in some cases given a concession to
soldier settlers over the three years’ period which, ac-
cording to certain estimates, would involve Victoria in
a loss of £1,000,000. I put forward, then, the plea
that in regard to the repatriation aspect of the matter,
the Commonwealth should share a larger measure of
the loss.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is what I understood.
Mr. LAWSON.—I was dealing then purely with the
question of land settlement, which is the work of the
States. But to the extent that there are further con-
cessions and further losses involved in the actual re-
patriation work the Commonwealth should share with
the States the losses sustained.
The CHAIRMAN.—Jt is all repatriation work.
The resumption of a block of land, or the building of a
railway in addition to settling the settlers and advanc-
ing the money, is all part of the one job.
Mr. LAWSON.—So far as Mr. Clarke is concerned,
it is largely a question as to the way in which the con-
cession should be made. Mr. Clarke'voted against the
remission of the 1 per cent. You, Mr. Chairman,
have also said that you do not approve 'of the conces-
sion taking that form, and have suggested another
method, of which Tasmania approves, and which we
also think is a better one. We think the free period
concession should be carried by the Commonwealth,
as well as the loss following upon the reduced interest.
If a more workable scheme can be l devised,'we are ’pre-
pared to stand by it. We are not putting bur hands
behind our backs when the Commonwealth is’ making
a gracious offer to the States. We give three years
free of interest in respect of land which is originally
taken up; but in the case of improved farms,"purchased
by soldiers, and which will give' a, return in twelve
months, the concession of no interest extends over only
one year. The principle we go upon is that during the
probationary period, in which there will be no return
to the soldier settler, there should be no burden upon
him.
Mr. GARDINER.—That is the view expressed by
the Chairman.' 1
Mr. LAWSON.—It seems to me that we are agreed
as to the principle, and that the only point-in'dispute
is as to the form to be adopted.
Mr. ANSTEY. —I think we could carry the motion
that has been proposed, land then deal with the whole
question.
Mr. HAYES.—If the relief that the Commonwealth
offers is to apply to interest on public works that have
for their object the settlement of soldiers, T will have
to revise my figures, as, I asked for none. I cannot go
back to my State and say that I refused money for pub-
lic works at a reduced rate of interest.


The CHAIRMAN.—I think we can agree to the
motion moved by Mr. Theodore, and then discuss de-
tails as to form and amount.
Motion agreed to.
The CHAIRMAN.—There ‘are various ways in
which you may consider the forms of early relief. You
could do it in the shape of a full forgiveness of interest.
You need not say what it is going to apply to just at
•present, or whether or not it applies to public works
associated with repatriation. We can come to that
later on, when the application of the concession is de-
cided. It could take the form of full forgiveness for a
brief time or partial forgiveness for a five-year period.
I have offered you one suggestion. You might discuss
that in detail. That would be a half-rate of interest
for three years. If that is not sufficient, show us why.
Keep in mind that if you desire it to be an insurance,
as I think your Treasuries should, against losses on the
projects on which this money is spent, I will invent a
method to put that into suspense in the Commonwealth
, Treasury if you like, so that it should not be passed
over in a way that you think unsafe. I should be glad
if the Conference would discuss for the time being
whether you regard half-rates for three years as equit-
‘ able between the two parties.
Mr. CLARKE.— There are going to be extraordi-
nary difficulties, which, however, may be overcome
To the man who gets a ready-made farm we give one
year free of interest; after that he pays the full
amount. If be learns that the State is giving other
people concessions for three years he will ask for the
benefit of those concessions.
Senator MlLllEN.—Will he iask to be allowed to
pay interest for the first year?
Mr. CLARKE.—I suppose he will not.
The CHAIRMAN.—The man who has a walk-in-
walk-out proposition has no right to demand the same
concessions as a man who has to be a pioneer, clearing,
fencing, and improving bis land and putting up build-
ings from the time he goes on.
Mr. LAWSON.—We give him only one year free of
interest. We give three years to the other.
The CHAIRMAN.—That shows at once that you
■are discriminating, and I think you must .agree to that
principle.
Mr. CLARKE.—I quite agree that the two cases are
different, but the soldier who learns that cheap money
-is going begging in the second or third year, while he
is paying full interest, will complain.
The CHAIRMAN. —We should not want insurance
against the sort of scheme Mr. Clarke has instanced.
The States should be prepared to take settlers on ready-
made farms without any concession by the Common-
wealth, because they will not fail in anything like the
same proportion.
Mr. CLARKE.—I would be prepared to insist that
no concession should be given in those cases.
The CHAIRMAN.—What I am dealing with is an
insurance fund to guard you against the probable
failures in the more difficult forms of settlement.
Mr. HAYES.—The Government nearly always buys
half-infproved estates and cuts them up. If an estate
is cut up into twenty blocks and twenty men have to
make a living off it, practically every block has to be
very much improved, so that it cannot be considered
a walk-in-walk-out proposition.
Mr. CLARKE.—In those cases we give the three
years’ concession, but where we buy a farm with a
house, fences, water laid on, and land cleared, we expect
the man who goes in to start earning from the moment
he enters, in most forms of agriculture.
Mr. HAYES. —Most of those single farms are
capable of very much further development.
The CHAIRMAN. —I do not think Mr. Clarke
meant resumption and subdivision.
Mr. CLARKE. —No. I distinctly guarded against
saying that. In the resumption of an estate, where we
have to make everything on the farm, we give the man
three years. New South Wales gives him five. Your
concession of interest for five years will apply exactly
to New South Wales. The question will have to be con-
sidered from the point of view of Victoria and other
States, which give other forms of concession.
The CHAIRMAN. —That is a matter about which
Senator Millen is somewhat concerned, but we are
, rather off the track. Here is a proposition by me of
half interest for three years. Instead of seeing the
difficulties of any concessional arrangement in regard to
a particular class of settler, why not say whether this
offer is or is not enough, generally speaking, to cover
the whole case?
Mr. ANSTEY.—What about the last two years? We
have just carried a resolution that will extend for five
years.
The CHAIRMAN. —There must be a period given
within the five yea*, although you may consider three,
four, or five.
Mr. THEODORE.—We shall have to pay at least
5$ per cent, for this money in the first years, at any
rate. It is costing us more than that now.
Mr. CLARKE. —Better take it at 6 per cent.
' Mr. THEODORE.—Then, for every £1,000,000
advanced to the State from the Commonwealth for re-
patriation purposes, the State will each year have
to find from its revenue fund £60,000 in in-
terest alone. That will continue so long as the
loan is outstanding. It is obvious that for the
first year we shall get practically no return
from repatriation works. Some States will get some
recoup where they charge interest on the first year on
the advance actually made to the soldier, but practically
irj. every State the interest will be a dead loss for the
first year if it is not recouped by the Commonwealth.
In the second year the position will be somewhat better,
but probably over the whole term the States will
not be fully recouped, even for the interest charge,
by the soldiers, fr#m the fact that concessions
are made in interest to them, and, in addition,
actual losses will be made from time to time. Many
of these losses will not be absolutely realized for many
years. A soldier may make one or two payments of in-
terest and instalments towards the redemption of the
loan, and- after that he may prove to be a failure. He
may make no success of his farm, and abandon it, leav-
ing the State an asset which is probably not worth
25 per cent, of what the State has advanced on it.
Senator MILLEN. —If he has been there two years,
and his farm is not worth 25 per cent., you must have
been making very bad advances.
Mr. THEODORE.—After two years, although a man
may give some evidence that he is not going to be a
success, you cannot take him by the ear and eject him,
even though you know his prospects are very poor.
That has been the experience already of the Repatria-
tion Committees of the States. They know that some
men have made greater progress than others. They
know that others, sooner or later, will inevitably be
starved out through drought or flood, or be
failures and leave their farms, leaving the State
insufficient assets to cover the advances made.
During the whole period of the loan, perhaps 25
years, there will be constantly accruing losses that
will have ultimately to be written off by the States and


be a burden on the revenue of the States. The full ex-
tent of the probable losses cannot be ascertained in the
first five years, but during the first five years the greater
percentage of the loss, including loss of interest, will
be known, and must be made good from the State
revenues, and that will be the period of the
greatest difficulty for the States. The loss will
occur, not only where advances are made to
soldier settlers, but also in regard to public works con-
structed for the special benefit of the repatriation
scheme. Those works are not likely to be reproductive
in the first five years. Rather, in that period they will
probably be a very complete and dead loss, although
they will be reproductive, in all likelihood, in the course
of time. Your suggestion, Mr. Chairman, is a gdod
one, but the amount of the concession is not sufficient.
The CHAIRMAN.—I do not believe in 6 per cent,
money. It should not cost more than 5j per cent. Let
us fix our minds on 5j per cent, as the probable maxi-
mum. On the £40,000,000 scheme in the first schedule,'
the concession of half interest for three years would
amount to about £3,300,000 as an insurance to the
States. For five years it' would amount to about
£5,500,000.
Mr. THEODORE.—On each £1,000,000 advanced
to the States, the Commonwealth will be bearing' a loss
of £27,500 per annum, and the States a similar loss.
That will make an aggregate loss of £82,500 borne by
the Commonwealth for three years on every million
pounds advanced. I am satisfied that the State
loss will be much greater than that, no matter
how carefully managed or controlled the scheme is. If
it were not so, we need not look with any anxiety on the
scheme. There will be a loss for some years on some
of the public works constructed. Some of them will
return no interest whatever. Some will return working
expenses only, and some will not even return working
expenses. If you could give the States some conces-
sion by way of subsidy or rebate, not necessarily by a
reduction of interest, it would be more satisfactory.
I quite agree with Mr. Hayes that any reduction in the
rate of interest will he expected to benefit’ the soldier
to the greatest possible extent. It will he far better to
debit the States with the full rate of interest, and give
the States in respect of every £1,000,000 advanced a
certain percentage of subsidy, say, £27,500 for every
£1,000,000 for five years.
Mr. HAYES.—That would not give the soldier relief
at all.
Mr. THEODORE. —The States will have to give the
soldiers relief by way of reduced interest and other-
wise. Already, without any concession from the
Commonwealth at all, but paying the Common-
wealth the full rate which the money costs the. Com-
monwealth before it is advanced to us, Queensland is
giving the soldiers concessions, and will, no doubt, con-
tinue them.
Mr. LAWSON.—What concession are you giving ?
Mr. THEODORE.—We are not charging more than
3£ per cent, in the first year.
Mr. COYNE.—We give them Crown land rent free
for three years.
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—In Western Australia we
have given power to the Minister to defer the rent on
re-purchased land taken up by returned soldiers for
five years, and to add the amount to the payments due
for the balance of the term of the lease.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is not forgiveness; that
is deferred payment for five years.
Mr. THEODORE.—‘It is clear that every State
gives some concessions, and we will continue that prac-
tice, even if we ourselves pay the full amount for the
money.
The CHAIRMAN.—If you decide on some form of
concession, either by way of subsidy or remission of
the interest rate, you will then be in a position to know
what you can do, and can decide on your own initiative
how far you will extend that concession to the soldiers.
Mr. McPHERSON. —Whatever concession the Com-
monwealth is good enough to give the States will be
handed over, so far as we are concerned, entirely to the
'soldiers. If you make the half-interest concession for
three or five years, we shall pass it on in its entirety.
I do not feel, like Mr. Theodore, that the concession
ought to be put to a fund to reimburse the States for
subsequent losses in the settlement of soldiers on the
land. It should! be a straight-out allowance to the
soldier to start his undertaking. If the Commonwealth
could see its way to adopt the arrangement made by
the Victorian Government, that is, advance free of
interest for three years, it would be the fairest way to
do it, and would be in the best interests of the soldiers.
The CHAIRMAN.'—That attitude on the part
of one or two Governments would provoke
complications in the scheme. , Although the Com-
monwealth would be responsible . for finding the
money for land settlement for soldiers, the
difficulty is that such settlers might be differently
treated in Queensland, say, from those in Victoria.
What we are trying to arrive at is some degree of uni-
formity ; and if the States could pass on to the soldiers
any concessions which the Corifinonwealth might grant,
that, of course, would naturally be desirable. But if
they found themselves able to face the prospective
losses on a full remission of interest for three years,
we should be able to hammer out approximate uni-
formity in our desires.
Mr. McPHERSON.—It is clear, of course, that,
whatever public works may be instituted in connexion
.with this project generally, others besides soldier settlers
would share in the benefit. With regard to land settle-
ment of our returned soldiers, the soldiers themselves
would be the,only persons who would pet the benefit.
And, in that light, we are not concerned about the re-
mission of interest upon public works expenditure. We
will be prepared to bear that ourselves. - -
Mr. THEODORE. —It stands to reason that if you
built a railway you could not say that it should be used
exclusively by soldier settlers. But the building of that
railway would be prompted by the necessity for facili-
tating, or initially bringing about, the settlement of
soldiers; and that railway would not have been under-
taken by the State but for such necessity. If we were to
agree that the interest loss in respect of such a public
work were to be exclusively a State matter, the States
would be bound to face a dead loss upon their settlement
schemes during the first years.
The CHAIRMAN. —I have a keen recollection of
the attitude adopted by the Queensland delegates at the
first Conference in connexion with the War Council.
They put the view that settlement, as undertaken in
certain of the States, would be chiefly through resump-
tion, while in other States it would be upon Crown
lands already served by railway communication. But
Queensland would be in such a position that further
settlement upon Crown lands could only be undertaken
if public works were provided to facilitate settlement
and permit of communication with the markets. The
argument now is that a three years’ proposition, either
in the form of remitted interest or of a compounded
subsidy would not be sufficient in point of amount.


Mr. THEODORE.—I move—
That in order to partially recoup the States for
losses necessarily incurred in connexion with land
repatriation, the Commonwealth shall, during the
first five years, pay to each State a subsidy at the
rate of £27,500 per annum for each £1,000,000 ad-
vanced.
That would amount to a total remission of £137,500
in regard to each £1,000,000 loaned.
’ The CHAIRMAN. —That is equivalent to half in-
terest for five years.
Mr. ANSTEY.—Does that mean that we should have
to charge the soldier the full rate of interest?
The CHAIRMAN.—That is another problem, which
should hardly enter into this specific discussion just
now. 1
Mr. ANSTEY. —It would mean that the whole of the
benefit to be conceded to the States would have to go
by way of subsidy to the soldier settlers.
The CHAIRMAN. —It is plain, of course, that if
you are going to pass all of the Commonwealth con-
cession on to the soldiers, it would probably be better
for the Commonwealth to revise the interest arrange-
ment on advances, as one distinct step in policy and
business arrangement, and, to say that instead of
merely bearing half the loss with the States, we should
agree to pass this on to the States and for them to give
their advances free over a certain time to the settler.
Mr. GEORGE.—You might bring about some com-
plications with regard to what the States are already
doing.
Mr. CLARKE.—There is one point which should not
bo lost sight of in any ]#oposal to grant advances upon
stock free of interest over a number of years. Stock
must be repaid for shortly after it is handed over.
Advances for stock must be repaid promptly, because
the security disappears so quickly.
The CHAIRMAN.—Of course, this is not a question
of repayment, but of interest. The question of loan
repayment is not one of interest.
Mr. COYNE.—I suggest that if the Commonwealth
agrees to loan the money to the States, it should
guarantee the rate of interest; that is, what you pav
for the money. And, at the end of five years, the
different States should then submit a statement to the
Commonwealth Government showing what the total
losses have been in connexion with securing land for
repatriation purposes; and that, at that stage, it would
be for the Commonwealth to meet us over our losses.
This would bring about uniformity in the matter
throughout the Commonwealth in the treatment of our
bovs who settle on the land.
The CHAIRMAN.—But this is what would then
happen. Good settlers—good in intention and success
—would pay up; the others would not. And your
Government, knowing that whatever loss might be
incurred', you could put in a claim upon the Common-
wealth, would sav. " That is the definite amount of
our loss, and it will be met by the Commonwealth.”
A settler would naturally say, too. “ Whv should I
pav when that other fellow across the road does not,
and is not penalized for failing to do so?” That
would be doing an injustice.
Mr. ANSTEY. —I think that the suggestion of Mr.
Haves is the best, namely, that we should have the
money free for, say, three years. The question of
extension over five years could be further considered.
But, in the interim, the States would be able to ascer-
tain who were the successful settlers, and could cull the
failures. It is when a man has to begin to pay that
we shall learn whether he is a success or not; and that
is where the reeponeibilitv will be felt bv the States.
The CHAIRMAN. —No; the responsibility is on the
States every minute.
Mr. ANBTEY.—I mean, as regards the collection
of interest.
Mr. HAYES. —If losses are made after the first
three years, we should pay for them.
Mr. ANSTEY.—Undoubtedly.
The CHAIRMAN.—It is perfectly clear that, with
the best of administration and luck, you will have some
losses. What I was anxious to do was to insure that
the States, who are doing the work of land settlement,
and who know best how to do it, should have their
losses shared with us in some equitable way. That
should stand apart from any engagement to give cheap
money to the soldier. • If you get back to that, you
will have in your minds the matter of an insurance
fund. We know that some amount will be necessary.
Mr. ANSTEY.—But public sentiment is very strong;
and if we were to say that our good settlers must pay
their interest obligations to the full, while at the same
time the States were receiving an easement, the weight *
of public sentiment would demand that the full conces-
sion should be handed on to the settler. If we did not
do that, it would be a case of the good settler paying
up to the full amount of his responsibility, and thus
helping the waster.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is the way we live in this
community all the time.
Mr. ANSTEY.—Yes; but strong pressure would,
undoubtedly, be put upon the State Governments for
passing on the full amount of whatever assistance
might be offered by the Commonwealth.
Senator MILLEN.—It is obvious that another ques-
tion has now been raised. At the sub-Conference ori-
ginally, this matter was discussed upon the basis, and
with the idea, that the Commonwealth should
shoulder a share of the losses sustained by the
States. Now the discussion is veering to the' view-
point that the Commonwealth contribution might go as
a direct concession to the soldier settler. If it is to be
designed as a relief to the soldier, we can achieve it
much more readily by making our advances at a lower
rate of interest. But if it is designed to help the
States to meet losses involved in their soldier settle-
ment policy, the losses cannot be met in that way.
Which is it to be? A relief to the soldier, or a help to
the States?
Mr. ANSTEY.—But can the losses sustained by the
States be met in this way? If you give us money at
a rate 1 per cent, cheaper than you are getting it,
that concession will undoubtedly have to be passed on
to the soldier. Can the States resist the pressure of
public opinion in that direction?
The CHAIRMAN. —In all probability the sugges-
tion thrown out by»Mr. Coyne, namely, for the
States to furnish the Commonwealth with a total esti-
mate of their losses over a period, and for them to
be recouped thereupon, would be too transparent an ar-
rangement.
Mr. —Without doubt, in a couple of
years a State Treasurer could emphatically show to the
public that the State concerned had suffered a. loss in
its land settlement policy—an inevitable loss which has
had to be made good from the Consolidated Revenue
equalling;, shall we say, a sum of a quarter of a million
sterling. If criticism were raised as to the States
being recouped by the Commonwealth upon the presen-
tation of a statement of loss over a certain period of
years, do you mean to say that a Treasurer could not
make out a good case to justify the receipt of such as-
sistance in order to recoup that loss, either actual or
prospective ?
The CHAIRMAN.—Do you want this to be an ar-
rangement by way of concession to soldier settlers over
and above what has already been made in interest
charges, or do you want it to be an insurance or sub-
sidy to the States?


Mr. CLARKE.—At present Victoria is losing some-
thing like £1,000,000 owing to concessions by way of
interest which the State is giving to soldiers. If the
Commonwealth will stand for that loss by giving us
free money for three years we would be perfectly pre-
pared to put aside the whole question respecting even-
tual losses through settlers failing. Victoria would
be prepared to stand that loss herself, and would not
ask the Commonwealth for assistance. That is, if we
could be cleared of the immediate liability of paying
£1,000,000 in interest upon dead'money—money which
is bringing us in nothing. That would make if as
simple a proposition as we could wish.
The CHAIRMAN.—But if I said “ yes ” to that, it
would only furnish relief In respect of the particular
commitments for which your Government have been re-
sponsible. . We must propound a scheme to continue
over the next few years—one which must be equitable*
to the Governments and generous to the soldiers.
Mr. CLARKE.—I cannot ad*’i se you to grant to any
State a concession which would enable us to come to
you in ten years and say, “We have tried to make a
success of a specific block by placing two, or three, or
four successive settlers upon it, and all have failed;
wherbfore, the settlement upon this block is thrown
back upon the State as a dead loss, and now we want to
be recouped for it.” If that were to be the procedure
one would never know where or what the liability was.
The CHAIRMAN.—I said that I thought a con-
tinuing concession would be unwise; and we have now
passed a proposition to the effect that whatever conces-
sions are made must be so made during the first five
years. We now say, “What kind of concession is pro-
posed ?’’ I have suggested half rates for three years.
Mr. Theodore says, “ Give us a subsidy equivalent to
half rates for five years.”
Mr. CLARKE.—No one can pronounce what the
loss upon any specific block mav be over a period of five
years. One cannot calculate the loss upon a block in
relation to personnel. Immediately one man has gone
out, having made a failure upon a holding, another man
may be got to take it up, and he mav be compelled to
abandon it also. Yet a third individual may have a
trv, and succeed. No authority would be in a posi-
tion to say at that stas'e what was the loss to the State,
at any rate, until it had been definitely proved that such
a block could be made a success, and had been proved
successful. 't I'.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is so. But the broad prin-
ciple under discussion is for the concession of half rates
for three vears. or something more upon such lines as
Mr. Theodore has proposed.
Mr. CLARKE.—I think the simpler method would
be to ask the Commonwealth Government to stand the
concession loss in the form of a remission of interest.
The CHAIRMAN.—There should be uniformity of
method throughout the States.
Mr. GARDINER. If Mr. Theodore’s suggestion
were adopted the losses over a period of five years
would represent flA’T.fiOO per million advanced.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is the idea. It would he
equivalent to saying to the States that the measure of
risk was 13J per cent, on all its advances. It is very
liberal.
Mr. ANSTEY.—It seems to me that if the States
are going to get anv benefit from the concession, it
must be on the basis of three years at least of no
interest. «
The CHAIRMAN.—How can the States get any
benefit under that arrangement?
Mr. ANSTEY,—Because they will be paying no in-
terest.
The CHAIRMAN".—Neither will the settler.
Mr. CLARKE. —At present the States pay interest
and make concessions to the settlers.
The CHAIRMAN.—Some do; and some do not.
Mr. GARDINER. If the money is obtained for
three years without interest the same argument will be
advanced by settlers for remission of interest.
The CHAIRMAN. The proposal for the three
years without interest or six years with half interest
will be the same to the soldier settler.
Mr. ANSTEY.—Whatever concessions are made by
the Commonwealth to the States must be passed on to
the soldiers.
The CHAIRMAN.—Does that mean that you do not
want assistance for *the State, but that you do want
cheap money for the soldier ?
Mr. ANSTEY.—If we get assistance for the States
the soldiers will make a claim in respect of interest at
the end of the term.
Mr. CLARKE. —The position is different in the
several States. • In Queensland, for instance, they
want to spend all their money on developmental works,
such as railways.
Mr. ANSTEY,—If repatriation works are included
I shall have to revise the South Australian schedule.
Senator MILLEN. —I think Mr. Anstey is finder a
misapprehension. In Schedule Ahe has included the
cost of works necessary to open up holdings. The
amount is £1,190,000.
Mr. ANSTEY. —Yes, I find that is so, Mr. Chair-
man. • '
The CHAIRMAN.—Let us endeavour to make some
progress. Do the States desire that the l concession
shall be in the shape of insurance to the States, or do
they desire a more generous arrangement for cheap
money for soldiers?
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—I favour any allowance,
granted by the Commonwealth being in the form of in-
surance to the States, and not by way of subsidy or
concession to the soldiers. We have already provided
for that, and have become responsible for it. On be-
half of Western Australia I wish the concession to, be
in the form of insurance against any loss that might
be sustained.
Mr. GARDINER.—On the lines of the Chairman’s
suggestion.
The CHAIRMAN.—Or on some agreed lines. What
does Tasmania say about that?
Mr. HAYES.—Very well. I think that any benefit
must be passed on to the soldier, and it will be passed
on.
The CHAIRMAN. —That is not the question. You
can come to any arrangement you like in regard: to
that matter. That is your job. Victoria is doing it
in one way, and Queensland in another. We are
discussing the financial arrangements to 1 be, made, and
I am only concerned, at this stage, in seeing if the in-
surance proposal is acceptable. You can squander
the money, if you like, but that must be your respon-
sibility.
Mr. HAYES. —I think' that any insurance concesr-
sion will be passed on, because the moment the soldiers
know the States are to be recouped for any possible
loss there will be a distinct incentive to show losses and
claim the concession.
The CHAIRMAN. —I am not proposing to recoup
the States for losses. lam proposing to establish an
insurance fund that may meet probable losses. It
may be over-generous, or it may be too meagre. We
are not going to recoup the States in that sense. Is
Tasmania of somewhat the same view as'Western Aus-
tralia in regard to the proposal?
Mr. HAYES. —I think so.


Mr. THEODORE.—That is our view, too. There
should be a recoup of the amount of' loss sustained by
the State.
Mr. GARDINER.—I understand that while the
States are to be charged full rates, the Commonwealth
will set aside a certain percentage.
The CHAIRMAN.—Are you satisfied with it?
Mr. GARDINER.—We are; 1 think it is a good
scheme.
Mr. ANSTEY.—I am prepared to accept it.
The CHAIRMAN.—That view is different from the
one expressed by you some time ago, Mr. Anstey.
Mr. ANSTEY.—I want to be assured that the States
will get the benefit of the scheme, and shall be re-
couped for their losses. I am prepared to accept it.
Mr. COYNE.—In addition to the five years’ pro-
posal, will the Commonwealth, be prepared to meet
some of the losses that the States have sustained up to
the present?
The CHAIRMAN.—That is a matter for considera-
tion. Unless we settle principles we shall never get
to details.
Mr. McPHERSON. —Will the concession be* in the
form of a credit entry against debits? ' How is the
amount to be credited?
The«.CHAIRMAN. —It could be done in the' Com-
monwealth Treasury, and in a manner agreeable to the
States.
Mr. CLARKE.—WouId it be merely in the form
of a credit entry against the debits?
The CHAIRMAN.—It might be done in that way.
Senator Millen has suggested that this view might be
put before the Conference before we settle the matter:
There is apparently some difficulty in the minds of some
members of the Conference as to whether the whole
of the amount should be in the form of insurance or of
concession money to the soldiers; and he suggests that
if we fix our minds on a rate of 5| per cent., the
charge for interest against the 1 States might be 2J per
cent., and that 2f per cent, be regarded as forgiven for
five years. 'lt might be an arrangeable matter with the
States to set aside 1 per cent, of this interest concession
in the form of a relief of interest rates which otherwise
would be charged to the soldier, leaving 1$ per cent, as
insurance in the Treasury.
Mr. THEODORE.—The matter of relief should be
left with the States—to give any concessions they like.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is on© way of doing it,
but uniformity is desirable.
Mr. THEODORE.—AII the States have followed the
uniform plan drawn up by the Repatriation Con-
ference.
Senator MILLEN.—They have not, unfortunately.
The concessions vary in the different States.
Mr. THEODORE.—I mean, in regard to advances
for soldiers. They are not charging more than 3i per
cent, for the money in the first year, and thereafter an
increasing rate.
Mr. McPHERSON.—It would not matter, so far as
the Commonwealth is concerned, whether it is put to
reserve fund or against prospective losses. The matter
of relief for soldiers would be one for the States them-
selves. |
The CHAIRMAN.—It might work theoretically,
but practically it would jmt. If some States gave
greater concessions to soldiers, other States would have
to come into line. They could not resist the demand.
Mr. ANSTEY.—It would be far better to lay down
a uniform and definite scheme.
The CHAIRMAN.—I think we are likely to get
uniformity by assigning 2| per cent, as the interest
payable for a term of five years, and placing the other
2| per cent, to a contingency fund for insurance in
the Commonwealth Treasury.
Mr. THEODORE.—For the sake of uniformity, we
are agreeable to the scheme.
The CHAIRMAN.—The circumstances of all the
States are not the same. Territorial and community
conditions vary as much as if the several States were
so many foreign countries.
Mr. COYNE.—They vary within the States. An
industry such as hog-raising will return a profit more
quickly than fruit-growing.
Mr. CLARKE.—I think that the formula suggested
is as good as we are likely to find, each State reserving
its right.
Mr. THEODORE. —'I take it that there will be an
obligation on each State to hand over 1 per cent, of the
interest to its soldier settlers.
The CHAIRMAN.—My suggestion is that we should
arrive at an arrangement here, so that it may be ex-
pressed in the bond.
Mr. CLARKE. —We charge our soldiers 5 per cent.,
and if per cent, is to the the interest rate, we shall
have to remit J per cent, to bring the new settlers into
line with the old ones.
The CHAIRMAN.—What is needed is to prevent
disparity of treatment as much as possible, because if
one State Government gives a concession there will be
an agitation for a similar concession from the other
State Governments.
Mr. THEODORE.—If we agreed to use of each
£1,000,000 advanced £lO,OOO in reducing soldiers’ in-
terest, it would probably be best to make the conces-
sion largest in the first year. I take it that the States
would so arrange that in the first year or two there
might be a complete remission of interest so far as the
soldier settlers were concerned.
The CHAIRMAN.—I think that there could be
elasticity in that matter. You might say that of the
2f per cent, concession the equivalent of 1 per cent,
should be given to the soldier settlers. •
Mr. COYNE.—I do not think that a hard-and-fast
rule could be made. If one soldier abandons a piece of
land and another takes it up, the second man will
expect the same terms as the first. How long is this to
continue? I think that the matter should be left to
the good sense of each State.
The CHAIRMAN.—Good sense is often based on
experience. Without a uniform arrangement made
here you will have no insurance fund.
Mr. CLARKE.—Does this proposal as to insurance
fund include the whole of schedule I.?
The CHAIRMAN. —This is a proposal in relation
to that schedule, and covers every figure in it.
Mr. GEORGE.—Do I understand that we are to go
away from here under an agreement to make a uniform
charge ?
The CHAIRMAN.—>I have offered to the States a
remission of interest, but I suggest that unless you
arrive at an arrangement concerning the proportion of
the remitted interest that is to be passed on to the
soldiers and the proportion that is to be retained as an
insurance fund, the whole amount will eventually go
to the soldiers. If you are content with that, well and
good. Six months hence there will be strong pressure
on the various State Governments for concessions.
Some will yield, though others may not do so at first.
But the moment it is known that this concession has
been given by the Commonwealth Treasurer, there will
be an agitation for uniformity of treatment for soldier
settlers in every part of Australia.
Mr. MoPHERSGN. —We have embodied our con-
cession in an Act of Parliament. If we agree to the
proposed arrangement we shall have to pass another
Act. We have agreed to free the soldiers from interest
for three years.


The CHAIRMAN.—The difficulty which I am try-
ing to solve concerns the States, not the Commonwealth.
Motion agreed to.
The CHAIRMAN.—Does the Conference wish to
supplement the resolution by a proposal that the
money shall be kept in the Commonwealth Treasury
until demanded?
Mr. THEODORE.—I think that it had better be
paid to each State, which can, if necessary, put it into
a Trust Fund.
The CHAIRMAN.—What further question is there
to consider ?
Mr. THEODORE.—There is the question of alloca-
tion.
Mr. ANSTEY.—I think that we should carry a
motion to secure uniformity.
Mr. CLARKE. —You have no objection to Victoria
giving advances for three years free of interest?
The CHAlßMAN.—Personally I have no objection,
but it seems to me that it is for the States to bring
themselves into line. I wonder that they have not
already done so.
Mr. CLARKE.—Then what do you contemplate?
The CHAIRMAN.—What I want you to do is to
make up your minds whether the concession to be
given by the Commonwealth is to be treated as an in-
surance fund, or as something to be, passed on to the
soldier settlers, or a little of both. If the Common-
wealth concession is to be used as an insurance fund, in
whole or in part,. I think that the money should be
retained by the Commonwealth until required by the
States. If it goes directly to the States, there will be
a demand for its payment to the soldiers by way of
concession.
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—I am not in favour of the
proposed 1 per cent, concession to the soldier settlers of
Western Australia, because we have already made such
liberal allowances to them that we cannot go further.
Our soldiers have been treated perhaps more liberally
than those of any other State.
Mr. McPHERSON.—WouId it satisfy you, Mr.
Chairman, if we were to undertake, at this gathering,
to put this 2f per cent, to a reserve fund, to meet any
losses ?
The CHAIRMAN. —I should be quite satisfied with
that arrangement. I hold firmly the view that there
will be losses, and the Commonwealth is ready to share
them on an equitable basis. Therefore, I should like
this concession to be treated as an insurance. If the
States get the money paid over to them by way of
subsidy, it will not long be treated by them as an in-
surance, because the pressure upon them during the
crucial period will force them to pay it over to the
soldier settlers. You may be content that that should
happen, but the Commonwealth having agreed to remit
2 J per cent, of interest by way of bearing its share of
the loss, cannot be expected later to again contribute
anything by way of making good a loss.
Mr. McPHERSON. —Each State might undertake to
put the money to a reserve fund in its own Treasury,
to be used against specific loss.
Mr. THEODORE.—T am afraid that that would not
do. In some of the States the loss will be greatest
during the first five years. Many of our public works
will not be returning anything during that period, and
the loss will have to be made good from the consoli-
dated revenue. Losses in connexion with advances to
soldier settlers will not be confined to the first few
years.
The CHAIRMAN.—Were I a State Treasurer, I
would like to leave this money with “ Uncle.” I do
not sav that because I am Commonwealth Treasurer;
I sav it because I think that only in that way can the
money be kept for insurance purposes. It ought to
be written to the credit of the respective States, in
a repatriation land settlement insurance fund, and
paid to the States on proof of loss having been in-
curred.
. Mr. McPHERSON. —Would the money be paid to
our credit every six months, or every year ?
The CHAIRMAN. —It could be credited every
quarter, half-year, or year. If what I suggest were
done, the States would pay 51 per cent, interest, but
would have half of that amount for five years written
to their respective credits in one ledger, divided under
six headings.
Mr. GEORGE.—At the end of the five years’ period,
if our losses had not amounted to the sum at our
credit, would the whole of that sum be paid to us ?
The CHAIRMAN.—Yes, because the money would
be yours. .We could also provide that, should the
losses become very heavy, proportionate payments
might be'made. The whole of these points, or a por-
tion of them if w r e desire it, can be dealt with in a
covering resolution. You can request the Common-
wealth Government to pay the subsidy of £27,500 per
£1,000,000, or two-thirds of it, three-fourths of it, or
any part you please, into an insurance fund in the
Commonwealth Treasury, to be paid over to the States
on application in accordance with the terms of the
agreement.
Mr. GARDINER.—I should like to know whether
my brother State Treasurers think that by adopting
the Chairman’s suggestion we would get over the diffi-
culty of having to make a greater concession to the
soldier settler. I think we would do so.
The CHAIRMAN.—And avoid the danger of spend-
ing the money in other directions.
Mr. McPHERSON.—That is so.
Mr. GARDINER.—It is idle to disguise the fact
that there is such a danger. When a State Treasurer
was as hard up as I have been he might be inclined to
draw upon some of this money if it were not dealt with
in the way suggested by the Chairman. I think the
adoption of his suggestion would rid us of a good deal
of the pressure that might otherwise be brought to bear
upon us to use this money in other directions.
The CHAIRMAN.—A deputation asking for a rail-
way might say to the Treasurer when he said that he
had not the money to provide for the work, “ You have
£150,000 in this trust fund, Why not use it to build a
railwa.y? You will be able to recoup the fund later
on.” That is the kind of pressure you have to guard
against.
Mr. THEODORE.—I could not understand a Go-
vernment yielding to any pressure of the kind.
The CHAIRMAN.—I have been in all sorts of Go-
vernments, and congratulate you, Mr. Theodore, upon
your confidence. This is the boast of a strong man.
At all events, gentlemen, you may either deal separately
with this point or arrive at a decision now. The pro-
posal is extremely liberal, and, if carried out, the Com-
monwealth will have to pay over the money by way of
subsidy with other forms of payments. It will involve
a very big sum. On a rough estimate it represents
£5.500,000.
Mr. HAYES.—On the £39,000,000 basis?
The CHAIRMAN.—I am taking the basis of
£40,000.000.
Mr. HAYES.—But that has to be reduced, in view
of the position in regard to British soldier settlement.
The CHAIRMAN. —I am assuming that the sum
at which you have arrived is authentic.
SETTLEMENT OF BRITISH SOLDIERS.
The CHAIRMAN. —As to the British soldier
settlement, whatever the other four States may
do I sincerely hope that Western Australia and
Queensland will reach out for their share of British
ex-service men. 1 talked plainly on this question


the other day. It Is the imperative responsibility
of the States, if there is any land to spare —our own
boys, of course, getting the first call —to encourage
those who have served in the armies of Britain, and
who desire to roam, to come to Australia.
Mr. McPHERSON. —We already have a Dis-
charged Soldiers Act in operation in this State.
The CHAIRMAN. —I am not speaking of Acts; I
have seen many Acts passed vtith little result. I want
to see a resolution on the part of those States who feel
competent to deal, not only with our own people, but
with others, to reach out for what I may speak of as
“ the spill over ” from Britain, and not to allow it to
go to Canada and the United States of America. In
order to do this, unification of organization oil the
other side of the world is necessary. The High Com-
missioner, operating in complete concert with your
agencies in London, should be afforded a means of ad-
vertising exactly how th,e people of Australia feel
about this matter. He should be afforded means, after
our own men have been shipped back and settled, of
diverting shipping, in. order to carry to Australia this
excess population which wants to roam the world.
Since the war broke upon us we have had no advertising
of Australia. The Prime Minister is doing a little bit
in that way at the present time; but there should be a
campaign of advertising to show that we are prepared
to receive the ex-service men from Great Britain, and
to deal with the problem of settling them on the land. I
do not want to see city dwellers brought here, but I do ■
wish our rural producers to be increased in this way.
The two States of Western Australia and Queensland
are best able to tackle the subject, and the others, in
smaller measure, can also deal with it. All the States
should face it.
Mr. THEODORE: —There is the question of finance
Involved.
The CHAIRMAN^.—No doubt you had this par-
ticular phase of the subject in your mind when you
swelled your figures.
Mr. THEODORE.—We shall have some men coming
from the other States.
The CHAIRMAN. —Instead of attracting men from
the other States, it would be better to get these ex-
service men from Great Britain. We should thus pre-
serve our balance of population in the south and the
east, while the two great territories which are so
sparsely settled could deal with the men from overseas
in addition to providing for their own share of repatria-
tion work. Anything in reason that the Common-
wealth Government can do. to assist all the States to
tackle this job, in addition to dealing with our own
men, will be cheerfully undertaken, and particularly in
regard to the two States which, because of their wide
areas, feel most competent to provide for these men.
Mr. COYNE.—We have already made provision for
50.000 settlers.
The CHAIRMAN.—Turning aside from the ques-
tion of finance", will the Conference give their attention
to another phase of the subject? The Conference must
not lose sieht of the fact that the work of demobiliza-
tion is likely to be carried out far more rapidly than
was at first supposed. We have all read of the insistent
demands on the part of British. Canadian, and United
States troops for rapid demobilization, and no doubt
arrangements will be made so that, with the signing of
the peace terms, the Allies will be able to withdraw
their armies fairly quickly. It will be too late for us
to go in search of these men twelve months or twenty-
four months later. The machinery of government
should be Competent to at once devise a scheme of
unified organization for the absorption of British
soldier settlers in Australia. We should be able to set
our machinery going at this end without delay. I do
not' suppose we can make the arrangements at this
Conference, but the work ought to be taken in hand at
once.
Mr. THEODORE.—Everything depends on how we
deal with the men who are coming back—not only those
who will go on the land, but others. If there were an
unemployment situation, no State Government could
advertise to attract men from abroad.
The .CHAIRMAN.—I quite agree with you, but our
experience has been that the unemployment problem
mostly centres in the cities or the larger centres of
population. I do not say that we should do
this work relating to British ex-service men before we
solve our own problem, but we should get ready to do
it. We should announce to the world in terms of time
as well as of conditions what we are ready to do. Ho
doubt Canada is ready now to induce British ex-service
men to settle there. She was ready before the war, and,
perhaps, will get hundreds of thousands of these men.
Without derogating from the claims of Canada, she
cannot hold out to men with a given amount of capital
anything like the prospects in respect of land settle-
ment that Australia can offer them. We have terri-
torial and other responsibilities, and we want all the
white faces and arms we can get in Australia.
Mr. THEODORE.—We have millions of acres of
suitable land.
The CHAIRMAN".—In Victoria and Tasmania we
have got into the habit of talking as if we could do no
more in the way of land settlement. Fifty years hence,
when Victoria has. as I hope she will then have, a popu-
lation of 10,000,000 or 15,000,000, people will wonder
at the blindness of the men of to-day who thought that
there was no room for further settlement. Travelling
through Europe one does not see any country possessing
ten or twenty times the number of men on the land
that we have, that offers the opportunities that settlers
have here.
Mr. THEODORE.—A good stiff land tax would
remedy that.
The CHAIRMAN.—We have tried that, but it does
not do.
Mr. THEODORE.—Then it is not stiff enough.
The CHAIRMAN.—You should see the recent
impost I put on.
Mr. THEODORE.—The Victorian land tax is Id.
/ in the £l. The Queensland land tax goes up to Bd.,
and that is on top of the Common wealth tax.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is a statement of fact, but
perhaps not of benefit. I am, and always have been,
a land-taxer; but the land tax in itself is no cure.
REPATRIATION.—fa) WORKS PROGRAMMES OF
COMMONWEALTH AND STATE GOVERNMENTS;
(b) SOLDIER LAND SETTLEMENT.
Mr. LEE.—We have not yet settled the question of
the 2 1 per cent. To test the feeling of the Conference,
I move—
That the subsidy of £27,500 per £1,000,000 be
left in the hands of the Commonwealth in the
form of a trust fund for the benefit of the several
States as an insurance against loss.
Mr. THEODORE.—I am afraid that is not work-
able. The State knows the year in which the loss
occurs, and in which it would be of the greatest benefit
to have the money handed over to it by the Common-
wealth. That is when the State would want the money.
It would certainly be most inconvenient if the State
had to make a claim, and prove a definite and tangible
loss to justify it.
Mr. GARDINER.—I understood you to say, Mr.
Chairman, that the money became ours.
The CHAIRMAN.—My advice to you is to “ leave
it to uncle.” As the money fell into the trust fund


quarterly or half-yearly at the Commonwealth Trea-
sury, there should be an agreement drawn up between
the Commonwealth Government and the six State Go-
vernments as to the mode of paying it out. If you
want to conserve the fund as an insurance against
inevitable losses, that is the best way in which the State
Governments as a whole can hold the money. On the
other hand, the Queensland Government, apparent!y,
feels quite strong enough to resist pressure for the
passing out of that money in some form of expenditure.
Mr. THEODORE.—To keep the money in a trust
fund would be deferring, and, to a large extent, reduc-
ing the benefit.
The CHAIRMAN.—You can get interest on it.
Mr. THEOD.ORE, —But we could not get the money
in the year in which the loss actually occurred.
Mr. ANSTEY.—CouId you not agree that if any
State so desired, the money should be handed over to
it?
Mr. LEE.—I had it in mind to suggest the drawing
up of an agreement, such as the Chairman has indi-
cated, between the Commonwealth and State Go-
vernments, and that the agreement be varied to suit
the necessities of the different States. One State might
prefer to draw the money annually, and another to let
it accumulate for five years.
The CHAIRMAN.—I was trying to put the States
under uniform conditions with regard to the with-
drawal of the money. If it is to be an insurance fund,
it should not be monkeyed with. You should let it
accumulate until you know your losses.
Mr. CLARKE.—Out of that fund, we have to meet
certain losses in concessions and interest.
Mr. McPHERSON.—We do not mean losses in that
sense. What Mr. Clarke refers to are concessions; but
if a man goes on a block and fails, that is a, loss.
The CHAIRMAN.—These are the particular losses
I have in my mind: You advance a soldier settler £4OO
for fixed improvements, and subsequently have to pass
on the property to an ordinary civilian settler with the
assets on which you made your advance written down
to £2OO. There you have a clear loss of £2OO.
Another case: A man takes up land, and after four or
five years, through lack of knowledge or sickness, you
lose a dot of rent from him. Then you may have to
build a railway to open up a big area of Crown land.
Instead of showing working expenses and 5 per cent,
interest on capital, it shows in the first five years work-
ing expenses and 1 per cent. There is another form of
loss. All those forms of losses could be lumped, and
you would be wise to make an insurance-fund to meet
them. If you cannot mafye that fund with our money,
make it with your own.
Mr. CLARKE.—Some provision must be madq for
a totally different class of loss represented by conces-
sions. At present there is an agreement between the
State and Commonwealth that money will be advanced
by the Commonwealth - for improvements at 34 per
cent, the first year and 4 per cent, the second, the
States and the Commonwealth to share the loss on that
interest. You have abrogated that agreement by this
new one.
The CHAIRMAN.—That is what I propose, but if
you want to add that loss to the kinds of loss I was
speaking of, well and good.
Mr. CLARKE.—I should like to be able to present
an account to the Treasurer showing that the loss
under the old agreement comes to, say, £30,000 a year,
and inform him that the State wants to indemnify
itself out of the fund for that loss.
Mr. .GARDINER. —Did I not understand you to
say, in answer to my colleague, that the money would
be the States’ money ? Is it now suggested that- we
must present to the Commonwealth an account showing
our losses, or does the money become the absolute pro-
perty of the States, and do they have to recoup them-
selves out of it for {heir losses?
The CHAIRMAN.—The particular insurance fund
I have suggested would mount up, by quarterly or half-
yearly payments, gradually until it totalled £5,500,000
over a course of five years. In the meantime any con-
cessional losses, such as Mr. Clarke has mentioned,
would have to be borne, as they have to be borne to-
day, without any insurance fund, out of the Consoli-
dated Revenue. At the end of five years, or perhaps at
the end of three years, the States might say, “It is
clear that the loss we have sustained is so much.” The
agreement that we would draw up in regard to the
custodianship of the money would be such that after
the first one, two, or three years you would be able to
levy on the insurance to the extent of your individual
aggregate share of it.
Mr. CLARKE.—That will satisfy us.
Mr. THEODORE.—The proposal does not satisfy
me, but perhaps Queensland is somewhat differently
situated from the other States. During the next
twelve months, from this date, we may have expended
£1,000,000 on railways connected with repatriation
works. Probably the expenditure will far exceed
that, but we will take £1,000,000 for the sake
of argument. That money will have been actually
expended, and from the date of expenditure we must
find interest on it. At the end of the twelve months we
shall be liable for £50,000 in interest, chargeable on
our Consolidated Revenue, but the railway will not be
earning anything, because it will not be completed.
It would be the greatest relief to the State if
whatever assistance we were to get came to us in the
first year or two of that railway construction. After
that we should be able to bear the cost, because the rail-
way would be earning something.
Mr. CLARKE.—Is not your objection covered by
the Chairman’s proposition that each State should
make a statement to the Commonwealth of the' charges
to be debited against the fund?
Mr. THEODORE.—The difficulty is that when at
the end of the financial year we draw up an account of
the actual loss, it takes some time. Then the accounts
have to be audited, and presented to the Common-
wealth. Then they have to be audited by the Com-
monwealth, and perhaps twelve months afterwards, or
two years after the loss occurred, we get a recoup. I
think it is better to have the money when we need
it.
The CHAIRMAN.—The only solution I see is this:
With those of you who want to bind yourselves in an
agreement to hold this money as a bond fide insurance
fund against loss, and not to have it mopped up in
ordinary expenditure from the Consolidated Revenue
every year, we will make an agreement if you like. I
prefer the States to do it in that way, because it will
keep them more stable against the desire to expend the
money for any other purpose.
Mr. GARDINER. —What Mr. Theodore says is that
his State has to provide £50,000 worth of interest.
That must be provided somewhere, and he contends
that it would be of assistance to Queensland if £27,500
of it were credited to that State straightway.
Mr. THEODORE.—Yes.
The CHAIRMAN. —If I were State Treasurer, I
would face the problem in this way: I would say, “I
have that money in the Commonwealth Treasury, but
I cannot get it at once.” So I would levy ou my Trust
Funds or other mobile resources until the agreement
period expired.


Mr. THEODORE.—WouId your Auditor-General
permit it?
The CHAIRMAN. —Things of that kind have been
done. I have done them myself.
Mr. THEODORE.—Perhaps that is how you have
obtained your present reputation.
Mr. GARDINER.—What if we have no funds from
which we can draw?
Mr. CLARKE.—Cannot you issue short-dated Trea-
sury Bills ?
Mr. GARDINER. —I do not think there would be
much difficulty.
The CHAIRMAN. —I am trying to suggest to you
something for your benefit. It makes no difference to
us whether we put this money into an account, and
pay interest on it, or hand it over to you, except that if
you get it every half-year or year it will not be the full
insurance fund 1 thought it would be, for I know you
will spend it, and be mighty hard up, and sorry you
have done so.
Mr. GARDINER. —That is my fear, but there is also
the other fear that we may not have enough out of
revenue to meet the interest on the loans we get from
you.
The CHAIRMAN.—Is it proposed to proceed with
Mr. Lee’s motion ?
Mr.' LEE.—I should like to see the motion
carried, because I think that its principle is
sound. At the same time, to get its full value
there must be uniformity. 1 can foresee the
danger that if this amount is handed over to the
States, one State, which is more prosperous than the
others, will say: “ We are going to hand this on to
the soldiers,” and it will thus set up more of
that competition between the States of which
we have already had too much in dealing with
returned men. The weaker States are always at
a disadvantage in regard to concessions. The
soldiers say to us: “New South Wales or Queens-
land is doing this, that, and the other; why cannot you
do the same?” but we are not in a position to do it.
Sir ELLIOTT LEWIS.—And we have to put on
taxes to meet the cost.
The CHAIRMAN.—There is not only the demand of
the soldier, or of the community on his behalf, for
bigger concessions, but you will be pressed to spend this
money on other projects, and when it is gone there will
not be an insurance fund.
Mr. GARDINER. —It must be clearly understood,
especially if we take the money temporarily out of other
funds, as you suggest, that the actual amount we expect
is coming to us from you. It will not, do if we expect
£27,500, and you hand us over £27,500, less some big re-
duction.
The CHAIRMAN.—There would be no big reduc-
tion, because there would be a definite arrangement with
the Commonwealth.
Mr. GARDINER.—You say this to the States: “ We
are prepared to allow you £27,500 against every
£1,000,000 borrowed.”
The CHAIRMAN. —I have not said that yet.
Mr. GARDINER.—We think that is a fair propor-
tion of our loss, and we want to be sure that that is
the sum we can rely on getting.
The CHAIRMAN. —If the Commonwealth Govern-
ment says “ Yes,” that is the position. ,
Mr. GARDINER. —JThen that is all right; that
makes it clfiflr.
The CHAIRMAN. —If you find it impossible to
arrive at an arrangement for holding the money, we
will keep it for any State that wants us to do so under
some suitable agreement. The amount mentioned is
more generous in point of time and rate than I have
hitherto been authorized to give. We are talking of
an arrangement that means a concession of £5,500,000
in five years, which is obviously a big thing, but I am
so convinced that you, gentlemen, ought to be heartened
on this job which you are attempting, that I am pre-
pared to recommend it to the Federal Cabinet. I can-
not go further than that at the present time, and I think
you will realize that it is a very liberal arrangement. If
the States, without the concession of lower rates other
than those they have given to soldiers already, are
going to lose more than £5,500,000, I shall be pro-
foundly surprised, and will regard it as an evidence of
misplaced activity on their part.
Mr. THEODORE. —I think the States will lose more
than £5,500,000.
• The CHAlRMAN.—Queensland may. do so on ac-
count of its developmental projects.
Mr. GARDINER. —Our loss would probably be
more also.
The CHAIRMAN.—The same remark applies to
Western Australia; but if I believed that £5,500,000
would be lost in five years by the other States, which
have not the same developmental problems, in carrying
out repatriation by means of land settlement, I should
be very anxious about the future of Australia.
I do not think the States will lose so much.
The Commonwealth is asked to behave very liberally,
but we realize that the States are doing the job, and we
want you to do it; and that is why I ask that you should
accept the proposal as now put before you.
Mr. McPHERSON. —We would like to have had the
arrangement so phrased that we should not be com-
pelled to take the whole amount if we did not require
it. We have placed our maximum requirements be-
fore you.
The CHAIRMAN.—If you should come to us and
say, “We do not want £10,000,000; we can do with
£5,000,000,” we would give you a special decoration.
Mr. THEODORE. We have been discussing this
project as having to do with a five-year period.
The CHAIRMAN.—No; for three years.
Mr. THEODORE.—The discussion regarding subsidy
from the Commonwealth to the States had to do with
a five-year period. I take ft, however, that it does not
matter when we get the money.
The CHAIRMAN. No. You will be drawing
some of it, I dare say, during 1919. From the time
we furnish the money this arrangement holds good.
It is a five-year business arrangement in relation to
interest;, after it becomes payable.
Motion (Mr. Lee’s) lapsed.
Mr. ANSTEY. —I would like it to go forth from this
Conference that at least 1 per cent, of that 2| per
cent, given by the Commonwealth should go as a con-
cession to the soldiers. That,should be laid down as
a principle. I move—
That at least 1 per cent, of the 2| per cent, con-
cession be passed on by the States in the form of
reduced interest to soldiers.
The CHAIRMAN.—No one will be unsympathetic
with the principle, but there will be a difficulty in the
cases of the States which have gone better than that
already.
Mr. ANSTEY.—It will not affect them if the motion
is carried.
Mr. CLARKE.—The States will have to offer the
best they can to the soldiers. That, I think, should be
far enough for us to go in this regard.
The CHAIRMAN.—For those States which have
already given cheaper money than the motion pro-
poses, this would not be a binding resolution; but it
would bind those which have not done so.
Mr. GEORGE.—It would be dangerous to agree to a
motion of this character. We cannot do more in
Western Australia than we are offering now.


The CHAIRMAN.—I am afraid that unanimity will
not be reached, because the States set out upon different
bases originally.
Motion (Mr. Anstey’s) withdrawn.
Mr. THEODORE.—I wish to introduce the matter
of the recouping of the States for actual cash expen-
diture already made in connexion with soldier settle-
ments and repatriation carried on by the States.
The CHAIRMAN..—I am willing to concede retro-
spection in relation to the 2| per cent, concession
undertaken by us. But I do not want to have placed
upon my shoulders the responsibility of saying to the
States which have indulged in big resumptions and
have issued their bonds
Mr. THEODORE.—I am referring solely to cash
expenditure. In Queensland we have had to draw
upon our trust funds, expecting to be recouped, and the
sum runs to about a quarter of a million sterling. We
cannot draw upon our ordinary loan funds. Savings
Bank funds have been used.
The CHAIRMAN.—Subject to the concurrence of
the Minister for Repatriation, I should feel inclined to
take this matter over, if that is all there is in it.
Mr. GROOM.—Do you mean for us to take up the
balance of the men’s contributions?
Mr. THEODORE.—That would be the most satis-
factory arrangement —to merge them.
The CHAIRMAN.—I urge you not to put that in
the form of a resolution, because at this stage I cannot
say whether it would be acceptable to the Common-
wealth Government. Regarding those States which have
been carrying out works of the kind and have fur-
nished the cash, and are thus out of pocket, I will under-
take to analyze their circumstances with Senator Millen
at once, and I tEink we can absorb them into the gene-
ral housing scheme.
Mr. GROOM.—Is your expenditure upon resump-
tion included in Schedule 1. ?
Mr. THEODORE.—No. I think the Commonwealth
should recoup the States for their actual cash outlay
on laud settlement during the past eighteen months.
The CHAIRMAN.—In effect, Queensland stood out-
side the original scheme. You said, “We are going on
our own.” If that was outside the area of agreement
between the Commonwealth and the States, you cannot
now put it down in the form of a promissory note and
say that we indorsed it. We did not.
MV. THEODORE.—We did not actually have repre-
sentation upon the Board, but we had consultations with
the Minister for Repatriation in regard to advancing
money to us on the same terms as under the scheme.
Senator Millen agreed, and inspected the soldiers’ settle-
ment accommodation in Queensland. But we had not
advanced the matter so far as to get any money from
the Commonwealth.
The CHAIRMAN.—I cannot commit the Minister
for Repatriation; but if he agrees, I will approve of
what he affirms.
Mr. ANSTEY.—In South Australia we have spent,
roughly, three-quarters of a million on resumption of
land.
Mr. THEODORE.—I am not referring to resump-
tion, but only to moneys advanced for improvements.
Mr. ANSTEY.—We have advanced £164,000, but
have received nothing from the Commonwealth. I do
not think we have claimed it.
The CHAlRMAN.—Excluding Queensland for the
time being, I say to those five States which went into
the agreement and got money under it, that what they
must ask me to-day—and with perfect safety—is to
apply this concession to that money. But do not ask
me to find any more capital than is already set out in
your schedule.
. Mr. ANSTEY.—WiII that place South Australia in
the same position as Queensland regarding advances
for homes ?
Tne CHAIRMAN.—If your proposition is on all-
fours, the acceptance of Mr. Theodore’s proposal would
necessarily involve acceptance of yours.
Mr. GARDINER. —In addition to the Common-
wealth advance of £5OO, we advance £250. Will that
come under this proposal ?
The CHAIRMAN.—I do not think so. What we
do is to agree to an advance of £500; and until the
agreement for £625 supersedes that amount, I think
the States ought to bear any additional amount
advanced.
Mr. LEE.—In Tasmania, we have advanced
£200,000 in resumption of land for returned soldiers.
Will the Commonwealth pay 2'i per cent, interest on
that amount?
The CHAIRMAN.—Did you get money from the
Commonwealth for those resumptions?
Mr. LEE.—No.
The CHAIRMAN. —Certain States have had money
from the Commonwealth under the original arrange-
ment, and all I can be expected to do is to allow 2|
per cent, as concession on those advances. I should
think, however, that no State would ask for this con-
cession with regard to land resumptions.
Mr. LEE.—Do you mean that you would not advance
2if per cent, on the capital involved ?
The CHAIRMAN. —No. We did not find the
money.
Mr. LEE.—But is not that unfair to those States
that have no Crown lands available ?
The CHAIRMAN.—Under the original agreement,
the States undertook to find all the land for returned
soldiers if the Commonwealth assisted financially. We
knew that the circumstances of the States were widely
different, and that it was harder for Tasmania to
operate the agreement than for Western Australia or
Queensland. But you took it on. It is not proposed
to make this arrangement retrospective in regard to
those earlier engagements.
Mr. ANSTEY.—Except so far as our advances are
The CHAIRMAN.—That is so.
Mr. HAYES.—But what would the position have
been if we had come to you asking for £200,000?
The CHAIRMAN. —You would not have got it, be-
cause the arrangement was otherwise. You took the
responsibility of advancing for resumption.
Mr. LEE.—What is the position with regard to the
future? Supposing we come to you for money for
future land resumption?
The CHAIRMAN. —That is in this agreement. I
am talking about the future, because I want you to
hurry. As far as land resumption is concerned, that
has been a State responsibility. But now from this
Conference the Commonwealth propose to be associated
with the States in a new arrangement.
Mr. THEODORE. —It would be unfair to say that
because we were in a sense outside the original agree-
ment and made no claim, we are to be shut out, while
South Australia’s claims are recognised, because we
were carrying out our scheme with the cognisance, if
not the approval, of the Commonwealth Government.
The CHAIRMAN. —I did not say that you would be
shut out. Mr. Anstey has said that South Australia,
until now, has made no claims. If South Australia does
present a claim, it will be for you to submit Queens-
land’s claim for the consideration by the Minister, and
if he says that your claim is on all-fours with that of
South Australia, I will have* to foot the bill on his
recommendation.


Mr. GARDINER.—ton are referring to the £5OO
advance. We advance more than that, and I presume
we will get nothing on any amount over and above the
£5OO.
The CHAIRMAN.—No concession will be allowed
on the excess amount. Before we leave these matters, I
should like to direct your attention to the second
schedule, as I assume there will be some adjustments.
It has been reported to me by the Minister for Re-
patriation that the figures decided upon at the sub-
Conference were based on all the data available, and I
suggest that if you have corrected figures to submit we
should have them with all possible despatch.
Mr. COYNE. —I think It was an entirely false basis
on which to draft the figures, because in Australia we
have a Targe number of men moving about from State
to State. I refer particularly to shearers. Shearing in
Queensland starts very early in the year, and men en-
gaged in that occupation usually finish up in Victoria.
They spend the largest part of their time in Queens-
land, but I have no doubt that a great number are re-
garded as Victorian enlistments.
The CHAIRMAN.—I see that is a disadvantage, but
it had to be adopted as a working basis. There is,
however, sufficiently elastic provision in the fourth re-
solution to overcome any difficulty if any State is going
to do more in the way of land settlement than is
suggested by the quota.
Mr. COYNE. —I could see this difficulty at the sub-
Conference, but we were asked to make provision for
what we were prepared to do now, not two years hence.
I say there must be a big margin for States like West-
ern Australia and Queensland, which have large areas
of Crown lands upon which to settle men.
The CHAIRMAN. If Queensland or Western
Australia is prepared to mop up the extra men, we are
willing to help you under this scheme.
Mr. GROOM.—The Minister for Repatriation men-
tioned 20,000 men as the number likely to require land
in the various States. He originally asked for 17,000
holdings, and that quota was communicated to each of
the States concerned. Now he has increased the num-
ber to 20,000, and the quota for each State has been
proportionately increased. It is open for soldiers to
apply to any particular State, and in the event of any
State being called upon to do more than its quota,
provision can be made.
The CHAIRMAN.—If, for example, Queensland or
Western Australia is called upon to do more in this
direction than the other States, the . other States will
have less, and the fourth resolution provides the means
for an adjustable arrangement.
“ That the Commonwealth be asked to make avail-
able for each State the amount of money necessary
for advances for soldiers’ settlements, and the neces-
sary public works in aid of land repatriation, on
the basis of the quota of men enlisted from each
State, leaving for further consideration the ques-
tion of the Commonwealth advancing further as-
sistance should it become apparent that the quota
in any State will be exceeded.”
If soldiers want to settle in, say, Queensland, they will
have full opportunity to do so. Senator Millen has
fixed on 20,000 as the number of soldiers who probably
will requisition for land in all the States. But
that is merely conjectural. I should not like any
of the States to come along later and say to the Com-
monwealth, “You misled us. We made our arrange-
ments on a 20,000 basis, and there are only 10,000 ap-
plications.” On the other hand, there might he
30,000 So far as -we cap judge on the
data available,' 20,000 lodks like the probable maximum
number of holdings required, and it is the duty of this
Conference to deal with that estimate, so that all the
Governments concerned may know their objective.
Mr.- CLARKE.—Senator Millen expresses him-
self as uncertain on the data available, and personally I
would not like to affirm that 20,000 is the maximum. I
think it might possibly run to 25,000.
The CHAIRMAN, —On the data available, I
think the Conference should proceed on the assumption
that 20,000 will be the number, though I do not want
to make a prophecy or to register a misunderstanding.
Are you satisfied that 20,000 is a safe and proper
estimate on which to work at present?
Mr. CLARKE.—I should say that we are satis-
fied. That was the basis which we accepted in the
sub-Conference.
Mr. GEORGE.—We cannot go further than that.
The CHAIRMAN. —Is South Australia satisfied?
Mr. ANSTEY.—Yes.
The CHAIRMAN.—I desire an understanding be-
fore we part that 20,000 is regarded by all the State
representatives as a reasonable estimate of the number
Of soldier settlers to be provided for.
Mr. COYNE.—I think our quota is too low.
The CHAIRMAN.—I am not speaking of the
quotas.
Mr. COYNE. —Twenty thousand will be the mini-
mum. .
The CHAIRMAN.—At any rate, we are all of
opinion that the number of soldiers to be provided for
will be about 20,000.
There is another matter which interests me particu-
larly. Schedule I. does not indicate the periods dur-
ing which the States will require the £39,563,941 that
is asked for; how much will be needed in the first year,
how much in the second, and how much in the third?
Mr. THEODORE. —That is a matter on which each
State might communicate with you, giving definite esti-
mates for each year.
The CHAIRMAN. —I think that the information
should be as' complete as possible. All the details must
be obtainable from the Works and Lands Departments
of the States. Such information is needed for my
financial calculations. I ask you, gentlemen, to send to
me, as soon as you get back to your seats of govern-
ment, the information required for the calculation of
your requirements in the first, second, and third year.
It will be helpful to have, also, as much detail oonoern-
ing the works as can be given, as well as information
about resumptions and other matters. This will be
helpful to the repatriation authority.
Mr. GEORGE.—You suggest that we are to get the
total amount asked for. Do you desire similar informa-
tion regarding projected works for the giving of em-
ployment to soldiers, but not for the placing of soldier
settlers on the land ?
, <
The CHAIRMAN. —I am talking now of repatria-
tion propositions associated with Schedule I.
Mr.-GROOM.—Senator Millen would like , you to
indicate how many acres will be made available for
settlement in each area.
The CHAIRMAN.—In connexion with the opening
up of land by a railway, or other means, you might
tell us how many soldiers, as well as how many
civilians, will be provided for, so that we may know
the repatriation value of each work. We have an
interest in knowing what is done with the money we
advance under Schedule I. The cost of land settle-
ment, according to that schedule, varies considerably
in the different States. In Victoria, the total cost per
settler is £2,125 —£1,500 for land • and £625 .as the !
maximum advance. The full rate of interest/on the"
total sum will be more than £2 per week.


STATES’ EXPENDITURE OUT OF LOAN.
—
1906-7.
1907-8.
1908-9.
1909-10.
1910-11.
1911-12.
1912-13.
1913-14.
1014-15.
7
1916-16.
£
£
£
£
£
— £
£
£
£
£
N. S. Wales
1,058,653
1,965,329
2,906,507
3,246,640
3,921,758
5,491,103
7,703,594
9,126,844
6,996,107
8,173,104
Victoria ..
695,658
783,538
1,098,360
1,209,505
2,657,271
2,974,149
2,202,697
3,276,994
5,351,830
4,473,569
Queensland
683,570
1,033,676
1,247,821
1,486,216
1,995,301
3,324,248
2,448,066
2,190,150
2,638,266
3,061,839
8. Australia
499,132
495,928
832,114
978,082
1,567,210
1,756,050
2,247,337
2,762,686
2,632,769
2,097,197
W. Australia
900,964
733,745
1,012,452
1,028,995
1,484,367
2,344,070
3,423,020
2,883,169
2,521,608
1,584,643
Tasmania ..
156,945
224,954
334,200
435,104
300,216
435,557
404,560
498,141
785,269
880,394
3,894,822
6,237,170
7,431,454
8,384,542
11,926,123
16,326,177
18,429,274
.20,737,984
20,825,839
20,270,746
Mr. CLARKE.—lncluding Crown land, the total
cost per settler in Victoria will be £1,625. We have a
considerable area of Crown land.
The CHAIRMAN.—I am dealing with settlements
on resumed areas. In Tasmania the total cost is
£1,825 per settlor, or more than 355. a week. In regard
to Schedule 11., there is no data to enable me to judge of
the employment that the works for which it provides are
likely to give to returned men. The amount asked
for is £22,950,000 —an average of £7,650,000 a year
for three years. The Governments of Victoria
and New South Wales, in which States two-
thirds of the population of Australia reside, have
decided to make their own financial arrangements for
public works, and before I could promise on behajf of
the Commonwealth to make £22,950,000 available to the
other States, to find employment for returned soldiers,
I should want to know what they were doing. Should it
ibe the intention of the Governments of those States to
on a very vigorous public works policy, .my
power to borrow money, either here or in Great Britain,
might be affected. I have no knowledge of the intentions
of those Governments. I have no data from any of
the other four States as to what benefit this would con-
fer in the employment of returned soldiers.
Mr. HAYES.—I pointed out that we had very large
commitments in respect of our hydro-electric works
which would provide a lot of employment of various
kinds for returned soldiers.
The CHAIRMAN.—WiII not your expenditure in
respect of hydro-electric works relate mostly to im-
ported material?
Sir ELLIOTT LEWIS. —Not more than one-fourth
of it will be incurred in paying for material. We
estimate that three-fourths of it will be in respect of
headworks, canals, laying of pipes, and so forth, which
will give a lot of employment for pick-and-shovcl men.
The CHAIRMAN. —Before I make up my mind
how far I can go I shall want to know from the other
two States what their operations are likely to be.
Mr. HAYES.—We will supply you with our in-
formation as soon as possible—in fact, right away.
The CHAIRMAN. —I shall be glad of that. This
schedule as it stands is of no use to me. It gives no
information as to the character of the works to*be
undertaken, or whether they are to be reproductive.
Sir HENRY LEFROY.—We have that informa-
tion with us.
The CHAlRMAN.—Queensland has given us some
special particulars which have not been supplied by
the other States, and I shall be glad to have as early
as possible further information, to enable me to judge
of the utility of these undertakings from the repatria-
tion point of view. As soon as that information is
supplied I shall have it carefully examined, and see
how far it is possible for the Federal Government to
ascertain the intention of the Governments of Victoria
and New South Wales with respect to competitive
borrowing for works.
Mr. COYNE. —Is repatriation the only point that
you are going to take into consideration?
Mr. THEODORE. —And not necessarily land settle-
ment ? 1
The CHAIRMAN.—No. We had a contract with
respect to land settlement which we thought should he
reviewed and discussed, and we have discussed it. It
looked as if the pressure during the earlier period of
demobilization would be very great, and we wanted to
see how far the works programmes of all the States
could he co-ordinated and arrangements made for the
money to do this work. Two State Governments
which are the chief spenders have given us no particu-
lars. If they continue their public works policy as
they did before, from some points they will spend far
more than the Commonwealth.
Mr. McPHERSON.—Apart from land settlement,
we have spent £2,000,000 a year for the last two years
on public works.
The CHAIRMAN. —I have no information in the
schedule on that point.
Mr. McPHERSON.—We will supply it.
CO-ORDINATION OF COMMONWEALTH, STATE,
AND OTHER PUBLIC BORROWING.
The CHAlRMAN.—Standing as Victoria does, out-
side the proposed financial arrangement for the future,
I should like to know how she proposes to operate her
finances in regard to these matters?
Mr. McPHERSON. — We are prepared to help you
in every possible way.
The CHAIRMAN. —I have just had compiled a
statement showing what the States have been doing in
respect of loan expenditure for some time. The figures
are interesting—
In 1916-17 the expenditure out of loan fell to
£14,714,294, but whether that decline was merely tem-
porary, due to the pressure of circumstances, I do
not know. If two States intend to branch out uncon-
trolled, I shall rely upon the other States that have
not given us details to send them in at once, so that
we can analyze them, deliberate upon them, and supply
a statement of our possibilities.
Mr. THEODORE. —The question is rather too
urgent to he made the subject of correspondence. I
am prepared to remain here until we can, if possible,
C. 1144.—7
formulate a definite scheme. I recognise the urgency
of the matter so far as Queensland is concerned. It is
necessary to come to some definite conclusion, because,
if the Commonwealth cannot, or will not, undertake the
finding of this money, we shall have to make other
arrangements. Inseparably associated with the pro-
blem of our returned soldiers is the problem
of possible unemployment. I do not refer
necessarily to the unemployment of returned soldiers,
but to unemployment created by the return of our men.
We wish to make early provision, and cannot afford to


wait six months for the decision of this Conference.
We have practically put in hand works that will have
absorbed all our resources by the end of the financial
year.
The CHAIRMAN.—Quite so; but you must recog-
nise our difficulty. We came here with a proposal to
arrange the loans of the States. The two principal
borrowing States rejected it, and have decided to
remain outside any control. Associated with that pro-
ject was this more immediate project with regard to
public works during the repatriation period. These
two States, however/ still stand outside, apparently
fearing control. 1 am, therefore, left with the
handling of the four other States which have
not been such large spenders on public works.
The problem will not be solved in the least by these
four States and the Commonwealth obtaining a know-
ledge of one another’s objectives if, at the same time, we
know nothing as to what the two principal States are
doing. That is our difficulty at the present time. On
the land settlement proposition we have proceeded step
by step, and have settlement in sight, but on the loan
question the position is different. If, for example, New
South Wales is going to embark upon a loan expendi-
ture of £10,000,000 per annum, or Victoria upon an ex-
penditure of £2,000,000, £3,000,000, or £5,000,000, that
will condition my capacity to get money, and also con-
dition the spending of money in other ways.
Mr. THEODORE.—We can afford probably to wait
three months for a settlement of the matter, providing
we can obtain accommodation during that period; but
we must move rapidly. We, in Queensland, have re-
stricted ourselves, as shown by our declining annual ex-
penditure during the last two years, and our loan funds
are almost depleted. In view of the necessities of the
situation, we must act without delay, and we are will-
ing to enter into any reasonable arrangement with the
Commonwealth. Failing Commonwealth arrangement,
we shall have to move for ourselves.
The CHAIRMAN.—I can only put the matter as I
did in regard to the Savings Rank question, and say
that, failing agreement between the Commonwealth and
the States as a whole, as to the future borrowing policy,
the Commonwealth must negotiate with the individual
States that are agreeable that we should act for them.
Because of the resistance of the two principal States,
there can be no Australian policy. There will be
an elimination, to some extent, of competition, but not
of the whole of it, and I have simply to open negotia-
tions with the four States that may desire the Common-
wealth to arrange loans for them during the next throe
years. Those negotiations I am prepared to commence
at once, just as I am prepared to negotiate at once with
regard to the Savings Banks.
Mr. GARDINER. —Will you be prepared to receive
now the particulars we can give you in regard to our
expenditure, so that we may obtain some practical pro-
mise that will enable us to keep things going?
The CHAIRMAN. —The principle has already been
accepted, and I shall be very glad to go into the matter
with you. Had I been able to induce the whole of the
States to come into line with my proposal in respect of
the three years’ period, then, chiefly because of the pres-
sure of repatriation work, I should have been pleased
beyond measure, no matter what might have been done
at the termination of that period. It would have
afforded us an opportunity by actual experience to test
the advantages of such an arrangement, but since the
proposal has been rejected I do not wish to force it on
any of the States.
Mr. MoPHERSON. —You spoke just now of your
project having been turned down by the two principal
States because probably of the fear of control. I may
say at once that we were not actuated by any such fear.
The position is that we have made our arrangements
for the next eighteen months or two years, and really
think we can do better than the Commonwealth.
The CHAIRMAN. I said circumstances would
force the people to recognise the importance of the pre-
sent position. 1 was referring, not only to finance,
but to many other matters. If this Conference breaks
up without any substantial result except in regard to
repatriation work—if it breaks up without even a full
discussion of the per capita proposals and the Savings
Bank scheme, there will be little prospect of future
Conferences coming to any other understanding. The
result will be that these extra-constitutional activities
will disappear. The people have power to force
the acceptance of their opinions whether they
favour the States or the Commonwealth, and when they
see their politicians unable to solve many of the prob-
lems which have been demanding solution for the last
decade or more, they will naturally be disgusted.
I have done my best to propound a solution of some of
the problems, but my proposals have been incontinently
rejected by the older States. I see no hope of any-
thing being done except by individual negotiations.
That will result inevitably in the Commonwealth and
the States making their own individual bargains in-
stead of there being that general relationship which
should exist between the Commonwealth and the States.
I object to the principle of the Commonwealth indivjr
dually negotiating with any one State concerning a
general matter.
Mr. THEODORE.—And playing off one State
against the other.
The CHAIRMAN. —Quite so; but the States are
driving us to this course, since we can make no arrange-
ment with them as a whole. I shall go as far as I can
for the mutual advancement of the States that are will-
ing to co-operate, but feel powerless to influence those
States which desire to remain outside.
>
*
SPECIAL ALLOWANCE TO WESTERN AUSTRALIA
AND TASMANIA—MURRAY RIVER AGREEMENT
—RAILWAY CONCESSIONS TO MEMBERS OF THE
A.I.F. ON FURLOUGH IN AUSTRALIA—VALEDIC-
TORY.
Mr. GARDINER.—May Sir Elliott Lewis and I
interview you with regard to the special circumstances
of Western Australia and Tasmania?
The CHAIRMAN.—I should like, before you leave,
to discuss that question with you in order to ascertain
your points of view. New South Wales, Victoria, and
South Australia are very interested with the Common-
wealth in the big statutory project known as the Murray
Waters scheme. An agreement for the delivery of
water, construction, control and finance was embodied
by the four Parliaments in legislation. We have not
been able to put before the Ministers of those States
certain propositions which the Commonwealth has had
under consideration for some time, and I should like an
opportunity, as early as possible, of considering them
with the States interested. I hope the South Australian
representatives will bear that in mind. Victoria knows
of our desire, and we shall communicate with New
South Wales with the object of insuring substantial
despatch in connexion with these works for land
settlement and repatriation, and some variation of the
statutory contract between us.
Mr. ANSTEY.—We have not dealt with the ques-
tion of railway passes to returned soldiers, which is
of great interest to the States generally.
The CHAIRMAN.—I put that item on the agenda
paper at the request of the Commonwealth Railways
Department.


Mr. GROOM.—If the State Ministers concerned will
meet me to-morrow morning, at eleven o’clock, in the
Board Room of the Railways Department, I shall try
bo have all the information ready for them.
The CHAIRMAN.—The Commonwealth recognises,
gentlemen, that you responded to its summons to
this Conference in the pursuit of your public duty, and
is deeply grateful to you for spending so much time in
the consideration of problems which are pressing <Jn all
of us for solution. I regret that circumstances led to
the departure of an important delegation, but what
happened was natural. I hope that any correspon-
dence following this Conference, to finalize
that are left hung up, will be given the personal
attention of State Ministers, so that the undue delay,
which is sometimes inseparable from departmental cor-
respondence, may be avoided. On behalf of the Com-
monwealth Government, I thank you for your atten-
dance, and hope that the result of at least one section
of our labours will be to benefit the men who have done
«mch in the way of sacrifice and service to save this
country.
Mr. LA\vcON.—Before the Conference ends, we
should register, try resolution, our gratitude to the
Chairman for calling the Conference, and for the way
in which he has presided over our deliberations. His
ability is well known to us an. He has explained
everything most clearly and lucidly. It is true that
it has not been possible to arrive at an agreement on
certain important matters, but that does not lessen our
regard for the Chairman, or our recognition of the way
in which he has conducted the work of the Conference.
I think I am expressing the feeling of all of us when
I say that we desire to co-operate with and assist the
Commonwealth in the solution of the repatriation prob-
lem. The Conference has certainly been very informa-
tive and helpful to us all. Although it may not bear
fruit in a direct agreement on certain outstanding
matters, it will, nevertheless, have good results. 1
move—
That the Conference expresses its gratitude to
the Chairman for the able way in which he has
conducted its proceedings.
Mr. THEODORE. —I second the motion. The
Chairman has been largely responsible for the business-
like despatch of the items on the agenda paper. We
'have lost no time in frill or other unnecessary display,
but have got straight down to business. The Chairman
kept us very much to the point, and consequently there
has been more despatch than usual. We owe this to
the Chairman’s ability, common-sense and fair-minded-
ness, and to his essential sense of fair play towards all
members.
Motion agreed to.
The CHAIRMAN.—I am disappointed at many
of the results of the Conference. I realize that the
Commonwealth cannot expect to mould the minds of
other Governments exactly as it likes, but 1 did exp
that we would arrive at a greater degree of finality on
important problems. I thank Mr. Lawson and Mr.
Theodore and all the other gentlemen present for their
assistance throughout the deliberations, and for the
delicacy and grace of the compliment which
seen, fit to pay me.


GENERAL INDEX TO DEBATES.
Pages
'innotting- ( o-oidiiiiitioi. of Commonwealth, State, ami other Public Borrowing .. .. 13,38,53,73, 97
S'trjJ'j.'. h‘t remie Act 1910 .. .. .. .. •• 11,38,53
Empire War Debt Commission .. .. .. . •. .. .. .. 15
Miiit.h Uiv'-r Agrei inoiil .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 98
Qu. tram ii'.i.l'ln airi ot.h'T Iliseases—Co-ordination of Com,monw T eMth and State powers in respect of .. 75, 77
I.' vuy Com ionst 'i i rubers of A.i.F. on furlough in Australia .. .. .. .. 98
He, mtriatkm— -Works Programmes of Commonwealth and State Governments and Soldier Land
Sell!.-ni. nl - 1. 16, 67, 79, 83,
liei nni>'d Soliiie!'- IVufi-i. noo in employment.. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 8-’
Savings Banks' Competition—Elimination of .. . .. .. .. .. .. 36,38,53
*■ -tl lomcnt of Biitish Soldiers .. .. .. .. .. .. ... .. 10,91
Speeial AHnw.uiee in We.-iern Australia and Tasmaida .. .. .. .. .. 93
I'liMilion L.i.tt-.- Cniliirm Commonwealth and St'.to Taxation Laws and/or Collection by one Authority 67
War—( 111n>n\\t'ii.lt h Lull mnity .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 43. 76
Wheat l , 'inllnel , . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10, o 2
INDEX TO PRINCIPAL SPEECHES.
(.VoA. lb-marks made by way of intcrjectioT or during general discussions are not indexed.)
IWrott ;e,g- Co mdijiation of Commonwealth, State, and other Public Borrowing —
Tho Chairman .. .. 13, 60, 73, 97, 98
Mr. Holman .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. •• 39
Mr. Mi l’lfi-inii .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 46
Mr. Tlt.-odoro .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 50,73,97
Mr. l’-'.:ko .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 45
Sir li’irlt.ud Holler .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 51
Mr. Gurdiivr .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. 53
Sir Klii-.iD Lewis .. .. .. ~ .. .. ».. .. 59
I'onni"nunlift/, Siir/i/uit nenue Act 1910 — f
'rif ('it:ii I'iiitiii .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11,62,65
Mr. llolmnn .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 41
Mr. M.-l’h.'i-.i! .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 47
Mr. Theodore .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 49
Sir ISii-hanl Butler .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 52
Mr. Gardiner .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 57
S'r Elliott Lewis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 39
Hu]vitrial ion -Works Programmes of Commonwealth and State Governments and Soldier Laud Settlement —
Tho (’iinirmiin .. .. .. .. .. .. .. •• 1,36,81,83,96
S'lintor .Milh'tt .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,3,33,79
Mr. Holman .. .. .. .. .. .. •• •• 3,5 16
Mr. Liwson .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. •• 4,21,85
Air. Theodor,- .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 7, 20, 84, 86, 88
Mr. .. 6,26
'sir Hen . .!. i •rv . , . . . . . . . . . . . . • . ,2b
Mi. I . .. •• 9.30,92
i’.' vugs Ban!. • -inipi't 11. i• >i bjlimination of—
Tjn i ■ . . ■ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 37, 61, 05
Mr Holman ' -.r. G .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 38
-on .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4:6
. .e .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 49
Sir Riei.aid Butler .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 50
Mr. Gitrdirn-r .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 53
Sir Elliott. L wis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 59
l’ri'-.u-.i .m; Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by
Government Printer for the State of Victoria.
