

AUSTRALIAN TRANS-CONTINENTAL RAILWAY,
MR. JOHN M. INST. C. E., F.G.S.,
AFTER EXE IN COMPANY WITH
MAJOR-GEN. THE HONO M CY ADELBERT FEILDING.




QUEENSLAND.
REPORT
UPON THE PROPOSED
AUSTRALIAN TRANS-CONTINENTAL RAILWAY,
BY
MR. JOHN ROBINSON, M. INST. C.E., F.G.S.,
AFTER EXPLORING THE COUNTRY, IN COMPANY WITH
MAJOE-6EN. THE HONOURABLE WILLIAM HENRY ADALBERT FBILDIN6.
f
AUGUST TO DECEMBER ,
I
1881.
v/
LONDON:
PRINTED BY THOS. KELL AND SON, KING STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
1882.




2, Westminster Chambers,
London, S.W.
20 th March, 1882.
To the Chairman and Directors of the Australian Trans-
Continental Railway Syndicate.
My Lords and Gentlemen—
Having visited Australia, in company with Major-General the
Honourable William Bedding, and examined the country to be
traversed by the proposed Trans-Continental Railway, I have now the
honour to lay before you the following report thereon, including
an estimate of the cost.
Previous to leaving London, I had the advantage of several inter-
views with your consulting engineers, Mr. G. B. Bruce and Mr. Fras.
W. Fox, with whom I discussed various engineering details to be
attended to.
Consulting
- EngmeerB -
I left London, June 3rd, 1881. General Feilding having joined
me at Paris, we proceeded via Brindisi, Suez, and Point de Galle, to
Melbourne. From Melbourne, we travelled overland to Sydney, with
the object of seeing something of Australian railways. At Sydney we
took passages in the A.S.IST. Company’s steamship, “ Wotonga,” and
arrived at Brisbane, July 18th.
V°y a S e out.
Brisbane!
Here we were met by the Honourable Thomas Mcllwraith, the
Premier, the Honourable Boyd Dunlop Morehead, Postmaster-General,
and others. The next day we called, as advised by the Premier,
on Mr. Herbert, Commissioner of Railways, Mr. Stanley, Chief
Engineer of the Southern and Western Railway, and Mr. Tully,
Surveyor-General, y These gentlemen supplied us with some reports,
plans and maps asked\for, and gave us much information.
officials inter-
viewetL
At Brisbane, I also njiet Mr. Robert Watson, C.E., who had recently
inspected and reported upon the country for the Trans-Continental
Railway to the Queensland Government. .Although suffering, at the
time, from fever-ague, he kindly my enquiries as to the
nature of the country, its inhabitants and supplies procurable, and
showed me his plans. I met him again, when returning home, at
Melbourne.
Mr. Robert
Watson, C.E.
The purchasing of the whole of the supplies for the expedition
to the Gulf of Carpentaria was undertaken by General Feilding, and
he made all the arrangements he conceived necessary.
outfit,
Early on the morning of the 4th of August, the whole party,
including Messrs. Lyster, Grant, Raff, Kerle, and five others, left
Departure from
Brisbane.


Brisbane by special train for Roma, 317 miles distant, which was
reached the same night.
Western Railway
I took advantage of the opportunity to inspect the first railway
made in Queensland, and for this purpose rode on the engine whilst
crossing the mountain ranges. We passed through deep cuttings,
some of them made through rock, and a number of tunnels.
Sharp curves and steep gradients are numerous. In crossing these
mountain barriers the most serious obstacle to the through route has
been overcome. The working expenses of traffic over such lines
cannot but be heavy, and the rates are, in consequence, high, which will
affect the cost of carriage of all plant and materials required for the
railways of the interior.
Stating on the
exnedition.
At Roma we began the journey on horseback. The routes by
which we travelled to the Gulf of Carpentaria are marked on the large
scale sketch map—roughly eight miles to the inch —handed to the
secretary, on which also the camps are numbered consecutively. I
may mention that General Fielding’s are the same as far as Cloncurry.
When near Muckadilla, 27 miles from Roma, we met Messrs. Collier
and Halliday, representatives of an Australian Syndicate, on their
return from an examination of the country by the way of Yuelba, St.
George, Cunnamulla and Thargomindah, to the border of the South
Australian Colony, and back up the Warrego River to Charlville
Messrs. Collier,
Sikin 1 .^ and
with a view to make proposals to Government for the construction of
the lines South and West of the Trans-Continental Railway. Mr.
Gresley Lukin, the Queensland representative of this Australian
Syndicate, who had accompanied us from Brisbane to attend an
interview whenever we should meet his party, which had been thought
desirable in the interests of both Syndicates, here returned. What
took place, and the matters discussed, I leave to General Fielding to
report as being within his province.
Eoma-Mitclioll.
Roma is the present railway terminus, and Mitchell, the starting
point of the Trans-Continental Railway, is 51 miles west of it. The
Roma-Mitchell Section has been let by contract to Messrs. Fraser,
McDonald and Company, and the works are now in course of con-
struction.
MITCHELL TO CHARLVILLE.
O to 110
ixiilos
Mitchell '
Township.
Mitchell is a township, consisting of 67 wooden bouses roofed
with corrugated galvanised tinned iron and contains 233 inhabitants
—129 adults, and 104 children. It is situated on the right bank of
the Maranoa River, which, it is said, flooded the village in 1864.
Adjoining this township is Mitchell Downs, an open black soil plain,
which will be traversed by the railwa} r for five or six miles after which it
will enter a scrub. I may here state that the word “ scrub ”is applied
Description of
country.
2


Definition of
“ Scrub and
« Forest.”
to every stretch of thick growing timber whether bushes or trees; -
country covered with trees not growing close enough together to be -
designated scrub is “ forest.” None of the scrub we passed through
had entangling vines. A peculiarity of both scrub and forest, is the
absence of undergrowth bushes. With the exception of some open
country at Tyrconnel Downs, and one or two other places of small
area, scrub continues all the way from Mitchell Downs to Charlville, a
distance of 100 miles. The scrub contains box (a species of eucalyptus,
many hollow and useless for railway purposes), brigalow, bendee,
sandalwood (of little use) and some ironbark trees. Ironbark is the
best timber growing in Queensland for engineering purposes, it has
great strength, and is very durable ; there are two kinds, narrow
leaved and broad ; the latter is of little value. The soil of this scrub
land is sandy and gravelly, and in places slightly loamy. Between
Mitchell and Charlville the country is undulating, rising and falling in
different places 100, 200, and upwards of 3U0 feet.
Ironbark.
Soil,
Three tributaries of the Maranoa River have to be crossed, namely,
the Womallilla, Mungallala and Dalvadillia (or Black’s Water Hole)
Creeks, and two tributaries of the Warrego River, namely, Hamburgh
and Angellala Creeks, besides a number of smaller streams or “creeks”
as they are called in Australia. I took a section of the Warrego River
a few miles about its junction with the Nive River, and one of the
Nive itself. The Warrego River at the point referred to—Reynella—
spreads out a mile in width in flood limes, but rises to no great height
above its bed, 12 feet 6 inches being the extreme. The Nive at
Biddenham, rises to a height of 16 feet and spreads out 200 yards.
The beds of both streams are full of sand, suitable for mortar making.
The railway will cross the Warrego River, near Charlville, 30 miles
below the junction of the Nive River. The sections taken will give
some idea of the area of waterway to be provided. Soft sandstone is
found, but it is of poor quality and nearly worthless. Some ol the
ridges are strewn with red ironstone gravel and conglomerate, with
which the line may be ballasted. There are ironbark trees enough to
supply all the sleepers required for this section, and some for bridge
building purposes is also procurable. Our horses fared worse in this
district than any other, which at the time was all but destitute of
grass. The country between Mitchell and Charlville not being con-
sidered satisfactory we turned away northward before reaching Charl-
ville by way of Yo Yo Dam which we heard had recently been visited
by His Grace, the Duke of Manchester, to seek better country, and
sent a surveyor to explore to the southward and another to the
northward. The reports of the former were of an unfavourable
character; those of the latter, although not altogether favourable, were
far from being discouraging. On this northward route which was
surveyed and levelled through Hodgson, Taboonbay, Donnybrook,
Creeks.
Warrego Eiver.
Nive Eiver.
Ballast,
Timber,
Manchester,
Alternative Line,
Downs^ t 0 NITG


Bedford, Hogan thulla and Nive Downs [plans and sections of which
have been handed to the secretary], there was more good land and more
useful timber, than on the Mitchell Charlville section, also some
prospects of a coal field being found, as several specimens were picked
up in the beds of the rivers, two of which I have brought home with
me. All thoughts of a deviation in this direction however had to be
abandoned, as the contract for the railway from Roma to Mitchell was
let before we returned to Brisbane.
CHARLVILLE TO THE WARREGO RANGE.
110 to 210
miles.
Charlville
Township.
\
Description of
country.
Myall trees.
Charlville Township is situated on the left bank of the Warrego
River, and contains 39 houses, stores, &c., —18 dwellings, 5 hotels, 3
stores, 1 butcher’s shop, 1 saddler’s, 1 smith’s, 1 chemist’s, 1 aereated
water maker’s, 1 baker’s, 1 watchmaker’s, 1 shoemaker’s, 1 boarding
house, 1 bank, (Queensland National) I police barrack, 1 court
house and 250 inhabitants, including children. West of the Warrego,
and northwards to the Ward River, there are lightly timbered sandy
ridges, fairly well grassed with patches of thick mulga scrubs. To the
north of this as far as Biddenham, the country between the Ward and
Nive River is pretty flat, covered with good black soil, and lightly
timbered with blood-wood, coolibah and other gum trees. Northwards
of Biddenham, the country between the two rivers is open, and rises
to a height of from 100 to 200 feet above their banks at a pretty
uniform slope. The soil is very rich, and our horses had a good feed
of the tops of wild carrots there. Myall trees, which in appearance
resemble weeping willows, grow near the Ward River.
The country between the Ward and Nive, and between the Ward
and Langlo Rivers, is amongst the finest for sheep breeding and wool
growing. Merino sheep are considered best for this district.
In Queensland, country is spoken of as sheep country or cattle
country. Good sheep country is also good for cattle. The terms
imply for sheep, a dry climate, and short grasses with water convenient;
and for cattle any excess of grass and water. Country subject to
floods, if only a foot in depth, is unsafe for sheep but not for cattle ;
the} r can live and thrive well where sheep cannot. Wet lands, cold
clay soil, and poorly grassed, or country liable to be flooded, is unsuitable
for sheep, but not for cattle. New country is usually occupied by
cattle in the first place ; they are more capable of travelling for feed
than sheep, and in times of drought can do more for themselves.
Cattle stations also require less capital and trouble in first cost of
formation.
Sheep.
Definition of
Sheep and Cattle
country.
The most esteemed grasses are Blue and Mitchell, of both of
which stock are very fond. Blue is more easily pulled up and destroyed
than Mitchell grass; the new shoots of the former spring from the old
roots at no great depth below the surface of the ground, while those of
Grasses—Blue
and Mitchell.


the latter spring from joints of the old grass, the roots of which pene-
trate the ground two feet or more. Owing to this Mitchell is one of
the best drought-resisting grasses and is perennial. Grasses growing
for the most part in tufts or “ tussocks ” are capable of retaining great
vitality through very prolonged droughts, and afford excellent pasturage
for stock, even when dry and withered. It was the second
season of drought when we were there and all the grasses were dry—
made into hay by nature as it were—yet all the sheep looked well.
Grass tussocks,
There is more timber between the Langlo and Ward than between
the Ward and Nive Rivers From the Ward, above its junction
with the Warrego River to the Warrego Range, a distance of 90
miles, the railway will be of easy construction, and there are but few
streams to cross. This is fortunate, as suitable bridge timber is scarce.
Ballast also is scarce, but some soft shaly sand-stone is to be seen
cropping up in the sides of the creeks, which may possibly answer,
Timber,
Ballast,
THE SUMMIT.
WARREGO RANGE TO THE BARCOO RIVER.
The higher elevations of this range are about 250 feet above the
° u
plains on the southern side, but is crossed by the railway at only 150
feet. It is composed of rotten conglomerate rock, which may be
utilized for ballast. The soil is generally very sandy and the range
overgrown with scrub. Hundreds of trees may be seen that have been
destroyed by ants. The northern side of this range, which is rather
precipitous and about 100 feet above the plain, is about seven miles
from Elizabeth Creek. There is a twisting track down the range,
having in the steepest places a gradient of lin 6. The railway will
not attain a higher elevation anywhere than in the Warrego Range,
where it will not exceed 1,300 feet above sea level, or about 400 feet
above Roma. North of this range we found grass in abundance on
the plain, with patches of myall trees growing here and there, but no
stock was to be seen anywhere.
210 to 308
miles
-white ants.
Warrego Eange,
highest elevation
of E airway.
Absence of stock.
All down the Ravensbourne Creek, the country is good and open,
well stocked with sheep and fenced with posts and wire. Below its
junction with the Barcoo River at Avington, the country is subject to
floods, and occupied by cattle. Bridges on this section will be
numerous, there being many streams to cross. There is sufficient
timber for fencing purposes and some for bridge building and sleepers.
Giddia trees are found growing in this district which furnish heavy
hardwood fence posts, durable in any situation, wet or dry. This
wood resists the attacks of white ants. Posts six to nine inches in
diameter ma}” be obtained, for a length of 7 or 8 feet, and pretty
straight. Ballast is scarce ; the only place I noticed where any could
Enclosed land,
Qiadia trees


be procured, was on the surface of the ground near Lome Station
which is strewn with jasper-looking stones, slightly waterworn and
of a size suitable for both top and bottom ballasting.
Ballast.
THE BARCOO RIVER TO THE WATERSHED BETWEEN
THE DIAMANTINA AND RIVERS FLOWING TO THE
GULF OF CARPENTARIA.
308 to 550
miles.
From a section I took of the Barcoo River, at Avington, across
the large water hole there, I found a depth of 19 feet of water, and
the bottom a fine mud. From observable flood marks, the water
rises 25 feet above this level, giving a total depth of 44 feet. This
is not exceeded by any river we subsequently crossed on our travels
to Point Parker. The Barcoo River spreads out to a width of 700
yards. The railway will not cross the Barcoo River at this point,
but below its junction with the Alice River, one of its main tribu-
taries where there is, I am informed, a favorable site.
Section of Barcoo
■ Rlver '
Tho Barcoo the
crossed.
Between the Barcoo River and the Aramac Creek and Thomson
River, 308 miles to 376 miles, is a fine sheep country, on which there
is more scrub than on the previous 200 miles, affording plenty of
giddia fence posts, and some for sleepers.
Barcoo Elver to
Creek^nd 0
Thomson Elver,
Fallen timber,
The Aramac Creek rises to a height of 15 feet above its bed, and
spreads out to a mile and a half in width during floods.
The Thomson River spreads out from 8 to 5 miles. At
Muttaburra, where I took a section of one of the narrowest places, its
width in flood times is three miles, and it rises to an extreme height
of thirty-two feet above its bed. It will not be necessary, however, to
bridge over the whole of the flood, as there is very little current, and,
so far as I can learn, the water is more like a lagoon than a river.
There are two low level timber bridges over its channels, or “ billa-
bongs,” as they are called in Australia, over which bridges the floods
flow and do little damage. Trees grow along the banks of the
Thomson River, but the country away from it is quite open and
considerable areas are treeless. Sandstone is to be seen in the beds
of the creeks, from which ballast can be obtained.
Thomson Elver.
Blllabongs.
Telegraph.
At the time of our visit, an electric telegraph line, with posts of
iron, was being erected in this district.
Cattle.
The country adjacent to Cornish and Landsborough Creeks, is
stocked chiefly with cattle.
From Muttaburrato the Diamantina River, 410 miles to 550 miles,
there are flat or slightly undulating plains, well grassed, and occupied
mostly by sheep. Five or six years ago the country near the Diaman-
tina was little known. There is a great scarcity of suitable timber for
bridge building and other purposes; the only trees to be seen, and
they stunted in their growth, are along the courses of the creeks.
Mircaburra to
the Diamantina
Diver.


Near the Mills and Wokingham Creeks, flat bedded stones from 2 to
6 inches thick are quarried, but the layers do not exceed 2 or 3
feet in thickness. The stone -will be useful for building culverts
and cottages or houses. It is the only stone I saw on our journey
that could be made use of for these purposes. Brick earth is found
in many places. On these plains and downs, fossil wood is found, and
the surface of the ground is in many places strewn with red and yellow
stones like shingle, which will have to be scraped together and used
as ballast, for I fear there is little else.
Building stone.
Brick earth.
Fossil wood.
Surface stones.
The line of railway from where it crosses the Ward, 120 miles, to
the Diamantina River, 550 miles, traverses a country now celebrated
for the richness of its pasturage, and at the present time depastures
about 2,000,000 of sheep, which will yield over 3000 tons of wool a
year, reckoning a washed fleece at lbs., and a greasy one at 5 lbs.,
and estimating roughly for half of each. Wool is the staple produce
and principal export of the Colony, and will be one of the main sources
of traffic on the railway. Mr. Tyson, one of the largest stock and station
holders in Australia, tells'me he considers that it is owing to the dry
salubrity of the climate that this industry has already attained the
height it has, and that if there were more rain there would not be
such sweet grass, and consequently that the country generally would
not be so suitable for sheep.
Pasturage.
Sheep.
Wool,
I
Salubrity of
climate.
Sheep are kept in these districts almost solely for the purpose of
growing wool, which is easy to convey. There is no market for meat
within easy reach. Both cattle and sheep are reared to stock new and
scantily stocked country.
WATERSHED TO THE CLONCURRY DISTRICT.
The watershed between the waters flowing southwards and those
•
to the Gulf of Carpentaria is very low and only just perceptable to the
eye, but there are a few hills along it standing up 150 or 200 feet.
550 to 670
milos
The first limestone I met with in our journey was in the bed of
the McKinlay Creek (at mileage 030), of the cone-in-cone structure.
This creek, in the neighbourhood of Beaudesert, floods the lands on each
side for several miles.
Limestone,
The railway will pass clear of the northern spurs of the McKinlay
Range, These mountain spurs are composed of mica schist rocks tilted
up, with quartz dykes, or “blows,” as called in Australia, projecting here
and there. Farther in the mountains, near the heads of the William’s
River and Fullerton Creek, the formation is more granitic, and the
William’s River for some distance flows down a valley of syenitic
granite rocks and boulders. White-stemmed gum trees, 2 feet and
more in diameter, grow along the [banks of the Fullerton Creek and
William’s River near their heads, but the country is so difficult
McKinlay Eange.


and rugged they cannot be got away without great expense. That
most forbidding of grasses, the triodea spinefex, grows in these
mountain ranges, and particularly on the plain immediately adjacent,
where it is intermixed with stunted giddia scrub.
Spinefex.
THE CLONCURRY DISTRICT.
670 to 700
miles-
Ballast.
Tea trees.
Bloodwood.
Mineral rail or
tramway.
Cloncurry River,
Granite.
Kunkur.
Building
Materials.
On'crossing the William’s River, the Cloncurry District is entered.
This district is, generally speaking, mountainous, but is only undulating
where the railway will traverse it by way of Fisher’s Creek and Pumpkin
Gully, at a height not exceeding 630 feet above sea level. Good ballast
is plentiful. On the banks of the river there are white-stemmed
gum and tea trees (melaleuca leucodendron) growing from 2 feet
to 3 feet 9 inches diameter. The inhabitants of Cloncurry
make no use of this timber. Tea tree piles have answered for
wharves, but for houses at Townsville have failed, the portion above
ground becoming rotten. Along the track to Boulia for a distance of
about 12 miles from Cloncurry, bloodwood trees grow, suitable for
sleepers. Up this valley, between quartzite mountain ranges, a tram
or railway can be made without much difficulty, should either ever be
required to develope its mineral resources, and it could be extended, I
believe, across the Selwyn Range. A tramway or railway could
also be carried up another valley to Top Camp Gold Mines, 30 miles
from Cloncurry. Beyond that, engineering difficulties are met with ;
rugged and precipitous rocks form the banks of the river, which runs
in a valley between mountain ranges. The bed of the Cloncurry
River, where the railway is shown to cross, is syenitic granite rock,
in the centre and in the north channel, and shingle and sand in
the south channel. In flood times it spreads out to a width
of 600 yards, and rises to a height of 33 feet above the lowest part
of its bed. A species of limestone is found on its banks, also in
the Williams or Corella and Leichhardt Rivers, like the kunkur
of India, which I find effervesces with muriatic acid, and may make
semi-hydraulic mortar equal to that of India. Crystalline limestone
is found near the Township of Cloncurry. The very best building
sand is to be obtained from the beds of the rivers. Bricks or
concrete will probably be used for building purposes in preference
to granite, which would be very expensive to quarry and work
with the dear labour of the colony. If cement be imported for
the making of concrete, it will be liable to a duty of 2s, per
barrel. These materials are only to be thought of for culverts,
&c. Any houses that would be erected would in the first place
be of timber, with galvanized corrugated iron roofs, like all the
houses of the interior. The houses—“ stations ”as they are called—
have no upper story; every room is on the ground floor, and there


is always a verandah, upon which the rooms open. The kitchen
is a separate building,, sometimes connected with the house by a
covered way. Corrugated iron is utilized for circular cisterns, par-
titions of houses, and all sorts of purposes. In it the best water is
collected and stored by cisterns above, or tanks below, the ground.
To show how extensively this article is used, I may state that in 1880
2,632 tons of galvanized iron (see page 84 “ Statistics of the Colony of
Queensland for 1880 ”) was imported into Queensland, on which a
duty of £5,264, or £2 per ton, was paid.
Corrugated iron.
One of the main sources of traffic on the proposed railway would
be that due to the development of the known but dormant mineral
resources of this region, which contains gold, iron ore—brown, micaceous
and magnetic, as at Black Mount or Mount Leviathan—and copper,
found in the form of red oxide and green carbonate. “ Colours,” as
miners call the indications of gold, are found in many places. Judging
by the surface, the Cloncurry District is rich in copper ; but whether
the lodes extend to any great depth or not remains to be ascertained.
Minerals a source
Gold,
Copper ore.
Copper requires to be dealt with in large quantities, vast weights
must be moved, and heavy machinery employed (very different from
alluvial gold mining), which accounts for no copper mining proper
ever having been done in this region.
Copper mining,
Holes here and there have been dug, in numerous places, widely
apart by prospectors, being neither capitalists nor miners, whose
object is to apply to Government for “ selections,” with a view to
sell, not to work the same. When I visited the Cloncurry
district, all the mines were deserted, but a small gang was employed
under a Mr. Goodfellow, for a New South Wales Company, in opening
up a copper lode near Mount Norma. He has since stopped operations.
The deserted alluvial gold diggers’ claims are falling in, and the.
quartz crushing plant,—engines, boilers, pumps, crushing machines'
and buildings—fast going to decay. "Very little work has been done :
during the past year or two, and in order that you may under-
stand the reasons for the present state of matters, and at the same
time possess some official information respecting the Cloncurry Gold
Field, I subjoin extracts from “ The Reports of the Department of
u Mines, Queensland” for years 1877, 8, 9 and 1880,and “ Statistics!
“ of the Colony of Queensland for 1880.”
Alluvial gold
a
machinery,
Cloncurry Gold
Field,
For the purpose of rendering more inteligible the report, I have
handed to the secretary a plan, showing the positions of the mines
named.
The Warden of the Cloncurry Gold Fields in his report thereon,
dated Ist October, 1877, gives the following information:—
“ The Keeps. —The ‘ Mary Douglas ’ reef is on a small hill, situated between
‘ Driscoll’s ’ and ‘ Cameron’s ’ and ‘ Squeezer's ’ gullies, in all of which, rich
deposits of coarse gold, both on the surface and in the deep ground, were found;
Warden’s report.


and careful examinations convince me, that these gullies have received their gold
from this hill. If this is the case, the inference is, that the deep leads on ‘ China-
man’s Flat,’ ‘ The Secret,’ ‘Red Jack,’ ‘ Linger and Die,’ and ‘ Jeweller’s’ gullies,
must have been fed from the hills (similar in formation to the ‘ Mary Douglas ’)
which surround them. Gold in small quantities has been found in many of these
hills, and there is a good field for intelligent prospecting in this locality, as there
is also every reason to think that fresh alluvial leads may be found, and those in
‘ Sharkey’s ’ and ‘ Chinaman’s Plats ’ picked up again. These leads were exceed-
ingly good, and should be worth another trial.
“ At Bishop’s Creek, great strides have been made towards putting the ‘ Gilded
Eose ’ Mine in thorough working order ; Messrs. Bibley and Killick’s machine has
been moved to the claim, and pumping and winding gear erected. Skilled miners
from Charter’s Towers and Castlemaine have been procured by the proprietors of
this mine, who now employ about twenty hands, and whose energy and enterprise
have greatly tended to develop the resources of the field. The mundic from this
claim has for some time past yielded about two ounces to the ton after roasting
and crushing, and it is anticipated that with proper appliances for the treatment
of the pyrites the yield of gold would be more than doubled.”
“ The proprietors of the “Mary Douglas ” claim recently washed thirty loads
of surface rubble, from 'which they obtained nuggets weighing 42, 18, 11, and 8
ounces, besides several smaller ones.
“ Although the yield of gold from the reefs has been very encouraging, none
of them are sufficiently rich to afford the very high rate of crushing hitherto
charged, but there is little doubt that a reduction of prices would make most of
them payable.”
All the mines mentioned above were visited by me either in com-
pany with Mr. Jack, the Government Geologist, General Feilding or
Mr. Uhr, the present Warden.
The total yield of gold for 1877 was 1,500 ozs., and the total
number of miners employed, all Europeans, was 54 —18 alluvial and
36 quartz miners. The number of quartz reefs proved to be auriferous
was 15. One steam engine of 10-horse power was employed, and five
stamp heads for crushing. £2OOO was the approximate value of all
mining plant in the gold field. In 1877, 1,190 tons of quartz was
crushed. The total produce then was 1,205 ozs., which yielded an
average of 1 oz. 0 dwts. 6 grs, per ton. The price chafged per ton for
crushing was £2. At Gympie it was only 10s., and at Charters Towers
from 12s. to 15s.
On the Bth October, 1878, the Warden visiting this gold field
reported as follows:
As advised in my last report, the Queenslander Company’s machine has
started crushing the Uncle Tom stone. Up to the time of my visit about 100 tons
had been put through. The results are by no means satisfactory to the tributors,
the average yield per ton being only 17 dwts., and I do not think the remainder of
the stone going through will increase the average. The gold is of very good
quality realizing £4 per ounce on the field.
“ At Bishop’s, the machine at the 1 Gilded Eose ’is in full swing on some very
good stone, and from present appearances of tables will probably return 2 ounces per
ton. 101 tons mundic stone from lowest level in this claim, returned the splendid
average of 286 ounces of gold. There are still about 30 tons of mundic tailings
10


to go through, and expected to swell the average to over 3 ounces per ton. Shares
in this valuable claim have recently changed hands, and the new shareholders are
now arranging to send one of their number to Yictoria for the purpose of obtaining
proper machinery for treating the mundie stone, tailings, &c.
“ At the Top Camp Alluvial Diggings, things are in much the same state as
when I visited the field in June last; gold is being got in more or less quantities
by all engaged mining there. The wet season is anxiously looked forward to, when
good results are expected. A few nuggets have been got lately by use of riddle
and dry blowing, averaging from 6 ounces down to dwts.
“ A small rush took place a few weeks ago, to Duck Creek, a tributary of the left
hand branch of the Cloncurry Eiver, about ten miles above Top Camp; a few
good patches were struck, all coarse gold and obtained by use of riddle, there being
no water on the ground. lam confidant that tlie day is not far removed when a
good field will be opened here, possibly during the coming web season, as many of
the diggers are only waiting for rain, knowing where to go to get gold.
“ McLeod still prospecting, reports finding colours everywhere he tried.
“ General order and health of the field, good. Distance from navigation and
the high rates of the common necessaries of life (when procurable) and the want
of capital, to develop the known mineral wealtli of this field, are its greatest
drawbacks.” '
The number of miners at Cloncurry on Ist December, 1878, was as
follows:
Europeans working quartz ... ... ... ... 8
Do. do. alluvial ... ... ... ... 25
Chinese working alluvial ... ... ... ... 1
Total ... ... 34
Number of
miners,
In 1878, 1,014 tons of auriferous quartz were crushed, which
produced 1,315 ozs. 12 dwts. 2 grs., giving an average yield of 1 oz.
5 dwts. 22 grs. per ton.
The amount of revenue collected for miners’ rights and business
licenses during 1877, was £76. ss. Od. and 1878, £46. 17s. Od.
During 1878, 43 miners’ rights and 5 business licenses were
issued.
In 1879 only 209 tons of quartz were crushed, tbe gross yield of
which was 293 ozs. being at the rate of 1 oz. 8 dwts. per ton, and the
average price was £3. 18s. Od. per ounce. The number of miners
employed 31st December, 1879, was 22, (12 alluvial and 10 quartz.)
The amount of revenue collected was £33. 50 miners rights
and 2 business licenses were issued during the year. Two steam
engines were employed, (25 aggregate horse power) and 15 stamp
heads. The approximate value of all mining plant on the gold field was
£3OOO. The price charged for crushing quartz was £1.155. Od. per ton.
The following was communicated by Mr. Reginald C. H. Uhr,
Warden of the Cloncurry Gold Fields, to the Honorable the Minister for
Mines, and was contained in the latter’s report, dated Brisbane, Ist
March, 1881.
Gold statistics,
“ In compiling my report in this gold field for the year 1880, 1 regret that I Warden’s report


cannot make it as favourable as I have done in former years. The long and
continuous drought experienced all over the colony has had the effect of bringing
all mining on this field to a standstill.
“ Prospecting with any chance of success has been utterly impossible. There
are many willing and able to prospect as soon as rain falls in sufficient quantities
to enable them to push out into the auriferous country.
“ There is still a large tract of country N.N.W. from Cloncurry open to the
prospector.
“ The general opinion amongst northern miners is still that large deposits of
gold exist in this locality, and doubtless may yet be discovered when more favour-
able seasons present themselves.
“ The output of the alluvial gold for the year has been confined to fossickers
principally, from whom I can obtain no reliable information as to the actual
result.
“ For a considerable time past a great deal has been said about gold dis-
coveries in the McKinlay Ranges, south and east of Cloncurry. A number of
men have been engaged prospecting the country indicated, but up to the present
time they have reported nothing payable. They report that colour can be had
almost anywhere they have tried: time and perseverance may reward their labours.
“ The Gilded Rose Amalgamated Claim, on Bishop’s Creek, the only line of
reef being worked on this field the last two years, has stopped, and applied to be
registered for six months on the ground that the stone is not payable.
“ The mining population on the field does not exceed thirty. With the wet
the numbers will be considerably increased.
“ Another great drawback on this field, to successful prospecting, is the want
of the common necessaries of life—to wit, flour, tea and sugar. There is no store to
be relied upon here, at present—they are out of everything, with little prospect of
obtaining a supply before the wet season.
“ Before concluding my report, I cannot allow this opportunity to pass
without saying a few words on the wonderful mineral deposits of this neighbour-
hood.
“Re Copper Deposits. —Of the Australian or Cloncurry Mines (the most
important in this immediate neighbourhood) much has already appeared in print
from the pens of various persons well qualified to give an opinion on such vast
deposits—any further report can be but a repitition of what has already been
made by others; at the same time, I venture to assert that any attempt at a
description of this wonderful property must needs fail to give a full estimate of its
richness and extent. One selection alone comprises 640 acres, on which various
lodes and rich deposits of ore exist. The most important outcrop rises to a
height of nearly 50 feet, and carries with it an immense load of high per cent,
ores throughout its entire length of 300 feet. Many other lodes have been
secured within a radius of 30 miles, the principal being those in the neighbour-
hood of Duck Creek, Fisher’s Creek and William’s River, south and east of
Cloncurry.
“ The latter, I have not myself visited. Other important mines have been
secured in a north-north-westerly direction, namely, two on the Dugald, and two
on the Leichhardt Rivers ; the former distant about 45 miles, and the latter about
70 from the Cloncurry; of these, I can speak from personal inspection.
“ That they will eventually prove to be of great value, the large and extensive
deposits of rich ore apparent on the the surface, seem to guarantee; cheap transit
to port, and the introduction of capital, are alone required to develop these different
properties, and render, in my opinion, this district second to none in mineral
production.


“ Should the scheme of a Trans-Continental Railway be carried out, it can
hardly fail to raise Queensland as a mineral-producing colony to a pitch of impor-
tance obtained by few countries in the world.
“ Valuable finds of copper are constantly being reported by prospectors in
this and the neighbouring districts, though the actual localities are not made
public, the discoverers being naturally desirous of keeping such knowledge to
themselves till the time arrives, when an immediate benefit may be expected by
securing the land.
“ A vast tract of country still remains to be explored, and, judging from the
discoveries already made, it is reasonable to suppose far more yet remain to be
revealed.
“ The want of fuel for smelting purposes is one great drawback to the
development of these mineral properties, though I believe there is far more than
is generally supposed. Another drawback is the remoteness of the district.
Capitalists have not yet found their way so far, and are, consequently, ignorant of
the investments open to them.
“ These evils would at once be overcome by a railway connecting the mineral
districts with some port on the northern coast.
“ The prospect alone of such a scheme being carried out would, I have no
doubt, induce capitalists to invest, as in most localities where copper exists there
is sufficient timber to last for several years at least, by which time, in all proba-
bility, the completion of a railway would obviate the necessity of smelting on
the spot.
“ Another valuable discovery has been recently reported of fire-clay, graphite,
and antimony in this neighbourhood, and in the immediate vicinity of some copper
selections.
“ This, so far as the fire-clay is concerned, should prove a valuable acquisi-
tion.”
In 1880, 406 tons of quartz was crushed, which yielded 490 ozs.
of gold, being at the rate of 1 oz. 4 dwts. 1 gr. per ton, and the
average price was £3. 18s. Od. per ounce. The revenue collected
during the year was £41.105. Od. The number of distinct quartz reefs
proved to be auriferous is 15, and the extent of ground worked upon
30 square miles. The approximate value of all mining plant was
£1,500. The cost of crushing quartz was from £l. ss. Od. to
£l. 10s. Od.
Gold statistics,
The gold fields of Charters Towers and Gympie are the most
extensively worked in Queensland, and the Cloncurry the least so.
The number of tons of auriferous quartz crushed in 1880 was 39,285
at Charters Towers, which yielded 68,594 ozs. of gold, being at the
Tate of 1 oz. 14 dwts. 22 grs. per ton; and at Gympie 22,562 which
yielded 39,511 ozs. of gold, being at the rate of 1 oz. 15 dwts. per ton.
Mining at Charters Towers and Gympie is carried on with adequate
capital and proper appliances.
Charters Towers
Until a railway is constructed, these mineral lands must remain
dormant, so far as copper is concerned, as the cost of transport to the
sea coast is more than the proceeds of the copper mines could afford.
Information respecting the regulations of gold fields, and the
purchasing or leasing of land for mining purposes, other than gold,
Want of a
raiiway ’


Acts of Parlia-
ment relating to
minerals.
Snbstance of
Acts of Parlia-
ment.
may be obtained from the Gold Fields’ Act of 1874; Regulations
under Act of 1874 ; Gold Mining Companies’ Act of 1875 ; Gold Fields
Act Amendment Act of 1878; Gold Mining Appeals’ Act of 1880;
Mines’ Regulation Act of 1881 ; Gold Fields Homestead Act of 1870
Gold Fields Homestead Act Amendment Act of 1880 ; Mineral Lands
Act of 1872 ; and general regulations.
The following is the substance of the above Acts :
Gold. —A miner’s right costs ten shillings a year, with which he
can work for himself or another. Consolidated miner’s rights for any
number of years not exceeding ten, are issued to persons who agree to
work in co-partnership. Leases of land, not exceeding 25 acres, are
granted for 21 years, at the yearly rental of £1 per acre. Business
licenses are issued for a period not greater than ten years, at the rate
of £4 a year, entitling the owner to occupy land on any gold field not
exceeding a quarter of an acre, for the purpose of residence and carry-
ing on business. On the proclamation of a gold field upon crown lands
under lease for pastoral purposes, such lease may be cancelled.
Rewards not exceeding £lOOO are to be paid to actual discoverers of new
gold fields. A prospector’s protection area beyond the limits of a pro-
claimed gold field is 400 yards by 400 yards; within the limits and not
more than three miles from nearest workings 300 yards by 300 yards;
between two and three miles 200 yards by 200 yards; between 400
yards and one mile 150 yards by 150 yards. Protection areas must
be worked continuously or be liable to forfeiture. A miner may take
up and work any unoccupied crown land. Reward claims are given for
the discovery of payable gold in creek, river, or ordinary alluvial
ground, and on any new reef. The size of ordinary quartz claims is 50
feet along the supposed reef by 400 feet; river and creek claims, 150
feet frontage, with a width from bank to bank not exceeding 100 yards;
tunnelling claims, 800 feet on each side for a length of half a mile,
but must not be less than 100 feet below surface of ground. Miners
can take up agricultural leases on gold fields in one lot, not to exceed
40 acres, at a rent of one shilling per acre.
Minerals other than Gold. — The area purchasable for mining
purposes shall not exceed 320 acres nor be less than 20 acres.
Applications for land must be accompanied by a deposit of ss. per
acre and survey fee. The price of mineral lands is 30s. per acre.
The balance of purchase money and deed fee are to be paid within
twelve months from approval, but the deed of grant in fee simple is not
issued unless a sum has been expended equal to £1 per acre in bond
ii<ie working the minerals. Leases of mineral lands, not less than 20
nor more than 300 acres are granted for 99 years, at a rent of ss. per
acre per annum. Default in payment of rent forfeits the lease, but
the lessee is permitted to defeat the forfeiture by paying the rent due
and one-fourth more within 90 days. Mineral leases may be trans-
14


ferred on payment of a fee of £l, 10s. together with stamp duty. A
mining license, in force for 12 months, is issued to any person applying
for the same on payment of 10s. Licenses are granted for any term
■not exceeding 15 years, authorizing the person to cut, construct, and
use races, drains, dams and reservoirs through and upon any crown
lands.
Most of the copper ore of the Cloncurry District would probably
, . . __ _ , tvt „ TTT , , ~
be sent to smelting works at Newcastle, in New South \\ ales, and the
vessels would bring back coal.
Shipping of
copper with coal,
Mining industry, together with that of cattle and horse breeding,
must he regarded as the future main staples of the northern districts,
Future industry
district.
CLONCURRY TO POINT PARKER (TERMINUS).
Between the Cloncurry and Corella Rivers, a distance of about
25 miles, is a red sandy plain with hills of granite rocks and boulders
’ r °
rising therefrom, and thousands of small ant hills. Next the Cion-
curry, what little grass there is, is spinifex, whilst nearer the Corella
River both the soil and grass improve in quality. Open scrub of
giddia and beef trees chiefly, with a few small iron bark trees, is passed
through. The Corella River, in flood, is 470 yards wide, and rises to
a height of 30 feet above its sandy bed. The banks of this river, by the
water holes, are fringed with young and slender tea trees. In passing from
the Corella to the Dugald River, a granite ridge is crossed and a sandy
stony country. The Dugald River flows in a valley, which cannot be
said of any other river where crossed by the railway. Its bed is sandy
and rocky. Large tea trees grow along its banks, which in
places are composed of fiery red quartz porphery rocks. Copper lodes
are found in the neighbourhood. At one I noticed an abandoned
blacksmith’s forge. Plenty of quartz gravel for ballasting purposes is
obtainable all the way from the Cloncurry to Cabbage Tree Creek.
Along the banks of this creek, white stemmed gum trees grow, and.
further back, giddia 10 inches diameter. As the Leichhardt River is
approached, the land improves in quality, and down the sides of the
Leichhardt, it is excellent and well grassed. Bloodwood trees, from 10
to 20 inches in diameter, suitable for sleepers are obtainable. White
stemmed gum, 12 to 27 inches in diameter, are met with, also a few
bauhinias and Moreton Bay ash trees. Limestone containing fossil
belemnites, &c., is found at Kamileroy. The Leichhardt contained more
water than all the rivers put together hitherto crossed on our journey,
for most of them were quite dried up, and only a few had even a chain
of small muddy water holes. The Leichhardt had water holes several
miles in length, though there was no running stream visible. Its
channel is well defined, and its banks, in places, quite precipitous, but not
rocky, and 4 0 feet in vertical height. About a mile above its junction with
Cabbage Tree Creek, it spreads out more than half-a-mile in width,
700 to 1000
railes.
Description of
country.
'Williams or
Corella Eiver ‘
«
Dugald district.
Copper.
Ballast.
Giddia.
Bloodwood.
Leichhardt Eiver


and rises to a height of 32 feet above its sandy and shingly bed, in
which may be seen very large trees brought down by floods. Nine
miles below this junction it does not spread out so wide, (only 000
yards,) and lower down less still, but there is more depth of water.
Shingle ballast is obtainable from the bed of the Leichhardt River.
Shingle.
Gunpowder
Creek.
Avoidance of land
subject to inun-
dation.
Sandy Creek.
Gregory and
Fiery Downs.
Soil.
Gregory Eiver.
/ -
Foliage.
The railway is to cross this river below the junction of Gunpowder
Creek which in flood is a large river itself. Thence to the Gregory
River and Point Parker the railway is drawn to avoid, as much
as possible, country subject to inundation. I was assisted in this
[by reports subsequently received from Mr. Jack, government
geologist, and Mr. Harry Raff, land surveyor, who made lateral
explorations. Very tall coarse grass grows near Sandy Creek, and in
its bed large tea trees. A belting of giddia scrub is passed through
before reaching it. Sandy Creek spreads out in flood, where we
camped, about 220 yards, and rises to a height of 34 feet. At Fiery
Downs the pasturage is finer. The creek we found quite dry, but
Cutaway Creek, an “ana” branch, was full of water. What was remark-
able about this branch was the absence of trees along its banks for a
greater distance than any previously seen. Nearer Gregory Downs
the soil is rather sandy, not so loamy as at Fiery Downs, but still very
good. The Gregory River was the only flowing stream we saw on our
Avhole journey. It had a strong current of transparent water, averaging
say 80 feet in width by five'or more feet deep, running over a shingly
and sandy bed. On its banks and along the sides of its bed grow large
gum, tea (Melaleuca leucodendron), fig, and pandanus trees, with rich
foliage affording good shade, so different to the sombre, shadeless trees
hitherto met with, all of which had narrow, lancet-shaped leaves, few
in number, and those hanging down in a vertical position, exposing
little evaporating surface to the sun. The Gregory River is by far the
finest between Roma and the Gulf of Carpentaria. The main stream
spreads out in flood to a width of 340 yards, and rises 30 feet in height.
There is another channel or “ana” branch greater in depth than this,
hut not so wide.
At Gregory Downs, Mr. Jack, who had accompanied the expedition
irom Cloncurry, returned, and here Mr. William E. Armit, F.L.iS., and
three of the native police force under his command joined our party,
and accompanied us all the way to Point Parker. They rendered us
good service in searching for water and keeping watch at nights, as the
country is inhabited by wild blacks, who are not so much met with in the
interior, although they are pretty numerous about the mountains of the
Dugald and Cloncurry; as near the coast. It was fortunate the police
were with us, for, the first night we spent at Point Parker, a large number
of tall, able-bodied blacks crept stealthily up and close to our camp.
They were observed by the native police on watch, who fired a few rifle
shots over their heads, when they rushed away through the bushes, and
although we spent several days exploring the neighbourhood, we never
Mr. W. E. Armit,
Native Police.
Blacks.
Attack on camp,
and repulse.


saw them again. These blacks, with their families, we came suddenly
upon the day before, whilst engaged making their midday meal of cockles
on the sandy beach. At sight of us, the men and younger females fled
to the bushes, leaving the old women and children and those with babes
to take nare of themselves. Those, on our approach, all crowded
together and were much afraid of us at first, but their fears were
allayed after a while, and they showed us where to procure fresh water
from one of their wells. In return a few presents of red cloth, &c., were
made them. All the men, women, and children were perfectly naked,
and they do not appear to have any huts. We found afterwards at
Point Parker some of their spears with quartzite heads, hid in the
trees, together with wommeras or throwing sticks, and fan-shaped
rafts, composed of sticks bound together, and near Pearl Creek the
body of a rather big man buried up in the branches of a tree, dried
like a mummy. His legs were doubled up and his teeth all perfect.
At Point Parker there are some rough rubble enclosures made by
the natives to entrap fish as the tide recedes.
Families of the
blftcks
A black’s grave.
North of, and alongside the Gregory River at 872 miles is an open
plain. The intervening country between this plain and the Nicholson
River and Point Parker is sandy, covered with low thick brushwood
more or less, and subject in places to floods. The Nicholson River,
where we crossed it, was almost dry and like a sandy desert. I took a
section of this river, and from the highest observable flood marks, I
find it spreads out 700 yards in width, and rises 25 feet above the
lowest part of its bed. Here, I asked Mitchell, our black tracker who
assisted to measure across, to point out where the flood rose to,
and then again on the other side. I found on reducing my levels that
the opposite sides agreed to within a foot, and there were no well
defined marks on either side. Some good sized blood-wood trees, that
will be useful, grow near the Nicholson River. For further informa-
tion respecting the country along this river, I beg to refer you to the
map left with the Secretary, showing the route of the Australian tra-
veller, Mr. A. C. Gregory, in 1856, traced from one he kindly lent me,.
About half-way between the Nicholson River and Point Parker, are ‘
some open spaces covered in all directions with the nests of white ants.
The nests are conical in form, red in colour, and as much as 11 feet in
height. The bases show marks of floods two feet above the surface of
the ground.
Nicholson Eiver.
A. C, Gregory,
Esq.
White ants’nests,
At Point Parker, where we arrived on November 15th, we met
Captain Pennefather, of the Queensland Government schooner
“ Pearl,” and Mr. G. F. Eliott, surveyor and draughtsman under Mr.
Wm. D. Nisbet, Engineer of Harbours and Rivers. They had been
sent by the Government to make a survey and take soundings of the
bay or roadstead, and to. wait our arrival. We visited, with the
schooner, Bailey Point, Bentinck and Sweers Islands, and the Batavia
Captain Penne-
fatlier*


M°rvcyaiid ker
soundings.
River, in York Peninsula. A lithographed copy of the new survey and
soundings Mr. Grey, Under Colonial Secretary, promised to forward
to me by the next mail after my departure, as it was not quite ready
when I left.
POINT PARKER.
Point Parker
Peach.
Tide.
Point Parker is a rough, flat, rocky ledge of ironstone conglomerate
jutting slightly into the sea. Mangroves fringe the coast at the Point
and to the westwards. To the east is a nice sand}', shelly beach.
There is but one tide in 24 hours, and it rises at spring tides 10 to
13 feet, and at neaps 3to 8 feet. A pier, or jetty, to reach a depth of
16 or 17 feet at low water would be about a mile in length.
The land available for a township at Point Parker is of limited
extent, perhaps 9 square miles, and is nearly, if not quite, surrounded
by salt pans. It rises from a few feet to perhaps 25 feet at the highest
points above high-water spring tides, but the largest proportion of the
area is only 8 or 10 feet above high water.
Extent.
Salt flats or pans.
Elevation.
Soil.
The soil on the higher portions is a mixture of loose sand and
vegetable matter, and on the lower, black. Pandanus trees grow in
the low, swampy ground, and stunted blood-wood and a few casurina
trees in the higher. Near the Point is a cluster of five conspicuous
she-oaks.
Timber.
Water -
A small supply of rather brackish water is to be obtained by
sinking wells a few feet in depth in the swampy hollows, but not
in sufficient quantities for the smallest township, to say nothing- of
shipping. If a township is to be formed here, fresh water would have
to be brought in pipes a distance of twelve miles; and should this
source not be satisfactory, there is a fresh water lagoon at Rocky
Creek, twenty miles distant.
, Point Parker has a pleading appearance after travelling across
sandy plains and salt pans. The mirage about these salt pans is
wonderful. Lakes, islands and trees appear in every direction.
Mirage.
BAYLY POINT.
Description.
Extent
Well.
Bayly Point is 10 miles west of Point Parker. It is an ironstone,
sandy, gravelly, plateau, about 9 feet above spring tides in elevation,
pretty firm to tread upon, and perhaps 2 square miles in extent,
covered with stunted bloodwood and other trees. The natives’ well
there was quite dry.
BENTINCK ISLAND.
Description.
Timber.
Bentinck Island is about 10 miles long, and from 3 to 9 broad, flat,
and but slightly elevated above sea level. It is fairly well grassed,
and wooded with gum, bloodwood (useful), tea and pandanus trees.
The soil is sandy. We walked along a chain of ponds, and saw


numbers of ducks, turkeys and pigeons, and near the shore a deserted
blacks’ camp, where there were lying on the ground some cymbium
shells, with the core broken out, and full of fresh water. A few
of the natives showed themselves on shore.
Wild fowl,
inhabited by
blacks.
SWEERS ISLAND.
\
Sweers is 5 miles long by broad. It is occupied by Mr. Walter
Kreffield and his family. There are no blacks upon it. He has the
following stock upon it; 320 cattle, 800 sheep, and 400 goats. There
is a well 14 feet deep with 3 or 4 feet of water in it, about 200 yards from
the shore, near which there is deepwater and good anchorage. Inspection
Hill on this island, 100 feet high, is the most elevated land anywhere
around. The Township of Carnarvon on the island no longer exists.
It was formed by the inhabitants of Burketown, a township on the
main land, which they were obliged to desert, owing to fever epidemic
in 1867.
Description.
Cattle, sheep and
goats.
Well.
Carnarvon
Township.
From Sweers Island, we sailed to Kimberley, a telegraph station
only, at the mouth of the Norman River, to announce our safe arrival.
When leaving the Norman River, we stuck on a sand bank for eight
hours. The schooner which only drew 8 feet 6 inches of water was in
charge of the pilot at the time.
Kimberley.
BATAVIA RIVER, YORK PENINSULA.
400 miles N.N.E. of Point Parker.
After getting off the sand hank, we sailed for the Batavia
River, the mouth of which is like an estuary. We saw a large
number of blacks, athletic looking men, on the shore who walked
along to keep up with us, gesticulating with their arms and spears, as
if they would restrain us from ascending the river. Captain Penne-
father proceeded on his course with his two breach-loading ship’s guns
prepared for action in case they made an attack upon us, but after a
while we left them behind and sailed up the river about 35 miles
wiien we cast anchor and went ashore on the left bank, where it was
about 15 feet above the surface of the water. The banks up to this
point are low and fringed with mangroves. Our object in going up the
river was mainly to look for timber suitable for bridge building. I
saw some bloodwood trees from which piles, 40 feet long, could be
obtained, but they are rather wide apart. We observed some open
stages about 12 feet high, upon which, it is said, the black males sleep,
whilst the gins—females—keep up a fire below to drive the mosquitos
away. We found the mosquitos so bad that afternoon, when a slight
shower of rain came on, that we were glad to beat a hasty retreat.
Whilst doing so we brushed green ants off the foliage whose bite we
found very sharp. We went still higher up the river to some islands,
about 42 miles from its mouth, the last few miles being done in the
Description.
Wild blacks.
Bloodwood.
Mosquitos.
19


Tropical palms,
Timber.
whale boat; the banks were lined with large tropical palms. We landed
on the right bank where the land was more elevated, and I saw some
very fine trees, one cut by Captain Pennefather, a species of cedar,
thickness at bottom, 20 inches, at 52 feet from the bottom, 12 inches,
and quite straight, a specimen of the wood I have brought to England.
I did not see trees enough to make it decidedly worth while to go to
great expense in making arrangements for felling. A further exami-
nation would be necessary to settle the question. Deep water extends
close to the banks of the river where timber wharves could be easily
constructed. The water was salt as far as we went up the river, but
Captain Pennefather informs me it is fresh at these islands when the
tide is out. We saw many large crocodiles in the river, and heard
the loud note of the rifle bird in the woods adjoining it. Captain
Pennefather pointed out to us a nest or mound on the ground, about
20 feet in diameter, and 9 feet high, of a bird the Megapodius.
Deep water.
Batavia River
blocks
When we descended the river, two blacks came out to the
schooner in a frail bark canoe, which one of them propelled with a
paddle, whilst the other baled out water with a shell. Captain
Pennefather presented them with two bushmen’s friends’ knives, a few
bottles, and some red cotton cloth. In return, they gave us spears with
quartz heads and then departed. They kneel in their boats and sit on
their heels.
Opposed to settle-
ments proposed
in the Batavia.
Settlements
should be near
railway.
Land and fertile
districts should
be given in lieu
of all unfit for
settlement.
Eichness of soil
on plains.
Fertility of soil.
Formation of
townships.
General Feilding contemplates forming settlements on this river,
and taking land upon it in lieu of the poor land adjoining Point
Parker. I myself fear the advantages will not counterbalance the
expense attendant on the establishment of it so distant from the
railway, to say nothing of the military defence General Fielding
thinks necessary, in the prospect of having to cope with the blacks,
who are evidently numerous. Any settlements to be formed should,
I think, be near the railway itself. Whatever power and means the
Syndicate may become possessed of, should, I think, be concentrated
as much as possible, and it would be to the interest of the Queens-
land Government to aid them in this by granting lands in the
fertile districts in place of those that are unfit for settlement,
as the Government of the Dominion of Canada are doing, who are
constructing railways on the land grant principle. Although there
are barren, sandy, and almost worthless stretches of country near
Point Parker, the downs and plains are covered to a depth of several
feet with brown or black soil rich in vegetable matter, and whenever a
wet season occurs, or wherever, as on gardens, the ground is regularly
watered, its great fertility is made evident by the abundance of its
produce. It is here where settlements should be encouraged. The
choosing of eligible sites along the course of the railway for townships
will have to be made with great judgment, as good water in a season
of drought is scarce.


From the Batavia River we went to Thursday Island, which we'
reached December 4th, 1881. Here we bade good-bye to Captain
Pennefather, who acted as our host in sailing about the Gulf of Car-
pentaria, in a most admirable manner, and deserved our best thanks.
We were fortunate in getting the Eastern and Australian Steam
Navigation Company’s s.s. “ Menmuir ” from Hong Kong, which took
us to Townsville, where we landed for a few hours, and thence to
Morton Bay, where the Government sent their small steamer, “ Kate,”
to take us up to Brisbane. We landed on a holiday-kept in comme-
moration of Separation Day.
Thursday Island.
Return
Brisbane.
CLIMATE.
The climate is healthy, though hot, and it is to the peculiar
dryness that the salubrity is owing. The nights and mornings we
found always cool, and there being little or no moisture in the atmos-;
phere, we slept in the open air, often on the ground, without suffering
the slightest ill effects. What we suffered from most, was cold early
in the mornings, during the month of August, and to near the end of
September. I had not provided sufficient warm clothing. Frequently
the water in our buckets was frozen over, and shortly after washing
in a vulcanized india rubber basin the water would become a light
mass of ice. The Winter months are certainly dry, clear and bracing.
The temperature in Summer we found high, 110 and 112 in the shade,
yet the heat was not distressing, being dry, not like the moist relaxing
heat of many parts of India. I enjoyed good health throughout the
journey.
Extreme dryness.
Cold and frost.
We had rainy weather w hen at Biddenham, and the earth became
so soft, no progress could be made with the expedition. We had
several rainy days at the Gulf of Carpentaria, and got wet through; we
suffered no harm, however, and our progress was not affected by it.
Rain,
AGRICULTURE.
Agriculture on an extensive scale, as in Texas, I fear cannot be
carried on successfully from year to' year, owing to long periods of
drought; it may be, however, on a smaller scale in favoured localities
with the help of irrigation. Of course, this portion of Queensland is
only in the pastoral stage.' Other portions, as may be seen in the
appendix, are emerging into the agricultural.
SETTLEMENTS AND IMMIGRATION.
These matters 1 leave General Feilding to deal with.


GENERAL REMARKS.
In travelling through Queensland, we found as a rule, an awful
stillness to prevail; no sounds of animals, birds or insects. When
near water, parrots, cockatoos, and duck (black, whistling, Burdekin and
shag) made noise enough, not forgetting the screeching crow, which
was our surest sign of water not being far away. Pelicans and cranes
frequent the water holes. The most useful bird to us was the young
bush turkey, or bustard. It affords excellent soup. Pigeons of various
kinds we met with, bronze winged Torres Straits, &c. Occasionally, we
saw small herds of kangaroo, wallaby, and other marsupial animals,
peculiarly fitted for the Australian climate, as they can live long
without water. Now and again, we came across a stray wild dog, or
dingo, or an emu marching along with six or seven young ones ; and
on the Leichhardt River we saw many thousands of flying foxes.
Hawks were plentiful, and ocaasionally we saw “ native companions.”
We frequently came upon beautiful park-like vistas. The source of
our greatest annoyance was flies, like small house flies ; they rose in
millions from the grass, and settled upon us and got into our eyes till
they were quite inflamed.
Mr. Turnbull of Lansdowne, Mr. and Mrs. Edkins of Mount
Cornish, Mr. Stewart of Malvern Hills and pothers showed us great
hospitality.
Tea we found to be the drink of the interior, used at all hours
most freely. For bush life, nothing is so invigorating or refreshing.
ESTIMATE OF COST.
For the purposes of estimate I have divided the line from
Mitchell to the Gulf of Carpentaria into four sections, the divisions
being made with no other object than to preserve in each length, its
own physical characteristics. Thus :
Section No. 1. oto 130 miles. May be described as decidedly
undulating, and covered with scrub, and with some rivers.
Section No. 2. 130 to 305 miles. Flat or slightly undulating,
lightly timbered with no large rivers.
Section No. 3. 305 to 600 miles.. Quite open, and flat and slightly
undulating, with two large rivers, and a number of smaller ones.
Section No. 4. 600 to 1000 miles. Slightly undulating and flat,
with numerous very large rivers, and partially covered with scrub.
The bases for the estimate are given in the remarks which follow
the summary below, and the details are shewn on pages 52 to 68 in
the appendix.
22


Dost per
mile of
railway.
Description.
Section I.
0 to 130 miles
from Mitchell.
Section II.
130 to 305 miles
from Mitchell.
Section III.
300 to 600 miles
from Mitchell.
Section IV.
600 to 1000 miles
from Mitchell.
Branch Line to
Hnghenden.
£
Land
£
s, d.
£
s. d.
£
s. d.
£
s. d.
£ s. d.
100
Surveys ...
13,000
0 0
17,500
0 0
29,500
0 0
40,000
0 0
—
57
Clearing
8,190
0 0
10,500
0 0
14,750
0 0
24,000
0 0
—
1,497
Earthworks
161,523
6 0
144,750
0 0
307,375
0 0
883,750
0 0
—
98
Fencing
3,856
7 4
30,800
0 0
46,200
0 0
17,600
0 0
—
15
Level Crossings and Beads
2,650
0 0
2,500
0 0
4,200
0 0
6.000
0 0
—
111
Drains and Culverts
12,740
0 0
17,150
0 0
29,500
0 0
52,000
0 0
—
877
Bridges
65,300
0 0
20,850
0 0
246,283
6 8
544,840
0 0
—
1,890
( Permanent Way, including 1
( Ballasting J
224,294
0 0
313,350
0 0
593,813
0 0
759,080
0 0
—
51
Water Stations
5,800
0 0
7,875
0 0
13,600
0 0
24,000
0 0
—
293
Bolling Stock
69,365
0 0
45,005
0 0
76,000
0 0
102,800
0 0
—
32
Workshops
7,540
0 0
4,444
0 0
7,600
0 0
12,000
0 0
—
60
Station Works
11,565
0 0
7,000
0 0
15,000
00
26,000
0 0
—
66
Telegraphs
7,220
0 0
11,837
10 0
20,017
0 0
27,200
0 0
—
77
Workmen’s Cottages
10,400
0 0
12,630
0 0
22,000
o o
32,000
0 0
—
21
Miscellaneous
3,000
0 0
3,000
0 0
5,300
0 0
9,500
0 0
—
300
Engineering
39,000
0 0
52,500
0 0
88,500
0 0
120,000
0 0
—
60
Head Offices
800
0 0
1,000
0 0
1,700
0 0
2,500
0 0
—
'278
Contingencies
32,312
6 8
35,138
10 p
70,066
13 4
134,289
0 0
_ —
Totals ...
678,556
0 0
737,830
0 0
1,597,405
0 0
2,817,559
0 0
518,650 0 0
B.695
Per mile
5,220
0 0
4,216
0 0
5,415
0 0
7,044
0 0
4,510 0 0
Length.
Cost per mile,
for works as
usually let by
Contract in
Queensland.
Cost per mile,
including Rails,
Rolling Stock
and Buildings,
also Telegraph,
Total Cost.
Section I.
„ II. ...
„ ni. ...
„ IV. ...
Miles.
130
176
295
400
£
2,774
2,107
8,188
4,986
£
5,220
4,216
5,415
7,044
£
. 678,556
737,830
1,597,405
2,817,559
Branch to \
Hughenden... j
1,000
115
2,250
4,510
5,831,850
518,650
1,115
£3,600
£5,695
£6,850,000
SUMMARY OF ESTIMATE
The estimate is based on the cost of similar works, in somewhat
like situations in the Colony of Queensland, excluding the earlier
railway sections which cost more than those subsequently constructed.
The materials are estimated at present rates. Portions of the Queens-
land railways have been made at a cheap rate per mile,
because there are extensive tracts of country requiring little
more than grading, but the rate is really a high one when the actual
Basis,


amount of labour bestowed upon them is taken into consideration.
Earthworks that cost from Is. Bd. to 3s. 6d. a cublic yard, in Queens-
land, are executed in India, by native contractors, at 3d. or 4d., and in
England, from Bd. to Is. Id. It would not be possible to carry out
the Avorks with foreign labour so cheaply as this, but by introducing
Chinamen or Coolies on the northern section, the cost may be
reduced, I think, below my estimate; by how much I cannot say, as
Chinamen have not been employed to construct Queensland railways.
It is Avell known, however, that in the northern mining districts they
can make a fair profit, where others cannot earn subsistence money.
On sugar plantations Polynesians or Kanakas are employed.
Cost of earth-
works.
Labour.
Chinamen.
Working men of
Queensland.
The working men of Queensland, especially those residing at
Brisbane, are jealous of foreign races, and wish to prevent Chinamen in
particular from entering the country, because their labour is cheaper.
If Queensland is to be opened out there must be more labour, and
that labour must be procurable at prices that are not practically
prohibitive. It is very doubtful whether the Avorking men of
Brisbane are fit for raihvay work in the northern regions. What is
Avanted there, I think, is a different people, Avho can Avithstand the
climate and some different systems of immigration, settlement, and
management than noAv in force. Again, if, for the Avorks on the southern
portion of the raihvay, emigrants be sent out from Europe unskilled
in raihvay making, my estimates Avould most likely be exceeded.
The table on the next page shows the average wages for last year.
Eight hours is a working day in Queensland, and the amount of
work performed is less, per hour, than in the Southern Colonies, and
less again there than in England.
Working day.
From the above it will be seen that labour is very dear. Notwith-
standing this, my estimate of the cost of construction alone, that is,
exclusive of rails, buildings, telegraph and equipment, is only from
£2,000 to £5,000 per mile, or, including these, from £5,000 to £7,000,
the average being at the rate of £5,695 per mile. The higher rates
are Avhere extensive provision for Avaterway must be made for flood
times, and where there is a scarcity of suitable timber for bridge build-
ing. High ground out of the reach of floods will be chosen Avherever
it is possible, but there is no Avay of avoiding the crossing of the
larger rivers and some lands liable to floods. For comparison I sub-
join a tabular statement shoAAung the cost of the Queensland raihvays
prepared from the Report of the Commissioner of Railways for 1880.
It ranges from about £5,000 to £19,000 per mile. The expenditure
on the Northern Railway to 31st December, 1880, is given as £3,306
per mile, but the first section of thirty-five miles was only opened for
traffic in December, 1880. The contractor had not, probably, there-
fore been settled with, nor the usual 10 per cent, retention money
and the sum for maintenance been paid; some of the works
Cost of railway
in Queensland.
24


DESCRIPTION OF LABOUR.
Average Wages
per diem
without Board
and Lodging.
Average Wages
per Annum
with Board and
Lodging.
£ s. d.
ARTISAN LABOUR.
Brickmakers ...
0 7 0
Bricklayers ...
0 11 0
Brassfounders...
0 12 0
Blacksmiths ...
0 11 0
Cabinet-makers
0 12 0
Carpenters
0 11 0
Coopers
0 10 0
Engineers
0 12 0
Masons
0 9 0
Painters
0 10 0
Plasterers
0 10 0
Wheelwrights
0 12 6
AGRICULTURAL LABOUR.
Farm Labourers
£85 to £40
Ploughmen
45 to 70
Reapers
40 to 45
Mowers
40 to 46
Thrashers
40 to 45
Bush Carpenters
50 to 70
PASTORAL LABOUR.
Shepherds , ...
40 to 60
Stock-keeper ...
45 to 60
Hutkeepers
30 to 40
Generally useful men on Stations
85 to 60
Sheep washers, per diem
5/-to 7/-
Shearers, per 100 sheep sheared ...
15/- to 25/-
Boundary Eiders, per week
25/-
SERVANTS—
Males & Married Couples.
Married Couples without Family
£40 to £60
„ „ with Family
...
45 to 50
Men Cooks, for Hotels ...
• ••
50 to 60
Grooms
45 to 50
Gardeners
0 6 0
45 to 60
Females.
Barmaids
40 to 75
Cooks
40 to 50
Laundresses ...
30 to 50
General Servants
...
26 to 40
Nursemaids ...
18 to 25
Housemaids ...
...
20 to 26
Farm-house Servants ...
...
26 to 35
Dairy-women...
...
26 to 35
MISCELLANEOUS LABOUR.
Dam-makers, with rations
6/- to 7/-
Quarrymen
0 10 0
General Labourers
0 6 0
! :
WAGES.
Average Rates op Labour in Queensland.


SECTION.'
Length
in
Miles.
DATE OPENED.
Cost
per mile
to Dec., 1880
REMARKS.
Brisbane to Ipswich
24
June 1875
£
18,985
Nothing charged against Rolling Stock.
Ipswich Deviation
2
June 1875
18,202
Do. do. do.
Ipswich to Toowoomba
78
May, 1867
15,755
Including Rolling Stock.
Toowoomba to Dalby
52
April, 1868
6,822
Do. do.
Gowrie Junction to Warwick
58
Jany., 1871
8,568
Do. do.
Dalby to Eoma ...
165*
Sept., 1880
4,832
Do. do. 5 Expenditure in-
( complete.
Warwick to Cherry Gully ...
20
Deer., 1880
10,109
Do. do. do.
Total length
899*
Average cost
£8,947
per Mile.
CENTRAL
RAILW
AY.
Rockhampton to Westwood
30
Sept., 1867
10,801
Including Rolling Stock.
Westwood to Comet
110
Mar.,- 1878
6,032
Only £100 charged against Land.
Comet to Withersfield
G3
Octr., 1880
5,031
Nothing charged against Land. Expen-
[diture incomplete.
per Mile.
Total length ...'
203
Average cost
£6,428
1
also would no doubt be incomplete. For these reasons I have not
included the Northern Railway in the tabular statement.
SOUTHERN AND WESTERN RAILWAY—QUEENSLAND.
Guage of Lines 3 feet 6 inches, in all cases.
The average cost of the Central liailway, excluding the Rockhampton and Westwood Section,
and taking from Westwood to Withersfield 173 miles, is, exclusive of land, £5,670 per mile, up to
December, 1880.
LAND.
I have not included any|expense for land in my estimate, except the
cost of surveying it for railway purposes. No freehold property, that I
am aware of, is touched by the railway. To the secretary I have handed
a land plan I have prepared, showing all the sheep and cattle stations
in the vicinity of the railway, giving the names of the lessees, areas
of land occupied by each, together with the numbers of cattle and
sheep on each, so far as could be ascertained. Lessees have certain
pre-emptive rights over improved lands held under the Pastoral
Lease Acts, and will be entitled to the value of their improve-
ments, not exceeding 1 Os. per acre, on such land as may be occupied
for railway purposes. The following are the Acts relating to the
Land plans.
jVcts of Furliß*
ment relating to
land.


lands of the Colony of Queensland: —“ The Crown Lands Alienation
Act of 1876,” “The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876, Amend-
ment Act,” “The Settled Districts Pastoral Leases Act of 1876.”
“The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,” “The Western Railway Act,”
“ The Railway Reserves Act, Amendment Act of 1879.”
General Peilding will report fully as to the lands proposed to be
handed over to the Syndicate by the Government. I may, however,
state that in my opinion a good deal of the land through which the main
line of railway passes, say about one-fifth of the total, will be worth little
or nothing to the Syndicate. Between Mitchell and Chariville there
are 80 miles of this land, and between Cloncurry and Point Parker,
about 120 miles which would be useless for agricultural or mining, and
of the smallest value for pastoral, purposes. lam of opinion that the
Syndicate should, in lieu of the blocks at these places, press for an
increase in the quantities of land to be obtained from the Government
at other points of the railway, say between the Ward and Diamentina
Rivers, and on the banks of the Gregory and Leichhardt Rivers.
Worthless lands,
Land in fertile
giyen^Ueu^of^ 6
any unfit for
settlement.
I consider that the holders of the Trans-Continental Railway should
be in such a financial position as to enable them to keep possession of
the bulk of the land granted—in order to make the best price—for
at least five years after the line has been opened throughout, and to
be able to lease it then, rather than sell it outright. The land to be
transferred to the Trans-Continental Company will not be better when
the line is made than other available lands in Queensland, and will
not be the most accessible. It is only, therefore, by husbanding it,
and by incurring some expense in storing water for it, that a reason-
able value can be obtained.
Land sales not to
136 P resse d.
If the land sales are distributed over say the first fifteen years
after the opening of the through line, and if the Syndicate obtain
available agricultural land in the place of that described as of little
use, I am of opinion, judging from its description and from what
is obtained in other somewhat similar parts of Queensland, that the
Company may fairly anticipate getting eventually an average of 10s.
or 12s. per acre, or its equivalent, in rent or lease. Some of this
land, in the most favoured places, can be sold or let at a higher
price than this average immediately on the opening of the line, but to
reap the full value of the concession the Company should be able to
hold the bulk and wait the market.
Estimated value,
SURVEYS.
I have put down the same rate for surveys as the Engineer-in-chief
r’Ut down in his estimates for the extension of the Central Railway into
ihe interior. The trial and permanent surveys of the last contract for


works let in the Western Railway from Roma to Mitchell, a distance
of 50 J miles, cost, as returned by the Commissioner of Railways in his
Report for 1880, £4,051. 7s. 10d., or at the rate of £BO per mile.
Surveyors in Queensland have scrub and trees to cut down for their
chain-lines, which accounts for the rate being so high.
Cost of surveys
for railways in
Queensland.
CLEARING.
The average price of the last tenders sent in to the Queensland
Government for clearing land required for railway purposes of all
trees, undergrowth, &c. was £6O per mile for a width of H chains,
and £5 for every additional acre. On the Southern Extension from
Warwick towards Stanthorpe the contract prices for the same
description of work were £B5 and £lO.
Cost of clearing
away scrub, &c.
EARTHWORKS.
The formation width of cuttings and embankments is 15 feet, with
slopes of to 1, the same as on the Roma Mitchell section. See
lithograph drawing appended. On the Central Railway contracts, the
formation width is 14 feet, and the Fassifern Branch of the Western
Railway now in course of construction only 13 feet.
Formation width,
FENCING.
With regard to fencing, I have estimated for its erection through
existing paddocks, and have allowed for a probable increase during
the next two or three years. The squatters of Queensland would
oppose, I think, anything less than this being done, after the Govern-
ment have fenced so much of their own railways, but possibly only
half the total sum in the estimate may be required. If fencing be
dispensed with through paddocks, cattle and sheep, although they
could not be prevented from straying on to the line, could be prevented
passing from one paddock to another, by constructing an open culvert
across the railway where it intersects the fence. The fences that have
been erected by squatters are nearly all wire. According to the
statistics for 1880, 2854 tons of wire was imported on which a duty
was paid of £5,709.
Through
paddocks.
Wire fence.
BRIDGES AND VIADUCTS.
The cost per lineal foot of bridging is arrived at by working out the
quantities of several bridges at current prices. In timber bridges, the
quantity of timber varies from 11 to 15 cubic feet per lineal foot, accord-
ing to the height of the bridge. Where timber is not scarce, and at the
Cost.


same time not plentiful, sawn or squared timber in bridges cost 6s,
per cubic foot. Round timber in girders and corbels, 17 inches
diameter costs 6s. per lineal foot. Ironbark piles 17 inches diameter
at head and 12 at toe, cost driven ss. per lineal foot equal to 7s. 6d.
per cubic loot. Bolts, straps and tie rods fixed, cost 7|d. per lb.
Iron girders for 50 feet openings, weigh with fastenings, 14 tons,
and exclusive of the material their erection costs, including carriage
from railway terminus £l6 per ton. Ironbark piles for the first
sections of the Trans-Continental would probably be obtained from
Miles on the Western Railway 86 miles from Roma, the present
terminus. Ironbark weighs 901 b. per cubic foot. Some piles are also
to be obtained from the Warrego, south of Charlville.
Timber super-
etructures.
Erection of iron,
Wooden piles.
Cast-iron screw piles in place cost on the Brisbane and Sandgate
Railway (now in course of construction) £25 a ton, and at Mary-
borough £3O. 10s.
For type drawings of timber, bridges, and culverts, see Appendix.
Screw piles.
PERMANENT WAY.
Steel rails are estimated for 41J lbs. per yard, with steel fish
plates for suspended joints.
Weight of rails.
On the Central and Northern Railway Extensions, the engineer
has reduced the quantity of ballast to 523 cubic yards per mile in the
contracts lately let; but as more is added afterwards by the Mainte-
nance Department, 1 fail to see any economy. It only reduces the
first cost to swell that of the maintenance. 2,640 sleepers per mile
are now being laid on these railways, a greater number than is in my
opinion necessary, if there was a more liberal allowance of ballast.
Ballasting.
Wood sleepers.
My estimate is for 1,980 sleepers per mile (see deawing appended),
to be placed 2 feet apart, centre to centre at the rail joints, and 2 feet
9 inches everywhere else, with 1,173 cubic yards of ballast (equal to
two-thirds of a cubic yard per running yard), which will make a good
enough road for the traffic for a number of years. To use 2,640
sleepers per mile instead of 1,980, would increase the cost of the 1,115
miles of the Trans-Continental Railway £110,385, reckoning the
sleepers at 3s. each.
Twenty per cent, of the sleepers required may be obtained 10 inches
by 5 inches,half-round, and the rest from giddia trees 8 inches diameter,
By laying the round side down in the districts traversed by the railway.
Jarrah sleepers 6 feet 6 inches by 8 inches by 4 inches cost 2s. each
f.o.b. at Rockingham, Western Australia ; they, weigh 100 lbs. each.
Sleepers and timber for every purpose may be obtained at Mary
Borough, in Queensland.
On the Brisbane and Sandgate line, in course of construction, some
experimental wrought-iron sleepers are being laid, and this question of
iron sleepers may have to be considered some day for the Trans-Con-
tinental Railway.
Iron sleepers.
29


Cartage of
materials.
Transport of
rails, &c.
Different routes
for getting
materials into the
interior.
4 feet Bj-inch
gauge recom-
mended.
With regard to the item in the estimate for cartage of permanent
way materials from the wharf to the railway at Brisbane, this may not
perhaps be necessary, as a new line of railway is proposed to be con-
structed shortly to a wharf on the river at South Brisbane, from the
Western Railway. Should this be carried out in time, there would be
some saving by having the materials carried by the railway instead of
being carted through the streets of the Capital.
If the Queensland Government carry out the extension of the
Central Railway to Barcaldine Downs, plans for which were approved
by Parliament last session, it would be cheaper to bring the rails and
fastenings for Section 111. of the estimate, from Rockhampton, distant
about 400 miles. But the saving will not be so great as might be
supposed, because freight is much higher to Rockhampton (at least, it
has been so during the past three or four years) having ranged from
325. to 455. per ton. My estimate of freight to Brisbane is only 255.
a ton, the rate for ,! berth ” or general ships for which rails are useful
as dead weight. In full cargo ships the rate would be higher, also the
insurance. If rails be sent out to Rockhampton in ships drawing
more than 16 feet of water, they cannot ascend the Fitzroy River, on
which Rockhampton stands, owing to shoals, and in this case there
would be an additional expense of from 7s. to 10s. a ton for
lighterage.
There are two other routes that may be considered for bringing
materials and plant to this central section, viz.:—(1) From Townsville by
the Northern Railway via Charters Towers and Hughenden, and (2),
From Point Parker. At present, the Northern Railway is only open
for traffic to Reid River, a distance of 35 miles from Townsville, other
sections towards Charters Towers are in course of construction, and
Parliament approved of plans for the extension of the Northern
Railway as far as Hughenden last session. The distance from Towns-
ville to Charters Towers is 87 miles, from Charters Towers to
Hughenden, 158, and the intervening distance between Hughenden
and junction with proposed Trans-Continental Railway, 115, making
a total of 360 miles. From Point Parker to the nearest end of Section
111. is 400 miles.
It will be cheaper to import materials and plant from (1) Rock-
hampton, (2) Townsville, or (3) Point Parker to Section 111. than
from Brisbane, that is, supposing all the projected railways to be
carried out in time. As I have doubts of this being done. I estimate
for materials to be obtained from Brisbane for Section 111. to be safe,
as well as for Sections ,1. and 11.
GAUGE.
The question of gauge requires the full consideration of the
Syndicate. I have no hesitation in giving my own opinion in the case
30


of the Trans-Continental Railway, that the gauge should be 4
feet 8J inches; that the Government should be asked to make
the Roma Mitchell section of this gauge, and to alter the remainder
of the Southern and Western Railways. The whole of the New South
Wales Railways are of the 4 feet 8-| inch guage, and interchange of traffic
between the colonies will some day be very great. Independently of
the inconvenience and expense of a break of gauge, it is now generally
admitted that the carrying capacity on the Southern and Western
lines is less than is necessary.
The formation Avidth of banks and cuttings on the Southern and
Western Railway is 15 feet. In my estimate for the Trans-Continental
Line I have adopted this as the basis, as required by the Railway
Companies’ Preliminary Act. This formation width Avould be sufficient
for a gauge of 4 feet 8i inches in cuttings, and two or three feet
additional Avidth in the banks, or say 18 feet would be ample. I may
mention that I have recently constructed a portion of one of our
English main lines Avith cuttings and banks of these formation widths.
Bridges Avould cost a little more in extra width. Sleepers Avould require
to be 2 feet longer and the ballasting Avider, Rolling stock would
not cost more, as, if made of greater dimensions, the carrying capacity
would be proportionately larger. In fact, lam satisfied that an addition
of £350 per mile to my estimate Avould giA r e the Syndicate a railway
of the much more valuable gauge of 4 feet inches, and at this cost
there is no question that it should be secured. No doubt the Govern-
ment would be inclined to give better terms for the Avider gauge.
ost or i ncrease
of gauge.
WATER SUPPLY.
The main defect of the interior is the absence of a trustworthy water
supply. Even in moderately dry seasons, tracts measuring hundreds
of square miles are left entirely destitute of water. This question will
have to be Avell considered before commencing the works, as droughts
in Queensland affect their progress, and add to their cost. Dams
or reservoirs will have to be constructed in suitable places before the
arrival of the main body of the men. During the construction of
existing Railways Avhere provision for a water supply Avas not made,
it had to be hauled great distances by engine poAA T er, and the
privations suffered by the workmen upon advanced portions of
the works, Avere as reported by the Engineer “ serious in the
extreme.” Difficulties also have been experienced in obtaining
fodder for cattle and horses employed upon the works. Sites suitable
for the storage of water Avhere the natural supplies are feAv, and the
quality bad, will not be very difficult to find along the course of the
railway. The information I obtained along the route relative to Avell
sinking was not encouraging. A Avell "200 feet deep has been sunk at
Upper LansdoAvne Avithout finding Avater, and at two other places on
Droughts,
Dams,
'Wells.


the same station widely apart with a like result. At Barcaldine Downs
a well 120 feet deep has been sunk. It yielded water so brackish it
could not be used, and another only 10 feet deep in another situation
gave forth the same sort of water. A well at Ayrshire Downs has
been sunk 169 feet deep without finding water.
Mr. Henderson,
Dams for travel-
ling stock.
We met Mr. Henderson, hydraulic engineer, at Barcaldine Downs.
He was inspecting dams and reporting thereon to Government, who, I
believe, contemplate the formation of lines of dams for watering
travelling stock where the supply of water is uncertain.
Water stations
for locomotives.
With regard to water stations for locomotives. On the Western
Railway the average distance apart is about 18 miles. The ordinary
tanks in the Queensland Railways hold 7000 gallons, and the larger
ones 11,000. When the water supply is obtained from lagoons or
dams, it is pumped into the tank with one of Hayward and Tyler’s
double plunger pumps, driven by a belt from a small vertical engine
fixed on a vertical boiler stand, one man attends to three, travelling by
train from one to the other. Several of the dams cost about £lOOO
each. At Gowrie Junction, and Jondaryan on the S. and W.
Railway, double-action single-barrel force pumps are worked by
American wind mills. At Townsville, on the Northern Railway, and
at Dulacca and Blythdale on the S. and W. Railway, Tangye’s special
steam pumps are used. In a few cases water is obtained by gravita-
tion as at Highfields, Roma, and Gorge.
Pumps.
anclTanks pipCB
There is an import duty of 2s. per cwt. on cast-iron pipes and
tanks, but steam-engines and boilers are exempt.
Cost of steam
pumps.
The steam pumps on the Northern Railway cost £96, and the
cast-iron tanks £lO3 each, f.o.b. England.
ROLLING STOCK.
The prices in the estimate of carriage and waggon stock are
based upon the cost of the same description built in the Government
workshops at Ipswich, by Mr. Horniblow, locomotive superintendent,
and the quantities for the Mitchell Chariville .Section are nearly in the
same proportions as now in use on the Southern and Western Railway.
In view of the railway from Charlville to Fort Burke, in New South
Wales, being carried out, the numbers will not be too large. On the
rest of the railway the quantities of rolling stock are nearly in the
same proportion as now in use on the Central Railway. Besides
building their own rolling stock, the Government let the building of
waggon stock by contract, to builders who have workshops at Mary-
borough —the principal timber district of Queensland —and Brisbane.
If carriages and waggons be imported, there will be an ad valorem
duty of 5 per cent.
Although the carriage and waggon stock is estimated at cost of
manufacture in Queeensland, including delivery on the Trans-Con-
Basis of estimate
of cost.
.


tinental Railway, it may be found that they can be imported as
cheaply, notwithstanding the 5 per cent, ad valorum duty. Besides
this, there is the question of suitable seasoned timber, whether there
is a stock sufficient available in the Colony, or whether it must be
imported. *
Import duty.
Seasoned timber.
The rolling stock on the Southern and Western Railway and
Northern Railways have side buffers, and in the Maryborough and
Gym pie Railway, recently opened, automatic central coupling buffers.
Buffers.
c K sses
locomotives.
Only two classes of locomotives are estimated for, to be in general
use on the railway, one capable of working fast mixed passenger and
mail trains and the other slower goods traffic.
I am supposing that the designs for engines, carriages and
•n t ■■ ~ .„ ~ , . , ,
waggons will be made with a view to uniformity and interchangeability
of parts for economical reasons.
Designs for
waggons and
carriages.
STATION WORKS.
The station accommodation estimated to be provided is more
than is required under present circumstances, but looking to increase
of population and traffic that may be expected after the construction
of the railway, including the extension proposed from Charlville to
the New South Wales boundary, it will not be safe to estimate for
less.
Station accom-
mod&tion
mo a 10n-
Galvanized corrugated iron is much used for station buildings,
upon which there is a customs duty of 2s, per cwt.
Galvanised iron,
WORKSHOPS.
The New South Wales Parliament has voted the sum of £250,000
for new workshops and machinery, whilst the total length of all their
lines open for traffic at the end of 1880 was 849 J miles, considerably
less than the main line of the Trans-Continental Railway. The sums
put down in the estimate must be looked upon as very moderate
in amount. The estimate, however, is not based upon the number of
miles of railway, but upon the quantity of rolling stock. •
ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH.
I have estimated for this to be carried throughout along the line
of railway. It would be the first work put in hand on each section for
the purpose of being used during the construction, and is, I consider,
a necessity under the circumstances, although there are telegraph lines
already in the country which could to some extent be made useful for
the purpose. Queensland has at the present time about 7,000 miles
of telegraph line open for public business —(vide map accompanying
this report showing their position).- Telegraphic communication is fre-
quently interrupted, caused, the Postmaster-General reports, by trees
falling on the lines, either burnt, blown down, or accidentally or care- ■
lessly felled. Many poles are destroyed by lightning, and on new lines J
being erected, these are provided with lightning conductors. The lines l
; Necessity of
telegraph.
Postmaster
General’s report
as to mainten- j
ance.


Alluvial gold
discovered when
digging post
holes.
Importance of
telegraph.
Cost.
suffer from floods, and other interruptions are caused by bush fires,
blacks cutting and stealing the AA T ire, and through Avhite ants destroying
the insulator pins, and thus alloAving the Avire to fall to the ground.
The cost and difficulty of maintaining lines of telegraph in the
colony are not light. There is no route overland better than alongside
a raihvay Avhere any damage done can be seen and repaired quickly.
In the Southern and Western districts of Queensland the cost of main-
taining in working order was at the rate of 11s. od. per mile of line,
anil in the Northern districts £1 16s.
It was when digging post-holes upon the Etheridge River in Cook
District that alluvial gold was found which led to the opening of a
rich quartz mining gold-field there. It is considered that but for the
telegraph which kept up constant communication this remote gold
field would have been abandoned soon after its discovery.
There is an import duty of 2s. per cwt. on wire; and on
insulators and telegraphic apparatus, 5 per cent, on the value
thereof.
The average cost of the electric telegraph lines in Queensland,
erected by the Govmrnment between the years 1876 and 1880 AAuth
wooden poles, including supervision, all labour and materials, but
exclusive of buildings, was £4B per mile. The line noAv under con-
struction Avith iron poles from Aramac to Cloncurry, via Diamantiiia,
is estimated to cost £66. 10s. per mile, and from Isisford to Welford
HoAvns, £66. 12s.
The superintendent of telegraphs reports to the Hon. JohnM.
Macrossan, the Minister of Works, as follows;—“ It is difficult to say
what the difference in price would be for constructing a line with iron
poles as compared with timber. In many places, I believe, it would
be impossible to obtain a tender for the latter. The iron poles, such
as used on the western lines, now in course of construction, cost
30s. 3d. at present, in London, but the last 2,200 were purchased for
275. 3d. We are only using sixteen (16 ) of these to the mile, against
twenty (20) wooden posts in the western country, not but that 16 poles
should be sufficient, but the risk of fire must be taken into consider -
tion. It must be remembered that an iron line is nearly indestructible,
and the saving in repairs is something considerable annually. Where
timber is good and plentiful, it would, of course, in this county, be
simply wasting money to use iron, and such poles are not used
excepting occasional!}’ along railway lines, or here and there in plains.”
“ In the case of Eulo to Thargomindah, tender for iron line was
£32. 10s. Od, Add £24. 4s. Od. for poles, would have cost £56.145. od.
Tender for wooden line accepted at £44 per mile. This exclusive of
Avire, insulators, &c. BlacTcall to Isisford, tender for . iron line
£3B. ss. Od. Add ,£24. 4s. Od. Total £62. 9s. Od. Tender for
wooden line £3B, exclusive of wire, insulators, &c.”
“ 21/12/81.”
34


WORKMEN’S COTTAGES.
The building of workmen’s cottages along the line will help to
promote settlement, and will be a necessity to maintain the way and
works. A small rental should be charged to cover the interest on
expenditure, and provide for repairs.
ENGINEERING.
£3OO per mile is the rate put down by the Chief Engineer in his
estimates for the Queensland Government of the Westwood and
Comet River Sections of the Central Railway, and Mr. Robert
Watson, late engineer of the Victorian Government Railways, informs
me £3OO per mile was the actual cost of engineering there. Superin-
tendence, office, clerical, and incidental expenses are included under
this head, also inspection of permanent way materials, rolling stock,
and girders, and all engineering expenses in England and the Colony.
COAL AND FIREWOOD.
The draft agreement gives the Syndicate the right to import
coals duty free until the railway is made to a working coal field in
Queensland. Coal is, I believe, known to exist in several places in the
district to be traversed by the Railway, but I am unable to name
any point on the line where a suitable field will be found.
In the meantime some use might be made of the firewood
at various points, although, no doubt, a good deal of coal will have to
be brought from some of the Australian fields, or from England. Coal <
for locomotives, delivered at Rockhampton from Newcastle, N.S.W.,
costs 31s. 6d. per ton, owing to ships having no return cargo, and coal
at Ipswich, from local coal fields near the Western Railway, 7s. 6d,
per ton. The duty on foreign coal is 2s. per ton.
Cost of coat
MAINTENANCE.
The railways of Queensland are costly to maintain. Floods do
considerable damage, necessitating repairs to be done without delay
and under unfavourable circumstances in order to keep the line open for
traffic. Slips occur; losses have to be made up owing to subsidence ;
station buildings, being of timber, require constant repair of some
kind. It is also found that dry seasons seriously affect black soil
embankments; indeed, in some cases, more so than wet [weather.
Repairs to timber bridges are a heavy source of expense, through the
use of defective material. Large numbers of sleepers have to be
renewed. White ants make great havoc in bridge timber and station
buildings.
Renewal of permanent way, where the rails are of iron, and parti-
cularly in the mountain ranges, has hitherto proved a considerable item


of expense of maintaining the lines in efficient condition. Latterly the
renewals have been effected with steel rails, and it is anticipated the
cost will be largely reduced.
The cost of maintenance of the Southern and Western Railway
for 1880 varied for different sections of the 375 miles open for traffic
from £136. 16s. 2d. to £352. Bs. 7d. per mile, or an average of £195.
The cost of maintenance of the Rockhampton and Westwood
section of the Central Railway was £157, 12s. 6d. per mile in 1880,
TRAFFIC.
The prospects of traffic appear to be much the same as those of
the Central Railway.
The Leichhardt District, is that which is tapped by the Central Rail-
way, which has its terminus in Port Curtis District lying along the sea
coast north and south of Rockhampton.
I travelled over the Central Railway from Rockhampton to
Bogantungen—227 miles, as far as open for traffic —and back. The
land on each side of the railway to be seen from the train is for
pastural and agricultural purposes inferior, or at any rate in no way
superior to the greater part of that proposed to be traversed by the
Trans-Continental Railway. The country further back is, I believe,
better. It is not a mineral carrying line at present, but when the branch
to Clermont of Peak Downs where copper ore is found, is opened for
traffic it no doubt will be so. Good timber for building and other purposes
is plentiful in the Expedition Range, which is crossed by the Central
Railway, and it has an advantage in this respect. Away from
Rockhampton it passes through a very sparsely populated district, and
the districts of the first two-thirds of the Trans-Continental Railway
cannot be much less so. The remaining third may be said no doubt to
be at present almost uninhabited; still, there will, I anticipate, be
little difference as regards population shortly after the opening of the
railway. The population of Queensland in each of the Census
Districts for 1881 is given in an appendix.
The traffic of the Central Railway is that of a pastoral district.
In 1880 its net earnings paid £3 15s. lOd. per cent, on the total
capital expended, as per the following information from Commis-
sioner’s Report; —
£11,757 7 4 Passenger Traffic.
71,625 17 7 Goods and Live Stock.
83,383 4 11 * Total Receipts.
4,344 18 1 ... ... Non-paying.
87,728 3 0 Gross Earnings.
38,251 13 3 Working Expenses,
49,476 9 9 Balance Available.
*


Pastoral District of
Sheep.
Cattle.
North-east portion of Warrego...
300,555
89,700
Mitchell ...
1,790,582
258,343
Gregory North
192,519*
64,262
Burke
133,609
165,494
Total
2,717,265
527,799
which on £1,305,044. 6s. 6d. total capital expended on the 203 miles
open for traffic, yields the percentage named above.
The non-paying traffic is the free carriage of immigrants, police,
prisoners, hospital patients, railway labourers, government servants,
and volunteers.
In 1879, £l. 18s. lid., 1878, £3. Os. 9£d., and in 1877, £2.145. Bd.
were the net returns on the capital expended.
The live stock—as far as I can ascertain facts from official
sources—in the pastoral districts traversed by the Trans-Continental
Railway, compare favourably with those of the Central Railway.
The subjoined tables (pages 38 and 39) prepared by Mr. P. R.
Gordon, Chief Inspector of Stock, show the number of sheep and
cattle in each of the pastoral districts of Queensland, for the last 10
years.
In connection with the Trans-Continental, Mr. Gqrdon makes the
following interesting remarks:—
“ As the question of penetrating the distant western districts by railways is
now engaging public attention, I have deemed it advisable to append a table
showing the number of sheep in each of the pastoral districts of the colony for the
last twelve years—from 1869 to 1880 inclusive, from which it will be observed
that the sheep have been gradually moving westwards. Thus, whilst in 1869, in
that portion of the colony extending from the sea-board westwards to about long,
147, E. the sheep numbered within a fraction of 7,700,000, they now scarcely
number three and a-half millions; whilst the districts of Warrego, Mitchell,
and Gregory, which at the former date carried only 846,000, now support nearly
three millions, with the numbers daily increasing.”
The following is a return made by Mr. P. R. Gordon, Chief
Inspector of stock, of the cattle and sheep depastured December 31st,
1880, which will furnish traffic to the Trans-Continental Railway :
From these tables, it would seem that three-sevenths of the
total number of sheep, and one-sixth of the cattle in Queensland, are
in the districts to be served by the Trans-Continental Railway. For
further particulars of the distribution of the live stock in the imme-


Pastoral District.
1869.
1870.
1871.
1872.
1873.
1874.
1875.
1876.
1877.
1878.
1879.
1880.
Burke ...
96,185
58,217
24,369
21,000
17,450
22,142
18,923
14,000
88,940
•24,255
116,908
133,712
Burnett...
Cook
762,782
728,487
5,700
557,606
464,134
12,000
432,396
2,600
864,040
286,796
293,763
181,155
• ••
208,267
172,907
161,621
221
Barling Downs ...
Gregory North...
Gregory South...
2,522,231
2,521,553
2,498,499
2,304,213
2,559,908
2,544,396
2,895,429
14,686
2,219,550
52,361
15,460
1,770,998
87,142
19,255
1,407,760
*
1,395,510
;171,157
*
1,523,326
440,038
19,708
Kennedy
585,992
250,948
142,806
177,775
174,894
186,154
272,296
268,955
113,161
97,551
28,671
25,676
Leichhardt
2,209,223
2,048,561
1,800,622
1,661,728
1,752,029
1,773,158
1,696,321
1.581,674
1,174,116
810,390
826,215
938,693
Maranoa
1,023,150
910,142
868,172
808,578
819,143
799,098
878,960
717,229
780,742
540,509
676,258
783,219
Mitchell...
472,751
825,874
407,306
446,297
559,293
589,881
821,776
752,912
1,002,741
1,660,084
1,811,683
1,760,202
Moreton
247.551
231,488
203,298
148,490
122,498
79,373
70,667
68,519
32,198
80,390
24,670
21,230
Port Curtis
291,541
255,857
180,256
151,801
89,291
91,134
42,418
41,173
27,732
10,665
56,745
9,193
Warrego
373.977
330,888
419,864
402,089
487,458
531,246
580,684
645,678
744,384
621,209
499,281
611,244
Wide Bay
18,732
25,894
19,492
18,589
18,965
16,061
22,425
16,115
9,000
7,746
16,787
9,659
8,604,115
7,693,109
7,122,290
6,616,694
7,035,925
6.996,688
7,101,381
6,687,279
5,976,564
5,418,826
5,796,742
5,437,742
RETURN showing the NUMBER of SHEEP in each of the PASTORAL DISTRICTS of QUEENSLAND for the Twelve Years
from 1869 to 1880 inclusive.
P. E. GORDON,
Chief Inspector of Stock.
! *““ r ”' “•-=«■ •» P=*» — * n to, «** a.,. to. „ „ 0 ,
- correctly apportioning them it is deemed advisable to omit them. ' ’
p. e. a.
38


Pastoral Districts.
1871.
' 1872.
1873.
1874.
1875.
1876.
1877.
1878.
1879.
1880.
Burke
24,692
3,300
49,506
' 30,949
65,264
96,123
119,697
125,373
179,936
216,960
Burnett
101,087
126,148
126,796
248,468
199,522
196,816
205,622
213,361
222,044
247,982
Cook .*
3,922
11,642
800
1,026
4,342
5,594
7,797
17,334
22,532
19,792
Darling Downs
109,772
124,863
119,282
150,694
142,401
161,718
134,339
113,186
127,817
147,571
Gregory North
...
...
...
• ••
...
...
...
*
*
Gregory South
...
...
...
...
S. •••
...
...
*
*
Kennedy
144,312
149,615
161,100
177,561
185,059
325,599
294,216
315,362
345,133
389,903
Leichhardt ...
90,996
96,281
101,784
117,933
118,077
149,021
156,489
190,929
226,621
265,869
Maranoa '
131,066
112,660
125,594
134,850
190,837
218,916
239,700
246,831
271,711
212,044
Mitchell
43,305
34,667
44,380
72,098
101,384
120,900
196,805
240,320
315,142
331,276
Moreton
178,312
176,507
186,667
203,992
202,924
235,522
207,324
198,504
218,569
251,019
Port Curtis ...
163,672
174,971
187,8; 2
195,400
262,727
283,491
278,996
286,126
886,190
394,546
Warrego
78,812
118,666
153,042
190,301
247,762
256,157
362,841
411,874
432,872
501,480
Wide Bay
98,387
71,972
86,920'
86,797
92,277
100,122
95,755
110,855
136,417
119,859
1,168,235
1,200,992
1,343,093
1,610,105
1,812,576
2,079,979
2,299,582
2,469,555
2,805,984
3,168,271
Increase on previous year ...
...
32,757
142,101
267,010
202,471
267,403
219,608
169,978
336,429
362,287
TABLE showing the NUMBER of CATTLE in each of the PASTORAL DISTRICTS of QUEENSLAND for the Ten Years
from 1871 to 1880 inclusive.
♦ The Returns for North and South Gregory are returned to the Registrar-General with those of Mitchell and Warrego Pastoral Districts, in the Police Districts of Cunnanmlla, Blackall,
and Marathon, and I hare not the means of separating them; the latest returns under “ The Brands Act give North Gregory 120,471, and South Gregory 126,468.
P. E. GORDON,
Chief Inspector of Stock.


1.
Southern and Western Railway
Miles
Brisbane to Roma
... 317
Gowrie Junction to Stanthorpe ...
K- *
O
OO
<>
•J*
Maryborough Railway
Maryborough to Gympie
... ... 61
3.
Bundaberg Railway
Bundaberg to Moolboolaman
41
4.
Central Railway
Rockhampton to Bogantungan ...
... • ... 227"
5.
Northern Railway
Townsville to Ravenswood Junction
• •• ••• 55 -
Total . 800
diate vicinity of the railway, I beg to refer you to the accompanying
land plan. The numbers of stock are greater on the Trans-Continental
than on the Central Railway, but I have not the means of ascertaining
which has the greater number per relative area. Looking at the map,.
Mitchell and Warrego disticts compare favourably with Leichhardt.
In Burke and Gregory North Districts, considerable areas are un-
occupied, and none of the districts are stocked throughout to their
full grazing capabilities. With water storage, the numbers would be
greatly increased.
The Trans-Continental Railway will not cost more per mile than
the Central Railway ; there are, therefore, reasonable prospects of the
Australian Trans-Continental earning a fair dividend.
The earnings of the Southern and Western Railway in 1877 paid
£3. 12s. l()d. per cent, on the capital expended; in 1878, £3. 12s. 9|d.;,
in 1879, £2. 10s. fid.; in 1880, £2. 11s. fid. The diminution in the
earnings between 1878 and 1880 is probably accounted for by the
rapid extensions that have taken place. ;
Had the Southern and Western Railway been constructed at as
cheap a rate as the Central Railway, that is £6,428 per mile, it would
have paid a dividend of nearly 5 per cent, in 1880 instead of
£2. 11s. fid., and if the working expenses had been the same, that is
43‘60 per cent, of the receipts instead of 58'09 it would have paid a
dividend of per cent.
Queensland has at the present the following railways open for
traffic: —
The Maryborough and Bundaberg Lines were opened in ]BBl,
and the Northern Railway in December, 1880.
With this report I hand a Queensland Railways classifica-
tion and general rates and fares list.
CONTINGENCIES.
I have added only 5 per cent, for contingencies, instead of the
usual 10 per cent., as the estimate is designed to include everything:
of importance.


STANDARD GAUGES OF STRUCTURES AND ROLLING
STOCK.
A drawing will be found in the Appendix, showing the minimum
gauge of structures and the maximum gauge of rolling stock, on the
Western, Central and Northern Railways which will be joined with
the proposed Australian Trans-Continental Railway.
Object of railway.
SUMMARY.
The Australian Trans-Continental Railway is required to open a
route to afford a speedier communication for mails and passengers
between Europe and the Colony of Queensland, to develop a trade with
Asia, but more particularly for the purpose of opening out the pastoral,
agricultural, and mineral resources of the Colony. With these objects
in view the line of railway has been laid out, having a due regard to
economy in the cost of construction. The course shown on the map
and plans, together with the limits of deviation to be allowed there-
from, are those agreed to at an interview ! had with the Premier.
The gauge proposed is that of the Queensland Railways, viz., 8 feet
6 inches. The advisability of constructing the Trans-Continental Rail-
way and changing the existing railways to the English gauge of
4 feet 8J is under consideration of the Queensland Government.
The New South Wales lines are of the 4 feet 8| inch gauge, and
if the Queensland Government continue to use the 3 feet 6 inch gauge
there will ere long be a break of continuity which will be very damag-
ing to both colonies.
Gauge.
The minimum radius of curve I propose is 30 chains, and the
ruling gradient lin 75. In one or two cases perhaps lin 60 may be
adopted to save earthwork. The earthworks on the whole will be
light. No tunnels will be necessary. Bridges and flood openings
will be numerous, but less so than by any other route that can be
chosen. The beds of the rivers and creeks are almost dry during the
greater part of the year, and sometimes for two or more consecutive
years, and these years of drought are followed frequently by excep-
tional years of floods. Daring heavy rains the rivers are swollen;
to a considerable volume, and their banks being low as a rule, the
country is subject to inundation for considerable distances. As the
floods nowhere rise to a great height, there is not much object in con-
structing the bridges at a low level so that floods may pass over
them, which I contemplated doing previous to my taking sections of
the large rivers to be crossed.
General descrip-
tion of works.
Floods.
Low level lines and bridges have beon constructed on the Central
Railway, but under different conditions; there the Dawson and
Comet Rivers flow in valleys, and the floods rise to a much greater


height. To keep the superstructure of viaducts above flood level in
cases like these would involve great expense, scarcely warranted
under the circumstances. Tn 1875 the Central Railway 'was sub-
merged for miles, causing a suspension of traffic which lasted three
w r eeks. The Bui’dekin River, on the Northern Railway, spreads out
to a width of nearly half a mile, and rises from 60 to 70 feet in height
during floods, whilst the large rivers on the Trans-Continental
Railway spread out from double to six times this width where
proposed to be crossed, and to ten times or more in other places,
hut they rise only to about half the height.
divers.
With the exception of the Gregory River, which is evidently fed
by springs, all the rivers are formed from surface drainage merely, and
evaporate nearly all they collect, and decrease in the largest number
of cases to disappearance. Coastwise, most streams decrease in
volume.
Timber should be used in the construction of the bridges where
available, and plate or lattice girders and cast-iron piles, or columns,
where their use will be more economical, which will invariably be the
case where spans of 40 feet and upwards must be adopted. In some
cases of small flood openings, rolled iron joist girders on cast-iron
columns sunk into concrete foundations may be used. Cement
concrete or brickwork abutments and piers and culverts may be built,
where the necessary materials are handy.
Bridge materials,
Permanent way.
■ The permanent way estimated for will be of a substantial
character, the rails of steel weighing to the yard corresponding
to a 401 b. iron section with a flat bottom. The joints will be suspended
ones and connected by steel fish plates. Cross sleepers 6 feet 6 inches
long by 8 inches by inches of hard durable wood will be used, 1,980
to a mile. Two-thirds of a cubic yard of ballast per running yard is
the quantity I propose to make a good running and easily maintained
line.
Fencing.
The fencing will consist of hard wood posts and strained wire. It
is proposed to be erected through paddocks, and near stations, but at
no other places.
Station buildings sufficient for the work, will be placed according
to the requirements of the traffic, and built with a due regard to
economy.
Stations.
Water supply.
Water for supplying locomotives, will be obtained by impounding
storm water in dams or reservoirs, or from permanent water holes in
rivers and creeks; where such exist, and forced into elevated tanks by
steam pumping engines.
Effect of the
railway.
The Australian Trans-Continental Railway will open up the
country, stimulate the development of its resources, pastoral, agricul-
tural and mineral, distribute population, enable the graziers to embark
their wool for Europe, and salted or live meat for foreign consumption;


promote trade and commerce, and add greatly to the value of the
land and to the value of the produce of the land. It will also open
a speedier route for mails and passengers between Europe and the
Colony, avoiding the dangerous east coast, and will enable the squatters
to carry on existing operations more profitably, and the farmer and
miner to venture upon new enterprises.
With the growth of population and the expansion of industries ]
this national, and I hope, inter-colonial undertaking may be expected
to yield a fair dividend at no distant date.
Dividend,
RAILWAYS OF AUSTRALIA.
South Australia has a total length open for traffic of 820 miles ;
292 miles on a gauge of 5 feet 3 inches, and 528 on a gauge of 3 feet
0 inches
Victoria has 1,199 miles open for traffic, of double line, and
1,024 f miles of single, all on a gauge of 5 feet 3 inches.
Existing rail-
ways.
New South Wales has 1,000 miles open for traffic, all to a uniform
gauge of 4 feet 8J inches, excepting the private line between Moama
and Deniliquin, which is connected with the Victorian line from Sand-
hurst to Echuca, and is on a gauge of 5 feet 3 inches.
Western Australia had 72 miles open for traffic 31st December,
1879, upon the same gauge as the Queensland Railways, viz., 3 feet 6
inches.
Queensland has 800 miles open for traffic.
ROCKHAMPTON ANT) PORT ALMA RAILWAY AND
WHARF.
General Feilding’s negotiations with the Honorable, the Premier,
were interfered with through the sudden death of Sir Joshua Peter
Bell, President of the Legislative Council, which occurred soon after
our arrival in Brisbane. The near approach of Christmas, further
interfering with official intercourse, I was requested, by General
Feilding, to take the opportunity to inspect the site proposed for a
wharf at Eupatoria Point, or Port Alma, and my report thereon is
herewith annexed.
Wharf at Port
thereto fromf*™ 7
Rockhampton,
When at Rockhampton I availed myself of the opportunity to
inspect the Central Railway as far as open, to Bogantungan, so as to
enable me by comparison to form some idea of the amount of traffic
that might be expected to accrue to the Trans-Continental Railway,
to see the method adopted of crossing rivers with low level bridges,
the impounding of water, and other engineering works.
Central Railway,


When there I saw Mr. Archibald Archer, Member for
Blackall, now the Honorable the Colonial Secretary (Sir Arthur H.
Palmer, late Colonial Secretary, having been appointed President of
the Legislative Council), when he mentioned that he would be opposed
to the Trans-Continental Railway being carried round by Lansdowne
Station, which was General Peilding’s first idea. The line, as laid
down, however, by myself and the Premier avoids this, and is besides
more direct as may be seen by referring to the plan.
NEGOTIATIONS.
On returning again to Brisbane I found General Feilding had
called upon the Premier during my absence to discuss the terms of an
agreement for the construction of the Trans-Continental Railway, but
had been obliged before proceeding far to retire through serious illness.
At his request I took the business in hand, and the Premier granting
me interviews whenever I wanted them, I was able to report at once
to you the terms he would be prepared to recommend to Parliament,
and the course of the line of railway.
I need not here refer to these matters further than to mention
that General Feilding submitted formal proposals to the Premier just
before our departure from Brisbane, including, in addition to those I
reported upon, terms for a guarantee of four per cent, for six years on
the Point Parker and Cloncurry section ; grants of land to be 12,000
and 15,000 acres per mile, instead of 10,000 and 12,000, and an arbi-
tration clause, which I think is necessary, relative to any difference of
opinion as to the strength and durability of the railway works that may
arise. If the Government should refuse these additional terms, and
the negotiations fail in consequence, they may regret it hereafter, for
the terms proposed are, I am sure, very reasonable under all the cir-
cumstances. The government ought, I think, to give the small
guarantee asked for, if they have faith in the progress of the Colony.
I left Brisbane Tuesday, January 24th, in company with General
Feilding, for' Sydney, where he w r ent on board the steamer hound for
San Francisco, and I proceeded to Melbourne, to catch the s.s.
“ Khedive ” which had left Sidney before my arrival.
When at Melbourne, I called upon Mr. Jenkyn Collier with a
letter from General Feilding, asking for an offer from the A ustralian
Syndicate he represents, for the construction of the Mitchell Charlville
Section. By appointment, I met Mr. Collier and Messrs. Halliday,
Holtom, Walker and Munro at Scott’s Hotel, who, after consulting
together, informed me, they were not in a position to make an offer, as
another Syndicate in opposition to theirs’ was being formed to submit
proposals to the Queensland Government to construct the Warrego
44


line for 10,000 acres of land per mile, whilst theirs’ was 12,000, and
they did not feel inclined to reduce this quantity, in order to obtain
the concession. Should their proposals for the Warrego line to New
South Wales not be accepted, they would not be desirous to enter into
a contract for the Mitchell Charlville Section, neither could they
undertake anything unless plans, sections and specifications were
provided for them. At the meeting the merits of a railway west from
Charlville to the South Australian boundary were discussed. I ex-
pressed my favorable opinion of it, as likely to be a good dividend
paying line at no distant date, if joined to the South Australian
Railways. Mr. Collier had no doubts upon this point, and felt sure
the South Australian Government would themselves make the con-
nection. He is satisfied from enquiries which he and Mr. Halliday
made when examining the Cunnamulla route that a railway of easy
construction through good country can be made west from Charlville,
about 300 miles in length, as indicated in the map accompanying this
report. The Australian Syndicate are ready to join you in this under-
taking, and to take a substantial interest in it, by subscribing one-third
of the capital required.
I think this subject well worthy of your consideration. Should
things work out satisfactorily, the Australian Syndicate might, so they
say, be willing to join you in the larger scheme. That some Austra-
lians resident in the Colony, should have an interest in this undertaking
I feel is desirable for its success.
I shall have pleasure in affording any further information you
may require, and have the honour to remain,
My Lords and Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
JOHN ROBINSON,
M. Inst. C.E.


Brisbane, 20 th January, 1882.
Major-General the Hon. Wm. Fbilding.
Sir—
ROCKHAMPTON AND PORT ALMA RAILWAY AND
WHARF.
I have to report that I have visited Rockhampton, in accordance
with your wishes, and inspected the course of a railway proposed
to be constructed from the Central Railway to Eupatoria Point, and
also the site for a wharf at the latter place—Port Alma.
The proposed line will branch from the Central Railway west of
the present station yard, cross a number of town allotments, then
an open forest, which is accommodation land belonging to Sir Charles
Nicholson, and a few enclosures fenced with substantial posts and
rails, and at five miles from the point of junction enters upon unin-
closed land (commonage), which continues for five miles more, when
u selections,” all fenced, have to be traversed for about ten miles.
Here—that is, twenty miles from the commencement of the railway—
mud flats are met with, and they continue all the way—twelve
miles to Port Alma. The total length of the railway will be about
32 miles. The first 20 miles is along the right bank of the
Fitzroy River and the last 12, along the Casurina Creek. The
Avhole of the country may be described as flat and is more or less
subject to inundations; the greatest depth of flood water is 5 feet,
near Rockhampton ;in other places is but 2to 3 feet. At high water
spring tides the mud flats are covered with 18 inches of water.
To carry the railway across these mud flats, side ditches will have
to be cut to drain as much as possible the seat of the embankment,
which need only be a very shallow one, and will be constructed chiefly
of facines, to be obtained from mangroves growing on the bank of
Casurina Channel. They cost, delivered, Is. 6d. per cubic yard.
There is no ballast anywhere on this proposed route, and it will have
to be brought from a considerable distance, most likely from a rock
cutting, near Gracemere. Only one river of importance will have to be
crossed. This river is now spanned by a public road bridge constructed
of timber, 120 feet in span, and with a roadway 20 feet wide. It cost
£2,500. The bridge to carry the railway will not be so wide, and will
not require a planked roadway. Fresh water for the locomotives will


be obtained from the Towns Waterworks, and from some lagoons half
way between Rockhampton and Point Alma. I fear there is no other
source of supply. Wells might be sunk, but the water would probably
turn out to be brackish. Mr. Alexander Jardine, C.E., of the Har-
bours and Rivers Department, and Mr. McEchern, of Walter Reid &
Co., accompanied me, and rendered me much assistance. To view the
mud flats and site of wharf, a steamer was necessary, and there were
none available for several days ; but thanks to Mr. Jardine, Mr. Archer
(now the Hon. the Colonial Treasurer), and Captain Sykes, the difficulty
was at last overcome.
The Eitzroy River has a tortuous channel, full of shoals, and is
difficult of navigation. Five or six years ago the minimum depth over
some shoals was two feet. Since then channels have been dredged,
training-walls built, and the minimum depth is now six or seven feet.
The Government purpose continuing the improvements of the
Eitzroy River, till a minimum depth of ten feet is obtained at low-
water ordinary spring tide. The rise of water at ordinary spring tides
is nine feet; £92,500 has been voted by Parliament for training-walls,
&c , on the Eitzroy River, of which £59,652, 11s. 2d. had been spent
in 1880. During the same year £12,285. 17s. Bd. was spent in a new
dredger.
Port Alma Wharf is intended to allow mail steamers, and others
drawing more than sixteen or seventeen feet of water, to discharge and
take in cargo. Mr. Msbet, the Engineer of Harbours and Rivers, states
that it is accessible at all times to vessels of the largest class, and is the
nearest point to Rockhampton that can be made available for the
purpose, and advocates the erection of wharves and sheds as the best
solution of the difficulty.
The object of the proposed Railway, is to get cargo to and from
Port Alma Wharf and Rockhampton, at a cheaper and speedier rate
than by lighters and small vessels taking it riverwise. It will also be
used by passengers who will save much time in going up and
down the river. I made enquiries some time ago, as to the cost of
lighterage of permanent way materials at Rockhampton, and was in-
formed 10s. per ton.
Plans for a wharf at Port Alma are being prepared by Mr. Aesbit
500 feet in length, and 60 feet in width, with warehouses 480 feet in
length and 40 feet in width. The wharf is to be constructed of cast-
iron screw piles and a timber deck, at an estimated cost of £27,000 ;
this does not include wharf cranes or other machinery. The design
was for 12 inch piles, and Mr. Aesbit informs me that 15 inch piles
have been sanctioned, so that the total cost will probably reach
£30,000.
Attached is a plan showing the general course of the railway and
site of wharf at Eapatoria Point or Port Alma.


£
Clearing
' 800
Earthworks
... 78,400
Eenciug
6,400
Level Crossings
1,350
Bridges and Culverts
2,900
Permanent Way
... 46,700
Water Stations
900
Miscellaneous
2,500
Telegraph
1,670
Engineering and supervision, &c
7,000
Total for 32 miles
... £148,620
The following is my estimate of the cost of the railway, 32 miles in
length, for a single line of way, on the 3 feet 6 inches gauge:—
== £4,644 per mile.
I have excluded land, not knowing what it will cost, also rolling stock
and station buildings, thinking that arrangements could be made with
Government for working the line with their own stock.
The total cost of the railway, with land and rolling-stock, together
with wharf and warehouse, may be approximately estimated at £200,000.
To give some idea of the trade there is with Rockhampton, I may
mention that the value of the exports in 1880 was £625,362, and of
the imports £343,476.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
(Signed)
JOHN ROBINSON,
M. Inst. C.E.


APPENDIX.
Area of Queensland ... ... ... ... ... 669,520 Square Miles.
Population, Census 1881... ... ... ... ... 213,525.
Total value of Imports, 1881 ... ... ... ... £3,087,296.
Do. Exports „ ... ... ... ... £3,448,160.
Wool Exported, clean ~ ... ... 4,856 Tons.
Do. greasy „ ... ... 6,019 „
10,875 Tons.
Extent of Land in Cultivation:
Freehold ... ... ... 90,507 j Acres.
Leasehold ... ... ... 31,523 f „
122,031 Acres.
CROP RAISED IN QUEENSLAND DURING 1880.
Wheat ... ... ... ... ... ... 223,243 Bushels,
Oats ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,081 ~
Barley ... ... ... ... ... ... 31,433 „
Maize... ... ... ... ... ... , ... 1,409,607 „
Potatoes ... ... ... ... ... ... 16,177 Tons,
Cotton ... ... , ... ... ... ... 125,736 lbs.
Sugar Cane, crushed ... ... ... ... ... 12,497 Acres.
Sugar .. ... ... ... ... ... ... 15,861 Tons.
Arrowroot ... ' ... ... ... ... ... 280,388 lbs.
Tobacco, cured leaf ... ... ... ... ... 299£Cwts.
Hay—Wheat ... ... ... ... ... ... 653 J Tons.
Oats ... ... ... ... ... ... 6,483 „
Barley ... , ... ... ... ... ... 364 „
Sown Grass ... ... ... ... ... 15,940 „
Bananas ... ... ... ... ... ... 760,560 Dozens.
Pine Apples ... ... ... ... ... ... 52,364 „
Oranges ... ... ... ... ... ... 199,461 „
Vines:
Wine made ... ... ...' ... ... 85,455 Gallons.
Grapes for table use ... ... ... ... 568,562 lbs.


PRODUCTION, 1880.
Quantity of Euxn Distilled ... ... ... ... 201,111 Gallons.
Tobacco Manufactured ... ... ... ... ... 26,708 lbs.
Snuff do. ... ... ... 500 „
Soap do. ... ... ... ... ... 29,254 Cwts.
Candles do. ... ... ... ... 6,175 ~
Rope do. ... ... ...' ... ... 3,070 „
Leather, made .... ... ... ... ... ... 11,935 „
Number of Bricks made ... ... ... ... ... 10,696,850.
Value of Pottery and Tiles made ... ... ... ... £6,218.
Quantity of Ice made ... ... ... ... ... 4,725 Cwts,
Beer made ... ... ... ... ... ... 356,982 Gallons.
Biscuits manufactured ... ... ... ... ~ 4,055 Cwt.
Yield of Gold from quartz crushed, 1880 ... ... ... 181,054 Ounces.
Mines: > i
( Number of Mines
■< Quantity of Ore
(Value
3 '/
6,290 Tons J.
£11,290 J
Clermont and
Tenningering.
Copper
C Number of Mines
■< Quantity of Ore
(Value ...
173
1,553 Tons >
£47,300 j
Stanthorpe, Palmer
and Cook.
Tin
("Number of Mines
■< Quantity of Ore
(Value ...
1 )
897 Tons >
£18,845 j
Lead
Eavenswood.
{Number of Mines
Quantity of Coal raised
Value ...
n 'i
58,052 Tons V
£24.573 J
Coal
Ipswich.
{Number of Mines
Quantity of Ore
Value
1 1
6 Tons >
£l5 J
Manganese
Gladstone.
Number of Euns, 1880, in the Unsettled Districts ... ... 6,446.
Area ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 364,085 Square Miles.
Rent ... ... ... ... ... ... ... £151,835.
Number of Euns in Settled Districts ... ... ... 153
Area ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,944 Square Miles.
Rent ... ... ... ... ... ... ... £18,113.
Total Area of Crown Lands leased in 1880 for pastural purposes
in the. Settled and Unsettled Districts of the Colony of
Queensland ... ... ... ... ... 238,739,091 Acres.
Bent received ... ... ... ... ... ... £169,948.
50


CENSUS DISTRICT.
PERSONS.
MALES.
FEMALES.
Aramac...
1,500
1,230
270
Balonne
• > • ' ...
...
...
...
2,407
1,604
803
Blackall
••• ...
...
...
1,652
1,214
438
Bowen ...
... ...
...
...
1,539
845
694
Brisbane
... ...
...
...
...
31,109
15,296
15,818
Bundaberg
... ...
...
...
; ...
4,879
3,044
1,835
Burke ...
••• ...
...
...
1,246
1,063
183
Burnett...
... . ..
...
...
2,686
1,664
1,022
Caboolture
... ...
...
...
6,757
3,656
3,101
Cardwell
... ...
...
...
1,196
939
257
Charleville
... ...
...
...
...
1,458
1,115
343
Clermont
... ...
...
...
5,544
3,643
1,901
Cook
... ...
...
...
3,653
2,698
955
Cunnamulla
. ...
...
...
...
656
509
147
Dalby ...
... ...
...
...
1,296
579
717
Darling Downs Central
...
...
...
5,301
3,015
2,286
Darling Downs
East
...
...
4,337
2,518
1,819
Darling Downs North
...
3,910
2,226
1,684
Darling Downs West
.
937
627
310
Diamentina
... ...
• ••
...
654
523
131
Drayton and Toowoomba ...
...
...
10,004
4,995
5,009
Etheridge
„ ...
...
.*•
1,042
934
108
Fassifern
... ...
...
3,784
2,017
1,767
Gladstone
... ...
...
...
1,632
911
721
Gym pie
... ...
...
7,432
4,234
3,198
Ipswich...
... ...
...
...
7,188
3,596
3,592
Kennedy
... ...
...
7,268
4,668
2,600
Leichhardt
... ...
958
545
413
Logan ...
5,256
3,020
2,236
Mackay...
... ...
...
5,787
4,088
1,699
’Maranoa
...
...
3,929
2,338
1,591
Marathon
... ...
...
1,219
1,025
194
Maryborough
... ...
.
9,926
5,619
4,307
Moreton East
...
4,379
2,918
1,461
Moreton West
... ...
10,049
5,311
4,738
Oxley ...
... ...
...
11,103
5,711
5,392
Palmer ...
... ...
5,574
5,473
101
Peak Downs
...
...
433
249
184
Rockhampton
...
...
7,431
8,663
3,768
Somerset
...
...
...
673
626
47
Springsure
... ...
...
...
...
1,438
900
538
Stanley...
... ...
...
...
1,307
764
543
Stanthorpe
... ...
...
...
,,,
2,069
1,215
854
St Lawrence
••• ...
...
...
...
799
524
275
Taroom...
... ...
...
...
...
565
373
192
Tiaro ...
...
...
...
2,126
1,319
807
Townsville
... ...
...
...
5,140
2,965
2,175
Warrego
••• ...
...
• ••
...
514
412
102
Warwick
... ...
• ••
...
•••
3,596
1,730
1,866
Westwood
... ,,,
...
...
...
4,589
2,570
2,019
Wide Bay
... ...
...
• ••
...
1,802
1,139
663
Woothakata
...
...
...
...
1,796
1,465
831
Totals
...
...
213.525
126,325
88,200
CENSUS—1881.
POPULATION IN EACH CENSUS DISTRICT.


DESCRIPTION OP WORK.
1
1 Quantities.
Rate.
Amount.
Total Amount.
SECTION I.— 130 miles (Mitchell to 20 miles North op Charlville),
£
s.
d.
£
s. d.
L —Land. Not included.
II. — Surveys
130 miles
£100
13,000
0
0
III. — Clearing
13,000
8,190
0 0
0 0
130 „
£63
8,190
0
0
IY. Earthworks Cutting 628,896
Side Cutting ... 371,*276
1,000,172 cub. yds.
183,960 „
3/-
1/3 .
150,025
11,497
16
10
Side Drains
The quantities on this Section of 130 miles are just double the actual
quantities of earthwork on 65 miles of railway from Westwood towards
Cornel, on the Central— formerly the Northern— Railway, given by the
Engineer-m-Chief in his Report on Branch Railways, in 1877, to the Queens-
land Government as “ representing an average Australian country.” The
prices are those of recent tenders to Government
0
0
161,523
6 0
Brisbane, January, 1882,
AUSTRALIAN TRANS-CONTINENTAL RAILWAY.
ESTIMATE OF COST
For a Single Line of Way, with a Guage of 8 ft. 6 ins.
52


V.— Fencing.
, . bfdwood posts, 6 ft. 6 in. long, 6 in. by 3 in., 18 ft. apart, charred
at bottom and sunk 2 feet into the ground, with 6 wires— No. 8 annealed— having three
hardwood battens, 6 It. long, 4 in. by 1 in. placed between each of the split posts, and
driven 12 m. into the ground. r
Posts, battens and erection, including carriage of wire and straining brackets
from Mitchell ... ... ... ... __ ®
Bound posts, 9 in. in diameter at angle, and intersection of fences "!
Wire. —Invoice cost, f.o.b., England ... ... ...
Freight to Queensland ... ...' "
Insurance
26 miles
1,800 lin. ft.
26 tons
26 „
£125
1/3
£13/4/-
£2
3,250
81
843
52
0
5
4
0
18
o
0
0
0
0
0
o
Import duty —2/- per cwt.
520 cwta.
2/-
2/11
63/3
4
52
Cartage from Wharf to Brisbane Station ...
tons
a
15
10
Bailway Carriage, Brisbane to Mitchell, 426 miles at Hd. per
ton per mile ...
26
69
4
6
3,856
7
A
The Railway Act requires Fencing to be erected through private lands ...
Cost per lineal yard, Is. 8id.
Only 13 miles of the 130 are estimated to be fenced, and that of the
cheapest description to be erected on the Eoma-Mitchell Section.
VI. — Level Crossings and Eoads.
Earthworks, metalling, box or pipe drains, gates and fencing
2,650
0
0
Metalling and blinding costs 8/- per cubic vard.
2,650
0
0
VII. —Box Drains and Tile Culverts.
Estimated at the actual cost per mile in a similar country on the Central
xvauway
...
130 miles
£98
12,740
0
0
By Drains, 12 in. by 12 in., cost per lin. yard ... 25/-'
12,740
0
0
” ». 15 „ ,, 40/-
” qr ” ” ” - 50 /-
- including faces
” rn ” ” - 68 /-
and tarring
” 60 » 24 „ „ ... 105 j-j
VIII. —Bridges or Viaducts.
Mnmrnlnllo m , ber 16, 20 and 26 ft. openings for Washpool, Wamalilla,
; £ Bla ° kb ; W^ Cr Hole, Hamburgh, and other Creeks, An gellala
and Warrego and Ward Eivers; also Flood opening’s
Iron bridges, with 50 ft. openings for centre of Warrego and Angellala Eivers
17,914 lin. ft.
200 ,.
£3/10/-
£13
62,700
2,600
0
0
0
0
65,300
0
0
Carried forward
...
...
...
...
£267,259
0
0


DESCRIPTION OF WORK.
Quantities.
Rate.
Amount.
1 Total amount.
Brought forward
IX. — Permanent Way.
..
•
...
...
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
267,259 0 0
Cost of One mile :
Quantities.
Rate.
Amount.
Steel rails, 41 J lbs. per running yard, corresponding to
401b. iron section, 24ft. in length each ...
Iron Dog-spikes, 18 to each rail —7,920 x i lbs.=
3,960 lbs
Iron Fang-bolts, 4 to each 24 ft. rail, 1£ lb. each,
440 per mile x 4=1760 x l£lbs.=19cwt. 2qrs. 161bs.
say
Steel Fish-plates, 15 in. long, 440 pairs, 10£ lbs.
nearly per pair ...
Steel Fish-bolts (J-in.) and Lock-nuts, ’84 lbs. each,
1760 x 84 lbs.=1,478 lbs.
Freight to Brisbane of rails, fastenings and cases ...
This rate is for rails carried in “berth ” or general ships,
for which rails are useful as dead-weight. In full cargo ships
freight would be from 35/- to 40/-per ton.
Insurance ... ... ... ... ... sa y
Cartage, Wharf to Railway Station, Brisbane
(Rates for cartage vary from 2/6 to 2/11 a ton.)
Unloading and Stacking
Sleepers of the country (16 to a ton)
Ballasting f of a cub. yard per lin. yard, spread
Laying Permanent Way, including Carriage of rails
and Fastenings from Mitchell
Railway Carriage of rails and fastenings from Brisbane
to Mitchell, at per ton per mile
65.00 tons.
1.77 „
1.00 „
2.00 „
0.G7 „
80.00 „
80.00 „
No. 1,980
1,178 cub. yds.
l,7601in.yds.
80 tons. |
£7
£12
£12
£7
£24/10/-
25/-
2/9
3/-
5/6
1/10
53/3
£
455
21
12
14
16
100
8
11
5
297
323
161
213
s. d
0 0
5 0
0 0
0 0
8 3
0 0
6 3
0 0
3 0
0 0
11 6
6 0
0 0
*
Total Cost per mile
...
1,637
0 0
Main Line ...
. Passing Places and Sidings
...
...
130 miles.
61 „
£1,637
£1,637
212,810 0 0
10,640 10 0
ESTIMATE OF COST — continued .
54


Points and Crossings, 20 sets-.- ,. ,
Cost f.o.b. England ... ... ... 07c a n
Freight to Brisbane ... ... 39 n 0
Insurance ... ... ... 4 0 0
Cartage, Wharf to Eailway, Brisbane ... ." 3 0 0
Eailway carriage to Mitchell ... . ’ 53 0 n
Unloading ... ... ... 1 0 0
Laying including carriage from Mitchell, 20 sets.’.’.’ 170 0 0
bquared sleepers for crossings, 1,400 cub. ft., at 4/3 297 10 0
No.
6 £1,700
« £1,890
6 £795
V £765
843 10 0
224,294 0 0
5,800 0 0
X. —Water Stations.
-. , Including dams, pipes, pumps, engines, cast-iron tanks and stands; also engine
pits, at an average distance apart of 21 miles. ’ b0 en 8 lno
XI. —Polling Stock, for 3 ft. G in. Gauge.
■ and Tenders Passenger Engines — American tvne—("Baldwin
Whf + ny 1i mg wheels coupled, acting as drivers, with a four-wheeled swinging
bogie truck leading. Cylinders 12 in. diameter, stroke of piston 16 in.; diameter of driving
wheels 3 ft 7 in., of bogie 2 ft., of tender 2 ft. 4 in. Weight of engineTmntv 1 7 W
4 cwts of tender 4 tons 17 cwts Weight of engine in steam, 19 tons® 4 cw “.f(on drivers
12 tons, on bogie 7 tons 4 cwts.) Capacity of tender 780 gallons. Length of engine and
tender over bufiers 33ft. Cost at Mitchell ... . ° engine ana
This class of engine is considered a most’satisfactory one by the Loco"
motive Superintendent in Queensland for passenger traffic.
Bi'rhaI t engines, with six wheels coupled, acting as drivers, and with a two-wheeled
issel bogie-truck leading:— Cylinders 12 in. diameter, stroke of piston 20 in • diameter of
driving wheels 3 ft 8 in., of bogie 2 ft., of tender 2 ft. 9 in. Weight
17 tons 15 cwts., of tender 7 tons 11 cwts. Weight of engine in steam 19 +on«?^tt Q / ’
I f 14 t0 - nS ° n b ° gi t 4 tons 12 cwts ') Wat ® r capacity of tender 1000 gano™
Length of engine and tender over buffers 36 ft. 3 in. Cost at Mitchell . gallons.
t „„/ 0 r g00 f S traffi ? tl f is class of en g in 6 gives the most satisfaction to the
Locomotive Superintendent of Queensland.
n n ... , , By The Eailway Companies’ Preliminary Act of 1880,” locomotives are
admitted duty free at any port in the Colony during the construction of the line.
1 4 St * ss Saioon Carriages, American style, with door at each end and onening on
a platform ; to run on two four-wheeled bogie trucks (with Grover’s radial system preferred!
Under frame and bogie frame of angle and T iron, body of cedar and pine Width 7 ft
Carried forward ...
5,800 0 0
10,200 0 0
15,120 0 0
4,770 0 0
5,355 0 0
£35,445 0 0
£497,353 13 4
55


DESCRIPTION OF WORK.
Quantities.
Rate.
Amount.
Total Amount.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
Brought forward ...
* »••
35,445 0 0
497,353 13 4
XI. — Rolling Stock —( continued ).
Second Class Carriages, American style. To carry GO passengers
7
£610
4,270 0 0
Brake Yans, with 6 wheels, 2 ft. diameter, weight empty 7 tons
5
£570
2,850 0 0
Do. for ballast trains, underframe of hardwood; body of cedar and pine.
No. of wheels 4, 2 ft. in diameter; length over buffers 19 ft.
8
£210
630 0 0
Post Office Yans
2
£300
600 0 0
Covered Goods Waggons, with sliding doors, underframe of hardwood, 4 wheels,
2 ft. diameter, wheel base 7 ft. length over buffers 17 ft., weight empty 3 tons 2 cwts,
carrying capacity 7 tons
24
£165
3,960 0 0
Open Goods Waggons, wheels and length the same as Covered Goods Waggons,
weight empty 2 tons 14 cwts., carrying capacity 7 tons
120
£98
11,760 0 0
Cattle Trucks, underframe of- hardwood, wheels and length same as above
6
£160
960 0 0
Sheep Trucks to carry 60 sheep do. do.
20
£150
3,000 0 0
Horse Boxes to carry 2 horses do. do.
3
£240
720 0 0
Engine Truck, with open swivel turntable deck for carrying portable engines and
other wheeled vehicles ... ... ...
1
£120
120 0 0
Bail Trucks
6
£200
1,200 0 0
Coke Trucks
2
£150
300 0 0
Water Trucks for supplying water to workmen and engines on dry parts of the line
3
£180
'390 0 0
Eive Ton Travelling Crane
1
£170
170 0 0
Gunpowder Yan...
1
£190
190 0 0
. Ballast Waggons
20
£110
2,200 0 0
Timber Trucks ...
■ £120
600 0 0
69,365 0 0
Cost of Rolling Stock in this Section = £533 per mile.
Amount.
XII. —Woekshops.
£
s. d.
Including buildings for the repairing of locomotives, carriages and wagons, with stationary
engines, boilers, machinery and tools, also cottages for workmen. Proportion chargeable to this section
...
...
7,540 0 0
XIII. — Station Woeks.
Mitchell Station.
Earthworks ... ... ... ... ... ... 3000 yds. 3s.
450 0 0
Forming and metalling station approach, yard, &c.
...
150 0 0
ESTIMATE OF COST — continued.
56


Fencing and gates ...
120
6 0
Drainage ...
200
0 0
Station buildings as at Eoma, contract price
1,233
0 0
Station master’s bouse do. do.
589
0 0
0 0
0 0
[) o
Steam shed do. do.
1,075
1,859
447
Goods’ shed do. do.
Carriage shed do. do. ... ...
Loading bank, sheep and cattle yards ...
240
0 0
Semaphore signals, fittings and levers ...
...
96
9 0
6,409
0
0
One set of signals costs f. o. b. £18. 7s. Od.; freight £3. 9s. Od-; andinsurance 5s. 4d.
Tyrconnel Downs.
Waiting shed, no platform
...
• ••
•«•
120
0
0
Saddier’s Water Hole.
,
Earthworks, metalling, and drainage
115 0 0
Booking and telegraph office ...
Station Master’s house
350 0 0
400 0 0
32 0 o
120 0 0
Semaphore signal, fittings, and lever erected complete ... ,,,
Loading bank
Fencing, and gates ...
30 0 0
1,047
0
0
Alio* —Downs.
Waiting shed, no platform
...
• •»
120
0
0
Charlville Station,
Earthworks
Fencing and gates ...
...
300 -C
100 c
) 0
) o
Drainage
120 C
o
Station building, including platform, telegraph office, urinal, &c.
690 C
0
Station Master’s house
Steam shed ... ... ... .... \ \
Goods do, ... ... ... ...
Carriage do.
400 C
875 C
693 C
-‘G5 C
0
0
0
0
o
Loading bank, sheep and cattle yard
160 0
Semaphore signals, fittings, and levers ...
96 6
0
Millie.
3,749
0
0
Waiting shed, no platform
...
120
0
0
11,565 0 0
Carried forward ... ...
...
£585,823 13 4
57


DESCRIPTION OF WORK.
j Quantities.
, Kate.
i
Amount.
Total Amount.
Brought forward
XIV, —Electric Telegraph.
Wooden poles, wire, and insulators erected complete
Instruments, fittings and batteries
There is an import duty of 2s. per cwt. on wire ; and on insulators, and
telegraphic apparatus 5 per cent, on every hundred pounds value thereof.
130 miles
£54
£
7,020
200
s.
0
0
d.
0
0
£
585,823
7,220
s.
13
0
d.
4
0
XV. —Workmen’s Cottages (Wood and Galvanized Iron.)
For platelayers or repairs men...
Engine drivers
Guards ...
Firemen ...
A small rental should he charged to cover the interest on expenditure
incurred, and provide for repairs, &c.
No.
GO
5
5
5
£122/10/-
£230
£230
£150
7,350
1,160
1,150
750
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10,400
0
0
XVI. —Miscellaneous.
Coaling stages, turntable, loading-bank and warehouse cranes; mile and
gradient posts; notice boards; waggon, cart and baggage weighing machines; booking-
office and waiting room furniture, clocks, lamps, &c.
An engine turntable costs f o.b. £195, freight £32, insurance £2.15s. (id.
A 5-ton wharf crane costs f.o.b. £92. 5s.
A 30 cwt. warehouse crane costs f.o.b. £27. 10s.
...
3,000
0
0
3,000
0
0
XVII, —Engineering.
Including superintendence, office, clerical, and incidental expenses ...
13 ( ) miles
£300
39,000
0
0
39,000
0
0
XVIII. —Head Offices.
For General Manager, Secretary, Engineer, &c. Proportion chargeable to this
Section
800
0
G
XIX. —Contingencies, 5 per cent.
...
...
...
...
£646,243
32,312
13
6
4
8
Total Cost of Section I. — 130 Miles
Cost of construction of Section No. 1, as usually let by Contract in Queens-
land, that is, exclusive of rails and fastenings, equipment, fencing wire telegraph,
pumps, tanks, engines, buildings, turntables, workshops, machinery and tools —
= per mile £2,774.
Cost including these „ £5,220.
...
...
£678,556
0
0
= per Mile
...
£5,220
0
0
ESTIMATE OF COST—confirmed.


SECTION II. —175 miles. (130th to 805th mile.
From 20 Miles North of Chahlville to Avington.
I.—Land. Not included.
II. —Surveys
...
.
,
175 miles
£100
17,500
0
0
17,500
0
0
III. —Clearing. chains in width ...
. ..
. .
175 „
£60
10,500
0
0
10,500
0
0
IV. —Earthworks,
Excavation from cuttings and side cuttings run to form embankments
760,000 cub. yds.
3/-
114,000
0
0
J Do. side ditches and water courses ...
, ,,
250,000
1/6-
18,750
0
0
Surface forming fifteen (15) ft. wide, with cuttings or
embankments not
exceeding 1 foot deep, nearly 91 miles
...
. . .
160,000 lin. yds.
1/6-
12,000
0
0
144,750
0
0
V.—Fencing.
! As on Section I, Say 100 miles of the 175 to be fenced through paddocks
352,000 „
1/9-
80,800
0
0
30,800
0
0
VI —Level Crossings and Eoads.
i Including earthworks, metalling, drains, gates and fencing..
...
...
2,500
0
0
VII. —Box Drains and Culverts
2,500
0
0
As in Section I
... .,
• ...
...
175 miles
£98
17,150
0
0
17,150
0
o
VIII —Bridges.
Of timber over Middle, 'Whitechapel, Westphalia, Elizabeth, Eavensbourne,
Bride, Hope, Wooroolah and other Creeks, also flood openings
. . .
5000 lin. ft.
£3/15/-
18.750
0
0
Of iron tor centre openings of 50 ft.
...
...
150 „
£14
2,100
0
0
20,850
0
0
IX. —Permanent Way.
Quantities.
Rate.
Amount.
Cost of 1 Mile,
£
s. d.
Bails and Fastenings delivered at Mitchell ...
, r
850
19 6
Carriage of ditto from Mitchell to Section II., 130
miles at l£d. per ton per mile
80 tons
16/3
70
0 0
Sleepers of the country
No. 1,980
3/-
297
0 0
Ballasting spread
1,173 cub. yds.
6/-
351
18 0
Laying, including carriage of Bails and Fastenings
from Section I. (Terminus) ...
1,760 lin. yds.
1/10
161
6 0
Unloading
...
...
5
16 6
1,737
0 0
Carried forward
...
...
£244,050
0
0


DESCRIPTION OF WORK.
Quantities.
Rate.
Amount.
Total Amount.
& s. d.
£ s. d.
Brought forward ... ... ...
244,050 0 0
IX .— Permanent Way — ( continued ).
Main line ...
175 miles
£1,737
303,975 0 0
Sidings and passing places
5
£7,787
8,685 0 0
Points and crossings, 16 sets laid complete. The same as on Section I, with
the extra carriage added
• •• • • •
390 0 0
313,350 0 0
X.— Wat'eb Stations.
Including dams, tanks, pipes, pumps, engines, and ashpits...
• •• • ••
...
7,875 0 0
7,875 0 0
XI. — Bolling Stock.
Same description as for Section I.
No.
£
Passenger engines
6
1,700
10,200 0 0
Goods do.
G
1,890
11,840 0 0
First-class saloon carriages
3
795
2,385 0 0
.
Composite carriages ...
3
755
2,295 0 0
Second-class carriages
3
G10
1,880 0 0
Brake vans for passenger and goods trains
4
570
2,280 0 0
Do. for ballast trains ...
3
210
630 0 0
Post-office vans
1
300
300 0 0
Covered goods waggons
12
165
1,980 0 0
Open do.
GO
98
5,880 0 0
Cattle trucks
5
160
800 0 0
Sheep do.
12
150
1,800 0 0
Horse boxes
4
240
960 0 0
Engine trucks
2
120
240 0 0
Bail do.
4
200
800 0 0
Coke do.
2
150
300 0 0
Water do.
2
180
260 0 0
Five ton travelling crane
1
170
170 0 0
Gunpowder van
1
190
190 0 0
Ballast waggons
12
110
no o o
Timber trucks
2
120
120 0 0
Carriage do.
1
135
135 0 0
45,005 0 0
The quantities of rolling stock for this section are nearhj in the same jirnjior-
K
tions as now in use on the Central Railway.
Cost of rolling stock = £257 per mile.
ESTIMATE OF COST — continued.
60


XII. —Workshops.
able to this Section 88 ’ Machinery ’ and tooIs > also workmen's cottages. Proportion charge-
4,441
0 0
4,444
7.000
11,837
12,630
3.000
52,500
[1,000
0
0
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
XIII. —Station Works.
. , Buildings, fencing gates, loading banks, sheep and cattle yards drainage
signals, goods, carriage and engine sheds ... ... ... _ J ° '
• ••
7,000
0 0
XIV. —Electric Telegraph.
Iron poles, wire, and insulators erected complete ...
Instruments, fittings, and batteriefe ...
175 miles
£66/10
11,637
200
0 0
0 0
XY. —Workmen’s Cottages.
For platelayers
be built elsewh r ereT ine and Jokers."’(Chargeable to tills Section,' but may
SO „
£135
10,800
1,830
0 0
0 0
XVI. —Miscellaneous .
Coaling stages, cranes, weighing machines, mile and gradient posts, &c.
• « •. .
3,000
0 0
XVII. —Engineering,
Including superintendence, office, clerical, and incidental expenses ...
175 „
£300
52,500
0 0
XVIII. —Head Offices.
For General Manager, Secretary, Engineer, &c. ...
,,,
...
1,000
0 0
XIX. —Contingencies, 5 per cent.
r ••• ••• ••• ... ...
Total Cost of Section II.— 175 Miles ...
...
...
...
702,691
85,138
10
10
0
0
...
...
...
£737,830
0
0
. C ’ 0St .f construction, as usually let by Contract in Queensland, that is, exclu-
sive of rails, buildings , telegraph, and equipment, dc, ... £2 107 I
dost, including the above ,,, 210 T
= per Mile
£4,216
0
0
i


DESCRIPTION OF WORK.
Quantities.
liATE.
Amount.
Total Amount.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
Brought forward
••• •••
...
SECTION III. — 295 miles. (305th to 600th mile.)
Avington to North of Dividing Range.
I. — Land. Not included.
— - - - ■
II,—^Surveys
295 miles
£100 '
29,500 0 0
29,500 0 0
III, — Clearing ... ... ... ... ...
295 „
£50
14,750 0 0
14,750 0 0
IY. —Earthworks .
Excavation from cuttings and side-cutting run to form embankments
1,520,000 cub. yds.
3/3
247,000 0 0
Do. side ditches ...
500,000
1/9
43,750 0 0
Surface forming fifteen (15) ft. wide, with cuttings and embankments not
exceeding 1 foot deep ...
190,000
1/9
16,625 0 0
.
307,875 0 0
Y, — Fencing.
Say 150 miles of the 295 to he fenced through paddocks only
528,000 lin. yds.
1/9
46,200 0 0
46,200 0 0
VI. — Level Crossing and Roads.
Including earthworks, metalling, drains, gates and fencing
,,, ,,,
• ••
4,200 0 0
4,200 0 0
YII. — Box Drains and Pile Culverts ...
295 miles
£100
29,500 0 0
29,500 0 0
YIII. — Bridges and Yiaducts.
Of timber, over Gowan, Oakhamptou, Black Gin, Ilfracombe, Collumptou,
Brutus, Scrub, Cattle, Bradley, Western, Bangall, Jessamine, Bauhenia, Mills, Werna,
Wokingham, Rupert, Campsie and other creeks
31,362 lin. ft.
£4/6/8
135,900 0 0
Of iron, for centre spans of 50 ft.
900 „
£15/10/-
13,950 0 0
n.o Tin ( 5 s P ans of 100 ft -> cast-iron piles and wrought iron lattice girders
500 „
£26
13,000 0 0
viauuct over tne jsarcoo j 1Q do _ 5Q do> do. £22,916. 13s. 4d.
500 „
£15/10
7,750 0 0
(_15 do. 20 timber
500 „
£4/6/8
2,166 13 4
Viaduct over the Thomson f 1 ® pa * of 100 fi > cast iron pUes and nought lattice girders
100 „
£26
2,600 0 0
viaauci over tne xnomson j g0 do 5Q do< do £73,516. 13s. 4d.
1,500 „
£15/10/-
23,250 0 0
( 550 do. 20 timber
11,000 „
£4/6/8
47,666 13 4
CO
CO
CO
ro
ESTIMATE OF COST — continued.
62


IX. — Permanent Way.
Cost of one mile.
Quantities.
Rate.
Amount.
Rails and fastenings delivered, say at Mitchell
Carriage of ditto, from Mitchell to beginning of
Section III. , ... ... ... ... that is
805 miles at l£d. per ton per mile
Unloading
Sleepers of the country
Ballasting spread
Laying, including carriage of rails and fastenings
from Section II.
/
80 tons
80 „
No. 1,980
1,173 cub.yds.
1,760 lin.yds.
88/-
8/6
6/6
2/6
850 19
162 0
6 6
346 10
381 4
220 0
d
6
0
6
0
6
0
Total cost per mile
...
...
1957 0
0
* *
Main Line
Sidings, and Passing Places ...
Points and Crossings, 20 sets. Same as in Section I., plus the extra carriage ..
295 miles
8 „
£1,957
£1,957
577, 8i5
15,656
842
0
0
0
0
0
0
593,818
13,600
76,000
7,600
15,000
20,017
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
o
X. — Water Stations.
Including dams, pipes, tanks, pumps, engines and ashpits
...
«. ...
...
13,600
0
0
XI. — Rolling Stock.
Q ie same description as on Section I., and in the same proportions as on
section il., or as on the Central Railway, nearly £258 per mile
76,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
Xli. — Workshops.
, Buildings, Machinery and Tools, also Workmen’s Cottages,
able to Section III
Proportion charge-
7,600
0
0
Xlli. — Station Works.
, ... , Including Junctions with Central and Northern Railways: —fencing, gates,
E^ ca^ e jcrds, drainage, signals, goods, carriage and engine
15,000
0
0
XI Y. — Electric Telegraph.
Iron poles, wire, insulators erected complete
Instruments, fittings, and batteries ... ...
Note.-— £66. 10s. Od. is the cost of the Government line through this district
with iron poles, but I anticipate a saving when the railway is under con-
struction, as there will be greater facilities for transnort.
295 miles
£66/10 /-
19,617
400
10
0
0
0
Carried forward
...
...
...
£1,403,838
6
8
63


DESCRIPTION OF WORK.
Quantities.
Rate.
Amount.
Total Amount.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
Brought forward
•••
...
1,403,838 6 8
XV. —Workmen’s Cottages.
For repairs-men, engine-drivers, firemen, guards, &c.
...
22,000 0 0
22,000 0 0
XVI. —Miscellaneous.
As on previous sections
••• •••
• ••
5,800 0 0
5,300 0 O
XVII. —Engineering.
Including superintendence, clerical office, and incidental expenses ...
295 miles
£800
88.500 0 0
88,500 0 0
XYIII. —Head Office.
For General Manager, Secretary, Engineer, &o. Proportion chargeable to this
section
...
• ••
1,700 0 0
1,700 0 0
1,521,338 6 8
XIX. —Contingencies 5 per cent.
...
76,066 13 4
Total Cost of Section III. —295 Miles ...
...
...
£1,597,405 0 0
= per Mile
£5,415 0 0
Cost of construction as usually let by contract in Queensland; that is, exclu-
give of rails and fastenings, rolling stock, telegraph buildings, workshops, machinery,
tools, iron girders, pumps, tanks, dc. ... ... ... ... £3,188 I
Cost including these ... ... ... ... ... £5,415 J
SECTION TV. —400 Miles. 600th to 1000th Mile.
From North op Dividing Range, through Clonourry to Point Parker, Gulf op Carpentaria.
I.—Land, not included.
II. —Surveys
400 miles
£100
40,000 0 0
40,000 0 0
III. —Clearing
400 „
£60
24,000 0 0
24,000 0 0
ESTIMATE OF COST — continued.
64


IV. —Earthworks,
1
Excavation from cuttings, run to form embankments
Do. side cuttings do. do. ...
Do. side ditches ...
excedins Ifootdeep'T" 6 "*!!“ <“> * *“* ««*»£■* noi
4,500,000 c. yds.
650.000 „
300.000 „ .
3/6-
21-
2/-
787,500
65.000
80.000
0
0
0
0
0
0
10,000 lin. yds.
2/6-
1,250
0
0
V.—Fencing.
883,750
0
0
Say 50 miles of the 400 to he fenced ...
176,000 „
21-
17,600
0
0
VI- —Level Crossings and Hoads.
17,600
0
0
Including earthworks, metalling, drains, &o.
6,000
0
0
VH* Box Brains, and Pile Culverts
6,000
0
0
400 miles
£180
52,000
0
0
VIII. —Bridges and Viaducts.
52,000
0
0
Dromedary M ’ Kil l la y» Gi^ dia - Holy Joe, Williams, Elder, Fisher, Dougald,
iX Tnd iSXtW [lttl S° 0d DS a ndy, Fiery, Cartridge, Emu, Ghost, Dismal, Moonlight,
.UocKy, and many other creeks or rivers without names; also flood openings.
Of timber, 20 and 26 ft. span
Of. iron, 50 ft. span
T7- i Do. 25 „
Viaducts over f Ten spans of 50 ft. each, of iron V f
the Fullerton. \ Forty of 20 ft. each of timber | \ £12,800 4
( ve s P ans 1 °1 1°° ft- each, cast-iron piles or cylinders and 3 /
60,000 lin. ft.
8,000 „
£
6
16
300,000
48,000
0
0
0
0
3,000 „
500 „
800 „
10
16
6
30,000
8,000
4,800
0
0
0
0
0
0
Cloncurry. J _ wrought-iron lattice girders ... ” 1 1
1 Twenty do. 50 do. do. do.
v Twelve do. 20 ft. each of timber ... ) |
Wilhams or f Four spans of 50 ft. each of iron ... i }
Corella. \ Fifty-seven of 20 ft. each of timber ” |£10,040j
( s P ans , °1 100 ft. each, cast-iron piles or cylinders and i (
500 lin. ft.
1000 „
240 „
200 „
1,140 „
30
16
6
16
6
15.000
16.000
1,440
8,200
6,840
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Leichhardt. J m wrought-iron lattice girders ... ...” ( 1
] Twenty do. 50 do. do '"do I M0 > 00( M
(Fifty do. 20 ft. each of timber ... ... ’ ) (
Grpunrv J m!” SpaC | s of 10( ( ft - eacll > cast-iron piles and lattice girders ") (
£ y* x Pen do. 50 do. do > P9-3 lonJ
(Eighteendo. 20 ft. each of timber ... ’ ... j ’ i
N; l l fm en s P ans °l 10° ft- each, cast-iron piles and lattice girders ) (
Nicholson. J Twenty do. 50 do. do. do ( £4 o 400 J
(Twenty do., 20 ft..each of timber ... . j £48 ’ 400 |
600 „
1000 „
1000 „
400 „
500 „
360 „
1000 „
1000 „
400 „
80
16
6
80
■ 16
6
83
16
6
18,000
16,000
6,000
12,000
9,000
2,160
30.000
16.000
2,400
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
544,840
0
0
Carried forward
...
1,568,190
0
O
65


DESCRIPTION OP WORK.
Quantities.
Rates.
Amount.
Total Amount.
1
£ s. d.
£ s. d
Broughl
forward
.
...
1,568,190 0 0
IX. —Permanent Way.
Quantities.
Rate.
Amount.
per mile.
Steel rails 41| lbs.
65 - tons.
£7
£ s. d
455 0 C
Dog spikes
1-77 „
£12,
21 5 0
. Fangbolts
1- „
£12
12 0 0
Steel fish-plates, 15 inches long
2- „
£7
14 0 0
Steel fish-bolts and lock-nuts ...
•67 „
£21/10/-
16 8 8
Freight to Point Parker, of rails and fastenings with
cases ...
80- „
£2/5/-
180 0 0
Insurance
8 12 3
Eailway carriages
80- „
£1/5/-
100 0 0
Unloading and stacking
5 0 0
Sleepers ...
1,980 No.
8/6
346 10 0
Ballasting ... ... ...
1,173 cub. yds.
6/6
881 4 6
Laying road, including carriage of materials from
depots
1,7G0 lin. yds.
3/6
308 0 0
Cost per mile
...
...
1848 0 0
Main line ...
400 miles
£1,848
739,200 0 0
Sidings and passing places
«•#
10 „
£1,848
18,480 0 0
Points and crossings, 32 sets laid complete
... ...
...
...
M00 0 0
X.—Water Stations.
759,080 0 0
Including dams, pipes, pumps, engines, boilers, tanks and stands : also engine
ash-pits
••• •••
...
...
... ...
• ••
24,000 0 0
XI. — Eolling Stock.
24,000 0 0
In the same proportions as provided on Central Eailway, equal to £257 per
mile, as per estimate for Section II.
...
...
...
...
• ••
102,800 0 0
XII. — Workshops.
102,800 0 0
Including buildings, stationary engines and boilers, machinery and tools : also
workmen s cottages. Proportion chargeable to this Section ...
...
...
...
12,000 0 0
12,000 G 0
ESTIMATE OF COST — continued.
66


XIII.-
—Station Works.
Including buildings, platforms, signals, sheep and cattle loading-banks and yards
26,000
0
0
•
XIY.-
-Electric Telegraph.
v .
26,000
0
0
Iron poles, -wire and insulators erected complete ...
Instruments, fittings and batteries ... ...
400 miles
£66/10/-
26,600
600
0
0
0
0
X
XV.-
-Workmen’s Cottages.
27,200
0
0
For repairs men or platelayers, engine drivers and firemen, guards, &c.
32,000
0
0
XYI.-
-Miscellaneous.
32,000
A
0
Coaling stages, mile and gradient posts, loading-bank and warehouse cranes, &c.
9,500
0
0
xvn.-
-Engineering,
9,500
0
0
Including superintendence, office, clerical, and incidental expenses.
120,000
0
0
XVIII.-
—Head Office.
120,000
0
0
Section
For General Manager, Secretary, Engineer, &c. Proportion chargeable to this
2,500
0
0
*** # * ••• . . . ••• •••
2,500
0
0
...
XIX,-
-Contingencies, 5 per cent.
r ••• ••• ••• ... ...
Total Cost of Section IY. —100 Miles
...
...
...
2,683,270
134,289
0
0
0
0
-
...
...
...
£2,817,559
0
0
= per Mile
...
£7,044
0
0
Cost of construction, as usually let by contract in Queensland, that is, exclusive
of rails, fastenings, girders, rolling stock, telegraphs, pumps, tanks, workshops,
buildings, machinery, tools , Sc. ... ... £4 ggg )
Cost including these ... ... ... £7'o44 [P cr mile.
SECTION V.— 115 Miles.)
Branch to Hughenden; to join the Northern Railway from Townsville.
Construction, buildings, and equipment complete...
115 Miles
at £4,510
...
518,650
0
0
— per Mile
...
£4,510
0
0
67


Section.
Length.
Cost per Mile
of Construction
as Let by
Contract in
Queensland.
Cost per Mile
including
buildings and
Rolling Stock.
Total Cost
as per annexed
Details.
No. I.
Miles.
130
£
2,774
£
5,220
£
678,556
„ II. ...
175
2,107
4,216
737,830
„ HI- ...
295
3.188
5,415
1,597,405
IV. ...
400
4,936
7,044
2,817,559
1000
5,831,350
Branch to")
Hughenden)
115
2,250
4,610
518,650
Total
1,115
£3,500
£5,695
£6,350,000
AUSTRALIAN TRANS-CONTINENTAL RAILWAY.
Summary showing Estimate of Cost of Construction and Equipment.
JOHN ROBINSON,
M. Inst. C.E.


TBO* KELL * SOU, LITH. 40, KING ST COVENT GARDEN
Note. The ft Ring oF cess is only required
where directed/- hy the Engineer.
CROSS SECTION IN BANKS AND CUTTINGS.
Scale;, 20 Feet to an Inch,
SURFACE FORMATION
TO INCLUDE CUTTING AND BANK UNDER ONE FOOT DEEP.
BANK
SHOWING ALSO SIDE CUTTING.
CUTTING.
AUSTRALIAN TRANSCONTINENTAL RAILWAY.
JVbte. Side, ditches and/ cuttings are, further away
on- this side, to allow of future/ doubting of line,
Fencing is proposed to he erected
thro' haddocks Sc Townships only.
LONGITUDINAL ELEVATION AND SECTION
PERMANENT WAY.
PLAN.
Scale. 6 Foot to ;xn Inoli.


10 FEET
15 FEET
CROSS SECTION
CROSS SECTION,
HALF
LONGITUDINAL SECTION,
HALF
ELEVATION
HALF LONGITUDINAL SECTION.
HALF ELEVATION.
i
a
g
o
c
e>
g
o'
p
8
o
s
o
p
PLAN
PLAN.
PILE CULVERTS.
DETAILS OF COGGING


QUEENSLAND S. & W. RAILWAY.
H. C. Stanley Esq,. Engineer.
15 FEET FLOOD OPENINGS.
UP TO 10 FEET HIGH FROM RAIL TO SURFACE.
- - II
-HC a KELL iL Lo;.' r LITE 40, king s t covelt garden.
SECTION E.F.
SECTION C. D.
SECTION A. B.
END SECTION SHEWING BACKING LOGS.
END SECTION SHOWING PITCHING
ELEVATI ON
PLAN.
DETAIL OF COGGING,


THQ S KELL & SON. LITH 40,KING S T COVENT GARDEN.
CROSS SECTION AT E. F.
PIERS BETWEEN 15 AND 20 FEET HIGH
CROSS SECTION AT G-H.
PIERS ABOVE 20 FEET HIGH
Note, Jrvßridges on curves, Carvt> to he put oiv Beadstcch
Biers to he -plcuxch orv the skew, where directed try the! Engineer.
QUEENSLAND. S. & W. RAILWAY.
H. C. Stanley EsQ. Engineer.
BRIDGES WITH 20 & 26 FT OPENINGS.
CROSS SECTION AT A. B.
PIERS UP TO 10 FEET HIGH.
CROSS SECTION ATC.D.
PIERS BETWEEN 10 AND 15 FEET HIGH.
DETAILS OF COGGING.
ELEVATION.
PLAN.


NAMEofLINE
G U A G E
MINIMUM
ST
lUCTUBE
1
dAxirv
UM
LOAC
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
J
K
L
M
N
0
P
0
R
S
T
U
V
W
Soutlrai
M.'flyborou$i
Bundabei^
3.6
3 6
3.6
11.0
11,6
11 0
2.6
2.6ftss^
3.0 Goods
2.6Biss8 r
3.0 Goods
23Rjss*i
2.G Goods
L6Sss r Xa
03Sssi£
2-6 Goods 1
T.nBtgfTpr
Q.SBssi&e
2.6 Goods
14?. 0
14 6
ii 6
4.0
4.6
4.6
11.6
11.6
11.6
6 6
6.6
0.6
13 0
13 6
13.6
10.0
ib 6
ib.6
15.0
15.6
17.0
17.6
8.4
8.4
8.4
7.10
7.10
7.10
9.6
9.6
9.6
11, 5
11. 6
11,6
loo
i6.6
10 0
2.6
Gsnlia
Cffltni
4 3
Buffirs
BifSr;
3 3
3.3
3.3%
6 4
6.4
o.4
2.i
2. i
2 0
THO* KELL <fe SON, UTH. 40, KING S T COVENT GARDEN.
QUEENSLAND RAILWAYS.
STANDARD GUAGE.
MINIMUM STRUCTURE - MAXIMUM LOAD.


THE AUSTRALIAN TRANS CONTINENTAL RAILWAY.
MAP OF QUEENSLAND
Shewing Railways & Telegraphs open under construction & projected
to accompany the report of
Mr. Jon Robinson M. Inst: C.E.
10 March 1882
Scale 50 Statute Miles to 1 Inch.
Reference.
Transcontinental Railway
Railways open
do. under constriction
projected
Telegraph Lines
Telegraph Stations
District Boundaries


PROPOSED AUSTRALIAN TRANS CONTINENTAL RAILWAY.
SHEWING COURSE OF LINE AS AGREED TO AT INTERVIEWS OF JANY 9 TH 1882.
BETWEEN THE HON. THOMAS Mc ILWRAITH L.L.D. PREMIER OF QUEENSLAND &
Mr. JOHN ROBINSON, M. INST.C.E.
mm. Mmnf Inin# 1,000 Mlm
Branch/
