

Pl“iH
SITUATED ON
JIMBOUR, DARLING DOWNS,
QUEENSLAND.
Hv WILLIAM FRYAR, Esq., Inspector of Mines under the
Queensland Government ; and the
Honbi.e. A. C. GREGORY, C.M.G., formerly Surveyor General
of that Colony.
Brisbane :
PRINTED BY WATSON, FERGUSON, AND CO., QUEEN STREET.


REPORTS
THE COAL FIELDS
BELONGING TO
f (|f IjarliinJ I)frun|s ami Ijtalcrii jitml Cm,
SITUATED ON
JiMBOUR, DARLING DOWNS,
QUEENSLAND.
By WILLIAM FRYAR, Esq., Inspector of Mines under the
Queensland Government ; and the
Honble. A. C. GREGORY, C.M.G., formerly Surveyor General
of that Colony.
PRINTED BY WATSON, FERGUSON, AND CO., QUEEN STREET.




REPORT
JIMBOUR COAL FIELDS,
By Wm. FRY Alt, Esq., Inspector of Mines.
Brisbane, 19th Feby., 1884.
Sie Aethce,
I do myself the honor to offer a few remarks touching
the seam of Coal visited on Bth and 11th inst., at Dingo Point,
Jimbour; and to forward the accompanying section.
It will be seen that the seam consists of six bands, layers
or strata of Coal comprising 7 feet 3 inches of Coal: the five
intervening bands of shale being eleven inches in thickness,
making altogether eight feet two inches for the total height of
the seam; being a little more than is usually considered the
best for safe and economic working. The excess, however, is
in the bands of shale, which are objectionable under any cir-
cumstances, but are utilised to some extent in building up walls
to separate the ingoing and outgoing currents of air in the
rooms or spaces which have not been holed into each other.
When there is no refuse available this is usually done by
“brattices” —thin boards battened together and nailed to the
props, or by brattice cloth, a coarse fabric, the interstices of
which are closed by a coating of tar or other similar material.
The Coal is visibly of a light, oily nature, and not easily
pulverised; will stand handling well; be easily lighted; and
will burn with a quick and intense heat. The specific gravity
of a piece which I brought down with me is l - 28, which gives
1,555 tons to the acre per foot in thickness, or a total of 11,340
tons per acre. Of this quantity it would be reasonable to
assume that two-thirds might be obtained from the mine. Oc-
casionally much more is obtained, but the average is decidedly


loss ; from the nature of the Coal however and the convenient
height of the seam something more than the average may
reasonably be expected. The proportion offsmall Coal will be
much less than usual as the Coal is decidedly not of a friable
nature, and the lowest stratum (12 in.) even if inferior in quality
will come in handy for “ holing ” or undermining, and the one
inch shale band which will be a guide in so doing can be con-
veniently taken down and thrown back before the more {impor-
tant process of taking down the principal strata is performed.
The next two strata above with a one inch band between could
then be taken down and probably this operation could be
repeated to several yards in extent when the next group, 17 in.
thick, consisting of two bands of stone and one of Coal, might
be taken down and separated, after which the upper portion
containing 2 feet 3 in. of Coal and 1 inch of shale would be
taken down. This method of working would probably best
allow the separation of the stone or shale from the Coal, but
might have to be varied if in practice it was found that the
Coal and shale did not separate easily without being taken down
in the mass.
The specific gravity mentioned above shows the Coal to be
much lighter than most if not all of the deep-seated Coals.
The anthracites for instance range T4O to I'6o. The "Welsh
Coals are also almost without exception heavier. The English
Coals vary considerably but average about the same as this,
while the Scotch Coals are almost without exception lighter.
It is quite heavy enough however for the geological position it
occupies, and any higher specified gravity would indicate a
larger proportion of incombustible matter.
As an analysis of the Coal will be made by the Hon. A. C.
Gregory and the result furnished you, a correct estimate of the
commercial value of the seam may be obtained ; and with other
data, the specific gravity, which may vary slightly in the differ-
ent layers or strata of Coal, will be given, and which may
indicate a slightly different result to that given above. It may
also be stated that of the six layers of Coal in the seam some
may be inferior, and if at the top or bottom, they might be left
in the mine undisturbed, as, even if saleable they might mate-
rially decrease the value of the better portions. In some cases
layers of Coal in what is practically the same seam, are essen-


tially different in their chemical composition and commercial
importance, it was therefore impressed on your] miner that in
addition to the bag of Coals containing a strip through the
whole seam, to be sent to Mr. Gregory for analysis, there should
be sent sample bags of each different stratum in order that
their respective values might be judged either by sight or more
exact means such as working tests or analyses ; for it will be
understood that it was impossible to form any opinion in the
shaft, where the exposed surfaces were clogged with debris from
the buckets, and the water prevented any good light being
thrown thereon, while that obtained in the sinking and then on
the surface had not been kept separate. Separate samples
however will effectually settle the point.
Assuming the whole of the Coal described above to be
‘ merchantable,’ there is still a sufficiency of coarse Coal and
shale to form a good roof, for although the timbering in the
shaft only allows two feet four inches to be seen, it would be
brought much below any very yielding material to ensure the
safety of the shaft itself; it is therefore certain that there is
sufficient rigid and cohesive material to form a good roof.
Touching the extent of the seam it is scarcely necessary to
form any estimate, as there is without doubt sufficient to supply
your possible requirements for many years; for supposing some
one or two of the layers not to be good and your production
be only 5,000 tons per acre, that would probably be a year’s
consumption, and a few thousand acres is not much in the
extent of a Coal seam where its persistence appears to be
almost parallel with that of the plain surface, the outburst of
basalt about a quarter of a mile south-east of the shaft being
the only evidence of a break in the strata within several miles
of the shaft. The depth it will be seen is nearly 80 feet from
the surface of the surrounding country to the top of the seam.
The rise, NNW. a little under 3°, or about 1 in 20.
It will be seen by the section,that another seam, four feet
thick, and having only 3 inches of foreign matter, has been
sunk through, but as there would be much more water to con-
tend with at this depth, and the seam is not so thick as the
upper one, which contains enough Coal for your requirements, it
is scarcely necessary to further refer to it; it may be stated also
that except for very effective/reasons, the upper seam ought


always to be worked first, as the working of the lower is not
thereby prejudiced, whereas in working a lower seam, any other
lying within 10 or 12 fathoms over head, is very likely to be in-
jured by the displacement of the strata, through the Coal being
worked'out below.
Touching the question of water, your present pumping
apparatus is equal to 4000 gallons per hour, and is more than
sufficient to keep the bottom of the shaft free, but the bottom
of the shaft is 20 feet below the bottom of the seam, and the
natural level of the water is only 8 feet above that point, so that
very little pumping will be required to keep the seam free from
water. It is also highly probable that after the pump has been
at work a while, the natural level will be lower. On the other
hand, after a very heavy and continuous rain, such as we occa-
sionally get, the pumps will have a little more work to do, but
I imagine your present arrangement is sufficient for anything
you are likely to have to contend with, providing the surface
water be carried off at a reasonable rapid rate.
Touching the method of working, whether the “long wall,”
pillar and board (stoop and room of the Scotch), or wide rooms
and small pillars, with a view of sacrificing the latter, a little
experience would show which is desirable. In any case strong
pillars would have to be left near the shaft. I believe the wide
rooms with small pillars sacrificed is the plan usually adopted in
the thick Coal Colleries in New South Wales.
Touching the question of economic production, I must
reason from less reliable data. A considerable proportion of the
expense already incurred has been admittedly to secure a supply
of water, and has been or is being recouped by the supply ob-
tained. But a little more expenditure would be necessary in
order to work Coal, as winding apparatus, a raised platform or
“brace-head and screens,”shoots or hoppers,” would all be
necessary, the expense would be trifling however in comparison
with the laying down of a line of Railway to the mine, and if a
sufficient demand to justify the latter expenditure could be relied
on, the supplying of that demand would amply justify the
necessary expenditure at the mine itself. And it will be under-
stood that the more complete the outfit at the mine, the lower
the working expenses ought to be. It is therefore reasonable to
suppose that the sum of six shillings per ton should suffice to


pay for extraction from the mine, wheeling, raising, and all
incidentals, such as timber, oil, horse-feed, wear and tear, interest,
and all such other expenditure as might not fairly be classed as
invested capital, but would properly be considered as working
expenses.
What then would be the probable demand ?
What the cost of adine of Railway ? And what the price
obtainable clear of all commission, &c., for the Coals ?
1 have not the number of the portion on which the shaft is
situated, but knowing the locality, 1 find by the official maps
that it must be nearly equi-distaut from Jimbour and Dalby,
and not less than seven miles from the nearest accessible point
of the Southern and Western Eailway, but the distance to Dalby
is only eight miles, and it may be considered preferable to connect
with Dalby, as the advantages of connecting with an important
station already established, are many in comparison with a con-
nection where points have to be laid off, (making a fresh break
in the line,) a cottage for the pointsman to be built, and all the
inconveniences incidental to a new departure, to be incurred.
On the other hand, it is probable that all the land needed for
the shortest line is already in the hands of the proprietary of
the mine, whereas, for the.line to Dalby, the town commonage,
and (he lands of private holders probably intervene.
But taking the shortest distance (7 miles) the country is
level, and there are no water courses of importance to cross.
Ballast* would be obtainable by rail from Bowenville, sleepers
and culvert timbers probably from below the Range, by the
Railway side, the cost of 40lbs. rails at £8 per ton would be
£5OO per mile of single line, (2 rails,) and this would cover the
cost at present, although this item is liable to considerable fluc-
tuation, present English price, £4 10s. to £4 15s. The price of
cast rails from the Government lines has, I believe, been £5 per
ton, and these might be serviceable for a line for the conveyance
of Coals, but the economy of giving £5 for old rails when the
price of new in England is £4 10s. may be questionable; more-
over it is probable that the old rails are iron, whereas the price
above-quoted is for steel, and they are found to be vastly more
durable and suitable for your purpose. As there would be no
' There is an ample supply of ballast half a mile from the mine, not seen by Mr.
Gregory—Mr. Gregory’s report.


earth work of importance, either cuttings or embankments, this
line ought to be laid down for £lO,OOO. This is not an exact
estimate, that being impossible without actual survey ; but it •is
very likely a good rough approximation. Interest at 8 per cent,
and say 2 per cent, for refundment of capital, in view of the
exhaustion of the mine, or any other unlikely contingency, would
amount to £l,OOO per annum ; wear and tear would be a charge
or working expenses, but the Railway being provided, assuming
that the Government find rolling stock as appears to be done for
the colleries in the Moreton district, a charge of fid. per ton
ought to cover cost of carriage to Dalby, or to such point on
the S. & W. Railway line as may be made the point of connection.
I believe one penny per ton per mile is the charge in New South
Wales on Government lines, where the use of the line itself, as
well as of the trucks is found; allowing also fid. per ton for
agency or management and clerical work in connection with the
principal establishment at the head station, and one shilling per
ton royalty, the entire cost when placed on the Railway, say
at Dalby, would be eight shillings per ton, exclusive of interest
on the cost of the line of Railway.
Now assuming that 100 tons per week during fifty weeks be
the year’s production, i.e., 5,000 tons; the interest would amount
to four shillings per ton, making a total cost of twelve shillings.
I think the estimated cost is fair, and with a large demand that
at the mine would be a little less per ton, whereas with a smaller
demand, the cost of the Railway would render it inadvisable to
proceed with the work.
Touching the probable demand: Any Coal at present avail-
able at Dalby must be brought 130 miles by rail and raised
nearly 2,000 feet vertically in ascending the range, which for
carriage alone must represent a cost nearly equal to the full
price I have estimated for the Jimbour Coal at Dalby, so that
there is a wide margin; and a much higher price, supposing the
Coal to be of equal value, might be obtainable. Indeed, with
a supply of suitable Coal on the Downs, the whole of the trade
on the range might be expected, consisting chiefly of the rail-
way trade, —Toowoomba to Stanthorpe, 107 miles; Gowrie
.Junction to Mitchell, 261 miles ; Pengary Junction to Cabailah,
11 miles; in all, 379 miles. The railway from Warwick to
Killarney is in process of construction, that from Mitchell,


westward, also, and it may safely be assumed that these will he
continued, and that from Stanthorpe to the border, as well as
other lines, will shortly be commenced. Also, as it would be
extremely desirable to avoid carrying coals up the range for the
return journey down, something might be calculated on from
this source.
But-taking the lines now in operation from Toowoomba
southward and westward as above, a train is run each way per
day on all the lines, extra trains 3 days per week from Toowoomba
to Warwick and from Toowoomba to Dalby, and every day from
Toowoomba to Cabarlah, besides specials, goods trains and ballast
trains, all of which consume fuel but do not appear on the time
tables from which the above data are taken, and taking half the
distance to Ipswich on the down trip only, we have 1,000 train
miles per day, to which add one fifth for the traffic not given in
the time tables—it might safely be estimated at a much higher
proportion but this will suffice—and we have 1,200 train miles
per day, which at a consumption of 30 lbs. per train mile
(again a very low estimate, but as the lines are mostly very level it is
enough for an estimate), and 313 working days in the year —no
holidays on the railway —these are the times when extra and
1200 x 20 x 213
heavier trains are required ; —the consumption is 2240 =
5,030 tons per annum.
I have entirely left out of the calculation any demand
which might arise in Toowoomba, Dalby, Roma, Warwick, or
elsewhere, for manufacturing, steam, or domestic purposes;
neither have I considered the value of the Coal or of the rail-
way to the Jimbour estate, which latter is an item, although not
so large as it may appear, seeing that the heavy traffic accruing
therefrom is vid Macalister on the Eoma line.
Of course I am aware that a liberal discount must be made
in consideration of the fact that the railway demand is already
met from other sources and that the towns have not yet com-
menced to consume coal —at any rate, not for domestic purposes
—the indigenous timbers supplying the fuel they require; but
bearing in mind the lower cost at which Coal could be supplied
from Jimbour, and the great economy of space required in
comparison with that required for wood, as well as its more
convenient and portable form, it is not unreasonable to expect


that the Ipswich Coal would speedily be driven out of the
Darling Downs markets, and possibly, although more slowly,
firewood for stationary steam manufacturing or domestic pur-
poses would be to some extent supplanted by the cheaper and
more convenient fuel.
Touching the permanency of the demand, it can scarcely
be supposed that once a demand is created and the consumption
established, there will ever be any falling off unless there be
something radically wrong in the article supplied, for, with the
ever increasing population, the ever decreasing supply of fire-
wood, the continued extension of railways, and the establish-
ment and progress of manufacturing industries, the increasing
demand for coal amounts to an absolute certainty.
It is scarcely necessary to refer to the fact that we are at
present dependent on New South Wales for a portion of the
coal required by the steamers on our coast—that thirty years
ago the coal trade of that colony, with which Queensland was
then connected, was not equal to that of Queensland alone at
the present time, and that it has multiplied more than twenty
times during that period. Jimbour is too far inland to benefit
by the coast trade, but when the collieries near the coast do not
supply the coast trade, there is little to fear from their com-
petition, for any of the trade arising from the top of the main
range, westward, always provided the analysis and practical
testing of the Coal shews that it is at least equal in economic
value to that supplied from the Ipswich Coal field.
It only remains to be added that it does not appear to be
practicable in this case to begin on a smaller scale than that
stated above, and then to increase the out-put gradually, as the
whole expenditure is involved in the Railway connection, which
must be completed if begun, and it would scarcely be worth be-
ginning unless with the prospect of obtaining sale for about 100
tons per week within a year or t\vo of the opening of the mine,
although there is reason to suppose the demand should, in that
time, be more nearly double that quantity.
I have, &c.,
WILLIAM FRTAE.
The Hon. Sib A. H. Palmer, k.c.m.g.,
President Leg. Council of Queensland,
Parliamentary Buildings, Brisbane.


REPORT
JIMBOUR COAL FIELDS,
Bv The Hon. A. 0. GREGORY, C.M.G.,
FOEMEELT SI'EVEYOE GenEEAL.
The greater part of the Jimbour Estate consists of an
extensive open plain formed by the silting up of part of an
ancient lake, with detritus brought down by streams rising to
the eastward in the highland of the Bunya Mountains, and as
these waters flowed over the old Devonian slates, carbonaceous
shales, and the more recent volcanic outbursts of basalt, the
result is that the soil of Jimbour plain is of an extremely
fertile character, containing abundantly all the mineral consti-
tuents necessary to support vegetation as well as a large propor-
tion of organic matter, forming a soil which is well adapted to
the growth of cereals, such as wheat, maize, sorghum, Ac., and
leguminous plants, as lucerne, Ac., of which in favorable seasons
heavy crops have been successfully raised for many years, while
the slightly undulating character of the country is exceedingly
favorable for the adoption of steam cultivators.
The natural productions of the land consist of a variety of
grasses, chiefly perennial and of the varieties most valued in
the native pastures of Queensland.
The growth of timber is chiefly restricted to the basaltic
ridges on the eastern margin of the estate, and on the banks of
the Condamine River to the west.
Originally the surface of the plain has been nearly level,
having a very slight fall towards the west, but the progressive
deepening of the channel of the Condamine River on the west-


em side lias also caused the erosion of a channel through the
central part of the plain and by which the present Jimbour
Creek drains off the surplus rainfall, so that no part is liable to
extensive inundation.
The soil varies in depth but there are few places where
there is less than three feet of rich black soil, resting on allu-
vial detritus which fills up the irregularities of the ancient
surface of the Coal measures beneath, and which form one of
the most important geological features of the district.
The Coal measures are not visible on the surface in any
part being covered by the rich black soil, but in sinking wells
they have generally been found at depths varying from 50 to
100 feet. And in several places seams of Coal have been pene-
trated, while the impervious nature of some of the beds of
shale belonging to this series has maintained the subterranean
water supply at an accessible depth.
As regards this water supply it may be observed that it is
met with at about 100 feet on the eastern or higher part of the
plain, the depth increasing to about 200 feet on the lower part,
approaching the Condamine River, indicating that the source of
supply is probably on the higher land towards the Bunya Moun-
tains and that the flow beneath the surface is to the west, also
that it is not derived from the immediate surface rainfall, as it
is much below the level of the surface water in the channels of
the creeks and even the Condamine River.
This condition of the water supply is of the highest impor-
tance as it not only accounts for the remarkable purity of the
water obtained from the wells but it also insures a permanent
source unaffected by the vicissitudes of seasons and affords a
certainty of meeting all the requirements of agricultural or
pastoral occupation.
In consequence of the scarcity of labor in the earlier years
of the colony and the large number of stock to be supplied,
some difficulty was at first experienced in raising the enormous
quantity of water required from deep wells, but the adoption of
windmills to work the pumps has altogether obviated the diffi-
culty, the open character of the country being specially favor-
able to the use of wind power.
There is an ample supply of timber for splitting and sawing,
both hardwood and pine, on the ranges towards the Bunya


Mountains, which locality would become the most important
source of timber supply to the Western districts if a branch
railway were constructed, the present difficulty of carriage
being the only obstacle to the development of the great re-
sources of the district.
Timber suited for ordinary mining purposes is abundant on
the margins of the open plain and there is no difficulty in
supplying any demand which might be contingent on working
the Coal deposits.
The rich surface soil is not adapted for making bricks, but
should the Coal be worked there would be abundance of excel-
lent fire-clay available with suitable fuel for burning bricks.
There is excellent freestone quarried a few miles to the north
of the head station and of which the Jimbour house is built.
On the eastern limit of the estate there are several outbursts of
basalt rock which furnish an inexhaustible quantity of stone
suited for rough masonry and material for roads and railway
ballast.
The more immediate object of this report has, however
reference to the Coal deposits on the Jimbour Estate. At an
early period of its occupation it was ascertained that Coal
existed on the property, but in the undeveloped condition of the
district there was no demand for mineral fuel beyond the re-
quirements of the station itself, and consequently, except
raising some 2000 tons for local use, from a seam found in
sinking a well at the head station, there has not yet been any
other attempt to work the Coal.
The extension of the railways on Darling Downs and the
Western districts has now attained to a considerable mileage.
From Toowoomba via Dalby and Eoma to Mitchell there are
270 miles of railway open and further extensions in progress.
The Warwick and Stanthorpe line from Gowrie Junction is 99
miles, and the Highfields branch, 11 miles, making a total of
380 miles in actual work on the western side of the Great
Dividing Range.
Hitherto the Coal required for the working of these lines
has been brought from near Ipswich, a distance of 75 miles, to
Toowoomba, over the steep gradients of the “Little Liverpool ”
and “ Great Dividing ” Ranges, the latter having an elevation
of 2000 feet, and this haulage at the low rate of one penny per


ton comes to Gs. 3d. per ton, a very heavy item in the working
of the railways on the western slopes of the range.
The traffic on the Western and Southern railways beyond
Toowoomba amoimts to two regular daily mail trains and at
least two other trains for goods, &c., or an average of four
trains running 380 miles for 313 days per annum, or an aggre-
gate of nearly 478,000 train miles in the year; and estimating
that 25 lbs. of coal are consumed by the locomotive for each
train mile the total requirement is over 5000 tons per annum.
The position of the .Timbour Coal mines is so nearly central
on the railways referred to that they would have an advantage
of at least 80 miles less haulage to supply the locomotives as
compared with the present carriage from Ipswich, while there
would be the additional advantage of avoiding the heavy gra-
dients between Ipswich and Toowoomba, as the more level lines
above the range admit of double the load being carried by each
train.
Although Coal seams have been found on several parts of
the estate (notably at the head station) yet on account of
greater proximity to the railway that at “Dingo Point” has the
greatest interest, the locality being seven miles from the Dalhy
railway-station, and the intervening country cither level or on a
slightly descending grade, there being no watercourses or
ravines to cross.
At the Dingo Point well the shaft has been sunk through
76 feet of surface soil, then 3 ; \ feet of impure Coal which would
make a safe roof, when a seam of Coal 8 feet thick, but with 5
bands of shale having an aggregate of 1 foot, leaving 7 feet of
workable Coal, under which there is 13 feet of fire clay and
shale, and a second Coal seam 4 feet thick, with three thin part-
ings of clay. But the lower seam, in consequence of water in
the shaft, could not be fully examined.
The dip of the Coal, so far as could be ascertained in the
small space of the shaft, is about 3° to the SSE., in which direc-
tion a dyke of basalt shews on the surface about a quarter of a
mile distant.
The country being nearly level and strata horizontal, there
is reason to suppose that no great disturbance of the coal seams
exists, more especially as on the line of strike to the West coal


has been struck in a well some 21 miles distant, and seven miles
to the northward, at the Jimbour Station, the seam of Coal worked
there has every appearance of being identical with that at “Dingo
Point,” while it would be easy to actually prove the Coal by
putting down some boreholes over the contiguous 1000 acres.
The quality of the Coal is that known as “ free burning,”
“ long-flame,” or “ Camirl Coal.” It is hard and brilliant in frac-
ture, does not soil the hands, and will stand exposure to weather
or rough carriage without injury or loss by 'waste. It ignites
with great facility, burns freely with long flame and compara-
tively little smoke; it does not cake but burns to white heavy
ash without any cinder.
The comparative value of the Coal as fuel has been deter-
mined by burning five samples, taken from the different parts of
the seam, in a small vertical steam engine with a special tank for
measuring the water evaporated, the apparatus having been used
for testing almost all the Coals found in other parts of Queens-
land, and also some from New South Wales, so that the relative
results can be relied on for the determination of the relative
value of steam Coals in the market.
As a steam Coal it comes closely up to the average of the
Ipswich Coal now in use on the railway in regard to the work
done per ton, but it has a great advantage in its superior hard-
ness and weather-resisting qualities, while the Ipswich Coals are
so tender that it is difficult to prevent their wholly falling into
“ slack.”
The economic value as a gas Coal is about double the average
of the Ipswich Coals.
As a household Coal its qualities are excellent, being very
clean, and burning freely even in small quantities, but the demand
for this purpose would be limited.
Apart from the value of the Jimbour Coal as fuel it has,
perhaps, a higher prospective value as a source of paratine and
illuminating oils, giving 16J per cent, of crude petroleum, or
about 37 gallons per ton of Coal. The manufacture of illumin-
ating oils as a commercial question involves many contingencies
which are beyond the scope of this report, and it is, therefore,
sufficient to state that an unlimited supply of the raw material
is available.


The accompanying statement of the particulars of the testing
of the Coal for economic purposes gives the more important
features of its quality. The samples in each case were not picked
but taken from the average of the portion of the seam repre-
sented, as a commercial average in ordinary working the mine.


Details of Tests foe Economic Value of Coal from
JIMBOUE.’
The Coal being burnt in a2H. P. vertical engine, the feed water at
78° F. Steam !got up with wood, and fire withdrawn and Coal lighted,
steam 201bs.
LBS.
Coal burnt ... 100
No. 1 Coal, 12 inches top of seam
Water evaporated 498
Ash 14
No. 2 Coal, 15 inches
Coal burnt ... 100
Water evaporated 529
Ash ... ... 16
<S
s.
S
0
1
No. 3 Coal, 9J inches
Coal burnt ... 100
Water evaporated 477
Ash 18
No. 4 Coal, 24 inches
Coal burnt ... 100
Water evaporated 498
Ash 20
No. 5 Coal, 15 inches
Coal burnt ... 100
Water evaporated 461
Ash 20
Waterstown, Ipswich
Coal burnt ... 100
Water evaporated 499
Ash 18
Thomas, Bundamba
Coal burnt ... 100
Water evaporated 507
Ash 15
Walloon Coal
Coal burnt- ... 100
Water evaporated 457
Ash 15
Tivoli Coal, best
Coal burnt ... 100
Water evaporated 561
Ash 10
Tivoli Coal, second
Coal burnt ... 100
Water evaporated 499
Ash 12
S
{
“Waralah,” Newcastle, New
South Wales
Coal burnt ... 100
Water evaporated 505
Ash 7J


Test ok Average kkom all parts of the Jimboue Coal
Seam, fob Oil, Etc.
LBS. I'lß CKNT.
Coal distilled in Ketort ... ... 72 ... 100
Coke remaining in Retort 34 ... 47
Oil, S.G. 0-975 12 ... 16.7
Ammonia Water ... 5J ... 7.6
Uncondensed Gas, &c 20| ... 28.5
The Coal does not cake, and is not suited for coke or smiths’ forges
and similar work. Average Specific Gravity, T 275.
A. C. GREGORY.
Brisbane, 18 March, 1884.
Watson, Ferguson, & Co., Printers, Qneen Street, Brisbane.


SECTION OF SEAMS OF COAL
SUNK THROUGH AT DINGO POINT,
JIMBOUR, DARLING DOWNS,
QTJEEITSLiiITD.
Scale I inch to 1 foot.
Tan/ermy Sra/n. SarA'ice
/bur See/ al/arenali/yrt/ bevel.
Chat ami SIO/1& Bamls-
/ Chut.
CoaZ..
CoaZ._.
CoaC
CbaZ.
Coal
Coal yymi SAa/eßay/y/s
CbaZ...
&cuut
C0a7,.... „ .
. j 6 (vui
Coal.
Coat.
C/o/u A rCA/CAyreeld
Aa-e Clay. JSollr/a rCSAa/l.
